<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981215.1600.0143 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton is on his way home from the Middle East. Mr. Clinton, 
first lady Hillary Rodham Clinton and daughter Chelsea took in some 
sight-seeing before they boarded air force one. Earlier, the president 
held a three-way summit with Israeli prime minister benjamin Netanyahu 
and Palestinian authority President Yasser Arafat at a Border crossing 
between Israel and Gaza. Mr. Clinton was unable to persuade Israel 
to resume West Bank troop withdrawals under the wye river land-for-peace 
deal, but he says the peace process is back on track. Walter Rodgers 
has more. Peace. An Israeli soldier's plea for peace at the end of 
the U.S., palestinian and Israeli summit aimed at restarting the peace 
process. I do think we are back on track. We are going to see this 
through and feel good about where we are now. So does Israeli prime 
minister Netanyahu. But for different reasons. Facing a no confidence 
vote Monday and in need of right wing support to stay in office, he 
rejected all American requests to implement the wye land-for-security 
agreement now. I think the Americans are wise enough to understand 
that no amount of pressure can force Israel to relinquish its capital, 
Jerusalem. That no amount of pressure will force us to release terrorist 
murders. To Israelis, it sounded like the beginning of a Netanyahu 
re-election campaign. To others, it spelled a summit failure. It was 
a mission impossible from the beginning, because Netanyahu and the 
israeli government had no intention of compliance. President Clinton's 
love feast with the Palestinians in Gaza did not sit well with Mr. 
Netanyahu's government, which deeply resented the american president's 
sympathy for the Palestinian suffering. We must acknowledge neither 
side has a monopoly on pain or virtue. Perhaps worse in the long run 
for Israel, this vote which Mr. netanyahu insisted on calling for 
nullification of clauses in the palestinian charter hostile to Israel. 
Arafat gave up the covenant which was already dead anyway, so he just 
dug it out and reburied it. In return, he got a virtual American declaration 
of support for Palestinian sovereignty. I would say it's one of the 
best deals since the Indians sold Manhattan. Publicly at least, Mr. 
Netanyahu sees himself as the winner at this point. He suspended the 
peace process and bested President Clinton again. All situations with 
Netanyahu are adversarial, and there is only one winner. And he wants 
that to be him? And that has to be him, always. Mr. Netanyahu has 
won, beat all the odds for 2 1/2 years. But when you think about it, 
so has Yasser Arafat, for over three decades. Walter Rodgers, CNN, 
Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>