<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981215.2130.1515 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two of Hollywood's most popular stars are reuniting for a romantic 
comedy for the Internet age. Paul Vercammen has that. You know what 
that hanky reminds me of? hmm? First day I met you. First day you 
lied to me. I didn't lie to you. You did, too. Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan, 
fighting and flirting again in "you've got mail." They first explored 
the romantic comedy genre in "Joe versus the volcano" -- There's no 
such thing as a perfect -- Then in "sleepless in Seattle," regarded 
in show business as a Date movie that scored. How do you feel about 
being responsible for improving many moviegoers' sex lives? I've never 
been accused of that. It's exactly what I was going for. Well, then, 
I say we accomplished what we set out to do. Do you think we should 
meet? Hanks' and Ryan's characters make a cyberhookup in "you've got 
mail," an update of the classic, "the shop around the corner." So 
she wants us to take, like, a couple of steps. "mail" is directed 
by Nora ephron, who also directed the duo in "Sleepless in Seattle." 
Here's the theory on their chemistry -- We have this class, it's the 
only class that we have during the -- it's our only class together. 
Like, fourth period. 55 minutes. We never see each other -- Except 
for that class. In the course of the rest of the day, except for that 
day. And we sit in the back, and we get in trouble. Yeah. But we're 
laughing about stuff that has nothing to do with -- American history. 
Yeah. But we still get a "B" in the class. Because we're smart, or 
because why? Because Nora's the teacher. He cheats. So much time together. 
I'm sorry, what? I don't know. I forgot to tell you. Oh, it's my line, 
sorry. How does this settle with Hanks' wife, Rita Wilson, or Ryan's 
husband, Dennis quaid? I like Rita, Tom likes Dennis. Dennis is a 
fine lad. And honestly, before I did this movie, I hadn't seen Meg 
probably for like six months or so. Yeah. And chatted a little bit, 
but that was it. So we're really not together all that much. no. Also, 
we're professionals, and this is what we do. And we do like each other, 
that's genuine. We're lucky. But Ryan isn't sold on the idea of someone 
meeting good fortune in love online. I just think the idea that you 
could be romanced by someone that you don't know, and you don't know 
what kind of persona they're creating, I'm very confused by it. I'd 
like to talk to somebody about what their real exchange was like. 
It's probably the same exact percentage as people who fell in love 
with somebody they were sitting next to on a plane. I would really 
appreciate it if you would just go away. Kathleen? After teaming up 
once more, Hanks and Ryan should be qualified to philosophize on love 
connections. Paul Vercammen, "CNN Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>