<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981215.2100.1806 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now that it appears perhaps likely that the house will vote to approve 
at least some articles of impeachment, members of Senate are confronting 
the real possibility of holding a trial that could conceivably end 
with the president's removal from office, the "New York Times" national 
political correspondent Rick Berke writes about the issue for tomorrow's 
paper. Rick, is there anyone who is saying even somewhat patronizingly, 
look, let the house do what it's going to do, when it gets over here, 
cooler heads will prevail? We have a lot of ideas? We're going to 
take our time? They might be saying that, but they're not saying anything 
about a Compromise. Every senator I talk to, democrat, republican 
alike today, said if this thing passes through the house, as they 
suspect, there's going to be a Trial in the Senate. And many of these 
senators would not have said this two weeks ago. Right after Thanksgiving 
I went to Hawaii for vacation, thinking this whole thing was calm 
for a while. Suddenly, a few days later, there's this March to impeachment. 
A lot of senators said that to me today. Suddenly, two weeks ago, 
the house is moving towards impeachment. They weren't prepared for 
it. Now they're preparing and saying we fully expect a trial in the 
Senate if these events unfold this week as expected. I know you talked 
to some big names in the Senate. Thmedia loves the phrase "the conscience 
of the Senate." Who approaches that these days? You talked to Lieberman, 
to cane. Both have spoken about the morality of this. They say, look, 
if the Senate -- if the house is doing its obligation and approves 
these ticles of impeachment, whether or not we think Clinton should 
be impeached, they're saying it's our obligation to at least have 
the trial. And it would -- they don't seem to think it's right to 
short-circuit the process as senator Dole today has proposed in an 
op-Ed piece in the timestimes. There are other ideas floating around 
that the White House is pushing to broker some kind of deal. But several 
several of these senators said no, if the house bites the bullet, 
we've got to too whether or not we end up dealing with it to the end. 
Are you finding that some of this appears anger driven at the president, 
that it's personal, that it's about what he has said in hisublic comments 
and what he hasn't said? Will, that's a good point. I think a lot 
of this is coming about because there isn't much good with even among 
democrats toward the president. You don't see many democratic senators 
coming out and saying there's no way i would vote to impeach the president. 
And a lot of them are saying -- you ask them what they're going to 
do, and they're saying I'm going to be a juror in this process in 
the Senate trial, so I better not speak out, I can't speak out. That's 
hardly reassuring to the White House to have other democratic senators, 
who would in other cases be supportive of the president, to refrain 
from saying they would support him. Rick Berke front-page story tomorrow 
morning's paper. Thanks for coming in. Thank you, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>