<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981215.2100.2191 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We talked about it earlier, senator Bob Dole's op-Ed column this morning 
in the morning's "New York Times." Often, veterans come forward in 
times of trouble, offering advice and solutions that ignore party 
and go right to fixing the problem. Now is such a time. We're joined 
tonight by three Washington veterans. Clifford Alexander served as 
counsel to Lyndon Johnson and as secretary of the army under presiden 
Carter. Jack Watson served as longtime aide and chief of staff to 
president jmy carter. He iwith us from the nation's capital. And Sam 
Skinner served as chief of staff to President George bush. I'll get 
it. He served in the bush cabinet as secretary of transportation. 
He is with us from Chicago. Secretary Skinner, if approached for your 
advice and counsel and no one is making that extraordinary leap of 
faith tonight, but let's call it a Possible, if approached, what would 
you say to this president Well, I think the first thing we have to 
do is probably advise everybody who's advising him to make sure we 
don't take anything for granted. This is a very fluid situation. The 
Senate, if the Bill of impeachment is voted out, is Senate is going 
to take this very seriously. The first thing I would suggest granted. 
Number two, surround yourself with some very key seasoned people who 
will tell you exactly what they think and won't be intimidated by 
the fact that you're the president or you're in the oval office. Those 
are hard to find. Jack Watson, on your watch, names were brought in 
to the Carter White House when the need was seen, names like -- the 
surprise was,F course, hdley, lloyd Cutler. You brought in some pros. 
Of course it was argued at political seminars since without them. 
There's always room for good advice, and presidents need good advice 
from outside the White House all the time in order to have a broader 
perspective. As far as your question to Sam, I think what the president 
and his people need to understand fundamentally here is it's not just 
Bill Clinton's presidency at stake here and his reputation. It is 
the presidency. It's institution of the presidency. It's the relationship 
between the institution of the presidency and the congressional branch 
of government. Those are very, very fundamental important constitutional 
and governmental issues that cannot be lost sight of this in process. 
As we watch President Clinton have an unintended meeting with that 
pillar on his way out to make comments. Some would argue wise men 
aren't all they're cracked up to be. They're invariably white and 
often very wrong, witness the collection that President Johnson brought 
in twice to talk about Vietnam almost to a person around that table. 
They admitted later on mistakes were probably made in the cabinet 
ro in those meetings. Well, in this situation, to expect at this point 
in his presidency that this president is going to somehow seek out 
wise men and women I think is an improper assumption. There have not 
been the dwpment of long-term relationships with members of congress. 
This president for over six years didn't do what past presidents have 
done -- Spend the time massaging, getting to know, cajoling members 
of Congress so those relationships were there. He spent his time I 
think all too often in sophomoric attempts to act like he was very 
busy on the nation's business. Now in this situation, he continually 
relates to what it will do to him, and what he has to get over is 
something internal to him. It has to do with how he will now present 
himself, and he ought to prepare himself for a trial, and no what 
it is going to do to him. It's what is it doing to the institution 
of the presidency and what is it doing to the entire system of governance 
in this country. He hasn't thought about that as much as he should 
have over the past several months, and that's going to be working 
to his detriment. In this country, you can't expect that somehow these 
things are going to be decided because there was a poll yesterday 
that saidis approval rating was 60-something%. It's going to be what 
will be a good method of impeachment for this country. He can't come 
to a conclusion sitting around with wise people. Secretary Skinner, 
your problems didn't have the problems that Jack watn's boss did. 
Well, president bush had the ability, Brian, to bring in people, people 
that he had known for a number of years that were well aware of -- 
had a Lot of experience in Washington, like senator Simpson, senator 
Baker, zwroust name a few, congressman Montgomery. These are people 
who had seen a lot of things and had a lot of experience and would 
give him good advice. During the war, he surrounded himself with people 
within the cabinet, like secretaries Baker and Chaney, etc. And you 
need that kind of advice, but you also need someone who will tell 
you what the facts are and give you good, candid advice. I'm sure 
all three of us have had expernces where people will tell us in the 
chief of staff's office, this is what I want to tell the president. 
We'd take them in there, and they would say the exact opposite. It's 
hard to find people who will be candid with the president. And it's 
getting harder given legal process here. Of course Jack Watson, clifford 
Alexander raises a good topic, that the subt that brings us here is 
the discussion of this White House per Se. Quick, name the short list 
of the joud ciders who have been calledn in the past. Who would this 
president call? Who would show up? Well, one that I think of is senator 
Benson. He's now -- senator Mitchell. He's used both of those. They 
could probably give some good advice, and they're both lawyers, so 
that would give you the ability to talk to them in a candid and free 
way, which is difficult, given what we're talking about here. But 
those are the kind of people whose advice you need to seek. And you 
can't take anything for granted. United States senators take their 
job and role seriously under the constitution. We've seen this before. 
When senator Byrd warned everybody not to tamper with the jury. You've 
got to take this seriously. You've got to come up with a solution 
that makes sense for everybody. Jack Watson? Brian, at this stage 
of the game, the primary people with whom the president ought to be 
conferring are the members of Congress. One of the most important 
issues presented here by this situation and by this crisis for the 
presidency is the very fundamental constitutional issues of roles 
and relationships between the presidency and the Congress. I think 
that the path that the house is on would appear from all current evidence 
to be a path from which the house is not going to turn. It appears 
now that there will be articles of impeachment rendered to the senate. 
I think that the president and his people need to be consulting in 
private, candid ways with the leadership of both the house and the 
Senate. It may be too late to avert the relt of the delivery of the 
articles of impeachment to the Senate at this point. There's 36 hours 
or so remaining for that process to wind its way. I think the problem 
with this president now is that it is too late to engage in procedures. 
To have a genuine discussion of the issues at the 11th hour and 59th 
minute when there's about to be a vote isn't going to cut it. E president 
has talked a lot about his dilemma, but he has not listened lot. You 
don't get a sense whe you see him in the public domain that he is 
understanding that he needs to seek out people and do more than see 
what the polls say on a given day. And that is not somehow coming 
forward. Now, the American people are understanding because the American 
people are in a holiday season and the American people's 401 's are 
doing well, and they're talking about what their situation is presently 
personally. But we are now in a situation where a man is under a legal 
system that really at the beginning of what may be the most momentous 
trial in the history of this country. He needs to figure out what 
he needs to do and say as the president of the United States in the 
best interest of this country, not of Bill Clinton and his place in 
history. At this point, gentlemen, I have to thank you. We're moving 
on to a sad note. Sam Skinner, clifford Alexander, Jack Watson thank 
you for coming on the air. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>