<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981215.2100.1068 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As we told you earlier, at least half a dozen moderate use republins 
announced today they would vote to impeach the president. This, of 
course, came as a big blow to the White House, which had hoped to 
sway them the other way. Another moderate republican who has not yet 
made up his mind, calling, instead, for a face-to-face meeting with 
the president, is congressman chris Shays of Connecticut. Night he 
hosted a town meeting to hear the thoughts of his constituents. They 
have been going on for some time now. Pat Dawson is listening in on 
the meeting tonight. He is with us from Norwalk, Connecticut. Good 
evening, Brian. The first thing we should say is we've heard strong 
opinions tonight, both pro and Con, on impeachment. The one conclusion 
we can draw is that the death of democracy may be greatly exaggerated. 
This was a remarkable event in the sense that in less than 24 hours' 
notice, there were several hundred Pele here half an hour before it 
was supposed to start. The fire marshals had to close the room down. 
They put a number of people into a different room to watch it on a 
Television feed. There were probably 100 or 200 people turned away 
at T doors, who scowledn't even get into the building. It was quite 
a remarkable night for some people in Fairfield county to have their 
saze. As you pointed out, Chris Shays, has at the point of the republicans 
in this process. He said he was beginning to waver at this particular 
event. He said he was still leaning against impeachment. I believe 
that the impeachable offenses, if I had to vote tonight, have not 
been proven. And I believe -- and I believe -- And I believe the proven 
offenses are not impeachable. Now, but it is darn close. And that's 
the problem. It is darn close. But this independent counsel, deciding 
that he was going to Levy charges, in a sense, against the president 
in the campaign season, I believed -- as a republican, I believed 
he was trying to effect -- affect the election. So, I'm coming kind 
of to the conclusion here, I don't think telling the truth comes easy 
to this president. The people of Connecticut clearly had a chance 
to have their say tonight. Opinions were lodged pro and Con, but all 
the opinions were passionately held. If Jack welsh, without question, 
Yuan virsly acknowledged as one of E finest C.E.O.'s of America's 
corporation, if he had been in a situation the president finds himself 
in and had lied seven, eight months ago to shareholders, and if those 
shareholders had spent money to find out and prove he lied, would 
he have his job today? Jack welsh is not an elected official of G.E. 
he serves at the behest of stockholders and board members. He's not 
bound by our constitution. It is impossible to believe that we are 
thinking about removing the president of the United States because 
of lying about sex. If these were the standards, we would remove significant 
members of those people in Washington. Treason and bribery are crimes 
against the state. And even where perjury -- were perjury proven, 
which it has not been, it must be perjury against the state. Remarkable, 
Brian, as we said that there were so many people here tonight. And 
perhaps more remarkable, the fact that so many people waited around, 
as long as two hours, for a second shift, the availability of being 
able to get into that hall and have their say. Among the rangs turned 
away, I understand the notable. Indeed. Pall Newman, a resident of 
Westport, not far from here, was here. He shared his observations 
with us, both about impeachment and also american democracy. Mr. Newman, 
what reason for you to come out here tonight? What was the message 
for Mr. shs? Well, the message for Mr. Shays that I would have sent 
if I -- if there had been room for me in there, ant there isn't, is 
that I -- I really do N believe that the framers of the constitution 
would have believed that this was an impeachab offense, that it was 
a high crime and misdemeanor against the United States. So, Brian, 
tonight Chris Shays meets with his constituents, and tomorrow he meets 
with the president of the United States. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>