<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981215.2100.2988 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Beginning today on the "today" program on NBC and across all of the 
broadcasts in the NBC news family, "Nightly News," "dateline NBC," 
including this one,he editors and producers of NBC news today unveiled 
their list of the top 10 most interesting moments of the year about 
to be just passed, 1998. For a look at background, what made the list, 
what did not, and their significance, we are joined tonight for some 
perspective here in Washington by American University historian Alan 
lichtman, an author and historian of the presidency. Alan, I thought 
we would take a look at those related to politics and politicians 
beginning with a feel-good story, John Glenn return to space. Absolutely. 
This is a truly wonderful story. I'm reminded of the old saying from 
horace Mann -- be ashamed to die until you have won one small battle 
for humanity. John glern has won two, one three decades ago, and one 
this year. He showed there are no restrictions, no limitations to 
human potential. We used to say you're too old to do something, you're 
too young, you're a Woman, you're a black person, you can't do it. 
John Glenn has shattered all of that and opened up new worlds of human 
potential to everybody. The resignation of Newt Gingrich as house 
speaker. Well, what that shows, of course, is that absolute power 
not only can lead to absolute corruption but absolute arrogance. He 
was touted as theost brilliant of republican politicians. He led the 
republicans into the promised land in 1994, and he let arrogance overcome 
him by misleading the house investigating committee. And he didn't 
listen to the people. He hurt his own party pushing too hard on the 
impeachment issue. Another item is something that has been mentioned 
universally with anger over the past several days and weeks as people 
go on making their decision on how to vote, and that is the finger 
wagging denial of the president in the White House. It's one of the 
shameful episodes in American history. Of course we're not talking 
here about the kinds of crimes that Richard nixon committed, but no 
president should ever look the people in the eye, and I don't care 
if the ument to use the word lie or misle. No president should ever 
do that "the American president" should always speak from the heart, 
speak straight to the American people. I hope that's a lesson every 
future president takes with him. Another of the moments coming out 
came out on the Internet, specifically on the Drudge report site, 
breaking news about a relationship between the president and an intern. 
It broke so many things open wide. It changed the history of even 
the discussion of journalism. And it really gave us the scandal that 
we'reere talking about here tonight. That's right, although I think 
the scaal probably had an irresistible force and would have come out 
some way or another. But we're not talking about a whole new era of 
journalism, where distinguied journalists like yourself have to compete 
with the tabloids. We're talking about the 24-hour newsycle. No story 
is too salacious. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>