<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981215.2100.0678 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The White House continues to make top aides available to talk about 
what may be their changing position as the house vote nears, including, 
perhaps, another word or appearance of some sort from the president 
before thursday's vote here on the hill. Special White House counsel 
Jim Kennedy with us from our Washington bureau. Mr. Kennedy, can we 
expect to hear from the president again before the vote? Well, I'm 
not aware of any plans for that right now. Are you aware of any options? 
Is any draft being discussed, anything of -- anything at all? no. 
Has the president been placing personal phone calls? He's on the way 
back from the mideast. I don't believe he has been placing calls himself. 
What do you say is the challenge right now vote wise? Well, obviously, 
there are enough undecided people to leave the outcome uncertain. 
We have a couple of magic Bulls remaining, one, the constitution, 
and the other, the will of the people. If the people attend to the 
constitutional standards here and listen to the voice of the people, 
the outcome is clear. Well, you say the constitution is the magic 
bullet, it looks like if a vote were held toont, this thing might 
go right by you. Well, I think we're missing possibly an historic 
opportunity here if it does go by us. There is an opportunity to bring 
bipartisan closure to this whole thing this week with a by partisan 
and unifying vote for censure. The alternative is a partisan vote 
for impeachment, which will send this to the Senate, where we face 
the prospects of a devicive time. Bob Dole wrote a piece this morning, 
as you know, saying he's been solicited by no one, calling for a joint 
resolution that would have a Critical and punishing effect on the 
president. Is there a White House reaction to his idea? Well, senator 
Dole today offered a serious and thoughtful idea. We have not embraced 
any particular plans, but we certainly welcome attempts by anyone 
to find some by partisan consensus here, to try to find a unifying 
way to bring this to an end promptly. That's in the national interest. 
The republican leadership, unfortunately, has moved to keep options 
off the table except impeachment. They have blocked efforts for censure, 
even though we think a majority of the house would embrace censure. 
However, it appears, again, you're headed for a Senate trial. And 
what do you do then? Are you shifting strategy already, at least looking 
ahead, planning for that possibility? I'm not going to speculate about 
what might happen after thurs. Our focus is on Thursday. There are 
still enough undecided members of Congress. We're appealing to them 
to listen to their conscience and their constituents as well, because, 
clearly, 2/3 of the American people want this to be over. They would 
like a by partisan vote for censure. We hope the republican leadership 
will listen to that. It's not too late to to the right thing. If you 
were advising the president, and in a sense, you are, would you recommend 
an in-person visit to the capitol if that looks like the only way 
out? I would never talk about advice I would offer to the president. 
That would be his choice. I think now what's important is for members 
to examine the constitution and the public will. Those are the two 
most important factors inront of them. As we said, a crucial 48 to 
72 hours coming up. M Kennedy,Hanks for coming on the air. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>