<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981215.2100.0211 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And as we've been reporting, there's apparently been some movement 
in the numbers here in Washington during the course of this day. Tonight 
we have a late look at the president's chances of surviving the impeachment 
vote, if any. Now as soon as two days away. Norah O'Donnell with us 
tonight. She covers Congress for "roll call," the newspaper of Capitol 
Hill. Norah, two quick questions. Number one, where does it stand? 
Number two, how did it change today? Well, as one top republican leadership 
source told me tonight, the walls are closing in on the president. 
He has very little wiggle room left. These six republicans, moderate 
republicans, who have been sitting on the fence last week, announced 
they will vote for the impeachment. E momentum is not in the White 
House's favor. The list has grown -- excuse me -- narrowed. We were 
talking about 30 undecided republicans cht tonight we're looking at 
between 12 and 15 that may go their way. It's making it much more 
difficult for the White House to get away from impeachment. Norah, 
while the material facts in the case have changed scarcely, a lot 
of this, people have been complaining, especially at the White House, 
appears to be anger driven after the president's last set of comments. 
That is not supposed to be a component in the impeachment proces no. 
These moderate republicans are upset with what they consider the president's 
inability to come to the truth with what he's done, with Chris shays 
tomorrow, who is, ocourse, one of these republicans who said he would 
not vote for impeachment and is anging his mind. Jack Quinn had been 
saying he wouldn't vote for impeachment, but now is going to vote 
for it. Clearly, the White House is in a difficult time now. What 
they're sayg is they're trying to keep even the democratic reversals 
from happening. The momentum doesn't look good tonight. The numbers 
are much smaller. We've been going through the list, checking off 
who's left, quite frankly, for the White House. Tomorrow, congressman 
Brian Bilbray is expected to make an announce Henry hyde is expected 
to make an announcement. Jay Dickey, the republican from Arkansas, 
representing the home district of President Clinton, is expected to 
make an announcement. The list appears to grow narrower every day, 
grows more dim for the White House. Norah O'Donnell with a late live 
look. Thank you, norah. Thanks, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>