<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981215.1830.0265 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Washington and across the country, people are asking, "why doesn't 
the president just admit he lied? Isn't that what moderate republicans 
want to hear?" Yes, but at the White House they're approaching that 
only as a last resort and may not even then. why? NBC's Pete Williams 
tonight on the jeopardies it unleashes. For legal, political, and 
personal reasons, this would not be an easy option for the president 
to change his story now and say that he did lie under oath. The first 
problem -- legal jeopardy. He'd be making a direct admission of a 
crime. That would be the most damaging possible evidence in a criminal 
case. And Ken Starr, the independent counsel, could always prosecute 
the president later for perjury. But suppose congressional leaders 
agree to lobby Starr, not to prosecute. What then? The president say 
as form other prosecutor should never make any admission of hopes 
of getting a deal. Confession may be good for the soul. But in this 
instance, if President Clinton admitted to lying to the grand jury, 
he would make himself extremely vulnerable to an extremely aggressive 
prosecutor. The second problem with an admission -- political danger. 
Some members of Congress warn that such a change in his story now 
could backfire. A leading political analyst says if the president 
declares that he did commit perjury, it could cost him more votes 
in the house he would gain. A lot of the people that are remaining 
in the Clinton camp are doing so by saying it wasn't perjury. He may 
have lied about having an affair, but it wasn't perjury. The moment 
he concedes that he committed perjury, I think he pulls the rug out 
from under those folks. And a third problem -- an admission would 
be personally difficult for the president. Because, his harshest critics 
say he has trouble with the truth, whether it's about this affair 
-- I did not have sexual relations. -- or about inhaling marijuana 
or avoiding the Vietnam draft. And while the president's defenders 
insist his testimony was truthful, a Psychologist who studies lying 
says there's only one word for statements so calculated to mislead 
the public. He says something designed to lead us to believe nothing 
at all inappropriate happened which, to me, is a lie. And finally, 
it may come down to this, that the biggest problem of all for the 
president in making a statement now in saying that he lied may be 
that he still does not believe that he did. tom? Thanks very much. 
Pete Williams at the capital tonight. Of course, the American people 
have been weighing in on all of this. Capitol Hill switch boards have 
been jammed all day. There's been an avalanche of E-mail as well. 
They get about 80,000 of E-mails. On an average today, there were 
more than 1 million E-mails. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>