<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981215.1830.0564 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the holiday shopping season hits its peak, a stunning announcement 
from a major clothing chain tonight. Some of their winter jct jackets 
imported from Asia are trimmed with dog fur. They have been recalled, 
but it turns out this problem may be more widespread and involve other 
animals often thought of as only pets. "Dateline" has been working 
on this story. Tonight, we have more from NBC's Chris Hansen. At first 
glance, it looks like a scene from a pet shop or animal shelter -- 
a crate full of cats, waiting for adoption. But these cats have no 
hope of finding a loving home. This puppy is doomed as well. He will 
be kept in a cold, dark hovel until he is grown. Then, like these 
older dogs, he will be put in a sack and taken to his death. It's 
horrendous. It's horrific. There's nothing I can compare it to. Rick 
Swain took great risks to get these pictures, pictures of cruelty 
to cats and dogs that are often too violent and disturbing to air. 
I've never seen anything like it in my life. I mean, it's as ugly 
as anything I've ever seen. Swain is the chief investigator for the 
humane society of the United States, an organization dedicated to 
the protection of animals. He and German photojournalist and animal 
rights activist, Manfred karremann, went undercover in the republic 
of China, for 18 months. They went from factory to factory to determine 
whether pets were being turned into pelts. I'm never going to forget 
the conditions that these animals were kept in. I'm never going to 
forget what the slaughter looked like. Swain and the humane society 
have an agenda here. They are anti-fur, and they admittedly timed 
the release of their investigation to discourage holiday season fur 
sales. These animals aren't raised for China. They're raised for the 
American consumer, for the European consumer. In a letter to NBC news, 
the Chinese embassy in Washington disputes the humane society's allegations 
saying "this trade in dog and cats has nothing to do with the fur 
industry." Swain showed us the parka his investigators bought at a 
Burlington coat factory in New Jersey. He keeps in the collection 
of dog and cat coats he brought back from China. This man is the company 
lawyer. What did Burlington coat factory think it was buying? Burlington 
coat factory thought it was buying a parka with a hood that would 
be lined with coyote fur. He says based on what the humane society 
found, Burlington coat factory has ordered all of the coats pulled 
from its stores. Anyone who purchased one can bring it in for an exchange 
for refund. Rick Swain says the humane society of the United States 
is now going to focus on toughening U.S. import regulations. The Chinese 
government for its part says only recently have the Chinese begun 
to view dogs and cats as household pets. They also insist they do 
not use dog and cat fur for commercial purposes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>