<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981215.1830.0070 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. In great political struggles it almost always comes 
down to the numbers. And tonight, in the greatest political struggle 
of his life, the numbers are running against President Clinton. More 
and more members of the house are publicly announcing they will vote 
to impeach the president and send the charges against him to the Senate 
for a trial. If no more democrats defect, the president needs 14 republicans 
to avoid impeachment. So far he has only two who have publicly announced 
that they are with him. There are approximately 20 undecided republicans 
as the president returns tonight from mixed results on his Middle 
East trip. What can he do to keep the house from voting impeachment? 
NBC's David Bloom at the White House. David, what are they saying 
there? Well, Tom, tonight some of the president's top advisers leading 
democrats and key republicans all agree President Clinton will almost 
certainly be impeached later this week by the U.S. House of Representatives. 
A top democrat opposed to impeachment saying barring a miracle, it's 
over. One of the president's leading advisers says we don't have the 
votes and a Key democrat adds if the president can't do something 
extraordinary now, he's going to be impeached. Tonight, when the president 
returns from Israel, he'll confront the most dire political crisis 
in his life. These are the six republicans previously leaning against 
impeachment or are undecided who today said they will vote to impeach 
Mr. Clinton. It has become apparent and clear to me that the president 
did commit perjury in the civil deposition and in grand jury testimony. 
The decision is won of conscious and personal character and most importantly, 
was in the best interest of the country. Tonight, the New York republicans 
who has been spearheading the effort to censure rather than impeach 
all by conceded defeat. Right now, unless something unexpected and 
totally dramatic happens in the next 24 or 48 hours, he is going to 
be impeached. But against all odds, the White House does see a potential 
way out. Today, moderate republican Michael castle of Delaware proposed 
that he be censured, pay a fine of no less than $2 million and remain 
subject to criminal prosecution once he leaves office. Tomorrow, Christopher 
Shays meets with the president to ask him on behalf of a small number 
of still undecided republicans to admit he lied under oath. Tonight, 
as Clinton supporters work the halls of Congress to Muster votes, 
White House aides say that if Shays forecastal can give the 14 republicans 
he need togs survive, the president can consider paying a fine that 
can exceed $1 million and acknowledge he made false statements under 
oath. Now, not perjury, but false statements under oath. Even that 
is an admission President Clinton is so far refused to make. But tonight, 
a top democrat says the question is this, does the president now fear 
impeachment more than he fears indictment? One of the closest friends 
of the president says the White House is already gearing up psychologically 
for the next big battle, a likely Senate trial they never thought 
would come. tom? Thanks you very much. David Bloom at the White House 
tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>