<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981215.1830.0913 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight, the driving force to impeach the president. 
He is congressman Tom DeLay. Born in Texas, 51 years ago. Before entering 
politics, he owned and operated his own pest extermination business. 
Now in his seventh term in the house, he ranched number three in the 
republican leadership. But tonight, he is leading the growing campaign 
to impeach Bill Clinton. NBC's Lisa Myers tonight talks with him "in 
depth." "the whip" -- that's his official title. That means he whips 
republicans into line and counts votes. But insiders know him as "the 
hammer." So why do they call you the "hammer"? Frankly, I'm sometimes 
too Blunt, and too forthright in what I say and what i believe, and 
it comes across as being a little heavy-handed. This son of an oil 
rigger believed Bill Clinton should be impeached long before most 
anyone else. Any time you hear anybody calling for censure has never 
red the constitution of the United States. Then, with Newt Gingrich 
on his way out and the new speaker happy to keep his distance, DeLay 
stepped into a power vacuum to lead the charge against the president. 
Tough, shrewd, some say, Ruth less, he is a favorite in the conservative 
ranks of his party. DeLay may be the most powerful and most feared 
republican in the house today with or without his collection of whips. 
I actually know how to use them. Do they work well on members? I don't 
use them on members, although this one is a little worn. That makes 
him an easy target for democrats. I would just like to say that any 
discussion of pressure being put on members, which leaves out the 
name of Tom DeLay is equivalent to debating impeachment without mentioning 
Monica Lewinsky. The democrats complain that you've been strong-arming 
some of our members. Strong-arming, the democrats are trying anything 
and everything to put a Face on impeachment. And I'm the face, unfortunately, 
for them. I'm not strong-arming. I haven't asked one member to vote 
one way or another. Would you admit to helping educate some of them? 
Certainly, I think it's important. DeLay has kept every republican 
up to date on the evidence as well as on legal and historical arguments. 
He is one of the few people in town not surprised that the house appears 
about to impeach the president. You've said of the president "I don't 
believe a word he says." That's pretty harsh. Well, it's true. Unfortunately. 
Some say a vote to impeach President Clinton will be a personal victory 
for you. No, it won't. It will be a personal tragedy for me. It's 
a tragedy for our system of government. It's a tragedy that Bill Clinton 
led us to this point. But critics say it's DeLay who has driven Congress 
to the brink of impeachment by blocking a vote on censure. And he 
now boldly predicts that the Senate may ultimately remove Bill clinton 
from office. Lisa Myers, NBC news, the capitol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>