<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981215.2000.2909 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Times up to guess the answer to today's Geography Quiz. We are looking 
for an old European city, a beatific capital famous for its canals 
and infamous for its coffee houses. The answer, of course, is Amsterdam. 
There's been quite a stir on the streets of Amsterdam lately since 
a Dutch prince removed a certain article of clothing in public. At 
a recent African fashion show, 73-year-old Prince Klause wiggled free 
of his navy blue necktie, calling it "a snake around my neck." It 
caused a flurry of reports about a growing trend in tielessness there. 
Peter Brookman works for Radio Netherlands. And Peter, how have the 
Dutch reacted to Prince Klause's little strip show? As they usually 
react, quite remote. It took about 12 hours before some kind of official 
reaction came, and it was from the management of the Dutch Fashion 
Institute. And they set the action was very welcome, and in a way, 
he suggested that maybe now, Dutch men were tending to wear ties much 
less. But on the other hand, Dutch people in general are not so tie 
minded. So are people now going without ties, those who were wearing 
them? Oh, no, no. There were discussions on the radio, and in general, 
people said if you have to perform the company you're working with, 
for instance, me, when I'm introducing studio guests, I take care 
that I wear a tie, because it has to do with your appearance. But 
the moment the guest has gone or the moment I'm alone, I take my tie 
off. So you have a tie off now? Yeah, yeah, yeah. I wonder - You know, 
there was an American film, "It Happened One Night," where Clark Gable 
took off his shirt and there wasn't a T-shirt underneath, and that 
caused apparently a whole trend in T-shirtless men around the United 
States. I wonder if Prince Klause is seen as something of a trendsetter 
himself, or is this - Do you know him kind of doing his own little 
funky show and now people are going to forget it. Yeah, I think what 
you said last, that will happen, because men are aware that from time 
to time, they need a tie. There are much more stores now that sells 
ties than there were ten years ago. So I don't think he can stop that. 
What he may be trying to say was tie is like something of a corset. 
Do I use the proper word? Corset, yes. Yeah. They said at the beginning 
of this century, the women liberation, "Throw away your corset and 
be what you are." I think he did the same thing to men, tried to be 
a little bit more loose. And if you turn it around, tie is not a sign 
of you being a real gentleman. I see. So I think actually you were 
referring to bra burning maybe that happened in the '60s. Yeah, yeah, 
yeah, yeah, yeah. So is he tieless from now on, then? No. In the beginning 
of January, they have the grand reception of the foreign ambassadors 
in the palace, and he will wear a tie, I'm sure about that. Well, 
I guess, you know, if he had a lot of influence here in the United 
States, there'd be a lot of American men, I bet, who'd applaud him 
and whip off their ties as well. Oh, yes, people applauded him in 
the palace, also, where they undertook his action. They applauded 
for him, and they threw off their tie as well. But the moment they 
had to get into their limousines, they had their tie on again, because, 
I mean, that's society today. Peter Brookman is with the Dutch World 
Broadcasting Service or Radio Netherlands. He spoke to us from Amsterdam. 
Peter, thank you. You're welcome. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>