<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981215.2000.3107 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today's musical closer is set a reggae beat, two reggae beats, actually. 
THE WORLD's Marco Worman samples a couple of new releases from opposite 
sides of Jamaica's reggae generation gap. Even to a reggae novice, 
the titles of the two albums alone spell out where the musicians are 
coming from. One is called "Next Millennium" by the artist, Bounty 
Killer, and the other is "Gathering of the Spirits," by the Roots 
All Stars. Not much similarity, and there's a reason for that, says 
the University of Vermont's Charles Tunis Snyder, a specialist in 
what he calls the rhetoric of reggae music. There's sort of a different 
generational approach. They're a different thematic approach, and 
they have a different target audience. How can you buy or sell the 
sky, the warmth of the land? The idea is strange to us. If we do not 
own the freshness of the air and the sparkle of the water, how can 
you buy them? Reggae critic, Charles Tunis Snyder, hears different 
thematic paths taken by the musicians on these two CDs. Here's his 
take on the release by the elder Roots All Stars. "Gathering of the 
Spirits" album seems to be much more global. It's more about colonialism, 
about environmental destruction, and gender oppression in majority 
world countries. Whereas the Bounty Killer release is really looking 
at urban issues, urban sexuality, urban violence, lack of economic 
opportunities, stuff like that. As someone who examines symbolism 
and meaning in reggae lyrics, Professor Snyder keeps close tabs on 
the culture and morals of Jamaica. On the album by Bounty Killer, 
Snyder says a couple of songs deal with cultural themes that the veteran 
musicians on "Gathering of the Spirits" would probably find objectionable. 
On the Bounty Killer album, there is some talk about people getting 
in your way, shooting them down like Al Capone, using the guns of 
Navarone. And there's also a fairly strong anti-gay song on "The Next 
Millennium," Bounty Killer CD. I don't think that the people on the 
"Gathering of the Spirits" would disagree about the latter, unfortunately, 
but they might disagree about the former. In Jamaican society, views 
and attitudes, whether they be about homosexuality or gun possession 
are reflected in reggae lyrics. But with time, says Tunis Snyder, 
the views and the lyrics are changing, especially with the younger 
dance hall musicians. A lot of the artists who are most popular now 
in the reggae dance hall really have very conscious themes and give 
a lot of respect and credit to the older reggae musicians, whereas 
five or six years ago, popular dance hall tended to be a lot more 
carnal, a lot more crass, more pro violence. I really think that the 
roots and the rap, hip-hop camps will come together. They already 
have come together schematically on traditional reggae themes and 
traditional reggae symbolism. Even though they'll be different in 
terms of instrumentation in lyrics. I expect them to continue to come 
together more. On the Bounty Killer album, you hear those two camps 
converging on the track "No Super Star," where rapper, Bunny Rugs 
echoes the protest singer persona of the late Bob Marley. And on "Gathering 
of the Spirits," former Bob Marley backup singer, Judy Mowett, provides 
a glimpse of a soulful urban reggae future with this cover of the 
Donny Hathaway tune, "Someday We'll All be Free." For THE WORLD, this 
is Marco Worman. Judy Mowett brings today's proceedings to a reggae 
close with "Someday We'll All be Free." I'm Lisa Mullins thanking 
you for joining us today and inviting you to return tomorrow for another 
spin of THE WORLD. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>