<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981215.2000.2013 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today, the chairman of the U.N. weapons inspection team, Richard Butler, 
is putting the finishing touches on a report about Iraqi cooperation 
on the issue of weapons inspections. He will deliver it first to the 
Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, for a review. In the report, Mr. Butler 
will give his assessment of whether or not Iraq has complied with 
conditions established by the Security Council for the removal of 
sanctions against Iraq. The BBC's Rob Watson joins us from the United 
Nations in New York. And Rob, there seems to be a lot at stake here 
possibly. What is riding on this report? Well, on the face of it, 
what's riding on the report is a great deal, because the United States 
and Britain had warned that if Iraq wasn't giving full cooperation 
to the weapons inspectors, then military action could not be ruled 
out. On the other hand, what was also being offered to Iraq if it 
was felt to be keeping its side of the bargain was this much discussed 
and long-awaited comprehensive review, a look inside the Security 
Council at exactly how things stood between the U.N. and Iraq over 
fulfilling the Gulf War resolutions. But I think what's really important 
here is the mood in the White House, and in Downing Street, because 
it's only the U.S. and Britain are going to take major action. And 
I think if they really wanted to take drastic action, military action, 
they would do so whether or not Mr. Butler's report was particularly 
damning or not. Although it seems at this point that there is something 
of a dichotomy between the United States policy and what the secretary 
general or some of those at the United Nations feel at this point. 
The secretary-general apparently yesterday said that once Iraq met 
disarmament qualifications, there should be no excuse for keeping 
sanctions, especially the oil embargo. Doesn't that seem to contradict 
the American position? Absolutely. There is a general division, really, 
between the United States and Britain on the one hand, and the secretary 
general and some of Iraq's friends in the Security Council - Russia, 
France, and China - who of Iraq's friends, I don't think that they 
believe that Iraq has done all it should do on the disarmament front. 
But they tend to feel that the whole - this whole going from one possible 
military confrontation to another is hopelessly counterproductive 
and that it would really be better to lift the sanctions against Iraq 
whatever reservations however awful you may think that the Iraqi government 
says just because this endless tension isn't doing anyone any good. 
So in the long run, I wonder how significant you think Mr. Butler's 
reports are going to be in determining whether or not there is a lifting 
of the sanctions. I think it will be significant, but I don't think 
one should be naive about this. I don't think - In my mind, there 
is no doubt that Mr. Butler will not have been sitting in his little 
office closeted from the rest of the world thinking out of thin air 
what to write. I'm convinced he will have discussed with London and 
Washington the tone of his reports. This will not be a report, but 
comes as a surprise when it lands on the floor of the Security Council. 
The BBC's Rob Watson speaking to us from the United Nations in New 
York. Thank you, Rob. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>