<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981215.2000.1182 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. In the United States, it's baseball. 
In Canada, hockey reigns supreme. In Brazil, you better know your 
soccer. And in Puerto Rico, well, let's let our roving reporter, Boris 
Maximov, tell you what drives them crazy down there. Despite all the 
American flags fluttering in the breeze all over San Juan, despite 
all the McDonald's, Burger Kings, and strip malls, you know you're 
in a different country when you open the yellow pages and see an entire 
category devoted to the biggest spectator sport of Puerto Rico: cock 
fighting. Yes, cock fighting is bigger than baseball, bigger than 
basketball, bigger than anything in terms of attendance, in terms 
of popularity, in terms of pure animal passion. And the cock fight 
is quite a spectacle. Dozens and dozens of men, very few women, stand 
and sit in rows above the round ring. Two handlers bring out two roosters, 
show them to the assembled multitudes, and then cover each with a 
transparent plastic box. The birds face each other, the electronic 
clock starts the countdown, the boxes are lifted, and the birds go 
at each other immediately, pecking viciously, slashing each other 
with their spurs, flying up, ducking, picking. The crowd goes wild. 
Very surprisingly little blood and few feathers are flying. Each fight 
lasts the maximum of 15 minutes and ends in one of three ways: A bird 
gets killed, a bird runs away, or it can be declared a draw if the 
two roosters fight it out until the end. All very interesting if you 
see it for the first time. But what is the attraction for the regulars? 
It is more than excitement. It's one of the biggest sport here in 
Puerto Rico. What's so special about it? Blood. It's like Wrestlemania 
or even better. You make money out of it. So there's blood and money. 
That's right. You better believe it. Yes, the great part of the thrill 
is betting. As soon as the fight starts, men jump to their feet and 
start betting with each other furiously. That's the source of most 
of the noise you're hearing. It looks chaotic. People will wave their 
hands, flash one, two, three, five fingers, point at each other, shout 
trying to attract attention, et cetera. But appearances can be deceptive. 
There are rules here and pretty strict ones, too. It is, after all, 
called a gentleman's game here in Puerto Rico, as two regulars, Angel 
Gonzales and Ezekiel Calero kept insisting. Every time you bet with 
a person, if you lose, you bring the money to him. If you win, they 
bring it to you. Always? Always. Even when the birds are killed, you 
don't. You pick up the other one. why? The roosters are the animals 
that fight, not our... not us. There's a great deal of respect. That's 
right. If you ignore the roosters going at each other with all they've 
got, the entire place looks and feels a lot like the stock market 
before the computers. Men are sending each other obscure signals. 
The din is enormous. Everyone keeps one eye on the fight and the other 
on everybody else, at the same time frantically trying to attract 
attention of someone to place a bet. It also is one of the very few 
places in Puerto Rico where all classes of the rich, the poor, and 
those in the middle meet on equal terms. As long as you have the cash 
and are excited about the proceedings, step right up. So what do all 
those signals mean? How do you know who is offering what? For example, 
if a man raises one finger, what is he trying to bet? I asked one 
of the regulars, Isaac Morano. Well, when people raise one finger, 
what does that mean? A hundred or a thousand. After that, they put 
four finger up, the other guy likes the other chicken, what we'll 
say is a thousand mill. And when they say mill, say when they call 
the thing like this mill, and they have to expect from the other person 
to say, "bet." If you don't say bet, that means it's not bet yet. 
Each combination of fingers means a certain sum. The bets get placed 
almost every second during the fight. Just like the stock brokers, 
astute players also hedge their bets with a counter bet just in case 
their favorite bird loses. And after every 15 minutes, at the end 
of each fight, a hush descends on the auditorium. People settle their 
bets, collect money, discuss their fortunes or misfortunes with everyone 
around. Blood,, money, passion, all get mixed into the spectator sport 
in Puerto Rico. Serious money changes hands every few minutes. All 
of those present can contemplate death. After all, the roosters do 
die here. It is a brutal sport, bloody, and messy. But then, so is 
life. At least here, there are rules. For THE WORLD, this is Boris 
Maksimov. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>