<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981215.2000.0950 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton's historic visit to the Middle East hasn't dampened 
the media's enthusiasm for focusing on his troubles at home. American 
newspapers and broadcasts outlets remain transfixed on the impeachment 
drama, but around the world, the president's domestic woes have drawn 
scant attention. Many international newspapers covered his historic 
visit to Gaza without mentioning the "I" word once. One exception 
is London's "Guardian" newspaper, but its sole front-page mention 
of the matter doesn't appear until the seventh paragraph of its story 
on the president's trip to Gaza, and the comment is less than damning. 
"The president may be sapped by the threat of impeachment back home," 
the reporter writes, "but abroad, he can still generate enough electricity 
to light up an emerging nation." The next mention isn't until page 
12. And it's a similar story in Russia. And today's "Moscow Times," 
it's back on page seven. At the top of page seven, the headline reads, 
"Panel's Vote to Impeach Raises Heat on Clinton." David McKue is a 
"Moscow Times" news editor. The attitude among Russians is that America 
must be a very fortunate country indeed if it can afford to concern 
itself with what seem to them trivialities like the president's affair 
with a White House worker and the concept of the niceties of perjury 
compared to some of the things that go on in Russia are difficult, 
I think, for people over here to grasp. But the impeachment story 
hasn't been lost on readers in Israel, says Amos Frageev of the "Daily 
Mahareev". We ran this story today. The headline says, The Republicans, 
"The President is using his foreign policy to get away from personal 
matters." And the subtitle said, "Efforts are continuing to convince 
some of the Republicans to support the president. Recent polls says 
59 percent of the Americans object the impeachment." Frageev says 
his paper is giving the impeachment story prominence in part because 
to Israelis, Clinton is not very foreign. This is the kind of story 
that has its peaks and lows in terms of our readership, but basically, 
it is considered to be a major story because Clinton is a household 
name all over Israel. And not only the juicy parts interest our readers, 
but Clinton has a special link to Israel. He was here four times during 
his presidency. We don't treat President Clinton as another foreign 
leader. For most Israelis, Clinton is one of our own, so to speak. 
And in Italy, one of the countries where Clinton's domestic troubles 
still make the front pages, things are a little simpler. According 
to journalist, Carlo DeBlasio, it's the sex that sells. The Italians 
are always very sensitive on whatever has to do with sex because this 
is a Catholic country with two millennium of repression on sex life. 
DeBlasio adds, however, that the technicalities of the process are 
proving somewhat difficult for Italians to understand. A scan of the 
world's front pages today reveals that they may not be alone. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>