<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981215.2000.2183 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We turn now to another Arab nation that, like Iraq, has a longstanding 
dispute with the United Nations and Britain and that, again like Iraq, 
is seeking to end U.N.-imposed sanctions. Libya has been holding two 
suspects in the 1988 bombing of a U.S. airliner over Lockerbie, Scotland. 
Washington and London have been seeking the hand over of the men for 
a trial in the Netherlands. Today, Libya's top legislative body said 
it was satisfied with the plan. THE WORLD's Alan Dow has our story. 
When U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan returned from Libya last week 
without a firm agreement to hand over the two suspects. Some pundits 
suggested Annan's mission was a failure. The Libyan leader, Muammar 
Qadhafi, left the question of handing the two suspects over to his 
General People's Congress. Some said that was just another stalling 
tactic, but today, Libya's parliament OK'd a trial in a third country. 
"The General People's Congress expresses its satisfaction with the 
agreement reached between the Libyan's petition Americans on the trial 
of the Lockerbie suspects in a third country. This constitutes a fundamental 
basis for settling this problem. The decision was read aloud on Libyan 
TV. It's still unclear when or even if the two suspects will be handed 
over to the authorities in the Netherlands. The statement referred 
to continuing obstacles that are preventing the trial from going ahead 
as soon as possible. The main obstacle has been where the accused 
would serve their sentences if convicted. The United States and Britain 
insist it would have to be in Scotland. The Libyans have been equally 
adamant that if guilty, the defendants should serve their sentences 
in Libya. Colonel Qadhafi and his Congress have now endorsed the third-country 
trial, but Asher Shamresh, a Libyan exile and opponent of the Qadhafi 
thinks the Libyan leader is still worried. What he is worried about 
is what is this trial going to throw up? Is it going to drag the regime 
into other problems? Is it going to drag other names from the regime 
into the trial? Are there going to be other people, you know, to be 
charged with other crimes? That's what he's worried about. And it 
is quite possible that once these things come up in the trial, no 
government or any political pressure can stop, you know, the consequences. 
Despite today's action by the Libyan Congress, the final decision 
to hand over the suspects for trial still rests with Colonel Qadhafi. 
The People's Congress makes its own decisions, but the outcome is 
often predictable. Those decisions have to be made in accordance with 
the colonel's own ideas on what the decision should be. George Joffey 
of London's Royal Institute of International Affairs says the relationship 
between Muammar Qadhafi and the General People's Congress only appears 
democratic. Alongside that very democratic external structure, they 
grow up a parallel structure, a structure of control and manipulation. 
And beyond that, too, there grew up a very repressive security apparatus 
as well, controlled by members of his own tribal group and his own 
family. Joffey says Libyans are fed up with the economic sanctions, 
therefore, any attempt by Colonel Qadhafi to end them would raise 
his esteem in the eyes of ordinary Libyans. The sanctions foisted 
upon them by the United States and later by the United Nations have 
isolated them, not Colonel Qadhafi, have punished them, not the colonel 
and his close associates. And they feel profoundly disenchanted and 
profoundly hostile to an outside world which has treated them with 
what they see as such unjust contempt. The United States reacted cautiously 
to today's announcement by the Libyan Congress. A National Security 
Council spokesman said Libya must hand over the suspects. "Justice 
has been delayed for almost ten years in this case," he added, "and 
it's time for Libya to meet its obligations. For THE WORLD, I'm Alan 
Dow in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>