<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981215.2000.2471 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Among the more dreaded aspects of international air travel are the 
unending lines that await you at the point of entry. And among the 
more intriguing ways to reduce the waiting time is something called 
INSPASS. It's a biometric system of identification, biometric like 
voice recognition, retinal scans, or facial measuring systems. They 
all check you against previous measurements to grant you access to 
computer systems and buildings and the like. Well, this new system 
works the same way, but it uses your hand. THE WORLD's Clark Board 
reports on the arrival of INSPASS. As British author Douglas Adams 
once wrote, it can hardly be a coincidence that no language on earth 
has ever produced the expression, "as pretty as an airport." Aesthetics 
aside, the international arrivals area at the end of a long-haul flight 
can be a miserable place. The U.S. Immigration and Naturalization 
Service thinks it could be better and that biometric technology can 
help. Its developed a program called INSPASS, short for the Immigration 
and Naturalization Service Passenger Accelerated Service System. It's 
currently up and running at seven airports in North America. The program 
is open to frequent business travelers from the United States, Canada, 
Bermuda, and 26 other countries. Mike Hatcher is a vice president 
at EDS, the company hired to help design INSPASS. If it speeds you 
through a - You know, if you avoid a long line at an airport because 
you're able to go through, there is the benefit that people see. So, 
yeah, as long as there's benefit for the public and service to the 
citizen, then I think folks feel very good about that. INSPASS operates 
by measuring a person's hand geometry. Think of it as a three dimensional 
picture of your hand translated into nine or ten numbers, which are 
then stored on a card with a magnetic stripe. The card and your hand, 
along with your passport, are then all you need to enter the country. 
Welcome to Newark International Airport's terminal B, the first INS 
facility to test INSPASS. Since 1993, an INSPASS machine has been 
here electronically welcoming visitors to the United States. Standing 
in front of the INSPASS kiosk, which looks a lot like an ATM machine 
but doesn't spit out tens of twenties, INS area port director, John 
Thompson, runs through the drill. So when you're issued your card 
and you arrive on a international flight, you'd bypass the queuing 
areas, come straight to the INSPASS kiosk, and you take the card and 
insert it into the reader, which I'm doing right now, and it's checking 
me against the various databases that they have and is now processing 
information. The machine is now prompting me to place my hand into 
the reader, which I'm doing so. And at this point in time now, everything's 
checked out OK. It's now generating the receipt. I take the receipt 
out of the machine and I go right straight down to customs and get 
my luggage. That process takes only 30 seconds when all goes well, 
and with thousands of international travelers coming through Newark's 
56 non INSPASS booths every day, Thompson says the lines can sometimes 
feel as if they're backed up to Hoboken. When you - If you arrive 
at this airport, you could be standing in a queue for up to 20 minutes 
during our peak arrival periods of times. So with this card and kiosk, 
you bypass that whole - You go right through the machine, and you 
could be out of here. So you could save easily 20 minutes on a given 
day. They love it. They rave about it. We wondered why we didn't do 
this years ago. It's in the afternoon, and things are getting busy 
in the international arrivals hall, so busy, in fact, that a line 
is forming even here at Newark's one INSPASS kiosk. An American pilot 
just in from Milan happens to get rejected. What you got? Monitor. 
On the whole, if you found that it works well or that it doesn't work 
that well? Yes, just look at the line out here versus the line here. 
It's well worth the time to go get yourself processed for it, yeah. 
We're pleased with it so far. Is it frustrating, though, when that 
kind of stuff happens? No, no. You just got to go with the flow. The 
on-duty immigration officer assigned to INSPASS says that not everyone's 
so philosophical about the system switches. But one Spanish passenger 
who's used INSPASS for two years says the system has improved. Lately, 
they improved it because before, it was 50/50 it was going to work, 
but now it's fairly reliable.1 Most travelers seem to agree. I love 
it. It's wonderful. I'm from Sweden. And how long have you been using 
the INSPASS? First time I'm using it. And how was it using it for 
the first time? It was great compared with standing in line. You feel 
when you're coming here, you feel like you're a piece of cattle standing 
in line. I mean, that's not what we are treated in Europe normally. 
It's unbelievable. The INS's John Thompson says he's not surprised 
that these travelers like INSPASS. If you have an ATM machine and 
some live tellers, you'll notice the people will be willing to line 
up to an ATM machine and avoid the personal human contact, 'cause, 
you know, ATM machines and our kiosk doesn't talk back. It doesn't 
- It always welcomes you. It's kind of funny, but that seems to be 
human nature. They'd rather deal with something automated like this 
and a lot of times with a live person. But not everyone welcomes the 
kind of biometric identification that INSPASS employs. Evan Hendricks, 
who edits the "Privacy Times" newsletter in Washington, worries about 
what happens when the private sector starts using the technology. 
There are very few restrictions on how private sector companies collect 
and use information, whether they want to disclose it or sell it. 
That would be one concern. And the other concern with this sort of 
technology is it can be used surreptitiously. You could set up systems 
where people are putting their hand down and not know that they're 
being identified, one, by their hand scan; and two, the hand scan 
can be used to connect them to a computer profile. So that would really 
be one of the heightened concerns about this sort of system in the 
future. Despite those concerns, you're probably going to see more 
and more biometric base systems like INSPASS in the not-so-distant 
future, and a lot of people won't mind letting big brother in the 
door if he gets them through the airport 20 minutes faster. For THE 
WORLD, this is Clark Boyd. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>