<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981215.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton is heading home from the Middle East today to a 
political culture almost as irascible as the one he leaves behind. 
Mr. Clinton is due to return to Washington a day and a half before 
the House of Representatives opens debate on four articles of impeachment. 
President Clinton is returning from a three-day trip to Israel and 
Palestinian territory not exactly triumphant but far from empty handed. 
THE WORLD's Richard Myron wraps up the president's day. President 
Clinton began his day with an early-morning meeting with Israeli Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat at 
the Aris check point between Israel and the Gaza Strip. Outside, there 
was a sense of anticipation and excitement. Inside, President Clinton 
tried to break the deadlock in the implementation of the Wye memorandum. 
We sat there, you know, for an hour long, an hour and 25 minutes today, 
with all the parties in the room, including the major members of each 
side's team, as well as the leaders, and everybody had their say. 
And there was some - We got beyond the, you know, people stating their 
own positions to actual conversation, and I'm quite hopeful. I think, 
you know, the proof is always in what happens tomorrow, not what happens 
today. But I think at least we got a process set up, and we can go 
forward. Yesterday, the Palestine National Council voted to nullify 
that part of it's charter calling for Israel's destruction, as Israel 
had demanded. But today, Prime Minister Netanyahu said the Palestinians 
still have more to do, such as prevent anti-Israeli incitement, and 
gather up illegal weapons in the West Bank. I think both sides understand 
now where the other stands, and I think the important thing is that 
- to understand that we are committed to a mutual peace. There will 
be redeployment speedily as soon as the Palestinians fulfill their 
part, the other provisions. And if they do it, I cannot tell you how 
much time it would take. The faster they do it, the faster we'll redeploy. 
The Palestinian leadership reacted with anger. Palestinian legislator 
Hanan Ashwari says the people are losing faith in the peace process. 
The more Netanyahu tries to fabricate pre-conditions and more pressures 
and so on in order to avoid the implementation himself, then I think 
that it's very clear that this process is not only - not going anywhere, 
but rather than as an instrument of building confidence and trust, 
as a confidence-destroying instrument. And it's creating a situation 
that's extremely volatile and unstable. After the meeting with the 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders, President Clinton, along with the 
first lady and Chelsea, went to Bethlehem to visit the birthplace 
of Jesus. In the shadow of the Church of Nativity, a choir of Palestinian 
children sang carols, as the president lit a candle on the Christmas 
tree. Bethlehem is in Palestinian-controlled territory, and joining 
the first family was the first Palestinian family: Yasser Arafat, 
his wife, Suha, and their daughter, Sahua. Palestinians welcomed the 
president's trip to Bethlehem and Gaza, but according to Palestinian 
analysts, Marty Abdul Hardy, people are looking for more. The street 
is not satisfied. The street is full of frustration and anger and 
saying, "Then what, what? Our leader is still behind bars. Our land 
has been confiscated. Our trees have been uprooted. Occupation is 
still here. We should end occupation." But there's unlikely to be 
any immediate movement in the peace process, despite the danger of 
trouble and despite diplomatic efforts by the Americans. Wye is in 
the water. Wye is a victim of internal Israeli politics. Israeli writer, 
Hersch Goodman. Next Monday, the 21st I think it is, of December, 
that Netanyahu faces a critical vote in the Knesset that could call 
for early elections. And there will be no withdrawal, and there will 
be no release of prisoners. There will be no concessions. There will 
be nothing that will be interpreted as weakness until after Monday. 
Given such domestic political concerns, along with the increased violence 
on the West Bank, and Israel's refusal to continue its troop withdrawals, 
President Clinton's efforts were unlikely to yield a breakthrough. 
Still, Mr. Clinton says the peace process is back on track. His National 
Security advisor qualified his boss's assessment, noting it's a bumpy 
track. For THE WORLD, this is Richard Myron in Jerusalem. To see how 
President Clinton's Middle East trip has been received by Arab and 
Jewish constituencies here, we turn to two prominent leaders in the 
Arab and Jewish communities in the United States. James Zogby is president 
of the Arab-American Institute. He joins us on a cell phone as he 
travels to Gaza. Malcolm Honline is executive chairman of the Conference 
of Presidents of major Jewish organizations. He joins us from his 
office in New York. Let's start off with you, Malcolm Honline. How 
has President Clinton's trip gone so far from your perspective here 
in the United States? Well, we welcomed the trip, and we prayed for 
its success, and believe that there was an achievement in the vote 
in Gaza yesterday. But the real test will come with a follow up with 
the implementation of the commitments that were undertaken in the 
Wye agreements, and seeing to the expression of appreciation for the 
president's efforts by the compliance with the agreements and the 
commitments that were undertaken. That is yet to be proven. And James 
Zogby, do you have the same kind of concerns as well? I wonder if 
in some ways you did not see the trip as a complete success, given 
the fact that the Palestinian vote was no surprise, the vote taken 
to omit the section from the... Ratification. And a vote of ratification 
for an issue that has been resolved to the satisfaction of the Israeli 
government in 1996, and also to the satisfaction of the United States 
in 1996. We should say what that is. This is the omission of the clause 
that calls for the destruction of Israel. I would add that while Palestinians 
have done that, we have not had a similar onus place in other parties 
in Israel. The Harut Party, which is one of the key parties in the 
Likud block, has in its charter that both the East and West Bank of 
the Jordan River are theirs. And they have not done that, and I don't 
think Palestinians are asking them to do that. They're asking rather 
for performance on the ground by withdrawing from territory, by recognizing 
Palestinian rights. But the real accomplishment for Palestinians and 
I think for the peace process, was the president's very powerful statement 
to Palestinians yesterday. His understanding of the Palestinian reality 
is acknowledgment of their suffering and his tribute to their aspirations 
to live as an independent free people I think was very, very deeply 
appreciated and will, I think, inspire them to move forward. That 
was a very strong statement by the president yesterday basically saying 
that Palestinians now have a chance to determine their own destiny 
on their own land, perhaps a statement stopping just short of endorsing 
statehood among the Palestinians. Mr. Honline, I wonder if that concerns 
you. Are you concerned about the president's remarks yesterday? Well, 
there are things that the president said that are of concern. The 
fact is that it's the Israelis who have given the Palestinians the 
first opportunity through the autonomy plan adopted at Camp David 
and proposed then by Prime Minister Begin and followed by all the 
subsequent governments to give the Palestinians - and 98 percent of 
Palestinians today live under Palestinian control - the first right 
to determine their day-to-day lives. That does not say the same thing 
as sovereignty in statehood, which America has always opposed. The 
key is, though, the performance on the ground. And until we see the 
confiscation of weapons, the arrest of those who have been involved 
in terror, the reduction of the police force, all the things that 
we're committed to by the Palestinians in this agreement and in the 
Oslo agreements, that is really the key. It's what's the performance 
on the ground, which enable Israel then to move ahead with further 
concessions, because Israel has turned over the first concession of 
land. The Wye accords require that certain markets be met in order 
for the second redeployments to take place and the third redeployment 
as part of that agreement. Mr. Zogby, do you want to respond to that? 
Let me just say this. In this regard to implementation, you know there 
have been lots of problems here. This process was moving along, and 
we have had a number of roadblocks in the last two years. And the 
president's been trying real hard to move it forward. We've achieved 
the compromise of a compromise of a compromise of a compromise and 
still, the current Israeli government is creating today some new conditions 
that they want met but go beyond even where the Wye agreement was. 
I think that what we ought to do is listen very clearly to what the 
president said. Let us implement what we have. Let us trust each other 
and move forward. Malcom Honline, let me ask you then, the president's 
remarks, given the nature of them, what kind of response do you think 
they'll create in the Jewish community here in the United States? 
I mean, is there a sense that the president will be hurting in terms 
of support for him or for the Democratic Party? No. And I think that 
people separate the issues, but American Jews support the president's 
efforts and appreciate the commitment he made going at this time, 
the commitment of the administration to try and help the parties reach 
an agreement. The United States has obviously been up front and played 
a critical role in bringing things to the point where they are and 
will continue to play an important role. Well, thank you both for 
speaking with us. Malcolm Honline is the executive chairman of the 
Conference of Presidents of Major Jewish Organizations, and James 
Zogby is the president of the American-Arab Institute. He spoke to 
us on his cell phone as he traveled in Gaza. Thank you both. We appreciate 
it. You're very welcome. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>