<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981215.0500.0460 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While President Clinton helps to fend off crisis in the Middle East, 
his administration faces a crisis at home. The House of Representatives 
is expected to vote later this week on articles of impeachment against 
the president for his conduct relating to his relationship with a 
White House intern. Most observers say the outcome of that impeachment 
vote in the House is too close to call. If the House of Representatives 
does pass articles of impeachment, the matter moves to the U.S. Senate 
where a trial is held to determine whether Mr. Clinton should be forced 
out of office. As the House vote draws near, the possibility of a 
Senate trial is the subject of heightened concern. Correspondent David 
Swan reports. The Senate is being very careful not to prejudge the 
case. In an unusual joint statement, Republican leader Trent Lott 
and Democratic leader Tom Daschle have declared they will make no 
official comment unless and until the House impeaches the president. 
This has not stopped others from talking, including Democratic Congressman 
Charles Schumer, who sits on the House Judiciary Committee but moves 
to the Senate next year. If the House impeaches, we will tie up all 
three branches of government for months and months. The House Judiciary 
Committee Republicans will prosecute the case with all of the zeal 
that we have seen thus far. The president will call witness after 
witness because he can and because to defend himself, he must. The 
Supreme Court chief justice will hear the case in the Senate. The 
Senate will be paralyzed for legislating. The prospect of a government 
in deadlock is an argument often raised by anti-impeachment forces. 
Democrats and some legal scholars warn the case could drag on for 
months, though a majority leader Lott has suggested it would only 
take days or weeks. If there is a trial, Chief Justice William Rehnquist 
will preside with House Republicans acting as prosecutors and the 
president's lawyers defending him. The 100 senators will simply sit 
and listen like any jury. It is not clear if or when they would also 
find time to pass bills. Democrat Ron Wyden thinks he and his colleagues 
would be neglecting their duty if they let the trial hold up the country's 
other business. Certainly, senators ought to be asked to work overtime 
to insure that both of those constitutional obligations are addressed. 
No matter how long the trial lasts, few observers predict the Senate 
will find Mr. Clinton guilty and force him from office. Conviction 
requires a two-thirds majority or 67 votes, and that would take 12 
of the 45 Senate Democrats and all 55 Republicans. Congressman Henry 
Hyde, whose Judiciary Committee handles impeachment in the House, 
acknowledges this now appears unlikely. I don't have any idea other 
than conventional wisdom which says the votes are not there, but I'm 
hopeful if we can make a case on the floor and if we can get this 
to the Senate, that some senators would take a second and hard look 
at what we have. The prospect of a divisive, fruitless trial has triggered 
discussion about other options, perhaps a form of plea bargain or 
censure like the measure now being offered by House Democrats. A professor 
of government and political science at Georgetown University, Steven 
Wayne, agrees the president's acquittal is all but certain, but he 
says, under the Constitution, the Senate is still duty bound to take 
up the case. We know the outcome of the trial, but I think once the 
ball starts rolling, you have to play according to the rules, and 
I think the rules and precedent in this case is if the House votes 
a bill of impeachment, the Senate is the trying body. The only previous 
impeachment trial took place 130 years ago when President Andrew Johnson 
was acquitted by a one-vote margin. That case was centered on a president's 
affair but on whether he had the power to fire the secretary of war 
with Congress' consent. There was no radio, television, or Internet 
to spread the proceedings instantly worldwide, but historians say 
there was a venomous partisan atmosphere. If nothing else, that part 
of the trial may be repeated this time. David Swan, VOA News, Capitol 
Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>