<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981215.1600.0574 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While an impeachment decision by the House draws closer, President 
Clinton has been in the Middle East trying to boost the prospects 
for peace in the region. He capped his visit with a summit with Israeli 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat. 
Mr. Clinton expressed satisfaction with the outcome, but VOA's David 
Gullis reports that obstacles remain to implementing the Wye River 
accords. Mr. Clinton brought the two leaders together at Israel's 
Aeris check point along the Gaza Strip in an effort to put the trouble-ridden 
implementation of the Wye River agreement back on track. The president 
emerged after the two-hour meeting to say that he achieved what he 
set out to on the Middle East mission and the two sides had recommitted 
themselves to resolving their many disputes. But he conceded that 
there will be delay in the critical next step in the process, an Israeli 
pull back from another five percent of the West Bank that is scheduled 
to occur on Friday. We have to resolve a number of issues. agreed 
upon it to go forward. I think it would be enforcing it if we got 
too far behind schedule, and I hope we can keep pretty much to the 
schedule that's there. But that's obviously - That remains to be worked 
out here. We believe in keeping to these schedules as much as possible, 
and we work very hard to put all this back on track here. I do think 
that we are back on track. We're going to see this through, and I 
feel good about where we are now. Mr. Clinton paid an unprecedented 
visit to Palestinian-controlled Gaza Monday and witnessed a dramatic 
reaffirmation of the nullification of anti-Israel clauses of the Palestinian 
charter by hundreds of Palestinian leaders. Palestinian leader Arafat 
left the meeting without comment, but Mr. Netanyahu told reporters 
the Palestinian action on the charter resulted from a tough approach 
by Israel. He said that will not change even in the face of U.S. pressure. 
I think the Americans are wise enough to understand that no amount 
of pressure can force Israel to relinquish its capital, Jerusalem, 
that no amount of pressure will force us to release terrorist murderers, 
that no amount of pressure will force us to make withdrawals when 
the Palestinians don't carry out their part. It's just not a subject 
on the table, and I think the president thinks in different terms. 
I think the administration is wise enough and clear enough to understand 
that the only peace that will move forward is a peace which the Palestinians 
comply with and not only Israel. Mr. Netanyahu said Israel is ready 
to make the West Bank re-deployment speedily if the Palestinians fulfill 
their responsibilities. Though he faces a no confidence vote in parliament 
soon, he said that would not affect his decisions on the peace process. 
David Gullis, VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>