<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981215.1600.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton's chances of becoming only the second president 
in history impeached by the House of Representatives continued to 
grow Tuesday as more Republican moderates announced they would support 
impeachment in a vote by the full House later this week. The Republican 
push for impeachment seems to fly in the face of public opinion polls, 
which continue to show that more than 60 percent of Americans are 
against the idea and would prefer a lesser form of punishment known 
as censure. VOA national correspondent Jim Malone reports on how public 
opinion is working both for and against the president. The impeachment 
debate dominates the nation's air waves. Radio and television call-in 
shows take the nation's political pulse on an hourly basis, giving 
equal time to those who want the president thrown out of office. He 
took an oath when he testified, betrayed it. How can you trust a man 
like that to run our country? And those who want him to stay. I don't 
agree with his actions. I deplore what he's done, but I don't think 
that the whole country should suffer for it. The polls have been fairly 
consistent since the Clinton/Lewinsky scandal first broke in January. 
The president's public approval rating has remained for the most part 
at 60 percent or higher, and most Americans continue to oppose impeachment 
by the House, which would lead to Senate trial where the president 
could be removed from office. But while public opinion seems to be 
on the president's side, it appears to be more passive than aggressive 
in its support of the president. Pollsters like Andrew Kohut say the 
public has become disengaged from the impeachment debate because they 
believe it's being driven by pure partisan politics. The public doesn't 
like what they see. They see a very partisan argument, straight line 
votes. Most people thinking that the Republicans want to get rid of 
him not because it's a serious crime, because it's political. Some 
Republicans take pride in the fact that they're going against public 
opinion in their pursuit of the president. The former education secretary 
in the Reagan administration, Bill Bennett, has long urged Republicans 
to proceed with impeachment without regard to what the polls say. 
This country was founded by people who said, "Let's do the right thing 
whether popular or not." I think they are doing the right thing. I 
think they deserve credit. Whether the public will give them credit 
is a separate question. Even if the president is impeached by the 
House, most political analysts expect he would survive an impeachment 
trial in the Senate. But former Clinton political adviser, Dick Morris, 
argues that the likelihood of a Senate acquittal actually works against 
the president in this week's House vote on impeachment. Oddly enough, 
the more likely he is to be acquitted for the Senate to let him off, 
the more likely it is that the House will impeach him, because at 
that point, impeachment only becomes a strong form of censure. And 
it's kind of a free shot on goal for any of the Republicans. One of 
his problems is that these days, the one thing he's always worked 
on, which is to win public opinion, doesn't matter, because the Republicans 
are much more concerned about what their political base thinks than 
what they independent voters in the country think. But some pollsters 
believe the Republicans eventually could pay a steep political price 
if the continue to push for the president's removal from office in 
the face of the opinion polls. Several Democratic and even a few Republican 
political strategists say the Republican drive for impeachment could 
be turned against them in the 2000 election campaign and could help 
the Democrats recapture control of the House which they lost to the 
Republicans in 1994. Jim Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>