<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981215.0500.3226 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York City based Trans-Siberian Orchestra is out with a new 
album for this holiday season called "The Christmas Attic." And VOA's 
Bernie Bernard spoke with Paul O'Neill, the founder and creator of 
the group. "The Christmas Attic," part two of a holiday trilogy, is 
told through the eyes of a small girl. Doubting the existence of Santa 
Claus, she climbs to the attic to listen for reindeer hooves and discovers 
an old trunk containing letters from many years before. Through the 
help of an angel, the child reads and ponders the letters, as she 
regains her faith in the magic of Christmas and the holiday spirit. 
Trans-Siberian Orchestra's producer, arranger, musician, and songwriter, 
Paul O'Neill shares his vision for "The Christmas Attic." Basically, 
the overall theme for it is how Christmas has also the same effect 
way back in the past, and the way thing are looking it will have the 
same effect on people in the future. We tried to do that musically, 
too, like some of the songs that we did new arrangements of, one called 
"March of the Kings," was originally written in the year 1200. And 
I've always found it fascinating that a melody that was written during 
the crusades, people still recognize today and it still has impact 
today and will probably have impact another thousand years from now. 
The Trans-Siberian Orchestra presents music that ranges from traditional 
to modern, with thundering guitars and keyboards weaving with lush 
orchestral arrangements. There's even a fantasy blues tune about the 
first jazz musician in King Herod's court, who saves the lives of 
the wandering magi or three kings seeking the Christ child. Producer 
Paul O'Neill uses rock musicians, Broadway vocalists, symphony players, 
and performers from some of the New York's finest recording studios, 
and he says the entire work complements that same eclectic mix. You 
try to write the lyrics that they're so good they would stand up as 
poetry, and you try to write the music so it doesn't need the lyrics. 
But then when you put them together, you know, sum of the parts is 
greater than the whole, and then you're always looking for that extra 
angle, and that's where the Broadway, the rock opera comes in, because 
you put the song in the context of the story, it cuts that much deeper. 
"The Christmas Attic" theatrical fantasy also includes a narrative 
poem that ties all the songs together. For attics have their secrets, 
and toys will have theirs, too, like who wants hell to love them, 
when they last when new. And so it's here that they must wait between 
reality and dream, hoping all will be remembered and that all can 
be redeemed. For the holiday season, Paul O'Neill will be presenting 
live performances of "The Christmas Attic" in the New York City area. 
He hopes to take a full production on the road next year to coincide 
with the final part of his Christmas trilogy. I'm Bernie Bernard. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>