<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981215.1600.0738 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Africa, a peacekeeping effort by the French in Rwanda in 1994 brought 
accusations of aiding the Hutus in the massacres of ethnic Tutsis. 
However, a just released French parliamentary inquiry into the Rwanda 
massacres says that France was not as has been alleged, an accomplice 
to the killings. Instead, it says France was forced to go it alone, 
while the rest of the world community stood aside and committed strategic 
errors in doing so. Julian Nundy reports. Parliamentary committee's 
report published Tuesday rejects allegations of French complicity. 
Instead, it uses the words "trapped" and "manipulated" to describe 
France's dilemma. It says France was hampered by its own strategy 
and manipulated by the Hutu-led Rwandan government at the time. It 
insists that it was Rwandans alone who carried out the killings. According 
to the United Nations, some 850,000 people, mostly ethnic Tutsis, 
were massacred in events that have been officially classified as genocide. 
Since the killings in 1994, there have been consistent allegations 
that France continued to supply arms to the Hutus then running Rwanda, 
and that French Army officers sent as part of a peacekeeping operation 
provided other assistance. Some French press reports even charge the 
French officers fired artillery at Tutsi positions. To define France's 
responsibilities, the parliamentary committee was set up under a former 
socialist defense minister, Paul Pelas, earlier this year. It heard 
the evidence of dozens of witnesses, many of them in private for reasons 
of state security. Those heard in closed session included military 
and intelligence chiefs. Among those heard publicly was Jean Christof 
Mitterand, the son of the late Socialist president, Francois Mitterand, 
and his father's main adviser on African affairs. At the time of the 
massacres, Francois Mitterand was still president. Giabrana, a Socialist 
member of the French parliament, said that France had underestimated 
the dangers of genocide when it intervened on a mission to restore 
peace. Mr. Giabrana said France was suspicious of ethnic Tutsi leaders 
because it suspected them of leading a campaign on behalf of the United 
States and other English speaking countries in the Great Lakes region 
of Africa. The parliamentary report backs the thesis of Edwar Palodeur, 
who was then France's conservative prime minister, that France was 
the only country that tried to stop the carnage. It says that the 
United States, for example, was still smarting from the losses it 
suffered when it sent peacekeeping forces to Somalia the previous 
year therefore reluctant to get involved in a new African mission. 
Julian Nundy for VOA News, Paris. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>