<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981215.0500.2252 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here in Washington, the White House is making a last ditch attempt 
to ward off President Clinton's impeachment by the U.S. House of Representatives. 
Mr. Clinton said in Gaza Monday, he is ready to reach a reasonable 
compromise with Congress over the Monica Lewinsky scandal. His spokesman, 
Joe Lockhart, says the effort to remove Mr. Clinton through impeachment 
is a purely partisan attempt. There is a, you know, a small group 
of the Republican leadership who have made it their mission in life 
to remove the president against perhaps the will of the House, certainly 
against the will of the American public, and we believe against the 
best interests of the future of our country. So again, I don't think 
that they'd be fighting so hard to keep it from coming to the floor 
if they didn't think there was a solid chance of it passing. Mr. Lockhart 
says confidential discussions are underway with those members of Congress 
who remain undecided ahead of an impeachment vote. The White House, 
meanwhile, is pushing the idea of an alternative punishment for President 
Clinton, not impeachment but censure. VOA's Paula Wolfson has more 
on that. The battle over censure is growing. Republican leaders say 
they will not allow a vote in the full House on this alternative to 
impeachment. They say a strongly worded statement condemning the president's 
actions but minus the threat of removal from office is little more 
than a slap on the wrist. Vice President Al Gore is fighting back. 
What the leadership of the Congress has done is to present any kind 
of compromise along the lines that the American people want to see. 
And instead, they threaten to put the country through this long ordeal 
that would ensue, and it's not the right thing to do. The White House 
knows many undecided members of the House of Representatives prefer 
censure, and minus that option, could be persuaded to vote for impeachment. 
Over the last few days, supporters of the president have watched in 
horror as several moderate Republicans have announced their intention 
to vote to impeach, and the latest news is not good for the White 
House. Connecticut Congressman Christopher Shays, one of the first 
Republicans to declare his opposition to impeachment, says he's having 
second thoughts. Mr. Shays says he wants a meeting with President 
Clinton to discuss his case and acknowledges his level of support 
is slipping. The comments from Mr. Shays are just the latest sign 
of trouble for the White House. Moderate Republicans like Christopher 
Shays are likely to cast the deciding votes on impeachment, a vote 
that is now too close to call. President Clinton faces four articles 
of impeachment when the House convenes on Thursday, all stemming from 
his efforts to conceal his relationship with former White House intern 
Monica Lewinsky. If the House votes to impeach, a trial will be held 
in the Senate to determine if Bill Clinton's misdeeds warrant his 
removal from office. Paula Wolfson, VOA News, Capitol Hill. The full 
U.S. House of Representatives will begin debating the impeachment 
issue Thursday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>