<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981215.1600.3169 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, it's time now for our weekly look a the most popular films at 
North American theaters. There are two new entries on the top five 
chart, including the latest big screen adventure "In the Final Frontier," 
which beams onto the chart in first place. Alan Silverman has the 
list, starting with some animated youngsters at number five. Well, 
just have an ant sister. "The Rugrats Movie" takes a rollicking ride 
with the precocious toddlers from a popular cable TV show from the 
Nickelodeon channel. The cartoon characters end up in fifth place. 
At number four, "Enemy of the State. The political thriller co-stars 
Will Smith and Gene Hackman as unlikely allies against a renegade 
government security agency. Why are the after me? I don't know, and 
I don't want to know. Here they come. "Enemy of the State" slips to 
fourth place. A bitter sweet fantasy opens up at number three. Mom, 
it's a snowman. I saw him. Terrific job. No. Mom, he's alive. In "Jack 
Frost," a musician, his career always keeps him away from his loving 
wife and growing son, dies in a car accident. But he magically comes 
back transformed into a rotund snowman and determined to be a companion 
to his son. Charlie, it's me, Dad. Honest. Ah, ah, get away from me. 
I can't explain the part about me being a snowman, but Charlie. Michael 
Keaton stars as the human character and as the voice of the computer-animated 
snowman. It's not like I, you know, a script came and said, you know, 
it's a movie where you play a snowman and I went "Yes, I've been waiting 
for this snowman shot. Finally. Got the snowman deal." No, it wasn't 
like that. It was more like, "A snowman? OK." You know, I mean, there's 
been stupider ideas that turned out to be good movies, so I didn't 
go, "I ain't playing on snowman." I never did that. I said, "OK, I 
wouldn't have thought of that." Then I finally read it and started 
crying at about 70 and thinking, "OK, I know I'm emotionally unstable." 
But, you know, I know there's heart to this thing. Despite a chilly 
reception from most critics, Jack Frost opens in third place. "A Bug's 
Life" drops to number two. The computer-animated fable of hardworking 
ants and marauding grasshoppers features the voice of, among others, 
Oscar-winner Kevin Spacey, as the leader of the grasshoppers. Not 
because I'm in it or my voice is in it, but I knew it was just - I 
marveled at it. I absolutely thought this is so great, 'cause all 
the kids are like screaming and yelling. And you know, when I get 
eaten, they just like cheer. It's just what they're capable of doing, 
the imagination. I mean, when I get taken to a world, there's nothing 
more exciting for me 'cause I have so many memories as a kid of sitting 
in the back of a theater and the lights are going down, and that light 
going over your head, and the screen, and just being completely dominated 
by this world. It's a bug eat bug world out there, Princess. One of 
those circle of life kind of things. "A Bug's Life" is bumped from 
the top by the latest voyage of the Starship Enterprise. Hometown 
torpedo. Isn't that the universal greeting when communications are 
down? I think it's the universal greeting when you don't like someone. 
Full impulse. In "Star Trek, Insurrection," Captain Jean-Luc Picard, 
First Officer Ryker, Wharf, Data, LaForge, Counselor Troy, all the 
first generation team become freedom fighters when an idyllic remote 
world is threatened by intergalactic conspirators. Patrick Stewart 
says it's just fun to work with his friends. Well, the truth is we 
actually spend a lot of time together anyway. All these people are 
my friends, and I think I am theirs, and a bond develops during the 
life of the series which just has remained strong as ever. The villains 
are led by Oscar-winner F. Murray Abraham, who says his youngsters 
are more impressed by the "Star Trek" action figure than they are 
by his Academy Award for "Amadeus." My kids got so excited about the 
action figure. Oscar be damned. Action figure. But it's true. I'm 
going to buy a bunch and give them out for Christmas stocking stuffers. 
If Picard or any of his people interfere, eliminate them. The ninth 
film, based on "Star Trek," "Insurrection" opens up at number one, 
the new most popular movie at North American theaters. Alan Silverman 
for the Voice of America in Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>