<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981215.0500.1828 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton plans to spend most of his day today in Israel meeting 
with Israeli and Palestinian leaders in an effort to reach a compromise 
on such issues as Israel's refusal to release Palestinian prisoners. 
Following a meeting early Tuesday with Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat 
and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Mr. Clinton said both 
sides have reaffirmed their commitment to the Wye River peace accord. 
Jerusalem correspondent David Gullis monitored a post meeting news 
conference. There's still some very profound issues that need to be 
settled. President Clinton himself admitted that it looks unlikely 
that the Israelis will make this scheduled troop withdrawal on Friday. 
The Israelis again are very insistent that the Palestinian authority 
take a number of additional steps, stop talk of unilateral declaration 
of the Palestinian state, stop inciting anti-Israel violence. And 
so these committees will work on it. You know, President Clinton certainly 
put the best face on this that he is satisfied he achieved what he 
said he would do. Now it's been left to these various committees to 
resolve these issues. You certainly have to question whether once 
President Clinton leaves the scene late in the day whether these committees 
will deteriorate into the kind of squabbling that have repeatedly 
delayed implementation of the Wye agreement. Dave, you covered the 
original talks that led to the Wye agreement. What is your assessment, 
the kind of shape its in at this moment? It's been going forward, 
you must say, in a painful, painful way. I think even President Clinton 
in his address in Gaza talked about pulling teeth each step of the 
way. Each side has raised objections. The Israelis, of course, hold 
the high cards in that they're the ones who are to give back the territory. 
This coming Friday, they are supposed to turn back another five percent 
of the West Bank from exclusive Israeli control to joint Israeli Palestinian 
jurisdiction. But Israel has these conditions that they want to cement; 
they're very adamant about it. And one thing that Prime Minister Netanyahu 
said just now in his news conference was that the reason why the Palestinian 
assembly voted again to reaffirm the revocation of these elements 
of the charter was because of a firm Israel policy, and he says that 
they will continue to be firm on many of these issues. He was stressing, 
for instance, that he wants the Palestinian authority to eliminate 
parts of the elementary school curriculum that are still in Israel's 
view at least hostile to Israel. There are many, many problems. Ariel 
Shirom, the Israeli foreign minister, said that the Palestinian authority 
has itself has stockpiled weapons that Israel would like to see handed 
over to the United States under the terms of the Wye agreement. Israel 
is being tough on this, and they say that is why they got that progress 
at Gaza yesterday. Well, Dave, the president did say that he had accomplished 
all he set out to do, and yet it does seem there remains a lot left 
to do. Do you have any thoughts on that? Well, that's correct, and 
I say again that even President Clinton seemed to acknowledge that 
the troop withdrawal will not go ahead on schedule on Friday. He said 
it would be unfortunate if it got too far behind schedule. That is 
VOA Jerusalem correspondent David Gullis. He was speaking with News 
Now host Kurt Henshon and Meredith Buell. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>