<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981215.1600.2691 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Most Americans believe the world is better off because of science. 
Yet, according to most scientists and educators, most of us are woefully 
ignorant about scientific concepts and methods. So as Jane Hughes 
reports, these experts are trying to approve the American public's 
understanding of science. Dr. John Miller and his colleagues estimate 
that the vast majority of Americans don't even know the meaning of 
the most basic scientific terms. Dr. Miller is director of the International 
Center for the Advancement of Scientific Literacy at the Chicago Academy 
of Sciences. There is about 15 percent of Americans who would be what 
I would call civic scientifically literate. And by that, I mean they 
understand enough basic science concepts and enough about the process 
of science to be able, for example, to read about a dispute in the 
Tuesday "New York Times" science section and maybe make some sense 
of it. Dr. Miller says the scientifically literate person can give 
a rudimentary definition of terms like experiment and theory and understands 
the basic differences between molecules, atoms, and electrons, for 
example. Whatever the contemporary issue of the day is, whether that's 
an interesting, a nutro waste, or a global warming, or the ozone layer, 
or things like that, those kinds of things will become comprehensible 
to a person who understands these basic ideas. Dr. Miller blames schools 
for failing to give students a more thorough education in science. 
And increasingly, for example, non-college bound students rarely get 
a wet lab biology course. Now they're studying biology out of textbooks. 
It's very bad science. It's old science. It will not equip those young 
people that live in the 21st century at all. Some states, like nearby 
Maryland, are setting benchmarks for what students should have learned 
by a certain grade level. Montgomery County instructional specialist 
Steve Christiansen describes the general expectations for secondary 
school students. All students based upon the Maryland state quarter 
learning goals for science, national science education standards should 
have reasonably firmly implanted in their mind, you know, concepts 
such that if they picked up a newspaper, such as the "Washington Post" 
or the "New York Times," and they were reading a scientific article, 
they could understand the vocabulary and the potential contemporary 
implications. Steve Christiansen wants secondary school students to 
be capable of grasping broad scientific concepts such as the structure 
of matter. By the age of 16, 17 years old, students should have a 
pretty firm understanding of the molecular nature of matter, not just 
the specific definition for what a molecule is, but a feel for the 
fact that there are these small particles that make up everything. 
Curriculum specialist Steve Christiansen says most students are interested 
in the broad scientific issues that will eventually affect their lives. 
His goal is to equip them to understand the science underlying issues 
such as global warming, atomic waste, and the depleting ozone layer 
so that they can make sound rational decisions about how to deal with 
them as scientifically literate adults. I'm Jane Hughes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>