<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981215.1600.1355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the 1940s and '50s, and even into the 1960s, "Life" magazine was 
one of the most popular publications in the United States. The world's 
best photographers covered everything from news and politics to fashion 
and Hollywood for "Life." And the Latvian born refugee named Philippe 
Halzman had the distinction of having his images appear on "Life's" 
cover a record 101 times. A retrospective of the photographers work 
is currently on display at the National Portrait Gallery here in Washington. 
VOA's Susan Loeb reports. Philippe Halzman was a successful photographer 
in Paris when the Nazi invasion in 1940 forced him to flee. His wife 
and sister entered the United States without any problem, but the 
fact that Phillip Halzman had a Latvian and not a French passport 
made it difficult for him to get a visa. Curator Mary Panzer says 
a friend intervened on his behalf. His wife and his sister went to 
Princeton, New Jersey where Albert Einstein was living, and Einstein 
called a connection in Washington, and very shortly thereafter, Philippe 
was able to leave France and enter the United States. Several years 
after he arrived in the country, Philippe Halzman took a portrait 
of Albert Einstein as a gesture of thanks. Mary Panzer says it remains 
one of the most familiar portraits of the great scientist. Einstein 
was looking directly into the camera, and his hair is like a white 
mane, and he has a very sad but open expression on his face, and he 
and Halzman had been talking about the impact of nuclear energy and 
the atomic bomb. And Halzman asked him did he ever think that there 
would come an end to war, and Einstein said as long as there are human 
beings, there will be war. Like the portrait of Einstein, many of 
the photographs in the exhibition at the National Portrait Gallery 
are the definitive portrait of their subjects. Mary Panzer says Philippe 
Halzman had a talent for capturing the essence of his subjects' personalities. 
That's what Halzman was aiming for always. He wasn't satisfied until 
he felt that he'd gotten something that no one else had achieved and 
that he'd somehow revealed the essence of the person. But his success 
in being able to do that is marked by how many of his portraits have 
become our most familiar image of the people that he's photographed. 
An admirer of the surrealist, Philippe Halzman established both a 
friendship and a working relationship with Salvador Dali. The two 
collaborated a number of projects, including one of the most famous 
images of the painter, which shows both the artist and his work in 
progress suspended in mid air. And across the whole picture, you can 
see cats that seem to be flying and water that seems to be hurling, 
and everything is floating in this great Dali-like masterpiece. It 
took about nine hours and many tries hurling the cats and throwing 
the water, and then everyone in the studio would clean up the water, 
recover the cats, and start all over again to make sure that they 
had gotten the effect that they wanted. A little surrealism carried 
over into another series of works by Halzman, which he called "Jumpology." 
Curator Mary Panzer says the portraits of the Duke and Duchess of 
Windsor, Richard Nixon, and others suspended in mid air drew out of 
an assignment to photograph comedians like Groucho Marx and Bob Hope. 
And they performed while Philippe took pictures, and one of the things 
that they often did was jump. The following year in 1953, Philippe 
Halzman received a very important commission to photograph the Ford 
family on the 50th anniversary of the Ford car, and they were all 
relaxing after the picture had been made, and Philippe turned to Mrs. 
Edsel Ford, who was the closest thing to a queen that the American 
country had at the time, and he looked at her and he said, "Could 
I take a picture of you jumping?" And she said, "With my high heels 
or without them?" Philippe Halzman, who died in 1979, built his career 
on creating portraits of individuals. But his work as a whole creates 
a much broader portrait of the United States, according to curator 
Mary Panzer. He knew he wasn't making a simple document, but he wanted 
to communicate his point of view. He wanted to show other people what 
he saw when he came to America. America through the eyes of Philippe 
Halzman was a land of opportunity and optimism. During the years between 
the second World War and the Vietnam War when all of the images on 
display at the National Portrait Gallery were taken, many Americans 
felt the same way. I'm Susan Loeb. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>