<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981215.1600.2155 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The destruction of six million Jews in Europe during World War II, 
along with the confiscation of their assets, is a tragedy that is 
widely known today. But millions of gypsies or Roma, Poles, and other 
Slavs, political and religious dissenters, homosexuals, and handicapped 
prisoners also died. The Roma and Sinte, as German-speaking gypsies 
were known, were singled out like the Jews for destruction purely 
on racial grounds. Gypsies and the Holocaust is the subject of today's 
edition of Dateline. Here's Pamela Taylor. Delegates from more than 
40 countries met in Washington earlier this month to try to untangle 
the complex issue of Holocaust era assets looted by the Nazis during 
the second world war. The U.S. State Department invited a Romany organization 
for the first time to be a full participant in the Washington conference. 
The conference brought together some of the world's most renowned 
experts on Nazi confiscated assets, as well as Holocaust survivors 
and government representatives. VOA's State Department correspondent 
Kyle King has more. U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, whose 
grandparents were killed by the Nazis told the delegates that the 
conference offered the world a chance to correct one of history's 
great injustices. We know well our inability to provide true justice 
to Holocaust victims. We cannot restore life or rewind history, but 
we can make the ledger slightly less out of balance by devoting our 
time, energy, and resources to the search for answers the return of 
property and the payment of just claims. Delegates to the conference 
will examine a host of issues, including the question of unpaid insurance 
claims to some Holocaust victims. Secretary of State Albright said 
she hoped the conference would speed its work because she noted the 
survivors of the Holocaust are now old and many records are being 
lost over time. VOA's Kyle King at the State Department. Also taking 
part in the conference were members of the International Romany Union, 
which representative the Romany and Sinti people. Ryko Jurich, president 
of the union, explained why this meeting is so important to his people 
and repeated what he said in his opening remarks to the conference. 
The group is thankful that our organization, the International Romany 
Union, was recognized by the conference, and on it came to public 
knowledge that the Romany Holocaust, genocide was very similar to 
the Jewish Holocaust, especially the mass murdering of Roma in concentration 
camps. At least 500,000 Roma were killed during the Nazi era. In addition, 
according to the recently discovered documents from Auschwitz, we 
know now that a considerable amount of gold was stolen from the victims. 
Ryko Jurich of the International Romany Union says his organization 
has proposed that 15 percent of the compensation paid to victims should 
go to Roma and Sinti survivors. Mr. Jurich's translator, Marcelle 
Cortiad, is professor of Romany studies at the National Institute 
of Oriental Languages and Civilizations at the University of Paris. 
He was also a member of the Romany delegation at the Washington conference. 
Professor Cortiad explains why this story of the Romany victims of 
the Holocaust is less well known than that of the Jews. The Jews lost 
a big part of their interrogencia, but they had many century long 
tradition of research when the federation of our people was slightly 
different. The first Romany interrogencia was still emerging right 
before the war with the first congressives, the first one occurred 
in 1933, the first worldwide Romany congress. And there were previously 
a dozen chilchera centers in Germany and some theater in various countries. 
So all this was destroyed, so we are the first generation of people 
who really can work in formal way about the Holocaust. Professor Cortiad 
says he recently contributed a long article about the Roma and the 
Holocaust to the French National Encyclopedia. He says he hopes eventually 
that all school books on the Holocaust will include a chapter on the 
Roma and Sinti. This is a special matter of education. First of all, 
education of the population as a whole through books, but also through 
broadcasting. This is also a matter of education of the Roma themselves. 
Marcelle Cortiad, professor of Romany studies at the University of 
Paris. Holocaust survivor, Rita Prigmore, was born into a well-known 
Sinti family in the town of Vertsburg in Southern Germany. Ms. Prigmore's 
family had lived there since the 1600s. Her father, who is related 
to jazz guitarist, Jangle Reinhardt, was also a famous musician. Her 
mother was a singer and dancer. Rita Prigmore and her twin sister 
were only six weeks old when Nazi doctors began experiments on them 
in the spring of 1943. Within days, her sister was dead. Rita Prigmore 
herself suffered partial brain damage from the experiments. For years, 
she has experienced migraine headaches, fainting spells, and sporadic 
loss vision. She explains to VOA's Judith Latham how her parents and 
other members of the family, like so many other Roma and Sinti, were 
forced to be sterilized. Before they eloped, they had signed to papers 
to be sterilized or deported to the concentration camps. And because 
of being entertainers and celebrities, they did not deport us like 
some of other families. And at the time when my mom went to be sterilized, 
they found out she was with child but not with one, but two identical 
twins, two girls. So because deportation was anyways to be happened, 
they decided they could prolong that if she would give up the twins 
for experimental purposes like when Dr. Mapinititch dying the eyes. 
Were you and your twin sister used for experiments? Yes. Mama would 
only visit us once in a while. And when we were six weeks old, mama 
got again the family papers to finally go to Auschwitz. We were all 
on one list, so mama panicked, and she and my grandpa and my grandma 
went into the clinic and wanted to see us. And when they went up there, 
usually the little beds, there were two of us, Rolanda and I. There 
was only one bed occupied and that was me. She went out and wanted 
to know what happened, and then she start fighting with the nuns, 
and then one of the younger ones said, "Why don't you tell the lady 
that the little girl is dead?" So they took my mom down the hall and 
she opened the door, and there was a bathtub. My sister laid in there 
with just a little white dress on and a Band-Aid around her head. 
Mama, of course, panicked so she ran back and she took me out, and 
there was a big commotion and fighting, and she took me and she ran 
down the stairs. And by the time we got back home, the Gestapo was 
there. And then mama just had to give me back. And the in 1944, the 
Red Cross came to my mom and said, "You can pick up your little girl," 
and that's how I got back to my family. How many Roma and Sinti probably 
perished during the Holocaust? I would say 75 percent. Why are you 
here at the Washington conference on Holocaust era assets? We are 
here because we have a right of a certain part of the funds. There 
is a lot of Sintis, Romas that did lose their assets just like my 
family, too. We had a big house and all that was taken away from us. 
Why is there so little general knowledge about the fate of the Roma 
and Sinti during the Holocaust? Romas that came out of the concentration 
camps, most of them, they're very happy to have survived. They never 
thought about going into politics, that they would have to go and 
fight for their rights. And a lot of them didn't have the schooling. 
That's where the Jewish people are way ahead of us. Survivor Rita 
Prigmore is today president of the German Gypsy International Women's 
Organization. She spoke with VOA's Judith Latham. Gypsies and the 
Holocaust was written and researched by VOA's Judith Latham. For Dateline, 
I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>