<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981215.0500.2703 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More than 1,000 scientists and officials from government and industry 
met in Japan this past weekend to examine an issue of growing concern. 
The health problems associated with a group of widely used chemicals 
known as estrogen enhancers. As Amy Bickers reports from Kyoto, there 
is mounting evidence these substances are interfering with reproduction 
in humans and animals. In rivers across Britain, male fish are carrying 
eggs in their reproductive glands, indicating they have developed 
some female physical traits. In the north Pacific Ocean, a large number 
of whales and dolphins have died mysteriously of infectious diseases, 
and in the United States, Japan, and Europe, doctors have reported 
an increasing number of problems with the human male reproductive 
system over the last several decades. According to scientists attending 
a symposium in Japan, these occurrences are the result of one worldwide 
problem: chemical pollution. But scientists, along with their counterparts 
from government and industry wrapped up a three-day conference Sunday 
on hormone disruptive chemicals called estrogen enhancers. These compounds 
are found in pesticides, metals, and plastics in virtually every nation 
on earth. They frequently meet in just oil and water through waste 
disposal and other means. As Tony Macarowski, a senior adviser at 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency explains, the officials at 
the conference debated the levels at which these chemicals could be 
dangerous to human beings and wildlife. The concentrations if they're 
harmful or not frankly is not well understood presently. Sort of the 
- You were talking about sort of a spectrum of opinions. You'll have 
some people say, "Well, they're at such low levels that it's not a 
problem." Sort of the opposite end of that argument is, "Well, why 
are we as human beings even have this number of chemicals in our bodies? 
Why do we use that many chemicals?" The chemicals at issue include 
the pesticide, DDT, and substances in plastic called plasticizers, 
which bind the material together. Some of the chemicals have been 
banned for years in the United States, Japan, and Europe, while others 
remain in use. In poorer parts of the world, the dangerous banned 
substances are still frequently used, which has many officials here 
concerned that the health risks associated with these hormone altering 
compounds could become more prevalent in the developing nations of 
Asia, Africa, and other regions. In Japan especially, the government 
and scientific community have been deeply involved in research on 
the topic. Doctors say the widespread practice of incineration of 
plastics and other trash in this country has led to contamination 
of some residential areas leaving many citizens outraged. The results 
of the Kyoto University study unveiled at the symposium underscores 
the high level of public concern. It shows the reproductive gland 
of Japanese men have been shrinking over the past three decades. Some 
scientist and industry representatives say it may be premature to 
link reproductive problems with these hormone altering chemicals now 
found all over the world. But there was general agreement that more 
studies need to be done to see if there's clear evidence. Participants 
at the forum such, as Jeff Brighty, a toxicology specialist for the 
British Environment Agency, say new legislation controlling or bearing 
these chemicals could ultimately follow. No country comes up with 
exactly the same set of laws. And so we have to have a sort of constrictor, 
as it were. But within my law, I cannot look at me where it's past 
controlling the substance, whether it's treated or substitute something. 
I like to be very useful for me to recommend to my industrial collaborators. 
One project that may shed some light is a joint international study 
now underway in Japan, the United States, Denmark, France, Finland, 
and Scotland to monitor the effects of estrogen enhancers on human 
reproductive health. Studies on animals from dolphins to frogs are 
also taking place and results so far suggest that these chemicals 
are affecting many species around the globe. Amy Bickers for VOA News, 
Kyoto, Japan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>