<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981215.0500.1355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Boston, Massachusetts, a neighborhood called Roxbury is notorious 
as one of the city's roughest areas. Most people might say that Roxbury 
is an unlikely place to find computer professionals, but that's exactly 
what one company is doing. VOA's Martin Secrist has more. In the next 
decade, it is estimated that more than a million new computer programmers 
will be needed in the United States. Many of these people will work 
on the growing number of Web sites that are being established around 
the country. Knowing this, Nick Gleason and Jim Pickerello founded 
City Soft in 1997, a company that recruits and employs young, motivated 
people from poor and technologically isolated urban neighborhoods. 
City Soft arranges training for their employees, working with nonprofit 
and government sponsored training organizations to find free instruction 
for people with the company. Private training schools also have donated 
instruction to people who have come to them through City Soft, teaching 
them to use programming languages such as HTML. The newly skilled 
people then go to work for City Soft clients. Nick Gleason says they 
act as developers for Web sites. Increasingly, that is coming to mean 
a whole lot of programming kinds of tasks as the Web gets integrated 
into the sort of core processes of businesses in an organization. 
Everything - It's starting to become a more mainstream part of information 
technology. City Soft has opened up the computer profession to people 
such as 21-year-old Roxbury resident, Ali Fernandez. Was it what I 
expected? No, not at all. It's actually better than what I expected, 
'cause I'm learning so much, you know, that it actually turned out 
to be better. I thought it was just going to be like a job, but it's 
much more than a job. Like become part of my life now. Ali Fernandez 
says he does not leave the office behind him at the end of the day. 
No, I take the office with me. Every time I leave with one of the 
guys, like the office is all we talk about. So it's like I've become 
pretty involved with the company like as far as what we do. They make 
sure that, you know, we become a part of the company. Ali Fernandez 
worked with another City Soft developer, Tony Alvez, on the company's 
first project providing support for Boston.com, the Web site of the 
"Boston Globe" newspaper. Former "Globe" employee, Scott Cohen, supervised 
the Web site which he says offers news updates, classified listings, 
and so forth, and needs the constant support of more than just a few 
people. It takes a lot of manpower to convert content so that it's 
Web ready. That might mean research and development. It might be cropping 
photos for the Web. It might be translating text files to HTML. A 
lot of it can be automated but not all of it. Mr. Cohen describes 
what City Soft employees did for the "Boston Globe's" Web site. We 
had some very specific requirements starting very early in the morning,, 
6:00 a.m. to come in and assist a very small crew in preparing Boston.com, 
the "Boston Globe's" Web site for the public. City Soft essentially 
gave us a couple of people to put in the newsroom and help us do that 
work. They have been previously trained on our systems, and they were 
able to hit the ground running. Mr. Cohen was impressed with the people 
from City Soft. They're incredible. I mean, they were actually better 
trained than most of the college graduates that had been coming in 
for interviews. They were extremely creative, extremely dynamic, energetic, 
extremely hard working, very smart. They had everything that it took 
to kind of thrive in new media, you know, entrepreneurialism, creativity, 
the ability to shift directions very quickly, multi-tasking. City 
Soft co-founder Nick Gleason says that City Soft is not a charity. 
It is a business and it's for profit status speaks to that goal. It 
allows us to show that the folks, the employees from the neighborhoods 
here that don't start out with technology can in fact become competitive, 
mainstream employees, and that it shakes off a lot of the baggage 
and stereotypes about urban areas. Nick Gleason has a business degree 
from Harvard University, but also has worked for nonprofit community 
groups in Boston. He says that social organizations, while admirable, 
can lose sight of their objective and become accustomed to making 
handouts not investments. "We want to be self-sustaining," says Mr. 
Gleason, a goal that is being achieved both by the company and its 
employees. The dream of City Soft developer Tony Alvez had been to 
buy a motorcycle, but once he had saved enough money to do so, he 
bought a computer instead. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>