<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981215.0500.2069 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations or ASSIAN opened a two-day 
summit in Vietnam on Tuesday. The nine nation grouping is meeting 
under the shadow of the ongoing Asian financial crisis. VOA correspondent 
Gary Thomas reports from Hanoi on a new mood in ASSIAN. At previous 
ASSIAN summits, leaders spoke glowingly of ASSIAN's sense of self-confidence 
and global relevance as a key player on the international stage. But 
the sobering reality of the financial crisis that has battered the 
once vibrant Asian economies made for a decidedly more somber gathering 
Tuesday. One by one, ASSIAN leaders rose in Hanoi's cavernous Bazhin 
Hall to speak of the challenges brought by the financial crisis and 
the doubts raised about ASSIAN's unity and viability. Singapore's 
prime minister, Goh Chok Tong, noted that other countries are taking 
ASSIAN less seriously and that the crisis has frayed ASSIAN's cohesiveness 
to some extent. He said that the Hanoi summit does not live up to 
international expectations, major powers will turn away from Southeast 
Asia. ASSIAN enables its individual members to punch above its reach. 
Yet it is not simply enough to assert or believe in our own values. 
We must convince others of our relevance to them. We're expected to 
produce tangible proof lest our confidence in ourselves is grounded 
in reality. ASSIAN leaders are to ratify a set of measures drawn up 
by their foreign and economic ministers to deal with the crisis. They 
include accelerating the creation of the ASSIAN Free Trade Area or 
AFTA by reducing tariffs more quickly and other plans to enhance closer 
cooperation. In his first appearance at the ASSIAN summit, Philippines 
president Joseph Estrada made an impassioned plea with his colleagues 
not to forget the poor, who have been the most badly hurt by the crisis. 
The human toil of financial crisis which I spoke of before the most 
urgent and concrete action. We must implement the fervor, the ASSIAN 
action plan on rural development and poverty eradication, as well 
as the ASSIAN action plan on social, our poor to serve, nothing less. 
With Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen in the audience as an observer, 
the leader sidestepped the contentious issue of Cambodia's membership 
in ASSIAN with a bit of diplomatic face saving. They said they have 
decided to admit Cambodia not at this summit, but rather at a special 
meeting of foreign ministers in Hanoi, a meeting for which no date 
has been set. That still leaves membership for Cambodia in limbo. 
ASSIAN leaders have always said that Cambodia will be admitted saying 
it is just a matter of timing. Some member nations want to see more 
evidence of political stability in Cambodia before it becomes the 
tenth and final member of the ASSIAN club. Gary Thomas, VOA News, 
Hanoi. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>