<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981209.1830.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We begin again tonight with the president's fate. The 
country may not be paying close attention, but unless there's a Dramatic 
change in the Congress, the president is one step closer tonight to 
being impeached. The articles of impeachment have been drawn up. There 
are four. One for criminal perjury, lying to a grand jury. Principally 
about his relationship with Monica Lewinsky and his efforts to iNS 
fluns witnesses. Civil perjury, lying during the Paula Jones deposition. 
A third for obstructing justice, including a plot to conceal his gifts 
to ms. Lewinsky and influence her testimony by getting her a job. 
And the fourth article is for abuse of power, including deceiving 
the congress and the American people. Washington is in a very somber 
mood tonight. Now, there's still a powerful tug of war in the full 
House of Representatives about what to do. And so today, four democrats 
in the house have tried to head off the impeachment by offering a 
motion to censure the president for, as they put it in their motion, 
reprehensible action. Nothing decided. Washington is also nervous. 
Today, the Judiciary committee had as its final witness, the White 
House counsel, Charles ruff. He was described as the president's cleanup 
hitter. Our first report is from ABC's Linda Douglass. The committee 
will come to order. White House counsel Charles ruff tried to drive 
home the White House line that the president's conduct is morally 
reprehensible but not worthy of impeachment. In order to have committed 
an impeachable offense, the president must have acted to subvert our 
system of government and members of the committee. That did not happen. 
Ruff challenged the committee to consider the specifics -- what if 
Kenneth Starr was right to conclude that the president lied under 
oath about touching certain parts of Monica Lewinsky's body? Let each 
member assume that Ms. Lewinsky's version of the events is correct, 
and then ask, "am I prepared to impeach the president because after 
having admitted having engaged in egregiously wrongful conduct he 
falsely described the particulars of this conduct?" He attacked many 
of Starr's findings, charging some were based on little or no evidence. 
Example -- Starr's conclusion that the president plotted to conceal 
his gifts to Monica Lewinsky. There is not one single suggestion anywhere 
in any testimony that the president suggested, brought up, hinted 
at the notion of Ms. Lewinsky's concealing these gifts in any manner. 
Starr's report relied on Lewinsky's grand jury testimony, "at some 
point I said to, the president, 'maybe I should put the gifts away 
outside my house.' I think he responded, 'I don't know, or let me 
think about that. But ruff cited nine additional statements Lewinsky 
made about the gifts. Nowhere did she say that Mr. Clinton suggested 
concealing them. When their turn came, republicans peppered him with 
questions about lying. Did the president mislead the American people 
when he denied having sexual relations with Monica Lewinsky? He admitted 
doing so. Did he lie then? I have no doubt that he walked up to a 
line that he thought he understood, reasonable people could determine 
that he crossedded over that line and that what for him was truthful 
but misleading or nonresponsive and misleading or evasive, was in 
fact false. What's the difference between that? He believed rightly 
so that he was telling the truth. When? When he used the word sexual 
relations to mean sexual intercourse. The chairman of the Judiciary 
committee said tonight he will allow the committee members to vote 
on a motion to censure the president, but not until after they voted 
to impeach him. This is very big stuff, these articles of impeachment. 
We're joined by Sam Donaldson and cokie Roberts. First to you, Sam. 
I hear stories of a very nervous White House and almost clutching 
at the possibility of censure. Well, they're nervous as you might 
suppose. In fact, you'll hear any official here tell you the president 
will listen to any censure motion or resolution. Look at the language. 
He'll look at language requiring a fine. He'll look at language denouncing 
him in the stiffest terms, even language that will require his signature, 
up to admitting perjury. That he won't do. The reaction to the articles 
of impeachment in more specific terms? They said they were expected. 
They believe the republicans rushed them out because Mr. ruff did 
such a Terrific job, according to the people here. They said in a 
statement that nothing in this case compels the Congress to impeach 
the president. Strange use of the word compels but that's what they 
said. Lets go to Capitol Hill. Cokie Roberts is up there. A lot of 
waivering republicans and how much pressure? A lot of waivering republicans, 
Peter, and they're feeling pressure from the White House, cabinet 
members, business people who have connections to them. They say the 
president has to do something more. He has to admit that he lied. 
And they say without that, that they don't see how he avoids impeachment. 
Let me point out you're in the bureau, not on Capitol Hill. Thank 
you. Is there any doubt in your mind now that this is going to go 
ahead, the full distance or is the waivering enough among republicans 
that this could suddenly reverse itself? They say the dynamic is extremely 
fluid at the moment and there could possibly be a vote not to impeach, 
not to send it on to the Senate. There could be some crystalizing 
moment when people suddenly say we're voting to impeach the president 
of the United States. But others say, look, we have -- we've thought 
about this for a long time and our voters have thought about this 
for a long time. They're hearing a lot from the voters. They're hearing 
more to impeach than not to impeach. They're saying it's the an organized 
effort. Cokie, thanks very much. Cokie Roberts and Sam Donaldson. 
As we said, a very big and somber evening in Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>