<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981209.1830.1171 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're gonna take "A closer look" tonight at some interesting cutting 
edge technology and how we average human beings interact or in some 
cases are not yet able to interact very successfully with our computers. 
Today is actually the 30th anniversary of the computer mouse. If ever 
there was a mouse that roared. 0 million of them were produced last 
year. They have been the key to making computers accessible at all. 
We forget perhaps what it used to be like. You needed lines of code 
just to move a cursor on the screen. Now with a flick of the wrist 
and a click, well, we're getting there. First here's ABC's Jack Smith 
on the technology that may be just around the corner. It is a device 
we take for granted, like the telephone. But without it, the computer 
revolution might never have happened. We have a pointing device called 
a mouse. a device invented by a Silicon Valley scientist 30 years 
ago. I get this mild feeling of amazement that there's so many of 
them out there. And perfected by others. Small inventions like the 
mouse can have such large consequences. The mouse was the first revolutionary 
step towards making computers interact directly with human beings. 
To see how we'll interact in the future, the next step, you need only 
look, where else? At games this holiday season. When I hit the side 
of the road or go over a bump, I can actually feel it in the steering 
wheel. It's called force feedback. My hands can actually feel what 
my eyes are seeing on the screen. It's this way of engaging all the 
human senses that the mouse of the future will have. The same technology 
that provides you with feedback when you hit a wall can provide you 
a feeling of texture when exploring a certain material on the screen. 
Corduroy? Corduroy. Or silk. And a mouse that did that would make 
technology -- Easier, simpler, more pleasant, more enjoyable, more 
productive. In the future, the work of a mouse could be done by other 
things -- a camera, for instance. The camera detects my movements 
and acts according to them. Scientists are even using cameras to track 
your eyes. The cursor moves to what you're looking at and the computer 
puts that information on the screen. You just looked at that and it 
appeared on the screen here. That's right. And as computers get so 
small -- I use this for web browsing. They can be projected into your 
eyeglasses or fit in your pocket. They'll have to be activated, not 
by hand, but by voice. People will be able to do their work by talking 
to their computers instead of using the mouse and key board. The goal 
is to act with your computer the same way you'd act with another person. 
And that's the future? That's the future. Imagine computers without 
mice or keyboards that know how to recognize you. I don't have to 
remember your name because the system is doing the task for me. And 
computers that know what you're thinking, for instance, detecting 
frowns of puzzlement. It's amazing. The computer will actually think 
about understanding what you're trying to do, knowing a little about 
your thinking, trying to help you, teach you, do it for you. I think 
that's the mouse of the future. It's not us getting better at moving 
something, it's the computer getting better at understanding us. Touch, 
voice, even thoughts -- the way we interact with computers, machines, 
in the future, will be unlike anything we know today. Jack Smith, 
ABC News, Palo alto, California. What an age we live in. Let's concentrate 
for a minute or two on that word interaction. Today we were talking 
to a professor. He's the head of the media lab at the Massachusetts 
institute of technology. He actually thinks the computer builders 
need to do a better job than they are doing. All this promise about 
the future in that report from Jack Smith, when is the future? The 
future is much sooner than most people think. The pressure on computer 
manufacturers to make computers that are easier to use will be enormous. 
People will just not tolerate for many longer, the problems we've 
had in communicating with machines. Will it get any easier? It has 
to get easier, Peter. A lot of the complications in using computers 
is self-imposed. By that I mean it's imposed by what I consider gratuitous, 
overweight, fat software that has to be simpler and easier to use. 
Some day, so inexpensive that computers will cost less than bicycles. 
Are computers really going to understand me a little better? Are they 
going to understand my emotions? They not only are going to understand 
your emotions, they have to understand your emotions. Think of computers 
in the role of helping children learn. Think back to your favorite 
teacher as a child. That teacher wasn't so much an expert in math 
or geography, that teacher was an expert in you. That teacher understood 
you emotionally, responded to you, said the right things at the right 
time because that teacher was enormously good at understanding you 
as an emotional being. If computers can't do that, they'll be useless 
in teaching and frankly, they won't be useful in the long term. Nicholas 
negroponte. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>