<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981209.0370 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The boards of directors of the Swedish and British pharmaceutical 
companies Astra and Zeneca confirmed Wednesday they intend to merge, 
making a global player out of two mid-sized companies that would have 
had to struggle to make it on their own. The new company, AstraZeneca, 
would be the third-biggest company worldwide in its field, with combined 
1998 sales of about dlrs 10 billion. It would become Europe's No. 
2 drug-maker. ``I'm convinced this is an excellent business transaction,'' 
Percy Barnevik, the proposed chairman of the company, said at a news 
conference. Barnevik currently heads Investor AB, the investment of 
arm of Sweden's Wallenberg family, which owns 12 percent of Astra. 
The proposed chief executive is Zeneca's CEO Tom McKillop. McKillop 
said final merger documents are expected by the end of the year and 
that he hoped for shareholder and regulatory approval soon afterward. 
Asked about a possible bid by a rival company, McKillop said, ``There 
is nothing we can do to prevent any eventual interloper,'' adding 
''we are well prepared to fight for this marriage that we support.'' 
Barnevik said he has explained the proposed merger to Prime Minister 
Goeran Persson. Astra and Zeneca, including non-pharmaceutical divisions, 
had total 1997 sales of 15.9 billion dollars, with pre-tax profit 
of 3.5 billion dollars, the companies said. The combined market capitalization 
was put at 67 billion dollars. About 6,000 jobs _ 11 percent of the 
current combined workforce of 54,000 _ would be lost, mostly from 
marketing divisions, said Hakan Mogren, AstraZeneca's proposed deputy 
chairman. In the face of a wave of mergers in the pharmaceuticals 
industry, Mogren said Astra and Zeneca had little choice but to join 
forces. ``If we are going to be competitive among world pharmaceutical 
companies, we need this merger,'' he said. Restructuring was projected 
to require three years' time and about dlrs 1.2 billion, McKillop 
said, after which annual operating costs would be lowered by about 
1.1 billion dollars. The merger had been rumored for months. Confirmation 
boosted Astra's shares by 12 percent, to 169 kronor (dlrs 21), in 
early trading Wednesday on Stockholm's bourse. Astra is best known 
as the maker of Prilosec, an ulcer and heartburn medication that is 
the world's best-selling prescription drug. It comprises about half 
the company's total sales. But the drug is scheduled to lose its patent 
protection in 2001, opening the door for generic firms to make a less 
expensive copy and slow the company's overall sales growth. Analysts 
speculated that was a leading factor influencing the merger. Astra, 
established in 1913, also makes lidocaine, a popular local anaesthesia. 
Zeneca is the second-leading maker of cancer drugs behind Bristol-Myers 
Squibb of the United States. It also has a large agro-chemical business 
and owns Salick Health Care, a U.S. operator of cancer treatment and 
dialysis centers. Last year, Zeneca introduced its migraine drug Zomig, 
and earlier this year received clearance for a breast cancer drug. 
But like Astra, Zeneca also has several cancer drugs expected to soon 
lose their patent protection. Officials from both companies said their 
product mix, similar corporate cultures, and research and development 
focus make the merger a good fit. ``It's good for our shareholders 
... employees ... customers and patients,'' Mogren said. The companies 
said shares would be merged on an equal-value basis. The AstraZeneca 
corporate headquaters would be in London, the research and development 
headquarters in Sweden. Last week, Germany's Hoechst and France's 
Rhone-Poulenc agreed to merge their drug and agro-chemical businesses 
as the first step toward a total merger. In France, Sanofi and Synthelabo 
recently announced their dlrs 10 billion merger. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>