<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981209.1111 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ukraine's parliament set up a commission Wednesday to look into the 
arrest in Switzerland of former Ukrainian prime minister Pavlo Lazarenko 
on money laundering charges. The commission, approved by a vote of 
243-8, will be headed by deputy speaker Viktor Medvedchuk and will 
also look into the conduct of Ukraine's Foreign Ministry and other 
government institutions in the case. The Verkhovna Rada urged its 
speaker Oleksandr Tkachenko to express lawmakers' concern over the 
arrest to Swiss authorities and the Council of Europe's parliamentary 
assembly, and ask that the case be resolved as soon as possible. Lazarenko, 
now a centrist opposition legislator, was detained last week upon 
entering Switzerland, and was charged last Friday in connection with 
a ``relatively large'' sum of money. On Tuesday, Lazarenko appeared 
before a Swiss court to deny allegations of money laundering, while 
his supporters continued to stage demonstrations in Kiev demanding 
his release. The Geneva court will decide next Friday on the prosecution's 
demands that Lazarenko be detained for an additional three months. 
The defense is urging his release on bail of up to 5 million Swiss 
francs (dlrs 3.6 million), saying the charges were insufficient. Lazarenko 
has admitted moving money to Swiss accounts but claimed he could prove 
it was not of criminal origin. His backers in Ukraine say he is the 
victim of a political smear campaign, and accuse the Ukrainian authorities 
of doing nothing to help him. Ukraine's Foreign Ministry, however, 
dismissed such criticism Wednesday, saying it ``had done everything 
possible at this stage,'' including verifying the circumstances of 
the arrest and helping two lawmakers from Lazarenko's party to travel 
to Switzerland. Lazarenko has refused to meet with Ukrainian consular 
officers in Geneva since the arrest. He also was carrying a Panama 
passport, said First Deputy Foreign Minister Oleksandr Chalyi. Ukraine, 
which has no dual citizenship, has asked Panama to clarify whether 
such a passport had been issued to Lazarenko, Chalyi said, according 
to the Interfax news agency. Lazarenko was prime minister from 1996-97, 
and was then dismissed by President Leonid Kuchma. Critics say Lazarenko 
reaped huge profits from the distribution of natural gas supplies 
in the former Soviet republic when he served as prime minister, but 
he and his allies deny the charges. In a statement Tuesday, Lazarenko's 
Hromada party said the arrest in Switzerland was an ``unprecedented 
act of reprisal aimed at discrediting an opposition leader.'' Lazarenko 
and his followers maintain that Ukrainian authorities want to blacken 
his name before presidential elections in October 1999, and he has 
even accused Kuchma's close entourage of plotting to kill him. Hromada 
fared well in parliamentary elections this year and Lazarenko was 
widely considered a top contender in the future presidential race. 
A Geneva judge, Laurent Kasper-Ansermet, is in Ukraine for the investigation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>