<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981209.1466 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia, the superpower emeritus of Europe, warned NATO Wednesday that 
as the alliance develops its new military and political strategy for 
the 21st century, it must recognize that the ultimate authority for 
military action beyond NATO borders is the United Nations. ``The main 
decision-making body remains the United Nations,'' Russian Foreign 
Minister Igor Ivanov said at a news conference after a meeting of 
the NATO-Russia Permanent Joint Council. ``NATO should keep this in 
mind while discussing its strategic concept.'' Ivanov spoke after 
NATO foreign ministers met Tuesday to discuss updating the political 
and military principles that guide the alliance. He said that since 
the creation of the joint council in 1996, the former enemies have 
made great progress in dealing with their differences and finding 
areas for cooperation. But he made no secret that serious differences 
remain. For its part, NATO believes that continuing to cooperate despite 
these differences is proof of the council's success. ``Kosovo is a 
good example of that,'' NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana said, 
referring to the Serbian province in Yugoslavia where ethnic Albanians 
are fighting for independence. U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, 
who told the allies that Bosnia and Kosovo are prime examples of the 
kind of threats that had to be faced outside NATO's borders, said 
it is only common sense to deal with instability before it lands on 
the alliance's doorstep. The Russians vehemently disagreed with NATO's 
decision to threaten air strikes in Kosovo without a specific mandate 
from the United Nations. At the same time, however, they continued 
to work with western countries to achieve a political solution and 
are contributing to a task force of unarmed civilians who are now 
patrolling the Serbian province and monitoring the cease-fire. The 
Russians fear that NATO will effectively circumvent Russia's veto 
on the U.N. Security Council. And, they wonder, if the world has abandoned 
the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of countries, 
what standards will be used and who will apply them? Several ministers 
tried to explain to Ivanov the reasoning behind NATO's action in Kosovo 
and allay Russia's concerns. They said there was no attempt to circumvent 
the United Nations, but that when the U.N. route became blocked, NATO 
had no choice but to act to avert a humanitarian disaster. In Tuesday's 
meeting, foreign ministers began updating NATO's strategic concept, 
which in recent years turned away from defense against a Soviet onslaught 
in Central Europe to regional conflicts, ethnic violence, terrorism 
and weapons of mass destruction. Russia is watching this process closely. 
``We cannot be indifferent to the plans and decisions taken by NATO,'' 
said Ivanov. ``We've described our point of view on some points that 
are being discussed now.'' He was adamant about the role of the United 
Nations. NATO continues to keep its forces on alert for intervention 
in Kosovo should Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic abandon the 
cease-fire. ``Today, there is no threat of humanitarian catastrophe 
in Kosovo,'' Ivanov said. ``As to (the NATO forces), our position 
has not changed. The question now is in the dimension of political 
negotiations.'' Earlier in the day Ivanov held separate talks with 
Albright. At a news conference, Albright said the two had gone over 
several bilateral issues, including Russia's cooperation with Iran 
and the START II nuclear disarmament treaty. Russia's Communist-led 
parliament long has delayed ratification of START II treaty, signed 
by the United States and Russia in 1993. The treaty would halve their 
nuclear arsenals to about 3,000 to 3,500 warheads each. Albright said 
the Russian minister had told her he expects the Russian parliament 
to ratify START II by the end of December. The U.S. Senate ratified 
the treaty in 1996. ``I'm hoping that when I'm in Moscow at the end 
of January we can begin the Start III talks,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>