<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981209.1476 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Enraged by Israel's refusal to release security prisoners, Palestinians 
stoned Israeli troops Wednesday in the most widespread West Bank clashes 
in months. A 17-year-old stone mason was killed by Israeli gunfire 
and scores of other Palestinians were injured. The violence came despite 
U.S. appeals for calm and raised new concerns that U.S. President 
Bill Clinton's visit to the region next week is triggering unrest, 
rather than reassuring Israelis and Palestinians about their troubled 
peace accord, as intended. On the outskirts of West Bank towns, thousands 
of Palestinians hurled stones from slingshots at helmeted Israeli 
soldiers who fired tear gas, live rounds and rubber-coated steel pellets. 
In scenes reminiscent of the 1987-1993 Palestinian uprising which 
began exactly 11 years ago Wednesday, streets were littered with rocks 
and overturned metal trash containers, and walls of thick smoke from 
burning tires rose into the air. Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat 
and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu traded new recriminations 
Wednesday and said they would not soften positions despite intensive 
U.S. efforts to get the Wye River land-for-security accord back on 
track. Netanyahu has suspended Israel's troop withdrawal in the West 
Bank and said that with the Palestinians violating ``every part of 
the agreement,'' he was not likely to change his views. ``If they 
(the Palestinians) mend their ways, we'll continue with the agreement,'' 
Netanyahu said. ``If they don't, we won't.'' A defiant Arafat said 
he would not drop demands that as part of the Wye agreement, Israel 
release Palestinians jailed for anti-Israeli activities and not just 
common criminals. ``We tell our heroes in the prisons we will not 
close our eyes until we see them in front of our eyes,'' Arafat told 
cheering supporters. Hamas spiritual leader Sheikh Ahmed Yassin announced 
he would refuse food in solidarity with hundreds of prisoners on hunger 
strikes. Netanyahu has said he told Arafat from the start that Israel 
would not free those involved in attacks on Israelis and accused the 
Palestinian Authority of inciting against Israel to achieve with violence 
what it cannot get in negotiations. While Wednesday's violent protests 
outside most West Bank towns appeared to have been coordinated to 
some degree by Arafat's Fatah faction, the issue also touched a raw 
nerve in Palestinian society and many Palestinians joined in spontaneously. 
Nearly every family has had members jailed by Israel in 30 years of 
occupation. Asis Barghouti, 21, who was shot in the arm by Israeli 
troops during clashes north of the town of Ramallah, said he took 
to the streets because his father has been held for three years without 
charges and his uncle has already served 21 years of a life term for 
an attack in which Israelis were killed. ``If Netanyahu does not release 
the prisoners, this will be the situation every day,'' Barghouti said 
from his hospital bed, referring to the hours-long Ramallah clashes 
in which hundreds of Palestinians burned tires and pelted Israeli 
troops with rocks. Barghouti's grandfather, Salah, 74, dressed in 
a long brown robe, said he backed the rioters. ``I was out there with 
them, collecting rocks and giving them to the young men,'' he said. 
A 17-year-old stone mason, Jihad Iyad, died at Ramallah Hospital after 
being shot in the chest by Israeli troops. In Jerusalem, Nasr Erekat, 
a 21-year-old university student and cousin of chief Palestinian peace 
negotiator Saeb Erekat, died of injuries sustained two days earlier. 
Over a thousand people attended his funeral Wednesday night, scores 
of them leaving the procession to throw stones at nearby Israeli troops. 
The soldiers responded with rubber bullets and tear gas. In all, 87 
Palestinians were injured Wednesday by rubber bullets and three by 
live rounds. Nine Israelis, including four soldiers and two riot policemen, 
were hurt by stones. Hoping to calm the situation before Clinton's 
arrival Saturday night, the U.S. Mideast peace coordinator, Dennis 
Ross, held talks with Netanyahu and Arafat to try to settle the disputes. 
On the prisoner issue, Ross appeared to be siding with Israel, saying 
that ``the prime minister is doing what he said he would do.'' Under 
the Wye accord, Israel is to release 750 prisoners by the end of January. 
In a first stage, Netanyahu freed 250, most of them criminals. Ross 
also said he was trying to prevent a new argument over the procedures 
for revoking provisions in the PLO founding charter calling for Israel's 
destruction. On Monday, the Palestine National Council, the Palestinians' 
parliament-in-exile, is to reaffirm a decision by lesser bodies to 
annul those clauses. Both Arafat and Clinton will speak to the delegates. 
Netanyahu insists the PNC take a vote, but the Palestinians say a 
vote is not required. Invitations to the PNC gathering inform delegates 
the purpose is to hear Clinton speak. ``The PNC doesn't intend to 
vote on anything,'' Palestinian legislator Walid el Awadeh told Israel's 
Channel 2 TV. ``We are committed only to what was decided in Wye River.'' 
Ross said he was trying to arrange a compromise. ``The procedure that 
will be worked out will make it very clear once and for all that the 
charter is nullified,'' Ross said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>