<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981209.0356 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Roman Catholic John Hume and Protestant David Trimble arrived Wednesday 
for celebrations leading up to the Nobel Peace Prize they will accept 
in the shadow of discord over their accord aimed at ending Northern 
Ireland's sectarian strife. Hume, 61, is a single-minded peacemaker 
who leads the Northern Ireland's major Catholic party. Trimble, 54, 
is chief of the Protestant party and was a key player in peace efforts. 
The Norwegian Nobel Committee picked the two as the driving forces 
behind a peace accord reached in Belfast, Northern Ireland, in April. 
However, in the less than two months since the committee announced 
its decision, the accord has run into trouble over disarmament. Hume 
and Trimble arrived together at the snowy Gardermoen airport, north 
of Oslo, on a private jet that brought them from Washington D.C. They 
were immediately whisked away by a waiting column of vehicles. They 
are to accept their Nobel prize at a gala ceremony in Oslo's city 
hall on Thursday, followed by a traditional torch light parade and 
a banquet in their honor. On Friday, events celebrating their prize 
include the Nobel Peace Concert. In its awards citation, the Nobel 
committee called Hume ``the clearest and most consistent of Northern 
Ireland's political leaders in his work for a peaceful solution.'' 
``As the leader of the traditionally predominant party in Northern 
Ireland, David Trimble showed great political courage when, at a critical 
stage in the process, he advocated solutions which led to the peace 
agreement,'' the citation said. The latest dispute in the decades-long 
Northern Ireland conflict came last week when Trimble's Ulster Unionist 
Party repeated its demand that the outlawed Irish Republican Army 
begin to disarm before its political wing Sinn Fein is allowed to 
join a new governing body for Northern Ireland. The April peace agreement 
envisioned Protestant and Catholic politicians forming a multiparty 
administration for Northern Ireland and joint policy-making bodies 
with the Irish Republic by October. Neither of those steps have been 
taken. In Washington last week, Trimble warned that failure of militant 
nationalists to surrender their weapons ``is tending to poison the 
atmosphere.'' But Trimble, a member of the British Parliament, also 
said that glitches in carrying out the peace accord should not be 
seen as signs that it is collapsing. In Northern Ireland, police this 
week said IRA leaders had met secretly on a possible policy statement. 
Many hope they will announce a breakthrough in disarmament. Hume trained 
for the priesthood before becoming a well-know peace activist and 
leading Catholic civil rights protests while condemning IRA violence. 
Trimble was a Belfast university law lecturer who opposed efforts 
to share power with Catholics because he feared it would jeopardize 
Northern Ireland's union with Britain. Joining peace talks was a major 
change in his stance. The laureates were just two of many involved 
in the Northern Ireland Peace process, including Sinn Fein leader 
Gerry Adams. The Nobel Prizes, which include a 7.6 million Swedish 
kronor (dlrs 950,000) award, are always presented on the Dec. 10 anniversary 
of the death of their benefactor, Alfred Nobel, a Swede who invented 
dynamite. The peace prize is awarded in Oslo and the other prizes 
in Stockholm, Sweden. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>