<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981209.0724 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Roman Catholic John Hume and Protestant David Trimble arrived Wednesday 
for celebrations leading up to the Nobel Peace Prize they will accept 
in the shadow of discord over their accord aimed at ending Northern 
Ireland's sectarian strife. Hume, 61, is a single-minded peacemaker 
who leads Northern Ireland's major Catholic party and Trimble, 54, 
is chief of the main Protestant party and was a key player in peace 
efforts. Shaking hands as they appeared at a joint news conference, 
both expressed optimism about the peace process. ``I'm optimistic 
about the process, but I don't expect the process to be entirely trouble-free. 
The important thing is that our two parties are committed whatever 
the difficulties may be,'' said Trimble. Hume said the peace agreement 
will be seen as a watershed. ``A couple of years ago, who would have 
thought that the two governments and all the parties would have been 
in the same room in a totally peacefully atmosphere? That in itself 
is a major progress, given our past.'' Hume said. The Norwegian Nobel 
Committee picked the two as the driving forces behind a peace accord 
reached in April. However, in the less than two months since the committee 
announced its decision, the accord has run into trouble over disarmament. 
Hume and Trimble arrived together at the snowy Gardermoen airport, 
north of Oslo, on a private jet that brought them from Washington 
D.C. They were immediately whisked away by a waiting column of vehicles. 
They are to accept the prize at a gala ceremony in Oslo's city hall 
on Thursday, followed by a traditional torchlight parade and a banquet 
in their honor. On Friday, events celebrating their prize include 
the Nobel Peace Concert. In its citation, the Nobel committee called 
Hume ``the clearest and most consistent of Northern Ireland's political 
leaders in his work for a peaceful solution.'' The citation praised 
Trimble for showing ``political courage ... a critical stage in the 
process.'' The latest dispute in the decades-long Northern Ireland 
conflict came last week when Trimble's Ulster Unionist Party repeated 
its demand that the outlawed Irish Republican Army begin to disarm 
before its political wing Sinn Fein is allowed to join a new governing 
body for Northern Ireland. The April peace agreement envisions Protestant 
and Catholic politicians forming a multiparty administration for Northern 
Ireland and joint policy-making bodies with the Irish Republic by 
October. Neither of those steps have been taken. Although Trimble 
last week warned that failure of militant nationalists to surrender 
their weapons ``is tending to poison the atmosphere,'' he denied in 
Oslo that the peace accord was in trouble. He said he expected the 
governing body to be in place by March or April. ``There is a tendency 
that some elements of the media get into too much of a spin over quite 
minor glitches. These matters will be overcome,'' Trimble said. Hume 
agreed, saying that since the agreement was endorsed by the people 
of Northern Ireland, it is was the duty of all parties to carry it 
out. ``Anyone who wants to oppose or undermine the agreement is acting 
against the will of the people and acting against democracy,'' Hume 
said. In Northern Ireland, police this week said IRA leaders had met 
secretly on a possible policy statement. Many hope they will announce 
a breakthrough in disarmament. The laureates were just two of many 
involved in the Northern Ireland peace process, including Sinn Fein 
leader Gerry Adams. At the news conference, Trimble was asked how 
he expects peace to succeed when he refuses even to shake hands with 
Adams. ``The original idea of a handshake is that someone offered 
us an empty hand to show there were no weapons in it. I look forward 
to the time Mr. Adams and his associates are able to show an empty 
hand. That time will come,'' Trimble said The Nobel Prizes, which 
include a 7.6 million Swedish kronor (dlrs 950,000) award, are always 
presented on the Dec. 10 anniversary of the death of their benefactor, 
Alfred Nobel, a Swede who invented dynamite. The peace prize is awarded 
in Oslo and the other prizes in Stockholm, Sweden. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>