<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981209.0353 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Defense Ministry ordered a new probe Wednesday into the death 
of a South Korean army officer earlier this year to determine if he 
was killed by a subordinate to cover up illegal contacts with North 
Koreans. The order came amid legislative allegations that the officer, 
initially thought to have committed suicide, might have been slain 
by an enlisted man under his command. First Lt. Kim Hoon, 26, was 
found shot in the head in a bunker inside the border village of Panmunjom 
on Feb. 24. The initial investigation concluded that he shot himself 
with a pistol. But a parliamentary probe of the case last week brought 
allegations that an army enlisted man might have killed Kim to hide 
his illegal contacts with North Korean officers at the heavily guarded 
village, known as a joint security area. Staff Sgt. Kim Young-hoon, 
28, was arrested Tuesday on charges of making unauthorized contacts 
with North Korean officers at the village in 1997. The soldier allegedly 
crossed the border at night more than 30 times and received cigarettes, 
drinks and other gifts from North Korean officers assigned to lure 
South Korean soldiers over to their side, ministry officials said. 
At least two other South Korean soldiers were also under investigation 
on similar charges, they said. The American-led U.N. Command, which 
controls half of Panmunjom, said it was cooperating with the investigation. 
Under the U.N. flag, a battalion of American and South Korean soldiers 
guard the southern half of Panmunjom, a 400 meter (yard)- wide area 
which serves as the sole contact point in the demilitarized zone, 
or DMZ, separating the two Koreas. South Korean officials began the 
investigation after they were tipped off by a North Korean border 
guard who defected to the South in February, the ministry said. The 
defector, Byon Yong-kwan, 26, reportedly told investigators that North 
Korean security agents had established contact with as many as 42 
South Korean soldiers at the border village in 1997 alone. He also 
reportedly told investigators that some South Korean soldiers had 
promised to spy for North Korea after getting expensive gifts from 
communist agents, including a dlrs 4,000 Rolex wristwatch. Opposition 
legislators investigating the case alleged that the dead officer got 
into a tense confrontation with some of his subordinates when he tried 
to discipline them for making unauthorized contacts with North Koreans. 
The two Koreas are still technically at war because the 1950-53 Korean 
War ended with an armistice, not a peace treaty. South Koreans are 
banned by law from meeting North Koreans without government permission. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>