<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981209.0130.0060 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Without even a lunch or dinner break, President Clinton's defenders 
spent 11 impassioned hours before the house Judiciary committee, arguing 
against impeachment. And they'll be back in the morning for more of 
the same. Ginger Blackstone reports on day one of the defense. In 
his opening statement, the president's lawyer laid out a Familiar 
defense. What Mr. Clinton did was wrong, but not impeachable. The 
president wants everyone to know, the committee, the Congress and 
the country, that he is genuinely sorry for the pain and the damage 
that he has caused and for the wrongs that he has committed. But as 
an attorney, I must caution this committee to draw a sharp distinction 
between immoral conduct and illegal acts. That did not satisfy republicans 
on the committee. They asked for details about Mr. Clinton's affair 
with Monica Lewinsky and about conflicts in how he and she have described 
it. Did he lie to the American people when he said, "I never had sex 
with that woman"? You know, he doesn't believe he did, and because 
of the -- He doesn't -- May I explain, congressman? He doesn't believe 
that he lied? No, he does not believe he lied because his notion of 
what sex is is what the dictionary definition is. Later, the committee 
heard from three former house members who voted for articles of impeachment 
against President Nixon in 1974. They said this case is nothing like 
Watergate. There's nothing like that in this evidence here. There's 
nothing that touches on the moral or the illegality of the level of 
evidence that you had with Richard Nixon. We had no choice but to 
impeach. And they warned that without a bipartisan agreement on how 
to punish Mr. Clinton, the committee would be judged harshly. What 
I'm saying to you is how important it is to come away with public 
respect and public confidence in what you're doing. Maybe that's not 
your first choice, but maybe if we're going to live with this verdict 
for history, it's the best choice. Republicans said they had to vote 
their conscious with or without the democrats. He committed grand 
jury perjury, and when you come to believe that, like we do, if it's 
21-16, so be it. The final witnesses were a former Watergate prosecutor 
and a Counsel for the Senate Watergate committee. They said Mr. Clinton 
deserved something less than impeachment. He has engaged in reprehensible 
conduct. He has engaged in conduct in which I believe he should receive 
a sharp censure. Indeed, I think he should agree to pay a substantial 
fine. But I don't think that he's engaged in conduct that demonstrates 
he is a Danger to America. As the day came to a close, republicans 
complained the White House still had not addressed the facts and evidence 
in the case against mr. Clinton. Not yet. Zero for three. Three panels, 
no facts, no evidence. The last day for the president's defense begins 
Wednesday morning. Ginger Blackstone, "Headline News." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>