<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981209.0130.1487 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some people might say celebrity watching is America's favorite sport. 
Jill Brooke explores the phenomenon with the author of a new book 
and the stars themselves. There are all types of addictions. Some 
people are addicted to chocolate, others to cigarettes. And many believe 
that, as a culture, we're addicted to celebrity. I mean, you look 
at how celebrities are regarded in society. I mean, they are beloved 
by everyone. How well remunerated they are. How many perks they get. 
I mean, celebrity is really the stakes to almost everyone in America 
now aspires. In his book, "life: the movie," Gabler says that the 
obsession with celebrity is warping reality. Because of so many media 
outlets covering celebrities, you see the same stars over and over 
again. As a result, the public develops a false sense of intimacy 
with them, believing the celebrities are really their friends. I can 
only imagine it's because it is easier to look to someone else's life 
for intrigue and interest and to point a finger and say, "oh, that 
was good, or that was bad," than to look at oneself, because that's 
the great challenge of life, to be accepting of yourself. But if you 
keep all of your thoughts and opinions going outward, then there's 
no self-examination and you're safe. So celebrity, in a way, is escapism. 
That's what movies are. And so it seems realistic that there is an 
overlap into the way that movies are sold and the way actors are presented 
into the public world. Marilyn Monroe and DiMaggio The author also 
points out that the public doesn't seem to mind being manipulated 
by all the spin, as long as the performance is entertaining. Hugh 
grant, Eddie Murphy and President Clinton are all still very popular 
despite their sex scandals. Celebrity is amoral. Their transgressions 
become part of their story. It becomes part of what they sell. It 
becomes part of the entertainment of the celebrity's own life, which 
now supersedes anything a celebrity does on screen or on record. Won't 
you help me At its best, celebrity can be a force for good. Celebrities 
are often bait to raise awareness and funds for charities. And the 
themes addressed in some of their work can often spark dialogue about 
the issues. It makes me feel responsible for the work I do, to not 
enforce really bad stereotypes to sex and violence. I mean, certain 
themes I don't want to be part of. While many debate whether it's 
good or bad, most agree that celebrity is an addiction that will be 
hard to break. Jill Brooke, "CNN Entertainment News," New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>