<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981209.1130.1505 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Lock on phasers, "star trek" fans. The crew of the enterprise is heading 
to a theater in your universe. Dennis Michael has the story. This 
is too important -- "star trek: insurrection," the ninth film in the 
franchise, finds the federation beset on all sides by foes and new 
allies, the son'A, who may even be worse than the enemies. I know 
what a hologram is, captain. The question is, why would anyone want 
to create one of our village? Federation officials seek to betray 
the prime directive by forcing a peaceful civilization off its world. 
Will the crew of the "enterprise" stand by? Lock and load. That's 
the heart of "star trek" is the prime directive, which is not that 
different from the golden rule. You know, it's basically, "do unto 
others," you know? And in the case of the prime directive, it's, "don't 
do unto others." Take a look at the same story now from another dimension 
-- the dimension of Hollywood. Once the only major science fiction 
franchise, now "star trek" is surrounded by "the X-files," "Babylon 
5," "men in black," dozens more. How does it maintain its place in 
the universe? By sticking to what made it "star trek" in the first 
place. Rick Berman, the writers, the other producers and the cast 
have been absolutely determined to hold onto what were the fundamentals 
-- most of the fundamentals -- of Gene roddenberry's vision. If Picard 
or any of his people interfere, eliminate them. We always try to find 
contemporary resonance wherever we can. And there is an underlying 
seriousness about the way -- in other words, it's about something. 
Red alert! All hands, battle stations! But if you're looking for a 
dry lecture on planetary ethics, "Star trek: insurrection" isn't it. 
Second-time director Jonathan frakes, familiar to "trek" fans as the 
resourceful second-in-command, will riker, is very sure about the 
course the "enterprise" is taking while he's at the helm. It's still, 
at its root, about relationships. And it's not afraid to talk about 
something philosophical, something political, to take a moral and 
ethical stand. "star trek: insurrection" has plenty that's new, as 
well as that which is reassuringly familiar. The ninth installment 
is the most outdoor of all the series. Much of it was shot in the 
sierras, instead of at the Paramount lot. And the special effects 
are wilder and more sweeping than any in the past, now that the series 
is doing its effects via computer. But with all the changes, it's 
still "star trek." We really, I think, do it better than anybody else. 
And that will keep the son'A, and the borg and competing studios at 
least a few parsecs behind. Dennis Michael, "CNN Entertainment News," 
Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>