<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981209.2130.1506 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With so few hits on the airwaves, it becomes a big event when a show 
lasts long enough to celebrate its 100th episode. "ER" is celebrating 
that milestone. Jill Brooke looks at its impact on the industry. Certain 
shows will be remembered for different reasons. Thank you. A daughter 
giving me change. Bless you, you're the best. "Cosby" brought back 
the sitcom format. Will you give me that check? You are drooling the 
zeros off of it. "roseanne" brought viewers a blue-collar grittiness. 
And "Seinfeld" brought in the era of the single, urban dweller. I 
know, honey. I know. But many say that "ER" will be remembered for 
something else. It is the show that changed the financial relationship 
between the studios and the networks, after the show presented a Bill 
that would make even blue cross cringe. The price went up from $2 
million to $13 million an episode at a time when the network bosses 
were facing dwindling viewership and profits. So now, instead of being 
renters, their home improvement plan is to get longer leases and become 
part owner of the shows, so they can share in merchandising and syndication 
profits. This is a good one. The advantages -- creatively, you are 
more in control and you can make sure that things that you want to 
have happen with shows happen or people listen to you. And at the 
same point, if your show becomes a home run, you own a piece of it. 
Yet the studios argue that network meddling in the creative product 
could impact the quality of the shows. I think we consider ourselves 
pretty flexible dealmakers in terms of trying to figure out a creative 
arrangement between the network and ourselves, in terms of appropriate 
co-ownership of programming. I think that if there's again too much 
vertical integration, too much power all in one place, it seems to 
me that, again, the diversity of choice that's being created for the 
public is going to suffer. It has to suffer. And the studio chiefs 
also have other leverage. If the network demands become too great, 
they'll do business elsewhere. As this struggle continues, the networks 
are already investing in more news shows and reality programs like 
"alien autopsy," which are owned and produced by the networks. This 
is a response to the public, but it also doesn't force you to make 
bad deals on people who maybe don't have hits in them. Observers believe 
that this fight will be resolved. In the end, they're going to do 
business with each other. I think that really what's going to happen 
is that you, the viewer are just going to have more things to choose 
from. Do you really care if your hit is on NBC, or if it's on upn 
or if it's on cable, you just want television that pleases you. All 
right, come on, people. let's go. Let's get them out. Move. But quantity 
is not necessarily quality. And everyone is still looking for the 
next hit like "ER." Jill Brooke, "CNN Entertainment News," New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>