<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981209.1600.0055 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Republicans on the house Judiciary committee would agree with White 
House counsel Charles ruff on at least one issue. He says the president's 
behavior in the Monica Lewinsky matter was morally reprehensible. 
That appears to be all the common ground they can find. Ruff, who 
is testifying before the committee at this hour, and a panel of five 
former federal prosecutors who testified earlier today, all say the 
president's conduct falls short of the standards for impeachment. 
Jean smev has more on today's testimony. From the White House counsel 
today, an admission. When he stood in the Roosevelt room and said 
he did not have sexual relations with Ms. Lewinsky, he knew a vast 
majority of people listening to him out there probably understand 
that to mean he did not have any improper relationship with her of 
any kind, and he knew when he said that holding within him as he did 
his understanding that sexual relations meant sexual intercourse that 
he was misleading the people that were listening to him. With measured 
tones, and careful words, Charles ruff tried to shred Ken Starr's 
case against the president point by point. It was full, he said, of 
specious arguments, conflicting information and bad legal judgments. 
Myth, he said, has replaced reality. Ruff was, by turns, conciliatory 
and critical, apologetic and forceful, but his bottom line on the 
question of impeachment never changed. In order to have committed 
an impeachable offense the president must have acted to subvert our 
system of government. And members of the committee, that did not happen. 
As the White House wove the president's defense, a gesture from judiciary 
chair Henry Hyde. He will allow a committee vote on censure, though 
it is sure to fail. And one committee republican indicated some new 
flexibility. I believe the president committed serious crimes, but 
if he would reconcile himself with the law so that we could end this 
thing on a note of honor, I may consider a different disposition than 
impeachment. The White House's sole republican panelist, former Massachusetts 
governor William weld, proposed the president admit wrongdoing, be 
fined and be open to prosecution after leaving office. If any of you 
are thinking we've got to vote yes on impeachment to tarnish the president, 
he's already tarnished. And that's not really the purpose of impeachment. 
Nobody is going to forget this stuff. Weld was one of five former 
prosecutors who said the case against the president was a loser that 
would never be sustained in court. The committee is still drafting 
its articles of impeachment, at least one will pass. The vote count 
in the house is, even at this late date, still uncertain. Jeanne Meserve, 
CNN, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>