<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981209.1830.0501 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A familiar and predictable scenario in Iraq again tonight. The United 
Nations inspection team that is supposed to make unannounced visits 
to suspected weapons sites was stopped cold. Is this the start of 
another countdown to a crisis. Joining me now from the Pentagon is 
NBC's Jim Miklaszewski. Jim, what's going on there? Well, Tom, we've 
been here before. But tonight it seems that the U.S. and Iraq may 
be headed towards still one more military showdown. In Baghdad today 
U.N. weapons inspectors headed out of their compounds, but didn't 
get very far. In the first serious confrontation since inspections 
resumed three weeks ago, Iraqi officials blocked a U.N. team from 
entering Saddam Hussein's party headquarters during a surprise inspection. 
Richard Butler called it a serious violation. It is particularly serious 
because we're in a period where we're testing the promise that Iraq 
gave to the security counsel plea weeks ago when they were about to 
be bombed. The Iraqi foreign minister accused Butler of provoking 
a crisis situation. But NBC news has learned U.N. inspectors believe 
the party headquarters may have contained sophisticated parts for 
Iraqi long-range missiles prohibited by the United Nations. And if 
we found these components and these components were there it would 
have proven our case that Iraq has not disarmed. In fact, since Saddam 
Hussein barely avoided U.S. air strikes nearly a month ago, he's continued 
to defy weapons inspectors. Iraq has refused to turn over weapons 
documents, blocked inspectors and, according to sources, Iraq has 
also tampered with U.N. monitoring systems at weapons sites. U.S. 
sources tell NBC news all this increases the chances for American 
air strikes against Iraq. Today, nine B-52s left the U.S. for the 
gulf region. Several hundred troops and two patriot missile batteries 
have been ordered sent to Israel. And a second aircraft carrier will 
soon arrive in the Persian gulf. Now, the Pentagon says all this movement 
is simply part of routine rotations and exercises. But sources tell 
NBC news that within the week U.N. inspectors plan to turn up the 
heat on Saddam and dramatically increase the number of surprise inspections. 
All those additional military forces will arrive in the gulf just 
in time. Should President Clinton be forced again to order air strikes 
against Iraq. tom? Thanks very much, Jim Miklaszewski at the Pentagon 
tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>