<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981209.1830.0961 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight -- protecting America's astronauts as 
they walk in space tonight. What we call spacesuits. But NASA calls 
them E.M.U.s., "extravehicular mobility units." They're crucial to 
surviving the perils of space, like the dramatic temperature change. 
Facing the sun, astronauts can be blasted with temperatures up to 
250 degrees. Facing deep space the temperature can drop to minus 250 
degrees. So what do U.S. astronauts wear? NBC's Robert Hager "in depth" 
on the newest design in space suits. a seven-hour spacewalk in an 
environment far more hostile than anything below on earth. Astronauts 
Jerry Ross and Jim Newman, installing antennas to beam back information 
from the first two pieces of what will become the international space 
station. But without spacesuits, they couldn't breath and their blood 
would boil instantly. Suits vastly different from early designs decades 
ago that look like the tin man or the Michelin man or Buck Rogers 
or r2d2 with legs! Today's $10 million suits honed over 78 spacewalks 
to date. And now, upgraded again for the rigors of working on the 
space station. Underneath starts with a layer of long underwear then 
a body length garment with a series of hoses that circulate water 
to keep astronauts cool, 300 feet of hose running through each liner. 
To give you an idea just how complex all this is, let's take a closer 
look at the pants here. Now these have to be pressurized, blown up 
with air like a balloon against the vacuum of space. This is the lining, 
a plastic covered nylon to keep that air. The whole suit weighs, on 
earth, close to 300 pounds, the pants about 40 pounds. But, of course, 
in space they are weightless. But that doesn't make them any less 
cumbersome to get into. Over the head goes the snoopy cap, with radios 
in the ears. Then the helmet, with visor-like sunglasses for space, 
and a sunscreen, if glare gets worse. On the gloves, pull a tab and 
it turns on small heaters down in the fingers. But still hard to use, 
according to NASA engineer Phil west. You're putting your hand into 
a glove that's really just a balloon shaped like your hand, and as 
you squeeze it, it becomes fatiguing. If you have ever squeezed a 
tennis ball or a racquetball, that's the type of thing we are talking 
about. There's pressure there, so even though you work to make the 
gloves very efficient, they're still fatiguing. For refreshment, a 
tube to suck up water, a quart of it stored in the suit. The backpack 
keeps astronauts alive. A scrubber to get rid of carbon dioxide, battery 
for electricity, and two tanks with enough oxygen for more than seven 
hours, with two more tanks for an emergency. A very small particle 
could actually blow through a space suit and create a Leak. There's 
never been such an emergency, but with five more years of construction 
and 160 space walks to go, experts fear some accident is inevitable. 
But not today. 240 miles up, all going well for the astronauts and 
the space suits that protect them. Robert Hager, NBC news, Houston. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>