<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981209.1830.0069 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. For two days the president's lawyers, professors and 
other politicians have argued before the house Judiciary committee 
that the president's behavior was, as one put it, morally reprehensible, 
but not an impeachable offense. The republican majority was not moved, 
not one vote. And tonight they are preparing four articles of impeachment 
against the president. It is now all but certain to go to the full 
house and perhaps to the Senate for trial. We begin with NBC's Gwen 
Ifill. House republicans laid out a Blunt, critical case against the 
president tonight, proposing four articles of impeachment against 
the president, including two charges of perjury. One, that the president 
lied under oath when he told a grand jury, among other things, that 
he did not touch Monica Lewinsky intimately. I did not have sexual 
relations as I understood this term to be defined. The other charging 
civil perjury, based on Mr. Clinton's denials about Lewinsky in the 
Paula Jones sexual harassment case. The third charge, that the president 
obstructed justice, urging his secretary Betty Currie to conceal the 
Lewinsky relationship. The fourth charge, abuse of power, that the 
president intentionally asked government officials to lie for him 
then tried to use executive privilege to avoid answering questions. 
White House counsel Charles ruff told the committee today that they 
are is overreaching. The president did not obstruct justice. He did 
not tamper with witnesses. He did not abuse the powers of his office. 
Not so, say committee republicans. I am not prepared to say that that 
the expect standard of conduct for an american president is simply 
that he or she may not be indictable. Capitol phone lines were swamped 
today, and lawmakers report their offices have been flooded with mail 
on both sides of the issue. And anticipating a close vote on the house 
floor next week, committee chairman Henry Hyde took the unusual step 
today of appealing to moderate republicans who are considering voting 
against impeachment, asking them to "Withhold judgment" on impeachment 
until committee lawyers make their final arguments tomorrow. Tomorrow 
republicans plan to unveil a previously secret videotape. Portions 
of the president's recorded testimony in the Paula Jones case. And 
use Bill Clinton's words to seal their case. Gwen Ifill, NBC news, 
the capitol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>