<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0439 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following are the texts of a working draft of the House Judiciary 
Committee's resolution to impeach President Clinton and a resolution 
to censure Clinton, as provided by the judiciary committee: Impeachment 
Resolution Resolved that William Jefferson Clinton, President of the 
United States, is impeached for high crimes and misdemeanors, and 
that the following articles of impeachment be exhibited to the United 
States Senate: Articles of impeachment exhibited by the House of Representatives 
of the United States of America in the name of itself and of the people 
of the United States of America, against William Jefferson Clinton, 
President of the United States of America, in maintenance and support 
of its impeachment against him for high crimes and misdemeanors. ARTICLE 
I In his conduct while President of the United States, William Jefferson 
Clinton, in violation of his constitutional oath faithfully to execute 
the office of President of the United States and, to the best of his 
ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United 
States, and in violation of his constitutional duty to take care that 
the laws be faithfully executed, has willfully corrupted and manipulated 
the judicial process of the United States for his personal gain and 
exoneration, impeding the administration of justice, in that: On Aug. 
17, 1998, William Jefferson Clinton swore to tell the truth, the whole 
truth and nothing but the truth before a Federal grand jury of the 
United States. Contrary to that oath, William Jefferson Clinton willfully 
provided perjurious, false and misleading testimony to the grand jury 
concerning: (1) the nature and details of his relationship with a 
subordinate government employee; (2) prior perjurious, false and misleading 
testimony he gave in a Federal civil rights action brought against 
him; (3) prior false and misleading statements he allowed his attorney 
to make to a Federal judge in that civil rights action; and (4) his 
corrupt efforts to influence the testimony of witnesses and to impede 
the discovery of evidence in that civil rights action. In doing this, 
William Jefferson Clinton has undermined the integrity of his office, 
has brought disrepute on the Presidency, has betrayed his trust as 
President, and has acted in a manner subversive of the rule of law 
and justice, to the manifest injury of the people of the United States. 
Wherefore, William Jefferson Clinton, by such conduct, warrants impeachment 
and trial and removal from office and disqualification to hold and 
enjoy any office of honor, trust or profit under the United States. 
ARTICLE II In his conduct while President of the United States, William 
Jefferson Clinton, in violation of his constitutional oath faithfully 
to execute the office of President of the United States and, to the 
best of his ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution 
of the United States, and in violation of his constitutional duty 
to take care that the laws be faithfully executed, has willfully corrupted 
and manipulated the judicial process of the United States for his 
personal gain and exoneration, impeding the administration of justice, 
in that: (1) On Dec. 23, 1997, William Jefferson Clinton, in sworn 
answers to written questions asked as part of a Federal civil rights 
action brought against him, willfully provided perjurious, false and 
misleading testimony in response to questions deemed relevant by a 
Federal judge concerning conduct and proposed conduct with subordinate 
employees. (2) On Jan. 17, 1998, William Jefferson Clinton swore under 
oath to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth 
in a deposition given as part of a Federal civil rights action brought 
against him. Contrary to that oath, William Jefferson Clinton willfully 
provided perjurious, false and misleading testimony in response to 
questions deemed relevant by a Federal judge concerning the nature 
and details of his relationship with a subordinate government employee 
and his corrupt efforts to influence the testimony of that employee. 
In all of this, William Jefferson Clinton has undermined the integrity 
of his office, has brought disrepute on the Presidency, has betrayed 
his trust as President, and has acted in a manner subversive of the 
rule of law and justice, to the manifest injury of the people of the 
United States. Wherefore, William Jefferson Clinton, by such conduct, 
warrants impeachment and trial, and removal from office and disqualification 
to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust or profit under the United 
States. ARTICLE III In his conduct while President of the United States, 
William Jefferson Clinton, in violation of his constitutional oath 
faithfully to execute the office of President of the United States 
and, to the best of his ability, preserve, protect and defend the 
Constitution of the United States, and in violation of his constitutional 
duty to take care that the laws be faithfully executed, has prevented, 
obstructed and impeded the administration of justice, and has to that 
end engaged personally and through his subordinates and agents, in 
a course of conduct or scheme designed to delay, impede, cover up 
and conceal the existence of evidence and testimony related to a Federal 
civil rights action brought against him in a duly instituted judicial 
proceeding. The means used to implement this course of conduct or 
scheme included one or more of the following acts: (1) On or about 
Dec. 17, 1997, William Jefferson Clinton corruptly encouraged a witness 
in a Federal civil rights action brought against him to execute a 
sworn affidavit in that proceeding that he knew to be perjurious, 
false and misleading. (2) On or about Dec. 17, 1997, William Jefferson 
Clinton corruptly encouraged a witness in a Federal civil rights action 
brought against him to give perjurious, false and misleading testimony 
if and when called to testify personally in that proceeding. (3) On 
or about Dec. 28, 1997, William Jefferson Clinton corruptly engaged 
in, encouraged or supported a scheme to conceal evidence that had 
been subpoenaed in a Federal civil rights action brought against him. 
(4) Beginning on or about Dec. 7, 1997, and continuing through and 
including Jan. 14, 1998, William Jefferson Clinton intensified and 
succeeded in an effort to secure job assistance to a witness in a 
Federal civil rights action brought against him in order to corruptly 
prevent the truthful testimony of that witness in that proceeding 
at a time when the truthful testimony of that witness would have been 
harmful to him. (5) On Jan. 17, 1998, at his deposition in a Federal 
civil rights action brought against him, William Jefferson Clinton 
corruptly allowed his attorney to make false and misleading statements 
to a Federal judge characterizing an affidavit, in order to prevent 
questioning deemed relevant by the judge. Such false and misleading 
statements were subsequently acknowledged by his attorney in a communication 
to that judge. (6) On or about Jan. 18 and Jan. 20-21, 1998, William 
Jefferson Clinton related a false and misleading account of events 
relevant to a Federal civil rights action brought against him to a 
potential witness in that proceeding, in order to corruptly influence 
the testimony of that witness. (7) On or about Jan. 21, 23 and 26, 
1998, William Jefferson Clinton made false and misleading statements 
to potential witnesses in a Federal grand jury proceeding in order 
to corruptly influence the testimony of those witnesses. The false 
and misleading statements made by William Jefferson Clinton were repeated 
by the witnesses to the grand jury, causing the grand jury to receive 
false and misleading information. In all of this, William Jefferson 
Clinton has undermined the integrity of his office, has brought disrepute 
on the Presidency, has betrayed his trust as President, and has acted 
in a manner subversive of the rule of law and justice, to the manifest 
injury of the people of the United States. Wherefore, William Jefferson 
Clinton, by such conduct, warrants impeachment and trial, and removal 
from office and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor, 
trust or profit under the United States. ARTICLE IV Using the powers 
and influence of the office of President of the United States, William 
Jefferson Clinton, in violation of his constitutional oath faithfully 
to execute the office of President of the United States and, to the 
best of his ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution 
of the United States, and in disregard of his constitutional duty 
to take care that the laws be faithfully executed, has repeatedly 
engaged in conduct that resulted in misuse and abuse of his high office, 
impaired the due and proper administration of justice and the conduct 
of lawful inquiries, and contravened the laws governing the integrity 
of the judicial and legislative branches and the truth-seeking purpose 
of coordinate investigative proceedings. This misuse and abuse of 
office has included one or more of the following: (1) As President, 
using the attributes of office, William Jefferson Clinton willfully 
made false and misleading public statements for the purpose of deceiving 
the people of the United States in order to continue concealing his 
misconduct and to escape accountability for such misconduct. (2) As 
President, using the attributes of office, William Jefferson Clinton 
willfully made false and misleading statements to members of his Cabinet, 
and White House aides, so that these Federal employees would repeat 
such false and misleading statements publicly, thereby utilizing public 
resources for the purpose of deceiving the people of the United States, 
in order to continue concealing his misconduct and to escape accountability 
for such misconduct. The false and misleading statements made by William 
Jefferson Clinton to members of his Cabinet and White House aides 
were repeated by those members and aides, causing the people of the 
United States to receive false and misleading information from high 
government officials. (3) As President, using the office of White 
House counsel, William Jefferson Clinton frivolously and corruptly 
asserted executive privilege, which is intended to protect from disclosure 
communications regarding the constitutional functions of the executive, 
and which may be exercised only by the President, with respect to 
communications other than those regarding the constitutional functions 
of the executive, for the purpose of delaying and obstructing a Federal 
criminal investigation and the proceedings of a Federal grand jury. 
(4) As President, William Jefferson Clinton refused and failed to 
respond to certain written requests for admission and willfully made 
perjurious, false and misleading sworn statements in response to certain 
written requests for admission propounded to him as part of the impeachment 
inquiry authorized by the House of Representatives of the Congress 
of the United States. William Jefferson Clinton, in refusing and failing 
to respond and in making perjurious, false and misleading statements, 
assumed to himself functions and judgments necessary to the exercise 
of the sole power of impeachment vested by the Constitution in the 
House of Representatives and exhibited contempt for the inquiry. In 
all of this, William Jefferson Clinton has undermined the integrity 
of his office, has brought disrepute on the Presidency, has betrayed 
his trust as President, and has acted in a manner subversive of the 
rule of law and justice, to the manifest injury of the people of the 
United States. Wherefore, William Jefferson Clinton, by such conduct, 
warrants impeachment and trial and removal from office and disqualification 
to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust or profit under the United 
States. Censure Resolution It is the Sense of the Congress that _ 
On Jan. 20, 1993, William Jefferson Clinton took the oath, prescribed 
by the Constitution of the United States, faithfully to execute the 
Office of President; implicit in that oath is the obligation that 
the President set an example of high moral standards and conduct himself 
in a manner that fosters respect for the truth; and William Jefferson 
Clinton has egregiously failed in this obligation, and through his 
actions has violated the trust of the American people, lessened their 
esteem for the office of President and dishonored the office which 
they have entrusted to him. Be it resolved that: 1. The President 
made false statements concerning his reprehensible conduct with a 
subordinate; 2. The President wrongly took steps to delay discovery 
of the truth; 3. No person is above the law, and the President remains 
subject to criminal and civil penalties for this conduct; 4. William 
Jefferson Clinton, the President of the United States, by his conduct 
has brought upon himself and fully deserves the censure and condemnation 
of the American people and the Congress; and by his signature on this 
joint resolution, the President acknowledges this censure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>