<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0263 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
How do you cope with the serious illness of a child? Some ways are 
primal, and others are learned on the job. I tried both the old and 
the new during the last year, after my 10-year-old son, Peter, was 
told that he had ulcerative colitis. But when he was hospitalized 
just a few weeks ago to have his colon removed, I packed my laptop 
computer along with his favorite blanket and stuffed animals. In another 
era, I would have paced in the family waiting room with my address 
book and a bag of quarters to pass on hospital news to friends and 
relatives. But on that day, my connection was achieved with a Web 
site on his surgery and hospital stay. Since Peter got sick, in November 
1997, I have used the Internet for many things related to his illness. 
It was natural for me: as the founder and general manager of NFL.com, 
I've been running an extremely busy Web site for more than four years. 
That makes me just slightly younger than John Glenn in Internet years. 
I rely on the Internet every day for research and communication; still, 
I could never have anticipated its significance as our bridge from 
the confinement of the hospital to the world. Peter had begged me 
for months to help him create a personal home page. When I finally 
got around to it, he was too weak to participate. Too many months 
of steroids had weakened his bones, distorted his features and bloated 
his body. My handsome and skinny 10-year-old was trapped in a form 
that seemed stolen from the Cartman character on ``South Park.'' Last 
summer, as Peter played with old friends and made new ones, we worked 
with his doctors to try new drugs and new therapies, hoping to avoid 
surgery. Peter's spirits never flagged. When he became too weak to 
bike around his beloved summer haunts on Fire Island, he borrowed 
an adult tricycle. He had a pinch runner for softball games, he finished 
``The Lord of the Rings,'' and he played endless games of Monopoly 
with his sisters and dad. According to Peter, it was the best summer 
of his life. I wouldn't rate my own summer quite so highly, squeezed 
between Peter's medical needs and work, with pockets of time when 
I lost myself on the Internet, looking for miracles and sharing information 
about the disease with others on line. But no miracles materialized, 
and on Nov. 1, we were finally preparing Peter for surgery. I alternated 
between fussing over him with chicken soup that he didn't have the 
appetite to eat and banging on my computer keyboard. It was a strange 
dual role. I could do little to ease Peter's discomfort, so the hassle 
of giving myself a crash course in Web design was a good distraction. 
Despite my experience at the NFL Web site, I had never really done 
the heavy lifting myself. Other people, far more proficient in Internet 
technology, had created the basic site architecture. Now I was the 
uncertain Webmaster of www.kirschner.org. My goal was to open a Web 
site that would provide basic information about Peter's recovery as 
well as answer general questions about colitis, colectomies and how 
to get in touch with us. The site had to be easy to use and visually 
appealing. Most important, and most difficult to achieve, it had to 
be interactive. I spent the better part of the day before Peter's 
surgery huddled over the computer and weeping as I listened to the 
television coverage of the New York Marathon. Just one year before, 
I had run the marathon for the first time. From the exhilaration and 
pride of that moment to the terror and melancholy of this day was 
too far to fall. We arrived at Mount Sinai-New York University Medical 
Center on a Monday morning at 6:45. In addition to the usual patient 
paraphernalia, I carried a cellular phone, a laptop, a digital camera, 
a digital tape recorder, a microphone and assorted plugs, wires and 
adapters. The surgery began at 8:30 a.m. We were prepared to wait 
for at least three hours. Mercifully, by 10 a.m., Dr. Stephen Dolgin 
sent Nan Lim-Sulit, a nurse practitioner, to tell us that all had 
gone well, that the doctor was nearly done and that Peter would be 
in the recovery room shortly. It was a true act of kindness. By early 
that afternoon, Peter was sleeping deeply in his hospital room, tubes 
and wires connecting him to various intravenous pain medicine and 
nutrients. While he rested, I, too, got wired. An adjustable hospital 
bed table made an admirable mobile desk. The Web site was up and running. 
My first technical challenge was just logging on to the Internet through 
the hospital's unpredictable telephone system. I had to dial in again 
and again, frequently losing the connection midstream. As Peter became 
more alert, he and I settled into a routine. His job was to rest and 
submit to the hospital staff's questions and examinations. In addition 
to good old-fashioned mothering, my duty was to update the home page 
in the evening, adding digital photos and audio clips. Peter's pediatric 
gastroenterologist, Dr. Keith Benkov, and Dolgin submitted gracefully 
to posing for the home page with their patient and his stuffed animals. 
Peter particularly loved to show visitors a picture in our online 
family album that was taken before he became sick and strikingly ``cushingoid,'' 
exhibiting the moon-faced steroid effect named after a real Cushing. 
The hospital staff, too, seemed to enjoy the Web site. Three medical 
students trooped in one day, having heard about the site when Peter's 
case was presented in pediatric rounds. Modern medicine! On the third 
night, I tried to install a new computer game for Peter. To my horror, 
my brand-new laptop crashed. Suddenly, I was staring dumbly at a screen 
that was beyond Windows, beyond DOS, a relic from some prehistoric 
setup protocol. A call to the computer help line at first brought 
no relief, as Stan, the laconic technician, diagnosed a fatal system 
board error. Send it back tomorrow, he commanded. ``Just think up 
one more fix,'' I pleaded. ``The hospital setting, Peter's illness 
_ I need desperately to get back on line!'' I was just about ready 
to offer him my Super Bowl tickets when he offhandedly suggested a 
voodoo reboot with keyboarding combinations I had never heard of. 
Suddenly, there was the friendly face of Windows back again. Thanks, 
Stan. The best feature of the Web site was a guest book, which was 
eventually signed by more than 100 people. (A counter on the home 
page has registered more than 1,000 visits, probably suggesting that 
our guests have been on the site about 10 times each.) I had wrested 
these features from the software late the night before surgery, and 
the victory was worth the effort. Every evening, I rolled the computer 
over to Peter's bedside and we read the guest book together. Every 
single message was a little jolt of energy for Peter and me. Our oldest 
visitor was well into his 80s, and many of Peter's fourth-grade classmates 
signed the book on their own or with their parents. There are a few 
clowns in every crowd: my nephew revealed his diabolical plot to alter 
Peter's photos digitally and send him nude around the Internet. A 
business colleague offered to handle advertising sales on this highly 
trafficked site. The site documented Peter's first walk in the hospital, 
his first meal, his return home and his triumphant welcome back to 
school just 15 days after surgery. Recently we celebrated his last 
dose of steroids. At some time in the future, he will return to the 
hospital for reconstructive surgery, but we are grateful for each 
strong new day and are not looking too far ahead. Was this all a little 
too much like ``The Truman Show,'' as I produced a site that invited 
people to experience Peter's illness and recovery in something close 
to real time? Perhaps it seems uncomfortably close to the wacky stories 
of live medical events on the Internet, where total strangers are 
sharing everything from childbirth to open heart surgery. For now, 
I'll beg off on the deeper ethical considerations. All I know is that 
the Internet enabled us to create a living community that temporarily 
knit together everyone close to us in a deep and emotional connection. 
Digital never felt so warm. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>