<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0511 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Opera singers keep showing up in the wrong places. Sometimes they 
are good singers: Cecilia Bartoli, appearing as Susanna in the Metropolitan 
Opera's ``Marriage of Figaro''; Renee Fleming, very nearly appearing 
in the Met's ``Traviata,'' and Patricia Racette, who did appear there. 
Sometimes they are not good enough: Marcelo Alvarez, for example, 
opposite Ms. Racette, as Alfredo. Who or what put these people where 
they ended up, and why, begins as a mystery. Ms. Bartoli is a splendid 
mezzo-soprano and a gifted clown, but turned loose on Mozart, her 
physical comedy paved over the ambiguities that make Susanna so appealing. 
Ms. Fleming, of the pure and melting soprano voice, withdrew from 
Franco Zeffirelli's latest exercise in directorial grandiosity scarcely 
three weeks before opening night. It was, I think, a prudent move 
for several reasons. Ms. Racette has all the goods to handle Verdi's 
demanding first act but no contact with her character at all. Alvarez, 
a tenor from Argentina, presents a different case, but his offers 
a clue or two about the others. Vigorously promoted and copiously 
interviewed before his appearances here, Alvarez embodied hopes: not 
only his own and the public's but also those of his managers. As the 
Pavarotti-Domingo era slides away, the salable new tenor star has 
yet to appear. Perhaps still smarting from the unfortunate hoopla 
surrounding Roberto Alagna a few years ago, managements wisely refrained 
from calling Alvarez the Fourth or even the Fifth Tenor. Alagna is 
a better singer than he appeared to be at the Met three seasons ago, 
but the stigma of those beginnings has never really gone away. The 
music business, shrunken and downsized, knows that it cannot flourish 
on small enterprises. Discover the big career; making money in classical 
music depends on it. Success comes in the form of packages: the tying 
together of recitals, operas and popular-music crossovers with the 
media of recording and television. Audiences buy tickets to events 
featuring people they see on television. Records feed public appearances, 
and the process works the other way around as well. It takes a wide-reaching 
presence at the center of these packages to make them work, and the 
search is on. One wishes that it were conducted in a more perspicacious 
way. Alvarez is somewhat less than a diamond in the rough; he is a 
singer with unused good qualities and some misused ones as well. Letting 
him lurch clumsily through a major opera production in New York was 
an act of wishful thinking, and a distinct unkindness to the singer 
himself. Alvarez needs time in smaller, quieter opera houses and a 
coach to teach him that musical eloquence is not outbursts of emotion 
piled one atop another. His promoters and managers must have heard 
him in the flesh beforehand, or is it that they did, and simply didn't 
listen correctly? The disturbing trend everywhere in the business 
is the presence of decision makers who are not musicians: eager salesman, 
to be sure, but too often armed with the wrong information about their 
products. Sustaining the big career means bigger repertory. Ms. Bartoli 
has stuck largely to Rossini and the like, and only teased us with 
the prospect of roles beyond. Ms. Fleming's canceled Violetta in ``La 
Traviata'' was a clear attempt to get her beyond the lovely lyrical 
roles she has done with such dazzling beauty. Ms. Fleming's handlers 
can howl angrily when it is suggested that her withdrawal was for 
reasons other than personal, but I think that deep down they know 
that Violetta is inappropriate for her gifts. This is a career-defining 
role and good business, but it demands a certain tough brilliance 
that Ms. Fleming simply does not possess. She can be grateful she 
didn't sing it, especially in a voice-eating 3,900-seat habitat like 
the Met. I worry that the opera business _ the opera singer business, 
in particular _ is interested too much in the big career and not enough 
in the right career. Trying to inflate something beautiful of moderate 
size into blockbuster proportions is a devouring and ultimately unsuccessful 
endeavor. I wish that a Bartoli or a Fleming, instead of worrying 
about expanding her repertory, could be led to settle on what she 
does best. The perils of expansion are not new to the music world. 
Thirty years ago, midlevel American symphony orchestras felt Ford 
Foundation money jingling in their pockets. Although it was intended 
for endowment building, much of it was squandered on delusions of 
grandeur. Hometowns suddenly looked provincial and confining; now 
was the time to conquer the world. There would be recordings and tours, 
Carnegie Hall and the Concertgebouw in Amsterdam. The wreckage of 
such ventures is still to be found in cities like New Orleans, Denver, 
Kansas City and San Diego. Orchestras forgot who they were, what they 
could do, and what their rightful constituency was. The financial 
crashes that resulted have frightened the classical-music world ever 
since. Ambition without prudence and foresight is lethal. Miscasting 
in opera is epidemic, and its motives have too little to do with music 
and too much to do with jobs and careers. The singers themselves have 
the final say, but given the size of the average backstage ego, modesty 
and good sense are often too much to hope for. If bad judgment can 
be visited on a decent young man like Alvarez, it stands to reason 
that it will affect career decisions for people far more talented 
than he. A heartbreaking Rusalka, a gorgeous Manon, Ms. Fleming escaped 
from ``La Traviata'' with her life. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>