<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0376 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This town was once the steel capital of the East, its namesake company 
turning out girders for the Golden Gate Bridge, Rockefeller Center 
and the Supreme Court building. But today Bethlehem is best known 
as a charming tourist spot of historic churches and ubiquitous Christmas 
decorations. The main evidence most visitors see of Bethlehem Steel's 
existence is the miniature wooden replicas of the old steel mill and 
of the company's former headquarters that are sold in gift shops around 
town. The shuttered mill may turn into a retail-and-restaurant complex, 
and the only vestige of steel is the office tower where Curtis Barnette, 
the company's chief executive, is leading a campaign to save the domestic 
steel industry _ and, he says, America. Not wanting to see the steel 
industry itself turn miniature, Barnette and industry leaders are 
fighting back. With appearances before Congress, arm-twisting of the 
administration, a sophisticated publicity campaign and a barrage of 
anti-dumping lawsuits, Barnette heads the Stand Up for Steel coalition. 
This union-industry effort is aimed at protecting the domestic industry 
from the low prices and cutthroat competition brought on by the global 
financial crisis and a flood of imports from Asia, Latin America and 
Russia. But in taking up this fight, Barnette and the industry are 
coming up against some harsh realities: that many buyers of domestic 
steel, like the auto industry, welcome falling prices and that a main 
road to recovery for struggling countries is to export more goods 
to the United States. As a result, the industry's cry for relief may 
have a lot less impact than similar pleas have over the years. By 
every measure, the domestic industry is suffering. Market prices for 
its mainstay product, hot-rolled steel, have fallen by $50 a ton, 
or 18 percent, this year to reach a new low of $200 a ton this month. 
Lower-priced imports are gobbling up total market share, rising from 
23 percent to an all-time high of 35 percent. And with mills nationwide 
cutting production runs, spot layoffs have begun. ``The American consumer 
would not benefit from the extinction of the American steel industry,'' 
Barnette said in an interview in his office here. ``I'm unaware of 
any U.S. customers saying that they wish to purchase illegally traded 
and dumped steel. We shouldn't say, `Let's help Russia, let's sacrifice 
the steel industry.' Japan should solve its own problems and not export 
them to the U.S.'' That is the message the industry has been sending 
for decades and the one still being sent, over and over, by Barnette, 
a lawyer by training and, since 1992, chief executive of the nation's 
second-largest steel company, which traces its roots to 1905. The 
company, whose employment has fallen from a peak of 130,000 in the 
1960s to 16,400 today, makes most of its steel in Indiana and Maryland. 
Bethlehem Steel and the country's No. 1 steel producer USX, along 
with 10 other steel companies and the United Steelworkers of America, 
have backed up Barnette's tough talk with a series of trade cases, 
filed in September, accusing Japan, Brazil and Russia of dumping their 
steel here _ selling it below cost _ and asking that import duties 
be imposed. These cases, in which the industry seeks new tariffs by 
February, are speeding through the Commerce Department and will then 
go to the International Trade Commission, an independent government 
agency. The industry and the union have also been flexing their muscle 
in Washington, especially at a White House grateful for the union's 
mobilization of Democratic voters in the November elections. An all-star 
line-up _ President Clinton, Vice President Gore, Secretary of State 
Madeleine Albright, Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin and other Cabinet 
officials _ met with Barnette and his group in November, and since 
then Clinton has lectured the Japanese on this issue and promised 
faster action in enforcing trade laws. Moreover, a nonbinding resolution 
calling for a one-year ban on steel imports passed the House in October 
with a resounding 340 votes. The industry was also able to get a resolution 
put into the huge spending bill enacted in the last days of the 105th 
Congress requiring the administration to come up with a plan by Jan. 
5 to fight steel imports. Last month, after another visit by Barnette 
to Congress, a number of senators who belong to the Senate Steel Caucus 
called on the administration to take swift action to curb imports. 
``We're fighting for the heartland of America,'' said George Becker, 
president of the United Steelworkers of America, which is sharing 
the cost of the $3 million ``Stand Up for Steel'' campaign. ``All 
the blood is gone from our industry; we can't bleed anymore. We don't 
have enough steelworker jobs to give away to keep the economies of 
Japan, Russia and Brazil going. I feel the president's top priority 
is to stand for America and to stand up for workers.'' To insure that 
steelworkers' jobs are saved, the industry and the union have been 
keeping the Washington doors open with generous campaign contributions 
and get-out-the-vote efforts in steel towns. In the 1997-98 election 
cycle, the union and industry donated $1.2 million to candidates and 
parties, mostly from the union. The bulk of it, $985,802, went to 
Democratic candidates and committees. Moreover, Democrats do not want 
to enter the 2000 presidential election with several thousand unemployed 
steelworkers across the country. Yet as the Stand Up for Steel campaign 
continues, the industry faces some tough crosscurrents. Moves to limit 
the flow of low-cost imports risk undercutting some of the nations 
hardest hit by the global financial crisis, ones that may have to 
rely on exports to help them bounce back. And while falling prices 
hurt steel companies, they help auto makers, construction companies 
and other manufacturers, which are under pressure to make their goods 
more competitive at home and abroad. Moreover, some say the industry 
must, in part, bear the blame for its predicament. Nearly a dozen 
steel producers, over customer objections, pushed through price increases 
in the spring, just as weakness in the yen and other currencies began 
eroding the price of imported steel. Moreover, even as the strikes 
at General Motors Corp., which lasted nearly eight weeks, reduced 
the demand for steel, domestic steel companies did not cut back on 
production, creating a market glut when the seven-week strike ended 
in July. ``The steel industry deserves a Nobel Prize in lack-of-understanding-in-economics 
for raising prices when the dollar was appreciating and the world 
economy was slowing,'' said John C. Tumazos, an analyst with Sanford 
Bernstein &AMP; Co. ``The steel companies raised prices when market 
economics did not support it. A lot of these steel senior officers 
should hand in their resignations.'' nn Two of the industry's biggest 
customers, GM and Caterpillar Inc., have issued statements opposing 
the anti-dumping suits. ``We strongly object to suggestions that steel 
trade should be subject to `special' protections,'' Caterpillar said. 
``The quotas used to protect the steel industry in each of the last 
four decades hurt American industries that use steel and rewarded 
foreign steel traders with a guaranteed share of a restricted U.S. 
market.'' GM, in a statement, said: ``The dumping actions filed against 
Japan, Brazil and Russia will have a negative effect on prices U.S. 
consumers pay for finished products with high steel content.'' It 
added: ``Worldwide economic upheaval and fluctuating currencies are 
the real issues. Indeed, the filing of these complaints could make 
the situation worse.'' Robert Crandall, an antitrust expert at the 
Brookings Institution, said: ``In every trade complaint there are 
some who benefit, and that is all of us who use consumer products 
made from steel. In fact, most of the pitch made to protect steelworkers' 
jobs and companies are from companies who lost their competitiveness 
a long time ago. It's an argument they've made for 25 years. They 
continue to blame their predicament on imports. There's no doubt the 
current low prices of imports exacerbate their problems. But the roots 
of them have nothing to do with imports.'' Barnette counters that 
his industry has invested $50 billion in modernization and cut 300,000 
workers from payrolls in the last decade to better match supply and 
demand. While the industry pushed through a price increase last spring, 
it did so not knowing what the future held. And the industry kept 
up production during the GM strikes not knowing that it would last 
so long. Besides, each domestic producer wanted to have steel products 
ready for when the strike ended. And while Barnette acknowledges that 
falling currencies and collapsing economies have a lot to do with 
the low prices of steel imports, the drop in prices, he said, is so 
severe that it goes beyond those factors and into dumping. ``We're 
trying to remind the public of the very significant competitiveness 
of our industry,'' Barnette said. ``We're sometimes viewed as protectionist 
and rust belt in our thinking when we are a high-tech, low-cost, world-class 
industry. We believe in open markets. But when the rules are breached, 
they should be enforced, and that is what is happening.'' Many observers, 
even those critical of some industry decisions, acknowledge that the 
current situation is particularly difficult. The danger, though, is 
that the building of protectionist walls could make it hard for troubled 
countries to raise money through exports, slowing a global recovery. 
And that, in turn, would make the steel industry's problems drag on. 
``Steel, to a degree, has a legitimate beef,'' said Kimberly Elliott, 
a research fellow at the Institute for International Economics in 
Washington. ``But if other countries retaliate or if closing the market 
for steel from these crisis countries causes them to further spiral 
downward, that will affect all U.S. export industries. The broad macro 
effects of that can be staggering.'' Scott Morrison, an analyst with 
Donaldson, Lufkin &AMP; Jenrette, says that sadly, the domestic steel 
industry may be a sitting duck in the churning world economic waters. 
``Even if the industry wins some concessions in their trade suits, 
will it save the industry? My thought is no,'' he said. ``It's very 
difficult in this environment of a global downturn to block out a 
couple of countries and expect to get better prices. As long as there 
is global oversupply, our prices won't be able to diverge much from 
global prices. Until the global economy turns up, it will be difficult 
to see the steel industry in much better straits than now.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>