<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0516 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Robert F. Kennedy Jr., the Hudson Valley environmentalist, has accused 
state officials of improperly requesting his personal real-estate 
records in an effort to embarrass him, saying officials may be trying 
to discourage his conservation organization from pushing a lawsuit 
against the city. Kennedy's group, Riverkeeper, has filed a lawsuit 
to force New York City to use tougher restrictions on septic tanks 
in areas around the reservoirs that supply the city's water. But now 
Kennedy's own septic tank has come under scrutiny. ``It appears to 
be an effort to intimidate me,'' Kennedy said. The state is seeking 
records related to Kennedy's five-bedroom home on a 10-acre lot in 
Mount Kisco, N.Y., on the shores of Howlands Lake, which is part of 
the New York City watershed. Kennedy says he believes that the officials 
suspected that his own septic tank did not meet the standards he demands 
in his suit, but Westchester County documents dated 1987 indicate 
that it does. A house built on four acres of land that Kennedy sold, 
however, appears not to meet the standard, according to the county 
documents. Ronald J. Tramontano, one of the two state Health Department 
officials who requested Kennedy's records, said the request was part 
of a general study of 6,000 Westchester County septic systems begun 
before Kennedy's suit was filed in October. But he acknowledged that 
the actual request for the documents concerning Kennedy's home was 
made in November, after the suit was filed. ``We're not out to pull 
any dirty tricks on anybody,'' said Tramontano, who, as director of 
the Health Department's Center for Environmental Health, said he had 
been cooperating with Kennedy for years to fight water pollution. 
Tramontano said he was tipped off by someone in the Westchester County 
Health Department that Kennedy's septic system might not meet strict 
standards. Tramontano then asked county health officials to turn over 
documents relating to the septic system. But before turning them over, 
a County Health Department employee called the Westchester County 
attorney, Alan D. Scheinkman, who advised him not to give them up. 
``It didn't appear to serve any legitimate governmental purpose,'' 
said Scheinkman, who, after consultation with County Executive Andrew 
J. Spano, demanded that state officials make a formal written request, 
which they have not done. ``This was a back-channel request that seemed 
to be solely to embarrass Kennedy,'' Scheinkman said. The suit that 
Riverkeeper is filing along with nine other environmental groups seeks 
to force the city to stop using less stringent state guidelines than 
those the city had planned to use on the construction of septic systems 
in the New York City watershed. Since the state and the city closely 
cooperate on watershed issues, Kennedy said he thought the state was 
trying to help its partner when it sought his records. Mike Mckeon, 
press secretary to Gov. George Pataki, seemed to confirm this. ``People 
were doing due diligence and this came up in the process,'' he said. 
``In a lawsuit, you go about getting as much information as you can 
about the entire case.'' The fight over these rules are the latest 
front in the long-running battle over how to protect the city's drinking 
water from pollution without throttling development in the counties 
where the reservoirs are located. The city and northern communities 
agreed 22 months ago on a broad initiative to curtail pollution in 
the watershed, thereby forestalling the need for the city to build 
a huge new filtration plant to meet federal drinking water standards. 
The federal Environmental Protection Agency, which approved the accord, 
has criticized the city for reverting to the weaker state standard. 
On Tuesday, the Watership Partnership Council, consisting of the governmental 
and private groups that drafted the watershed agreement, is to meet 
in Albany to try to settle the lawsuit. Kennedy and Tramontano both 
say they hope the meeting will be successful. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>