<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0484 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Microsoft trial focused Wednesday on an esoteric issue that is 
crucial to the outcome of the antitrust case: What is a computer operating 
system? The answer is important because the government contends that 
Microsoft Corp. illegally tied its software for browsing the World 
Wide Web to its industry-standard Windows operating system to stifle 
competition in the Internet software market. Microsoft says its browser 
is not a separate product unfairly tied to Windows but merely a feature 
of its operating system. For hours, Steven Holley, a Microsoft lawyer, 
battered away at the government's expert witness, David Farber, a 
computer science professor at the University of Pennsylvania, asking 
him arcane questions about fine distinctions in programming files. 
Clearly, the questioning was intended to try to get Farber to concede 
that drawing a neat, sharp line separating the operating system _ 
which controls a computer's basic operations _ from other software 
was tricky, if not impossible. For the most part, Farber held his 
own, batting away the challenges to the central tenet of his testimony, 
which was that there is no obvious technical or user benefit to integrating 
the operating system and the browser as Microsoft did. Microsoft apparently 
has had its own difficulties in defining just what an operating system 
is. The government offered into evidence a dictionary of computer 
terminology published last year by Microsoft. The entry for operating 
systems makes no mention of Internet software or anything related 
to it. And the definition for a Web browser seems squarely at odds 
with Microsoft's courtroom contention that its Internet Explorer browser 
is an inextricable element of Windows rather than a separate software 
product, or application. The Microsoft dictionary states that a Web 
browser is an ``application that allows users'' to navigate the Internet. 
And Microsoft, it seems, had some trouble finding a distinguished 
expert witness to agree entirely with its view of the operating system 
and the browser. In September, when Microsoft initially named its 
12 witnesses, the list included Michael Dertouzos, director of the 
computer-science laboratory at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
He was listed as Microsoft's technical expert. But Dertouzos was soon 
dropped from the Microsoft witness list after giving a deposition 
in the case, part of which was entered into evidence Wednesday. When 
asked, ``Is a browser an application?'' Dertouzos responded, ``Historically 
and today, it is the case that browsers are treated as applications.'' 
In the afternoon, James Gosling, an executive for Sun Microsystems 
Inc., whose cross-examination began last week, took the stand again. 
With sharp questions and the introduction of e-mail evidence, the 
Microsoft legal team attacked the government's allegation that Microsoft 
unfairly tried to ``pollute'' Java, an Internet programming language 
developed by Sun, because Microsoft viewed the new technology as a 
threat to its dominance of the personal computer software market. 
Instead, Microsoft tried to portray its own work with Java, which 
it licensed from Sun in 1996, as an effort to make the new Internet 
programming language work smoothly with Microsoft's Windows. Microsoft 
introduced an e-mail sent on Aug. 31, 1995, by Gosling, one of Java's 
creators, to Scott McNealy, Sun's chairman, sketching out a number 
of options on how to exploit Java as a business. One option, he wrote, 
was to use Java to ``go after Microsoft.'' But later he wrote: ``I 
wouldn't `go after' Microsoft. I'd want to work with them, but beat 
them at their own game ... or at least give them the illusion of working 
with them.'' Accusing Sun of dealing with its rival in bad faith, 
Thomas Burt, a Microsoft lawyer, asked, ``Isn't that exactly what 
you did?'' Microsoft also introduced e-mail from Sun to its closely 
aligned Java partners, led by Netscape Communications Corp. and IBM, 
which are also archrivals of Microsoft, to establish industry working 
groups to develop Java software. Microsoft, Burt noted pointedly, 
was left off those groups. In the antitrust case and in a private 
suit in California, Microsoft is accused of deliberately making its 
version of Java incompatible with Sun's standard Java. Burt insisted 
that the split was Sun's fault. ``Isn't it true that Sun had no interest 
in making Java work especially well with Windows?'' he asked. Gosling 
replied that any lack of cooperation on Sun's part was a result of 
Microsoft's stance that its version of Java would work smoothly only 
on Windows and would not include the Sun software to make it work 
on several operating systems. ``Where we drew the line was when Microsoft's 
work blocked out other software platforms,'' Gosling said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>