<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0329 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Britain's Home Secretary Wednesday turned down Gen. Augusto Pinochet's 
plea to be set free, ruling that a Spanish extradition case against 
the former Chilean dictator can could go forward in English courts. 
The 83-year-old general now faces an indefinite stay in England as 
the case proceeds. In the first step of the legal process, he must 
appear Friday at a hearing on a Spanish petition to have him stand 
trial in Madrid on charges of crimes against humanity. While any extradition 
remains a long time and many legal twists and turns away, the decision 
on Wednesday was a significant step that brought exuberant cheers 
from the general's enemies and angry denunciations from his backers. 
In a diplomatic protest, the Chilean government immediately recalled 
its ambassador to London, Mario Artaza, explaining, ``It is to give 
more information and is also a gesture.'' Home Secretary Jack Straw, 
the British government's law enforcement minister, issued the decision 
in a brief statement. ``I signed an Authority to Proceed in respect 
of Senator Pinochet today,'' he said. ``The Spanish request for his 
extradition will now be considered by the courts.'' The decision, 
coming two days before Friday's deadline, dashed the hopes of Pinochet's 
supporters and the Chilean government that Straw would put an end 
to the extraordinary case and let him return to Chile. Fearing that 
outcome, the general's opponents were in court Wednesday afternoon 
seeking to delay Pinochet's departure to allow them to file an appeal 
keeping the case open. They lost that effort in London's High Court, 
but minutes later Straw's announcement made the matter moot. Straw 
had been weighing Pinochet's fate since the five Law Lords of the 
House of Lords, England's highest court, ruled on Nov. 25 that he 
did not enjoy immunity from arrest as a former head of state and could 
be held in England while the extradition request was considered. It 
was Straw's task to judge the validity of the Spanish claim. A one-time 
student activist who took part in anti-Pinochet rallies 25 years ago, 
Straw had said he was acting in a ``quasi-judicial'' capacity and 
would base his decision on the law and not on any political consideration. 
Friends and foes of the verdict chose to see it according to their 
own convictions. Human rights groups hailed it as a victory against 
tyrants and noted that it came a day before the 50th anniversary of 
the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. ``This 
is a wonderful birthday present,'' said Reed Brody, advocacy director 
of Human Rights Watch. ``The wall of impunity which Pinochet built 
in Chile by force of arms is being torn down by international law 
and the political will of the world community.'' But former Prime 
Minister Margaret Thatcher, a friend and supporter of Pinochet, described 
Straw's action as a ``grave mistake,'' saying, ``He had ample power 
to put an end to this shameful and damaging episode. He has chosen 
instead to prolong it. Neither he nor the government can hide behind 
legal posturing. This was a political decision, and it represents 
a failure of political leadership.'' William Hague, leader of the 
Conservative Party, said it was a ``cowardly decision and instead 
of doing the right thing, he has given in to activists within the 
Labor Party and to his own prejudices from the past.'' British law 
is generous in allowing appeals of the periodic steps in a lengthy 
process like extradition, and the Pinochet case could work its way 
back up to the House of Lords for future judgments. The final move 
to extradite requires another decision from Straw once all the legal 
remedies have been exhausted, and legal experts have said it would 
probably be more than a year before Pinochet could face an order to 
go to Madrid. In a five-page written reply to a parliamentary question 
in which he detailed his reasoning, Straw said he could not sustain 
the charges of genocide and murder in the petition because they did 
not fit the legal definitions of extraditable crimes under Britain's 
Extradition Act of 1989. He said, however, that he was able to match 
the accusations by a Spanish judge, Baltasar Garzon, with equivalent 
British criminal charges of attempted murder, conspiracy to murder, 
torture, conspiracy to torture, hostage-taking and conspiracy to take 
hostages. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>