<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0436 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The White House completed its defense against impeachment before the 
House Judiciary Committee on Wednesday with an admission by its top 
lawyer that ``reasonable people'' might conclude President Clinton 
had lied under oath. But, in a methodical, somber assault on the accusations 
against the president, the White House's top lawyer and its last round 
of witnesses argued that no prosecutor would try Clinton on the evidence 
gathered by the independent counsel, Kenneth Starr, no jury would 
convict him and no responsible Congress would remove him from office. 
As presidential aides encouraged an alternative punishment like censure, 
Charles Ruff, the White House counsel, tried to raise the perceived 
stakes of impeachment, grimly urging the House not to treat it as 
``an indictment, or some formalistic slap on the wrist.'' ``Each member 
_ and I need not tell you this _ must bear the weightiest burden that 
our Constitution contemplates,'' Ruff said, ``the burden of making 
an individual determination that the president has committed such 
grave offenses against our polity that he is no longer fit to serve, 
that the will of the people should be overturned.'' Ruff, a Watergate 
special prosecutor and a seldom-seen architect of Clinton's defense 
for the last 10 months, appeared Wednesday afternoon before the committee 
in hope of rescuing Clinton from becoming the only president since 
Andrew Johnson to be impeached by the House. He rounded out two days 
of relayed regrets and legal and historical argument by saying that 
Clinton believes he could eventually be prosecuted for concealing 
his affair with Monica Lewinsky. ``Absolutely,'' Ruff said, when asked 
if he could assure the committee that Clinton would not pardon himself 
or accept a pardon from a successor. Under questioning, Ruff said 
that ``reasonable people'' might determine that the president lied 
in a civil deposition in the Paula Corbin Jones case in grand jury 
testimony about his relationship with Ms. Lewinsky. They might conclude, 
he said, ``that he crossed over that line.'' ``But in his mind _ and 
that's the heart and soul of perjury _ he thought and he believed 
that what he was doing was being evasive but truthful,'' Ruff added, 
capping a 10-hour session. Ruff mixed his acknowledgments of wrongdoing 
and reasonable disagreements with a bare-knuckle attack on Starr's 
impeachment referral to Congress. While Gregory Craig, White House 
special counsel, tried on Tuesday to defer questions about specifics 
in the case, Ruff embraced them, eagerly taking up Republicans' challenge 
to debate the facts. Ruff followed a panel of former prosecutors who 
spent the morning piling derision on Starr's referral. ``This case 
would simply not be given serious consideration for prosecution,'' 
said Thomas Sullivan, a former U.S. attorney for the northern district 
of Illinois. ``It wouldn't get in the door. It would be declined out 
of hand.'' The White House considers it inevitable that the committee 
will vote this weekend along party lines to approve up to four articles 
of impeachment, which were released Wednesday. Over the last two days 
_ in a strategy it intends to pursue until the House votes _ it pitched 
its arguments past the committee to the moderate House Republicans 
that it fears might support impeaching Clinton in the belief that 
the Senate will not remove him. The discussion remained respectful 
Wednesday, even as panelists expressed contempt for some evidence 
and Republicans complained of semantic games. ``This is good wordsmanship,'' 
Rep. Ed Bryant of Tennessee drily complimented the panel of lawyers 
this morning. But no one gave any evidence of a changed mind. Wednesday 
evening, Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina conservative who has adopted 
a more moderate tone, surprised Ruff with an argument that Clinton 
had led a White House strategy to smear Ms. Lewinsky by portraying 
her as a stalker. He advanced the theory that Clinton met with his 
secretary, Betty Currie, the day after he was questioned regarding 
Ms. Lewinsky in his Jones deposition, in order to lead her through 
questions that would support such a strategy. Starr reported that 
the president said to Mrs. Currie, ``Monica came on to me, and I never 
touched, right?'' Ruff made repeated statements of remorse on the 
president's behalf. Indeed, following an example set by the White 
House on Tuesday, he beat up on his boss Wednesday, while stating 
that impeachment was not a reasonable punishment. ``He misled his 
family, his friends, his colleagues and the public,'' Ruff said. ``And 
in doing so, he betrayed the trust placed in him not only by his loved 
ones but by the American people.'' The president met with Ruff for 
about an hour on Tuesday to review his testimony. His voice lowered 
in mock, dramatic tones, Ruff _ an experienced criminal defense lawyer 
as well as a prosecutor _ read at several points from Starr's referral 
during his hour-long opening remarks. Then, as he turned to evidence 
that he said exculpated Clinton, he would shift to a conversational 
manner: ``Well, you might want to know,'' he started at one point, 
after falling silent for a well-timed sip of water. As part of Wednesday 
morning's panel, William Weld, the former governor of Massachusetts 
and a Republican, lent a bipartisan cast to Clinton's defense. He 
was harshly critical of Clinton's conduct, saying that the president 
was ``already tarnished.'' Saying that impeachment was not warranted 
and censure was not enough, he recommended a five-part package that 
included censure, a fine, and the possibility of eventual prosecution. 
Like other panelists, Weld has a connection to the White House. Clinton 
appointed him to be ambassador to Mexico, though the Senate refused 
to act on the nomination. Weld did not tell the White House in advance 
of his five-part censure proposal, said Joe Lockhart, the press secretary. 
Officials refused either to endorse or disavow it. Clinton made no 
public mention of the proceedings against him Wednesday. He met for 
90 minutes Wednesday afternoon with 48 members of Congress for a closed 
discussion of ways to fix the Social Security system. Wednesday evening, 
he presided at the annual ``Pageant of Peace'' _ the lighting of the 
Christmas tree _ and held a holiday party for military personnel. 
Aides to Clinton said that they were weighing whether he should make 
another public statement of contrition, perhaps by seizing on a reporter's 
question. Some of the president's outside advisers are urging that 
he should soon begin speaking one-on-one to wavering Republicans. 
Ruff and the panel Wednesday morning returned repeatedly to the substance 
of the evidence against Clinton. As a result, the committee plunged 
into its most detailed discussion of some of the most graphic issues 
before it. One of Starr's accusations is that Clinton lied in denying 
that he reciprocated Ms. Lewinsky's ``intimate touching.'' That is 
the basis for a claim that Clinton has committed perjury, and the 
committee has struggled to confront it on live television. After some 
panelists dismissed the dispute as a he-said-she-said matter that 
could not be prosecuted, Rep. Bill McCollum, a Florida Republican, 
noted that witnesses interviewed by Starr's prosecutors said that 
Ms. Lewinsky had confided her intimate relations with the president 
to them. ``A jury would be hard pressed not to convict under those 
circumstances,'' he said. But Richard Davis, a former assistant U.S. 
attorney in New York and a former Watergate prosecutor, disagreed. 
Ms. Lewinsky had an incentive to lie even to her friends, he said, 
because ``otherwise she would be acknowledging an unreciprocated sexual 
relationship.'' Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass., then observed, ``telling 
the truth was not the most noticeable characteristic of this set of 
interrelationships.'' Republicans continued to complain Wednesday 
that the White House was presenting no new facts. ``Five groups have 
come before us, no one yet has addressed evidentiary matters,'' Bob 
Inglis of South Carolina complained to Ruff, who vehemently disagreed. 
In his opening remarks, Ruff said that Republican complaints about 
the lack of new facts ``turn the world I know on its head,'' since 
the burden of examining the evidence rested with the committee. But 
he proceeded to give a detailed review of Starr's evidence of perjury, 
obstruction of justice, and abuse of power. He argued that Starr had 
ignored some facts, twisted others and interpreted innocent exchanges 
in a sinister light. In large measure, Ruff presented a dramatic, 
televised presentation of the arguments laid out in a 184-page legal 
brief released by the White House Tuesday night. Along the way, he 
challenged the frequent criticism that Clinton's legal team _ and 
lawyers generally _ resorted to hairsplitting and legalisms. Ruff 
worried, he said, that ``our sometimes irresistible urge to practice 
our profession'' could ``stand in the way of securing a just result.'' 
But, he continued: ``It is not legalistic to point out that the president 
did not say what some accuse him of saying. It is not legalistic to 
point out that a witness did not say what some rely on her testimony 
to establish. It is not legalistic to point out that a witness was 
asked poorly framed or ambiguous questions.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>