<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0549 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Extreme summer heat and humidity of the kind most threatening to health 
have become more frequent in the United States over the last half 
century, two federal researchers say. According to their study, in 
Thursday's issue of the journal Nature, the frequency of extremely 
hot, humid days and of heat waves lasting several days increased substantially 
from 1949 to 1995. In terms of the threat to health, however, another 
finding was especially significant: The increase in heat stress was 
greater at night than in the daytime. Many experts say that extremely 
high temperature and humidity over successive nights is a crucial 
factor in heat-related deaths. When nearly 600 people died in a heat 
wave in Chicago in 1995, for example, many of the deaths were attributed 
to an unremitting combination of record high nighttime heat and humidity 
that allowed no respite from daytime heat stress. Some studies have 
shown that extreme summer heat has more impact on people's health 
than any other kind of severe weather, and that the elderly are most 
vulnerable. ``If these climate trends continue, they may pose a public 
health problem, particularly as there are increasing numbers of elderly 
people,'' wrote the authors of the study, Dr. Dian Gaffen and Rebecca 
Ross, research meteorologists at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration's Air Resources Laboratory in Silver Spring, Md. The 
apparent trend toward more extreme heat generally coincides with a 
warming of the Earth's surface in recent decades, both globally and 
in the United States. The dominant view among scientists is that at 
least some of this warming has been caused by emissions of heat-trapping 
gases like carbon dioxide, which is emitted by the burning of coal, 
oil, natural gas and wood. The Earth's average surface temperature, 
which has risen 1 degree Fahrenheit in the last century, is projected 
to rise 2 to 6 degrees over the next century, further increasing humidity 
and making heat waves more frequent and intense. By comparison, surface 
temperature has risen 5 to 9 degrees Fahrenheit since the depth of 
the ice age 18,000 to 20,000 years ago. While the increasing frequency 
of extreme heat and humidity cannot be directly linked to the warming 
trend, Dr. Gaffen said it was ``consistent with what is predicted 
in the global warming scenario.'' Thomas Karl, director of the National 
Climatic Data Center, agreed. ``I think these are the types of conditions 
that will become more frequent and more intense when they do occur'' 
if the climate warms as projected, Karl said. ``We've already seen 
examples of that this past year,'' he added, referring to last summer's 
heat wave in Texas. The projected increases in global temperatures, 
he said, ``would make this rather commonplace.'' By and large, Karl 
said, the Gaffen-Ross findings ``seem to be consistent with what we 
know from other analyses.'' He said that if data through 1998 were 
included in the study, ``I'm sure they would find even stronger trends.'' 
Worldwide, the last two years have been the two warmest on record. 
Dr. Gaffen and Ms. Ross had for some time been studying global distributions 
of temperature and water vapor, and they found an increasing trend 
of rising humidity accompanying rising temperatures. So, Dr. Gaffen 
said, they decided to see whether this meant that extremes of heat 
and humidity were also increasing. They defined ``extreme'' as the 
highest 15 percent of temperature and humidity measurements, as recorded 
every three hours around the clock in July and August from 1961 through 
1990. This threshold, they report, is ``closely correlated'' with 
levels above which, according to other researchers, human mortality 
increases sharply. Dr. Gaffen and Ms. Ross analyzed records at 113 
government weather stations around the country, mainly at airports, 
in search of information on two variables: the combination of temperature 
and humidity that meteorologists call ``apparent temperature,'' and 
temperature alone. Apparent temperature is a measure of the combined 
impact of heat and humidity on people and the sensation that results. 
It is increasing faster than temperature alone, the researchers said, 
because humidity is increasing faster. This would be expected in a 
warmer climate, since more water evaporates and the atmosphere can 
hold more. The researchers computed their thresholds of extremity 
for the average daily temperature, the daily maximum temperature and 
the daily minimum temperature for July and August at each weather 
station. They found that from 1949 to 1995, the annual frequency of 
days on which the thresholds were surpassed increased at all but 16 
of the 113 stations. The increases were largest for the minimum ``apparent 
temperature,'' which basically translates to a measure of combined 
nighttime heat and humidity. At some stations, Dr. Gaffen and Ms. 
Ross found that over the half century, the number of nights with extremely 
high apparent temperatures doubled, to about 18 days a year from about 
9 days a year in some places. The largest and statistically most significant 
trends were found to occur in some of the nation's most populated 
areas, especially from the Middle Atlantic States south to Florida, 
as well as along the West Coast and in big cities in the Southwest. 
Eight of the 15 cities in which the trend was most pronounced were 
in the Southeast _ including Miami, which headed the list nationally. 
Daytime increases were found to be not nearly as dramatic. In fact, 
the upward trend was statistically significant only west of the Rocky 
Mountains. East of the Rockies, the apparent temperature increased 
more than temperature alone. West of the Rockies, where summertime 
humidity increases are less marked, the trends of the two variables 
were similar. The investigators defined heat waves as periods of three 
or four days in which the average daily apparent temperature exceeded 
the top 15 percent threshold. On average, they found, each weather 
station experiences 1.7 three-day heat waves and one four-day heat 
wave a year. In the contiguous United States, the number of heat waves 
increased by 88 percent from 1949 to 1995. Two caveats have been attached 
to the study. To some extent, said Dr. Gaffen and Ms. Ross, the rising 
heat probably reflects increased urbanization; the concrete and asphalt 
in urban areas absorb and retain more heat than rural areas. But Ms. 
Gaffen said that most of the trend cannot be explained this way. For 
one thing, she said, not all the weather stations in the study were 
in urban areas. For another, the researchers looked for but did not 
find a correlation between population growth _ a measure of urbanization 
_ and trends in extreme weather. The other caveat was offered by Dr. 
Laurence Kalkstein of the University of Delaware, who has long studied 
heat and health. The threshold of extreme heat adopted by the researchers 
was not really selected on the basis of the relationship between health 
and extreme heat, he said. Earlier studies by Kalkstein have found 
that the threshold at which heat begins to kill people varies from 
one city to another. ``That's my only disagreement'' with the study, 
he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>