<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0429 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The chief Republican investigative counsel for the House Judiciary 
Committee had one heartfelt wish this summer: If an impeachment report 
landed at his feet _ ``God forbid,'' he said at the time _ he hoped 
President Clinton's sex life and its accompanying lies would play 
only a minor role in his inquiry. But, to his disillusionment, when 
David Schippers lays out the Republican case against Clinton on Thursday, 
his presentation will revolve almost exclusively around Clinton's 
sexual relationship with Monica Lewinsky and his efforts to keep the 
liaison a secret. It is not quite what Schippers, a former Chicago 
prosecutor, foresaw when he took on the management of the impeachment 
inquiry, Republican and Democratic members and officials say. He wanted 
to chew on seemingly meatier issues, like Whitewater and the influence 
of Chinese money on the 1996 presidential elections. ``Schippers is 
a guy who voted for this president and feels very unhappy at the way 
he has used this office,'' said Rep. Christopher Cannon, R-Utah, a 
Judiciary Committee member. ``And like any good investigator, he sees 
the problems and wants to go after them. He wants to nail them down. 
He's a crusader.'' An old friend of Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., chairman 
of the Judiciary Committee, Schippers has been a major, sometimes 
controversial force in shaping the course of the inquiry. In some 
cases, his decisions have made it seem that the Republicans were bungling 
the investigation, lurching from one scandal to the next, Republican 
and Democratic members and officials say. Some even wonder why Hyde 
delegated as much authority to Schippers as he did. Schippers led 
the committee's most recent move to expand the inquiry into the alleged 
campaign fund-raising irregularities in 1996, despite Hyde's end-of-the-year 
deadline and the failures of other congressional committees to find 
anything definitive, say aides and members. In fact, several weeks 
ago, when it seemed clear that Hyde's Dec. 31 deadline might not accommodate 
Schippers' investigatory agenda, he lost his temper at a closed-door 
meeting with staff and members. ``He became enraged,'' one Republican 
official said. ``He genuinely believes something is there.'' The Republican 
election losses, which spelled a quick end to the impeachment inquiry, 
only worsened Schippers's frustration. In fact, only one witness was 
ever deposed and no witnesses to actual events were ever questioned 
before the committee as Republicans rushed to finish the inquiry. 
But the investigator was able to proceed with some of his plans, anyway, 
in part because Hyde did not want the panel to ignore any potentially 
fruitful leads. It was Schippers's idea to subpoena the major figures 
in the case of Kathleen Willey, who has accused Clinton of making 
a sexual advance toward her. Schippers also led the quest for the 
memorandums written by Louis Freeh, the FBI director, and a Justice 
Department prosecutor, Charles La Bella. Hyde and the Republicans 
on the committee backed him. The memorandums called on Attorney General 
Janet Reno to appoint an independent counsel to look into alleged 
fund-raising irregularities. But the memorandums did nothing to bolster 
the inquiry; some moderate Republicans argued that the move served 
to annoy a weary public and to paint committee Republicans as modern-day 
``Keystone Kops,'' as one Republican put it. ``That was misguided,'' 
said Rep. Christopher Shays, R-Conn., a moderate. Schippers asserted 
his independence early in the inquiry, remaining reclusive and camera-shy, 
indifferent to the politics of impeachment. In fact, he often boasts 
about his political tin ear. Democrats rarely saw him. He has remained 
distant from the committee's political staff, working in a separate 
building and rarely venturing to Hyde's Rayburn building offices, 
although Thomas Mooney, Hyde's chief counsel, said the two, Mooney 
and Schippers, ``have not had a cross word the whole time.'' Almost 
immediately, the lifelong Democrat managed to rile committee Democrats. 
In his first appearance before the panel, Schippers told the members 
that there were ``15 generations of Americans'' who ``are looking 
down and judging what you do.'' The remarks were immediately stricken 
from the record after Rep. John Conyers, D-Mich., the committee's 
senior Democrat, objected. That same day, Schippers announced he would 
add several charges of potentially impeachable offenses to Kenneth 
Starr's original counts. The move created instant confusion, and left 
Republicans in the lurch as they backpedaled and tried to explain 
the political rationale. But Schippers appears to have made up ground, 
and, by some accounts, stole the show when Starr, the independent 
counsel, appeared before the committee. Asking concise questions designed 
to make the independent counsel look good, Schippers roused the audience 
to a standing ovation for Starr. On Thursday, he plans to show excerpts 
of Clinton's deposition in the Paula Jones sexual harassment case, 
the genesis of the current scandal, another move likely to outrage 
Democrats. But Rep. Asa Hutchinson, R-Ark., a member of the committee 
and a former U.S. attorney in his home state, said Schippers is simply 
doing what investigators do. He just doesn't give his actions a political 
gloss. ``It is his role,'' Hutchinson said, ``to look down every avenue.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>