<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In many houses, there (italics)is(end italics) a mouse stirring this 
holiday season: the one attached to the computer. It is being used 
for one-click gift ordering, with the promise of avoiding crowded 
malls and traffic jams and the hope of finding last-minute purchases 
on the Web. On-line holiday purchases are expected to double compared 
with last year, said Nick Donatiello, president of Odyssey, a market 
research company in San Francisco. And while online shopping will 
still account for only a small part of holiday purchases, wired merchants 
and investors have been salivating over the potential increases. But 
can shopping on line really make the last-minute rush easier? A sampling 
of shopping sites and interviews with Internet retailing experts suggests 
the answer is yes _ at least for products that can be found on the 
Web and especially for near-last-minute purchases. Just remember that 
many items are not easily available on line, that Web traffic itself 
can suffer from jams and that most of the things you click your mouse 
on still have to be delivered by trains, planes or trucks. To sweeten 
the season's shopping experience, Internet retailers have developed 
gift registries, gift suggestions for stumped shoppers and even live 
customer service _ just like stores. And the number of Web retailers 
grows every year, increasing selection and competition. There are 
big and efficient online sellers for books, CDs and computer equipment, 
and many sites offer electronic cards and gift certificates. There 
are even games that can be downloaded, theoretically, the night before 
Christmas. In fact, for grown-ups who would rather visit a root canal 
specialist than a toy store in the next two weeks, there is www.etoys.com, 
which promises that ``Santa can go to bed early this year.'' Toys 
are categorized by age, and pages describe what awards each toy has 
won. At www.toysrus.com, the Toys `R' Us site, you can check the baby 
registry created (off line) by the moms of the munchkins you're shopping 
for. At www.justpretend.com, (``toys and playthings that inspire imagination 
and creativity'') there are five sets of specialized dress-up sets, 
with reversible wizard-or-princess hats. For those with quirkier tastes, 
sites can be found offering four-pound fruitcakes, fancy sports equipment, 
foreign musical instruments and rare videos. Books are among the biggest-selling 
items on line, with Amazon.com and the Barnes &AMP; Noble site as 
two major places geared toward last-minute book buying. ``My goal 
is to take a two- or three-week period of hell and turn it into 15 
minutes of a pretty good time,'' said David Risher, senior vice president 
of Amazon.com, as he tripped through Web screens in his Seattle office, 
demonstrating how to give a present in the fewest possible seconds. 
``Let's say you're in a big hurry,'' he went on. ``We have a feature 
on the Web site, Gift Click. You can do it Christmas morning.'' The 
function tells your recipients via e-mail that you are sending presents 
and lets them do the pesky work of filling in the mailing addresses. 
For purchasers who put their credit card numbers on file, it's one-click 
shopping. Barnes &AMP; Noble, in addition to offering ``buy now and 
get a free book'' deals for new customers, (www.barnesandnoble.com) 
posts a chart of the last day you can order a book in stock for Christmas 
delivery. Another innovation for online shoppers is the gift registry. 
One example is the Wish List offered by iQVC, the Web version of television's 
QVC home shopping channel. About 10,000 people have signed up to use 
it, said Stuart Spiegel, vice president and general manager for iQVC. 
At iQVC's jewelry site (www.gemsandjewels.com), those who think it's 
blessed enough to receive can leave very specific instructions on 
what they want, right down to ring size, favorite stone and preferred 
designer. Those who are going for the greater blessings of giving 
use the password of the person who registered to find out which precious 
stone to concentrate on. ``It's no different from that magazine left 
on the coffee table a little too long opened to the right thing,'' 
Spiegel said. ``It is a fun way to point people in the right direction.'' 
A similar service is offered at Eddie Bauer (www.eddiebauer.com), 
where you can send out e-mail announcements to friends about what 
you want from the store. They're not subtle: ``Hi from (my email address) 
(my name)! I have an Eddie Bauer Wish List at http://www.eddiebauer.com. 
Just go to `Wish Lists.' ...'' The message includes the wisher's password 
to get access to the list, but not so much as a ``please'' or ``thank 
you.'' Another helpful feature for buying off the Web are shopping 
agents, programs that search commercial sites and come back with a 
list of items and prices, which can certainly reduce fingertip fatigue. 
One, www.mysimon.com, will even search for the best bargains for the 
objects you desire, then let you sent the results via e-mail straight 
to people who have you on their gift lists. Some online sites have 
gone so retro that they are providing actual human beings, through 
chat or e-mail, to help shoppers. During limited hours you can try 
live customer service at Azazz.com, an Internet-based department store 
that offers housewares, apparel and home office supplies, with free 
shipping. Another is Adatom.com, which offers brand-name furniture, 
linens and toys direct from the factory. The humans function much 
like the programs that are always available at sites like Amazon, 
which provide suggestions for other books or movies a ``Beloved'' 
or ``Titanic'' fan might like. For those who would rather decorate 
the house with all that time freed up by not shopping, you can buy 
live Christmas trees and wreaths or artificial trees that arrive at 
your door already strung with lights. Then try poring over the numbing 
prospect of 26 different kinds of angel ornaments available at Christmasdepot.com: 
(mauve satin, peach satin, pink satin, red lame starburst, red sparkle, 
red velvet, silver lame, silver lame starburst, etc.) At the Menorah.net 
site, candle holders are available in three-, six- and nine-foot models. 
Some of the less delightful aspects of holiday shopping exist on the 
Web as well, like piped-in tinny Christmas carols and traffic that 
can be heavy at peak hours, slowing things to a crawl. And every once 
in a while you might see the screen message, ``Please contact the 
server administrator and inform them of the time the error occurred, 
and anything you might have done that may have caused the error.'' 
So much for the customer is always right. The Web is never as smooth 
as it could be, and shopping is no different. It can be just as hard 
to find some things on line as off. For example, for the father who 
wants a video of the 1939 (not the 1978) version of the English drama 
``The Four Feathers,'' a search through Reel.com, Amazon.com, and 
MySimon yielded two sites advertising VHS versions of the flick, (both 
were out of stock), and one offering a laser disk, (too high-tech 
for Papa). Then again, he hasn't been able to find it in a real store, 
either. Yet the Web can be very useful for finding obscure items. 
Frith Maier of Seattle had her heart set on a heated toilet seat, 
like one she had enjoyed while visiting Japan, for her sister's outhouse 
in Alaska. After calling plumbing supply companies with no luck, she 
found one on the site of ToTo Toilets. The catch was that the seat, 
equipped with an extra device that delivers a puff of warm air, cost 
$900. If you want a used cello (knock-knock.com/mie/cellos.htm) or 
a bodhran, (www.bodhran.com) an ancient Celtic drum, your selection 
will likely be greater than can be found by skimming your local classifieds. 
Bodhrans, which are made of goat skin stretched over a wooden frame, 
abound on the web, from Ireland to Massachusetts to Prince George, 
B.C., with air mail delivery times as short as three days. For kids 
who need a specific brand of soccer ball, beyond what the mall stores 
sell, Soccer.com, for example, offers more than 25 kinds. Since online 
orders can be entered and registered so quickly, consumers can be 
forgiven for believing they can put off their shopping to the very 
last minute. Land's End's site, www.landsend.com, announces how many 
``shipping days left!'' until Christmas, and Christmasdepot.com counts 
down the very seconds. For Father's Day, Amazon.com processed lots 
of same-day sales, with gift certificate orders coming in via e-mail 
that morning, and being sent out the same hour, Risher said. The same 
is expected on Dec. 25. With the under-$1,000 computer hoping to attain 
Most Favored Donation status, computer sites on the Web are revving 
up for a high-volume December. Computershopper.com, on its holiday 
gift ideas pages, gives hints on how to buy someone a PC and have 
it last longer than a year. But earlier this week CompUSA, in its 
holiday Web section, listed a few items that were already out of stock 
and on backorder. One big site selling computers, Cyberian Outpost, 
(www.outpost.com), has warehouses and shippers located together and 
offers next day delivery for items ordered up until midnight Eastern 
time. And with the wide variety of software available there and from 
other sites to download onto kids' computers, a popular game could 
arrive this Christmas morning via the phone line, instead of the chimney. 
There are other aspects of the holidays that the Web can help with, 
of course, like planning dinner. Where else but on line could you 
find a recipe for Channukah Candle Salad (www.pastrywiz.com/archive/channuka.htm) 
that features half a banana stuck in a pineapple ring, topped with 
a gumdrop, with mayo dripping down to represent melted wax, and a 
green pepper handle for the candle holder? And what brick-and-mortar 
store could boast as many kinds of fruitcake as the Web sells, with 
Miss Melba's Olde Timey, Monastery, Gloria's Classic, Babs' Jamaican, 
Sunshine Hollow's Real Handmade Pecan four-pounder, and Carolyn's 
Cajun (from Cut Off, La.)? And for when the holiday hangover clears, 
there's always the return policy to think about. At www.azazz.com 
and Cyberian Outpost, returns are accepted for any reason. Amazon.com 
asks no questions about returned books, though CDs and videos need 
to be unopened. A pre-printed packing slip for returns comes with 
every order. Beats driving downtown, parking, and having to look someone 
in the eye and explain why that gift from your beloved isn't a keeper. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>