<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0544 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
To assess the impact of this city's efforts to comply with a court 
order to desegregate white and minority neighborhoods, the poor and 
the not-so-poor, consider the lives of Darnelle Burns and Jonathan 
Iacovino. Darnelle and Jonathan are 12-year-old boys who live around 
the block from each other, Darnelle in a low-income housing development 
on Clark Street, Jonathan in a sturdy two-family brick house on Belmont 
Avenue. Darnelle, who is black, calls Jonathan, who is white, his 
best friend. And Jonathan, who, like Darnelle, idolizes Michael Jordan 
and relishes video games, says that in his eyes, ``it doesn't matter 
what color you are.'' Their families, though, have never met. Darnelle's 
grandmother, Mildred Logan, who has raised the big, boisterous youth 
since infancy, moved to Clark Street in 1994, hopeful that Darnelle 
might thrive in a roomier, safer environment. But she knows that some 
white neighbors are just not comfortable with racial and ethnic minorities. 
And although Louis Iacovino, Jonathan's gregarious father, says that 
he has no problems with any of his new neighbors on a personal level, 
he also contends that the Clark Street development has enervated the 
neighborhood. ``I've got to give them credit: They're very decent, 
and I've got no complaints,'' said Iacovino, a 31-year-old businessman 
who is contemplating moving his family to Mahopac. ``But my personal 
opinion is that they should put the housing all in one area. It's 
tough on property values, you know? Once people hear the words `low-income 
housing,' forget it. ``The guy around the corner? He's trying to sell 
his house. And one time, these people who were interested drove around 
the neighborhood, spotted that housing, and they never called back.'' 
Twelve years after a U.S. District Court judge ordered Yonkers to 
desegregate, many city residents are still struggling to accustom 
themselves to the sight of new neighbors in old neighborhoods _ slowly, 
warily and with mixed feelings. But if most of these neighbors are 
not exactly swapping recipes, they do seem to be co-existing peacefully, 
according to interviews in recent days with more than three dozen 
residents and city officials. There have been no reports of serious 
problems flaring up in any of the neighborhoods where integration 
has become a part of day-to-day life. There have been no complaints, 
even, from some of the most ardent opponents of integration, who now 
say that the effect of the housing has not been as bad as they had 
feared. In a city that has long been convulsed by such a controversial, 
explosive issue, that is no small achievement. ``I think it's reached 
a point where people are now tired by the issue, and I think people 
have moved on,'' said Kevin Condon, a former City Councilman who often 
tried to bridge the dueling sides. ``I think that wouldn't have been 
possible if people's worst fears about the housing had turned out 
to be true.'' What may also have helped douse emotions is that Yonkers 
is a more diverse city now than it was in 1980, when the desegregation 
battle first exploded. With growing numbers of black, Asian and Hispanic 
residents, parts of the city have become more naturally integrated, 
Mayor John Spencer said. ``I've seen neighborhoods look different 
from just driving around,'' he said. Even so, Spencer and other officials 
breathed a sigh of relief last week when New York state agreed to 
pay $16.4 million to help the city build new housing and buy existing 
homes in predominantly white neighborhoods for middle-income families 
who are predominantly black and Hispanic. City officials say they 
hope the settlement will end a protracted battle that has saturated 
every aspect of life here, from education to real estate, from politics 
to neighborly relations. It began in 1980, when the Justice Department 
and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
filed a discrimination lawsuit against the city, charging that Yonkers 
had contributed to decades of segregated housing and schooling patterns 
by restricting public and subsidized housing to the city's southwestern 
quadrant. Five years later, Judge Leonard Sand of U.S District Court 
in Manhattan ruled in favor of the NAACP. In 1986, Sand ordered the 
city to provide sites for 200 rental units of public housing for low-income 
families and, later, 800 units of subsidized housing for middle-income 
families, outside of the predominantly minority southwest section. 
But the City Council defied those orders with such disdain that the 
judge imposed fines against the city that reached $1 million. Rare 
was the Council meeting at which people did not engage in shouting 
matches, or affix bumper stickers in protest to their heads. ``It 
was very poisonous,'' said Spencer, mayor of Yonkers since January 
1996. ``All intellect went out the window.'' A few things helped to 
smooth things out, though. In 1992, the city revamped its government, 
giving more power to the mayor at the expense of an often-fractious 
City Council. Four years later, city officials persuaded the federal 
government to give Yonkers more local control over the housing program. 
And following Sand's ruling in February that the state was also responsible 
for Yonkers' segregated past, the state agreed last week to contribute 
$16.4 million to finish the housing program. By 1993, city officials 
had relented and complied with the judge's order to build the 200 
units. Colonial in style, and discreet by design, the units were spread 
across seven sites throughout the city. By 1996, the city had come 
up with a plan to accommodate the 800 middle-income families: building 
four new developments totaling 140 or so units and assisting the other 
people with buying houses in existing neighborhoods. The first of 
those four developments is scheduled to break ground soon. Those milestones, 
city officials liked to say, proved that Yonkers was not the cesspool 
of racism and hatred that others had painted it as being. ``At one 
point, Yonkers was the laughingstock of the country because they looked 
like the most racist city in the Northeast,'' said Robert Crain, a 
professor of sociology and education at Teachers College of Columbia 
University who has researched Yonkers' desegregation efforts. ``But 
it wasn't. It was really no different from any other suburban community 
in New York or New Jersey.'' Charlotte Spivey was one of the first 
to move into one of the low-income complexes, the Lawrence Christopher 
Townhouses on Midland Avenue, in the shadow of Tibbetts Brook Park. 
She had moved into her $500-a-month, two-bedroom town house from a 
housing project in search of a better and quieter life for herself 
and her daughter, Diane. It wasn't easy, at first. ``You know there 
was a little prejudice,'' said Ms. Spivey, a 70-year-old black woman 
retired from a job at the city's Board of Education. ``People passing 
by, they'd call you names. The neighbors, they were a little bit leery, 
because they didn't know who we were.'' Daniel Pagano, a retired 78-year-old 
carpenter who has lived on Midland Avenue for 14 years, was one of 
those neighbors who vigorously opposed the idea of low-income housing. 
But now that some time has passed, he has changed his mind _ as have 
most other people in the neighborhood, he said. ``I was skeptical 
at first,'' Pagano said, examining a Christmas display on his front 
lawn. ``We figured it was being shoved down our throats. But we've 
had no problems, and we say hi to them. We talk about family and kids, 
sometimes.'' At the low-income town houses on Clark Street, near Yonkers 
Raceway, Yvonne Dixon also recalls encountering hostility at first. 
Before she had even moved into her two-story town house six years 
ago with her husband and three children, neighbors were putting their 
houses up for sale, alarmed at the news that minority tenants were 
moving nearby. These days, a gulf of unfamiliarity still exists. Mrs. 
Dixon has never thought about asking her neighbors to baby-sit for 
her children; she has never, she recalls, been inside any of their 
houses. But the fact is, she never expected much more. ``Everything 
is fine, everything is peaceful,'' Mrs. Dixon said. Even among the 
people who bitterly opposed Sand's rulings, there is the feeling that 
the low-income housing units have worked. ``Overall, I think it's 
been pretty successful,'' said Jack O'Toole, former president of the 
Save Yonkers Federation, a group opposed to the desegregation order. 
``I don't think there's as much crime or antisocial behavior as we 
expected.'' In fact, serious crimes in Yonkers dropped 24.7 percent 
from 1980 to 1997, in line with national trends. The middle-housing 
remedy, though, has its share of detractors, in particular the NAACP. 
Under the city's plan, families earning less than 50 percent of the 
Westchester median income can get as much as $40,000 in grants to 
help them buy a house. So far, 170 families have received assistance 
through this program, three-quarters of them members of minorities, 
with most of the people making about $45,000 to $50,000 a year, said 
Raymond Fitzpatrick Jr., a Birmingham, Ala., lawyer who has represented 
Yonkers in the case. But at the same time, it is a program, city officials 
repeatedly say, that is intended to foster economic, not racial, integration. 
``These are middle-class, working, mortgage-qualified human beings 
of all shapes, sizes and colors,'' Spencer said. ``What is wrong with 
that?'' What is wrong, according to the NAACP, is that the city has 
drifted from the original intent of the lawsuit _ providing assistance 
to low-income minority families _ and has cloaked the issue of desegregation 
in the innocuous language of economic integration. ``The vast number 
of beneficiaries are not the people whose rights it was determined 
were violated,'' said Michael Sussman, a lawyer for the NAACP. ``We 
have to start telling the truth about this, and not sugarcoat it for 
the white community.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>