<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0498 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Rep. Henry Hyde proclaimed in September that the impeachment 
of a president could not succeed unless it was bipartisan, Republicans 
hoped the scandal over President Clinton's relationship with Monica 
Lewinsky would fracture the Democratic Party. But now as the impeachment 
inquiry into the president moves steadily toward a climactic House 
vote next week, the issue instead is driving a wedge into the Republican 
Party. Fearing defections, Hyde, chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, 
Wednesday asked Republicans to ``withhold judgment'' until his committee 
finishes its work. The Republican split is not huge. Most of the 228 
Republicans in the 105th Congress are expected to support impeachment, 
while only a few dozen have come out against impeachment or are considered 
undecided. But the division is significant because these Republicans 
hold the key not only to Clinton's fate but to their party's survival 
as a congressional majority. Some of them fear that an impeachment 
vote could imperil them, leaving them with local enemies among Democrats 
and independents if they vote yes and among Republicans if they vote 
no. ``It will prevent the Republican Party from holding marginal districts 
and picking up new districts,'' said Rep. Peter King, a New York Republican 
who has become one of his party's most vocal opponents of impeachment. 
``It will relegate us to minority party status.'' Hoping to encourage 
more Republicans like King, the White House on Wednesday featured 
as one of its defenders the former Republican governor of Massachusetts, 
William Weld, who was head of the criminal division of the Justice 
Department under Ronald Reagan. The last time Weld took center stage 
in Washington was when Clinton tried to reach across party lines in 
1997 and name him ambassador to Mexico. Weld saw his nomination torpedoed 
by Sen. Jesse Helms, R-N.C., whom Weld accused of ``ideological extortion'' 
and of blocking him because he was fighting for an inclusive Republican 
Party. On Wednesday, Weld, though measured in tone, broke just as 
dramatically with the majority of House Republicans by proposing a 
tough censure option in lieu of impeachment. It would require a written 
congressional report on the president's behavior; a written acknowledgment 
of wrongdoing by the president, a fine paid by Clinton, and no attempt 
to forestall Clinton's possible prosecution on perjury after he leaves 
office, Weld said. ``Nobody's going to forget this stuff,'' Weld warned 
of impeachment, reminding Republicans that voters had chosen Clinton 
even after learning of Gennifer Flowers' accusations that the two 
had had an extramarital affair. ``This is a man who's been elected 
president of the United States twice and thus entitled to this office.'' 
There were also signs of a roiling struggle inside the sizeable Republican 
delegation from New York. After announcing that he favored a ``strong 
statement of rebuke,'' Rep. Amo Houghton, an upstate Republican, said 
he planned to reach out to an array of party elders, including Howard 
Baker, Bob Michel, Bob Dole and Newt Gingrich, for help to propel 
censure forward in place of impeachment. And while aides to Sen. Alfonse 
D'Amato denied that the New York Republican was doing any lobbying 
a day after he said impeachment would be a ``grave mistake,'' another 
Republican close to D'Amato had recently been making the same point 
to some fellow New Yorkers in the House. Rep. Charles Schumer, the 
Brooklyn Democrat who defeated D'Amato in November, said Wednesday 
he hoped D'Amato's remarks would push other Republicans to support 
censure. ``I think that Sen. D'Amato came out and said what he thought 
all along,'' said Schumer. Hyde himself became so concerned that he 
sent a letter to fellow House Republicans asking them to hold off 
declaring themselves until his committee completed work on articles 
of impeachment. He said in the letter that he was available for phone 
calls. He told reporters he wanted to contact fellow Republicans and 
``urge them to keep their powder dry.'' But a senior Republican aide 
outside the committee said, ``New York is not bleeding'' and that 
he expected a number of the uncommitted Republicans from New York 
to come out for impeachment, perhaps in the next several days. So 
far, Houghton, King and Rep. Jack Quinn have come out against impeachment. 
The impeachment struggle has become just the latest test of whether 
Congress' largely southern Republican leadership and its fervent conservatives 
can co-exist easily with its northeastern moderates. Rep. Christopher 
Shays, R-Conn., who opposes impeachment, said he did not expect to 
be ostracized for his position. ``There's a lot of respect going on 
among members,'' he said. ``We mostly intuitively know this is not 
an easy thing. There's almost a sense of camaraderie among Republicans 
because we do not agree.'' But Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga., who has been 
one of Clinton's most ferocious critics, sounded only half joking 
when he said Wednesday afternoon, ``It's the civil war all over again.'' 
Of the northeasterners, he said, ``If their constituents are telling 
them it's okay for the president to perjure himself and we want you 
to stand for that, so be it.'' Most Republicans, like Barr, come from 
solidly Republican districts. But the impeachment vote is particularly 
agonizing for those Republicans, many from the northeast, who represent 
swing districts. Some proponents of impeachment argue that those Republicans 
will not suffer from a vote to impeach the president because the Senate 
will never convict the president, thus nullifying the vote. But Democrats, 
who picked up five House seats in the last elections, have been poring 
over lists of Republicans who come from districts that voted for Clinton 
in 1996. They hope to help round up votes for Clinton by sending Democratic 
House members out to argue privately to these Republicans that they 
will be opposing the will of their constituents and their vote could 
haunt them in two years. King, who wants a censure alternative to 
come to a vote in the House, warned that his party will slip back 
into the minority if its leadership does not accommodate the needs 
of Republicans from swing or Democratic-leaning districts. ``I think 
the party leadership is still showing itself as the gang that can't 
shoot straight,'' he said. ``If anyone genuinely supports impeachment, 
than they have the absolute moral right and obligation to go forward. 
``But anyone who thinks this is going to help Republicans politically 
is absolutely crazy. This is going to divide the Republican Party. 
It's going to re-energize the Democratic party. And it's going to 
drive away independents,'' King said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>