<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On the sunny Saturday afternoon of Aug. 15, when a car bomb planted 
by an Irish Republican Army splinter group killed 29 people and wounded 
about 400 here, Mick Grimes was fussing over his newborn baby chickens. 
``I heard a bang,'' he said the other day. ``It sounded like a bomb, 
but it could have been anything, anywhere.'' He kept working to keep 
the chicks alive at his place in the nearby hamlet of Beragh. What 
he heard that day was the car bomb exploding on Market Street in Omagh 
at the height of shopping for back-to-school clothes, books and pencils. 
It was the deadliest act of terrorism in 29 years of sectarian violence 
in Northern Ireland. The next day Grimes, 73, a retired fireman, learned 
that the blast had killed his wife, Mary, 65; his granddaughter, Maura, 
18 months, and his daughter, Avril, 30, and destroyed the seven-month-old 
twin fetuses in Avril's womb. Like the bombers from the group calling 
itself the Real IRA _ who have not been caught but are known to be 
former members of the overwhelmingly Catholic IRA _ Grimes and his 
family are Catholics. Now, nearly four months later, with the heavy 
mist drifting down from the Sperrin Mountains giving Omagh a ghostly 
look, Grimes and most of the 20,000 others in the area are trying 
to cope with the lingering horror. They still have visions of loved 
ones ripped and splattered all over Market Street, and they live with 
the huge hole in the low skyline where six of the blasted buildings 
have been demolished. Grimes still has two sons and four grandchildren, 
three of them Avril's children. But he finds little joy in them. Like 
500 other people here, he gets counseling from government-financed 
doctors and social workers, who listen to his pain and hope it will 
fade. In addition to the British government's health plan coverage 
for the wounded and their immediate families, more than 200 people 
have received about $600,000 from the nongovernmental Omagh Fund, 
which has collected more than $1 million. ``It's hard to concentrate 
on anything,'' Grimes said at the new Trauma Center in Omagh, where 
adults go to weep and small children frightened by the blast draw 
ghastly faces reflecting their feelings. Often, Grimes said, he thinks 
of Mary, his wife, who was killed as she stood in a Market Street 
shop buying baby clothes for her other pregnant daughter, in London. 
``That was the best woman,'' he said softly. ``You could never say 
anything but good about her. She made jam _ gooseberry, rhubarb. Sold 
it and gave the money to starving people, in Sudan, I think it was.'' 
He said that over the years, he had written a secret book of poems, 
never showing them to anyone. One was about Mary, and last year he 
recited it on a tape and and played it on her birthday. ``At least 
she got to hear it,'' he said. Wendy McCay, 15, a Protestant schoolgirl, 
was standing on Market Street joking with friends when she was blown 
backward by the exploded maroon Cavalier, a piece of which gashed 
and broke her left arm. There is a deep, foot-long scar on her forearm. 
Before the blast, she said, she wanted to become a physiotherapist, 
and she still does. Now she frequently sees in her mind replays of 
the street carnage and of the confusion and blood in the hospital. 
``I never know when it's coming,'' she said, ``in school, anywhere 
_ I see the whole thing start to finish, just like a film.'' ``I feel 
unlucky to have been there, but lucky to be alive,'' she said. But 
hundreds, perhaps thousands, of the people of Omagh are suffering 
what doctors and social workers call ``survivor guilt.'' The guilt 
has come not only to ordinary citizens, but to the social workers 
and police themselves. ``I make a living out of this,'' one ambivalent 
welfare official said. The area police chief, James Baxter, said he 
and his wife no longer go to Market Street for coffee, partly because 
their favorite cafe, Nicholl and Shiels, was blown away, but also, 
he said, because he feels some guilt for the deaths. On the afternoon 
of the blast, he said, the guerrillas warned the police that the bomb 
would explode near the courthouse. The police began to evacuate that 
area and to move people down Market Street, into the middle of the 
block, closer to where the bomb was actually planted. One policewoman, 
who had unwittingly herded people toward the bomb, has not been able 
to work since and is being counseled for grief and guilt. One of the 
seriously wounded was Elaine O'Donnell, the daughter of a police constable, 
Jackie O'Donnell. Ms. O'Donnell's legs were broken in the blast, forcing 
her to postpone her wedding. The Police Superintendent, Baxter, said 
he and his wife had ``walked through Market Street'' recently. ``It 
was quite traumatic,'' he said. ``It reminds us of the fear that there 
could be another bomb, and certainly the feeling of all the pain and 
anguish. It seems a sacrilege to walk through Market Street.'' When 
Market Street reopened to the public recently and the town Christmas 
tree was lighted, several thousand people attended. But after that, 
relatively few shoppers were on the street. They are avoiding the 
site of the killing, afraid, they say, of another bomb and unable 
to look at the place were their husbands, wives, children and friends 
were killed and maimed. They are doing most of their Christmas shopping 
in towns an hour or more away by car _ in Londonderry or Belfast. 
Virtually everyone in this town, where about 60 percent of the people 
are Catholic, says that relations between Catholics and Protestants 
have always been cordial, if not friendly, and that the bomb has pushed 
them closer together. Many people were shocked by the bomb because 
it came just as the peace effort in Belfast seemed to be making progress. 
Now they realize that the guerrillas were trying to disrupt the political 
effort, and that if there had been no peace agreement in the spring, 
there might not have been any Omagh bomb in August. The police have 
questioned more than 40 people but have charged no one. They say they 
are getting close to identifying the killers but still need the help 
of informers. The Real IRA is considered particularly vicious. Its 
members consider themselves the vanguard of the anti-British rebellion 
by the Catholic minority in the province. But they killed and wounded 
mostly Catholics in the attack in August. They did so, by most accounts, 
by tricking the police into directing people closer to the bomb. The 
police and other officials involved with the peace effort say the 
bombers were especially nasty in their choice of a way to identify 
themselves as they warned the police that a bomb had been planted 
on Market Street. They used the name Martha Pope, an important assistant 
to former Sen. George Mitchell of Maine, chairman of the talks that 
produced the peace agreement that was approved in the spring. Two 
years ago she was the center of Belfast gossip after a tabloid newspaper 
reported she was having an affair with a Sinn Fein official who had 
served prison time as an IRA terrorist. They both denied the report, 
and she later received a six-figure settlement from the paper. But 
to the bombers her name as code was a good inside joke. Days after 
the blast, the Real IRA said that it was sorry _ that the attack had 
been a bad mistake _ and announced a cease-fire. Members of the IRA 
had apparently visited the splinter group members and told them that 
they were hurting the Republican movement's strategy, which at present 
is to support the peace effort and the participation of Sinn Fein, 
the IRA political wing, and its leader, Gerry Adams. There have been 
12 hoax bomb warnings since August, which keeps people edgy and focuses 
some attention on the peace effort, which has become stalled over 
other issues. Carla Irwin, 17, a Protestant who has attended several 
victims' funerals, said in an interview, ``It would be better for 
the politicians to fight out these disputes than to have the people 
fighting and bombing each other.'' Grimes said he was more numb than 
outraged. ``I don't have any anger,'' he said. ``I have no picture 
of who would do that. If they had a picture of them, then you'd have 
someone to hit. I do have bad periods. I think it would be better 
if I could weep.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>