<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0266 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Every day, hundreds of blind and visually impaired people in Asheville, 
N.C., rely on Bob Brummond's radio reading service for their national 
and local news. One of about 150 such services in the United States, 
Brummond's programming lets listeners who own a specialized radio 
receiver listen to the reading of newspapers and magazines and hear 
exercise programs. If they have a computer with Internet capability, 
a screen reader and a speech synthesizer, they can also listen to 
news off the Web page Brummond set up last year. But starting in January, 
Brummond expects, anyone with a telephone will be able to gain access 
to his page, the Regional Audio Information Service Enterprise site, 
raise.new-era.net, and hear the news read without a special radio 
or a personal computer. Brummond, who is general manager of the service, 
will be trying out a new voice-based browsing device from Productivity 
Works (www.prodworks.com) in Trenton, N.J., that will allow a caller 
to make his way through the Web page by punching buttons on a touch-tone 
telephone and picking out items of interest. Voice access to the Internet, 
along with ways of using speech-recognition technology to make computers 
respond to voice commands, is a growing focus of research. In October, 
for instance, Motorola Inc., Visa International and several other 
companies announced an alliance to create speech-recognition standards 
that could potentially make the Internet accessible to anyone with 
a telephone, reducing the need for personal computers. So new products 
like the Productivity Works browsing device, while intended primarily 
to help the blind, are being closely watched for possible broader 
applications. The Productivity Works product, Pwtelephone, runs on 
software compatible with Windows, and will essentially turn Brummond's 
Web page into a voice on the phone. ``Any blind or low-vision person 
with a touch-tone phone can now read the paper,'' said Brummond, who 
estimates that only about 5 percent to 10 percent of the blind people 
in his area use the Internet. Many blind people use screen readers 
to surf the Web, but the graphics elements are hard for such programs 
to digest. Many Web sites, however, including The New York Times' 
(www.nytimes.com), offer alternative, low-graphics versions. Pwtelephone 
is among a growing number of products coming onto the market that 
are designed to make computers and the Web more accessible to the 
handicapped. The Pwtelephone, which will sell for about $550, was 
introduced in month. When a person with a Web page buys the device, 
anyone can call in and listen to the contents of the page via a regular 
telephone. Productivity Works is widely known among the blind because 
it created Pwwebspeak, a browser that uses just type, instead of the 
visual elements required by Netscape and Internet Explorer, and therefore 
does not need a screen reader. About 20,000 customers use Pwwebspeak, 
according Mark Hakkinen, cofounder and senior vice president of Productivity 
Works. The product's usefulness may not be limited to the handicapped. 
Hakkinen said people who are on the road without a computer or otherwise 
not near one _ what he called ``situationally disabled'' _ can also 
use it to have access to the Web. If a company hooks its Web page 
up to Pwtelephone, an employee can call in and listen to information 
posted there. Speech-recognition and voice technology are developing 
quickly, with some successes occurring in various areas. But the current 
version of this particular product has a big limitation: only one 
person can call in at a time to each pwTelephone, because it responds 
to each user's request. Getting to the Web over the telephone, rather 
than using a computer and having to manipulate a mouse, may also help 
others who are disabled, said Neal Ewers, who is blind and does research 
and product testing at the Trace Research and Development Center at 
the University of Wisconsin. ``Someone with use of one hand may find 
the keyboard difficult, but he can use a touchtone phone,'' said Ewers. 
``It opens up the web for that person.'' Another product to aid visually 
impaired computer users is scheduled for release by IBM (www.ibm.com) 
in January. The Home Page Reader for Windows, which will cost $149, 
will read computer screen text out loud. It will be sold with Netscape 
Communications' Navigator browser. ``Both of these are examples of 
technology that provide better access to internet and web pages,'' 
said Professor Gregg Vanderheiden, director of Trace and a member 
of the World Wide Web Consortium, a group of volunteer computer experts 
who are working to make the Web more accessible. These products will 
allow ``more people to interact with more types of Web pages than 
in the past.'' The Home Page Reader was developed in IBM's Tokyo Research 
Laboratory with Chieko Asakawa, a blind researcher who worked on the 
early development of the software. It has been available in Japan 
for the last year. Curtis Chong, director of technology for the National 
Federation of the Blind, said he sees the product as an important 
step for the blind because it is made by the computer giant IBM. ``It's 
great for a major company to be using speech on a commercially available 
application,'' Chong said. ``This is a step in the right direction 
by a major company, which holds out a promise for the future.'' He 
added, ``The best way to think of this is a supplement for Netscape.'' 
The Home Page Reader can read HTML tags and decipher tables and columns, 
but like all top-of-the-line screen readers, it cannot read a graphic 
unless there is a written description of that graphic on the page. 
There are still some Web pages that will not be accessible because 
they lack text, Chong said. ``No matter how good the browser is, it 
won't help poorly designed web pages,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>