<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0446 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A panel of former federal criminal justice officials on Wednesday 
offered a new approach in defense of President Clinton against impeachment: 
No ``responsible'' prosecutor would bring a perjury case against Clinton, 
they said, because the evidence presented by the special prosecutor 
was insufficient to win a conviction in court. As a result, the officials 
testified, the House should not vote to impeach the president because 
that would force a trial in the Senate, and that would be the equivalent 
of taking a case to trial that cannot be won. The testimony of the 
former federal officials before the House Judiciary Committee raised 
the complex and highly ambiguous issue of prosecutorial discretion, 
the legal triage that occurs when prosecutors select which cases are 
worthy of pursuing and decide which ones are better dropped. The witnesses' 
approach likened the role of the House in the impeachment proceedings 
to that of a prosecutor. Each of the five witnesses on the panel was 
chosen by the White House as part of its defense. While the witnesses 
offered different views, each was consistent in arguing that the case 
against Clinton was so flawed it would not be brought to trial by 
any responsible prosecutor in the criminal justice system. One witness, 
Thomas Sullivan, a Chicago lawyer and a former U.S. attorney, said: 
``The ultimate issue for a prosecutor deciding whether or not to seek 
an indictment is whether he or she is convinced that the evidence 
is sufficient to obtain a conviction. ``It is my opinion that the 
case set out in the Starr report would not be prosecuted as a criminal 
case by a responsible federal prosecutor,'' Sullivan testified. ``The 
evidence simply does not support the conclusion that the president 
knowingly committed perjury, and the case is so doubtful and weak 
that a responsible prosecutor would not present it to the grand jury.'' 
That view was echoed by Edward S.G. Dennis Jr., a Philadelphia lawyer, 
also a former U.S. attorney who once headed the Justice Department's 
Criminal Division. He said: ``I think it's fairly clear that if a 
poll were taken of U.S. attorneys from any administration, you'd probably 
find the overwhelming number of them would agree with the assessment 
that this case is a loser and just would not be sustained in court.'' 
Dennis said it would be difficult to show criminal intent on the part 
of the president when he insisted to both a grand jury and to lawyers 
in the Paula Jones lawsuit that he had not engaged in sexual relations 
with Monica Lewinsky. Clinton has asserted that his answers reflected 
a belief that sexual relations must include sexual intercourse, and 
while he and Ms. Lewinsky engaged in other sexual acts those did not 
include intercourse. The issue of perjury has been the most troublesome 
for Clinton's defenders. Not only did Clinton deny having had sexual 
relations with Ms. Lewinsky, he also testified under oath that he 
had no specific recollection of having been alone with her. Charles 
Ruff, the White House counsel, acknowledged in Wednesday's hearing 
that while ``reasonable people'' might conclude that the president 
lied about his relationship with Ms. Lewinsky, Clinton himself did 
not believe he had lied. Proving the crime of perjury requires a showing 
that a person knowingly lied. The White House defense provides one 
reason why Clinton has not accepted advice from some in Congress to 
simply confess to lying: to do so would strip away his claim to such 
a defense. Wednesday's witnesses said that the perjury case also suffered 
from the fact that there were only two witnesses to the sexual acts, 
Clinton and Ms. Lewinsky and it was inherently impossible for a jury 
to determine who was telling the truth. Clinton has also said that 
he did not engage in sexual relations because he never touched her 
intimately, although she said otherwise. But Rep. Bill McCollum, R-Fla., 
countered that there were 10 people named in the Starr report who 
said that Ms. Lewinsky had told them before there was any investigation 
that the two had had intimate physical contact. In arguing that prosecutors 
would not take a case like Clinton's to court, Dennis also said, ``I 
believe that a jury would be sympathetic to any person charged with 
perjury for dancing around questions put to them that demanded an 
admission of marital infidelity.'' Dennis was chosen by the White 
House, in part, because he served as a criminal justice official in 
Republican administrations, although he has represented Maggie Williams, 
the former chief of staff to Hillary Rodham Clinton, in the Whitewater 
investigation. Other Republican witnesses on Wednesday have ties to 
the Clinton White House, notably William Weld, the former governor 
of Massachusetts who also testified that there was insufficient evidence 
for a perjury case and impeachment. Weld was nominated by Clinton 
to be ambassador to Mexico, but was never confirmed because of the 
opposition of Sen. Jesse Helms, R-N.C., who heads the Foreign Relations 
Committee. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>