<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0370 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Willie Mays was on the phone, telling a story about himself and Joe 
DiMaggio that went back nearly half a century. The Giants were playing 
the Yankees in the World Series in 1951. Mays, a precocious 20-year-old 
rookie, was in center field for the Giants. His hero, the graceful 
and already legendary DiMaggio, was 36 and playing his final games 
in center for the Yanks. The Giants had just pulled off a miracle, 
coming from far behind the Dodgers in mid-August to tie them at the 
end of the regular season and then beat them in the playoffs, the 
final devastating blow being the most famous home run in history, 
Bobby Thomson's ninth-inning, pennant-winning blast into the lower 
left-field stands of the Polo Grounds off the Dodger reliever Ralph 
Branca. So now Mays was in the World Series with his idol. ``When 
we were kids growing up in the South we would always pick one guy 
to emulate,'' said Mays during a conversation on Tuesday. ``Ted Williams 
was the best hitter, but I picked Joe to pattern myself after because 
he was such a great all-around player. I felt if you could hit and 
play good defense, like he did, and if you could run and throw _ if 
you could do all those things, then you could be in baseball a long 
time.'' I had called Mays, my favorite player when I was a kid, to 
congratulate him on a lifetime achievement award he is to receive 
from New York magazine on Monday. One of the first things he mentioned 
was that his thoughts were with DiMaggio, who is 84 now and fighting 
for his life in a hospital in Hollywood, Fla. ``I never told this 
to anybody,'' said Mays, ``but Joe hit a home run at the Polo Grounds 
in that series, and I knew that was his last year, so I was happy 
for him even though I was playing against him. So what I did was, 
I started clapping. And you just didn't do that in New York. But there 
I was standing in the outfield for the Giants clapping for Joe as 
he's rounding the bases.'' I looked it up. DiMaggio had been struggling 
in the series. Age and injuries had chipped away at his magnificent 
skills. He was hitless in the first three games. The home run, a two-run 
shot, came in game 4, which the Yankees won, 6-2. They won the series 
as well, 4 games to 2. I tried to imagine what it would have been 
like if that World Series had been covered the way big-time sports 
events are covered now. At least some of the cameras would have been 
locked on the Giants' rookie in center field. Over the years we would 
have seen, again and again, the Say Hey Kid applauding as the Yankee 
Clipper trotted out his last home run. Mays and DiMaggio. There is 
not a sane fan anywhere who will dispute that they were two of the 
greatest ballplayers ever to lace up a pair of cleats. Mays is 67 
now, and admits that a few ailments have slowed him some. He has a 
lifetime contract with the Giants but he doesn't travel as much as 
he used to. He's had a cataract operation and some problems with an 
ear, but he says he feels fortunate. ``You've got to take care of 
all those things,'' he said. ``The older you get, sometimes they get 
out of whack.'' I remember as a child walking with my parents into 
the enormous horseshoe-shaped structure that was the Polo Grounds, 
and feeling as if I had stepped into the Emerald City. All I wanted 
in that glorious expanse of green was a glimpse of Willie. And there 
he was, all afternoon, and on many an afternoon to come, drifting 
easily under a long fly ball and putting it away with a basket catch. 
And there he was, stealing second base and brushing the dirt from 
the bright white uniform, and then promptly stealing third. And there 
he was, with that beautiful swing, sending the ball high and deep, 
deep to left, and over the fence. How good was he? New York magazine 
notes that Mays hit 124 more home runs than Mickey Mantle, drove in 
366 more runs than DiMaggio and stole 155 more bases than the two 
of them combined. The sportswriter Jim Murray once wrote that ``he 
should play in handcuffs to even things out a bit.'' The afternoons 
moved more slowly in those days, and the summers seemed to last a 
little longer. It seemed as if all the men wore hats. And life could 
not be better if Willie went 4 for 4. Willie Mays was laughing on 
the other end of the phone. He seemed to agree. ``Those were good 
times, man,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>