<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0378 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This winter is quickly shaping up as one that will affect the music 
business and market for years to come. Two enormous changes have been 
taking place, utterly separate yet inextricably interlinked. The first 
is that on Thursday, Seagram is expected to close its deal to buy 
Polygram Records from Philips. Over the next month, beginning with 
a meeting Friday morning with Polygram employees at the Hudson Guild 
Theater in midtown Manhattan, the beverage and entertainment corporation 
will begin merging Polygram with the Universal Music Group, which 
it already owns. This will be the country's biggest record company, 
reducing the number of major labels from six to five and accounting 
for nearly a quarter of the music market. As a side effect, over the 
next month as many as 3,000 employees are expected to lose their jobs, 
important record labels will disappear and executives at the labels 
estimate that anywhere from dozens to 200 bands will be released from 
their labels. The second change is that a war of sorts has been taking 
place between online entrepreneurs and the music establishment. The 
battlefield is the Internet, where in the last year some 150,000 songs, 
according to the research company Forrester Research in Cambridge, 
Mass., have become available as computer files in a format called 
MP3, which compresses songs into easy-to-transfer bundles of CD-quality 
information. Some of these songs are on the Internet legally, with 
the permission of the band or record label that holds the copyright; 
others are bootlegged. Producers and consumers of MP3 music have accused 
the record industry of trying to suppress the spread of the format 
under the guise of stamping out piracy. But already there have been 
an estimated 5 million downloads of Winamp, which is just one of many 
software packages created to play MP3 files. And Internet sites like 
www.MP3.com, a gateway to thousands of free and cheap songs and albums, 
reports some 150,000 visitors a day. Recently Chuck D of the rap group 
Public Enemy became the first mainstream musician to take an adversarial 
stand on the matter, striking out against his label, Polygram-owned 
Def Jam, after he uploaded a new song, ``Bring the Noise 2000,'' onto 
his Web site for fans. ``Today Polygram/Universal or whatever they're 
now called forced us to remove the MP3 version of `Bring The Noise 
2000,''' he complained on the Web site. ``The execs, lawyers and accountants 
who lately have made most of the money in the music biz are now running 
scared from the technology that evens out the creative field.'' Executives 
at Def Jam and Polygram declined to comment on the matter. Clearly 
what is happening on the Internet is diametrically opposed to what 
is happening at record companies: as major labels are consolidating 
and tightening, the music world on the Internet is expanding and opening. 
In the process, Seagram is finding an artist rebelling; other record 
labels are finding that some acts want to make deals only if they 
are allowed to distribute or even sell some of their own music on 
the Internet, and still other acts, like the Beastie Boys, are uploading 
live songs on the Internet as MP3 files instead of giving them to 
their record company to use for their own promotional purposes. And 
the band Less Than Jake found itself in trouble when it posted songs 
owned by its label, Capitol, without permission. ``When you become 
very big, it becomes very hard to turn around,'' said Dave Turin, 
a producer who runs People Tree, an Internet label and music store 
for releasing less commercial side projects by well-known musicians, 
including members of Porno for Pyros and the Dust Brothers. ``I see 
major labels as a huge Michelin man made of cement, trying to turn 
around to see what's behind him but crumbling into pieces in the process.'' 
Even some major labels agree with Turin's assessment. ``Labels are 
going to wait to see what happens and then plug into it,'' said the 
top executive at one label, speaking on condition of anonymity about 
his label's lack of a plan for distributing music on the Internet. 
``They have to deal in the here and now. The economics and expectations 
of corporate owners is to make short-term financial results, not to 
be pioneers of the future.'' Perhaps a perfect David and Goliath Internet 
story is the controversy over Diamond Multimedia's Rio device, the 
first portable MP3 player (able to store songs from the computer on 
a flash card, or memory chip, in a Walkman-like device the size of 
a deck of cards). Instead of trying to reissue records, create compilations 
and release live recordings on flash cards for the Rio, critics say, 
record labels have been trying to wipe it out. ``Devices like the 
Rio are troubling because they encourage consumers to download illegal 
copies of our recordings,'' explained Kevin Conroy, the senior vice 
president for world-wide marketing at BMG Entertainment. He added 
that ``the proliferation of illegal MP3 recording devices will undermine 
and possibly destroy the legitimate commercial market for digitally 
delivered music before it even has a chance to develop.'' Last month, 
the Recording Industry Association of America obtained a temporary 
restraining order to keep Diamond from shipping its Rio player. But 
the order was overturned by a federal judge, and the Rio is now available 
for $199. The RIAA appealed the decision, and last week Diamond Rio 
countersued, accusing the association of engaging in anti-competitive 
business practices. Ken Wirt, Diamond's vice president for corporate 
marketing, said the Rio was not intended to encourage piracy, which, 
he said, could be found and stamped out much more easily on the Internet 
then in the flea markets and street stalls where bootlegged CDs are 
available. ``It's the right of major labels to encrypt their music,'' 
he said, referring to the ability to make Internet music files difficult 
to copy. ``But it's not their right to tell the thousands and thousands 
of independent musicians who use the MP3 market as their lifeline 
_ to distribute and sell their music _ that they can't do anything 
until the major labels get their voice in there. The RIAA wants to 
delay everything as long as possible, discouraging the production 
of MP3 among their members and discouraging the market for the players.'' 
RIAA president Hillary Rosen disputed Diamond's claims. Rather than 
suppressing technology, she said, the association is concerned about 
upholding copyright law. It cannot support devices like the Rio until 
there are effective security measures in place, she said. A record-business 
policy on the subject could emerge as early as next month, executives 
said. ``I know there's a lot of frustration with the slow pace of 
the majors in approaching these issues,'' Ms. Rosen said. ``But there's 
a lot at stake. When there's a major release,'' costing ``2 or 3 million 
in the making, the idea of putting it up for free in an MP3 format 
is not your first priority, by nature.'' For many keeping tabs on 
the battle, the issue seems like a rerun of the music industry's offensive 
against the spread of cassette decks, which saw the rise of skull-and-crossbone 
stickers that read ``Home Taping is Killing Music.'' It didn't. Already, 
technology may be moving beyond MP3 (short for MPEG-1, layer 3) and 
into MPEG-4, which compresses the data even more and is more adaptable 
to multimedia files. Companies like Sony and Creative Labs are working 
on portable devices that will play these files and prevent them from 
being easily copied. Recently, Intertrust Technologies Corp. in Sunnyvale, 
Calif., announced that beginning next year it would offer an advanced 
system for MPEG-4 files called the Intellectual Property and Management 
Protection interface, which will secure files, mete out royalties 
to appropriate parties and allow copyright holders to decide who gets 
their music, for how much money and how many times they can listen 
to it. ``In the next year the whole Web-based music business is going 
to morph,'' said Joe Jennings, a senior vice president at Intertrust. 
``You're going to see within a reasonable amount of time new types 
of devices in your car to buy music as you drive, new devices at plane 
terminals where you can download a set of songs for the flight, where 
your computer can be on a `dist' list of all the music a band is putting 
out.'' Marc Geiger, a co-founder of Artist Direct, which sells music 
merchandise through its Ultimate Band List on the Internet, envision 
a system in which record companies could increase profits by letting 
consumers subscribe to unlimited music on the Internet, for a monthly 
fee. But as dreamers dream and inventors invent, the consolidating 
record business seems reluctant to change. ``They're fooling themselves,'' 
Stan Goman, the chief operating officer of Tower Records, responded 
when told about Intertrust's solution. ``These kids can break into 
the Pentagon on their computers, so they're going to figure out a 
way to crack this system. There's no way out of it. If the record 
companies thought home-taping was a drag on their sales, wait until 
MP3 gets going.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>