<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0197 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The world of computer-based reference products is changing. First 
came the shrink-wrapped boxes with a CD-ROM or two inside. Now that 
is old hat. The big reference products on store shelves these days 
are ``suites,'' products that begin with an encyclopedia and add a 
dictionary, to look up the words in the encyclopedia that you don't 
understand; an atlas, to locate a place you're reading about; an almanac, 
for the kind of statistics an encyclopedia does not generally have, 
and a variety of other tools, like a thesaurus or a book of quotations. 
And all the suites have links to the Web for updating or supplementing 
information. Five CD-ROM's are now par for the course. Some suites 
also throw in speech recognition software, which can be helpful if 
it doesn't drive you crazy first. Shoppers in computer stores may 
find big displays of suites in the next few weeks, and these will 
probably continue in January, aimed at all the people who got new 
hardware over the holidays. (And when you install a suite, it will 
immediately make your enormous new hard drive seem considerably smaller.) 
Prices for the suites are unpredictable and are likely to be discounted 
sharply. These products tend to be what the computer stores use as 
``loss leaders'' to lure traffic, so shoppers may find one brand or 
another available for nearly nothing. (Owners of previous encyclopedia-only 
versions of the Grolier and IBM products have to buy an entire suite, 
including the encyclopedia, to get the add-ons; only Microsoft sells 
its package of encyclopedia add-ons, called Microsoft Bookshelf, separately 
for around $50.) The magic to the suites _ if they work well _ is 
the integration, the way a computer links the components together 
to make access easy. But putting all these books on the computer has 
some drawbacks. I have always found magic in the books themselves, 
like the copy of ``Bartlett's Familiar Quotations'' that my Aunt Leona 
gave me when I graduated from high school. It occupies a fat space 
on my bookshelf, and it's nice to leaf through. On the other hand, 
my printed copy is the 14th edition, copyrighted in 1968, and unless 
I graduate from high school again, I don't think anybody is going 
to give me a newer one. And the electronic version is easier to search. 
Evaluating something as big as an encyclopedia suite is necessarily 
a job of sampling, not fully digesting. For spot-checks of three of 
the biggest, I borrowed some homework assignments from Cabin John 
Middle School, in Potomac, Md. 1999 WORLD BOOK FAMILY REFERENCE SUITE, 
WITH VIA VOICE (IBM; $69.99 before $30 rebate; Windows 95 and 98.) 
The software for the 1999 World Book Family Reference Suite asserts 
ownership over your computer, unpacking itself into your startup group 
so its cluster of four icons sits smack in the middle of your desktop. 
It also takes over your hard drive: the suite, three CD's in all, 
requires 16 megabytes of RAM, 39 megabytes of hard drive space plus 
8 megabytes for online access. The Via Voice speech-recognition feature, 
for which a headset microphone is included, requires 32 megabytes 
of RAM and another 64 megabytes of hard drive space. World Book's 
layout is clear and intuitive, which is particularly useful for children 
and their bewildered parents. To test the suite's linked features, 
I looked up E.coli, a usually innocuous bacterium used for genetic 
research; one type of E.coli can sicken or kill people who eat undercooked 
beef. The dictionary, the Merriam-Webster Reference Library, gave 
me a 56-word definition and added a paragraph on Theodor Escherich, 
the eponym of the bug, which is more formally referred to as Escherichia 
coli. (If you had a reference suite, you could also look up eponym.) 
The encyclopedia pulled up an article on genetic engineering and helpfully 
put ``E.coli'' in red. The Information Please almanac returned a one-page 
list of headlines from August 1997, including one about Hudson Foods' 
announcement that it would sell a processing plant in Nebraska after 
beef from there was found to be tainted by E.coli and a four-page 
entry for October that said a federal jury in Omaha was investigating 
Hudson. (It meant grand jury, not federal jury.) Search for a single 
word, and the software will highlight it in each article where it 
appears (although E.coli was not highlighted in the almanac.) There 
are functions that allow you to use a highlighter and paste notes 
into the text and a ``homework wizard'' that helps organize reports. 
I think that might make homework a little too easy and would certainly 
encourage a greater reliance on the encyclopedia. Installation was 
a headache. My home computer, a Dell Dimension 350-megahertz machine, 
crashed every time I tried to install Via Voice. It accepted the Information 
Please almanac at one point but wouldn't give me access to it later. 
Clicking on the encyclopedia icon on the desktop sometimes got me 
into the encyclopedia and sometimes did not; on those occasions, it 
was necessary to close the icon box and call it up again from the 
Start menu. So I tried again at work, on a 300-megahertz Compaq Deskpro. 
At the Via Voice step, I got an error message: ``Please select or 
conform the correct folder where WB99 is installed or exit setup and 
install WB99 first.'' I'm no conformist, but leaving aside the diction 
error in the error message, I called customer support. After a 65-minute 
toll call, I was told to scan the disk for errors but found none. 
But somehow Via Voice installed properly afterward. It wasn't worth 
the effort, though. I went through the 10-minute training exercise, 
reading words on the screen aloud so the computer could get used to 
my pronunciation, and then I grabbed a copy of the newspaper and read 
in a paragraph to see how Via Voice would do. I read: ``MINNEAPOLIS 
_ The marksmen gulped a hasty dinner of pasta and salad before preparing 
to spend a chilly night stalking their quarry.'' Via Voice heard: 
``Minneapolis of marks and helped a hasty diner of pasta and salad 
before preparing to spend a chilly night stocking their quarry.'' 
I also tried ad-libbing: ``Good morning. Today is Wednesday, and I 
have a lot of work to do today.'' It wrote, ``Bad morning today a 
news Wednesday and I have a lot of work to do to them.'' 1999 GROLIER 
MULTIMEDIA REFERENCE SUITE (Grolier Interactive; $89.99 before $30 
rebate; Windows 3.1 and later, and NT.) The 1999 Grolier Interactive 
Suite is the king of the name-droppers, with Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, 
the Hammond Atlas of the World, the Wall Street Journal 1998 Almanac 
all included. And as an awkward inducement to register the suite, 
Grolier has also thrown in access to The New York Times Book of Science 
Questions and Answers, already on the disk. The suite also includes 
access to the online Encyclopedia Americana, aimed at college students, 
and The New Book of Knowledge, and it comes packaged with a small 
hardcover book, ``How to Improve Your Grammar and Usage,'' by Mark 
Rowh. A paperback book of quizzes and other activities is also included. 
The encyclopedia itself produced a definition of E.coli, a diagram 
of recombinant DNA, for which E. coli's DNA is often used, and entries 
on bacteria, Escherichia, food poisoning and infection, and meat and 
meatpacking. Despite the marquee names, Grolier is the most basic 
of the encyclopedias mentioned here, geared toward younger children. 
The Grolier package is not integrated; it is more like buying a shelf 
of books, not all of which are geared to the same age group as the 
encyclopedia. Bartlett's on line has advantages over the printed version. 
It offers chronological browsing of all quotations, or searches by 
keyword, author, topic, date or source. There was nothing under ``coli,'' 
but under ``bacterial'' I found a 1948 snatch of poetry by Theodore 
Roethke, who wrote that he studied ``the lives on a leaf,'' including 
``bacterial creepers.'' The printed Bartlett's was always great for 
browsing, and I enjoyed this new edition (the 16th, with multimedia 
add-ons), including gems that may not turn out to be enduring, like 
one from Gene (Eugene Wesley) Roddenberry, 1921-1991: Space _ the 
final frontier ... These are the voyages of the starship Enterprise.'' 
There are other recent classics, like ``I am not a crook'' (Richard 
Nixon, Nov. 11, 1973). Newer ones, like ``I did not have sexual relations 
with that woman,'' await a future edition. The disk also has a timeline 
that includes Alfred E. Newman and Uncle Sam, of the World War I recruiting 
poster. And this being multimedia, Bartlett's on a disk also offers 
sound clips of ``La Marseillaise'' (1792, the timeline informs me), 
video clips of Nixon's 1952 Checkers speech, Willie Mays' famous over-the-shoulder 
catch during the World Series in 1954 and the O.J. Simpson car chase 
of 1994. The Wall Street Journal Almanac divides itself into 10 categories, 
including Year in Review, Politics and Policy, the United States Economy 
and Money and Investing. None found E.coli. A search under ``bacteria'' 
found some articles on cloning in the Year in Review section. The 
Living in America section came up with an article on slowing the progress 
of Alzheimer's disease. The Hammond Atlas of the World is actually 
an atlas plus a small almanac, with statistics on population, migration 
and other subjects. I didn't bother asking for E.coli but went straight 
to the unrelated Ekoli. It found the name and jumped to a map of the 
country, but not one big enough to show that town. The Grolier suite 
is a good choice for families with young children or for an adult 
who really wants a digital copy of the Bartlett's or Hammond and doesn't 
mind an encyclopedia thrown in. But as a reference tool for adults, 
Grolier is not in the same league as World Book or Encarta. ENCARTA 
REFERENCE SUITE 99 (Microsoft; $79.99; Windows 95 and 98, and NT.) 
Microsoft's entry into the encyclopedia suite market is another space 
hog: 28 megabytes for the encyclopedia, 40 MB for the search function 
(based on queries written in ordinary language), 17 MB for the text-to-speech 
engine, 15 MB for the speech-recognition engine, 72 MB for Virtual 
Globe 99, 5 megabytes for Bookshelf 99, 4 megabytes for the Research 
Organizer and 15 megabytes for ``shared system components,'' for a 
total of 196 megabytes. The program boots itself when you put the 
first of five CD's into the drive. The encyclopedia gave a brief mention 
of E.coli and linked to a detailed discussion of bacteria in general; 
Virtual Globe located Ekoli, which is in Congo, and was ready to give 
me extensive facts and figures on Congo and its latitude, longitude 
and distances to other locations, but it, of course, had no geographical 
references on E.coli. Microsoft Bookshelf _ nine reference books, 
including a dictionary, a book of quotations and a timeline _ is on 
a separate disk and required a separate search. It defined E.coli, 
pronounced it for me and found a definition of travelers' diarrhea 
that included E. coli and a chart on the taxonomy of life. But if 
you are in the encyclopedia and open the CD-ROM drive to put in the 
Bookshelf disk, the program warns you to put the encyclopedia disk 
back. Click on Bookshelf and it warns, ``Unable to find Bookshelf.'' 
Bookshelf opens with a new word and quotations each time: a brief 
inspiration before you begin to search. The timeline lists the Hudson 
Foods incident and lists five discoveries made using E.coli. Encarta's 
linking of information is helpful, but the results can be weird. Use 
the dictionary to look up ``Jeremiad,'' for example, and then turn 
to the timeline for information on the prophet Jeremiah, and the adjacent 
entries on the timeline choices will include Jeremiah Dixon (Mason's 
partner in drawing the line that divides North from South); ``Jeremiah 
Johnson,'' a 1972 movie, and Jeremiah M. Johnson, Secretary of Agriculture 
in President Benjamin Harrison's Cabinet. The speech software in Microsoft's 
package did not strike me, a competent typist, as worth the trouble. 
I asked it to look for Cleveland, by spelling out the word letter-by-letter, 
and it simply refused to get the last letter, trying, in turn, b, 
g, e and t. My 12-year-old son (who won't use the Mavis Beacon typing 
tutor program I bought him, but that's a different story) would benefit 
from speech software, but it couldn't understand him at all. He tried 
to ask for information on the Crusades, and the response was ``crusiogaa 
can't be found.'' It's easier to learn to type. Of the three reference 
suites reviewed here, Encarta is easily the slickest. From an unpromising 
foundation (Funk &AMP; Wagnalls Encyclopedia, to be precise), Microsoft 
has built a huge research tool, one loaded with graphics and animation. 
Encarta often comes bundled with new computers, but it's a sensible 
investment on its own. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>