<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0519 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Yankees have expressed a willingness to trade Andy Pettitte in 
a package for Toronto's Roger Clemens, according to a major league 
executive. The teams, however, are not close to agreeing on the parameters 
for a deal. But Toronto, forced to swap the five-time Cy Young Award 
winner now that Clemens has demanded a trade, is apparently making 
progress toward a deal with another team. Gord Ash, the Blue Jays' 
general manager, said Wednesday night that he has received an offer 
from a team he would not name _ the Colorado Rockies or the Detroit 
Tigers, perhaps _ and now he has referred that team to Clemens' agents, 
Alan and Randy Hendricks. As of Wednesday evening, neither the Yankees 
nor the Texas Rangers, once thought to be the front-runners for Clemens, 
had been given the go-ahead to speak with the agents. The Yankees 
and Rangers apparently are finding Toronto's demands for Clemens _ 
four quality major league-ready players _ difficult to satisfy. An 
executive involved in the Toronto trade talks said that within the 
discussions of possible combinations, the Yankees have indicated that 
they are willing to trade Pettitte, who they refused to trade repeatedly 
in recent years; the third baseman Mike Lowell, who became expendable 
once the Yankees re-signed Scott Brosius to a three-year, $15.75 million 
deal, and second baseman Homer Bush. At least to this point, the Blue 
Jays do not seem interested in Pettitte. Rather, Toronto has asked 
for Alfonso Soriano, a 20-year-old shortstop the Yankees signed as 
a free agent last summer, for $3.1 million, as well as pitcher Ramiro 
Mendoza, Bush and Lowell. The Blue Jays would love to have Orlando 
Hernandez, but Hernandez is a frontline starter whose modest contract 
of $1.65 million for each of the next three years makes him too valuable 
to be traded. Brian Cashman, the Yankees' general manager, would not 
comment on which players were being discussed, saying only that he 
continues to talk with the Blue Jays about Clemens. Agreeing to the 
parameters of a possible deal is only the first of two obstacles the 
Yankees must hurdle before trading for Clemens. The second will presumably 
be negotiating a new contract for Clemens, who can veto any trade 
proposal. The Yankees then would also have to make other trades that 
would make room for Clemens' contract within the Yankees' payroll. 
Thus far, there is only moderate enthusiasm for a Clemens deal within 
the organization, though at any given moment the owner George Steinbrenner 
could order Cashman to make a trade. As with the Houston Astros and 
the Cleveland Indians _ other teams attempting to trade for Clemens 
_ the Yankees fret about giving away valuable players in a trade and 
then being forced to pay Clemens like a free agent. In a sense, however, 
the Yankees may feel as if trading a package that would include Pettitte, 
Lowell and Bush won't cut deeply into their reservoir of talent. Pettitte, 
26, has 67 victories in his first four years in the majors, and he 
has demonstrated an ability to pitch in big games. The Yankees refused 
to include him during trade talks with Seattle, Toronto and other 
teams in recent years. But scouts around baseball believe that the 
quality of Pettitte's stuff is diminishing gradually, much in the 
way Jim Abbott regressed and was released before his 30th birthday. 
At the same time, Pettitte's salary is skyrocketing _ he earned $3.8 
million in 1998, and he will be eligible for arbitration after each 
of the next two seasons. If the Yankees' executives agree with the 
assessment of others that Pettitte's ability is diminishing, they 
could trade him now. Lowell, 25, batted .304 for Class AAA Columbus 
last season and was called up in September. The Yankees are waiting 
to see if Lowell will be part of the Clemens trade, and if he is not, 
they already have discussed a trade that would send Lowell to Florida 
for the young pitchers Joe Fontenot, who threw well against the Yankees 
in a game last June, and the minor leaguer Ed Yarnall, a former Mets 
farmhand who was part of the Mike Piazza deal last May. The San Diego 
Padres also have interest in Lowell _ in fact, a Toronto official 
said that the Blue Jays have discussed the possibility of shipping 
Lowell to the Padres if they get Lowell from the Yankees. Bush, 26, 
primarily served as a part-time player for the Yankees last season, 
but will likely be traded before next season, while the Yankees can 
still capitalize on his value as a potential everyday player. The 
Yankees initially offered Lowell, Bush and a minor leaguer for Clemens 
on Monday, to open negotiations. Texas, committed to improving its 
team under new ownership, tried and failed to sign pitcher Randy Johnson 
last month. Now it is poised to pursue Clemens as its ace, and by 
signing the right-hander Mark Clark to a two-year, $9.5 million contract 
on Tuesday, the Rangers have the flexibility to trade one of their 
other starting pitchers, Aaron Sele or Rick Helling. Because Sele 
is eligible for arbitration and draws a higher salary than Helling, 
Texas would be more likely to trade Sele. Toronto has also asked for 
outfielders Rusty Greer and Ruben Mateo, as well as another player. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>