<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0460 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As President Clinton prepares to fly into the diplomatic sandstorm 
of the Middle East, it is not just land borders but political boundaries 
that have shifted, creating a whole new landscape for the three-sided 
relationship. This time, it is Yasser Arafat who is riding high. The 
strong, unbudgeable Palestinian leader knows that unrest in the West 
Bank and dissent in Gaza present no serious challenge to his rule. 
This is his moment of glory, the terrorist-turned-elder statesman 
welcoming the U.S. president _ ``our new partner,'' the official Palestinian 
newspaper said _ to his very own, eponymous airport, gateway to his 
future Palestinian state. Clinton and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
of Israel, on the other hand, both face the possibility of eviction 
from office, far more seriously in the Israeli's case. The U.S. president 
flies out as the Judiciary Committee in the House of Representatives 
decides whether to approve articles of impeachment, and Netanyahu 
is living on borrowed time until Parliament holds a vote of no confidence 
in his government within two weeks. Only for Arafat will peace be 
the central and indispensable preoccupation. For Netanyahu, who won 
but a short-lived reprieve from a Parliament ready to topple him on 
Monday, the peace plan is the devil that tore asunder his right-wing 
coalition. He is not about to embrace it, much less carry it out, 
during the two weeks he fights for his political survival, U.S. presidential 
visit, or no. And for Clinton, if he can concentrate, the land-for-security 
peace plan signed with such great ceremony in the White House in late 
October, is in danger of becoming a tainted foreign policy achievement. 
If successful, his visit from Saturday to Tuesday, like his efforts 
at the Wye Plantation in Maryland, could once more distract attention 
from the scandal that won't go away. If the trip is blemished by the 
unforgiving political realities of the region, though, the great mediator 
could end up seeming doubly beleaguered by forces beyond his control. 
Gaza is being scrubbed and Bethlehem repaved in anticipation of Clinton's 
visit. Palestinian poster makers are churning out glossy likenesses 
of the president, rather than the ubiquitous mugs of the chairman 
of the Palestine Liberation Organization. But even as the prime minister's 
wife, Sarah, taste-tests appetizers at the Jerusalem Hilton, Israel 
is playing the reluctant host. ``Feh,'' the Cabinet says to the trip. 
Netanyahu said, shrugging: ``If he wants to come, he should come. 
If he does not want to come, he should not come.'' The trip was Netanyahu's 
idea, according to the Americans, but it has backfired on the prime 
minister. He wanted to make sure the Palestinians lived up to their 
commitment to amend their charter, eliminating clauses calling for 
Israel's destruction. Clinton would preside over a vote of the Palestinian 
National Council in Gaza, and all the world would hear the Palestinians 
renounce their former war on Israel. But the trip has turned into 
something that bears the trappings of an official state visit by Israel's 
top ally to the Palestinian National Authority. And this signals a 
profound change in the dynamic between the Americans, the Israelis 
and the Palestinians. Most alarming to Netanyahu and his Cabinet is 
the sense that Israel risks losing its special relationship with the 
United States, and, even worse, that the PLO could someday be on a 
diplomatic par with them. ``I see this visit as a not terribly positive 
moment for Israeli-American relations, just as it is a very positive 
sign for U.S.-Palestinian relations,'' said Joseph Alpher, director 
of the American Jewish Committee in Israel. ``We're at the point where 
the degree and extent of the American coordination over the peace 
process is as extensive with the PLO as it is with Israel.'' Some 
Israelis see this as a complicated dynamic that reflects poorly on 
Netanyahu's diplomatic skills, at a cost to Israel. ``The problem 
is not that Clinton and Arafat are developing mutual trust, but that 
the Americans are getting closer to the Palestinians while they are 
moving further away from Israel,'' Akiva Eldar, a columnist, said 
in the newspaper Haaretz Wednesday. The peace negotiations at the 
Wye Plantation in Maryland in October took place against the backdrop 
of domestic politics as well. At that time, both Clinton and Netanyahu 
were seen to be assisting each other. The Israelis gave the president 
the chance to play an important role on the world stage while the 
transcripts of Monica Lewinsky's grand jury testimony were being released. 
And Clinton, by proclaiming Netanyahu a man of courage taking a great 
political risk, helped force the Labor Party opposition to back him 
when he returned; to oppose Netanyahu was to oppose peace. But now 
the American president and the Israeli prime minister are no longer 
allies but mutual threats. Netanyahu cannot cozy up to Clinton because 
the right wing, which he has two weeks to woo back, will tar him, 
the initiator, as the inadvertent godfather of the Palestinian state. 
And Clinton, who had hoped he would be presiding over festivities, 
is arriving at a new low in Israeli-Palestinian relations, which, 
if Netanyahu feels provoked, could end up ballooning into a genuine 
crisis during his time here. The Palestinian National Council may 
not end up taking what the Israelis consider to be a genuine vote 
on Monday, the day Clinton attends its meeting. In a worst case scenario, 
this could do more than freeze the agreement; it could sever it. Almost 
inevitably, Clinton will be dragged back into the role of mediating 
an agreement that is already signed. For Netanyahu, the dance of distancing 
himself from the peace plan will be a tricky one during this visit 
that is now so inopportunely timed to collide with his battle for 
survival. But many Israelis see his woes as selfish. ``Ultimately, 
the issue is less whether Netanyahu will survive politically, but 
rather the price that the country will pay,'' David Makovsky, the 
diplomatic correspondent for Haaretz, wrote. ``And unless a drastic 
change is made, the price will likely be to halt the Wye agreement 
and to hurt U.S.-Israeli relations.'' At that point, then, there will 
be a cost for Arafat, too, but in the meantime he and his aides are 
barreling forward, acre by acre. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>