<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0503 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Where have all the point guards gone? That is what comes to mind every 
time Patrick Ewing and Alonzo Mourning lumber out of another failed 
bargaining session with the truculent owners, and fumble the issues, 
like so many bounce passes into the post. They admit that most players 
by societal standards make a lot of money, but we ought to consider 
their life styles, and help out when they go panhandling in Atlantic 
City next week. Sure, we should. Hey, buddy: can you spare a grand? 
I can already hear the Ewing fans mumbling: there I go again, getting 
on poor, philanthropic Patrick. Tough. Noble a warrior as Ewing may 
be, a man who doesn't know better than to pull the cell phone from 
his ear as he makes a very public exit from a funeral chapel (saw 
this with my own disbelieving eyes a couple of weeks ago, after Red 
Holzman was eulogized in Queens) should not be influencing the livelihood 
of others. This has much more to do with being selfless than it has 
to do with being smart. Find me two honest Knicks who would call Ewing 
an angel of the cooperative spirit, on the court or off. Charles Oakley 
laughed when I raised this point during a conversation last week. 
``That's why we're in this situation,'' he said. ``You have all these 
so-called franchise players who aren't leaders, who don't make anyone 
better.'' Much as we are all numb to the $2 billion boondoggle that 
is the pro basketball lockout, the players appear desperate for a 
point guard's improvisational genius. I seem to recall reading that 
John Stockton spoke up at a player gathering several weeks ago, suggesting 
a more conciliatory negotiating stance, and was shouted down. Where 
have all the other point guards gone? The one-dimensional thinkers 
in control of the union outrageously claim they would rather lose 
the season than take what the owners want to give them. As Pat Riley 
would say, meet force with force. As Mourning would respond, punch 
back when hit. Forget the time of the game, the consequences of the 
act. ``Everyone knew the owners were gearing up for this fight,'' 
Isiah Thomas recently told Sam Smith of The Chicago Tribune. ``They 
were prepared. This is not the time to fight, to stand up and say, 
`I'm the biggest, I'm the baddest.' This is the time to live another 
day, have the fight three years from now.'' Not coincidentally, the 
owners in three years will have their sights set on another rich television 
deal, as opposed to pocketing millions from their latest haul. Their 
chests will not be so puffed. Has it occurred to the union to bargain 
for the kind of contract reopener the owners demanded three years 
ago? Even without one, who says the players can't strike, if whatever 
deal they agree to has the punitive effect the union leaders insist 
it will? Who says at some future point that they can't decertify, 
which is what Ewing's group used as a platform to gain control in 
the first place? Could they not dispatch an independent operator like 
David Falk to canvas the networks, explore a rival league, while they 
settle and play on? Instead, fund-raisers are dreamed up in gambling 
sites, one public relations nightmare after another. If these are 
Ewing's ideas, someone please grab hold of his cell phone and dial 
911. This is not meant to belittle the players' sentiment, their reluctance 
to let the owners tighten the reins. But these are not coal miners 
being sent to inhale fumes. These aren't factory workers being laid 
off, or having their benefits stripped. The entertainment industry 
is about here and now. How can they let so many players surrender 
a year off a short career, and risk financial ruin? A wise point guard, 
when trapped, makes the high-percentage pass. ``The thing we always 
prided ourselves on,'' said Thomas, a former union president, ``is 
not missing paychecks.'' History says the most important leaders in 
the National Basketball Association have been those who could make 
the right play, in midair, or mid-act. Bob Cousy founded the union 
in his friend's basement in Worcester, Mass. Oscar Robertson led a 
threatened boycott of the 1963 All-Star Game for improved benefits 
and lent his name to the lawsuit that helped produce free agency. 
Thomas in the late 1980s fought off the agents to redirect salary 
cap money for a better pension plan. If the owners unexpectedly cave, 
Ewing may yet emerge from this a union hero. Or he may wake up one 
morning to a player disaster, no season at all. The clock is ticking. 
The pressure is building. This is no time for a clumsy center to initiate 
the last play. But then, where have all the point guards gone? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>