<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0083 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Amazon.com, the rapidly expanding online store, is about to introduce 
a new service in which it will refer its customers to other Internet 
merchants selling goods that it does not carry, according to people 
briefed by the company on the plan. Amazon.com plans to place links 
marked ``Shop the Web'' throughout its online store early next week, 
these people said. This will allow consumers to search for items in 
a number of categories including apparel, toys, computers and travel. 
Such a search would display items from a selection of participating 
vendors. The vendors include some mainstream merchants, like L.L. 
Bean, the Gap and F.A.O. Schwarz, as well as some Internet-only merchants 
like Brainplay.com, a high-end Internet toy store. A spokeswoman for 
Amazon.com declined to comment on its specific plans. But she said 
the company had made no secret of its intention to introduce such 
a service since it bought a company called Junglee in August. Junglee 
has created software enabling Internet users to compare the prices 
and features of products for sale on any number of sites spread across 
the World Wide Web. Amazon has been moving at a breakneck pace to 
transform itself from its original business as an online bookstore 
into something closer to an electronic department store. It started 
selling music last summer and then last month introduced videos and 
a gift section with toys, consumer electronics and games. The new 
``Shop the Web'' service, using Junglee, is still somewhat of a test, 
the people briefed on the plan said. At first the link promoting the 
service will be placed in an unobtrusive place on each page. After 
the initial bugs are worked out, Amazon intends to create a button 
shaped like an index tab on the top of all of its pages, referring 
shoppers to other sources of books, music, movies and gifts. The intention 
is primarily to help consumers find items that Amazon itself does 
not stock. But with the Junglee capabilities, there may very well 
be instances of Amazon's steering customers to other vendors or better 
prices of goods that the company has on hand. But Amazon would still 
receive revenue in such cases. Initially, the participating online 
merchants will pay Amazon a fee for each customer who clicks on a 
link provided by the service to visit their site. Eventually, they 
may be required to give Amazon a percentage of each sale. Ultimately, 
Amazon users who surf off to other online stores by using the referral 
service may be able to buy things using Amazon's one-click purchasing 
system, which stores customers' shipping addresses and credit card 
information. Indeed, there is quite a race on by a number of Internet 
companies to combine shopping directories with services that make 
buying items faster and easier. For example, the Excite search and 
portal service has introduced a holiday gift shop with 300 items drawn 
from about 20 online merchants. Excite offers to keep a user's address 
and credit card information on file and send it to each merchant that 
a customer buys goods from. ``Just like Excite creates a massive, 
searchable index of Web sites, Excite will create a massive searchable 
database of products available online,'' said Andrew Halliday, Excite's 
vice president for electronic commerce. NYT-12-06-98 1527EST 
</TEXT>
</DOC>