<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0433 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Thursday, Dec. 10: At 
long last, the House Judiciary Committee has before it two resolutions 
_ one for censure and one for impeachment _ that define the choices 
before Congress and the nation. The censure resolution, drafted by 
four Democrats, needs more direct language about President Clinton's 
lies under oath. But it represents a vehicle for Democrats and moderate 
Republicans to deliver what the public properly wants, which is to 
condemn Clinton strongly and then allow him to finish his term. But 
getting the censure resolution out of the committee and to the House 
floor as an alternative to the impeachment indictment will be difficult. 
The dueling resolutions emerged in late afternoon, bringing a hectic 
end to a day when the committee's usual raucousness was replaced by 
a somber sense of history in the making. A lengthy presentation by 
White House counsel Charles Ruff brought into clear focus the overriding 
question. Do Clinton's offenses rise to the level of requiring impeachment? 
We reject Ruff's argument that the president ``believed that what 
he was doing was being evasive but truthful'' under oath. The evidence 
of Clinton's statements and conduct supports the view that he planned 
to lie, knew he was lying and took actions to cover up his behavior. 
Nevertheless, Ruff framed the constitutional issue well. Even if all 
the charges are true regarding lying about a certain definition of 
sex or where hands were placed, he argued, the scale of the offenses 
does not warrant overturning an election. We believe that these offenses 
warrant censure, the sterner the better. But the Republicans' four-count 
impeachment resolution argues, in contrast, that Clinton should be 
tried in the Senate on charges of lying to the grand jury, lying in 
the Paula Jones case, obstructing justice and abusing his power to 
disrupt the legal process. The grand-jury count is the most dangerous 
to Clinton. Moderate Republicans might vote for it in the absence 
of a chance to vote for censure. For that reason, GOP hard-liners 
will do their best to kill the censure resolution in committee and 
impose rules that prevent it from being brought later to the House 
floor. That would be a disservice to the national interest. If Clinton 
and the designated House speaker, Bob Livingston, are ever going to 
exert leadership in this historic confrontation, they need to use 
all their influence to keep censure alive as an alternative for a 
House vote. Although we favor censure, we do not share the view that 
all pro-impeachment Republicans are zealots. Certainly some Judiciary 
Committee Republicans are driven by political antipathy, just as pro-Clinton 
Democrats have prejudged the case. But as many committee members suggested 
in their thoughtful questions, it is not easy to overlook Clinton's 
conduct and his decision to contort the law rather than uphold it. 
But as Ruff pointed out, impeachment should be used when a president's 
offenses against the state are so grave as to allow no response other 
than removal. The obvious alternative of censuring Clinton and making 
him acknowledge the condemnation with his signature must be made available 
to the House members. History will judge a bipartisan vote for censure 
to have been a rebuke far more stinging than a partisan vote for impeachment 
that hits a dead end in the Senate and is heedless to a sense of constitutional 
proportion. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>