<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0482 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The room at the Waldorf-Astoria was divided into two symbolic parts: 
age and experience. On one side sat 17 current college football players, 
recipients of the National Football Foundation's Scholar-Athlete award. 
On the other side sat the 12 newest inductees into the College Football 
Hall Fame. All had not been scholars, but each represented a snippet 
of the scholar-athlete ideal: a balance between the student and the 
athlete. The college players represented the diverse tapestry of intercollegiate 
athletics, from superpowers like Nebraska to a Division III non-scholarship 
program like SUNY-Brockport. The older players ran the gamut from 
Alex Sarkisian, who played offense and defense for Northwestern from 
1946 to 1948 at Northwestern, to Bo Jackson, who played for Auburn 
from 1982 to 1985. For an hour the athletes and inductees engaged 
in a call and response of experiences: the younger men mostly expressed 
aspirations and spoke of the reality of their experiences to this 
point. Alex Sierk, the Princeton field goal kicker, spoke of discipline 
and the thrills of playing football; Corby Jones, the Missouri quarterback, 
spoke of pushing forward despite adversity; Tom Massey, a defensive 
back from SUNY-Brockport, said he played not for the cheering hoards 
or for rooms and books and tuition, but simply for love of the game. 
The older men, aided by time, put their colleges days in broader perspective. 
Mel Long, an all-America defensive lineman at Toledo from 1969 to 
1971, spoke modestly about going to Toledo as an older freshman and 
going out for the team on a dare. What Long did not tell was the story 
of his life before football. After finishing Macomber High in Toledo, 
Ohio, Long joined the Marines and went to Vietnam where he became 
a squadron leader and was decorated for heroism. After the brunch, 
I asked Long how he earned the honor. ``I killed six men,'' he said. 
He elaborated: his squad was ambushed, pinned down by machine-gun 
fire. He went into a nest to see if anyone was there. There were six 
North Vietnamese in the nest. ``They turned around, the look on their 
face was complete surprise,'' Long said. He shot each of them three 
times. Bo Jackson spoke of overcoming a speech impediment, making 
himself into a good student and becoming the first in his family to 
attend a large university and earn a degree. ``You can say I ran my 
way into college,'' he said. Jim McMahon stood and told a different 
story. He attended Brigham Young University. His love was baseball, 
not football. For all the lofty academic awards of the day, McMahon 
said, ``I basically went to school to play ball.'' Ron Johnson, a 
member of the foundation's board, said that he was somewhat stunned 
by McMahon's comments. ``Most of the people who have been honored, 
if they talk about just being an athlete, they talk about it in a 
different light,'' said Johnson, who was inducted in 1972. ``They 
talk about how they wish they would have seen the light; that there's 
another side of it. I can't remember anybody celebrating the fact 
that they just went to school to play football. If they're happy about 
that, that's their loss.'' McMahon, in his own way, was humble, and 
acknowledged that he came around a bit in high school when his parents 
made him stop playing until he put effort into his schoolwork. ``My 
folks said sports was not promised to anyone, you have to earn the 
right to play athletics. So I had to earn the right by getting good 
enough grades to be able to play. I did that and suffered through 
it.'' Now he is going through the same thing with his oldest son. 
McMahon told of having to go to school for a conference with his oldest 
son. ``I had to go talk to his teacher and principal about his grades,'' 
McMahon said. ``It was kind of tough. He's just like I was. I'm explaining 
to him: `Look, you have to at least be eligible. You can almost be 
brain dead, it doesn't take that much to keep yourself eligible to 
play sports.''' Tom Osborne, the retired Nebraska coach, spoke of 
some great times, and some bad times, with the Cornhuskers. He spoke 
of awards and championships. But they had not defined his career. 
Osborne recalled something that Bob Devaney, who preceded him as the 
Nebraska coach, said many years ago. ``He said, `The thing you want 
to remember is that when you die, the size of your funeral will be 
primarily determined by the weather.' What means the most have been 
the relationships.'' For all the old wisdom of adults, a college player 
crystallized the essence of the college experience and brought home 
the point about the fragility of relationships and life itself. Jeff 
Zurcher, a defensive back from Kentucky, recalled the Wildcats' great 
season. He recalled the absolute high of winning a game against Vanderbilt 
that gave Kentucky its most successful season in years. That game 
was the high point of his life. The next day he said that he learned 
that his teammate, Arthur Steinmetz, had been killed in a car accident. 
``He had his life ahead of him,'' Zurcher said, choking back tears. 
``He was so talented, he could have played in the NFL. But I learned 
about the importance of relationships. I learned that football, that 
life, can be taken away just like that.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>