<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0207 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Don't know what to buy that hard-to-please dog or cat on your Christmas 
list this year? Consider Champ-Pagne, a Canadian spring water developed 
by Milwaukee entrepreneur Chuck Christ. Packaged like real champagne, 
Champ-Pagne costs from $5.99 to $9.99 a bottle and is meant, according 
to the Associated Press story, ``to let the victorious dog or cat 
toast achievements in style.'' The obvious question here is: Exactly 
what achievements are we talking about? One could argue, of course, 
that anybody who would blow $10 on a bottle of water for a dog or 
cat might have trouble tying his or her shoes, let alone evaluating 
the achievements of a pet. But let us assume that there are legitimate 
reasons for buying this product, other than making Chuck Christ a 
rich man or hastening the day that America collapses into a black 
hole of self-indulgence. As I am writing this, I am being serenaded 
by the snores of my pug dog, Buster, whose idea of achievement is 
to polish off two bowls of food before curling up for a much-needed 
21-hour nap. Buster would probably enjoy Champ-Pagne, assuming a way 
could be found for him to drink it and sleep at the same time. Which 
brings up another problem: Most dogs and cats are much too busy to 
waste time on victory celebrations. If given a choice between sniffing 
another dog's butt or toasting success with a raised flute of Champ-Pagne, 
a dog will take the butt every time. Not being a cat person, I can't 
really say how a cat would react to Champ-Pagne. My guess is that 
your typical cat would be fairly unimpressed unless the drink were 
served with a dead-bird appetizer. Or it might wait until you're out 
of the house buying the Champ-Pagne and then steal your stereo. But 
I could be wrong because, like I said, I'm not a cat person. What 
is clear is that an achievement that warrants Champ-Pagne for one 
pet might only warrant three-day-old puddle water for another. (Assuming 
there is a difference. Besides not being a cat-person, I am also not 
a designer-water person.) For dogs like Lassie and Rin-Tin-Tin, finding 
people buried in mine-shaft cave-ins or rescuing children on the brink 
of a waterfall is all in a day work. For other dogs (Buster, for example), 
raising an eyelid is a major accomplishment. Since it is generally 
conceded that pets are much better able to manipulate their owners 
than the other way around, it is easy to see how an occasional reward 
of Champ-Pagne for a job well done could turn into a $1,000-a-week 
bottled-spring-water habit. A dog that once expected nothing for fetching 
your slippers is now pawing at the liquor cabinet simply because it 
stole only one of two pork chops off your plate. Which goes back to 
my earlier contention that a pet's idea of a victory might be far 
different than yours. A dog that goes a day without digging a hole 
in your back yard deep enough to bury Santa's toy bag may feel quite 
proud of its accomplishment whereas you might see it as nothing more 
than a temporary reprieve from the animal shelter. A pet that derives 
wicked satisfaction from watching you blow your kid's college tuition 
money on Champ-Pagne may become sullen and resentful once the novelty 
wears off and it realizes that the whole rigmarole is over nothing 
more than ... water. A fancy bottle is nice, but you've got to think 
that most pets would prefer a nice, meaty steak bone or, in the case 
of cats, a nice pile of squirrel entrails that have been left out 
in the sun for few days. This is not to say that some pets wouldn't 
appreciate a few fingers of Champ-Pagne with their canned horse snouts. 
In fact, I'm thinking of knocking back a bottle with Buster if and 
when he wakes up. (David Grimes is a columnist for the Sarasota (Fla.) 
Herald-Tribune.) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>