<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0222 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During the fall, homeowners often awaken to find their windows fogged 
over. In the winter, the windows may be covered with a thin layer 
of frost. Both the fog and the frost are examples of condensation. 
It occurs when moisture, in the form of invisible vapor in the warm 
interior air, meets with the cold surface of the window pane. Moderate 
condensation is not a cause for concern as long as it evaporates when 
the windows warm up, but in extreme cases it may not dry up. Then 
it will collect and run down to soak the window sash and sill. Heavy 
persistent condensation will flow past the sill to saturate the wall. 
Damp walls will encourage mold and mildew. Eventually the moisture 
will penetrate through the walls and rot the framing. Unfortunately, 
condensation is not always as obvious as foggy or frosted windows. 
Sometimes the warm moist air penetrates through the wallboard into 
the wall cavities. Here it meets with cold air and condenses as water 
droplets on the wall insulation. This moisture may eventually dry 
out during the spring and summer months or it may remain and eventually 
cause the quality of the insulation to deteriorate. Condensation is 
rarely a problem in the spring or the summer because the outside air 
never gets cold enough to cool and condense the vapor in the warm 
indoor air. In the fall, all homes will have some condensation because 
there is a certain amount of residual moisture left in the air from 
the hot humid days of summer. In time, with adequate ventilation, 
this will dissipate and the condensation should cease. In winter months 
condensation may become an annoying problem because there is not enough 
ventilation to remove the moist air. The problem may be exacerbated 
when a variety of indoor sources add to the humidity in the air. One 
way to prevent condensation is by lowering the humidity. This is not 
as easy as it sounds because ordinary activities like cooking and 
showering add significant amounts of moisture to the air. Opening 
a window for five minutes after cooking or showering may be enough 
to flush out the moist air. A better solution, however, would be to 
install exhaust fans over the stove and in the bathroom. These would 
pull the moisture out without introducing cold air into the room. 
Exhaust fans are effective in pulling out the damp air, but they could 
cause backdrafting in some homes. The air that pulled out by exhaust 
fans must be replaced. Backdrafting occurs when the replacement air 
is sucked in through the chimney or furnace flue. It is not a significant 
problem in older homes because replacement air usually comes through 
gaps and cracks around the windows and doors. Newer homes are tightly 
constructed so they have far less gaps. You can test for backdrafting 
by holding a smoking incense stick below the chimney flue. If the 
smoke from the stick is drawn into the house, there is a backdrafting 
problem. Opening a window will alleviate the problem, but this is 
only a short-term solution. The best way to solve the backdrafting 
problem is to consult with a heating professional about installing 
ductwork to provide fresh air directly to the furnace. Another potential 
source of indoor moisture is the clothes dryer. Make sure it is properly 
vented to the outside; otherwise all the moisture from the freshly 
washed clothes will be discharged into the inside. Houseplants can 
also throw off a lot of moisture. If possible limit the number of 
plants in your home or place most of the plants in a separate room 
and run a dehumidifier periodically. Operating a dehumidifier may 
seem like the best way to remove moisture from the air, but beware, 
it can drive electric bills up. Ground moisture seeping up from the 
soil in a crawl space or through a concrete floor can also add considerable 
amounts of moisture to the air. In the crawl space lay down sheets 
of 6 mil polyethylene over the ground. Seal concrete floors and walls 
with a moisture sealer. In addition, check the ground slope around 
your home. It should slope away from the house so that all rainwater 
drains away. Other sources of indoor moisture may surprise you. Storing 
large amounts of green firewood in the basement may increase the relative 
humidity by as much as 15 percent. The obvious solution is to store 
most of the wood outdoors or in the garage. A large aquarium can add 
to the humidity as the water in the tank evaporates. Placing a cover 
across the top of the tank will contain most of that moisture. Remember 
that reducing indoor humidity is important if condensation is a problem. 
If not, then making the air too dry _ less than 40 percent humidity 
_ can create respiratory and allergy problems. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>