<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0267 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With online sales booming, millions of people are going to try to 
see if they can cut down on trips to the mall this holiday season 
and do some shopping over the Internet. A lot of them will find that 
you can't always get what you want on the Web. Anyone whose shopping 
list includes, say, a Ralph Lauren sweater, a Pioneer car radio, a 
Burton snowboard or even the latest Beanie Baby from Ty Inc. will 
search high and low in cyberspace without, in most cases, finding 
them. The reason? These manufacturers prohibit retailers from selling 
their products on line. To be sure, the Web is brimming with retailers, 
and new stores and shops are coming on line every day, leaving the 
impression that the Internet is a vast, freewheeling bazaar. Still, 
many well-known brands cannot be found on line because their manufacturers 
contend that the Internet flattens even the most luxurious item to 
a garish, flickering image and then pits retailers around the world 
in a grueling price war. ``We don't think of our products as commodities 
that can be managed by point, click and order,'' said Ed Sachs, executive 
vice president for sales at Pioneer Electronics, which prohibits dealers 
from selling its audio and video products on line. Pioneer's stance 
is still common in many industries. That is especially so among makers 
of more expensive lines, which are concerned about controlling the 
image of their brand and have always tried to have a small number 
of local stores, whose loyalty they are loath to upset. Other manufacturers 
are resisting the Internet for a different reason: they want to join 
it later, selling their goods themselves. For now, Internet shopping 
remains a very slim slice of the retailing pie. A study by the Direct 
Marketing Association predicts that this year, $4.7 billion worth 
of goods and services will be sold over the Internet _ slightly more 
than 5 percent of the $87 billion that will be sold by direct mail 
and telemarketing and a tiny fraction of the $2.6 trillion in overall 
retail sales in the United States. In the future, of course, Internet 
selling is expected to claim a much bigger share of the shopping dollar. 
Virtually nonexistent four years ago, shopping on line is now the 
fastest growing form of retailing. This year's Christmas sales are 
expected to be two and a half times last year's, with hundreds of 
thousands of people buying on line for the first time. Consumers have 
been lured by the shop-at-home convenience, as well as by the ability 
to pick from a huge selection of products, whatever the omissions. 
What is more, early fears about credit card fraud are fading as millions 
of people buy products on line with few reported problems. As online 
shopping begins to move into the mainstream, manufacturers are coming 
under increasing pressure to allow their products to be sold in cyberspace. 
``There is a spiral effect,'' said Maria Latour Kadison, an analyst 
with Forrester Research, a Cambridge, Mass., consulting firm. ``As 
more consumers come on the Internet, it drives retailers to expand 
their offerings on line. And when the retailers offer better selection 
and easier-to-use stores, it draws even more consumers on line.'' 
So while many manufacturers are ``afraid to hurt the existing brick-and-mortar 
retail channels that have supported their brands,'' she said, ``they 
will either change their minds or they will lose out.'' There are 
already many brands that encourage online sales, including Philips 
Electronics, Donna Karan and Mattel. Other manufacturers have been 
keeping online stores from selling their goods simply because they 
want to cut out the middleman and sell their goods themselves. Macy's 
flagship store in Herald Square in Manhattan, for example, has rack 
upon rack of jeans and chinos from Levi Strauss. But Macy's new Internet 
site Macys.com does not carry a single pair of Levi's among its 250,000 
items. Why? Because Levi's insists that the only place to buy its 
products on the Internet is at www.Levis.com ``We want to present 
our brand at its best, both in terms of assortment and presentation,'' 
said Jay Thomas, Levi's director of digital marketing. Levi's, moreover, 
faces vigorous competition from the Gap, which has been doing a brisk 
business at its Internet store. The Gap (www.gap.com) does not face 
any retailer-manufacturer conflicts, because it makes and sells its 
own products. Some manufacturers, however, have been forced to restrict 
online sales because of pressure from their existing dealers. ``At 
first, we sold to a number of Internet sites, but we had to stop,'' 
said Lee Carlson, president of Belinda Barton Furnishings for Children, 
a maker of expensive sheets and towels in Cutchogue, N.Y. ``Our stores 
were upset. Their main concern was that people would go on line and 
find prices that were lower than what they were selling for.'' On-line 
shoppers are caught in the middle of these squabbles. Gregory Frye, 
for example, is such a fan of Calvin Klein that he has set up a Web 
site with an homage to the designer's ads. But crawling the Internet, 
he has been able to find only a few Calvin Klein perfume items at 
Macy's and some of the underwear line at a small site called www.metromanusa.com. 
Robert Triefus, a senior vice president for Calvin Klein, said the 
designer was worried that it would lose control of its brand image 
if its goods were sold on the Internet. Moreover, the company has 
not figured out how cyberspace fits into its existing geographic distribution 
agreements. ``Some of our licensees have agreements that cover certain 
territories,'' Triefus said. ``The Internet, by definition, is worldwide 
distribution.'' Such concerns about control show that the retail universe 
in cyberspace, despite the booming online trade in books, compact 
discs and computer equipment itself, is still at a fledgling stage. 
Without access to the merchandise, online entrepreneurs cannot hope 
to become the next Amazon.com. The best example is in consumer electronics, 
where none of the small online merchants have anything close to a 
complete selection. Greg Drew, the chief executive of 800.com, a start-up 
company with an Internet consumer electronics store, said he has been 
able to buy the basic lines of television and audio equipment that 
are sold in such mass market retailers as Kmart, but not the sort 
of sophisticated models that many Internet users want. ``We can get 
the low-end stuff, but the high-end stuff we can't even get close 
to,'' he said. Similarly, many makers of consumer appliances, like 
Maytag, have not been willing to let their dealers sell on line. ``Appliances 
are a huge business which has become increasingly concentrated through 
the major retail chains: Sears, Circuit City, etc,'' said Trevor Traina 
of Compare.Net, an electronic shopping guide. ``Their cozy relationships 
with retailers are keeping them from doing things that will build 
their business.'' James G. Powell, a spokesman for Maytag, said local 
dealers provided better service and support for its products than 
Internet sellers who might be halfway across the country from the 
buyer. ``We want to protect our premium brand reputation,'' he said. 
Of course, designers, electronics companies and others have long sought 
to preserve their reputations and prices by limiting the number of 
stores they sell through. And whole industries have evolved to help 
consumers get around those restrictions. In fashion, there are many 
stores selling close-out items and overstocks at discount prices. 
There are discount electronics stores that sell goods purchased in 
the gray market _ that is, through unauthorized distribution channels 
_ rather than directly from the manufacturers. All these businesses 
have their counterparts on the Internet. Bluefly.Com sells off-price 
clothing, including some items from designers like Ralph Lauren who 
will not directly supply Internet stores with their goods. And there 
has also been a rise of gray market dealers of other goods, even Beanie 
Babies, those small stuffed animals whose ever-so-cute variations 
have made them a rage among collectors. There is a vast secondary 
market for older Beanie Babies among the Internet auctions. But Ty 
refuses to sell directly to any company that wants to offer new Beanies 
on line. (A spokesman for Ty did not return several calls for comment.) 
``It's not easy to get Beanie Babies, but we get them,'' said Toby 
Lenk, the chief executive of Etoys, an online store (etoys.com) that 
is usually able to buy directly from the big toy makers. ``But since 
we go through a middleman, we charge $8.99 or $9.99 for a model that 
people who get the product directly sell for $5.99.'' The scarcity 
of Beanie Babies is an exception, and most manufacturers fear that 
the gray market, and Internet sales in general, will lower, rather 
than raise, the prices of their goods. They argue that this will ultimately 
hurt them and their customers by squeezing out local stores. ``Maybe 
if you bought a snowboard on the Internet it might be a few bucks 
cheaper, but it wouldn't help the sport,'' said Jake Burton, the founder 
and chairman of Burton Snowboards in Burlington, Vt., which will not 
let its products be sold on line. ``The specialty retailer has played 
a huge role in getting this sport off the ground.'' Still, a number 
of online stores have been able to persuade manufacturers to sell 
to them by promising not to discount their products or otherwise cheapen 
their image. Fragrance Counter, an online cosmetics store has won 
over some of the most reluctant and image-conscious manufacturers 
by seeking to create an upscale boutique that is the ``57th Street 
and Madison Avenue of cyberspace,'' said Eli Katz, the chief operating 
officer of the company (www.fragrancecounter.com). ``We sell everything 
at suggested retail price, and we romance and describe every product. 
But perfume makers were not convinced at first. ``When I first started 
calling on vendors, they thought that selling fragrances on a computer 
was bizarre,'' Katz said. ``I couldn't get the time of day from anyone. 
Now the perception has changed as people see how the Internet adds 
incremental sales.'' Fragrance Counter now carries nearly every major 
perfume line except for some very expensive brands like Annick Goutal. 
Other Internet holdouts, like Oakley, the maker of futuristic sun 
glasses, are also beginning to dip their toes in the online waters. 
But Oakley has spurned the Web sites of big dealers like Sunglass 
Hut (sunglass.com), granting online rights only to Eyevault (www.eyevault.com), 
a California start-up company. ``We have always focused on selective 
distribution,'' said Link Newcomb, Oakley's chief executive. I don't 
think that online retail should be any different.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>