<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In one of Europe's biggest mergers, the Zeneca Group PLC of Britain 
announced a stock deal valued around $35 billion Wednesday to buy 
Astra AB of Sweden, creating a pharmaceutical giant. The deal, which 
had been expected, was the latest in a series of cross-border mergers 
and acquisitions in the European pharmaceutical industry. These deals 
reflect a quest for size to pursue costly research into new drugs 
and to compete in a market dominated by U.S. corporations. The new 
company, to be called AstraZeneca, will be the world's fourth-largest 
pharmaceutical concern, with a market value of $67 billion. It will 
also represent the 10th-largest merger or acquisition ever. Under 
the deal, Zeneca will offer 0.5045 share for every Astra A-series 
or B-series share. Zeneca stockholders will control 53.5 percent of 
the combined company, which will have corporate headquarters in London 
and research headquarters in Sweden. AstraZeneca plans to cut 6,000 
jobs, or about one-ninth of the work force, to save $1.1 billion. 
``Astra and Zeneca are a perfect fit,'' said Thomas McKillop, head 
of pharmaceutical business at Zeneca _ which was spun off from Imperial 
Chemical Industries PLC in 1993 and has since increased its market 
value to seven times that of its onetime parent. The new company will 
combine the manufacturers of two well-known medications _ Astra's 
ulcer drug Prilosec and the Zeneca cancer treatment Nolvadex, or tamoxifen 
generically _ and will, according to McKillop, represent a great leap 
in global sales and marketing power. The companies had combined sales 
in 1997 of $15.9 billion and combined drug sales of $11.5 billion. 
Their combined pre-tax profit was $3.5 billion, and the combined research 
and development budget was $1.9 billion, the world's third largest. 
McKillop was named chief executive of the combined company Wednesday. 
Contrary to analysts' expectations, the chairman of new company will 
not be Astra's chairman, Haaken Mogren, but Percy Barnevik, one of 
Sweden's best-known industrialists. Barnevik is chairman of Investor 
AB, a holding company that is the investment arm of the Wallenberg 
family, which owns about 12 percent of Astra's stock. Mogren, who 
will be one of two deputy chairmen, had reportedly been under pressure 
from the Wallenbergs to improve the company's return. The other deputy 
chairman will be Sir David Barnes, the chief executive of Zeneca. 
Barnevik is also chairman of ABB Asea Brown Boveri, the world's largest 
electrical engineering company, and has a reputation as a no-frills 
manager with a history of fusing corporate cultures, a matter that 
is particularly relevant to the drug business. Only this year a planned 
merger between Britain's two biggest pharmaceutical companies, Glaxo 
Wellcome and SmithKline Beecham, fell apart largely because the companies 
could not agree on who would run the merged businesses. People close 
to the deal said that in discussions lasting several months, a central 
issue had been selecting the lineup of top management to try to avoid 
the divisions that torpedoed other drug industry deals after they 
were announced. ``This was gone through thoroughly to avoid that happening,'' 
one person said. Wednesday's deal prompted speculation about a counter-bid 
from other companies, perhaps Glaxo Wellcome. But McKillop said in 
a conference call with reporters: ``We have had overtures from quite 
a number of parties on a number of occasions. We did not feel they 
would be the right combination.'' Analysts were divided, with some 
arguing that sharp increases Wednesday in the share prices of both 
companies were driven by the possibility of a counter-bid. In London, 
shares of Zeneca rose 6.9 percent while Astra's A shares climbed 10.6 
percent in Stockholm. The deal closely followed an agreement by Hoechst 
of Germany and Rhone-Poulenc of France to merge their drug- and agricultural-products 
operations and a $10.4 billion stock swap between Sanofi and Synthelabo, 
two French drug companies. The proposed AstraZeneca deal would be 
the largest drug merger, surpassing the $28 billion combination of 
Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz, two Swiss producers, to create Novartis in 
1996, according to Securities Data Co. Under British accounting rules, 
the newest deal is classified as a merger of equals. It also coincided 
with expectations among some American investment bankers that Europe's 
move toward mergers of equals would increase as the single European 
currency, to be introduced on Jan. 1, spurs cross-border deal-making. 
``There is massive potential for this kind of deal, especially in 
Continental Europe,'' said Paul Gibbs, head of analytical policy in 
the European advisory department at J.P. Morgan. He spoke on Tuesday 
at a year-end briefing _ before details of the Zeneca-Astra deal became 
known _ and underlined a European trend toward mergers of equals that 
avoid paying a premium to the shareholders of companies being acquired. 
According to figures he presented, European mergers and acquisitions 
so far this year _ before the Zeneca-Astra deal _ totaled $643 billion, 
$214 billion of that in deals between companies of similar size. That 
represented a marked increase from $490 billion in 1997, with $51 
billion in mergers of equals. ``This year for me was the year of mergers 
of equals,'' said Klaus Diederichs, co-head of Global Advisory business 
at J.P. Morgan, saying at the same briefing that the wave of deals 
had been driven both by corporate revamping and by increasing pressure 
on executives and directors to create shareholder value. ``We believe 
there's much more to come,'' he said. Within Europe, the merger frenzy 
has been led by British companies, with 39 percent of the business, 
Gibbs said. But, with 11 countries joining in the euro next month, 
many analysts say that Continental European companies _ with their 
shares denominated in euros _ will find themselves pressed toward 
cross-border deals free of currency-exchange problems. Mergers were 
bound to be explored in the European pharmaceutical industry anyway, 
some analysts said, because of the escalating cost of research as 
patents on existing drugs expire. For example, the patent on Astra's 
Prilosec ulcer medication _ sold outside the United States as Losec 
_ expires in 2001. ``Astra has not felt strong enough to go it alone 
in this fierce competition,'' said Sigfrid Leijonhufvud, economic 
columnist at the newspaper Svenska Dagbladet in Stockholm. ``They 
need to put a lot of money into future research.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>