<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0311 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
To cross the Antarctic continent from the Weddell to the Ross Sea 
on foot: in retrospect the project seems a little banal, maybe because 
we've been spoiled by what exploration has accomplished in the meantime. 
But to Sir Ernest Shackleton in 1914, the trans-Antarctic hike was 
one of the last remaining prizes in exploration. So writes Caroline 
Alexander in her stirring new account, ``The Endurance: Shackleton's 
Legendary Antarctic Expedition.'' As Shackleton himself put it in 
the prospectus for his Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition: ``It will 
be a greater journey than the journey to the pole and back, and I 
feel it is up to the British nation to accomplish this, for we have 
been beaten at the conquest of the North Pole and beaten at the conquest 
of the South Pole.'' To this end, he bought a 300-ton barquentine 
from a Norwegian shipyard, renamed it Endurance after his family motto, 
``By endurance we conquer,'' manned it with a mixed company of officers, 
scientists and seamen, 27 in all, and set off from England on Aug. 
8, 1914, a week after World War I began. The remarkable story of what 
happened to the expedition has been told in several previous books, 
most notably in Shackleton's classic account, ``South,'' published 
in 1919 to help defray the cost of the project. Yet in Ms. Alexander's 
telling, the terrifying details of the journey come as vividly to 
life as ever. Ice conditions were unusually severe that year, with 
pack extending farther north than it had in anyone's recollection. 
Although Shackleton delayed his departure from South Georgia, an island 
east of the Falklands, until Dec. 5, he was soon surrounded by the 
sea ice that churned in an interminable clockwise circle in the Weddell 
Sea. By Jan. 15 the Endurance was locked in, 80 miles away, or a day's 
sail, from its port of destination to the south. As the pack ice bore 
the Endurance away to the north, it squeezed harder and harder, eventually 
crushing it on Oct. 27 and forcing its crew to abandon ship with its 
three lifeboats. For another six months the men drifted northward 
on floes until the ice began to break up. This permitted them to sail 
west in the most adverse weather conditions and to land eventually 
on Elephant Island, some 599 miles to the north of the Antarctic Peninsula 
and as grim and hostile a piece of land as was possible to imagine. 
Because there was no chance that anyone would ever find them there, 
Shackleton took the desperate measure of picking five men and trying 
to sail one of the 22-foot lifeboats to South Georgia, which meant 
traveling 800 miles across the most formidable ocean on earth, in 
winter. Miraculously, they succeeded, landing on the west coast of 
South Georgia 16 days later in what was subsequently ranked as one 
of the greatest boat journeys ever accomplished. Trekking over the 
island's glaciers, Shackleton rejoined civilization and set in motion 
the rescue of all 22 men on Elephant Island, which was finally achieved 
four months after he had left them. How has Ms. Alexander managed 
to retell Shackleton's adventure so vividly? For one thing, she avails 
herself of all prior sources, some of them unavailable until now. 
A travel writer and the author of four previous books _ among them 
``One Dry Season: Traveling in Equatorial Africa'' and ``Mrs. Chippy's 
Last Expedition: The Remarkable Journal of Shackleton's Polar-Bound 
Cat'' _ she skillfully weaves together diary entries and memoirs so 
as to evoke both the beauty and the terror of the Antarctic, the eerie 
landscape of ice blocks piling up like sugar cubes, the sound of emperor 
penguins crying soulfully as if lamenting the breakup of the Endurance. 
More significantly, Ms. Alexander has included 140 of the photographs 
taken by Frank Hurley, who was enlisted by Shackleton to create a 
visual record of the expedition. These photographs, by turns abstractly 
beautiful and graphic, were stored in hermetically sealed canisters 
that somehow survived the journey and have never before been published 
comprehensively. They will be shown in an exhibition at the American 
Museum of Natural History to open in April 1999, with Ms. Alexander 
as the curator. The only distraction from her powerful narrative is 
one's feeling of the absurdity of the venture, a nagging sense that 
the only force to match Shackleton's heroism in bringing his men through 
was his foolishness in having placed them at such risk in the first 
place. Of course, what Ms. Alexander also makes clear is that we are 
viewing the whole enterprise across the historical divide of World 
War I, which brought to an end what the author calls ``the Heroic 
Age of polar exploration'' and undermined faith in all forms of human 
striving. (Britain's preoccupation with the war explains why Shackleton 
took so long getting help to rescue his men from Elephant Island and 
finally had to turn to the Chilean government for a ship.) Yet if 
history distances Shackleton's exploits, Hurley's photographs return 
them to immediacy. We can look into the eyes of the men and recall 
how they described their feelings. One of them, Thomas Orde-Lees, 
a marine captain, wrote in his diary after one failed attempt by the 
crew to march over the ice pack, ``Were it not for a little natural 
anxiety as to our ultimate progress I have never been happier in my 
life than I am now, for is not this kind of existence the `real thing,' 
the thing I have for years set my heart on. . . .'' Elsewhere, Ms. 
Alexander quotes Shackleton in ``South'' describing the end of his 
final trek across South Georgia: ``In memories we were rich. We had 
pierced the veneer of outside things. We had `suffered, starved and 
triumphed, groveled down yet grasped at glory, grown bigger in the 
bigness of the whole.' We had seen God in His splendors, heard the 
text that nature renders. We had reached the naked soul of man.'' 
Such effusions of romantic agony combined with Hurley's remarkably 
crisp visual record serve to collapse history into a universal truth. 
What men will risk death for is any alternative to boredom. PUBLICATION 
NOTES: `THE ENDURANCE: Shackleton's Legendary Antarctic Expedition' 
By Caroline Alexander Illustrated. 211 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $29.95. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>