<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0368 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Barely two days into a crucial round of surprise arms inspections 
in Iraq, the government of Saddam Hussein barred inspectors Wednesday 
from the Baghdad city headquarters of his ruling Baath party. Several 
dozen inspections have taken place over the past two days but the 
one at the party headquarters was the first to have created a major 
standoff. At a news conference Wednesday night, a senior Iraqi minister 
accused the inspectors of breaking an agreement on access to certain 
places deemed sensitive by the Iraqis, usually buildings or compounds 
used by the leadership. The official, Amir Mohammed Rasheed, the oil 
minister, said at a news conference later that the inspectors had 
violated Iraqi ``sovereignty'' by trying to enter the party building. 
But he and other officials gave varying accounts of what had actually 
happened. In New York, Charles Duelfer, deputy chief inspector, said 
Wednesday that the leader of the team had been presented with conditions 
for inspecting the site which he rejected and then the team left. 
When a team arrived at the party office Wednesday, officials here 
and in Baghdad said, the inspectors were turned away, either because 
the Iraqis said there were too many of them or because they had not 
brought information on what they wanted to see and why. They refused, 
and were locked out for 45 minutes before leaving the site. Another 
Iraqi official complained that the inspectors had tried to enter the 
building ``in a provocative way and with no notice.'' U.N. officials 
said that ``no notice'' is the essence of surprise inspections. Richard 
Butler, the executive chairman of the U.N. Special Commission, which 
has been in charge of disarming Iraq since 1991, was restrained in 
reacting Wednesday, although he called the incident at the party office 
``very serious.'' He was not asked to report to the Security Council. 
Butler is planning to make a weekly report on general progress or 
lack of it to the Council on Thursday, and is expected to elaborate 
on Wednesday's standoff then, along with continuing problems over 
Iraqi refusals to turn over documents. The inspectors of the Special 
Commission, known as Unscom, have been back in Iraq for less than 
three weeks after Saddam revoked his Oct. 31 ban on cooperation. The 
inspectors did not begin surprise searches of new sites until this 
Tuesday. Several diplomats said the Iraqis may be poised to damage 
themselves by contravening Security Council resolutions, making it 
hard for even their friends to defend them, just as they seemed to 
be within reach of a comprehensive sanctions review. In Washington, 
David Leavy, a spokesman for the National Security Council, said that 
the Clinton administration expected the Iraqis to cooperate across 
a full spectrum of activities if they want to have the sanctions reviewed 
by the Security Council _ and to avoid another threat of military 
action. Leavy said in an interview that the United States wanted to 
hear from Butler before making a judgment on the level of Iraqi compliance. 
``But as the president said, if Iraq cannot live up to its obligations, 
if Butler determines that Unscom can't do its job effectively, we 
have the forces in the region to respond.'' In Abu Dhabi Wednesday, 
Iraq's Persian Gulf neighbors urged Saddam to respect Security Council 
resolutions, including disarmament measures as well as demands for 
the return of Kuwaiti prisoners. A statement from a summit meeting 
of the Gulf Cooperation Council said that compliance ``will lead to 
an easing of the sufferings of the Iraqi people, for which the Iraqi 
government is entirely responsible.'' Whenever cornered in recent 
years, Iraq has fallen back on complaints that the behavior of inspectors 
is an affront to Iraqi dignity and sovereignty. Since June 1996, when 
Butler's predecessor, Rolf Ekeus, said he would take Iraq's ``legitimate 
security concerns'' into account when conducting searches, Iraq has 
tried to protect a range of sites _ the list changes _ by demanding 
special treatment for them. Ekeus wrote a directive to inspectors 
then explaining how they should conduct investigations at places the 
Iraqis called sensitive. But there was never an agreement to exclude 
any site from the purview of the Special Commission. There was agreement 
only to limit the number of inspectors and to allow a high-level Iraqi 
official to accompany them through the building to be inspected, which 
would not be identified before the spot check. Inspectors say that 
giving advance notice and a list of material to be examined only gives 
the Iraqis time to clear buildings and other sites of damaging evidence. 
Iraqis refer frequently to the agreement signed in February with Secretary-General 
Kofi Annan, which they interpret as endorsing their view that special 
categories of sites deserve special handling. That agreement allowed 
inspectors, accompanied by diplomats, to enter barred presidential 
properties, but only for perfunctory walk-throughs. Inspectors have 
not tried to reenter those buildings since. Wednesday's thwarted inspection, 
officials said here, was described by the Iraqis as ``a facility for 
the leadership of the Baath Party'' and the ``Baghdad organization's 
main office.'' It was not the main national and international headquarters 
of the party, a sprawling new collection of buildings bristling with 
electronic devices in a Baghdad suburb. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>