<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0277 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Shopping for a personal computer can be more confusing than shopping 
for a car, as was pointed out in this space last week. But it is significantly 
cheaper, unless one gets a really big computer or a really lousy car. 
Shopping is easier for people who already own a computer. For one 
thing, they already know something about computers. For another, they 
can often use the Internet to gather information and do comparison 
shopping. But this year, according to market researchers, the majority 
of computer shoppers will be first-time PC buyers. Many of these novices 
tell researchers that they have been enticed into computer stores 
because of a desire to get connected to the Internet. Many of them 
do not understand computer terms like megabytes and megahertz, other 
than that ``mega'' means big and ``bytes'' and ``hertz'' sound painful. 
For them, shopping is also a big pain. It does not have to be so. 
Basically any new PC sold today has all the capability needed to connect 
to the Internet, send and receive electronic mail, browse Web sites 
and download software, and perform standard productivity tasks like 
word processing or scheduling. Such systems cost as little as $500 
and are the closest things yet in the computer industry to being disposable. 
Given the rate at which computer prices are falling, and given the 
trend among some companies to subsidize the cost of electronic devices 
like cell phones and cable set-top boxes in return for the customer 
agreeing to a long-term service contract, one can expect to see ``free'' 
or very cheap Internet-connected PCs being offered to consumers in 
the next year or two. But that day has not yet arrived, alas, so take 
your wallet when you go shopping for a PC. According to market researchers, 
the average home computer shopper has a budget of $1,500. Although 
today's sub-$500 computers can do basic tasks, they typically cannot 
do all the things that most consumers might want them to do, like 
play the newest games and process the latest audio and video applications. 
So, we recommended last week that people consider buying a more robust 
(i.e. expensive) computer, one that has enough power to do everything 
today, and that can be upgraded for an even longer useful life. That 
caused some readers to fly to their keyboards, arguing by e-mail that 
upgrading a PC these days is often not worth the expense or effort. 
They have a point, at least when it comes to inexpensive PC's. The 
El Cheapo computers typically use pipsqueak processors that will probably 
be too feeble to handle new software in two or three years. While 
it may be possible to rejuvenate the computer with a few strategic 
upgrades, it will probably make more economic sense simply to replace 
it with a new one when the time comes. After all, PC's that are more 
powerful and less expensive are being introduced every few months. 
But for the kind of computer that offers good performance for the 
best educational software, games and Internet applications that a 
consumer might want to use today, as well as a fighting chance at 
being useful in 2001, a brawnier PC is needed. Our basic specifications 
were for a minimum of an Intel Pentium II 350 or AMD K6-2 300 chip, 
a 6-gigabyte or bigger hard disk, at least 64 megabytes of system 
memory, decent video and audio cards, a v.90 modem, and so on. With 
a 17-inch monitor, such machines cost $1,200 and up. Curiously, IBM, 
Hewlett-Packard and Compaq _ three titans of the corporate world who 
used to ignore the home PC market _ are now considered among the leaders 
in this category. While $1,500 is typical consumer budget, those who 
want the ultimate home PC system, with the best components and features 
across the board, can easily spend $3,000. But bargains abound, even 
among the fastest PC's. Dell, for example, sells its Dimension XPS 
R450 computer, winner of PC Computing magazines MVP award for desktop 
computers, for $1,859 to $2,899 depending on options. The base price 
includes a big monitor, a DVD drive, and just about every advanced 
feature a PC user might desire. PC Magazine gave its latest Editors 
Choice award for home computers to the Gateway G6-450 desktop computer, 
a $1,998 model that is similarly loaded and includes a big monitor. 
Macintosh users wrote in as usual to express their outrage that last 
weeks column basically ignored the Macintosh. Since its introduction 
last summer, the Apple iMac has been the single most popular PC sold 
in computer stores each month. Why? It is not because the iMac is 
better than any other Macintoshes. In my view, it has some drawbacks. 
But at $1,299 _ or, more realistically, $1,500 with the extra components 
needed to make it truly useful _ the iMac is hundreds of dollars less 
expensive than other Macs. Apple also has been successful in persuading 
consumers that the iMac is easier to use than Windows-based computers. 
In survey after survey, fear of technological complexity is a major 
deterrent for people thinking about buying a first PC. Macs are indeed 
easier. Even so, I would recommend one of the (more expensive) desktop 
G3 Macs over the iMac for the same upgradeability reasons. Apple, 
incidentally, has just released Mac OS 8.5.1, a bug-fix for its relatively 
new 8.5 operating system. The 3-megabyte download is available from 
Apples web site, at www.info.apple.com/support. The upgrade will be 
available on CD-ROM in a few weeks. Getting back to Windows machines, 
another issue is not just what to buy, but where to buy it. Some people 
prefer to shop in a computer or consumer electronics store. Others 
find the convenience of shopping on line to be compelling. Of course, 
if the shopper does not already have a PC, it is hard to go on line. 
In that case, many of the major direct sellers of computers companies 
like Dell, Gateway and Micron offer impressive help by telephone. 
For those who can shop on line and buy directly from the PC maker, 
there are advantages. Prices are generally lower, and knowledgeable 
sales help is abundant. The customer can custom-order a PC with a 
wide variety of options. The direct-sales companies pioneered the 
idea of on-site service, where technicians come to your home or office 
to fix any problems in the first year. On-line shopping is also a 
boon for busy people, because the Web sites stay open around the clock. 
But there are also disadvantages to online shopping. Foremost among 
them is that online shoppers cannot see or touch the computers before 
they buy. (Gateway has opened about 100 showrooms to fix this problem.) 
The customer can choose any kind of a computer, as long as it is made 
by the one company. Then it often takes a week or more to get the 
computer. The customer has to pay a considerable shipping charge, 
which often offsets any gain from a lack of sales tax, and if something 
goes wrong with the computer, returns are a hassle. Conversely, the 
computer stores often carry several different brands of computers, 
which makes comparison shopping easier. In theory, the potential buyer 
can touch the computers and test their look and feel. Gratification 
is usually instant, and many stores have service and repair departments. 
Some stores offer classes. On the down side, getting good help in 
a computer store is notoriously difficult. After wandering the aisles 
unmolested by sales help for nearly 20 minutes last week, I finally 
located one very knowledgeable sales assistant at the local CompUSA 
store and ambushed him while he was stocking the shelves. The guy 
knew his stuff, but it quickly became apparent that in the balance 
of things, his technical skills were as impressive as his social skills 
were alarming. Mumbling, refusing to make eye contact and in obvious 
pain at dealing with customers, he answered each question as if there 
were electrode shocks attached to his feet and I held the controls. 
In contrast, my contacts on the telephone at Dell and Gateway sounded 
like James Bond. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>