<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981209.0506 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A federal judge Wednesday ordered Texas to postpone the scheduled 
execution on Thursday of a Canadian man convicted in the 1975 murder 
of a wealthy East Texas woman and instead called for a hearing to 
determine whether the man's right to a fair clemency process had been 
violated. Attorney General Dan Morales of Texas immediately appealed 
the decision to the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans. 
``It would be my hope and expectation that the execution will proceed 
as scheduled,'' Morales said. If the appeals court overturns the judge's 
order, the execution could proceed as scheduled at 6 p.m. on Thursday 
in the Texas death house at Huntsville. The case of the Canadian, 
Joseph Stanley Faulder, had drawn international attention in recent 
days, largely because of accusations by Faulder's lawyers that their 
client had never been properly informed at the time of his 1977 arrest 
of his right to contact the Canadian Consulate. But the stay of Faulder's 
execution, issued Wednesday afternoon by Judge Sam Sparks of federal 
district court, was not based on that issue, but on another raised 
in a separate appeal in the Texas courts. That appeal grew out of 
a Texas civil court judge's ruling last week in a class-action suit 
brought by a group of lawyers on behalf of all Death Row inmates. 
The appeal contended that the 18-member Texas Board of Pardons and 
Paroles had habitually failed to hold its meetings in public, sometimes 
voted over the telephone or by fax and failed to state the reasons 
for its decisions or to record its votes. Faulder's lawyers had requested 
a stay of execution, saying that there were deficiencies in the Texas 
clemency procedures and that there was, in fact, ``no meaningful opportunity 
for pardon or commutation of his death sentence.'' Sparks ruled that 
Texas did provide meaningful opportunity for pardons, but decided 
that further fact-finding was needed to determine whether there were 
deficiencies in the clemency process. He scheduled a hearing on the 
matter for Dec. 21 in Austin, although he noted, ``It is unclear how 
the board can document that its procedures are not arbitrary if it 
does not document its procedures at all.'' Lawyers for another convicted 
murderer, Danny Lee Barber, 43, also won a temporary reprieve from 
Sparks for their client on the same grounds Wednesday, just an hour 
before he was to die by lethal injection in Huntsville. The issue 
of whether Faulder had been properly informed of his consular notification 
rights is part of an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court, which has yet 
to announce whether it intended to hear the case. Under the Vienna 
Convention on Consular Relations, the United States and all other 
signatories are required to inform foreign citizens upon their arrest 
that they have the right to contact their consulate. Texas officials 
said they had never informed Faulder of that right because they did 
not know he was a Canadian citizen. The government in Canada, where 
public opinion is strongly opposed to the death penalty and where 
Faulder's case has received great attention, has appealed to the United 
States government to intercede with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas in 
seeking at least a temporary reprieve for the condemned man. The European 
Union added its voice Wednesday when Helmet Tuerk, Austria's Ambassador 
to the United States, issued a statement on behalf of the union asking 
Bush to halt the execution. The federal judge's announcement of a 
stay in Faulder's execution capped a busy day of developments in the 
case. Earlier, the state's pardon board announced that it had voted 
unanimously to recommend against any clemency in the case. Under Texas 
law, Bush is allowed to grant only one 30-day reprieve in any death 
penalty case without a recommendation for clemency from the parole 
board, and he has no power to reduce a death sentence without the 
board's approval. Speaking to reporters, Bush said that he intended 
to let the appeals work their way through the courts before making 
a final decision on a 30-day reprieve, but he indicated little interest 
in granting one for Faulder. For one thing, the governor said, Faulder 
had never claimed to be innocent, so the only issue was whether he 
had received due process, and that was up to the courts to decide. 
``My job is to enforce the laws of the State of Texas,'' Bush said. 
``We're a death penalty state. We believe in swift and sure punishment.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>