<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981209.2000.0583 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Straw's decision on General Pinochet's extradition case was of course 
eagerly awaited in Chile, where the debate over the former president's 
fate profoundly divides the nation. The World's Alexandra Martins 
is in the capital, Santiago, and she joins us now. Alexandra, what's 
the reaction been in Chile to this decision to proceed with Pinochet's 
extradition to Spain? Well, once again, it's two reactions of joy 
and sadness. Among the supporters of General Pinochet,. they talk 
of disappointment, they talk of anger, but also they say that the 
decision was expected. This was the reaction of Hernand Brion, who 
is the president of the Pinochet Foundation. For us, it's not a surprise. 
We really considered that the decision was political, and it was taken 
because we are a small country, and against small country you can 
do whatever you want, you know? Well, presumably the other side of 
this is that the detractors are celebrating. What has their reaction 
been? Yes, there have been reactions of joy. People are celebrating, 
and not only the relatives of the victims of human rights violations 
during the military government. Many people here feel that the only 
way that the truth, the full truth of what happened during the military 
government in Chile will come out is if the general is tried abroad, 
that there is no way, there's no hope that justice in Chile will allow 
truth to come out. And in that sense, the best for the country, so 
that finally they'll be able to start a process of reconciliation 
is that the general faces justice abroad. Well, Alexandra, the Chilean 
military has been relatively quiet so far, and Pinochet was one of 
them, and what comes out about him may conceivably affect them. Do 
people there fear that the army might once again intervene if these 
old wounds fester for too long? Well, the possibility of a coup, another 
coup in Chile is highly, highly unlikely. The new Pinochet, as people 
say here at the new commander of chief of the army, General Isordiete, 
is a very different man. He has a very calm style, and all along has 
been very cautious with the words he's used. And everybody here feels 
that the conditions are not the same as they were in 1973, and that 
there might be some maybe hard reactions, some demonstrations on the 
streets, et cetera, but that there's no way that there will be any 
sort of military intervention in Chile. This is the view also of one 
of Chile's most respected sociologists, Manuel Antonio Gareton. Even 
if the first moment we will have some riot, some very hard speech 
by the right and by the military, there are no important political 
consequence. Because the only political consequence will be a military 
coup, and the military coup, for what? To go to United Kingdom to 
liberate Pinochet? There is no for what. Assuming that he is right, 
Alexandra, still the Chilean government has taken a kind of hit, because 
this is a defeat for the government as well. They lobbied Britain 
to send the general home to face trial there. They didn't succeed 
at that. What's expected to be the government's next move? Well, the 
government probably doesn't know what to do next. There's little more 
that they can do, really,. because now if there is a trial, it's a 
judicial process, and there's no room for political arguments any 
more. The government has appealed for calm, the president is still 
in Brazil attending a regional summit. The national security council 
is going to meet on Friday. But so far, no concrete action has been 
announced. But while speculation continues about what the government 
might do, many people here are talking about the possibility that 
General Pinochet might never come back to Chile. He's a very old man, 
and many fear that he might die in England. This concern is shared 
by Congresswoman Maria Anjelica Christi, who's from the right-wing 
National Renewal Party. If he stays there too long, anything can happen,. 
anything can happen. And, of course, if he dies there, many Chileans 
will never forgive England or Spain for what they've done to us. And 
he will be a hero. Many people here share the fear that General Pinochet 
might die abroad, and even those who are not the supporters of the 
general are saying that if he dies abroad, then they will never know, 
really, the truth about what happened in their country. But the general 
feeling is, both sides of the argument, that Chile will never be the 
same. This has been a long process, and it's still a long way from 
its conclusion. People are speculating that General Pinochet might 
even stay at least a year in London. And next year there are presidential 
elections in Chile, so this will have an important effect on the political 
debate in the country, which will be completely dominated once more 
by the man who ruled the country for 17 years. Alexandra, thank you 
very much. Thank you, Tony. The World's Alexandra Martins is in the 
capital of Chile. Santiago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>