<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981209.2000.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Tony Kahn. We begin our program in London, 
where Britain's home secretary, Jack Straw, ruled today that extradition 
proceedings against Augusto Pinochet can continue. Straw's decision 
is by no means the end of the story. The former Chilean dictator intends 
to continue battling in the British courts to avoid being sent to 
Spain, where he faces charges of genocide, torture, and kidnapping. 
In a moment, we'll hear from Santiago, where Chileans are split almost 
down the middle on the Pinochet controversy. But first, for more on 
today's decision, we turn to The World's Alan Dow in London. In his 
ruling, Jack Straw said he saw no grounds for a stay of proceedings. 
Pinochet's advanced age and state of health did not sway Britain's 
home secretary from moving the extradition process forward. I said 
that I would be considering strict accordance with the legal obligations 
imposed upon me. I have done that. I considered all the representations 
made to me. And in the light of the representations and of my legal 
obligations, I've decided to issue an authority to proceed in the 
extradition of General Pinochet. , thank you! Jack Straw, thank you! 
Thank you!, I hope that it's not before our people. Today's ruling 
brought cheers from Chilean exiles here in London, but it dealt a 
blow to Augusto Pinochet and his supporters. Jack Straw was Pinochet's 
last hope of avoiding a humiliating extradition hearing. The next 
step in the process occurs Friday, when General Pinochet is scheduled 
to appear in a London courtroom. We can anticipate various kinds of 
appeals, applications, and flurries of legal argument all over the 
place. Michael Zander, a British legal expert at the London School 
of Economics, predicts the extradition hearings and legal arguments 
will take weeks. But he calls today's decision by Straw, and effectively 
the British government, very important. I don't think there's any 
doubt that it's extremely important. And, of course, the irony, or 
the coincidence of the 50th anniversary of the Declaration of Human 
Rights, is an extraordinary one, I think celebrated tomorrow. It is 
very important, because it will be seen as a landmark decision round 
the world, and courts all over the world will, I would say, regard 
themselves as being required to follow it. But they'll be inclined 
to follow it if it gives the lead on extradition proceedings in such 
cases. British reaction to today's decision has been mixed. Conservative 
politicians like the former prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, say 
Straw has made a grave mistake. She calls it "a shameful and damaging 
episode that will further harm relations between Chile and Britain." 
And, as might be expected, a spokesman for Pinochet, Patrick Robertson, 
agrees. At once stroke, by making his decision today, Jack Straw had 
condemned the Chilean people to a period of serious destabilization, 
and that is something which is to become hard to forgive when, as 
we'll see over the next few months, the process of peace and reconstruction 
and reconciliation in Chile is turned upside-down. Straw says his 
decision today was not politically motivated, that he based it solely 
on the law. But his background as a left-wing student demonstrator 
against Pinochet's regime leaves supporters of the former dictator 
unconvinced. Reporting for The World, I'm Alan Dow in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>