<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981209.2000.1258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Tony Kahn. In Japan, scientists have announced 
that they've cloned eight calves from the cells of a single adult 
cow. Four of the calves are alive, each a perfect genetic copy of 
the cow from which the cells were removed. This feat,, of the finding 
of the 3.5 million-year-old hominid skeleton we just heard about, 
makes for a momentous 24 hours of scientific discovery. Robin McGee, 
science editor of the London-based "Observer" newspaper, spoke with 
me about both developments. He says the discovery of the South Africa 
skeleton could solve some key questions about human origins. It offers 
that prospect. That's why they scientists are so excited about it. 
There are three things that define human evolution, bigger brains, 
bipedalism, and tool making. Of those three things, what does this 
skeleton help us figure out? I think almost certainly the bipedalism, 
the fact that this animal looks as if it was starting to walk upright 
and had been walking upright for a bit. But was not totally, you know, 
given up the idea that it had some ape ancestry. Its brain was very 
small, and there's no evidence at all that it made any tools. So we're 
only looking at really the very first aspect of what we define -- 
one of the definitions of humanity. Well, what's remarkable about 
today's news is that we have this discovery, which begins to answer 
even more questions about where man may have come from, and at the 
same time, we're getting news out of Japan that there's more research 
being done with cloning, which points toward the future of the way 
in which we can grow new creatures, basically out of themselves. Tell 
us about the story that's emerging in Japan. This is a researcher 
called Yoko Kato, and what she has done was to create, actually clone, 
eight calves from a single adult cow. And, of course, this is a further 
demonstration that you can clone an adult mammal, the most striking 
demonstration that we have of how advanced our potential to recreate 
-- to make identical copies of ourselves has become. Now, we know 
that this has been done before in Scotland with a sheep, Dolly. In 
what way is this an advance? One copy of an adult sheep was made, 
in this case eight copies were made. In other words, it's not just 
a matter of cloning yourself, but you could clone yourself five times 
over, were you to be so deranged enough to want to do that. Of course, 
the real benefit, the real economic benefit, points to agriculture. 
And if you have a very good line of cattle you want to reproduce, 
this makes it terribly easy to do that. Well, obviously if you get 
more highly prized cattle produced out of the same piece of beef, 
basically, price can go down. That's going to have economic effects 
in the long run. What about ethical effects? We know that when Dolly 
was cloned in Scotland, there was an immediate reaction, both positive 
and negative, about the implications of that for human beings. Would 
human beings be cloned? Is there that kind of climate of controversy 
surrounding this development in Japan? I don't think so in Japan, 
but certainly there has been quite a lot of controversy this week 
in Britain, because our ethical advisers on cloning have given the 
go-ahead to the use of experiments experiments using human clones 
to hold the possibility of making the tissue and cell lines and organ 
growth, in other words, taking -- you know, actually recreating some 
of your own cells to grow a new liver, for instance, or something 
like that. Basically, what is it that Britain has given the thumbs-up 
to in terms of cloning human beings? We know that no human being has 
yet been cloned. No, and what this -- what we have allowed is the 
use of embryos up to the first 14 days after fertilization to be used 
to research the possibility of growing tissue, taken from cells and 
supposing I have liver damage, and to try to grow a cloned liver from 
one of my cells. From one of your... , and all we have done is given 
ethical approval for research using embryos up to 14 days old for 
this, and then they will be discarded, those embryos. It's obvious 
from this news and news like it that developments, especially in this 
area, are happening incredibly fast, faster than cultures and norms 
and laws can seem to keep up with them. Is it your feeling that basically 
there's very little it can stop the directions in which these kinds 
of research may go? I think it has a certain momentum that will be 
hard to stop, I must say. I don't believe scientists are responsible, 
and they know what the public will and will not tolerate. I'm not 
too alarmed, but I can't see people stopping this one, I must say. 
Well, Robin, thank you very much for speaking with us. My pleasure. 
Robin McGee is science editor of the London-based "Observer" newspaper, 
and he broke the story, as a matter of fact, on the cloning of Dolly 
the sheep by a Scottish research institute. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>