<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981209.2000.0893 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Move over, Lucy,. there's someone even older than you are. Until today, 
that famous Ethiopian, age 3.2 million years, was the oldest hominid 
skeleton ever found. But now, South African researchers have announced 
an older one. And as The World's Carolyn Dempster reports from Johannesburg, 
it's in remarkably good shape. It's the kind of discovery paleoanthropologists 
dream about. For University of Advantastrand researcher Dr. Ron Clark 
and his two South African assistants, the dream became a reality in 
September this year, when they located the complete skull and skeleton 
of a 3.5 million-year-old hominid. This is without doubt the most 
dramatic discovery ever made, because apart from the Tong child, which 
also had upper and lower jaws in occlusion, this is the only skull 
of an Australopithecus ever found with the lower jaw and the upper 
jaw articulated together. It is also the only one ever found with 
its skeleton. So this is full of a wealth of information that's going 
to reveal to us over the next year or so, which is what I estimate 
it will take to uncover it. Dr. Ron Clark began looking for the skeleton 
after he stumbled across the bones of a small human foot in a box 
in a closet at the university. It had been mistakenly put away with 
monkey fossil remains. Clark was sure the rest of the human skeleton 
was buried somewhere in the Sterkfontaine Cave close to where Little 
Foot was found. So sure, that he gave his assistants the cast of a 
fragment of shin bone and asked them to find the bone that matched 
it. Clark said it was like looking for a needle in a haystack. But 
Stephen Motsume miraculously found the perfect match. When I get there, 
try to do this, this was fit actually perfect. But I wouldn't believe 
that. I tried to put it the other way round wrong. No, I put it exactly. 
No, it's OK, it's OK. I, and when he come, take this and fit it there, 
this was fit actually perfect. So we are very,. very happy for never 
can find this in that big cave. Locating the full skeleton, which 
lies embedded in hard rock, took another year of painstaking chiseling, 
but it was worth it, because what Clark, Motsume, and his colleague, 
Nkwama Molethe, have found is nothing less than a major breakthrough 
in understanding the evolution of humankind, according to the Bostront 
University Professor Philip Tobias. I go so far as to claim that Clark's, 
Motsume's, and Molethe's discovery is the most significant find ever 
made in South Africa since the original discovery of the Tong child 
in 1924. Probably it is the most momentous paleoanthropological find 
ever made in Africa. It's not yet possible to say whether the Sterkfontaine 
hominid is a man or a woman, so the scientists haven't given their 
find a name. What they do know is that the creature was about four 
foot in height, that he or she climbed trees but also walked upright, 
lived in a tropical forest, and died after falling into the deep shaft, 
which became a burial chamber for 3.5 million years. Today South Africa's 
Deputy President Tavo Beki paid tribune to the scientists, the discovery, 
and it significance for all Africans. Part of what we needed to do 
as Africans is to discover as much about our origins as is possible, 
because I don't believe that anybody who knows the contribution of 
this continent to the development of humanity could not but be confident 
that whatever our problems, we will serve them. And this find, I'm 
sure, will say that,. will communicate that. This is not the oldest 
hominid fossil found in Africa, but it is the first complete skeleton 
to emerge intact. And it will be critical to paleoanthropologists, 
who continue to try and unravel the puzzle of human evolution to determine 
what our human ancestors shared with the family of apes. It's not 
the missing link, but it does take us one step closer. For The World, 
I'm Carolyn Dempster in Johannesburg. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>