<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981209.2000.2028 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It seems like old times in Iraq. U.N. arms monitors today tried to 
inspect the headquarters of President Saddam Hussein's ruling Baath 
Party,. but were not allowed to do so. Iraq called the inspection 
attempt "provocative." A White House spokesman had a different view 
and warned that the United States is prepared to act if Iraq does 
not cooperate with the U.N. Special Commission. The BBC's Jeremy Cook 
is in Baghdad. Jeremy, what do we know about this latest of many provocations 
today and the response to it? What seems to have happened this time 
around is it's part of a number of inspections which were going on 
both in Baghdad and across the country today. A team of weapons inspectors 
headed out to central Baghdad, where they visited the regional headquarters 
of Saddam Hussein's ruling Baath Party. And when they attempted to 
enter the building, the Iraqis stopped them and said that they couldn't 
do so until they produced some sort of written clarification of exactly 
what their mission was there and what they were looking for. Now, 
after a short conversation among themselves, we were told that the 
U.N. weapons inspectors withdrew from the area altogether. Now, the 
question then becomes whether or not this entails a blocking of the 
weapons inspection team by the Iraqis. The Iraqis say no, it was simply 
a question of clarification. But in recent hours, the U.N. weapons 
inspectors' chief inspector, Richard Butler, has come out very strongly 
and said that the way was blocked, and this was an illegal act and 
against the agreements which the Iraqi government had signed with 
the international community. Well, we have the provocation, as it's 
been termed, and we have the response from the United States so far. 
But it's still words. Any actions expected momentarily or not? People 
are being quite measured. The secretary of state, Madeleine Albright, 
who's in Europe at the moment at a NATO meeting, was not exactly gung 
ho when she was asked about the whole issue. She was a bit more thoughtful. 
But she did bring up once again the issue of sanctions. The Iraqis 
are desperate to have the whole issue of sanctions back on the table, 
and Madeleine Albright said immediately that if they're even thinking 
about that sort of move, then this sort of lack of cooperation is 
not the way to go about it. What about the conditions that the economic 
sanctions have brought on Iraq? The Iraqis are calling it "organized 
genocide." I believe that was one of the terms that was used by the 
foreign minister the other day. Have you seen any evidence of the 
hardship and the starvation that would make you think of it as organized 
genocide? Firsthand, I haven't seen anything which would merit that 
sort of description. But I have to tell you that in recent days and 
weeks, there have been a series of medical symposia here in Baghdad, 
and there we've been speaking to doctors not only from Iraq but all 
across the board, and they say that the sort of malnutrition which 
we ourselves are witnessing leads to a general decline in the health 
of the nation. They point to problems such as infant mortality. They 
say that many more children are suffering from malnutrition and stunting 
that affects not only their physical but also their intellectual growth. 
That sort of thing is something which the people here are not blaming 
on their president, Saddam Hussein, they are blaming fairly and squarely 
on the West. I actually,. as it goes, spent the morning at a feeding 
station just outside of Baghdad. Now, there, the oil for food program 
is providing some basic nutritional requirements for the people, a 
little bit of oil, some flour and some sugar. The problem now is general 
malnutrition, and I don't think that's being denied by anybody who 
visits the country and visits those areas on the ground. Then tell 
us, Jeremy, something about the psychological condition of the Iraqis. 
Here they are, suffering privations of different kinds, and also one 
would imagine the emotional strain of not knowing when or if an attack 
of some kind is likely to be unleashed by the United States. Well, 
a lot of people I speak to around the ministry of information, where 
I spend a lot of my time, and around the city generally, are very 
worried. They're not only worried about the imminent threat, as they 
see it, of air strikes, but also about the ongoing place of Iraq in 
the outside world. And some of them will say privately, Look, we've 
got one man in charge, and this man is guilty of a lot of things. 
But we are not a bad people, and a lot of them feel a great deal of 
resentment at the sort of sanctions we've been speaking about in this 
conversation bring suffering across the board and are not targeted 
solely against the ruling elite. Tariq Aziz, the deputy prime minister, 
has said quite frankly that unless the sanctions against his country 
are lifted, the weapons inspectors will be told to go. And I think 
that is an indication of how things will be proceeding over the next 
days and weeks. Sanctions are the key issue for the Iraqi government. 
They want to get rid of them. The BBC's Jeremy Cook in Baghdad. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>