<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981209.2000.2392 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This Sunday, when voters in Puerto Rico choose among five options 
for the Caribbean island's future status, they will, in all likelihood, 
raise their voices in disunity. At one end of the spectrum lies the 
option of independence, at the other end, statehood. Somewhere in 
between is the status quo, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. For the 
rest of the week, we'll preview the referendum by measuring the mood 
of Puerto Ricans on the island and on the mainland. Today, The World's 
Morris Maximov takes us to San Juan. The plebiscite is imminent, the 
time for deciding the future of the island is here again. But some 
things are more important. Christmas season is in full swing, shopping 
malls in Puerto Rico are mobbed. Trees and decorations are disappearing 
from the shelves, and Christmas parades are all over. This parade 
wound its way from the old part of San Juan, the capital of Puerto 
Rico, and a wonderful affair it was. Quite American in form, beautiful 
girls, pompoms, swirling batons, marching bands,. The girls were in 
Santa outfit, red hats, fake fur, et cetera, but in miniskirts. But 
the tights were flesh colored, except not the color of their flesh. 
The girls' legs look much whiter or grayer than their faces. Meanwhile, 
the marching band played some pretty irresistible danceable tunes. 
The parade ended symbolically on the square near the harbor in the 
shadows of the tall building of Banco Populare de Puerto Rico on one 
side, and two huge U.S. warships on the other side. Puerto Rico here, 
U.S.A. there, side by side, and yet also facing each other. So who 
are these people with their American passports but no rights to vote 
for the president or Congress, speaking Spanish and driving yuppie 
wagons, eating rice and beans one day and burgers the next? What moves 
them, what makes them see the world the way they do? It's a society 
that has its own rationality and its own way of dealing with things. 
But it's a different rationality from American rationality, of a state 
rationality. Fernando Pico, professor of history at the University 
of Puerto Rico. Every society is shaped by its own past, and Puerto 
Rico is no exception. It is one of the oldest settlements in the Western 
Hemisphere. For 400 years, it was ruled by Spain, and for the past 
century, by the United States. In other words, says Professor Pico, 
the government has always been somebody else's affair. I feel that 
a central element in the history of Puerto Ricans is the absence of 
the state. Puerto Rico was in the periphery of the Spanish trade routes. 
The government developed the fortress city of San Juan, but it had 
very little to do with the development of the rest of the island. 
So people learned to do by themselves, and develop their own institutions 
separate from the state. When the Americans took over in 1898, they 
attempted a modernizing agenda, in health, in school, in road construction, 
in many areas. And again, people met these folks with suspicion, you 
know. They accepted what was good, they were very ambiguous attitudes 
towards the rest. The ambiguous nature of Puerto Ricans is there in 
plain view. As you sit in an open air cafe in the middle of old San 
Juan, all around you conflicting cultural signals abound. Students 
are strumming guitars, chatting in Spanish, with English words added 
for emphasis. A huge Coca-Cola truck is parked under an iron street 
light stamped "Madrid." Traffic signs are in Spanish only, but the 
health warnings on cigarettes are only in English. Across the street, 
an establishment called El Masson offers mushrooms. In the middle 
of the square, meringue gets mixed with blues, salsa with rock. Drums 
and coexist quite happily. Puerto Ricans simply pick and choose from 
their past, from the old and new masters, from their neighbors, the 
bits that work for them. From America, they took shopping malls, freedom 
of expression, fast food, the big cars. But shopping malls get painted 
pastel colors, preferably pink. The fast food has unusual spices for 
an American palate. And as for freedom of expression, it is wildly 
free. Where else would the annual AIDS Awareness Day become a party? 
Where else would the slogan "Abstensiones solution," abstention is 
the best solution, be used not by religious conservatives but by a 
group urging citizens to abstain from voting? Where else would a female 
taxi driver wink at you as she drives by in her Chevy? Where else 
are the locals proudly patriotic and also deeply attached to their 
American passports? Yes, we want to eat -- we want to eat three cakes 
at the same time and have them too. Journalist Manny Suarez has been 
observing political and cultural life in Puerto Rico for decades now, 
and he says that it is because of fear that people cannot decide whether 
they want to live in the 51st state or in the commonwealth with special 
status, or even in an independent republic. There's fear all over 
the place. I mean, you have the souls who favor commonwealth status 
putting the boogie man of federal taxes onto your lap, and you have 
the statehooders putting the boogie man of Puerto Rico becoming independent, 
and then becoming like the Dominican Republic, et cetera, et cetera. 
So basically those who are afraid of losing their U.S. citizenship 
and who want the federal voting rights are walking around mumbling, 
"Equality, equality," and support statehood for Puerto Rico. Those 
who are afraid of the imposition of federal taxes, afraid of the culture 
becoming too Americanized, are mumbling, "Dignity, dignity," and support 
commonwealth. The supporters of outright independence have only a 
few romantic followers. And everyone agrees that whatever happens, 
Puerto Rico is special. It is of America but not in America. It is 
also Latin American, Caribe, it is many things at the same time. To 
choose just one side, either the United States or pure Puerto Ricanness, 
would go against the nature of the place, that, as historian Fernando 
Pico says, this culture is socially, historically so many-sided. What 
people don't want is have the status ambiguity sold in a definitive 
way in which all other options are closed. why? Because ambiguity 
is much more useful. People want to have the best of both worlds. 
The outsiders often use a phrase, "confused identity," when describing 
Puerto Rico. I'm not too sure. Many-sided identity, using those words 
that fit at a particular moment, sounds better. People who found a 
careful path into the future in being themselves and belonging to 
others, a difficult trick to manage, and oh, so wonderful to watch! 
For The World, this is Morris Maximov. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>