<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981209.2000.3187 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For our musical closer today, we're going to head north to Nova Scotia, 
specifically to Cape Breton. That's an island. Nova Scotia gets its 
name from the Latin for New Scotland. The World's Marco Werman tells 
us about a Nova Scotian singer who's putting a little bit of old Scotland 
into her music. The Nova Scotia of tourist brochures is a land dotted 
with quaint fishing villages and gentle, soft-spoken inhabitants. 
But Cape Breton singer Mary Jane Lamond is inspired by sounds that 
you wouldn't expect from her home, factories and heavy industry. It 
was a place for me to start. I really was trying to give something 
of the soundscape of Cape Breton and include some more modern things 
as well. Mary Jane Lamond wanted the sound of her new release, "Souesay," 
to reflect the changing social environment in Cape Breton. "Oranche 
Nyon" is an old Cape Breton tune that women used to sing at home when 
they spun wool. Lamond's rendition begins with a soft rhythm set by 
an old spinning jenny. There's a lot of industrial sounds as well, 
which for me was making reference to kind of how modernization and 
industrialization affected Gaelic culture, and particularly where 
my family came from was very close to the steel plant in Sydney and 
the coal mines. And that's what I was thinking about when I heard 
this song. You know, the reason why people weren't singing that spinning 
song is because they're not spinning wool. People started sending 
their wool away to mills to be spun and woven, and so it just made 
sense to me to kind of make that statement. Mary Jane Lamond sings 
in Scottish Gaelic, a language that had virtually died out in Nova 
Scotia until renewed interest brought it back into schools several 
years ago. Lamond says the Nova Scotia government preferred to peddle 
the image of Scotland instead of its culture. There was -- well, they 
call it the tartanizing of Nova Scotia. So they had this whole kind 
of tartan and Highland bagpiper kind of marketing thing for tourism 
going on, but with none of those resources going back into teaching 
the language. And this has been going on since the 1930s. You know, 
it's an unfortunate situation, which, you know, people are trying 
to remedy, and including, you know, people working in government cultural 
affairs. But it'll be a long road if we're going to salvage any of 
this culture for future generations. A trademark of Mary Jane Lamond's 
brand of Cape Breton music is that she makes 300-year-old folk songs 
sound funky. But there are some songs that Lamond won't fuss with. 
Personally, I find that that's a downfall sometimes, when people modernize 
Celtic music or whatever, it kind of loses some of its guts. Like, 
some of the stuff that doesn't sound so pretty to the ear but is really, 
like, what we would say, close to the floor. And that's, I think, 
what's important to me to include the song on this record so that 
people would know where I'm coming from. And for more adventurous 
listeners, it may be just as important to know where Mary Jane Lamond 
is going. For The World, this is Marco Werman. The music of Cape Breton 
singer Mary Jane Lamond, very catchy, brings this edition of the program 
to a close. Check us out on line at www.theworld.org, and tune in 
again tomorrow for another spin of The World. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>