<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981209.2000.2998 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Tony Kahn. For a number of days here in Britain, 
the death has been predicted of Barry Horne. If you haven't heard 
of him, don't worry. Until recently, few British people would have 
been able to place a name to the face. The World'S Eddie Mayer has 
written us another letter from London. Barry Horne was jailed two 
years ago for a series of arson attacks on pharmacies. He's a supporter 
of animal rights, but this is where the intricacies of the English 
language come into play. To his supporters, he's an animal rights 
activist. To others, he's an animal rights extremist. No doubt to 
the people who suffered from his fire bombings, he's a terrorist. 
But Barry Horne believes with a passion the real terror is that being 
conducted by scientists in laboratories on animals. And such is his 
passion, for the last 65 days, he's been refusing food and has vowed 
to starve himself to death. He believes the government has reneged 
on an election promise to hold a formal inquiry into animal testing. 
And he intends to kill himself by fasting until it changes its mind. 
He's now in the hospital. His eight has dropped by half. He's gone 
deaf in one ear, lost his sight in one eye, and his internal organs 
are suffering serious, probably irreversible, damage. The government 
finds itself in an awkward position. It says it can't give in to this 
kind of threat, yet it's aware that if Barry Horne dies as a result 
of this hunger strike, his supporters have vowed to kill 10 top scientists 
who make a living from experimenting on animals. Barry Horne has made 
a will and arranged for a pagan funeral devoid of any religious trappings. 
The media coverage of the story has so far centered on Barry Horne's 
past, his illness, and the views of the scientists who are at pains 
to stress they care as much about alleviating pain as any animal rights 
protester. But I think there's something missing from the coverage. 
You will have your own views on the rights and wrongs of animal experiments, 
and so do I. But consider for a moment what Barry Horne is doing. 
On one level, it's almost laughable that someone should be prepared 
to die over an allegedly broken election promise. How many of us would 
be left if we all did that? On another, much more important level, 
here is a man, however flawed, who cares so deeply about something 
he's willing to die for the cause. How many causes are left that I'd 
be prepared to die for? What about you? Until next time, yours truly, 
Eddie Mayer. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>