<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981230.1830.0217 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's been clear for days that the president will face at least the 
beginning of a trial in the Senate, the question has been how long 
will that trial last and would the Senate allow a vote on censure? 
Well, tonight ABC's Linda Douglass has late word of a possible deal. 
What do you know? Sources are telling ABC News that republican and 
democratic Senate leaders are tonight, shopping around a proposal 
to their members which would call for a very short trial in the Senate, 
as short as four days, that would be follow the by a vote on each 
of the articles of impeachment to see if those articles rise to the 
level of a high crime and misdemeanor. If those votes fail to garner 
a two-thirds vote, there would then be a vote on censure. Now, such 
a schedule is likely to outrage conservatives who are demanding a 
Full-blown trial. The latest republican senator to call for a full 
trial of the president is ohio's Mike DeWine. He flew back to Washington 
today to send a message to his colleagues that they should not be 
looking for an easy way out. I will vote against censure under any 
circumstances. The Senate should either convict or acquit the president 
and nothing else. GOP sources say some conservative senators are calling 
their colleagues to say, forget about censure. The Senate should go 
through a trial, no matter how long it takes, and vote on Mr. Clinton's 
guilt or innocence. One reason, they argue, is while there are not 
enough votes in the Senate to convict the president now, a trial could 
take on a life of its own. After hearing the arguments and evidence, 
some senators might change their minds. That is why the house prosecutors, 
known as the managers, want to call witnesses. The house members that 
were meeting on yesterday, all believed at that time and still do 
that some presentation of witnesses is needed. But that issue has 
republicans fighting among themselves, Senate majority leader Trent 
Lott says he wants a quick trial with no witnesses. An idea endorsed 
by democrats and some republicans. But DeWine argued today the house 
managers should be given more power. We have to give defense to the 
managers. They have to get their evidence on. And tonight the lead 
house manager, that is Henry Hyde, the chairman of the house Judiciary 
committee, who spear headed the impeachment effort in the house and 
through the yk yk sent a letter to the Senate majority leader Trent 
Lott urging him against a hasty trial. That's one of the many things 
the senators will have to consider when they make some very important 
decisions. They'll return from holiday next week, just days before 
the trial is scheduled to begin. All right. Linda, thanks very much. 
Linda Douglass on Capitol Hill tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>