<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981230.1830.1117 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to take "A closer look" -- or maybe we should say lend 
"A closer ear" to Mars tonight. The red planet has always held a unique 
position in our imagination. We've sent robot spacecraft to photograph 
it, little rovers to analyze it. But this Sunday, NASA is expected 
to launch the Mars polar lander, scheduled to arrive on Mars sometime 
next December. And, as ABC's Ned Potter reports, when it gets there, 
we should be able to do something never done on Mars before. Listen. 
If you were a Martian and you sent a ship to earth with a Microphone 
on board, what do you think you'd hear? Perhaps this -- or this -- 
or this, depending on where you landed. But what if you were an earthling 
and you wondered what things sound like on Mars? That's why engineers 
have put a tiny microphone on the Mars polar lander. Everyone is interested 
in it, it's something that almost anyone can relate to. And it's such 
a neat idea. You just can't believe it hasn't been done before. What 
will the microphone hear? Most likely wind or sand blowing against 
it, but maybe something nobody expected. Scientists do say it will 
sound very different from earth. Here, there's a dense atmosphere 
to carry sounds. But on Mars, you would probably sound something like 
this, because the air is only 1% as thick. Scientists grant we may 
not learn a lot from the Mike, but it's making the trip because it's 
cool. The mission's main purpose is to make a first-ever landing on 
the edge of mars' south polar cap, then listen, look and dig, for 
signs of water on that bone-dry planet. The history of water is the 
big question. On earth, wherever you have water, you have life. Nobody 
expects to find either right on the Martian surface, which has been 
sterilized from eons by the ultraviolet Rays of the sun. But if you 
look from orbit, it's obvious that Mars has channels and canyons, 
no doubt carved long ago by flowing water. A lot of that water is 
now trapped in the polar caps, and there could be more frozen underground. 
So the lander will dig to look for it. It may be just a few centimeters 
beneath the surface. Separately, the ship carries two tiny probes 
designed not to land but to crash into the surface. That's how they 
were tested. The impact should send them several feet into the ground, 
and if they survive, they'll test for water, too. We have ignition 
and we have liftoff. a ship to relay their signals was launched three 
weeks ago, sending this view as it raced off toward Mars. NASA plans 
to assault Mars with a fleet of ships over the next decade, eventually 
returning samples of Martian soil. But it may still be a long time 
before astronauts make the trip, which brings us back to that little 
microphone. It's going to be a unique opportunity for people to really 
understand, in a Way that they could not before, what it's like to 
be on the surface of another planet. So when the ship reaches Mars 
next December 3rd, turn up the volume. Ned Potter, ABC News, New York. 
That sound technology, by the way, is pretty much the same used in 
hearing aIDS here on earth. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>