<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981230.0164 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yemen was criticized on Wednesday after its troops stormed the hideout 
of Islamic extremist kidnappers holding 16 Western hostages. Four 
of the hostages were killed. Two other hostages were wounded during 
the siege near the southern town of Mawdiyah, about 175 miles (280 
kilometers) south of the capital, San`a. The remaining 10 hostages 
were freed unharmed. Three kidnappers died. Yemen's Interior Ministry 
blamed the kidnappers for the deaths of the three Britons killed instantly 
and for the death of an Australian who died later in a hospital. It 
said security forces intervened after the kidnappers began killing 
the hostages. ``They proceeded in killing the captives after refusing 
any attempts at negotiations, which led security forces to storm the 
area to prevent further bloodshed and ensure the safe release of the 
rest of the hostages,'' a ministry statement said. But British newspapers 
accused the Yemeni authorities of premature intervention in the case. 
The Daily Mail asked on the front page, ``Did your tourists really 
need to die?'' British Ambassador Vic Henderson reportedly had pleaded 
with the San`a government to do nothing ``that in any way could jeopardize 
the safety of the hostages.'' In San`a, Yemenis told journalists they 
were surprised the government had intervened so quickly when it usually 
negotiated for several days, if not weeks, in hostage situations, 
which are frequent in Yemen. A London-based Islamic human rights group 
on Tuesday said it had contacted the kidnappers the night before and 
received assurances they would not harm the hostages. ``We hold the 
Yemeni government responsible for the deaths. The way the authorities 
handled the situation was barbaric and irresponsible,'' said a spokesman 
for the Islamic Observation Center. Kidnappings of foreigners occur 
often in Yemen, large parts of which are run by lawless tribes, but 
until now the hostages usually have been treated well and released 
unharmed. But this was the first time an abduction was carried out 
by Islamic extremists. Security officials said the kidnappers belong 
to Islamic Jihad, many of whose leaders fought Russian troops in Afghanistan. 
The group is believed to have about 200 members. The 16 tourists, 
12 Britons, two Americans and two Australians, were kidnapped on Monday 
near Mawdiyah. In London, the Foreign Office confirmed that three 
Britons _ Ruth Williamson, Margaret Whitehouse and Peter Rowe _ were 
killed, but did not provide their ages or hometowns. The Australian 
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said the fourth victim was 
a 35-year-old man from Sydney whose name would not be released until 
next of kin had been informed. The tourists wounded in the clash were 
an American woman and a British woman. The surviving hostages were 
taken to a hotel in Aden, where they were being helped by British 
and American volunteers, said David Pearce, a British Embassy official 
in San`a. ``They are obviously in a state of severe shock, and I mean 
severe shock,'' Pearce told the British news agency Press Association. 
``They are uninjured but obviously very tired, very stunned and in 
need of a good meal, a good rest and someone to talk to. They have 
been through an awful experience.'' After the shootout, security forces 
detained scores of suspected Islamic extremists, said the officials, 
who spoke on condition of anonymity. At least three of the kidnappers 
were captured alive, the Interior Ministry said. It said one of the 
kidnappers killed was an unidentified Egyptian. The kidnapping began 
Monday when the tourists' convoy of five vehicles was ambushed by 
men who opened fire on their police escorts. The kidnappers threatened 
to kill the tourists if the police did not back off, Yemeni security 
officials said. The kidnappers demanded the release of their leader, 
Saleh Haidara al-Atwi, who was detained two weeks ago in a government 
crackdown on Islamic vigilantes who had been enforcing strict Islamic 
rules in southern Yemen, security officials said. The kidnappers also 
wanted the release of another leader, the officials said. They did 
not identify him. Yemen said the governor of Abyan province, Ahmad 
Ali Mohsen, was negotiating with leaders of the Al-Fadl tribe, to 
which the kidnappers belong, before the shootout occurred. Tribesmen 
usually kidnapped foreigners to pressure the government into providing 
them with new roads, water or clinics. Four Germans are being held 
by a tribe in northeast Yemen. The kidnappers are demanding more schools, 
hospitals and telephone lines in their area. German diplomats have 
appealed to the Yemeni authorities not to attempt to rescue the four 
German hostages being held by a tribe in a different part of the country, 
Yemeni officials said Wednesday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>