<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981230.0480 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two Khmer Rouge leaders relaxed at a luxury hotel Wednesday while 
Cambodia's king and prime minister disagreed over granting them amnesty 
for their roles in the deaths of as many as 2 million people. King 
Norodom Sihanouk, 76, said he would refuse amnesty for Khieu Samphan 
and Nuon Chea, both members of the inner circle of the notorious Khmer 
Rouge leader Pol Pot, who died in April of a heart attack. The refusal 
puts Sihanouk on a collision course with Prime Minister Hun Sen, who 
struck a deal with the pair allowing them to defect to his government 
with assurances they would not be put on trial. The king, receiving 
treatment for several ailments in Beijing, stated in his palace bulletin 
that he feels the majority of Cambodians do not support a pardon. 
``I announce to this majority that I respect them and will not renew 
my power of amnesty for major Khmer Rouge criminals,'' Sihanouk said. 
``I leave all the responsibility to Hun Sen of handling this unfortunate 
and dramatic affair of pardons accorded to the Khmer Rouge.'' Hun 
Sen was silent on the issue Wednesday, but he is Cambodia's most powerful 
man. If he wants to pardon the pair _ which he claims is needed to 
prevent Cambodia sliding back toward civil war _ he can easily do 
so through the pliant court system. Without the popular king's approval, 
however, the deal will lack legitimacy in the eyes of many countries 
and Cambodians. Sihanouk, who lost a score of family members under 
the Khmer Rouge regime, said the world had a ``perfect right'' to 
bring the pair before an international tribunal to face justice for 
crimes against humanity. Monsignor Emile Destombes, Roman Catholic 
bishop of Phnom Penh, was quoted by Fides, a Vatican news agency, 
as supporting such a tribunal. ``The church works for reconciliation, 
but this must be based on truth, justice and the recognition of responsibility 
by those who have committee wrongdoing,'' Destombes said. Sihanouk 
bowed to pressure from his government in 1996 to grant amnesty to 
another Khmer Rouge leader, Ieng Sary, who in exchange broke the back 
of the rebel group by leading thousands of guerrillas out of a festering 
civil war. But with the Khmer Rouge now all but extinct, many wonder 
why Hun Sen is pushing amnesty again. Speculation has always run high 
that as a former Khmer Rouge field officer before fleeing purges in 
1977, he wants to protect his own past. Those who have studied evidence 
against the Khmer Rouge, however, say Hun Sen is relatively clean. 
But pressure is growing to hold someone accountable for the Khmer 
Rouge atrocities. The Khmer Rouge won a civil war in 1975 and turned 
the country into a slave labor camp. One person in five perished of 
overwork, starvation, disease and systematic executions. They were 
ousted by a Vietnamese invasion in 1979. After years of living in 
guerrilla camps in the jungles along the Thai-Cambodian border, Khieu 
Samphan and Nuon Chea are enjoying dlrs 240-a-night hotel suites since 
coming to the capital to cement their deal Tuesday. Ieng Sary is with 
them. Their families have toured the temples and palaces of a capital 
that never fully recovered after being emptied at gunpoint in 1975, 
when the Khmer Rouge forced Cambodians into agricultural collectives. 
The rebel leaders and their families plan visits to the historic Angkor 
temple complex, the seaside resort of Sihanoukville in the south, 
and their home provinces. Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea told a news 
conference Tuesday they were ``very sorry'' for the Khmer Rouge terror 
but refused to accept personal responsibility. Khieu Samphan said: 
``Let bygones be bygones.'' Eam Chan, 55, one of the handful of survivors 
from the infamous Tuol Sleng torture center where perhaps 20,000 people 
were brutalized before being executed outside the capital, said the 
apology can't erase his suffering. Accused of being a U.S. spy, Eam 
Chan was tortured daily by electroshock and asphyxiation. A favorite 
technique was to hold a wet rag over his face and drip water on it, 
suffocating him. ``The Cambodian people cannot forget that so easily,'' 
Eam Chan said. ``As a victim, my mind cannot be at rest without seeing 
the prosecution of these people, because the suffering was indescribable.'' 
Khieu Samphan met Boutros Boutros-Ghali, former United Nations secretary 
general, who is in Cambodia to promote the French language as head 
of the International Francophone Organization. Boutros-Ghali told 
a news conference that since the United Nations has not established 
an international tribunal, Cambodia's decision would have to prevail 
and the international community respect it. U.N. legal experts were 
dispatched by the present secretary-general, Kofi Annan, to Cambodia 
recently to assess the possibility of creating such a tribunal. Their 
report is due in a few weeks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>