<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981230.0928 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With full-scale war returning to Angola and the downing of a U.N.-chartered 
plane there, the United Nations must soon decide whether it's safe 
to keep observers in the former Portuguese colony. A U.N. pullout 
_ which is near complete in another revived African war zone, Sierra 
Leone _ could signal to Angola that the United Nations has at least 
temporarily given up on implementing the 1994 peace accord it brokered 
to end Angola's 20-year civil war. Secretary-General Kofi Annan has 
until Jan. 15 to decide on options, and U.N. diplomats say he may 
recommend the Security Council consider withdrawing the 1,016 troops 
of the U.N. Observer Mission in Angola, known as MONUA. U.N. officials 
and the council frequently have to make such decisions, weighing the 
benefits of staying in war zones to help civilians when they most 
need it against the potential risks to U.N. personnel. For the past 
four months, there has been no U.N. international presence in Afghanistan 
because of security concerns. But in Angola, where the United Nations 
has invested a decade of peacekeeping and millions of dollars to end 
a onetime Cold War conflict, the stakes of a pullout are especially 
high. ``Our conviction is after all these years, MONUA cannot withdraw 
completely and leave the Angolans to themselves,'' Portugal's U.N. 
ambassador Antonio Monteiro said in an interview. ``I think MONUA 
shall be there and trying in every occasion to help and to show the 
Angolans that war leads nowhere.'' Security concerns, however, are 
increasing daily: in addition to Saturday's crash of the U.N.-chartered 
cargo plane with 14 people on board, rebels launched an hour-long 
artillery bombardment Wednesday against Huambo, the country's second-largest 
city and a base for U.N. and aid agency staff. Already, the International 
Committee of the Red Cross _ usually among the last to leave _ has 
relocated most of its international staff to the capital Luanda. ``You 
can only have peacekeeping when you have peace to keep,'' noted U.N. 
spokesman Manoel de Almeida E Silva, echoing a phrase familiar in 
U.N. halls. The United Nations first sent peacekeepers to Angola in 
1989 to monitor the withdrawal of Cuban soldiers backing the government 
in the civil war that erupted soon after Angola gained its independence 
from Portugal in 1975. A 34-nation U.N. observer team replaced the 
peacekeepers in July 1997 to implement of the 1994 U.N.-mediated peace 
accord that ended the war. Security Council members Portugal, the 
United States and Russia were designated to oversee the progress. 
Over the past few months, however, the accord has disintegrated as 
fighting resumed. The opposition UNITA movement has violated U.N. 
demands by refusing to disarm and hand over land it controls. The 
government, meanwhile, has severed all contact with UNITA leader Jonas 
Savimbi and threatened to expel U.N. personnel if they meet with him. 
Annan first threatened a withdrawal in September, warning in a report 
to the Security Council that the U.N. mission might have to close 
down by February if both sides didn't make progress on the peace process. 
The current mandate of the force expires Feb. 26, and already the 
government has indicated it doesn't want observers in Angola beyond 
then, U.N. diplomats said, speaking on condition of anonymity. Some 
diplomats say the government wants the United Nations to leave because 
it thinks it can finally crush UNITA militarily and has no need for 
U.N. mediation to form a joint government with Savimbi. With that 
in mind, many would argue that now is precisely the time to remain 
engaged in Angola to halt the spread of fighting and care for its 
victims. ``We are willing. The question is are we able,'' said the 
Red Cross' Walter Fullemann. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>