<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981230.0187 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With a dozen churches in ruins, Christian congregations in western 
India are canceling New Year prayers this year, fearful of provoking 
more violence from radical Hindus on an anti-missionary crusade. In 
the last five days, Hindu and Christian villages in the dry hills 
of Gujarat have become increasingly antagonistic toward one another. 
The troubles also are rebounding against the governing Hindu nationalist 
Bharatiya Janata Party, which is facing demands to protect the Christian 
minority from its affiliated Hindu parties. Its hard core supporters 
say missionaries are bribing poor Hindus _sometimes by offering them 
jobs_to become Christian. The missionaries deny this. In the latest 
incidents, two Christian prayer halls in southern Gujarat were razed 
Tuesday. Since Friday, 17 churches, prayer halls or Christian schools 
have been attacked by mobs wielding axes, iron bars, hammers and stones. 
In Mulchand, a village of just 500 people, gold and silver Christmas 
tinsel hangs from the charred mud-tiled roof of the Protestant church. 
Flags of saffron, an auspicious color in Hinduism, fly from many of 
the thatched huts where Hindus live. ``We usually have a big New Year 
service just like the Christmas service. This year we're afraid to 
pray publicly,'' said Avinash Prabhakar. About one-fourth of the people 
are Christians in Mulchand, a farming village 130 kilometers (80 miles) 
from the nearest city, Surat. Harish Armali, a Hindu, said the damage 
to Mulchand is deep and permanent. ``There will be no peace now. We 
cannot be together after this, our ties are severed,'' said Armali, 
who said Christian schools required pupils to read from the Bible. 
The small chapel in nearby Jamalpada was one of the first sanctuaries 
stormed. Bamboo poles prop up wooden beams, and smashed tiles lie 
on the ground. The only wall left standing is adorned with a paper 
crucifix _ once the backdrop of the altar. Hansa Parmar, 10, saw a 
mob hurling stones at an empty Christian boarding school. ``I first 
thought it was raining stones. Then I got very scared of their shouting. 
Why do they want to chase us away?'' The trouble began Christmas Day 
when Hindus attending a rally hurled insults at Christian women returning 
from a prayer meeting in the town of Ahwa. Stones began flying in 
both directions. An anti-missionary call was taken up at a convention 
of the extremist Vishwa Hindu Parishad. On Sunday, Ashok Singhal, 
leader of the VHP which stands for World Hindu Council, accused missionaries 
of converting gullible, illiterate tribespeople with promises of jobs 
or financial gain. Fear of missionaries is deeply embedded in India, 
and anti-missionary actions flare up periodically. The conversion 
of Hindus is seen as a continuing legacy of British colonial rule. 
At the same time, competition is stiff for places in private ``convent 
schools,'' which teach in English and are considered superior to government 
schools. Private Christian schools are normally open to anyone who 
can pay the relatively high fees and does not object to the Christian 
orientation, which may include regular prayers and classes in ethics. 
While convent schools are coveted by the urban elite, missionaries 
are most active among rural indigenous tribes and low caste Hindus. 
Christians are 2.5 percent of India's population of nearly 1 billion. 
Some priests, speaking on condition on anonymity, said many conversions 
do take place in remote villages, but they denied resorting to bribes 
or inducements. In Mulchand, Nanubhai Zhugrabhoy said some people 
turned to Christianity after they were cured of debilitating diseases, 
from tuberculosis to alcoholism. ``I am the only Christian from a 
Hindu family. When I was ill I came to the church and found help. 
Then I took on this religion.'' Preetesh Rangdeve, 20, whose father 
converted to Christianity years ago, said missionaries had helped 
low caste Hindus with education and employment. ``Now the people who 
neglected villagers for years are telling them to come back and become 
Hindus,'' he said. Economic and social interests are also at stake, 
because upper caste Hindus fear they will lose the advantage they 
have over the illiterate lower castes, say some missionaries. ``They 
are not attacking us for our religion. They are against us because 
we educated the lower castes. This is a caste war,'' said the Rev. 
Oscar Barreto, a Roman Catholic priest. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>