<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981230.2130.0005 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
"CNN Headline News." I'm Kathleen Kennedy, in for Lynne Russell. U.S. 
officials say American and British planes are safe and sound after 
a missile exchange with Iraq today. But Iraq claims it downed a western 
plane. It's the second incident in a no-fly zone this week. Jamie 
McIntyre has more. Two days after the U.S. struck a missile battery 
which fired on planes patrolling Iraq's northern no-fly zone, the 
U.S. was again provoked into a similar attack against three targets 
in the south. This time, a pair of British tornado fighters on morning 
patrol spotted a half dozen or more surface-to-air missiles fired 
at them from near tahlil, the site of a major air defense headquarters 
building bombed by the U.S. just two weeks ago. The Pentagon says 
in response, four U.S. F-16s dropped 500-pound smart bombs, while 
another F-16 and an ea-6b provided cover with a pair of radar-seeking 
missiles. The Pentagon claims success. We're confident that our munitions 
are accurate and we're confident that we offered the proper response 
to this unprovoked attack. Pentagon analysts say Iraq appears to be 
trying its hardest to shoot down an allied plane. Firing many sa-6 
missiles at once and using optical targeting instead of radars to 
keep cockpit alarms from warning allied pilots in time. In addition, 
intelligence sources say Iraq continues to move its missiles around 
in an effort to keep U.S. and British pilots in the dark about where 
the dangerous missiles may lurk. If they have lack of information 
on certain areas, they could fly into what's known as a "S.A.M. trap" 
where they might follow an Iraqi helicopter or aircraft that would 
pull them into range of Ne of the sa-6 missiles. It was an sa-6 missile 
in a similar strategy that the Bosnian Serbs used to shoot down air 
force captain Scott O'Grady over Bosnia in 1995. O'Grady's F-16 was 
tracked on a distant radar and the targeting information was fed to 
a missile launcher underneath him. The targeting radar was only turned 
on at the last minute, giving O'Grady no time to take evasive action. 
U.S. commanders say the risk to pilots is real but minimal given the 
high-tech weaponry the allies have to defeat the Iraqi air defenses. 
Pentagon officials expect the confrontations to continue so long as 
Iraqi President Saddam Hussein thinks they are of some propaganda 
value and doesn't mind losing a few missile launchers and troops. 
Jamie McIntyre, CNN, the Pentagon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>