<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981230.1600.0094 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The no-fly zones over Iraq were established by the allies at the end 
of the gulf war. Jonathan Mann has details. After Iraq's defeat in 
the gulf war, Kurdish opposition groups in the north of the country 
decided to seize on the opportunity presented by a Weakened military. 
Once quarrelling Kurdish groups joined forces to take over towns left 
virtually undefended by Baghdad. But Saddam Hussein responded with 
surprising force, able to Muster still intact elements of the republican 
guard. And to use helicopter gunships, with deadly results. As scenes 
of thousands of Kurdish refugees began filtering out of Iraq, the 
United States, Britain, and France responded. In April of 1991, they 
established "operation northern watch," banning flights above the 
36th parallel. And in August 1992, "operation southern watch" went 
into affect below the 32nd parallel, protecting rebel Shiite Muslims, 
also under attack from baghdad. That zone was expanded to the 33rd 
parallel in 1996 after provocative moves by Iraqi air defense forces. 
France, though, pulled out of northern watch that year, and ended 
its southern watch patrols this month, after the U.S. and British 
attacks against Iraq. Iraq has never recognized the legitimacy of 
either zone, saying there were no U.N. resolutions to back them up. 
British and American officials say resolutions 678, 687 and 688 allow 
them to use all necessary means to protect Iraqi opposition groups. 
So what they're left with now is a piecemeal, patchwork, sort of, 
air-defense capability, and the systems that they probably have left 
are mobile systems that we couldn't target, 'cause we didn't know 
exactly where they were, and systems that they haven't been using 
and haven't been radiating with. There have been challenges in the 
past to the no-fly zones. In December 1992, American planes shot down 
an Iraqi fighter in the south. And in 1993, Iraqi anti-aircraft guns 
fired on four U.S. planes in the north. Despite a series of allied 
efforts, including the nationwide attacks on iraq this month, Baghdad 
has the potential to bring the high-tech fighters down. The mission 
is also costly, over $500 million a year for U.S. participation alone. 
But it now serves more than humanitarian roles. By allowing London 
and Washington to keep a close eye on Iraqi troop movements. That's 
one reason why Iraq has presented its biggest challenges this week. 
And one reason why neither side looks ready to back down. Jonathan 
Mann, "Headline News." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>