<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981230.1830.0498 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the 15th year, the president and Mrs. Clinton are attending the 
Hilton head, South Carolina, gathering called "renaissance weekend," 
a mostly democratic crowd of thinkers and notables. However, the president's 
fate at his upcoming Senate trial is very much in play while he's 
away. From the White House tonight, NBC's Claire Shipman with the 
latest. Brian there's still substantial uncertainty about how this 
might work and what the outcome may be. There's a lot of bickering 
among Senate republicans. Henry Hyde sent this letter to Senate majority 
leader Trent Lott complaining that the senators are acting too hastily 
and preparing for a Short, streamlined trial. As President Clinton 
escapes the chilly winds of Washington for the warmer breezes of South 
Carolina, his staff is anxiously looking for signals from Capitol 
Hill about the shape and scope of the upcoming Senate trial. One republican 
senator today joined some of his colleagues in denouncing any plans 
for a censure deal. The Senate should either acquit or convict the 
president and nothing else. But NBC news has learned that a group 
of conservative house republicans are poised to announce their support 
for censure. Worried that since it appears there aren't the necessary 
votes to convict him, the president might escape without punishment. 
Meanwhile, a proposal by Senate majority leader Trent Lott for a two-week 
trial with no witnesses has angered the house republicans who will 
act as prosecutors. They're already lobbying Senate allies for more 
time, and the right to call witnesses such as Monica Lewinsky. NBC 
news has learned that a new proposal is gaining momentum and could 
be part of lot. It's plan. It's a day or two for the senators to ask 
questions and the Senate would call for an early vote on whether the 
charges themselves, if proven, meet the standard for impeachment. 
If those early votes failed, the Senate could move directly to censure. 
If they passed, or came close, the Senate could move to a full-blown 
trial. Now, the White House, not surprisingly, would like to wrap 
this up very quickly, even before the president makes the trip to 
Capitol Hill on january 19th for the state of the union address. White 
House and democrat sources tell us if the trial is still going on, 
but it's only a mat irof a week, that address could be postponed. 
Brian? White House correspondent, Claire Shipman, on the White House 
lawn tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>