<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981230.1830.0912 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news in depth. Tonight, fear of the new millennium. As Americans 
prepare to ring in the last year of the 20th century, there are some 
who are looking past 1999, 366 days past it to be exact. For a growing 
number of people, the year 2000 is not a milestone to be celebrated. 
Instead, it is a marker of impending chaos or even, for some, approaching 
doom. NBC's Pete Williams tonight looks at this millennium phenomenon, 
"in depth." At their home in suburban Washington, Sally and Ray strockbine 
practice cooking on a wood stove -- a rehearsal for what they and 
a growing number of Americans worry will be a time of widespread shortages 
when the year 2000 arrives. They want to be prepared. We have some 
more over here. Wide variety of things, because, of course, you don't 
just want to eat beans. As computer Con sumtants they fear a disaster, 
as the computers crash unable to recognize the year 2000 date. I'm 
treating this like any disaster, except we know this is to come. And 
I think everybody should have the supplies on hand and should buy 
them now. a cottage industry has even sprouted up with trade shows 
featuring survival gear from air-tight food canisters to gas masks. 
But more radical survivalist groups fear something more sinister. 
They call the crisis, "the end of the world as we know it," a phrase 
used so widely, it has now turned into a popular acronym, pronounced, 
"Tee-oh-tah-Wah-kee," a term now buzzing around the computer Internet 
on sites warning of chaos in the year 2000. But could the fear turn 
violent? Some militia groups now worry that the U.S. government, maybe 
aided by foreign powers, could use a technological disruption as an 
excuse to assert more power. China military, U.S. military, Russian, 
British, et cetera, are all working together as it is. So it may turn 
out to be them against us. In other words, military, corporate powers 
against we the people. And researchers who track radical hate groups 
see another dimension -- a possibility that some white supremacists 
view the approaching millennium as a call to arms. They really do 
fear that good Americans will be crushed by some kind of massive world 
conspiracy, or that it provides them with an opening to create a revolution. 
Other groups fear the coming millennium for far different reasons. 
Apocalyptic predictions of judgment day on earth based on the Bible's 
book of revelations and its prophecy of a thousand-year reign of Christ 
preceded by global rule by the antichrist. Words, scholars say, that 
many religious groups take very seriously. It's this period of great 
tribulation that many people believe will precede the millennium that 
is a source, I think, of uneasiness and apprehension. Government and 
industry are spending billions to head off any widespread computer 
failures, and so far, groups predicting the apocalypse remain small 
and scattered. Officials say they know of no particular plans of violence 
when the year 200 O arrives, but will soon begin a nationwide survey, 
looking for signs of approaching trouble. Pete Williams, NBC news, 
Washington. One nor note about the millennium computer bug, a recent 
survey in the business world finds that over half of them, 56%, do 
not think it will be fixed in time. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>