<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981230.1830.0193 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While this evening its the cold that's making news, we have confirmation 
of what a lot of Americans already knew or at least suspected. This 
year was a warm one, in fact, one for the record books. NBC's Robert 
Hager has our report. 1998 worldwide, the warmest year ever recorded. 
And the record keeping goes back 138 years. Stanford's Steven Schneider 
-- We've broken it by a lot. This is really smashing the record in 
1998. And some say they can tell from dead coral around the world, 
80% off Australia, 90% off Indonesia, and tell from examination of 
tree rings, and cores of ice accumulated over the ages, all indicators 
of past temperatures, that the record-breaking is even more dramatic. 
British researcher, Phillip Jones -- We believe it's not only the 
warmest year of this century, but it's also the warmest year of the 
entire millennium. As for the U.S., three-quarters of the nation, 
much warmer than normal in 1998. Record-breaking warmth in the northeast 
and some of the midwest. And searing images -- drought in Texas, wildfires 
in Florida. And last winter, warmth that turns what should have been 
a blizzard of snow into a terrifying ice storm in New England. From 
the perspective of the whole planet and over the perspective of centuries, 
that's really quite a hammering. Why so warm? Most scientists believe 
man-made pollution, carbon dioxide, plays a role, trapping heat in 
the atmosphere like a Greenhouse. But the world depends on carbon 
dioxide, which comes from burning fuels that run our factories, cars 
and just about everything we need. And, it may be too late anyway. 
I don't believe that on the scale of our lifetimes, it's really a 
Reversible phenomenon. It's a phenomenon that we can slow down, and 
to some extent mitigate the impact of. But so far, carbon dioxide 
is still increasing and the warming is not slowing down. It's speeding 
up. Compared to the last 1,000 years, the rising temperatures in the 
last three or four decades is the most dramatic rise that we've seen. 
It's possible 1999 may bring brief relief. The temporary cooling of 
pacific waters, called La Nina, could interrupt the record breaking. 
But after that, most see a quick return to warming. We would expect 
overall, a lot more high temperature records to be set as we go on 
into the future. Could mean worse droughts. And as the heat saturates 
the air with moisture, worse storms as well. And perhaps several degrees 
warmer over the next 50 years. Several degrees gets out of the precedent 
for the evolution of human civilization. a sobering forecast, not 
only for the new year, but for the next millennium as well. Robert 
Hager, NBC news. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>