<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0303 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rather than resolving anything, the bombing of Iraq this month has 
raised new uncertainties not only about Iraq itself but also about 
how the West will deal with it in the months and years ahead. By deciding 
to proceed with the bombing campaign despite the lack of anything 
remotely resembling the broad coalition assembled for the Persian 
Gulf War in 1991, the United States and Britain sent a message of 
power that resounded across the Middle East to the Balkans and beyond. 
But because the bombing left President Saddam Hussein as defiant as 
ever, it left many questions unanswered. Chief among them is what 
the United States and Britain, its only true ally in the operation, 
can do next. There is clearly no appetite in either country for a 
major ground attack or sustained bombing of Iraq, the only military 
campaigns that might actually drive Saddam from power. And given his 
announced refusal to allow United Nations weapons inspectors back 
into the country, there seems no way to monitor closely his efforts 
to develop nuclear, biological and chemical weapons. Although Saddam 
has few friends in the world, there is growing anger in Arab countries 
at the devastating effects of U.N. sanctions on Iraq. This anger is 
beginning to spread to Europe and elsewhere. Saddam may hope to use 
it to portray himself as a victim rather than perpetrator. Every time 
the United States bombs Iraq, it becomes easier for Saddam to play 
that role. And with his new acts of defiance, including firing missiles 
at U.S. planes patrolling his skies, he seems to be taunting the United 
States to bomb again. This strategy may be paying off. Saddam recognizes 
that there are limits to what the United States and Britain are willing 
to do to keep him, as Prime Minister Tony Blair put it, ``in his cage.'' 
He is counting on international disapproval of air strikes, plus growing 
distaste for the sanctions, to tilt the political balance in his favor. 
Saddam, in short, seems to have taken control of this confrontation, 
forcing the Americans and British to react to situations he creates. 
They face the prospect of bombing Iraq every few months for an indefinite 
period, never dealing a knockout blow and never knowing when Saddam 
will use or threaten to use the prohibited weapons that he is said 
to be secretly developing. Rather than planning for a post-Saddam 
period, some diplomats in Baghdad are now wondering if Saddam will 
be a thorn in the U.S. side for years to come. ``Saddam's military 
infrastructure has been damaged, but not his command and control mechanism,'' 
said an envoy from a NATO country. ``Clinton had to attack because 
if he didn't, American credibility would have been destroyed. ``But 
as far as the ultimate goal of this whole effort, which is to force 
political change in Iraq, it's hard to see any progress at all. Nothing 
has changed, and no one seems to know where we go from here.'' Most 
of Baghdad's power elite, especially leaders of the ruling clans, 
are on the winning side of an odd political equation. They are Sunni 
Muslims, part of the group that controls the country even though they 
make up only about 30 percent of the population. They know that any 
rebellion against Saddam might well propel the majority Shiite Muslim 
population to power. That fact is one of two fundamental political 
realities there. The other is that Iraq sits atop 10 percent of the 
world's oil _ more than any country in the world except Saudi Arabia 
_ more than the United States, Mexico and Canada combined. Foreigners 
who live in Baghdad say that given these two realities, there is little 
prospect that sanctions and limited bombing will cause Iraqi military 
commanders or clan leaders to rebel against Saddam. ``Everyone in 
and around Baghdad, including the whole political and military elite, 
sees the size of the oil resource and wants a piece of it,'' said 
a European who has lived here for years and closely monitors public 
sentiment. ``They all know that overthrowing Saddam would trigger 
a chain of events that might well lead to the Sunnis losing everything. 
They would rather live for 2 or 5 or 10 or 20 years with sanctions 
than do something that could marginalize them forever.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>