<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0220 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Remember the scene in ``2001: A Space Odyssey'' when the apes confront 
their first computer? The computer just sits there, a silent monolith, 
unblinking, not even deigning to offer a cryptic error message. The 
apes have no access to technical support and, driven mad by frustration, 
they grab clubs and go on a rampage, smiting any chimp who is wearing 
a pocket protector. We can empathize with the apes, who probably did 
not have a firm grasp of the basic concepts of computer maintenance, 
including making regular backups, using a surge suppressor, installing 
a virus protection program and familiarizing themselves with utility 
programs. Boring, yes, but so are seat belts, antilock brakes, life 
insurance and dental floss. Computers need not make monkeys of us 
as long as we take some basic steps to minimize potential glitches 
in the coming year. Following are basic tips for new users, and suggested 
New Year's resolutions for veterans, to keep their computers humming 
along. At the top of our list is a good software utility package, 
and the Symantec Corporation comes to the rescue just in time with 
Norton System Works 1.1 (for Windows 95 and 98), which was introduced 
earlier this month. System Works comprises five major programs, each 
excellent on its own, that in various ways are intended to identify 
and fix computer problems before they become serious. The programs 
are the venerable Norton Utilities, Norton Antivirus, Norton Clean-sweep 
and Norton Crashguard plus a six-month subscription to Norton Web 
Services. System Works is a suite of utilities, and it is a sweet 
deal. At a list price of $69.95, the System Works package costs much 
less than purchasing each program separately. In a case of ``monkey 
see, monkey do,'' Symantec obviously saw how lucrative Microsoft Office 
was for Microsoft and decided to try the same approach with utilities. 
Regardless of its motive, the result is a happy one for consumers, 
who need click the installation button only once. Also, all the programs 
can be updated at once via the Internet using Norton's Web Services 
(a service that normally costs $29.95 a year). The flagship utility 
is Norton Utilities, which has the best diagnostic, tuneup and disaster-recovery 
tools I've seen in one program. Norton Antivirus is a strong line 
of defense against software viruses. Norton Crashguard minimizes the 
chances of Windows system crashes. And, new to Version 1.1, is Norton 
Cleansweep, a dandy utility that scours the computer for unneeded, 
redundant or temporary files, including Internet caches and cookie 
crumbs. Anyone who has tried to ``uninstall'' a Windows program that 
is no longer needed will appreciate Clean-sweep. But wait, there's 
more, as they say on television. System Works 1.1 also comes with 
a bonus pack of software including Norton 2000 (a utility that checks 
to make sure the computer can cope with the infamous Year 2000 problem), 
Norton Mobile Essentials for laptop users who travel a lot, PC Anywhere 
Express for remote access, Norton Secret Stuff (a simple encryption 
program for keeping e-mail messages private) and Visual Page, a Web-page 
design program. These are second-banana programs, but since they are 
free and installation is optional, their addition to the package is 
welcome. Symantec has no plans for a Mac version of System Works. 
On the bright side, Norton Utilities for Macintosh is very good. Mac 
users will pound their chests and proclaim that because Macs misbehave 
less often than Windows machines, there is less need for an arsenal 
of System Works utilities. As noted earlier, System Works includes 
a very good antivirus program. But a common mistake among computer 
users is thinking that once an antivirus utility is installed, their 
worries are over. Anyone who invites files into the computer from 
the outside world _ and that includes anyone who uses e-mail, ``borrows'' 
programs from friends or downloads files from the Internet _ is at 
risk for computer viruses. Viruses are nasty little pieces of code 
that can cause problems once they are inside the computer. The problems 
range from annoying mischief (causing messages to appear on the screen) 
to malicious destruction of data, including the complete loss of data 
on the hard disk. Viruses do not cause hardware damage, no matter 
what your friend said about a friend of a friend whose monitor burst 
into flames. In reality, computer users are far less likely to get 
a virus than they are to get an urgent warning about a virus threat 
passed along via e-mail from friend to friend, alerting everyone they 
know to something that was exposed as a hoax long ago. But new viruses 
are being written all the time, and if an antivirus program has not 
been updated recently, it cannot defend against the new threat. That 
is why it is important to refresh the program periodically via the 
Internet. Most of the major antivirus packages allow online updates 
for a specified time after purchase. The real risk to hardware comes 
not from viruses but from power surges, spikes and brownouts and ``line 
noise,'' which occur on electric lines all the time. Some of these 
transient electrical events are nasty enough to knock out delicate 
circuitry inside the computer. The insidious thing about them is that 
the damage is done before the user is aware that there was a risk. 
So buy a good surge suppressor. A surge protector, in the form of 
either a power strip or a control base, can detect and clamp down 
on all but the worst voltage fluctuations in just nanoseconds, protecting 
the computer and its peripherals. While today's computers are fairly 
robust when it comes to handling power anomalies, spending $50 to 
$100 or so on a decent surge suppressor is excellent insurance. I 
recently paid $80 for a Kensington Masterpiece Plus, which is about 
the size of a pizza box and includes enough sockets for all my computer 
components. It has a rating of 1,400 joules. In general, the higher 
the joule rating, the better job the device will do in protecting 
the computer. Beware of low-cost power strips that portray themselves 
as surge protectors but do not list the joule rating. A $10 power 
strip is no insurance. What is the worst thing that can happen to 
a computer, short of being stolen? Most veterans will say they don't 
fear the loss of their computers as much as they fear the loss of 
their data. Make a New Year's resolution to back up important data 
regularly. Steel yourself to the fact that your computer will fail 
someday and that the repair technician will simply throw away your 
old hard disk and replace it with a new one. All your files will go 
to data heaven. There are many different philosophies and strategies 
about backing up data, and we will discuss them at length in a future 
column. Make another resolution to use a screen saver. Any computer 
monitor, whether it is a conventional type with a cathode-ray tube 
or a liquid crystal display on a laptop, is subject to a long-term 
problem of burned-out pixels, resulting in ghost images on screen. 
There are screen savers built into both the Windows and Mac operating 
systems, but not everyone uses them. Finally, remember in ``2001'' 
when a mainframe computer named Hal gradually begins misbehaving and 
eventually becomes a paranoid homicidal maniac? Although the film 
does not specifically mention it, we now understand that Hal was merely 
suffering from the ``year 2000 bug,'' a programming glitch that will 
affect millions of computers and embedded controller chips just one 
orbit around the sun from now, on 01-01-00. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>