<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0218 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ducts are essentially channels designed to direct air from one place 
to another. They are made of sheet metal and are usually rectangular 
and in sections. Homes with forced air heating systems have a network 
of ducts that convey heated air from the furnace to all the rooms 
in the house. Since ducts have only a few moving parts _ dampers to 
control the flow of air _ it might seem that they would require no 
maintenance. This is true enough, provided that the duct work was 
properly installed and that the seals between sections have remained 
intact over the years. If not, much of the heated air from the furnace 
will escape before it can get to the living quarters of the house. 
By locating and sealing up these leaks, the homeowner can make the 
heating system more efficient and lower heating costs. The best way 
to evaluate the efficiency of a heating duct system is to have a heating 
specialist run a flow hood or blower door test on the ductwork. Both 
tests are effective in determining the amount of leakage in the system 
and in pinpointing where the leaks are. The costs for the tests vary, 
from $250 to $500, depending upon the size of the heating system in 
a house. The biggest problem that the homeowner may encounter, however, 
is finding a qualified technician to perform these tests. The tests 
were only developed and standardized within the last few years, so 
only a few heating specialists are even aware of them, much less trained 
to perform them. Still the homeowner should inspect as much of the 
duct system as possible. Pay particular attention to the seams around 
the return air plenum, all joints where branch ducts connect to the 
main line and the junction point where a duct is attached to a room 
outlet. Sealing leaking air ducts is also important because they can 
suck up unwanted materials like insulation fiber (if the broken duct 
runs through the attic) or insecticide (if the duct runs through a 
crawlspace) and spew it into the house air. If you find a loose duct 
connection, first clean it with a rag dipped in nonflammable cleaning 
fluid, then close the gap by installing sheet metal screws through 
the duct flanges. (Do not use sheet metal screws on clothes dryer 
ducts because they capture the airborne lint. Eventually, the lint 
accumulations will clog the duct opening). Finally, seal the joint 
with aluminum-faced duct tape. Do not use the familiar cloth-backed 
duct tape for sealing seams and joints. It deteriorates quickly when 
exposed to heat; for this reason, many local codes prohibit its use 
on heating ducts. Another way to seal duct seams is with three-inch-wide 
fiberglass scrim tape. Wrap the seam with the tape, then paint over 
it with water base duct sealant (these products are available at air-conditioning 
supply outlets). There may be times when you will want to add or modify 
an air duct. Even if you don't have a forced air heating system, you 
may need to install an exhaust fan that requires a duct to carry exhaust 
air to the outside. Or if you purchase a clothes dryer, you will have 
to install a duct to carry the hot air through an exterior wall. Working 
with metal ductwork requires a few specialized tools. You will need 
tin snips to cut the ducts to length and to cut holes for a connecting 
branch. You can get by with almost any kind of tin snip, but aviation 
shears will make the cutting job easier, especially if you have to 
work in cramped quarters (between joists). Unlike standard tin snips, 
aviation shears have compound lever-action handles that provide extra 
power for metal cutting. In addition, they are available with three 
different jaw configurations for making straight cuts, cutting circles 
to the left and for cutting circles to the right. The handles are 
color coded so you can tell at a glance which tool is which. Straight 
cutting snips have yellow handles, right-cutting snips have green 
handles and red-handled snips are left-cutting. The shears are good 
for cutting through a single layer of sheet metal, but use a hack 
saw with a fine-tooth blade (32 teeth per inch) to cut through the 
seams. Cutting across these thick seams can quickly dull even the 
best shears. If you have to install sheet metal screws, you need to 
drill pilot holes first. For this you will need a machinist's hammer, 
a prick punch and a drill with suitable bits. Heavy-duty work gloves 
are essential when handling metal ducts. The sharp edges produced 
after the metal has been sheared can easily make nasty cuts in your 
hands. Also, to be on the safe side, wear safety goggles to protect 
your eyes when working in cramped quarters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>