<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0470 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Devils had already missed on a penalty shot in the first period 
and had given away a goal on an unforced turnover in the final seconds 
of the second period. And in the final seconds of the game, Brian 
Rolston skated into the Washington Capitals' zone and stared down 
an empty net. When he got off his shot, he saw it hit the post, ricocheting 
the other way as the Capitals mounted one final threat. A shot was 
deflected away and as the bodies and the puck were cleared from in 
front of the New Jersey net, the Devils had survived for a 3-2 victory 
over the Washington Capitals at the MCI Center. Just how they could 
be high-fiving after a game that included these sorts of mistakes 
had even the Devils at a loss to explain. ``We had some breakdowns,'' 
goalie Martin Brodeur said. ``But we played pretty good and luck was 
on our side all the way through. We never got behind in the game and 
that makes a big difference. When it was 1-1 and 2-2, I made saves 
and we able to come back.'' The victory sent the Devils into the new 
year with a 21-9-4 record and an Eastern Conference-best 46 points. 
It also gave them a 2-0 record on a three-game road swing that concludes 
in Ottawa on Saturday. ``I certainly didn't mean to miss the empty 
net,'' Rolston said. ``When it comes back on the other end and they 
almost got a good shot there, you have to really think about it.'' 
Bobby Holik, who has been the hottest player in the National Hockey 
League in December with league bests of 12 goals and 18 points, gave 
the Devils the lead at 7 minutes 14 seconds of the third period. Dave 
Andreychuk directed a pass through traffic to Holik, skating alone 
near center ice along the left boards. Holik skated in, faked a pass 
to his rear that held the defenders and then slipped the puck around 
goalie Rick Tabaracci. The Devils never trailed, but had seen the 
Capitals match them every time they scored in the first two periods. 
The Capitals entered this game missing six players, including Adam 
Oates, but their spirit, which may have been broken in the second 
period, was resurrected when the Devils gave away the tying goal. 
With a 2-1 lead after a short-handed goal by Rolston, with help from 
Vadim Sharifijanov, the Devils had killed off a 5-on-3 power play 
for two minutes, frustrating the Capitals. And now they were just 
trying to last out the final seconds of the second period when Scott 
Stevens picked up a puck alone behind his own net. But as Stevens 
attempted to send the puck back out of the Devils' zone, Peter Bondra 
closed in from behind, and in a rush Stevens inadvertently directed 
it right to the stick of Washington's Steve Konowalchuk, who was alone 
inside the blue line. Konowalchuk fired immediately and Brodeur stopped 
the slap shot's initial thrust, but the puck trickled softly and slowly 
behind him. As he tried to dive back in vain, he collided with Sheldon 
Souray and the puck just went over the line to tie the score at 2-2 
with 14.7 seconds left in the period. The Devils jumped out in front 
at 7:36 of the opening period with Sharifijanov converting a pretty 
wrap-around goal. But the Capitals tied the score on a 2-on-1 break 
after Bondra cleared the puck to center ice, with Konowalchuk swooping 
in from the right side and swinging to the left, then feeding Michal 
Pivonka as he darted to the right post and one-timed the shot over 
Brodeur. The Devils squandered an opportunity to take a lead when 
Jay Pandolfo took off on a breakaway at 14:20 of the first period. 
Pandolfo was taken down from behind by Dmitri Mironov and awarded 
a penalty shot. But as he faked left and then tried to slip the puck 
into the right side of the net, Tabaracci, who did not fall for the 
fake, forced him to shoot wide right. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>