<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0322 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Early this year, Bonnie Black, a Hollywood talent agent, got a call 
from a casting director who was working against a deadline that even 
the toughest cinematic hero might have had trouble beating. The casting 
director had less than 20 hours to find an actor to play the role 
of an FBI agent on the television series ``Players.'' Such last-minute 
requests are common in Hollywood, where scripts can change with a 
moment's notice and actors are sometimes jettisoned just before filming 
begins. But technology helped solve the problem handily: Ms. Black 
told the casting director to log on to an online casting service, 
look up an actor's resume and photograph, and download the actor's 
digital video clip to judge if he was right for the part. ``In this 
case, the video took the place of the audition,'' Ms. Black said. 
``The actor went straight to the producers and got hired on the spot 
for a recurring role.'' (The series has since been canceled.) Now 
that technology has transformed Hollywood's special effects, it is 
beginning to have an effect on how actors are discovered. These days, 
casting directors can go to electronic search services to seek ``extremely 
attractive young ladies with good hair, good teeth, good bodies,'' 
as one request put it, and to field electronic resumes and photographs 
from talent agents who are pushing their clients. They can also do 
keyword searches of databases, looking, for example, for an Asian 
woman who is 5 foot 6 and 25 to 30 years old and can speak French. 
So far, these online services have had a modest impact on Hollywood's 
traditional casting system. But many people in the entertainment industry 
predict that electronic casting will become dominant as younger, more 
computer-adept executives replace the veterans. The two major electronic 
casting services in Hollywood are Castnet (www.castnet.com), owned 
by Entertainment Internet, and The Link (www.submitlink.com), set 
up by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences and Breakdown 
Services. Both online systems provide similar services to clients 
but have subtle differences. They serve as a line of communication 
between casting directors and talent agents, who for years have used 
messengers to send out actors' portfolios and notices for acting jobs. 
With computers, organizing an audition for an episode of ``Diagnosis 
Murder,'' for instance, can be completed in minutes instead of hours 
or days. ``Casting directors have never had a tool like this,'' said 
Richard Horgan, the president of Castnet, which began in 1996. ``They 
can sit in an office with Oliver Stone and look up all of the Caucasian 
males under 30 who have appeared in his movies. And talent agents 
can submit hundreds of resumes and photos for a role much faster and 
without wasting so much paper.'' The Link has access to about 38,000 
actors. Their portfolios are actually on The Link's sister service, 
the Academy Players Directory On-Line. To get into the directory, 
actors must be a member of a union and pay a $75 annual fee. Their 
photographs, agents' names and phone numbers are also included in 
the hardcover version of the directory, which, depending on whom you 
talk to in the industry, is either the Hollywood bible or is used 
primarily as a doorstop. The Link provides casting calls for nearly 
500 acting parts per week but does not transmit video or audio clips. 
Nearly 10,000 actors have paid the $149.95 annual fee to get their 
resumes and one photograph on Castnet (26,000 actors are being listed 
by the service at no charge, on a trial basis). Posting video clips, 
audio clips and additional photographs costs extra. The actors also 
gain access to a chat room and audition scripts. In addition, they 
can send casting directors electronic postcards to tell them of their 
latest on-screen successes and can solicit talent agents for representation 
without spending money on stamps. One thing actors do not have access 
to is either service's list of available roles, known in Hollywood 
as ``breakdowns.'' Only talent agents can view those (Castnet generally 
posts a dozen or so roles each day, and The Link six times that number). 
Most studios limit access to such information because they do not 
want to be besieged by aspiring actors. Security measures have been 
installed to keep out trespassers and to protect child actors from 
pedophiles. For example, clients usually get access to Castnet by 
dialing in to the service directly and using a password, instead of 
going through the Web. Recently, Taylor Jacobs, a talent agent in 
Burbank, Calif., was scrolling through the breakdowns on Castnet, 
as he does several times a day, when he came across a notice for a 
black actor, 40 to 50 years old, to play a ``smart, quick-witted'' 
political adviser ``with lots of energy'' on the PBS television series 
``On Common Ground'' at a pay rate of $200 to $375 per day. He went 
to the bottom of his computer screen where his clients were listed 
and clicked on one of the names. Within a few seconds, he had submitted 
the name electronically, with a resume and photograph, to the show's 
casting director. ``Actors who are submitted have a two- to four-hour 
advantage over those who are sent by hard copy,'' Jacobs said. ``That 
can be incredibly advantageous.'' Casting directors can log on to 
their computers to look at the dozens and sometimes hundreds of files 
that are sent to them for each open acting role. And they can arrange 
auditions by e-mail. ``I've logged in while in Hawaii and Belize,'' 
said Billy Da Mota, a casting director who specializes in commercials. 
``The point is that I don't miss a job. I can be on vacation and log 
in on my computer from wherever I can plug in my laptop.'' Often, 
talent agents encourage actors to post their portfolios on one of 
the major online services to improve their chances of being selected 
for an audition and to make it more convenient for the agent. Joan 
Messinger, a talent agent in Beverly Hills, Calif., pointed to the 
hundreds of files on actors in her office and said emphatically, ``If 
I can get away from not going to that shelf and pulling a picture, 
I'll do it.'' But online casting has yet to significantly reduce the 
amount of paper changing hands. After submitting actors' portfolios 
online, many talent agents also send out hard copy, too, just to be 
safe. Castnet is free for the 130 talent agents and 240 casting directors 
who have access. Some use the service as much as possible, others 
only occasionally. In all, 39 percent of Hollywood's agents and casting 
directors use online casting services to send or receive actors' photos, 
according to a survey of 120 people published in November by Back 
Stage West/Drama-logue, a trade publication. The movie industry has 
been especially resistant to online casting. Filmmakers are generally 
less rushed than their television counterparts and would probably 
have little chance of landing a star like Bruce Willis from an electronic 
posting. As a result, Rob Ash, an actor from Sherman Oaks, Calif., 
who is a member of Castnet, has only modest expectations. He said 
electronic casting still needed to gain acceptance in the film and 
television industry before it would have much effect on his career, 
which has been fairly limited partly because he is 6 foot 7. Ash said 
he had found an agent through Castnet after submitting an electronic 
resume. He also landed an interview on the dating show ``Change of 
Heart'' after seeing a talent search posted on Castnet's actors' forum, 
where small productions often post casting calls. ``I'm not foolish 
enough to think that I can get lots of auditions from this,'' Ash 
said. ``But it's great in an emergency situation. If an actor slips 
and breaks a leg, it's easy for casting directors to sign on and find 
a replacement fast.'' For some actors, paying to get online may be 
more of a waste of money than a smart career move, said Sheila Manning, 
a casting director in Los Angeles. She said actors living outside 
the major entertainment centers had little chance of success online, 
especially for commercials, which are sometimes cast in a matter of 
hours. ``Clearly, I'm not going to call someone from Norman, Okla., 
because I have to see them the next day for an audition,'' Ms. Manning 
said. And online video clips are often not useful, she said, because 
they take too long to download and are too small on a computer screen 
to be of much use in judging whether an actor is right for a role. 
In the end, online casting can help only up to a point. While technology 
may help actors get auditions, they must, in the end, be able to impress 
producers in person, at auditions. ``When choosing actors for audition, 
they are just buying an image: `I need a balding guy,' '' said Gary 
Bolen, an actor from Valencia, Calif., a Castnet member who regularly 
works on commercials and soap operas. ``Once you're there, you have 
to deliver.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>