<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0406 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A select House committee, in a classified report unusual for its bipartisanship, 
has found that over the last 20 years China has obtained, sometimes 
through theft, some of the most sensitive American military technology, 
including nuclear weapons design, government officials and witnesses 
before the panel said. The committee's final report, unanimously approved 
by its five Republican and four Democratic members on Wednesday, found 
that during Republican and Democratic administrations alike, China 
acquired a range of technology and technical secrets far beyond the 
transfers of information during the Clinton administration that prompted 
the panel to begin its inquiry this summer. In a carefully worded 
statement after the report was approved, the committee's chairman, 
Rep. Christopher Cox, R.-Calif., said that China's acquisition of 
American technology had harmed national security and that its ``acquisition 
efforts over the past two decades'' had been a ``serious, sustained'' 
activity. The panel released no details from its 700-page report on 
Wednesday because so much of its six-month inquiry dealt with classified 
information. The committee promised to begin a process, in consultation 
with the Clinton administration, to declassify as many of the findings 
as possible. But witnesses and intelligence officials who worked with 
the committee said it agreed with assessments by the Pentagon and 
the State Department that information shared with Chinese scientists 
by two American companies, Hughes Electronics Corp. and Loral Space 
and Communications, had improved Beijing's ability to launch satellites 
and ballistic missiles. In addition, witnesses said, the panel's conclusion 
that China had stolen military-related American technology might prove 
to be the most explosive part of the report. The panel uncovered, 
for example, a pattern by the Chinese of stealing nuclear weapons 
design technology from American military laboratories, said one person 
who has read part of the report. The committee, these officials said, 
faulted policies from the Reagan, Bush and Clinton administrations 
and made 38 recommendations to address those policy failures. The 
recommendations covered areas including security at U.S. weapons laboratories, 
handling of sensitive intelligence data and export-control policies. 
While the committee did not directly examine covert Chinese contributions 
to the 1996 American elections, officials said it did investigate 
the activities of a Chinese aerospace executive, Liu Chaoying, who 
has been a conduit for payments by the Chinese government to Democratic 
fund-raisers and who, with her father, Liu Huaqing, the former senior 
general in the Chinese military, has been involved in China's effort 
to acquire military-related technology. Federal investigators now 
say that access to American military technology was a primary motivation 
behind the payments by the Chinese government to Democratic fund-raisers 
that were later traced to Ms. Liu and other possible conduits. Ms. 
Liu and her father have been active in China's effort to acquire and 
sell sensitive technology, both in the United States and abroad, according 
to documents and intelligence officials. The committee was organized 
last summer after The New York Times disclosed that American satellite 
makers had helped Chinese scientists rectify failures in their rocket 
programs, conveying information that is applicable to long-range ballistic 
missiles. Over the last six months, the panel held 33 closed hearings, 
taking testimony from intelligence officials, industry executives 
and nuclear-weapons experts. The committee's inquiry initially focused 
on the interaction between American satellite manufacturers and China, 
whose rockets carry their satellites into orbit. It soon branched 
out to examine the export of other advanced American technologies 
to China, including advanced computers and machining equipment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>