<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0138 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even before the final sales numbers were tallied last week, it was 
clear that online holiday sales would shoot well past all expectations. 
And according to one recent study, the fact that buyers could make 
their purchases without paying state or local sales taxes or use taxes 
was a strong incentive for shopping on the Internet. Those who successfully 
pushed for passage in October of the Internet Tax Freedom Act, which 
declared a three-year tax moratorium for online sales, have reason 
to cheer. But the long-term implications could be troubling. Although 
the potential revenue is still too small to pose a serious problem 
in the immediate future, what happens a few years down the pike, when 
states see as much as one-third of their revenues circling the drain? 
``Right now, sales tax is the most important source of revenue for 
states, so the moratorium is something they're clearly aware of and 
worried about,'' said Austan Goolsbee, an economics professor at the 
University of Chicago Graduate School of Business. Goolsbee, who recently 
completed a study of the purchasing habits of online consumers, said 
his research showed that the number of online shoppers and the dollar 
amounts they spend would drop by 25 percent and 30 percent respectively 
if they were charged sales tax on their purchases. Despite the hue 
and cry that taxing Internet sales is ``unfair'' to a budding new 
form of commerce, the Internet in fact only intensifies a problem 
that has been brewing for decades in the mail-order business. Simply 
put, the legal issue is how to tax purchases that cross state lines. 
A state's sales tax, per se, can only be collected when both buyer 
and seller have a physical presence in the state _ meaning that either 
there must be a face-to-face transaction or an out-of-state seller 
must have an outlet somewhere in the state where the buyer lives. 
Until a few decades ago, this arrangement worked fine. When mail-order 
sales started to pick up steam, state governments decided they had 
better impose a ``use'' tax on people who bought items through catalogs 
(so called because they used their purchases in the state). Although 
virtually no one pays such a tax and virtually no state enforces it, 
consumers are supposed to voluntarily pay the equivalent of sales 
tax on these out-of-state purchases. Sellers cannot be required by 
states to collect these use taxes from their customers, as they collect 
sales tax, because of constitutional provisions banning the states 
from interfering with interstate commerce. Although catalog and Internet 
buyers benefit from this tangled web, even legendary tax opponents 
like Arthur Laffer, the supply-side guru of the Reagan administration, 
are concerned about the implications. ``A lot of government is at 
risk here,'' Laffer said. ``Sales tax funds virtually everything in 
the state,'' including police and fire departments, welfare, roads, 
schools and mass transit. ``It is probably the single best tax the 
state has, because it has the broadest base and the lowest rate, to 
collect large sums of money to fund government services,'' Laffer 
said. The situation is something of a political football, says Walter 
Hellerstein, a law professor at the University of Georgia who specializes 
in the application of constitutional law to state taxes. Despite the 
fact that state governments derive at least a third of their revenue 
and often more from sales tax, Hellerstein says, neither the Supreme 
Court nor Congress wants to be responsible for the havoc that would 
be created if the physical presence rule were rescinded. ``Mail-order 
sellers, since before 1967, have made billions of dollars in sales 
and have never collected use tax or filed a tax return,'' he said. 
``Because of that, the statute of limitations is open'' and, theoretically, 
sellers could be required to pony up huge sums of dollars in back 
taxes, a situation that would put most of them out of business. Other 
economists are recommending even more radical action. The Center for 
Community Economic Research at the University of California, Berkeley, 
warned in a paper in August 1995 that ``state and local government 
finances are becoming road kill on the information superhighway.'' 
In making its policy recommendations, the center noted that commerce 
was increasingly conducted nationally and globally, rather than locally. 
Thus, it said, state and local taxes should be scaled back or even 
eliminated and replaced with a national tax that is disbursed back 
to the states. Stating that ``study after study has shown the regressive 
nature of sales tax as a revenue source,'' the paper said sales and 
use taxes on mail-order (and, it would follow, Internet) purchases 
have more impact on the poor, the disabled and the elderly than on 
anyone else. Tell that to the advisory commission on electronic commerce 
that was mandated by President Clinton, after the passage of the Internet 
Tax Freedom Act, to come up with a solution to the taxation problem. 
The commission, which was to be made up of equal numbers of industry 
and government representatives, is already being berated by local 
government agencies like the National Association of Counties for 
being lopsided in favor of industry, with powerhouse companies on 
board including Time Warner Inc., Charles Schwab &AMP; Co., Netscape 
Communications Corp. and MCI Worldcom Inc. Government agencies are 
not the only ones incensed by the composition of the commission. ``This 
does not pass the smell test,'' said Charles McLure, a senior fellow 
at the Hoover Institute at Stanford University and the economist who 
wrote the basis for the Tax Reform Act of 1986. ``This is, `We're 
going to build a fence around the chicken coop _ but let's not put 
any chickens on it; let's put some wolves.''' Whatever the commission's 
final composition may be, one hopes its deliberations will be shaped 
by larger societal concerns and not just the convenience or power 
of the fortunate few. ``Everyone thinks they have a constitutional 
right to buy tax free when they buy mail order,'' Hellerstein said. 
``At some point, there's going to be revenue shortfall, and then I 
don't know what will happen. Right now, everyone's flush and all they 
can think about is some other way to cut taxes.'' NYT-12-27-98 1658EST 
</TEXT>
</DOC>