<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0432 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Senate Republican and Democratic leaders weighing President Clinton's 
impeachment are considering a plan to let senators hear evidence from 
both sides and then cast a preliminary vote on whether to move forward 
with a full trial, a Democrat close to the negotiations said Wednesday. 
Under this plan, the resolution to proceed with a trial would require 
67 of 100 votes, the same number required to remove the president 
from office. If the resolution to move to a trial failed, the Senate 
would then vote to adjourn the proceedings, which would require 51 
votes, and would take up a proposal to censure Clinton, the Democrat 
said. If the resolution passed, the Senate would hold a full trial, 
which would most likely include witnesses. Ever since impeachment 
by the House appeared inevitable, senators have been wrestling with 
how to satisfy a variety of conflicting goals. At one extreme are 
senators who want a full trial that would result in Clinton's removal 
from office. At the other are members who believe he has been punished 
enough and that a long trial would hurt both the country and the Senate. 
The proposal under consideration would try to establish a process 
that would be acceptable to both sides. It would give the Senate an 
opportunity to sidestep a drawn-out, politically unpalatable trial 
while allowing Republican senators some kind of vote on Clinton's 
removal from office, but one falling short of actual conviction on 
the impeachment charges. Democrats would also back a plan that would 
avert a trial and would get to a censure resolution quickly. Most 
senators have said they do not believe there are the 67 votes necessary 
to remove Clinton, and it is unclear whether the Senate could muster 
the same number to go forward. The Democrat, who spoke on condition 
of anonymity, cautioned that the proposal for a brief proceeding was 
still being negotiated by Sen. Trent Lott, the majority leader from 
Mississippi, and Sen. Tom Daschle, the Democratic leader from South 
Dakota, who have been discussing it on the telephone. And, the Democrat 
emphasized, neither leader had vetted the plan with his Senate colleagues, 
who are scattered across the country for the holidays. Both leaders 
would present the plan to their colleagues when they return for the 
swearing-in of the new Congress on Jan. 6, the Democrat said. Lott's 
office had no comment Wednesday. Daschle said Wednesday, ``We're working 
on this in a way that meets both of our mutual objectives, which in 
large measure could be defined as doing it fairly and expeditiously.'' 
Word of the proposal drew a sharp response from Republicans on the 
House Judiciary Committee, who will act as prosecutors during the 
Senate trial. On Tuesday, they met to discuss their strategy, emerging 
from closed doors with plans to call witnesses, only to learn that 
Lott was proposing nothing of the sort. In a stern three-page letter 
to Lott, Rep. Henry Hyde, the Illinois Republican who is chairman 
of the House Judiciary Committee, said he was ``especially concerned'' 
with the proposal to ``foreclose any trial if the House position fails 
to get a two-thirds vote on a preliminary motion.'' ``This proposal,'' 
Hyde wrote, ``effectively grants one-third of the Senate the power 
to decide whether there will be any airing of the evidence.'' ``I 
acknowledge that the Senate always has the authority to alter its 
procedures and precedents,'' Hyde added, ``but to do so in this instance 
would unwisely short-circuit the process.'' On Tuesday, Lott seemed 
to suggest moving toward a more expedited proceeding without spelling 
out the details. He told reporters he would like to see a speedy, 
but fair trial with no witnesses that would begin on Jan. 11 and conclude 
two weeks later. The comments on Wednesday by the Democrat who is 
close to the negotiations indicate that both Lott and Daschle are 
tentatively pursuing a course that could circumvent a traditional 
trial, at least initially. Under the plan being discussed by Lott 
and Daschle, the House and the White House would each present their 
cases, without calling witnesses, a process that would take no more 
than two weeks. After the presentations, the Senate would take a ``summary 
judgment'' vote on two issues: the quality of the evidence and whether 
the allegations of perjury and obstruction of justice rise to the 
level of ``high crimes and misdemeanors,'' the Democrat said. In effect, 
the Senate would set aside the House's vote on impeachment and judge 
the evidence and the accusations on its own. The Senate vote on this 
``dispositive resolution,'' which could split into separate resolutions 
on the evidence and on the accusations, would require a two-thirds 
majority, the Democrat said, the same margin needed to remove Clinton 
from office. The number would serve as a barometer for any future 
vote on removal. ``That way people are on record saying, `Yes, I would 
vote to move forward if these things are proven,'' the Democrat said. 
``And Democrats would say they are not proven and they don't meet 
these high standards.'' At this point, no resolutions of any sort 
have been written. ``There is no specific phraseology,'' the Democrat 
said. The Senate could set the two-thirds majority requirement simply 
as part of its rules for handling the proceeding. Lott and Daschle, 
the Democrat said, must still work out the details of the plan, including 
whether there should be an opportunity for debate during the presentation 
of evidence and whether the House should have a chance to rebut the 
White House's case. During a trial, senators would be free to ask 
questions of the prosecutors through Chief Justice William Rehnquist, 
who would preside over the proceedings, but they would not be permitted 
to debate. As far as a censure resolution, senators still have profound 
differences about what a censure resolution should say and what sort 
of penalties, if any, it should include. Just Wednesday, Sen. Mike 
DeWine, an Ohio Republican moderate, said, before hearing talk of 
the plan, that he would oppose censure ``under any circumstances.'' 
``The Senate should either convict or acquit the president and nothing 
else,'' DeWine said. In his letter to Lott, Hyde argued that the House 
and the president should have an opportunity to present their cases. 
``We believe that proper presentation of the evidence will likely 
require the appearance of a limited number of witnesses,'' Hyde said. 
``We also believe that the president and his counsel may wish to call 
witnesses as part of their defense.'' The Democrat questioned the 
House's insistence on calling factual witnesses before the Senate, 
especially since the judiciary panel opted not to call anyone other 
than independent counsel Kenneth Starr. But Hyde defended his committee's 
decision not to call witnesses during the impeachment inquiry, saying 
that the House and the Senate hold two distinct functions. The House 
moves to indict, he argued. The Senate moves to convict. It is likely 
that both sides would be permitted to present witnesses, if the Senate 
moves ahead with a full trial. Sen. Susan Collins of Maine, a Republican 
moderate, agreed, saying she would prefer to hear from witnesses, 
especially because they might help settle disputed facts. ``It would 
be helpful for me as a juror to hear firsthand the testimony so I 
can assess credibility,'' she said. ``It would be easier in the long 
run.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>