<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0331 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For U.S. art museums, 1998 was a memorable year. Along with their 
many standout exhibitions and acquisitions, record-breaking crowds 
and ambitious expansion plans, museums also had to contend with criticism 
about their collecting policies. Institutions in Seattle, Chicago, 
New York and elsewhere faced claims to holdings that had been looted 
from archeological sites, stolen by the Nazis or taken from American 
Indians. Instead of being guardians of civilization, museums were 
suddenly accused of being as crassly acquisitive as instant millionaires 
let loose on Rodeo Drive. In the most recent example, the Museum of 
Fine Arts in Boston was criticized for acquiring dozens of antiquities 
that, circumstantially at least, appear to have been illegally excavated 
in southern Italy and smuggled out of the country. Of 71 pieces bought 
by or given to the museum between 1984 and '87 (after the museum pledged 
to observe international codes to staunch the illegal antiquities 
trade), 61 had no ownership history, according to an investigation 
by The Boston Globe. Experts consider the lack of provenance a telltale 
sign that the works were probably plundered. The Boston museum, already 
under attack for owning Mayan artifacts that may have been looted 
from Guatemala, issued a brief response saying that it ``exercises 
appropriate diligence in the acquisition of works of art for its collection.'' 
But Alan Shestack, the museum's director from 1987 to 1994, conceded 
that the museum was ``not as rigorous'' as it might have been in insuring 
that the objects had not been stolen. Several experts agreed that 
most museums traditionally have made few if any inquiries about provenance 
if they really wanted an object. ``The questions being raised about 
Boston could be raised about many other museums,'' said Martin E. 
Sullivan, the chairman of the President's Cultural Property Advisory 
Council and the director of the Heard Museum in Phoenix. ``These are 
legitimate questions.'' In its two-paragraph statement, the Boston 
museum tacitly acknowledged as much, even as it indicated that it 
would keep the works in question. ``Over the years, laws and standards 
regarding the acquisition of works of art have changed,'' it stated. 
Its practices, the statement added, ``have changed accordingly.'' 
Change did not come without a push, however, largely from claims made 
over the last few years by Guatemala, Turkey, Italy, American Indian 
groups and families whose property was confiscated during World War 
II. ``There's been a great deal of sensitizing about these issues,'' 
said Ned Rifkin, the director of the High Museum of Art in Atlanta, 
``and all of us are exercising a great deal more thoroughness in checking 
provenance now.'' But if museum directors agree that the rules have 
changed for future acquisitions, they are not in complete harmony 
about what to do about the past. In June, members of the Association 
of Art Museum Directors pledged to take a prompt, detailed look at 
the provenance of all works their institutions have acquired since 
Hitler came to power. That research is in full swing. And, though 
only one claim has been resolved so far, if looted works are identified, 
some sort of return or payment is expected to be made on a case-by-case 
basis. Claims by American Indians got a boost in 1990 with passage 
of a law requiring federally financed institutions to conduct inventories 
of their holdings and return certain items. Some objects have gone 
back, though some critics complain that lack of money and bureaucracy 
have slowed repatriation. Others contend that tribal disagreements 
are hampering the process, too. Resolving the problems with classical 
and pre-Columbian antiquities is proving to be stickier, partly because 
people fear where it will end, provided it even does end. Greece's 
longstanding demand for the return of the Elgin marbles from London 
and Turkey's for the Pergamon Altar in Berlin get mixed in with Guatemala's 
and Italy's desire to halt the theft of objects that easily make their 
way onto the international market, no questions asked. But as long 
as provenance is not an issue, trade in newly excavated objects will 
continue, encouraging continued desecration of ancient sites. Many 
people are drawing a distinction between old disputes and current 
ones. At a recent conference on art, antiquities and the law at Rutgers 
University, participants pledged to adhere to an international code 
of ethics requiring museums, dealers and collectors to inquire about 
an object's origins and ownership history to make sure a purchase 
would be legal. Nations rich in antiquities were urged to stop lending 
to museums that continue to acquire looted artifacts. While many skeptics 
think this is all talk, Sullivan, for one, is convinced that the issue 
is not going to be dismissed so easily. He cited the Denver Art Museum, 
which in October returned a carved wooden lintel to Guatemala after 
being informed that it had been stolen from a Mayan temple in the 
1960s. The lintel had been given to the museum in 1973. ``I think 
this issue will snowball over the next few years,'' Sullivan said. 
``Public attention has been called to this issue, and a lot of foreign 
countries are aware of property in museums that should not be there. 
The road through the courts is long, but the road through the media 
and public opinion has created a lot of sympathy for them.'' Stephen 
K. Urice, an official at the Pew Charitable Trusts and a lawyer steeped 
in these matters, said directors and curators finally had gotten the 
message about works lacking pristine provenances. ``Where it really 
has to be driven home is in the minds of trustees,'' he said, pointing 
out that they have fiduciary responsibility for a museum's actions. 
Trustees, he said, have to act as a check on directors and curators 
who want to acquire a questionable object. They have to decide whether 
a museum has the legal obligation to return a claimed object and, 
if not, whether it is in the public's best interest to return it. 
``Otherwise, it can be interpreted as taking charitable funds and 
letting them revert to a private individual,'' as in the case of a 
Holocaust-era claim, he said. With a foreign country as the claimant, 
the decision would be much easier because an object would presumably 
remain in the public domain, he said. Neither Urice nor Sullivan are 
downbeat about prospects for losing artistic treasures in collections 
in the United States. ``Most of our museum collections are stable 
and will not be disturbed, though in some areas museums will have 
to respond,'' Urice predicted. Sullivan said: ``Not everyone would 
agree with me, but I think it's a good time for museums. If we want 
to maintain our status, we will be held to higher standards.'' When 
people walk through museum galleries, their words imply, they should 
be free to dwell on the objects, not on how they got there. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>