<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0353 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thousands of visitors travel by jet here to see the Rose Parade and 
the Rose Bowl, and tens of thousands ply Southern California's freeways 
to get to New Year's Day events. But then there are the happy few 
who step out of their bungalows to head down the hiking trails of 
Arroyo Seco and walk to the game via the city's majestic river canyon. 
The ritual trip down boulder-lined stairways set among the oaks and 
sycamores and into the fabled wash is a pleasure, known primarily 
to residents of Pasadena. This New Year's Day, however, Pasadena's 
best kept secret is different. . Since the early 1990s, the arroyo 
has been undergoing an extensive restoration to replace the exotic 
acacia, castor bean and flowering plants that drove out the native 
fauna. For the first New Year's Day in memory, Pasadenans will encounter 
a landscape of willows, toyon, coffeeberry, elderberry, and laurel 
and lemonade sumac, all California natives, in a lush riparian habitat. 
The habitat restoration, among the most ambitious in Southern California, 
extends 1.8 miles from the old Colorado Street Bridge, south of the 
Rose Bowl, toward the border Pasadena shares with South Pasadena _ 
an area of 52 acres. Pasadena was founded in the late 19th century 
as a winter resort. Houses were designed with sleeping porches and 
terraces open to the San Gabriel Mountains and arroyo views that gave 
Pasadena its character. ``Historically, the arroyo has been of great 
importance to Pasadena _ it's one of the reasons the city is where 
it is,'' said Adam Schiff, a California State Senator, on a recent 
tour of the arroyo. ``Philosophically, the restoration of its natural 
beauty speaks volumes about where Pasadena is, and was.'' The degradation 
of the natural environment was gradual. The Army Corps of Engineers 
rushed in after the devastating flood of 1938 and built concrete water 
channels down the arroyo, which controlled floods but denied water 
to the rest of the riverbed, drying out the vegetation that sustained 
native animals. In the 1950's, Pasadena went through an economic downturn 
and smog invaded greater Los Angeles. The city lapsed into shabby 
gentility. Residents rallied around its historic architecture. Restoring 
the city's turn-of-the-century houses preserved entire neighborhoods. 
(Despite its humble bungalows, Pasadena was once one of the wealthiest 
cities, per capita, in the United States.) Meanwhile, with better 
emissions controls, the smog lifted and the San Gabriel Mountains 
came out of the haze. The step from architectural restoration to the 
restoration of the arroyo was logical: one implied the other. ``They 
are separate but intertwined strands of the same rope,'' Schiff said. 
The restoration of what was in effect Pasadena's Central Park began 
with an environmental trade-off. In the early 1990s, Browning-Ferris 
Industries, the waste-disposal company, began filling a canyon about 
20 miles away in the San Fernando Valley. Browning-Ferris was required 
by state and federal regulations to create a comparable riparian habitat 
elsewhere. The company spent $5.5 million to recreate the Lower Arroyo 
between two of the seven concrete viaducts that span the canyon. The 
Arroyo Seco Foundation restored habitat south of La Loma. ``Before 
the concrete channel there was a whole meandering stream system working 
through the arroyo,'' said Michael Zander, head of Zander Associates, 
a Marin County environmental consulting concern that designed the 
new habitat. ``What we didn't have was water.'' Just under the Colorado 
Street Bridge was a small dam. Zander designed culverts to channel 
the water above the dam into streams that irrigated about eight acres 
of the arroyo, turning arid expanses into marshland. ``We took out 
all the exotic grasses, flowering plants and the weeds and trees that 
were in the way,'' said City Manager Cynthia Kurtz, who oversaw the 
project as Pasadena's director of public works and transportation. 
``After a lot of research, we came up with a mix of seeds for reseeding.'' 
Willows and cattails dominate the center of the stream, and toward 
banks and edges, there are alder, California black walnut, sycamore, 
poplar, cottonwood and elderberry. Beyond the edges are native centenarian 
live oaks. (The designers also left full-grown exotic trees, especially 
the eucalyptus.) ``Within a month of opening the floodgates, the birds 
came as if attracted by a magnet,'' said Rosa Laveaga, supervisor 
of Arroyo Seco Park. ``They're drawn to the water, and to the willows 
and alders, which provide great nesting areas. We had an overpopulation 
of gophers and squirrels, which made it difficult for plants to survive, 
but the increase in the number of birds helps keep the rodent population 
down. The hawks help police the area.'' `` `Arroyo seco' means dry 
river in Spanish,'' Schiff said. ``But the Gabrielino Indians called 
it Hahamongna, which means `flowing waters, fruitful valley.' What 
we do now will determine whether the Indian or Spanish term is more 
accurate. I'd like nothing more than to see the arroyo completely 
returned to the Hahamongna.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>