<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0309 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israelis joke that theirs is a country of 6 million people, 6 million 
cell phones and now, 6 million candidates for prime minister. Every 
time Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu turns around, he faces a potential 
new rival, not from the left but from his own conservative camp _ 
and, as of Wednesday, from his own Cabinet, after Environment Minister 
Rafael Eitan became the fourth right-wing candidate to throw his hat 
into the ring. Already, the campaign feels somewhat like a dysfunctional 
family's very public feud, and political experts are wondering whether 
it is wise to subject the country a five-month campaign. ``It's difficult 
to justify the two big parties' intention of postponing elections 
until May,'' Yosef Lapid wrote in the newspaper Maariv. ``It is in 
the national interest to finish this matter quickly, efficiently and 
elegantly.'' Israeli law dictates that when a government fails, it 
must be replaced within 60 days. But Netanyahu and the opposition 
Labor Party struck a deal to dissolve rather than topple the government, 
allowing them to negotiate an election date, now set for May 17, with 
a probable runoff on June 1. The date is still subject to approval 
by parliament. During this period, the national budget, secular-religious 
relations, the war in Lebanon and the Israeli-Palestinian peace effort 
will hang like punching bags in the election free-for-all. That is 
not to say that this has started out as an issues-oriented race. So 
far, the only lightning rod for debate has been Netanyahu's character, 
and all gloves have been off. On Wednesday he was assailed by a Labor 
representative for putting a $230 bottle of wine on the state's tab 
while dining in New York City, and he agreed to repay the nation. 
But the major issues cannot be frozen in time, and so decisions will 
be made by a government in the midst of a slow-motion dissolve. For 
months, as Netanyahu's government was teetering, the threat of being 
toppled hung over the prime minister's every move. Last week, when 
he cast one of 81 votes to disperse the government, the situation 
had reached farcical proportions: there were three different bills 
on the floor, each with a separate no-confidence motion attached by 
a different faction. It was legislation by blackmail: Pass this bill 
or we bring down the government. Now, the threat would seem to be 
moot, but the bartering continues, in the context of the campaign. 
For instance, the head of Parliament's Finance Committee, knowing 
that most candidates want to woo religious Jews, is promising to hold 
budget legislation hostage by tying it to an issue important to strict 
Orthodox factions. Avraham Ravitz, the finance committee chairman 
and head of the United Torah Judaism faction, said he would not bring 
the budget legislation to its next reading until Parliament approves 
a bill that in effect bans Reform and Conservative Jews from serving 
on the country's all-powerful religious councils. The bill, which 
is an attempt to circumvent a high court order to integrate the religious 
councils, passed by a thin margin, on its first reading on Monday 
night, drawing fierce criticism from Reform and Conservative Jewish 
leaders here. One, Rabbi Ehud Bandel, predicted a breakdown in relations 
with Jews abroad if the bill became law, saying it would discourage 
their financial support of Israel. ``The coalition has sold the values 
of 90 percent of the country in a close-out sale, and surrendered 
to ugly blackmail,'' a Labor member of Parliament, Ophir Pines-Paz, 
said, referring to Netanyahu's right-wing coalition. For Netanyahu, 
the race is between him and ``the left,'' a term he uses as a slur 
and has so far attached to three fairly middle-of-the-road establishment 
figures _ Ehud Barak, the Labor Party leader and former army chief 
of staff; Amnon Lipkin-Shahak, another former chief of staff, who 
is expected to announce his candidacy as a centrist next week, and 
Dan Meridor, of the Likud Party, who defected last week to run as 
a center candidate, too. But it is the vicious internal combat that 
most threatens Netanyahu at this point in the race. The question of 
the moment is who will be faithful to Netanyahu. Yitzhak Shamir, a 
former Likud party prime minister, set the tone at the beginning of 
the week by pronouncing Netanyahu an ``angel of destruction,'' presiding 
over the disintegration of the Likud. But Ehud Olmert, the mayor of 
Jerusalem, saved him his first major anxiety when he decided not to 
oppose the prime minister for the leadership of the party. Yitzhak 
Mordechai, the defense minister, is still on the fence, however, weighing 
a defection to Shahak's as yet unformed center party, in what would 
be a blow to the prime minister's candidacy. And David Levy, a former 
finance minister under Netanyahu, is reportedly set to join Barak 
on the Labor Party list only weeks after negotiations broke down with 
the prime minister about rejoining his Cabinet. Even Ariel Sharon, 
the hawkish foreign minister, who has stood fiercely by the prime 
minister's side as his most powerful ally, wavered a bit when asked 
if he would ever seek to be the country's leader. He would consider 
running for prime minister ``under certain conditions,'' he said on 
an evening talk show, but did not elaborate, telling journalists to 
figure it out for themselves. Some speculated that he might be tempted 
to jump in and take over the Likud if Mordechai bails out. So far, 
the three right-wing candidates who have declared their candidacies 
do not present a significant threat to Netanyahu, although they would 
leech support from him. They are Uzi Landau, a member of parliament 
who is challenging Netanyahu from within the splintering Likud; Benny 
Begin, a geologist and ultra-nationalist who left the Likud in disgust, 
and Eitan, a former army chief of staff and leader of the far-right 
Tsomet faction. But they reflect a key problem that lies ahead for 
Netanyahu, even if he surmounts the divisions on the right to emerge 
as its candidate. While he may have retained the support of the street 
_ time will tell _ he has lost the trust of most of the right-wing 
leadership. And it is not chiefly ideological; it is not that he signed 
the land-for-security peace plan with the Palestinians. It is personal. 
``Political disputes are not what muddied the relationship,'' Amnon 
Danker wrote in Maariv, citing the close relationship between other 
politicians who strongly disagree. ``The problem is one of a terrible 
character.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>