<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Responding to an ultimatum from Commissioner David Stern that the 
owners will cancel the National Basketball Association season unless 
the players accept the latest proposal, Billy Hunter, the union's 
executive director, informed his membership Wednesday that the players 
would soon make their last offer in an attempt to salvage the season. 
In a pugnacious response to the owners' revised proposal _ one that 
Stern has said is final _ Hunter sent a four-page letter by fax or 
express mail to his players last night. In it, he expressed hope that 
the two sides could complete a new collective bargaining agreement 
before Stern's Jan. 7 deadline, while also dissecting the league's 
plan in an effort to explain why he found it unacceptable. ``I have 
called David Stern and requested an opportunity to present it to the 
owners' labor committee as soon as they are available and certainly 
before the Jan. 7 date that Stern (finally) has said is the owners' 
deadline,'' Hunter wrote in the letter. The league's chief legal counsel, 
Jeff Mishkin, would not say whether a new union proposal would constitute 
the resumption of negotiations, but he acknowledged that the two sides 
would probably meet before canceling the season. In a point-by-point 
analysis, Hunter's letter said that the league's deal did not contain 
``enough help for the middle class and minimum-salary players.'' He 
also said that the players could not accept the league's total revenue 
distribution plan, which calls for the players to receive no more 
than 54.5 percent of basketball-related income. As the lockout turned 
six months old, no new negotiations were scheduled and it appeared 
the two sides were indeed headed toward either an 11th-hour settlement 
or the first cancellation of a professional sports season due to labor 
strife in American sports history. Stern, Hunter and internal bargaining 
teams from each side met in Denver last Sunday and appeared to be 
inching toward a settlement when the talks abruptly broke off. Instead 
of talking this week, the two principal negotiators waged their second 
postal battle in two weeks. On Dec. 17, Stern sent a letter to the 
players expressing his concern that the season would be lost and outlined 
the league's proposals. Hunter responded with a lengthy letter. On 
Tuesday, Stern again corresponded with the players, sending them the 
latest proposal and sounding even more grave as he reiterated that 
it was the owners' final offer. ``While it is of course your prerogative 
to reject our proposal _ as you did in Denver _ the consequences of 
that decision will be so catastrophic to your members that simple 
fairness suggests they be given a chance to be heard,'' Stern wrote 
in his cover letter to Hunter. ``Accordingly, we request and strongly 
urge that you put the NBA's final offer to a vote of the entire union 
membership.'' Stern's letter, which was also sent to reporters, lists 
the additional concessions the owners offered in Denver. Hunter has 
steadfastly refused to have the full membership vote on any of the 
proposals. In his letter to the players Wednesday, he detailed areas 
where the sides remain in disagreement, including changes to salary 
cap rules that the union calls a ``List of Horribles.'' ``The negotiating 
committee and I do not believe the owners have met us halfway yet, 
and we are not prepared to recommend that you accept this proposal,'' 
Hunter wrote. ``We believe this latest offer still contains steps 
backward that justify our continuing the struggle. Simply put, we 
have come too far to take a deal that is not a fair compromise for 
both sides.'' But he added, ``It is now a matter of sitting down for 
a last bargaining session where we each can reveal our respective 
bottom lines and engage in whatever trading may be necessary to get 
a deal done.'' Meanwhile, the players' negotiating committee and the 
agents' advisory committee held separate conference calls Wednesday, 
in part to discuss the impact of Stern's most recent proposal. The 
feeling among the majority of agents was that the commissioner would 
not cancel the season without further compromises on both sides during 
at least one final bargaining session next week _ despite Stern's 
insistence that there will be no more negotiating. With Stern and 
Hunter not expected back in New York until after the New Year's holiday, 
the possibility of all-night negotiations next week in Manhattan looked 
more and more likely. Emotions ran high on the agents' conference 
call, with several giving impassioned pleas about not accepting the 
deal on Stern's terms. At one point, according to an agent who spoke 
on the condition of anonymity, Leonard Armato, the agent for Shaquille 
O'Neal, tried to offer his peers some insight into Stern's thinking. 
Last Wednesday, Armato acted as a sort of liaison for the two principals, 
letting Stern and Hunter use his Los Angeles offices for a secret 
meeting. One agent replied, ``Leonard, you're being used.'' Hunter, 
too, refused to defer to the league in his response. In one of the 
more provocative responses to the league's plan for increased drug 
testing, he wrote: ``The commissioner wants more and more untapped 
control of the conduct of players. Stern has given nothing in exchange 
for all these noneconomic concessions described in his last two pages, 
ignoring, for example, our demand for independent review of commissioner's 
on-court suspension of three games or more. These disciplinary issues 
should be negotiated to their proper resolution, not imposed upon 
you from on high.'' But finally, he added, ``I have no doubt we could 
have a deal in a matter of hours.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>