<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0305 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a court decision that is expected to reawaken the divisive issue 
of who is a Jew, a district judge here Wednesday ordered the Israeli 
government to recognize conversions to Judaism performed by non-Orthodox 
rabbis. Orthodox Jewish politicians immediately denounced the ruling 
and promised to circumvent it by bringing a bill to the Parliament 
next week that confers the sole right to perform conversions on the 
Orthodox rabbinate. But leaders of the minority Reform and Conservative 
movements here celebrated what they consider a landmark victory in 
the battle to win equal status for their movements in the Jewish homeland, 
where the Orthodox control religious life. ``We rejoice, but it remains 
to be seen how long our rejoicing lasts,'' said Rabbi Uri Regev, a 
lawyer who heads the Reform movement here and represented the plaintiffs. 
``It seems we already have to gird up for battle once more.'' The 
chief judge of the Jerusalem district court handed down a 16-page 
decision that compels the ministry of the interior to register as 
Jews some 23 immigrants who converted either in Israel or abroad under 
non-Orthodox instruction. The government is expected to try immediately 
to get a temporary restraining order, and then appeal the decision 
to the Supreme Court for a hearing in February. The ruling has ramifications 
for scores of thousands of naturalized Israeli citizens, particularly 
non-Jewish Russians and Ethiopians who immigrated to Israel as part 
of a family with at least one Jewish member and who want to convert 
without making a commitment to the exacting life of the observant 
Orthodox Jew. Angela Goldin, who married an Israeli and moved to Israel 
from Germany in 1982, is one of the 23 naturalized Israelis who petitioned 
the court years ago, for herself and her 14-year-old, Israeli-born 
daughter. She and her daughter converted to Judaism in a Reform Jewish 
program in Israel because her husband was not a religious Jew. Orthodoxy 
was alien to them, and the Orthodox rabbi they initially consulted 
would have forced her husband to attend classes, too. Since her conversion, 
she has kept a kosher home and attended Sabbath services every Friday 
night. But her national identity card, which lists her citizenship 
as Israeli, declares her nationality as German where it says Jewish 
for most Israelis. ``Whenever we have to show the I.D., at airports 
or security checks, we have problems,'' she said. ``It's a terrible 
way to put it to you, but they look upon me like an Arab because of 
that one line on my card. They deny me who I am.'' Since every Jew 
is offered the right to Israeli citizenship, the question of who is 
a Jew is central to Jewish identity, which has been bound to the Israeli 
state since its birth 50 years ago. The conversion issue has set off 
years of battle between non-Orthodox and Orthodox Jews since Orthodox 
rabbis do not recognize the Reform and Conservative movements as Judaism, 
and thus do not accept conversions performed by their rabbis. It has 
also strained relations between American Jews, most of whom are not 
Orthodox, and the Israeli government, which has traditionally backed 
exclusive Orthodox control over personal issues like weddings, divorces 
and funerals. But after years of wrangling, the issue has lain dormant 
for most of this year. Court cases and legislation were put off while 
a government committee, headed by Yaakov Neeman, the former finance 
minister, tried to work out a compromise. The compromise would have 
left the Orthodox chief rabbinate with final control over conversion, 
but allowed for the opening of a joint Reform-Orthodox conversion 
institute. But it was rejected, both by the Orthodox and by the Reform, 
who believe that nothing would be changed if the chief rabbis retained 
the final say. Recently, the Orthodox rabbis have moved beyond not 
recognizing non-Orthodox conversions to nullifying Orthodox conversions 
if they see a convert is not living a religious life, according to 
lawyers for the Reform movement. In one instance, a Russian woman 
and her daughters were stripped of their Judaism because they chose 
to reside on a secular kibbutz. The woman's husband was an Israeli. 
Wednesday's court decision propels the issue back into the Parliament. 
Hanan Porat, a National Religious Party member who heads the Judiciary 
Committee, said he was ``very upset'' with the ruling, which, he said, 
``constitutes a judicial hijacking'' of the issue. He said he would 
introduce a conversion bill granting exclusive control to the Orthodox 
for its second and third readings next week. The bill was passed in 
a first reading last year, and needs three readings to become law. 
It is a difficult time for any sensitive piece of legislation, since 
the budget bill is pending. Religious members of Parliament could 
hold up approval of the budget if the conversion bill were not approved. 
Regev said he hoped that the Parliament would not be swayed by such 
pressure, remembering that most Israelis support religious pluralism. 
But the German-born Ms. Goldin, who said she was pragmatic, was not 
optimistic. ``We won the court case, which says we're Jewish like 
any other person here in Israel,'' Ms. Goldin said. ``But from here 
to registration it's long, long way. I don't think Israel is ready.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>