<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0295 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the man named Sor saw that he had been recognized, he covered 
his face with a scarf and tried to disappear into the crowd. But Vann 
Nath caught him. ``I held him by the arm and I asked him: `Is it you? 
Is it you named Sor?''' Vann Nath said, calling the man by his revolutionary 
nickname. ``He said, `No, it's not me, you're confused,' but I said: 
`Yes, it's you.''' Vann Nath, by a stroke of fate that still torments 
him, is one of only seven people who survived the Khmer Rouge torture 
house, Tuol Sleng, where more than 14,000 people died. The man named 
Sor was one of his guards. It was the kind of meeting that Cambodians 
continue to dread in a country that has still not confronted its recent 
traumas, where the bones of victims still lie unburied and where no 
one has yet been brought to trial for the deaths of more than a million 
people at the hands of the Khmer Rouge from 1975 to 1979. ``My mind 
was in chaos,'' Vann Nath said about his encounter, and it is chaos 
that many people here fear: chaos of the mind, like that of Vann Nath, 
and political chaos in a country where today's feuds and hatreds have 
their roots in the brutalities of the Khmer Rouge. Vann Nath's life 
was saved only because he was an artist and was assigned to paint 
portraits, working from photographs, of an anonymous man he later 
learned was Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge leader. Now, like it or not, 
the time has come for Cambodia to decide whether to face its past. 
This was the year of the collapse of the Khmer Rouge as a fighting 
force, and for the first time, its top leaders are available for capture 
and trial, unprotected by soldiers and land mines. This week Phnom 
Penh is witnessing the unnerving spectacle of two of the key Khmer 
Rouge figures _ Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea _ welcomed in from the 
cold by Prime Minister Hun Sen, enjoying the comforts of a luxury 
hotel and planning a trip to a beach resort. Some people, like Hun 
Sen, say Cambodia should ``dig a hole and bury the past'' in the interest 
of what he calls national reconciliation. Others, led by human rights 
advocates around the world, say Cambodia will continue to suffer until 
it cauterizes its wounds through a judicial process. Either way, Cambodians 
cannot escape the pain. They will continue to be tormented by their 
past whether it remains hidden and poisonous in their lives, or is 
reopened to bleed again. At a contentious news conference Tuesday, 
Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea waved away their country's suffering and 
urged the world to ``let bygones be bygones.'' But at the same time, 
the United Nations is moving forward with plans for a possible internationally 
sponsored trial of Khmer Rouge leaders for crimes against humanity. 
In January three international jurists will submit an evaluation of 
the evidence that has been gathered. The Khmer Rouge adopted a radical 
communism that tore Cambodia apart in an attempt to remake it. They 
emptied the cities, divided families, abolished religion, closed schools 
and sent tens of thousands to security centers like Tuol Sleng. The 
Khmer Rouge ruled for almost four years, until they were ousted by 
a Vietnamese invasion at the beginning of 1979. Pol Pot died in April 
1998 in a shack in his jungle refuge, but a dozen top figures are 
living free today among the people who were their victims. ``There 
is an obvious clash in these situations between reconciliation and 
mercy on the one side, and creating justice on the other,'' said Thomas 
Hammarberg, the U.N. official monitoring human rights in Cambodia. 
``The experience is that if you sweep under the carpet these kinds 
of very serious crimes, it is a very negative message for the future. 
And the international standards for human rights indicate that there 
should be trials.'' The question is whether the Cambodians have the 
moral and political will to relive their traumas and proceed with 
a trial. If not, the crimes of the Khmer Rouge may become one of the 
great atrocities of history for which there was never an accounting. 
Vann Nath's confrontation with the man named Sor took place on the 
grounds of Tuol Sleng itself, on the day a small museum was being 
opened within its shabby yellow buildings. It is a museum where the 
very walls are terrifying. Years after Vann Nath's ordeal, he returned 
to Tuol Sleng and covered the walls with paintings that depict the 
tortures that he witnessed or could hear from room to room. ``I have 
tried to forget but it is useless,'' he said. ``As long as I live, 
it seems I will never be able to forget even a small part of it'' 
_ the nighttime arrest that was never explained to him, the shackles 
and blindfold, the prison cell where his companions starved to death 
one by one, the screams of mothers as their children were torn from 
them. And, years later, he remembered the man named Sor. ``I pulled 
him into a room and I said to him, `If I were you and you were me 
in the time of Pol Pot, I would kill you now,''' Vann Nath said. ``But 
I didn't. I let him go. I just wanted him to know that I was not like 
him, that I would not kill someone for nothing.'' In Cambodia people 
often use the words ``justice'' and ``revenge'' interchangeably. And 
many say the time for revenge has passed. ``I was crying all the time 
until 1985,'' said Reach Sambath, a 33-year-old Cambodian journalist 
who lost his father, his mother, a grandmother and two brothers to 
the Khmer Rouge. ``Whenever anybody asked me about my family, I cried,'' 
he said. ``Every year in school, on the Day of Hate, everybody cried,'' 
he said, referring to a special day dedicated to keeping alive anger 
at the Khmer Rouge. ``Everybody remembered. People came out of the 
Khmer Rouge time with empty hands. They were angry and they were lonely. 
But now we have new families and new lives. It is difficult to find 
the tears.'' But as the presence here of Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea 
sinks in, some Cambodians are beginning to voice bewilderment and 
resurgent anger. Khieu Samphan, 67, was the Khmer Rouge head of state; 
Nuon Chea, 71, was a top ideologue. Their presence is an occasion 
for people, when asked, to recount again their losses and consider 
their future. Moeun Chhean Nariddh, 29, a human rights educator, offered 
one of the strongest arguments for a trial: the restoration of a sense 
of justice and proportion to this skewed and battered society. ``I 
wish that not only the top leaders but also the low-ranking Khmer 
youth would be put on trial to show that there is justice, even after 
10 or 20 years,'' he said. ``That would be a lesson: that you cannot 
escape justice. It would be fair to minor criminals _ thieves and 
robbers who have been tried for stealing a bicycle or stealing some 
money. I share the idea of releasing all these criminals if you don't 
put the Khmer Rouge killers on trial.'' ``The major human rights problem 
in Cambodia, in my assessment, is impunity,'' he said. ``People in 
positions of power, people with money, people with weapons _ they 
can do whatever they want against the small people. It's like a cancer 
in society. It makes people feel vulnerable and powerless. ``Part 
of the violence we see in Cambodia, with people settling scores with 
weapons on a local level, is that they do not trust the system of 
justice. They see these mass murderers going scot-free, and even treated 
as VIPs, while people with minor crimes go to jail.'' As recently 
as August, Prime Minister Hun Sen seemed to agree with this point 
of view, a characteristic flip-flop that suggests the possible flimsiness 
of his current assurances to Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea. ``Bringing 
those responsible for the genocide to justice is very important,'' 
Hun Sen said. ``I think that as long as the Khmer Rouge have not been 
judged, one will not be able to say that the political and military 
organization of the Khmer Rouge is really dead.'' He said the only 
question was whether a trial should be held under Cambodian jurisdiction 
or in an international court administered by the United Nations in 
a third country, like the ones under way now involving crimes committed 
in the Balkans and Rwanda. Either approach would need Hun Sen's cooperation, 
if only to capture the suspects. At the moment, the more likely route 
is a trial held in Cambodia, with international financing and assistance 
to assure that it is fair. A U.S. plan for an overseas trial would 
need approval in the Security Council and faces the likelihood of 
a veto from China, which has for decades been the chief international 
patron of the Khmer Rouge. In one of the bizarre twists of this Khmer 
Rouge endgame, former U.N. Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali 
took a break Wednesday in a visit here promoting the use of the French 
language to pay a courtesy call on Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea. Afterward, 
asserting ``I am a professor of international law and I know about 
these things,'' he said people should stop talking about an international 
court because the Khmer Rouge atrocities were an ``internal affair 
of a sovereign state.'' A Western diplomat passionately disagreed. 
``I profoundly believe that this is in no way a purely Cambodian affair,'' 
he said. ``So when people say we should ask what Cambodians want, 
yes. But it concerns all of us. That's implicit in the concept of 
crimes against humanity.'' Hammarberg has been verbally wrestling 
with Hun Sen over human rights for years, and he has mostly been losing. 
``I'm not stupid,'' he said of the question of a trial. ``I know it's 
politics.'' But some analysts are stumped by Hun Sen's possible motives 
in giving a free pass to Khmer Rouge leaders. Some suggest that he 
has been pressured by China as well as by Thailand, which for two 
decades has given refuge to the Khmer Rouge across its border with 
Cambodia. Steve Heder, a scholar of the Khmer Rouge who is examining 
records here for the War Crimes Research Office of the American University 
Law School, said, ``There are at least 10 prime suspects who could 
be rounded up quite easily and for whom there is documentary as well 
as other evidence to suggest that there are prima facie cases against 
them.'' The United Nations and the United States have made it clear 
that they have no intention of going after a larger group, Heder said, 
and that Hun Sen, a former middle-ranking Khmer Rouge soldier, has 
nothing to fear. In addition, Heder said, there is no solid basis 
to believe that the Cambodian people do not want a trial, or that 
a trial would threaten peace and order. Vague warnings of civil war 
by both Hun Sen and Khieu Samphan are empty threats, he said. Among 
the most dispirited Cambodians in recent months, as Hun Sen has squeezed 
democracy out of the political system, has been King Norodom Sihanouk, 
a largely powerless sovereign who nevertheless wields the country's 
strongest moral force. In a statement Wednesday, he washed his hands 
of the issue. ``Taking into account the very wide and undeniable discontent 
of the majority of the Khmer people,'' the King said, ``I announce 
to this majority that I respect them and will not renew my power of 
amnesty for major Khmer Rouge criminals. From now on, I leave all 
the responsibility to Hun Sen of handling this unfortunate and dramatic 
affair of pardons accorded to the Khmer Rouge. I will sign no more 
decrees concerning the Khmer Rouge.'' People here say that with the 
changing of the seasons, the great brown Tonle Sap, which flows through 
Phnom Penh, reverses its flow. To Cambodians, the river is a symbol 
of their nation. The waters are never fresh and the past does not 
remain in the past; it washes back again and again, with all its accumulated 
debris. ``The natural world explains the culture of its own nation,'' 
said Youk Chhang, the director of the Documentation Center of Cambodia, 
an independent research bureau where the evidence against the Khmer 
Rouge is being collated and computerized. In a statement this week, 
Youk Chhang warned that the Khmer Rouge could return from their defeat 
in a new guise. Some key figures have taken residence in their former 
stronghold at Pailin, near the Thai border, where 2,000 of their soldiers 
are still deployed, nominally as part of the government army. ``These 
monsters have sneaked back into town with Santa Claus,'' Youk Chhang 
said in his statement. ``After being in the jungle for decades, it 
is impossible for the Khmer Rouge to have defected and to be integrated 
with Cambodian society, either physically or emotionally.'' If they 
do reassert themselves, most experts agree, it will be at some future 
time, with a new generation of leaders, and not on the battlefield 
but in the political arena, backed perhaps with the muscle of their 
armed force. For Vann Nath, they have never disappeared. They are 
a part of his art and a part of his dreams. Before he was selected 
to work as a painter, he said, he shared the torment of his fellow 
prisoners in Tuol Sleng, many of whose officers remain free. ``My 
hunger was beyond imagining,'' he said. ``When I looked through the 
window I thought I could even eat the leaves on the trees.'' Every 
day, two or three prisoners died in their sleep, of hunger or torture, 
shackled together with 50 other men in a large bare room. ``We slept 
in rows, head to head, and we knew they had died because they stopped 
breathing,'' he said. ``We would turn to look at each other in the 
morning, and some were just dead.'' When the guards were not watching, 
some of the braver men broke the rules and whispered to each other. 
They whispered, ``We have no hope. We'll finish here.'' Or sometimes 
they asked each other, ``How many children do you have?'' Twenty years 
later, Vann Nath is so battered by memories that he no longer has 
the energy to wish for justice. ``I don't really care about a trial 
anymore,'' he said. ``I used to feel eager for a trial, but many years 
have passed. When Pol Pot died, I just felt a little regret that I 
would never see him on trial.'' But he said he does have something 
he would like to tell the Khmer Rouge leaders. ``If I had some kind 
of power to talk to them,'' he said, ``I would try to explain to them: 
Those people who died, they also wanted to live, like you.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>