<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0380 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cautious spending and a robust national economy have left virtually 
all the states in solid financial condition for the fifth year in 
a row, according to a fiscal survey released Wednesday. The healthy 
economy has allowed the states to give taxpayers the largest projected 
aggregate tax cuts by state governments in five years, $7 billion 
for the 1999 fiscal year; 29 states have reduced one tax or another. 
But the authors of the report, the National Governors' Association 
and the National Association of State Budget officers, warned that 
the rosy present faces important challenges in the future. In addition 
to an uncertain national economy, they amplified the warning many 
state officials have been sounding, saying that states are confronting 
the projected loss of billions of dollars in tax revenues to the sale 
of goods through mail order purchases and the Internet. ``The revenue 
loss is not huge now,'' Raymond C. Scheppach, executive director of 
the governors' group, said at a news conference where he discussed 
the latest Fiscal Survey of the States, a report that is published 
twice a year. ``But it is growing very, very rapidly. If we don't 
correct the problem, it will virtually lead to the collapse of state 
sales taxes.'' Currently, sales taxes account for as much as 40 percent 
of all revenues, with the rest coming largely from taxes on personal 
income, fuel and tobacco products. Stymied by courts and Congress 
in their efforts to capture taxes from Internet sales, states have 
been pushing back, saying that their revenue base is threatened. In 
comments Wednesday, the officials who produced the budget report attempted 
to project just how significant that threat might be. Scheppach said 
the revenues from consumer goods and services are steadily eroding 
as the convenience of shopping by catalog and, now more than ever, 
by computer gains in popularity. Measuring how popular is difficult 
to gauge. By one recent estimate, online sales this year could reach 
$5 billion, more than twice expectations. Bob Chatham, an electronic 
commerce analyst with Forester Research in Boston, said Internet sales 
projections for 2000 could exceed four times that amount. Going far 
beyond estimates by anyone else in business or government, however, 
Scheppach predicted that by 2002 sales over the Internet could reach 
as high as $300 billion. If that prediction proves true, it could 
translate into as much as $20 billion in lost revenues for the states 
and local governments. In addition, many of the most popular items 
sold over the Internet, including airplane tickets, are not subject 
to state sales taxes. But with Internet sales a relatively new phenomenon, 
no one really knows how high sales might reach or how deeply they 
could affect states as they try balancing their budgets. ``Is this 
a huge problem in 1998? I don't think so,'' said William F. Fox, a 
professor of economics at the University of Tennessee and past president 
of the National Tax Association, a nonpartisan policy group. ``But 
if the future estimates I've heard are anywhere in the ballpark, then 
yes, there could be a significant and growing problem that states 
need to worry about.'' The states, of course, are eager to recoup 
the losses, but their aspirations have been complicated by the reluctance 
of Congress and the Supreme Court to provide stronger guidelines as 
well as the difficulties states have in collecting taxes they are 
otherwise entitled to. In October, Congress passed the Internet Tax 
Freedom Act, which declared a three-year moratorium against taxes 
from online sales. The legislation provided for the creation of a 
19-member commission to study electronic commerce and recommend solutions 
to any tax inequities. But squabbles over the makeup of the commission 
have delayed the start of its work, discouraging government and business 
officials who were hoping for answers sooner rather than later. ``You 
always have hope,'' said Walter Hellerstein, a law professor at the 
University of Georgia who specializes in state tax laws. ``Realistic 
expectations are much different.'' The Supreme Court has only visited 
the issue of catalog sales, ruling in 1967 and 1991 cases that sellers 
are not required to collect a tax on goods unless the company has 
a physical presence in the state of the purchaser. In theory, much 
of the revenues are there, just waiting for the states to collect 
them. In the 45 states that have sales taxes _ the exceptions are 
Alaska, Delaware, Montana, New Hampshire and Oregon _ purchasers are 
liable for the taxes, no matter how they are bought. But few citizens 
voluntarily provide information that would increase their tax liability. 
The overall health of the states, as reflected by the survey report, 
derives in part by a conclusion that governors are making prudent 
economic and political decisions, by holding down the increase in 
spending and cutting taxes. The report estimates that states increased 
spending by 5.7 percent for fiscal 1998 and 6.3 percent for fiscal 
1999, a rate that is slightly below the 6.5 percent national average 
of the last two decades. That combines the overall tax cut of $7.02 
billion, much of it in personal income tax. Overall, it represents 
about 1.6 percent of the states' revenues Over the last five years, 
the recent span of tax-cutting, states have cut taxes by $22 billion. 
The states that enacted the largest cuts were California ($1.38 billion), 
New York ($1.10 billion), Massachusetts ($789 million) and Ohio ($780 
million). All had Republican governors at the time, but Scheppach 
said that the economic health was evident is states with Democratic 
governors, as well. Six states raised taxes for 1999, led by New Jersey, 
which budgeted for $200 million in revenues from new cigarette taxes. 
The others with increases are Florida, Michigan, Minnesota, Montana 
and South Carolina. The report said that almost all the states reported 
a surplus for the 1998 fiscal year, but in addition to tax cuts, they 
used the extra money for a variety of investment projects, likes schools 
and roads. Almost half the states, including New York, New Jersey 
and Connecticut, used some of the surplus to bolster the state rainy 
day account. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>