<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0298 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The most worrisome economic tiding for the new year is that health 
care premiums for employer-based coverage will rise by 10 percent 
or more in 1999. The startling figure, based on preliminary data from 
private employers and the program covering federal employees, is out 
of line with scant rate increases over the last four years. And it 
raises the question of whether managed care plans have returned to 
the days of double-digit rate increases, abandoning their promise 
to smother medical inflation. There are good reasons to believe the 
answer is no. The premium increases earlier in the decade were chronic, 
the symptom of a fee-for-service system lacking financial restraint. 
Next year's premium increases appear likely to be temporary. Health 
costs are rising, but not alarmingly so. It is too early to write 
off managed care as a fleeting has-been. The first task in sorting 
through the data is to distinguish premiums, which rise and fall in 
cycles like prices of other types of insurance, from the underlying 
costs of treating patients. ``It is the long-term trend in medical 
costs, not recent movements in premiums, that ultimately rules the 
markets,'' says Paul Ginsburg of the Center for Studying Health System 
Change. A study by Ginsburg and Jon Gabel of KPMG Peat Marwick shows 
that while premiums have risen only by 1 percent to 2 percent a year 
over the last several years, medical costs have been rising by 2 percent 
to 3 percent. Ginsburg attributes the underpricing of insurance to 
a familiar strategy by insurers to price low during economic good 
times to expand their share of local markets. Insurers might also 
have misjudged how quickly medical costs would start to rise after 
the onslaught of managed care five years ago. But whatever the reason, 
the practice of raising premiums by less than costs had to end and 
will do so with a vengeance next year. Federal employees already know 
that their premiums will rise by an average of 12 percent or more. 
Ginsburg expects premiums for employer-based coverage to rise by more 
than 6 percent next year, about double this year's rise. But beyond 
the catch-up in premiums, medical costs are also rising. Hospital 
costs have risen by only 2 percent a year over the last few years 
but are expected to grow at twice that rate next year. Drug costs 
are rising by more than 10 percent a year, primarily because patients 
are taking advantage of a deluge of powerful new treatments. These 
changes are not necessarily temporary. Ginsburg, based on interviews 
with employers, attributes some of the cost increases to a backlash 
against restrictive types of managed care, like health maintenance 
organizations, that do the best job controlling costs. ``Employers 
in tight labor markets are reluctant to impose a narrow network of 
approved specialists because of employee opposition,'' he said. There 
is a widely held belief that the managed care revolution has run its 
course. According to this argument, the inflation of medical costs 
has fallen only because employers are shifting workers from high-cost 
fee-for-service coverage into lower-cost managed care. But the savings 
will be one time, because managed care costs are rising at the same 
rate as those of fee for service. But the Ginsburg-Gabel study says 
otherwise. The cost increases of nearly every type of health plan 
have fallen drastically. Shifting among plans explains only part of 
the cost savings. Prof. Kenneth Thorpe of Tulane University, an architect 
of the Clinton administration's proposed health care plan, points 
out that where managed care plans have gained a substantial market 
presence _ in California, for example _ health costs are rising slowly. 
But where managed care remains nascent _ as in Louisiana _ health 
costs continue to soar. Competition, he argues, imposes a useful discipline. 
Yet, Thorpe suggests, managed care might have done about as much as 
possible to control costs through financial restrictions. He suggests 
that to knock more digits off of medical inflation will require other 
tactics. ``Managed care needs to better monitor physician care, feeding 
back the results of studies that would tell doctors which treatments 
work, which do not,'' he said. Beyond that, Thorpe expects managed 
care to move into ``life-style issues _ helping patients control smoking, 
drinking, obesity and cholesterol.'' Suppose Thorpe's vision becomes 
reality, managed care learns to do all the right things and medical 
costs creep up anyway. At that point, it might be time to relax. No 
one knows how much Americans should spend on health care. If well-informed 
consumers choose to spend money out of their own pockets for expensive 
insurance plans that provide easy access to a panoply of specialists, 
that should cause little second-guessing. The problem with the double-digit 
inflation of the early 1990s was that the fee-for-service system drove 
doctors and patients to excessively expensive and risky procedures, 
tests and drug regimes. It may turn out that even a disciplined system 
will prove increasingly expensive. Medical cost inflation has not 
been as low over the last few years as steady premiums seemed to indicate. 
Nor will medical costs be nearly as bad as next year's high-rising 
premiums might suggest. The mundane truth is that health care costs 
seemed destined to outstrip inflation by a percentage point or two 
for at least the next year or so. That news is not joyous. But neither 
is it frightening. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>