<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0314 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Eight months before the Watergate break-in in 1972, a Navy submarine 
slipped inside Russian waters in the Far East and put a wiretap on 
an undersea Soviet military telecommunications cable. Now this was 
a first-rate burglary. The podlike device enabled the Navy to monitor 
Russian ballistic tests and track the deployment of its Far Eastern 
fleet, not the least of which were submarines carrying enough nuclear 
missiles to lay waste to the United States. Even more important, perhaps, 
the taps gave presidents from Richard Nixon to George Bush access 
to the minds of Soviet war planners. It hardly needs saying that if 
Nixon had stuck to these kinds of operations instead of trying to 
bug the Democrats, he might well have retired with honors. But maybe 
not. What if one of the submarines had been caught and its crew and 
equipment captured, despite standing orders to blow themselves up 
if cornered? The Pueblo, a surface spy ship, had been taken by the 
North Koreans without a shot in 1968. What if, with war still raging 
in Vietnam, a missile treaty with Moscow teetering on failure, a secret 
opening to China still tender and Nixon on the ropes with Watergate, 
Russian hardliners had decided to stage a show trial of an American 
submarine crew? We'll never know what might have happened, of course, 
because the spy mission was a brilliant tactical success, followed 
by a second tap placed on an undersea Soviet cable in the Barents 
Sea (as well as later taps on Libyan and one can only guess what other 
cables to this day). No risk, no gain, as they say. Credit, or blame, 
can be laid at the feet of a few imaginative Navy officers and Nixon 
administration officials who approved the missions, but honors must 
go to the steel-nerved captains and crews whose dangerous and daring 
exploits are given an unparalleled and sometimes even hair-raising 
rendition in ``Blind Man's Bluff.'' After racing through 300 pages 
of close calls, nuclear reactor disasters, torpedo-room fires and 
horrible deaths in the bone-crunching depths of the unforgiving sea, 
one can only sit in respectful awe of the men who went deep for months 
at a time, year after year. This, really, is their story. It begins 
with the ill-fated voyage of the Cochino, an ``ugly piece of junk,'' 
as described by Harris M. Austin, a communications technician who 
boarded the World War II vintage sub in Londonderry, Northern Ireland, 
for a maiden spy mission to the waters off the Soviet port of Murmansk 
in July 1949. U.S. officials were anxious to learn of Soviet rocket 
and especially nuclear developments. (The Russians were only months 
away from exploding their first atomic bomb.) Austin was the first 
of a long line of submarine-based ``spooks'' whose job was to lock 
on enemy communications and analyze telemetry data from missile tests. 
The submarine skipper's job was to get him close enough to pick up 
a clear signal, which required slipping into Soviet territorial waters. 
Sometimes, in what can only be called a show of warrior macho, captains 
went beyond the call of duty, in at least one case sneaking within 
a stone's throw of a harbor dock. Imagine a Russian periscope popping 
up off the Fulton Fish Market. Boys will be boys. In the Cochino's 
case the thrill of risk came to a swift end when its batteries caught 
fire and exploded in the storm-whipped Arctic off Norway. The boat 
had to be abandoned, but not before several men died, including some 
from the Tusk, a companion submarine that rushed to the rescue. The 
episode is told in all its dramatic, horrid detail, including the 
death of some men from ill-designed flotation boots that kept forcing 
their feet to the surface and putting their heads underwater. The 
history of submarine espionage, in fact, is threaded with mechanical 
failures, most disturbingly a propensity for torpedoes to catch fire, 
which may have sunk the nuclear attack submarine Scorpion with its 
crew in the Atlantic in May 1968. Some pity really should be reserved 
for Soviet crews, however, who were presented with such slipshod nuclear 
engineering that their assignments nearly amounted to sentences of 
death by radiation. With the help of a Russian military reporter, 
the authors _ Christopher Drew, who broke many of these stories as 
a Chicago Tribune reporter before coming to The New York Times as 
a special projects editor, and Sherry Sontag, a freelance writer _ 
give a detailed account of the destruction of one Soviet submarine 
from a nuclear disaster in the Pacific in 1968, a story told in bits 
and pieces elsewhere before but never so movingly or completely as 
here. The book's title, of course, is borrowed from the children's 
game of group tag played with blindfolds. That is the bulk of the 
story here, the drama of nuclear subs and crews shadowing each other 
in a real-life ``Hunt for Red October.'' They sometimes crashed into 
each other, with consequences far more lethal than mere child's play. 
Some of the story will be old news to those who have followed the 
periodic disclosures of submarine espionage since 1975, when The Los 
Angeles Times uncovered Project Jennifer, the secret operation to 
raise a sunken Soviet submarine from the floor of the Pacific in 1968. 
Ivy Bells, code name for the Okhotsk wiretap, was disclosed by The 
Washington Post in a highly self-censored story in 1985. By as it 
turns out, the Soviet Union was already wise to it, having been tipped 
off by Ronald Pelton, its mole in the National Security Agency. The 
Barents Sea tap went undiscovered for years more, but the infamous 
Walker family spy ring, which began its work in 1967 and went undiscovered 
until 1985, may have given the Russians most of what they needed to 
know about U.S. submarine movements and capabilities at a fraction 
of the millions _ perhaps billions _ that the United States spent 
on high-tech undersea wizardry. Which raises the question: Was it 
worth it? Who knows? Espionage histories have to be taken with a grain 
of salt, even one as vividly told, impressively documented and persuasively 
argued as this one. ``Blind Man's Bluff,'' one can be sure, is still 
being played. PUBLICATION NOTES: `BLIND MAN'S BLUFF: THE UNTOLD STORY 
OF AMERICAN SUBMARINE ESPIONAGE.' By Sherry Sontag and Christopher 
Drew, with Annette Lawrence Drew. Illustrated. 352 pages. Public Affairs. 
$25. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>