<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0440 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the government of New South Wales ordered a coroner's inquiry into 
the death of the six yachtsmen competing in the Sydney-Hobart yacht 
race, the commodores of the hosting yacht clubs on Thursday visited 
the families of five sailors who died during the storm-ravaged event. 
Hugo van Kretschmar, of the Cruising Yacht Club of Australia, and 
David Boyes, of the Royal Yacht Club of Tasmania, went to Launceston 
in Tasmania to visit the families of the crewmates and neighbors of 
Bruce Guy and Phil Skeggs, who died on board the Business Post Naiad 
late Sunday. The bodies of Guy and Skeggs were taken from the dismasted 
boat, which was towed into the fishing port of Eden, in Victoria. 
Before they were rescued, their surviving crewmates had strapped Guy's 
body inside the boat's hull, where he had died of a heart attack. 
The body of Skeggs, 34, was still tangled in the rigging on the boat's 
deck. He drowned when he could not escape from his safety harness 
when it was swamped by an enormous wave. After visiting Guy's and 
Skeggs' survivors, the commodores flew to Sydney to see the relatives 
of three sailors who had been aboard the Winston Churchill, the oldest 
yacht in the race. Jim Lawler, Michael Bannister and John Dean were 
swept off a life raft they had entered when the 57-year-old yacht 
began taking on water. The bodies of Lawler and Bannister were recovered, 
while Dean was missing and presumed dead. In addition to the New South 
Wales inquiry, the Cruising Yacht Club of Australia will also investigate 
the disaster, addressing yacht and life raft design and weather forecasting. 
But the club has drawn criticism because its investigation will be 
private. The race organizers have the support of the Australian prime 
minister, John Howard. ``I'm not a yachtsman,'' Howard said. ``I have 
to respect the views of people who understand the sea. It seems pretty 
sensible to me that the only principle that you can work by is that 
each skipper is in command of his own ship and he alone has to decide 
what that boat is going to do.'' The Maritime Authority abandoned 
its search Tuesday for Dean and the other missing sailor, Glyn Charles, 
a British Olympian who was washed off the deck of the Sword of Orion 
Sunday night. Planes will fly over Hobart's Constitution Dock, the 
finish line of the race, to honor both the dead and the 30 search 
and rescue aircraft that spent four days scouring the churning waters 
of the Bass Strait, between Australia's southeast coast and Tasmania, 
for survivors. Though the winning boats crossed the finish line on 
Tuesday, the race continued. Wednesday night, 28 boats from the original 
115-yacht fleet had finished and 17 were still racing. There was little 
wind in the Derwent River heading to the finish line; the flags around 
the dock drooped somberly at half-staff. A brief presentation was 
made to AFR Midnight Rambler, the race winner on handicap and one 
of the smallest yachts in the fleet. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>