<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the arrest of two more retired senior naval officers this week, 
an Argentine federal judge appears to be expanding his inquiry into 
accusations that the armed forces systematically kidnapped the children 
of dissidents in the ``dirty war'' against leftists in the 1970s and 
'80s. Former Adm. Ruben Franco, 71, who commanded the navy for a time 
during Argentina's seven-year military dictatorship, was arrested 
Monday on suspicion that he was a central organizer of the kidnappings 
of an estimated 230 babies. On Tuesday a retired navy captain, Jorge 
Eduardo Acosta, 56, formerly a top officer at a clandestine torture 
center at the Navy Mechanics School, gave himself up after two weeks 
on the run. A total of nine officers, including the junta leaders, 
Gen. Jorge Rafael Videla, 72, and Adm. Emilio Massera, 73, have been 
arrested, detained or summoned to court this year for their suspected 
involvement in the baby-snatching scheme. Federal Judge Adolfo Bagnasco, 
who is prosecuting the case, has a list of 30 suspects. According 
to court papers, scores of women who happened to be pregnant were 
seized for political reasons, then taken to a maternity cell in the 
Navy Mechanics School and forced into labor or forced to have caesarean 
sections. They were then killed, usually dumped alive into the ocean 
or shot and buried in secret graves. Their children were handed over 
to childless wives of military officers. The Grandmothers of the Plaza 
de Mayo, a human rights group, has found about 60 young adults who 
were taken at birth, and 30 have been reunited with their families. 
For the most part, the suspects are now frail elderly men who, during 
their prime, were among the most powerful and feared men in Argentina. 
Several are also wanted by Baltasar Garzon, the Spanish judge seeking 
the extradition from Britain of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the former 
dictator of Chile, for their alleged involvement in the murders of 
thousands of people. President Carlos Saul Menem pardoned top military 
officers for their involvement in the dirty war soon after he was 
first elected in 1989. His action was criticized by human rights advocates, 
but his backers said it was the only way to stop a series of military 
coup attempts. Menem's pardon, however, did not cover the kidnapping 
of babies. Acosta told Bagnasco that the children born in the Navy 
Mechanics School were given back to their families. He told reporters 
that the case was part of a ``propaganda campaign,'' adding, ``This 
is a direct attack on the Argentine armed forces.'' Acosta was held 
in custody for five months in 1987 on charges of torture and making 
illegal arrests, but was cleared of those charges under Menem's amnesty. 
The military high command, which has tried to distance itself from 
crimes of the past, has been shaken by the flurry of arrests as well 
as a separate investigation into illegal arms sales to Ecuador and 
Croatia. While there has been grumbling by retired officers and some 
junior officers, the high command has made no official comment on 
the arrests. This week Gen. Martin Balza, the armed forces chief, 
withdrew a libel suit against the leader of the Mothers of the Plaza 
de Mayo, a human rights group of mothers of the disappeared, saying 
he hoped to contribute ``a small grain of sand to the process of national 
reconciliation.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>