<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0390 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The stain on his record will endure, reflecting a six-month prison 
term for drug use that disrupted a long and colorful career of public 
service. But therein lies the paradox of Marion Barry as he leaves 
office Saturday, ending 16 years as mayor of the District of Columbia 
and its most electrifying political personality for nearly three decades. 
At noon that day, Anthony Williams, the city's former chief financial 
officer and a relative newcomer to local politics, is scheduled to 
be sworn in as mayor. Williams, 47, a Democrat from California who 
moved to Washington only five years ago, easily won election in November. 
Yet Williams' triumph was achieved only after Barry, 62, chose not 
to run for a fifth term, an apparent acknowledgment that he knew it 
was time to move on. ``I'm proud of all we accomplished,'' Barry said 
Wednesday at his final weekly news conference, striking his familiar 
immodest pose. ``I have no regrets. I'm not sad. I'm not anxious. 
I'm not down. In fact, I'm up. I feel good physically, mentally, spiritually, 
and some say I look pretty good, too.'' Barry's personality and politics 
shaped much of the District through its economic rise and fall over 
his first three terms, 1978 to 1990. But after emerging from prison 
to make a remarkable return to office in 1994, it soon became apparent 
his mighty touch was gone. He could not escape the financial havoc 
that evolved during his third term and the next four years under his 
successor, Sharon Pratt Kelly. Huge deficits and dysfunctional agencies 
led the new Republican-controlled Congress in 1995 to create a control 
board, which snatched all meaningful authority over the city and left 
Barry as little more than a bit player. Only this year has the city's 
economy shown improvement, prompting the control board, in a final 
censure of Barry, to announce that powers of running the city would 
be restored to the new mayor. But Barry leaves a legacy more complex 
than that of a political leader who rose, fell and rose again after 
expunging the personal demons of drugs, alcohol and adultery. ``How 
he will be judged depends upon who is judging,'' said Ron Walters, 
a professor of political science at the University of Maryland. To 
many, especially black residents, he is still a hero. Mark Plotkin, 
a political commentator on WAMU, a local public radio station, said, 
``To some people in the city, he had achieved almost mythical proportions.'' 
As an active campaigner in the civil rights movement and one of the 
first black mayors to lead a large majority-black city, Barry made 
it a priority to hire as many blacks onto the city payroll as possible. 
He also encouraged the creation of minority-owned business, worked 
for downtown redevelopment and made sure his budget always had money 
for a summer jobs program for teenagers. The combination enabled thousands 
of once-poor District residents to achieve dignity and middle-class 
status and helped build a solid black middle class. He has also won 
e respect from blacks as well as many whites for what he described 
as his spiritual and emotional recovery following his prison sentence. 
Many District residents insisted they would have voted for him had 
he sought re-election this year. ``I think history will be kind to 
him for what he did for the little man and for children,'' said Sam 
Jordan, a longtime friend and political ally who heads the city's 
Office of Emergency Preparedness.``He made some mistakes, but he went 
back to his church and his Lord, asking for forgiveness.'' But Barry 
remains intensely disliked by other District residents, who viewed 
his substance abuse and adultery as symbols of arrogance, betrayal 
and malfeasance that left the city in perilous financial condition. 
``I think he was a disaster,'' said Marie Drissel, a community activist 
who helped recruit Williams to run this year. ``The idea that our 
mayor could be caught smoking crack cocaine is something a lot of 
other people aren't going to get over.'' Much of that sentiment was 
shared by Republican members of Congress. Barry always recognized 
the animus of his Republican opponents, and said Wednesday, ``When 
the Republicans took over, I knew they were philosophically opposed 
to returning power back to the people of Washington.'' But he pressed 
on, poking at Congress and offering his own life as an example of 
how to endure tough times and triumph. ``If I had to summarize all 
of what I've done, and I've done a tremendous amount,'' he said today, 
when asked how he would like to be remembered, ``I have given help 
and hope to a lot of people who didn't have any help and very little 
hope. I care deeply about the city. I do.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>