<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0360 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the second time this week, American fighter jets attacked an Iraqi 
air-defense battery Wednesday as Iraq carried out its threat to fire 
on American and British aircraft patrolling ``no flight'' zones. Four 
F-16s struck three parts of a surface-to-air-missile site outside 
the southern city of Talil after a squadron of American and British 
warplanes detected the launching of six to eight surface-to-air missiles, 
American military officials said. The fighters attacked with radar-seeking 
missiles and laser-guided 500-pound bombs, and the Pentagon said initial 
assessments suggested that a missile launcher and two vehicles had 
been damaged. On Monday, American jets attacked and destroyed a surface-to-air 
missile site in northern Iraq, the Pentagon said. Although the Clinton 
administration has tried to play down the skirmishes as ineffectual 
efforts by President Saddam Hussein to test American resolve, a senior 
defense official said Wednesday that Iraq had moved eight new surface-to-air 
missile batteries into the southern zone and six into the northern 
zone. After the exchanges Wednesday, the government-controlled Iraq 
News Agency said Iraqi forces had repulsed an American-led attack 
that left a farmer dead and two other civilians wounded. The agency 
again claimed, as it did on Monday, that it was ``virtually certain'' 
that Iraqi forces had shot down one of the attacking aircraft. The 
Clinton administration dismissed Iraq's claims, saying that all 24 
American and British jets flying over southern Iraq on Wednesday had 
returned safely to their bases. And while pilots take any surface-to-air 
missiles seriously, the missiles Wednesday never seriously threatened 
the warplanes overhead, the officials said. The United States and 
its allies created the zones in northern and southern Iraq after the 
Persian Gulf War to protect Iraqi ethnic groups facing repression 
from Saddam. Administration and Pentagon officials said they believed 
that Saddam was hoping to weaken international support for the ``no 
flight'' zones and, perhaps, to boost morale inside Iraq after four 
nights of American and British air and missile strikes earlier this 
month. One official said Iraq had made similar provocations in the 
wake of American strikes in 1993 and 1996 and speculated that the 
skirmishes would not continue much longer. ``They're for internal 
consumption,'' the official said. Britain's defense minister, George 
Robertson, said Wednesday that British and American pilots would continue 
to enforce the zones and retaliate if challenged. ``Saddam's war machine 
was badly damaged by the recent campaign of military action against 
his regime, and this latest gesture of arrogance and defiance is a 
sign of his weakness,'' he said in a statement. Still, the Iraqi challenges 
have focused attention on the American and British patrols, which 
are conducted from bases in Turkey, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait and from 
aircraft carriers plying the Persian Gulf. France, which joined in 
the creation of the zones, stopped flying its Mirage jets based in 
Saudi Arabia after the American and British strikes began on Dec. 
16. Also on Wednesday, President Boris Yeltsin reiterated Russia's 
strong opposition to the raids and the continued clashes in a 40-minute 
telephone conversation with President Clinton. It was the first time 
the two presidents had spoken since the strikes began. In the aftermath 
of those strikes, Clinton had tried to get Yeltsin on the phone, but 
failed. The National Security Council's spokesman, David C. Leavy, 
said Clinton explained to Yeltsin why the United States believed force 
was necessary. Leavy said the two also discussed Russia's economic 
crisis and its parliament's new delays in ratifying the second strategic 
arms reduction treaty, or Start II. ``They agreed, despite the differences 
over Iraq, that it is essential to continue to strengthen the relationship,'' 
Leavy said. The incident Wednesday began about 9:30 a.m. local time 
when four British Tornado jets saw the first of several surface-to-air 
missiles being launched, officials said. The F-16s, which were nearby, 
also detected the missiles. It was not clear which aircraft were their 
intended targets. During the four nights of raids, American and British 
pilots repeatedly tried to hit surface-to-air missile batteries. But 
they destroyed only half of 16 sites they attacked. In the two clashes 
since then, pilots have hit both batteries that fired missiles. Iraq 
may be relying on a lucky shot to bring down an American jet and its 
pilot. Several times in the last few days, Iraqi MiG fighter jets 
and helicopters have flown into the zones, apparently trying to lure 
American fighters toward surface-to-air missile sites, Pentagon officials 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>