<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0223 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jews may be the People of the Book, but they have come to cherish 
the CD-ROM, particularly the CD-ROM's ability to store a lot of religious 
text and teach children about the traditions of Judaism in an entertaining 
fashion. The two major distributors of Judaic software are the Davka 
Corp. (www.davka.com), based in Chicago, and Torah Educational Software 
(www.torahscholar.com), in Jerusalem. Davka, which has been around 
since 1982, grew out of the Institute for Computers in Jewish Life. 
CD's with Judaic graphics and Hebrew-language software are the most 
popular categories in Davka's catalog of more than 100 titles, said 
Rabbi Irving Rosenbaum, the company's president. Torah Educational 
Software was started in 1991 by a newly Orthodox Jew who became fascinated 
with Bible codes. He emigrated from the United States to Israel and 
runs TES with another American businessman who moved to Israel. In 
the last couple of years, Hebrew word-processing software has been 
a big part of TES' business. The company distributes what may be the 
most comprehensive _ and expensive _ CD-ROM in the Jewish market: 
Bar-Ilan University's Judaic Library version 6.0. It sells for $698 
and contains the Torah, the Talmud and about 200 other religious texts. 
The CD is the fruit of Bar-Ilan's Responsa Project, which has been 
transcribing religious texts for computer use for 30 years. The first 
version of Judaic Library sold for $1,200, but each subsequent version 
has come with more text, an improved search engine and a lower price 
tag. Initially, there were rumblings of criticism among Orthodox Jews 
of the use of CD-ROM technology, Rabbi Rosenbaum said, but the disks 
are now stocked by religious-supply stores, like those in the Borough 
Park neighborhood of Brooklyn. Sales of religious CD's in Orthodox 
neighborhoods tend to be of the Hebrew-only variety. The study of 
holy texts is the ultimate priority in the Orthodox world, and many 
publishers of Judaic software say they expect something of a buzz 
when DVD disks arrive with the layout of the Talmud page on the screen 
mimicking the way the pages appear in bound copies. The devotion to 
Torah study has led some Jews to justify the counterfeiting of software. 
But last week, a rabbinical court in Jerusalem ruled that it was a 
sin to make unauthorized copies of CD-ROM's. The rabbis said that 
while counterfeiting was not the equivalent of stealing, it was like 
trespassing and that Jews who bought bootleg CD's were ``helping the 
sinner.'' Religious Jews, in pairs of study partners, have been reading 
and discussing their holy books in study halls for millenniums. It 
is most unlikely that the advent of digital technology will change 
that. But in this technological age, CD-ROM's are likely to become 
an increasingly important tool in that learning. A Nightmare Told 
in Words and Pictures SURVIVORS: TESTIMONIES OF THE HOLOCAUST (Survivors 
of the Shoah Visual History Foundation; two-disk set for $29.95, or 
$69.95 for two sets with a study guide; Macintosh 7.1 and up and Windows 
95 and up.) This set of CD-ROM's features accounts from the huge digital 
archive of the Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation. Something 
of a technological marvel, the 150-terabyte archive (a terabyte is 
a trillion bytes or 1,000 gigabytes) contains videotaped oral histories 
from close to 50,000 Holocaust survivors. The foundation was started 
by the director Steven Spielberg after he made the film ``Schindler's 
List.'' The recording of survivors' accounts began in 1994. This CD-ROM 
compilation uses the stories of four survivors _ Bert, Sol, Sylvia 
and Paula _ to teach the history and geography of the Holocaust to 
students in grades seven and above. (A 32-page study guide created 
by Facing History and Ourselves, a Holocaust education group, comes 
with the purchase of a two-set teacher's pack.) The CD-ROM is narrated 
by Leonardo DiCaprio and Winona Ryder, two Hollywood heartthrobs the 
foundation no doubt hopes will draw in young people. The graphic design 
of the CD-ROM is muted, which is appropriate given the horrific nature 
of the information conveyed. Over a charred parchment background, 
sepia photographs and occasional snippets of black-and-white newsreels 
appear and dissolve as in a movie. One very effective aspect of the 
CD's interface is revealed by placing a pointer on a photograph. The 
contrast darkens and a couple of lines explaining the context of the 
picture appear in a window below it. A total of 80 minutes of survivors' 
accounts is divided into nine time periods: before the war, after 
the war and year by year, starting in 1939 and ending in 1945. Students 
can follow the progress of a particular survivor throughout the course 
of the Holocaust or track all four of them in any given period. A 
map of Europe is available for each time period. A valuable index 
of terms, locations, historical figures and events benefits from the 
Shoah Foundation's extensive cataloguing of the oral histories. You 
highlight a selection in a frame on the left of the screen and definitions 
appear in a frame on the right; the definitions range from a sentence 
to several paragraphs. A two-sentence entry on Birkenau, for example, 
explains that it was a death camp added to the Auschwitz complex in 
1941 and that more than a million Jews were murdered there ``with 
horrible efficiency.'' The index devotes three paragraphs to war criminals 
and war crimes, mentioning the Nuremberg trials and the Cold War's 
impact on prosecutions and listing prominent Nazis who were never 
brought to justice and a couple who were. The shortcomings of Testimonies 
of the Holocaust are minor. You have to sit through the same two-and-a-half-minute 
introduction every time you start up the CD-ROM. Some screens scroll 
down in a jerky fashion, leaving users wondering whether they have 
gone too far down in the text. And then there is the background music, 
somber strings that play while no one is speaking. It just isn't necessary 
and gets to be slightly grating after a while. But this is an excellent 
educational resource, thoughtfully designed and thorough in its presentation. 
The foundation gets high marks for approaching this task by telling 
the stories of four individuals, putting faces and voices to the horrors 
of the Holocaust. From the Torah to the Zohar SONCINO CLASSICS COLLECTION 
(Davka; $589; Macintosh 6.5 and up, and Windows 3.1 and 95.) The Soncino 
Classics Collection is a high-end title from the Davka Corp. It contains 
the complete English, Hebrew and Aramaic texts of the Torah; the Talmud; 
a collection of teachings and interpretations of Biblical verse known 
as the Midrash Rabbah, and the Zohar, the principal text of Jewish 
mysticism. The disk also includes Hebrew-only versions of a number 
of Talmudic commentaries. And the Hebrew version of the Bible has 
vowels and cantillation marks, which will be useful for those who 
are learning to read or chant the Torah. Hebrew and English text can 
also be displayed in windows that scroll by simultaneously. For a 
sense of the enormous amount of text on this disk, I called up one 
of the five books of Moses in English and put my scroll bar on automatic 
pilot. (``In the beginning'' seemed like a good place to start.) It 
took nearly five minutes to scroll through the 50 chapters of Genesis. 
One drawback is that users are unable to search for a particular weekly 
Torah portion, or parsha, as it is known in Hebrew, by name. The parshas 
have Hebrew names and are read each week. The coming parsha is Vayechi, 
and after consulting a hard copy of the Old Testament, I found that 
it begins with Chapter 48 of Genesis. Only then was I able to track 
it on the CD-ROM. The English translation of the Talmud on the Soncino 
Classics CD-ROM seems to have more footnotes than actual text. In 
a six-paragraph chapter, I found 34 footnotes. And the text is diligently 
indexed: in the English Talmud, there are 23 citations for the word 
``goat'' and 37 for ``poor.'' Of course, that's nothing compared with 
Moses, who had 1,432 citations in the Talmud. When you search for 
Moses, a results window appears, listing all the lines in which Moses 
is mentioned. Double click on Moses in any one of those lines, and 
a new window comes up immediately with the portion of the Talmud where 
that particular citation is found. The search word is highlighted, 
and you can scroll up or down to read enough of the Talmud to get 
the context of the citation. The CD-ROM allows you to pick from eight 
colors, including magenta, for the background and text. You may use 
any font available on your computer for the English text. Because 
it has English as well as Hebrew and Aramaic versions of the texts, 
this disk can be used by beginners and advanced students. For all 
but the most advanced scholars, it will be more than adequate. My 
rabbi assures me that if you drop this CD-ROM, it isn't necessary 
to kiss it, even though the disk contains the Almighty's name in a 
digital form. A Not Too Triumphant Effort TRIUMPH OF SURVIVAL:THE 
STORY OF THE JEWS IN THE MODERN ERA, 1650-1990 (Davka; $59.95; Macintosh 
6.5 and up, and Windows 3.1 and later.) This two-disk CD-ROM set is 
based on the book of the same name by Berel Wein, a rabbi and prolific 
historian. Rabbi Wein clearly has an impressive command of Jewish 
history and these disks cover a lot of ground, but they are also a 
classic example of why using a multimedia format for its own sake 
is a waste of megabytes. The short videos of showing Rabbi Wein sitting 
at a desk in his study lecturing on particular periods are unnecessary. 
The information would be more efficiently presented as text. And the 
video clips of brief television-reporter-like stand-ups by the rabbi 
(at Theodor Herzl's grave in Jerusalem or the original Carmel Wine 
factory) are frustrating. We don't want to see the historian. We want 
to see these places of historical significance. The producers went 
through the expense of shooting on location. Better to have panned 
the scenes and left the historian at home. There are some compelling 
clips. We get to watch a black-and-white film of David Ben Gurion 
declaring the Jewish state on May 14, 1948. There is color news footage 
of Palestinian youths throwing stones at Israeli troops during the 
intifada, Israeli civilians wearing gas masks during the Persian Gulf 
war and mourners reciting Kaddish at Yitzhak Rabin's funeral. Triumph 
of Survival uses audio, too, and the problems there are more evident. 
I clicked on a couple of ``hear audio'' links in a section on the 
Orthodox resurgence in America, and there was no sound. A picture 
came up instead. What the producers call ``audio stories'' on Jewish 
personalities are really cursory off-camera segments, 30 to 40 seconds 
long, by Rabbi Wein. Better to have a fiery sound bite of Meir Kahane 
or an excerpt of a classroom discourse of Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik, 
one of the latter-day giants of Orthodoxy. Rabbi Wein's succinct sketches 
of a wide range of Jewish historical figures _ from the Chofetz Chaim 
to Abraham Joshua Heschel _ will be valuable for students who hanker 
for a greater understanding of Jewish history. A number of photographs, 
maps and other graphics load instantly and help illuminate that history. 
Telling the Story for Children WHO STOLE HANUKKAH? and THE INTERACTIVE 
HAGGADAH (Jerusalem Multimedia Productions; $24.95 and $29.95, respectively; 
Macintosh 7.0 and up and Windows 3.X and 95.) These two CD-ROM'S, 
both with a holiday focus, are multilingual _ they can be viewed in 
English, Hebrew, Russian, French or Spanish. Both feature Gumby-like 
characters in colorful settings that are a collage of drawings and 
photographs. And the English version provides transliterated prayers 
for children who can't read Hebrew. Who Stole Hanukkah? requires the 
installation of Intel's Indeo video software, which comes on the disk. 
The game revolves around a missing jar of oil from the Holy Temple. 
Kids have to solve a series of puzzles to track down the jar. The 
CD-ROM's were produced in Israel with support from the Jewish Agency, 
a quasi-governmental group. The voices of many characters are a little 
too cute, and the Hanukkah CD-ROM suffers from a programming glitch: 
when a hot-linked object or character is clicked on, a white box replaces 
it for a couple of seconds before whatever replaces it appears, giving 
users cause for alarm. You wonder if the software is faulty. The content 
ranges from serious to silly. The CD provides sources in the Book 
of Maccabees and the Talmud for Hanukkah traditions. And for children 
weaned on MTV, three talking candles do a Motown version of ``Rock 
of Ages.'' The Interactive Haggadah begins with a family seated at 
a Passover table. Click on the wine goblet, and you hear the blessing 
recited over the wine. Click on the matzah, and the matzah blessing 
is chanted, followed by instructions for making shmura matzah. When 
users enter the kitchen, they find recipes for matzah balls, potato 
kugel and other Passover delicacies. Dragging ritual items like bitter 
herbs or the shank bone onto the Passover plate triggers clever clay 
animations that explain the significance of the items. My favorite 
portion of the program is a multiple-choice exam given by the father 
figure leading the Seder. ``What was the area of Egypt where the Jews 
lived?'' he asks. The answer is Goshen, but Seward Park and Brooklyn 
are the other choices. ``Who were the two midwives who refused to 
obey Pharaoh and saved Hebrew babies?'' If you guess Thelma and Louise, 
a buzzer informs you that the answer is incorrect. I assumed that 
the karaoke version of ``Dayenu'' on my ``Reggae Passover'' CD was 
the last attempt at mixing karaoke and the exodus from Egypt. I was 
mistaken. The Interactive Haggadah comes with an instrumental version 
of the Four Questions for your karaoke Seder. It's enough to keep 
Elijah from coming in. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>