<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0352 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A hardening of positions by the United Nations and the group that 
controls most of Afghanistan is crippling efforts to resume international 
relief work there, officials from both sides say. Stalled talks with 
the Taliban, the militant Islamic movement that rules more than 90 
percent of the country, mean that almost no significant work in vital 
areas like health and reconstruction from more than 20 years of civil 
war can take place in the country, which has now fallen under the 
grip of winter. UNICEF, the United Nations children's fund, said this 
week that education in Afghanistan had all but ground to a halt, with 
nearly nine of every ten girls and two out of three boys not in school. 
UNICEF said that 257 of every 1,000 children die before age 5, the 
fourth worst rate in the world. Other relief groups say that hospitals 
have run out of medicine and other essential supplies, while inflation 
has driven up the price of food. The dispute with the Taliban boils 
down to this: The United Nations, which withdrew all of its foreign 
workers four months ago, will not return until it has firm security 
guarantees for its staff. And the Taliban will not allow other activities 
by the international organization _ such as human rights investigations 
_ until the United Nations reopens its offices in the capital, Kabul. 
In August, the United States carried out missile attacks on training 
camps in Afghanistan run by a Saudi-born militant, Osama bin Laden. 
The United States has linked him to terrorist activities against U.S. 
targets, including U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. After the 
attacks, an Italian military officer serving with the United Nations 
was killed in Kabul, apparently in retaliation. The United Nations 
is demanding that the Taliban account fully for that killing and prosecute 
the attackers, and also that it solve the mystery of the earlier killings 
of two Afghan workers attached to the World Food Program in Jalalabad. 
Abdul Hakeem Mujahid, the Taliban's representative-designate at the 
United Nations, said in an interview Tuesday that his government had 
``done a lot of work in this regard.'' Shortly after the killing of 
the Italian officer, the Taliban authorities arrested two Pakistanis 
and charged them, he said. ``We have these two convicts and we have 
been investigating them,'' Mujahid said. ``So far they didn't admit 
anything. We gave some information to the U.N., but they didn't consider 
that it was enough.'' He said that the Taliban want to interview a 
French officer who was wounded in the attack to determine if he could 
identify the suspects in custody, but that their requests have gone 
unanswered. Mujahid said that the United Nations has also rejected 
as inadequate the information gathered on the attack on the two local 
relief workers in Jalalabad, a generally lawless city where kidnappings 
an shootings are frequent. In November, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi 
Annan recommended that the United Nations send human rights investigators 
to Afghanistan to look into accusations of massacres of Taliban troops 
in 1997 by opposition forces near the northern opposition stronghold 
of Mazar-i-Sharif. The investigators were also to look into reports 
that forces allied to the Taliban, if not the Taliban itself, had 
in turn killed an unknown number of civilians and opposition fighters 
in the same region this year, when the Taliban retook the area. Human 
rights groups have relied on reports from people who fled the area, 
who were largely supporters of enemies of the Taliban. The United 
Nations also wants to investigate how a number of Iranian diplomats 
and journalists were killed in Taliban military operations this year. 
The Iranians had supported Shiite, ethnic Hazara militias that were 
overrun by the Taliban. On Dec. 8, the Security Council supported 
those recommendations for investigations and also backed a plan to 
set up a permanent human rights and relief monitoring contingent in 
Afghanistan. In Geneva, the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights, 
Mary Robinson, is putting together a five-member team of investigators 
to study the reports of massacres. But her spokesman said that the 
team would need the cooperation of the Taliban as well as that of 
other fighters still in the area. This is being negotiated. Mujahid 
said that ``first the United Nations agencies should be shifted back 
from Pakistan to Afghanistan, then the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan 
will help them.'' Some nongovernmental aid groups, which had pulled 
their headquarters out of Kabul in July after the Taliban demanded 
that they move into a derelict technical college dormitory on the 
edge of the city, have returned. Some aid agencies have pledged that 
they will move to the building after it is renovated _ a date in the 
distant future _ in return for the right to work among Afghans who, 
they say, need their help immediately. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>