<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0378 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Justice Department announced Wednesday that it had joined a lawsuit 
filed by a whistle-blower against Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp., bringing 
new allegations that the company defrauded federal health programs 
through a scheme involving bogus expense claims. The action is the 
second time since October that the government has joined a whistle-blower 
suit contending that the health giant systematically cheated federal 
programs like Medicare out of millions of dollars by routinely overstating 
expenses in filed reports. By joining the second suit, the government 
for the first time has accused Columbia hospitals that were not previously 
owned by Hospital Corp. of America, which merged with Columbia in 
1994. The October suit named more than 200 hospitals, all of which 
were once owned by HCA. The latest suit names more than 100 other 
hospitals that were owned by the company before it merged with HCA. 
The latest suit also for the first time brings claims that Columbia 
hospitals manipulated expenses to increase reimbursement for outpatient 
services like home care, sometimes by misreporting expenses associated 
with the acquisition of companies involved in those businesses. Because 
outpatient care is reimbursed on the basis of cost, such a fraud could 
have a strong effect on any hospital company's bottom line. For example, 
the new suit contends that in 1994 Columbia bought several home-care 
agencies from Olsten Kimberly Corp. at artificially low prices and 
inflated fees to Olsten to manage them. That shifted expenses from 
good will, which is not reimbursable, to management fees, which are. 
Olsten has said it is cooperating with the investigation. The suit 
says similar cost-shifting was done in a 1993 transaction involving 
Rescare, another home-care agency. The suit also spells out specific 
instances where hospitals misreported costs by inflating the amount 
of property taxes paid, including unallowable marketing expenses or 
misreporting expenses made for doctor recruitment and offices. The 
lawsuit, which was unsealed Wednesday in U.S. District Court in Tampa, 
Fla., was originally filed in 1996 by John Schilling, a corporate 
whistle-blower who had worked on reimbursement issues for Columbia 
both as a consultant and an employee. Under the federal statute governing 
such cases, the suit was then reviewed and investigated by the Justice 
Department, which then decided to file its motion to join the litigation. 
At issue are the workings of a complex, little-understood part of 
modern hospitals known as the federal cost-reporting system, one that 
has meant billions of dollars in payments by the government to hospitals 
and other health care providers over the years. Those reports generate 
hundreds of millions of dollars in payments each year to Columbia 
alone. Through that system, portions of costs associated with patient 
care are reimbursed by programs like Medicare at different rates. 
But, in its suit, the government contends that the companies intentionally 
misrepresented costs to increase the reimbursement rate or receive 
payment for costs that were not eligible for reimbursement. Much of 
the government's critical evidence in the cost-reporting cases comes 
from secret, second sets of cost reports and work sheets maintained 
at the hospitals that contained significantly lower expenses than 
those in reports submitted to the government. But in this case, the 
government also obtained direct evidence from Schilling. He left his 
job of helping four Columbia hospitals prepare their cost reports 
in 1995 but rejoined the company after his suit was filed. From then 
on, he turned over information he obtained during that time to government 
investigators. ``John Schilling went the extra mile,'' said Stephen 
Meagher, a lawyer with Phillips &AMP; Cohen who represents both whistle-blowers 
in the cases joined by the government. ``He was able to give investigators 
a real-time picture of just how the cost-reporting practices were 
working.'' Schilling was a reimbursement manager for Columbia/HCA 
from 1993 through 1995 and was responsible for coordination and preparation 
of cost reports filed by four Columbia hospitals in Florida, each 
of which is named as a defendant. Schilling later worked as a consultant 
to the company to help prepare cost reports filed with Medicare. The 
case was brought under the False Claims Act, which allows whistle-blowers 
to file suit on behalf of the government. Under that Civil War-era 
law, the government can potentially recover three times any amount 
defrauded from a federal program. If the suit is successful, Schilling 
stands to receive as much as 25 percent of any amount recovered. Many 
of the allegations contained in the suit were not new. Information 
provided by Schilling became the basis of a criminal case filed last 
year against four mid-level Columbia executives, charging them with 
cost-reporting fraud at Fawcett Memorial Hospital in Port Charlotte, 
Fla. Much of the other information provided by Schilling was used 
by the FBI in support of an application for search warrants that were 
served in several states in the summer of 1997. ``The issues raised 
in this suit and the previous suit related to cost reporting are not 
new,'' said Jeff Prescott, a Columbia spokesman. ``Specific issues 
and even the specific hospitals named were all disclosed in the FBI 
affidavit that was unsealed'' in 1997. Both lawsuits are widely expected 
to be part of a broad settlement of fraud charges between Columbia 
and the government. Analysts have estimated that Columbia may have 
to pay more than $1 billion to settle various fraud claims being investigated 
by the government, including the cost-reporting case. ``I think we 
are going to see a lot more of these,'' said Nancy Weaver, an analyst 
with Stephens Inc. ``But we are still waiting to see if they can reach 
some kind of settlement in 1999.'' But analysts and lawyers involved 
in the case think that cost-reporting claims will make up the largest 
piece of any settlement. ``These cases show that the heart of the 
investigation of Columbia involves cost-reporting fraud,'' Meagher 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>