<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0275 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Internet is an orchard of unintended consequences. The network 
itself, with all its content and clamor and chaos, is an unintended 
consequence of Pentagon research. And like some kind of magic-realist 
garden plot, it is a place where every seed, whether carefully planted 
or heedlessly strewn, sprouts into a different species, blossoms into 
yet another species and bears unexpected mutant fruits. People bend 
it into shapes you wouldn't expect. And particularly gamers. ``I'll 
never forget one day, about three months after we launched the service, 
I went into this room and suddenly Van Halen started coming out of 
my speakers,'' said Brian Moriarty, co-founder and chief visionary 
of Mpath (www.mplayer.com), a digital playpen for 2 million online 
gamers. ``It turned out that one guy had decided that he wanted to 
play music while people were text-chatting, and so he turned on the 
CD and jammed his mike up against the speaker. ``Little did I know 
what this was going to turn into.'' From its inception, Mpath had 
built voice capability into its service so people could hurl epithets 
across the Internet as they decimated each other on Quake. But most 
game manufacturers weren't interested in using their limited available 
bandwidth for carrying voice data. It was more important to pump up 
the graphics or deliver more accurate positional information about 
bullets. Audio capacity was all but ignored in the game space. But 
it wasn't long before someone figured out how to use it in the chat 
rooms. ``There was a point,'' Moriarty said, ``when suddenly some 
kind of critical mass was achieved. You began to see a kind of chat 
regime. Maybe two talkers instead of one, or maybe three, and then 
the talkers started to outnumber the typers. Then social pressure 
began to be felt by these people because everyone was in on this conversation 
and the typers felt left out. So it snowballed very quickly, in a 
matter of a few months. And now, when you go in there, most of the 
users have got to have that microphone. If you go into the public 
chat areas, it's rare to find someone that doesn't have a microphone. 
In fact, a lot of users, when they create a chat room, it says, `Mikes 
only.''' Unlike Internet telephony, which has yet to find its feet, 
Mpath's voice chat spread in weedy profusion because the technology 
is cheap (the company's downloadable software is free, the service 
is free, and headset microphones sell for less than $40) and easy 
to set up, and because everyone was doing it. And because there is 
a richness in the human voice and its capacity for nuance: age, sex, 
social class, regional origin, cadences, rhythm, volume, tension, 
laughter. A sense of human presence. All of these subtleties, even 
the intake of breath, are amplified at a distance when you can't see, 
when all you can do is listen. That's why radio theater was so compelling. 
That's why the telephone is so compelling _ perhaps more compelling 
than a face-to-face conversation _ and why videophones are invariably 
disappointing. As Orson Welles said, the ear is more imaginative than 
the eye. Of course, people do some of the things one might expect. 
There are plenty of private chat rooms on Mpath with only two people 
in them. But there are also channels where far-flung relatives convene 
conference calls. And there is a sizable religious contingent of armchair 
preachers. ``They sit around and create their own Christian theme 
chat rooms and talk Christian and sing Christian and preach,'' Moriarty 
noted. ``On a good evening, you'll see three or four Christian rooms 
in chat.'' And then there's the singing. ``This is the fascinating 
thing that really caught us by surprise,'' Moriarty said. ``We have 
average Middle American kind of folks in the Southeast and into Texas 
who have discovered that Mplayer.com is a great way to get on line 
and sing. Hillbilly John is one of the ringleaders of the country 
singing group. He goes in there and organizes these live jamborees. 
Then there's this guy named Conway, and he runs a karaoke radio station 
on the service, pretty much every day as far as I can tell, and he 
sings a lot of Elvis in his own radio format. ``It kind of fell on 
us. All we did was give people the connection, and they discovered 
it. And now they're going crazy with it.'' Of course, a lot of the 
singing is horrible. But it is compelling in its horribleness. It 
is considerably more compelling than a personal home page, several 
times more compelling than any customized portal interface, and orders 
of magnitude more compelling than the whistles and bells of the media 
behemoths. The horrible singing is compelling because it is human. 
Because when someone gets up to sing, even in the dark, it involves 
a degree of risk, and it implies trust. ``Even when you hear people 
singing badly,'' said Brian Apgar, Mpath's co-founder and chief evangelist 
for chat, ``you can hear in their voice that they're trying. You can 
hear the feelings and emotions they're trying to communicate. And 
it makes you feel connected to them. It makes you feel for them. Because 
they're getting up there and expressing themselves. It's not phony, 
canned stuff from some major Hollywood conglomerate. It's coming out 
of somebody's trailer.'' No matter how fast the modems get, nothing 
in the overdesigned corporate infoglut can evoke the raw empathy of 
a butchered karaoke tune _ or ``Auld Lang Syne,'' for that matter. 
Because of all the fantastic things the Internet has on demand, the 
best thing it can deliver to us is one another. Happy New Year. (E-mail 
address: Herz(AT)nytimes.com) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>