<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0416 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The year that ends Thursday was a mediocre one for Madison Avenue, 
as the few creative impulses that agencies managed to muster appeared 
to have been diverted into making deals rather than effective, enjoyable 
campaigns. The advertising that prevailed during 1998 was so dreary 
and derivative that in comparison even the television season the broadcast 
networks are inflicting on their remaining viewers seems like another 
Golden Age. Worse yet for the established order, some of the most 
celebrated new ads were produced not by outside agencies but by talented 
teams employed in-house by marketers. Consumers would be less fearful 
of what peddlers have in store for them in 1999 if only advertisers 
like the Gap retail chain would deal themselves into the agency business. 
What follows is a look back at the rousers and howlers of the year. 
To level the playing field, recent ads in outstanding long-running 
campaigns _ for example, Absolut vodka, Altoids mints and ESPN ``Sports 
Center'' _ were excluded. The following are the acclaimed and the 
panned, starting with the high points in alphabetical order: AT&AMP;T 
A television commercial for AT&AMP;T Corp. can be called the most 
touching spot of 1998 that was left over from 1997. The commercial, 
centered on a soldier son who visited sites where his father fought 
in Vietnam, was delayed because of concerns it would prove contentious 
and exploitive. Viewers found the spot moving and poignant. Agency: 
Young &AMP; Rubicam Advertising. ADIDAS Five fanatical followers of 
the New York Yankees who painted the letters ``Y-A-N-K-S'' on their 
ample torsos were the focus of a hilarious campaign to promote the 
Adidas athletic apparel and footwear sold by Adidas-Salomon. Best 
moments: when the men mistakenly arranged themselves to spell ``A-N-S-K-Y'' 
and the mysterious assistance they provided David Cone in a bathroom 
to help him rest his pitching arm. Agency: Leagas Delaney. CALIFORNIA 
ANTI-SMOKING Advertising for the anti-smoking efforts sponsored by 
the California Department of Health Services always has effectively 
turned the iconography of the cigarette marketers against them, but 
a TV commercial introduced in June proved particularly pointed and 
prophetic. Months before ``60 Minutes'' drew attention to studies 
linking impotence to smoking, the spot wickedly dramatized the medical 
research by showing smoking men anxiously trying to impress attractive 
women _ only to be deflated when their cigarettes drooped like wet 
spaghetti. Agency: Asher &AMP; Partners. GAP Minimalism produced maximum 
results for Gap Inc. with campaigns for khaki pants, Internet selling 
and holiday shopping that rarely went unnoticed despite an understated, 
elegant style. One spot was widely deemed the most appealing of the 
year: the exhilarating, exuberant ``Khakis swing'' spot, directed 
by the photographer Matthew Rolston, that combined an eye-popping 
contemporary production technique, the moving freeze frame, with a 
rollicking vintage Louis Prima tune, ``Jump, Jive an' Wail.'' The 
only ones left wailing were competitors whose ads fell far short of 
Gap's _ and agencies worried that the retailer creates its own campaigns. 
Agency: in-house. MOUNTAIN DEW A clever, even intelligent television 
commercial for a soft drink? Yes, it happened this year with a spot 
for the Mountain Dew soda brand from the Pepsi-Cola Co. unit of Pepsico 
Inc. The commercial told the tale of a thirsty runner, the track star 
Michael Johnson, who went for a Mountain Dew only to find the store 
closed. The amusing premise was that he could run fast enough to turn 
back time to when the store was still open, but his furious efforts 
take him too far back _ to 1978, when a sign promised the store was 
``coming soon.'' Agency: BBDO New York, owned by the Omnicom Group.indep 
NEW BEETLE The irreverent introductory work for the revamped version 
of the VW Bug from Volkswagen of America was brilliant advertising 
that deserved to be the most acclaimed campaign of the year. The TV, 
print, outdoor and postcard ads helped make the New Beetle perhaps 
the most popular highway revival since speed limits returned to 65 
mph. The simple yet never simplistic campaign invoked the classic 
soft-sell pitch for the original Beetle, created by the old Doyle 
Dane Bernbach agency, yet still appealed to drivers born long after 
Beetles _ and even Beatles _ disappeared from the cultural landscape. 
Agency: Arnold Communications, part of Snyder Communications. NIKE 
A delightful commercial directed by John Woo (``Face/Off'') presented 
the members of the Brazilian World Cup soccer squad, sponsored by 
Nike Inc., playing an impromptu match at an airport when their flight 
is delayed. Fellow travelers were thrilled; security guards were confounded; 
fans of the Brazilian tune ``Mas Que Nada,'' heard in a version by 
the Tamba Trio, were pleased. Now if only the team had not lost the 
tournament final to France. Agency: Wieden &AMP; Kennedy. SATURN A 
deliciously quirky campaign, evocative of ``Twin Peaks,'' heralded 
the introduction of a three-door coupe from the Saturn unit of General 
Motors Corp. In two spots, a boy stood strangely in a field playing 
a tuba until a Saturn whisked him away. Another commercial recounted 
an enigmatic story of a man who brought an unusual friend _ a female 
mannequin _ along for a ride in a new Saturn. Agency: Publicis &AMP; 
Hal Riney, owned by Publicis S.A. TACO BELL The shtick of talking 
animals is as commonplace in TV commercials as shirtless beefcake 
is in Abercrombie &AMP; Fitch catalogs, but the Taco Bell unit of 
Tricon Global Restaurants offered a winning variation with a sassy, 
Spanish-speaking Chihuahua that entertained while still peddling the 
product. A campaign promoting a Taco Bell tie-in with ``Godzilla'' 
was far better than the clunky movie. And Taco Bell has sold more 
talking dog toys than Hasbro has sold Furbys. Agency: TBWA/Chiat/Day, 
part of Omnicom. TIMES SQUARE SIGNS The elaborate electrical displays 
in Times Square, known as spectaculars, grew more glowingly gaudy 
during 1998 as the neighborhood was set ablaze nightly with lights, 
characters and action. One new standout was a giant sign for Jell-O 
desserts, sold by the Kraft Foods unit of Philip Morris Cos. The billboard, 
built by Artkraft Strauss Sign Corp., combined thousands of real spoons, 
neon and electronic messages sent by consumers. Another was an oversized 
billboard for Planters mixed nuts, sold by the Nabisco Foods unit 
of the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corp. The sign, built by Spectacolor Communications, 
returned the dapper spokescharacter Mr. Peanut to Times Square after 
40 years. Agencies: Y&AMP;R Advertising, Jell-O; the Ammirati Puris 
Lintas unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies, Planters. Now here 
are the low points, also alphabetically: 
</TEXT>
</DOC>