<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0430 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A House committee, in a classified report unusual for its bipartisanship, 
has found that over the last 20 years China has obtained, sometimes 
through theft, some of the most sensitive American military technology, 
including nuclear weapons design, government officials and witnesses 
who appeared before the panel said. The committee's final report, 
unanimously approved by its five Republican and four Democratic members 
on Wednesday, found that during Republican and Democratic administrations 
alike, China acquired a range of technical secrets far beyond the 
transfers of information during the Clinton administration that prompted 
the panel's inquiry in May. In a carefully worded statement after 
the report was approved, the committee's chairman, Rep. Christopher 
Cox, R.-Calif., said that China's acquisition of American technology 
had harmed national security and that its ``acquisition efforts over 
the past two decades'' had been a ``serious, sustained'' activity. 
The panel released no details from its 700-page report on Wednesday 
because so much of its six-month inquiry dealt with classified information. 
The committee promised to begin a process, in consultation with the 
Clinton administration, to declassify as many of the findings as possible. 
But witnesses and intelligence officials who worked with the committee 
said it agreed with assessments by the Pentagon and the State Department 
that information shared with Chinese scientists by two American companies, 
Hughes Electronics Corp. and Loral Space and Communications, had improved 
Beijing's ability to launch satellites and ballistic missiles. In 
addition, witnesses said, the panel's conclusion that China had stolen 
military-related American technology might prove to be the most explosive 
part of the report. The panel uncovered, for example, a pattern by 
the Chinese of stealing nuclear weapons design technology from American 
military laboratories, said one person who has read part of the report. 
It was unclear when or over what period of time any of these nuclear-related 
thefts might have occurred. The committee, officials said, faulted 
policies of the Reagan, Bush and Clinton administrations but did not 
say whether the problems were worse in one administration than in 
another. It made 38 recommendations for legislation or executive orders 
to address those policy failures. The recommendations covered areas 
including security at U.S. weapons laboratories, handling of sensitive 
intelligence data and export controls. While the committee did not 
directly examine covert Chinese contributions to the 1996 American 
elections, officials said it did investigate the activities of a Chinese 
aerospace executive, Liu Chaoying, who has been a conduit for payments 
by the Chinese government to Democratic fund-raisers and who, with 
her father, Liu Huaqing, the former senior general in the Chinese 
military, has been involved in China's effort to acquire military-related 
technology. The committee began its inquiry after The New York Times 
disclosed that American satellite makers had helped Chinese scientists 
rectify failures in their rocket programs, conveying information that 
is applicable to long-range ballistic missiles. Over the last six 
months, the panel held 33 closed hearings, taking testimony from intelligence 
officials, industry executives and nuclear-weapons experts. The committee's 
inquiry initially focused on the interaction between China and the 
American satellite manufacturers whose satellites are carried into 
orbit on Chinese rockets. It soon branched out to examine the export 
of other advanced American technologies to China, including advanced 
computers and machining equipment. The panel hired outside experts 
to examine the question of whether scientists from Hughes Electronics, 
a subsidiary of the General Motors Corporation, and Loral had harmed 
national security by giving the Chinese lessons in rocket technology 
after the failure of two Chinese rockets in the mid-1990s. Both companies 
deny any wrongdoing, but earlier this month, the administration completed 
reports of its own on the subject, raising national security concerns 
about the assistance, especially the help that Hughes provided the 
Chinese in 1995. The intelligence arm of the State Department found 
that the 1995 ``tutorial'' by Hughes had ``resulted in significant 
improvement'' to China's rocket program, lessons that are ``inherently 
applicable to their missile programs as well.'' At a news conference 
Wednesday at the Capitol, committee members said their analysis had 
gone far beyond the reviews of the failed Chinese rocket launchings 
by Hughes and Loral. ``There was harm in some of the transfers of 
technology that occurred, but it's also fair to say this is not the 
only problem we uncovered,'' said Rep. Norm Dicks of Washington, the 
ranking Democrat on the panel. ``These are serious problems that must 
be addressed by the Administration and by the Congress.'' It is public 
knowledge that China has an aggressive military and economic espionage 
program, and that it has long sought to acquire American technology, 
both legally and illegally. But the House panel, formally called the 
Select Committee on U.S. National Security and Military/Commercial 
Concerns with the People's Republic of China, learned new details 
about the depth and scope of these activities as it completed the 
most comprehensive examination of the issue ever conducted by any 
part of the American government. The witnesses before the panel included 
officials from U.S. nuclear weapons labs, according to one witness. 
Last year the General Accounting Office, the auditing arm of Congress, 
issued a report that raised questions about the adequacy of security 
at the weapons labs, including a decision in 1994 to reduce background 
checks of various foreign visitors. The visitors, most of whom are 
Russian and Chinese, are not allowed access to classified areas. It 
is unclear exactly how much the American public will learn about the 
committee's findings. The issue of what to disclose is usually resolved 
by the release of general conclusions, and the withholding of details 
that might reveal how the sensitive information was acquired. ``Certainly, 
we look forward to reading the report and studying its recommendations,'' 
said David C. Leavy, a White House spokesman. ``In terms of declassification, 
we need to work with the committee in an appropriate way to move forward.'' 
The fact that the House of Representatives could find political unity 
in a year of fractious discourse is probably due to the serious national 
security concerns that underlie the work of the committee. Other than 
Cox and Dicks, the members of the panel are Republicans Curt Weldon 
of Pennsylvania, Porter J. Goss of Florida, James V. Hansen of Utah 
and Doug Bereuter of Nebraska, and Democrats John M. Spratt Jr. of 
South Carolina, Robert C. Scott of Virginia and Lucille Roybal-Allard 
of California. Most of the members have been active in national security 
issues. ``Our select committee was led to ever more serious problems 
of technology transfers and their national-security implications,'' 
Cox said in an interview on Wednesday. ``Addressing that issue led 
us to this extraordinary bipartisan result.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>