<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Federal regulators approved the proposed purchase of Amoco by British 
Petroleum PLC Wednesday after extracting a handful of minor antitrust 
concessions from the new company, which will become the world's third-largest 
petroleum company. The move by the Federal Trade Commission cleared 
the final obstacle to the deal, which is expected to close on Thursday. 
It will be the largest foreign acquisition of an American company 
ever, and it immediately raised the question of whether regulators 
will impose any significant obstacles on the far larger proposed acquisition 
of Mobil by Exxon. By a unanimous vote, the four commissioners ordered 
British Petroleum and Amoco, which will be called BP Amoco PLC, to 
sell 134 gas stations in eight markets and nine petroleum terminals. 
The terminals will be sold to Williams Cos. In addition, an additional 
1,600 independent and franchise dealers in 30 markets in the Southeast 
and Midwest are free to end their agreements with the two companies 
and seek better deals with their competitors. The two companies sell 
gasoline through a total of 16,000 stations in the United States, 
which represents about 16 percent of the domestic market. The American 
depository receipts of British Petroleum plunged by the end of the 
day as managers of index funds sold shares of Amoco, which will be 
replaced by Firstar Corp. in the Standard &AMP; Poor's 500-stock index 
once Amoco is acquired by British Petroleum. Shares of Amoco plunged 
$3.25, to $54.75. Adam Sieminski, an analyst at BT Alex. Brown, said 
Amoco dragged down the American depository receipts of British Petroleum, 
which fell $6.75, to $83.1875. He added that British Petroleum had 
been bid up earlier by index fund managers in Britain because the 
new company will be a larger factor in the FTSE Index on the London 
Stock Exchange. Based on Wednesday's closing stock price, the deal 
is worth $52.4 billion. It was impossible to predict whether the regulators 
would impose any significant obstacles to the proposed acquisition 
of Mobil by Exxon. On the one hand, the further consolidation of the 
industry by the merger of British Petroleum and Amoco suggests that 
vigorous antitrust enforcement could require big divestitures by Exxon 
and Mobil to satisfy the regulators. But on the other hand, Wednesday's 
decision continues the trend of the antitrust officials not to impose 
serious impediments to deals in the oil industry. Top officials at 
the FTC, which has only just begun its review of the Exxon-Mobil deal, 
cautioned Wednesday not to read anything into their decision because 
the two mergers present different issues. They said the wave of consolidation 
in the oil industry had prompted them to be vigilant to antitrust 
issues but that it was far too soon to make generalizations about 
the proposed Exxon-Mobil deal. ``We do these things one at a time,'' 
said Robert Pitofsky, chairman of the FTC. ``You have to look at each 
one of these deals on its own bottom. When there is an industry trend 
toward consolidation, like there is here, we are required to look 
at these deals particularly closely. But it would be an overreaction 
to say what we did in this situation may or may not have an impact 
on another case. These reviews turn to a remarkable extent on the 
particular facts of the deal.'' Analysts expect the government at 
the very least to require Exxon and Mobil to sell some gas stations 
and refineries, but whether they will be significant in number and 
whether more must be divested to satisfy regulators may not become 
known for months. With a market capitalization of about $140 billion, 
BP Amoco will rank third in the oil industry behind Exxon-Mobil and 
Royal Dutch/Shell Group. Pitofsky said he had been struck in the British 
Petroleum-Amoco merger by the fact that the two companies were ``more 
complementary than competitive'' because ``BP has a powerful presence 
in Europe and Amoco has a powerful presence in the United States.'' 
Since the two have limited markets of competition, he said, the modifications 
imposed on the merger of British Petroleum and Amoco would, in his 
words, be modest for a deal valued at $52.4 billion. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>