<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0466 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is the middle of the night, as Patty Wetterling sits on the living 
room couch, staring out the window, waiting for her boy, Jacob, to 
come home. She has been waiting for nine years. ``I still, deep in 
my heart, believe it is possible that he's alive,'' said Ms. Wetterling, 
who hung Jacob's stocking from the fireplace mantel again this year, 
as she does every Christmas season. ``Sometimes I look out the window 
and expect to see him come running up the driveway.'' Jacob was 11 
years old when he was abducted by a man with a gun in this small town 
on Oct. 22, 1989. His brother, Trevor, who was 10, and a friend, Aaron, 
11, were with Jacob that night. The three boys were riding their bicycles 
home from the Tom Thumb convenience store, where they had rented a 
movie, ``Naked Gun,'' when a man wearing a mask stepped out of a driveway. 
The man told Trevor and Aaron to run, or he would shoot them. And 
then he took Jacob. No arrest has ever been made. No body has ever 
been found. All that remains is uncertainty. For the Wetterling family, 
the uncertainty has meant nearly a decade of life lived in the half-step, 
not quite here, not quite there, reluctant to lose themselves completely 
to the moment, moving ahead with daily routines, because there is 
no choice, learning to sing again, even to laugh, but never as freely, 
or lightly, as before. Theirs is the burden of doubt known to people 
who live with mysterious holes in the family fabric, voids that go 
unexplained, losses that are never properly mourned: people who can 
only wonder at what became of a father, last known living in some 
faraway place, or a sister, tormented by emotional demons until vanishing 
into the streets, or a child, who went out to play one day and somehow 
crossed paths with evil. Jacob Erwin Wetterling was born on Feb. 17, 
1978, a boy who liked to celebrate his birthday with his grandpa, 
who loved to fish with his dad, Jerry, who slept with one arm around 
his brother, Trevor. A great fan of sports, he played soccer, hockey, 
baseball and football, and so worshiped Marcus Allen, the star Los 
Angeles running back, that he named his dog Marcus, and dressed the 
pup in a Raider's jersey. He could never eat enough peanut butter 
or guacamole. He was famous around the house for playing tricks on 
his mother for April Fool's, and for making her beautiful artwork 
for Mother's Day. The abduction of the sixth grader in this town 75 
miles north of Minneapolis, initially drew hundreds of law enforcement 
officials. But the case no longer gets much attention. It has faded 
from the headlines in the Minnesota newspapers. Agents for the FBI 
pulled out years ago. Only the local sheriff's department keeps close 
tabs anymore. But Patty and Jerry Wetterling keep looking. ``One morning, 
I lay in bed and couldn't go on anymore,'' said Ms. Wetterling. ``It 
was too hard. I pulled the covers up over my head and decided I was 
never going to get out of that bed again.'' But then she envisioned 
Jacob. He was huddled in a corner, saying he was going to give up. 
And she found herself speaking out loud: ``Hold on, Jacob. We're going 
to find you.'' ``So I pulled myself out of bed and took a shower, 
and went out to find him,'' she said. ``And that's what I do every 
day.'' Searching faces on buses and trains, at construction sites 
and shopping malls, Ms. Wetterling looks for a young man with brown 
hair and blue eyes, probably about 6 feet tall now, with a 21st birthday 
just around the corner. Ms. Wetterling started a foundation, Jacob's 
Hope, which focuses on the plight of missing and exploited children, 
a forum that gives her a chance to talk with law enforcement officers 
across the nation and keep her son's case from being forgotten. Some 
leads still come, but none has panned out. There are people who call, 
from all over the country, and say they think they have seen Jacob, 
sometimes sending pictures. There are con artists who call and ask 
about a reward. There are sadistic pranksters who call to try to twist 
their minds. The Wetterlings came home one night and switched on the 
answering machine. The voice of a young man whispered into the telephone. 
``This is Jacob Wetterling,'' he said. ``And I want you to know I'm 
still alive.'' The Wetterlings felt certain it was not Jacob, but 
there remained a shred of wonder. ``It's been so long,'' Ms. Wetterling 
said. ``Would we recognize his voice?'' The police traced the call 
and determined it was bogus. Plenty of psychics have called, some 
looking for self-promotion, some apparently driven by a misguided 
hope to help bring an end to their doubts. ``Jacob is cold and dead,'' 
said one caller, who identified himself as a psychic in New York. 
Ms. Wetterling responded with outrage. ``Because you had some funny 
feeling sitting in New York,'' she said, ``you decide to call and 
tell me to just quit and give up.'' Before the horror of the abduction, 
the Wetterlings led a seemingly charmed life, a popular and handsome 
family with a sense of playfulness and idealism. Jerry Wetterling, 
a chiropractor with a growing business in town, was president of the 
local branch of the NAACP. His wife, a former math teacher, stayed 
home with the children, was president of the PTA and a soccer coach. 
The eldest child, Amy, was sailing through school like a yacht. Jacob 
and Trevor were confident and happy-go-lucky. The youngest, Carmen, 
raced at life like fire across the prairie. But then came the earthquake, 
in the words of an aunt in San Francisco, that never stopped. Amy 
started to carry the world on her shoulders, driven to excel in everything 
she did, certain it was her role to make the world right. Carmen began 
to withdraw socially, especially as she neared age 11. The parents 
worried most about Trevor. They looked him in the eyes and talked 
to him about the abduction, the night when his parents and police 
officers asked him a thousand questions. ``You have to know that there 
was nothing different that you could have done,'' his mother told 
him. But to this day, she does not know if he believes that. Jacob 
had been an outstanding hockey player, a goalie on the traveling team. 
When it came Trevor's turn to join the travel team, he suited up, 
skated once around the rink, and walked off. ``I quit,'' he told his 
father, and never went back. He is a student at St. Cloud State University, 
just 10 miles from home. He has never much liked to be alone, a trait 
his mother calls ``a survival skill,'' and he has not wanted to go 
far from home. ``I'll pay you to go to that college you've talked 
about in Colorado,'' his mother said she has told him. But Trevor 
is not ready to go far from home yet. Amy recently graduated from 
the University of Minnesota with a degree in psychology and a minor 
in criminal justice. Carmen is a junior at St. Joseph High School. 
Since there was no extra time for anything but comforting the children, 
and searching for Jacob, the parents gave up their duties at the NAACP. 
and the PTA. Ms. Wetterling abandoned her plans to return to teaching 
part-time. Jacob's class of 1996 seemed to carry him with them. He 
was given a page in the school yearbook. The hockey team listed his 
name on the roster, since he should have been playing. The football 
team dedicated its season to Jacob, and then surprised everyone by 
winning the Central Lakes Conference championship. The abduction of 
Jacob robbed some of the innocence of his classmates, a burden they 
seemed to carry all the way through school. On the day of their graduation, 
the principal called the Wetterlings and asked them to speak to the 
departing seniors. ``Somebody has got to set them free,'' the principal 
said. Ms. Wetterling reminded the students about Jacob, a boy who 
was not afraid to try anything. ``Jacob believed in a world of possibility 
and potential,'' his mother said. ``Let your spirits soar.'' In the 
last few years, Jacob's world has changed without his knowing it. 
He lost his grandpa last year. Marcus, his dog, died a few years ago. 
And the fields near home have become thick with new houses, a subdivision 
called Pound Meadow Ridge. His father, who just turned 50, now has 
just a touch of gray in his hair at the temples, and his mother, 49, 
wears eyeglasses most of the time these days. But if he should ever 
find his way back to the driveway, he would see a big display of white 
lights on the garage door. It reads, ``Jacob's Hope.'' The family 
would never consider moving, since they need to be there when Jacob 
comes home. And they would not change the telephone number, despite 
some of the crank calls, because that's the number that Jacob knows. 
``Kids do come home,'' Ms. Wetterling said. ``And they do heal.'' 
Just a few months ago, the mother sat down to write a letter to Jacob's 
abductor, an appeal she intended to touch ``that shred of compassion'' 
his mother hopes exists in every human being. ``To the man who took 
Jacob,'' began the letter, which was printed in some Minnesota newspapers. 
She reminded the abductor that he, like Jacob, had once been an 11-year-old 
boy, and that something very wrong must have happened to him. ``For 
my own survival, I have had to let go of a lot of anger or I would 
be swallowed up in it,'' she wrote, asking that he call her and tell 
her what happened to her son. ``You have held the answers for so long. 
You also hold the pain. Please talk to me.'' The fireplace glowed 
with red embers, winds whipping across the frozen prairie, as she 
gazed out the window into the darkness. ``I think the world is about 
ready for a miracle,'' she said. ``Let it be here.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>