<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0388 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Almost four centuries after the Netherlands gave the Pilgrims refuge 
from persecution in England, a leading American scholar on the Pilgrims 
has been caught in the Dutch government's crackdown on immigrants 
and has been ordered to leave the Netherlands by Jan. 15. Dr. Jeremy 
Bangs, who last year founded a Pilgrim museum in Leiden, said the 
Dutch Ministry of Justice had rejected his application for permanent 
residency because, it said, he did not qualify for a work permit and 
it did not believe he could support himself. ``It is hard to get more 
ironic than to expel someone who is working on the Pilgrims, who were 
the most famous example of Dutch welcome and protection,'' Bangs said. 
At the time the Pilgrims fled to the Netherlands in 1608, Bangs said, 
the government boasted that it ``refuses no honest people free entry.'' 
Bangs, 52, receives financial support from the New England Historic 
Genealogical Society in Boston to conduct research on the history 
of the Pilgrims while they were in the Netherlands before leaving 
for America in 1620 and founding Plymouth. He recently discovered 
the first contemporary painting showing the Pilgrims embarking at 
Delftshaven on their way to America. Jane Fiske, the editor of the 
Register of the Historic Genealogical Society, which will publish 
an article about Bangs' discovery in January, said, ``This is a tragedy 
for Jeremy. He is such a talented individual, and he has done so well 
in his research and opening the museum, that this whole thing seems 
ludicrous.'' The Dutch Justice Ministry has been trying to deal with 
a record 50,000 illegal immigrants from Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia 
and the former Yugoslavia this year to the Netherlands, already one 
of the most densely populated nations. The immigrants contend they 
are escaping political persecution, but the Dutch government has been 
under pressure to treat them as economic refugees and expel them. 
A spokesman for the Ministry of Justice, Wijnand Stevens, said that 
Bangs could appeal the expulsion. Stevens also said the government's 
crackdown and Bangs' case were not related. But the leading Dutch 
newspaper, NRC Handelsblad, on Tuesday poked fun at the Ministry of 
Justice, suggesting that Bangs was a victim of bureaucratic stupidity. 
The problem for Bangs is that he may not apply for a work permit because 
he is an employee and director of the Leiden American Pilgrim Museum, 
the paper said. Only an employer may apply for a permit for an employee, 
under Dutch law. ``Bangs does not cost the Dutch state a single penny,'' 
the paper said. ``And his museum tells of a meaningful part of our 
history. Hillary Rodham Clinton who will visit the Netherlands in 
February has put the museum on her agenda. Perhaps she will arrive 
at a closed door because Bangs had to leave the Netherlands on Jan. 
15. Can someone explain this to Hillary?'' Friends and acquaintances 
of Bangs say another part of his difficulty may be that he lives simply, 
on the small income from the Historic Genealogical Society, and that 
the Ministry of Justice may not believe he has enough means of support. 
Neither Bangs nor the society would say what he is paid, but Ms. Fiske 
said: ``He lives very frugally, in a small apartment in an old building, 
and it is hard to see how he gets by. I think he is putting much of 
the money we give him into the museum.'' Before Bangs moved to Leiden 
two years ago, he lived in Scituate, Mass., and was curator of Plimouth 
Plantation. Bangs holds a doctorate in history from the University 
of Leiden. He has written 12 books and more than 40 scholarly articles. 
In his research, he has demonstrated that some of the people Americans 
today celebrate as the Pilgrims were not English. Several of them 
were French-speaking Walloons, or Protestants, and one even came from 
Danzig, in Poland. They had all come to Leiden because it was a center 
of religious tolerance at a time of warfare between Catholics and 
Protestants. Bangs said that if he is required to leave, the museum 
will likely close. If he does have to abandon Leiden, he may recall 
a passage written about the Pilgrims' departure in 1620 by William 
Bradford, later governor of Plymouth: ``So they left that goodly and 
pleasant city which had been their resting place near twelve years; 
but they knew they were pilgrims, and looked not much on those things, 
but lift up their eyes to the heavens, their dearest country, and 
quieted their spirits.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>