<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0434 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A state grand jury created largely through the efforts of a grieving 
grandfather and a suspicious legislator ended 18 months of investigation 
into the Oklahoma City bombing Wednesday, saying it found no evidence 
of a broader conspiracy or a government coverup. After hearing 117 
witnesses and weathering criticism that its work gave legitimacy to 
wild conspiracy theories surrounding the blast, the grand jury reported: 
``We cannot affirmatively state that absolutely no one else was involved 
in the bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building. However, 
we have not been presented with or uncovered information sufficient 
to indict any additional conspirators.'' The grand jury did return 
one sealed indictment. Prosecutors would not say what was in it, but 
in an interim report in October, the grand jury criticized, without 
going into specifics, ``improper and perhaps illegal attempts to exert 
influence on the outcome of our investigation.'' The grand jury was 
convened in June 1997, after a petition drive organized by Charles 
Key, then a Republican state legislator from Oklahoma City, and Glenn 
Wilburn, whose grandsons, Chase Smith, 3, and Colton Smith, 2, were 
killed in the day care center at the federal building. Wilburn, who 
died of cancer in July 1997, was not satisfied with the prosecution 
of Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols and had sought out witnesses 
on his own and pressed for more investigation, even as law enforcement 
officials and some relatives of other victims said he should let the 
government do its work. McVeigh and Nichols were convicted in separate 
federal trials in Denver, McVeigh of conspiracy and murder, Nichols 
of conspiracy and involuntary manslaughter. McVeigh was sentenced 
to death and Nichols was sentenced to life in prison. But Wilburn, 
who suspected a broader conspiracy, did not believe official denials 
that no one in federal law enforcement had any warning of the April 
19, 1995, attack that killed 168 people. Key, who helped collect more 
than 10,000 signatures on the petition to form the grand jury, criticized 
its conclusions. ``It was a ditto of what the federal government presented 
in the McVeigh trial,'' he said Wednesday. ``It had huge, gaping holes.'' 
During the trials of McVeigh and Nichols, theories that the bombing 
was the result of a wider conspiracy, involving domestic hate groups 
or foreign terrorists, flooded the Internet, right-wing talk shows 
and magazines, and short-wave radio. One theory held that the government 
itself was involved and used McVeigh as a fall guy. The grand jury 
said it found no credible evidence that the bombing, which was the 
worst act of terrorism on American soil and shook the nation's sense 
of security within its borders, was linked to foreign terrorists. 
It concluded that it was an act ``perpetrated by Americans on Americans.'' 
It also reported: ``We can state with assurance that we do not believe 
that the federal government had prior knowledge that this horrible 
terrorist attack was going to happen.'' The witnesses called before 
the grand jury ranged from Dennis Mahon, a Tulsa, Okla., leader of 
White Aryan Resistance, an extremist group, to Arlene Blanchard, an 
Army sergeant at a recruiting office in the building who survived 
the bombing. The grand jurors also reviewed hundreds of exhibits and 
thousands of pages of documents. But the grand jury's effort to interview 
federal investigators and examine the evidence they had gathered was 
delayed for many months by the federal trials of McVeigh and Nichols 
and by their appeals. The restrictions were lifted by the 10th U.S. 
Circuit Court of Appeals in Denver last fall, and federal agents appeared 
before the grand jury in November. Key, meanwhile, set up and won 
nonprofit status for a private group, the Oklahoma Bombing Investigation 
Committee, which also gathered information about possible witnesses 
and submitted their names to the grand jury and urged Congress not 
to let the federal investigation drop. He said Wednesday his committee 
would present its own final report, and ``it will read quite differently 
than this report today.'' Among other things, the grand jury investigated 
the identity of John Doe No. 2, the mystery suspect depicted in FBI 
sketches shortly after the attack. It reported that 26 witnesses offered 
such conflicting descriptions that he could have been anywhere from 
5-foot-3 to 6-foot-3, with a skinny build or perhaps a stocky physique. 
The grand jury called on Bob Macy, the district attorney in Oklahoma 
City, to carry through with his plans to bring state murder charges 
against McVeigh and Nichols for the deaths of 160 people whose individual 
cases were not brought in the federal trials. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>