<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0452 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Thursday, Dec. 31: Thousands 
of people who are not accused of any crime or who have completed prison 
terms for minor crimes spent this Christmas _ and may spend the next 
_ in jails around the nation. They are immigrants detained by the 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, which has filled its own detention 
centers and has now resorted to using local and county lockups. Hundreds 
of immigrants who are seeking political asylum share cells with people 
accused of violent crimes, and are often subject to abuse because 
they are foreigners. Keeping them in jails is cruel, unnecessary and 
a waste of money. The detentions have more than doubled since 1995 
because Congress now provides money for the INS to rent beds in local 
jails. In addition, punitive new immigration laws kicked in this year 
that expand the categories of immigrants the INS must detain as they 
await possible deportation. Most of the 16,000 people in detention 
on any given day are immigrants, legal as well as illegal, who have 
committed crimes, including very minor ones such as marijuana possession 
or turnstile-jumping, even if their convictions were long ago. They 
are held by the INS after they have finished their prison terms. Another 
group comprises illegal immigrants rounded up in raids on workplaces. 
The third group is asylum-seekers. The new immigration laws provide 
that everyone who comes to America seeking asylum is detained before 
a first interview. Those who pass it are then often detained for months 
or even years as they wait for their asylum hearings. Many of them 
are victims of torture or other traumatic events whose problems are 
exacerbated by jail. The INS has not been able to assure decent conditions 
even in the centers under its control. In 1995 inmates at an INS detention 
center in Elizabeth, N.J., rioted over beatings and the use of shackles. 
The INS later criticized the private company that administered the 
center, Esmor, for ``inhumane'' conditions. Conditions in local jails 
are often far worse, and the INS cannot supervise them. Human Rights 
Watch has collected numerous allegations of beatings and other mistreatment. 
The INS has called for a government investigation of alleged torture 
of immigrants by electric shock in a Florida jail. Immigrants often 
have no access to lawyers or even someone who speaks their language. 
Worst off are the 1,800 people scheduled for deportations to countries 
that will not take them back, such as Cuba. They are jailed indefinitely, 
some for years. The main reason for INS detention is that the vast 
majority of people at risk of deportation skip their court dates and 
simply vanish, given the chance. The INS is beginning to study how 
to get people to keep their court appointments without locking them 
up. One pilot project run by the Vera Institute of Justice, a nonprofit 
group, keeps immigrants who seem unlikely to flee out of jail if they 
check in regularly and receive home visits from supervisors. Preliminary 
results show that compliance has soared _ at one-sixth of the $20,000 
per year that detention costs. The INS should expand its search for 
alternatives to detention, including the use of bail. The 5,000 children 
detained each year should be put in group homes or foster care, not 
juvenile jails. Some people will require detention, but it should 
be in centers for immigrants. Congress should allow the INS to build 
its own facilities, which must be strictly supervised. Above all, 
the INS and Congress must abandon their punitive mentality. It is 
hard not to suspect that they are trying to deter immigration by making 
the process as harrowing as possible. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>