<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0139 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton said Monday that the Social Security Administration 
had completely fixed all its computers so that elderly people would 
receive their monthly benefit payments on time, without interruption, 
in the year 2000. In his most extensive remarks on the subject since 
July, Clinton said that elderly people ``can rest easy'' because the 
Social Security agency had repaired its computers to deal with the 
year 2000 problem. He did not address the situation at other agencies 
judged by the White House to be inadequately prepared for the year 
2000. These include the Pentagon, the Energy Department and the agency 
that runs Medicare and Medicaid. The year 2000 problem arises from 
early computer programming that often used only the last two digits 
of the year, making 2000 indistinguishable from 1900 to computers. 
If the problem is not corrected, experts say, computers could produce 
inaccurate data or shut down. Clinton said Monday that the year 2000 
challenge was ``a stunning problem'' for computer programmers. But 
he said: ``The millennium bug will not delay the payment of Social 
Security checks by a single day. The Social Security system is now 
100 percent compliant with our standards and safeguards for the year 
2000. To make absolutely certain, the system has been tested and validated 
by a panel of independent experts. The system works, it is secure, 
and therefore older Americans can feel more secure.'' Clinton said 
the computer repairs were a symbol of the policy changes that had 
to be made to renovate Social Security and keep it solvent for the 
baby boom generation. He again invited Congress to work with him on 
this task. The Social Security Administration was known to be ahead 
of other agencies in dealing with the year 2000 problem. Social Security's 
chief information officer, Kathleen Adams, said she and her colleagues 
had been working on the problem since they discovered it in 1989. 
By contrast, the White House Office of Management and Budget said 
this month that six other agencies were ``not making adequate progress.'' 
The six include the Pentagon, the Energy Department and the Department 
of Health and Human Services, which runs Medicare and Medicaid, the 
health programs for the elderly and the poor. Overall, the Office 
of Management and Budget said, only 61 percent of the government's 
``mission critical'' computer systems have been fixed. There are nearly 
6,700 such systems. Clinton's narrow focus Monday, in his first such 
speech since a call to action in July, disappointed many experts on 
the year 2000 problem. Rep. Steve Horn, R-Calif., who heads the House 
Subcommittee on government Management, Information and Technology, 
said: ``What about the departments and agencies that have started 
their remediation efforts only within the last few years? The Departments 
of Energy, Health and Human Services, Defense, Transportation and 
State are all failing in their Y2K repair efforts.'' However, Robert 
Cohen, a spokesman for the Information Technology Association of American, 
a trade group for the computer industry, said, ``Holding up an example 
of success shows President Clinton takes this issue seriously.'' Several 
independent consultants said that what the country really needed from 
Clinton was a commitment to make regular reports on a handful of industries 
like power, telephones and banks, whose problems could affect all 
Americans. ``Social Security is an easy shot,'' said Ian Hayes, president 
of Clarity Consulting in South Hamilton, Mass. ``President Clinton 
is not giving any reassurance to people who know a lot about the subject.'' 
Clinton has set March 31, 1999, as the deadline for federal agencies 
to have fixed and tested major computer systems to deal with the year 
2000 problem. But in a report issued on Dec. 8, the Office of Management 
and Budget said the Pentagon's progress was ``too slow to meet the 
March 1999 goal.'' Energy Department officials said they were worried 
about thousands of tiny computers and computer chips embedded in laboratory 
equipment and other devices. Federal health officials said that fixing 
computers was their top priority. While scrambling to repair computers, 
Medicare officials said they would miss several statutory deadlines 
for changes made by the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. One of these 
changes would reduce amounts that elderly people pay for hospital 
outpatient services, including diagnostic tests. Even if federal agencies 
repair their computers, they still must deal with state agencies, 
some of which are far behind them. Medicaid, for example, is run jointly 
by the federal government and the states. A state Medicaid program 
receives tens of thousands of electronic claims from health care providers 
each year. If their computers cannot cope with the year 2000, their 
Medicaid payments may be delayed. NYT-12-28-98 1954EST 
</TEXT>
</DOC>