<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0292 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Czarina Alexandra relied on Rasputin. Hitler consulted with seers, 
as did Pope Innocent VII, Nancy Reagan and much of the royal court 
at Versailles on the eve of the French Revolution. When Argentina's 
president, Carlos Saul Menem, needs otherworldly advice, he turns 
to Azucena Aguero Blanch, a 48-year-old elementary school art teacher, 
muralist and professional fortuneteller, she has told reporters. As 
she tells it _ and she's the only one talking _ over the last 15 years 
she has advised Menem on Cabinet selections and on toning down his 
hair style, dress and macho strut. In turn, Ms. Aguero Blanch converted 
from Roman Catholicism to Islam in 1988, she said, to better understand 
and advise Menem, who as the son of Syrian immigrants was born a Muslim 
but is now Catholic. A recent cover article in Noticias, a leading 
Argentine weekly magazine, publicized Ms. Aguero Blanch's importance 
for the first time. Perhaps most revealingly, it described how the 
president, 68, and the fortuneteller secretly met for an hour at the 
Alvear Palace Hotel in Buenos Aires in November to discuss a possible 
last-minute effort for a third consecutive term, despite a constitutional 
ban. In an interview with The New York Times, she said she argued 
strongly against a run since ``the stars aren't with him.'' ``He doesn't 
ask questions,'' Ms. Aguero Blanch said in the interview in her tiny 
apartment in this leafy provincial capital surrounded by vineyards 
and mountains. ``He's a Cancer. He just listens, and I give him a 
thousand pieces of advice.'' Whatever Ms. Aguero Blanch's relationship 
is to Menem, she is original. She wears a miniature Koran around her 
neck and eye makeup that makes it look as if she has two Stealth bombers 
flying over her eyelids. She shuns artificial lighting as energy-sapping, 
and decorates her dark apartment with a smiling Buddha statue, Turkish 
copper tea sets and a colorful wall rug depicting peasants dancing 
a vigorous flamenco. Her refrigerator door is a collage of cartoon 
characters reminding her to cut calories. Over the years, Ms. Aguero 
Blanch said she has done many services for Menem. Once he sent a close 
personal aide to her to receive a talisman to ward off a corruption 
investigation, she said, an act that rescued the aide from a possible 
indictment. In the recent meeting at the Alvear Palace, she said, 
she told him that Argentines would flock back to him in 2003, begging 
that he make a comeback. She also predicted that the long divorced 
president would remarry after leaving the Casa Rosada, the presidential 
palace. There was no response from Menem or the presidential palace 
to the article in Noticias. When called by The New York Times for 
comment on the Aguero Blanch report, Jose Luis Olivero, a presidential 
spokesman, said: ``I don't think we've said anything on this. I'll 
get back to you.'' Despite several calls for further comment over 
the next several days, Olivero never called back. More curiously, 
the Noticias scoop made only a ripple in the Argentine news media, 
aside from a couple of reports on local television and in Uno, the 
Mendoza daily. Apparently Ms. Aguero Blanch's reported role came as 
no surprise to Argentines, who are accustomed to their leaders seeing 
fortunetellers. Several respected biographies have confirmed that 
Gen. Juan Domingo Peron, Menem's political hero, consulted with a 
variety of mystics. Peron's third wife, Isabel, was dominated by a 
right-wing seer during her presidency in the early 1970s, which fell 
to a military coup. Jose Lopez Rega, a failed singer, got a hold on 
Mrs. Peron by pretending to have the power to transfer the late Eva 
Peron's mystical charisma on to her. Furthermore, mystical faith-healers 
called curanderos are still commonplace in Menem's home province, 
La Rioja, and across much of rural Latin America. Ms. Aguero Blanch 
said she did not know how Noticias found her. But she said she would 
like to use any future publicity to jump-start her career as a painter. 
She showed several photographs taken of her and the president together 
over the years, as well as a thick batch of envelopes addressed from 
the offices of the governor of La Rioja Province in the 1980s when 
Menem was governor and more recently from the presidential palace. 
(The contents, kept under lock and key, remain private.) Then again, 
little about Menem raises Argentine eyebrows anymore. ``It's not surprising,'' 
said Felipe Noguera, a prominent political consultant. ``Menem has 
inaugurated a style of politics close to show business. Movie stars 
and his kind of politician tend to see witches.'' Before Menem began 
softening his image in the last few years, he enthusiastically cultivated 
a flamboyant, derring-do style of fast sport cars, wildly extravagant 
sideburns and open dating with a colorful variety of women. In the 
last year, scandals touching several senior officials around him have 
overshadowed his early victories, like slaying hyperinflation and 
slashing the military budget. ``Menem protects people that he likes 
too much, and that's where he gets himself in trouble,'' Ms. Aguero 
Blanch said. ``He's just such an excellent friend, so affectionate, 
so attentive. He remembers everyone's birthday, even the flavors of 
foods that they like.'' Ms. Aguero Blanch's account of her long relationship 
with Menem is a richly embroidered tale of magic. One night in January 
1984, she said, she dreamed of meeting an Indian spiritualist who 
offered her a cup and news that a great man was about to enter her 
life. She called her sister the next day, and her sister told her 
that Gov. Carlos Saul Menem of La Rioja Province was to come to Mendoza 
that day. Ms. Aguero Blanch wangled her way into a luncheon given 
in the governor's honor at the Confiteria Monaco cafe. The magic had 
only started. Menem tipped his cup in Ms. Aguero Blanch's direction, 
just like the Indian in the dream. By the end of the luncheon, Menem 
had invited her to have breakfast with him the next day. She demurred, 
she said, uncertain of his intentions. Then she rethought her decision 
when some friends warned her that there could be repercussions for 
standing up a governor. She turned to her fortune cards and amazingly, 
she said, they told her that Menem would someday be president. For 
months the governor and Ms. Aguero Blanch wrote each other, and she 
agreed to meet with him in La Rioja in July 1984. It was over their 
first dinner, she said, that she assured him he would be elected president 
five years later. She was supposed to stay one day, but ended up staying 
15, according to Ms. Aguero Blanch. ``We went all over La Rioja, we 
talked,'' she said, ``and that's all you need to know to put in the 
newspaper.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>