<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0137 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At a private meeting with executives of Intel Corp. in July 1995, 
Bill Gates, chairman of Microsoft Corp., sounded a warning. As the 
companies pursued their joint vision of making desktop machines that 
could store and crunch ever-increasing amounts of digital data, Gates 
predicted they would face a looming challenge. ``Once networks are 
extremely fast,'' Gates said, there was ``no reason intelligence can't 
be central,'' according to notes taken by an Intel executive at the 
meeting, which were submitted as evidence in the Microsoft antitrust 
trial. Centralized intelligence, accessible via fast computer networks, 
would pose a threat to the dominant role of PCs _ the model on which 
Microsoft and Intel had built their lucrative businesses. Just three 
and a half years later, that challenge to the personal computer seems 
to be at hand. Even Andrew Grove, the Intel chairman, acknowledges 
that ``the center of gravity is shifting.'' But whether that shift 
is the beginning of a revolutionary transformation or an evolutionary 
progression is a matter of fierce debate. In one camp are the executives 
and technologists who argue that computing is entering ``the post-PC 
era,'' as advances on many fronts enable a world of intelligent networks, 
linked by powerful hub computers, feeding data to millions upon millions 
of so-called information appliances. Instead of the PC continuing 
to be the center of the computing solar system, they say, the network 
will become the universe. Information appliances, the post-PC proponents 
explain, can be thought of as personal communicators _ devices that 
mainly send and obtain information to and from the network, instead 
of creating and manipulating information the way personal computers 
do. The forerunners are digital cell phones, like the Nokia 6160 and 
the Qualcomm PDQ, and hand-held devices, like the Palm Pilot and the 
Motorola Pagewriter. And if these diverse digital gadgets are an indication, 
the information appliance market will likely resemble the consumer 
electronics business, with a flood of different products in every 
shape and description, a chaotic grab-bag of wacky failures and well-designed 
winners _ a world apart from the beige-box monotony of the personal 
computer industry. The post-PC enthusiasts see a future when everything 
from a household's car to its coffee maker has its own embedded microchips, 
ready to receive remote instruction. From work, a person could tap 
into the Internet to, say, program the video cassette recorder, defrost 
food and leave a message for a family member. ``We're at the beginning 
of a new age where we will have an explosion of embedded and personal 
devices,'' said William Joy, a founder and vice president of research 
of Sun Microsystems Inc. Paul Horn, a senior vice president for research 
at IBM Corp., is another adherent to post-PC doctrine. ``The trend 
is pretty clear toward a proliferation of different computing devices 
at the individual level being fed specialized information from powerful 
networks,'' Horn said. ``Instead of millions of personal computers, 
you have billions of devices eventually.'' But opponents of such thinking 
_ most notably Microsoft and Intel _ deride the post-PC concept as 
an amalgam of half-truths expounded by the losers in the PC revolution. 
The personal computer, the industry incumbents concede, must become 
smaller, cheaper and easier to use. There is a shift under way, they 
agree, toward more of the technology and software development being 
focused not on the desktop but on network hub, or server, computers. 
Yet all of that, they argue, can and will be embraced by the evolving 
personal computer industry, which has the capacity to expand both 
upward to take over industrial-strength corporate computing chores 
once handled by mainframe computers, and downward into the market 
for hand-held devices. ``It's not the post-PC era,'' said Craig Mundie, 
a senior vice president for consumer strategy of Microsoft. ``We're 
entering the PC-plus era.'' Yes, there will be a place for non-PC 
appliances, Mundie allows, but they will be ``complementary to the 
evolving personal computer'' _ anchored to the PC, not divorced from 
it. What the post-PC revolutionaries underestimate, the PC incumbents 
say, is the pull of the 250 million people who now use personal computers 
and who represent the infrastructure of modern computing. Without 
the personal computer, they say, the Internet would still be 20,000 
academics sending e-mail to each other from Unix workstations. And 
they contend that even the star among early information appliances, 
the Palm Pilot, owes its popularity largely to its ability to swap 
information with the personal computer. ``When you have hundreds of 
millions of users, change is evolutionary,'' said Grove of Intel. 
``Computers will become smaller, cheaper and more mobile. But they 
will be mostly full-function personal computers because people are 
going to want their same data in a form they are familiar with for 
years and years to come.'' Exponents of post-PC computing disagree. 
``The new era will escape the dependency on the PC,'' said Donna Dubinsky, 
a co-founder of Palm Computing, creator of the Palm Pilot, which is 
now part of 3Com Corp. She has moved on to found a new company, Handspring 
Inc., that hopes to help usher in what she calls ``an era of ubiquitous 
hand-held computing.'' There is no way, Ms. Dubinsky insists, to bring 
the next generation of hand-held devices below $100 in price without 
``disconnecting from the PC'' and making them ``an extension of the 
network, not the desktop.'' No one argues that the personal computer 
will go away. Indeed, personal computer shipments worldwide will rise 
nearly 13 percent annually though 2002, estimates International Data 
Corp., a research firm. What the post-PC faithful foresee, though, 
is a shift away from the personal computer as the dominant computing 
technology. And they can point to projections from International Data 
that by 2005 more information appliances linked to the Internet _ 
including set-top boxes, screen phones and hand-held computers _ will 
be sold than personal computers. The history of the mainframe industry, 
analysts say, is instructive. These big workhorse computers crunch 
more data than ever before. But for all intents, the mainframe era 
ended when the personal computer moved into the mainstream, with the 
introduction of the IBM PC in 1981. Investment and software development 
focused elsewhere. And the profit margins on mainframes _ after nearly 
two decades of pressure from the economics of the microprocessor and 
the personal computer _ are a fraction of what they once were. Information 
appliances, notes Steven Milunovich, a managing director of Merrill 
Lynch &AMP; Co., represent a break in the evolution of the computer 
industry because they are specialized devices _ designed to perform 
one or two tasks well _ instead of the general-purpose computers that 
both mainframes and personal computers have been. All of these new 
appliances will have digital technology in common, but they will be 
tailored for dozens and dozens of special-purpose niche markets, catering 
to different needs and users. It will be a more diverse business, 
far less susceptible to being dominated by a few leading technology 
vendors, as Microsoft and Intel rule the personal computer industry. 
The emerging information-appliance industry has attracted the consumer-electronics 
giants. Sony Corp., for example, is working to develop a new class 
of devices, adapted for what Mario Tokoro, head of the company's Information 
Technology Laboratories, calls the coming era of ``intimate computing.'' 
``The PC was created in the image of the monolithic mainframe of long 
ago,'' Tokoro, who is a computer scientist, said. In contrast, Sony 
expects the information appliance market to produce the Internet's 
answer to its ``Walkman'' products _ an opportunity for innovative 
new devices not available in the mature personal computer industry. 
According to the post-PC doctrine, the obstacle that prevents personal 
computers from being used by more than some 40 percent of American 
households is not their cost, which keeps dropping, but their complexity. 
One of the intellectual leaders of the post-PC movement is Donald 
Norman, a former researcher at Apple Computer and Hewlett-Packard, 
whose new book ``The Invisible Computer'' proclaims, ``The Achilles 
heel of the modern PC is its difficulty.'' The personal computer, 
Norman says, is the Swiss Army knife of modern technology. ``While 
it can fill an amazing variety of needs, it isn't particularly good 
at any one of them,'' he writes. The author's conclusion: ``Information 
appliances are the solution.'' America Online Inc. believes that information 
appliances are part of the answer to bringing the 75 percent of American 
households not yet linked to the Internet into the online community. 
An information-appliance program is an important element in the long-range 
strategy behind America Online's $4.2 billion purchase last month 
of Netscape Communications Corp. _ a deal that includes an alliance 
with Sun Microsystems, whose Java Internet programming language and 
Jini technology will be used to feed data to these simple devices. 
Just before the deal was announced, Marc Andreessen, a co-founder 
of Netscape, delivered a 12-page memo to Stephen Case, chairman of 
America Online, sketching his view of the technological opportunities 
for the combined company to extend its reach in the Internet and in 
electronic commerce. Internet appliances are clearly part of the plan, 
enabling America Online subscribers to get their e-mail and do online 
shopping through simple hand-held devices, for example. ``America 
Online has a big opportunity to drive the acceptance of these devices,'' 
Andreessen said. ``It's a consumer company and for these devices to 
be successful, you have to work backward from consumer behavior.'' 
At IBM, the strategy is to become the technology plumber for post-PC 
computing. The company has decided to leave the appliances to others, 
but it plans to supply components for them, from specialized semiconductor 
chips that use very little electrical power to tiny disk drives. IBM 
is also working on specialized hub computers, or servers, that have 
the software needed to act as a translator for users. These servers 
could field a request for information from a consumer and then render 
it in the form appropriate for that user _ whether sent to a pager, 
cell phone, hand-held device, set-top box or personal computer. Within 
IBM, the post-PC world is called ``pervasive computing.'' After a 
yearlong internal study, IBM has set up a pervasive computing unit 
to make sure the company's various businesses are attuned to this 
emerging market. ``We concluded this is going to be a big deal and 
it's going to change the industry,'' said Mark Bregman, general manager 
for the pervasive computing unit. IBM believes change can come without 
rapid arrival of high-speed data networks that can deliver movie-quality 
video and audio to information appliances anywhere _ the obstacle 
that opponents of the post-PC concept say will forestall any major 
changes. Bregman says the near-term benefits will be conveniences 
like calling an 800-number while on vacation and leaving voice-mail 
instructions so that several specific e-mail messages you are expecting 
will be forwarded to you for reading on the display screen of your 
cell phone. Venture capital investment is beginning to focus on the 
enabling technologies of the post-PC era, including new chips for 
information appliances, new screen-display technology, and optical 
networking, which promises to vastly increase the capacity and speed 
of communications networks. The investment and excitement about post-PC 
computing has some of the feel of the early 1980s, when the personal 
computer industry was starting to take off, observed Richard Shaffer, 
principal of Technologic Partners, a research firm. Today, Shaffer 
says, the personal computer industry is a mature business. Winning 
in that business, he explains, is mainly about marketing, manufacturing 
efficiency and inventory management _ with the success of Dell Computer 
Corp. as the exemplary case. But, he added, ``We're going back to 
an era when technology can really make a business difference again.'' 
NYT-12-27-98 1521EST 
</TEXT>
</DOC>