<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981230.0379 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After committing nearly $1 billion to build new factories in Russia, 
most Western tobacco companies have been hit with heavy losses since 
financial turmoil took hold this summer. But they say they will remain 
in the market, expecting the economy to pick up again. Russia's debt 
default and currency devaluation in mid-August devastated consumer 
purchasing power, and foreign tobacco companies have since seen a 
drastic decline in sales, losing ground to cheaper cigarettes made 
by Russian producers. The drop in sales comes as Russia had been gaining 
importance as a market for Western tobacco companies. The cigarette 
makers, facing multibillion-dollar lawsuit settlements and aggressive 
anti-smoking campaigns in the United States, saw Russia as a lucrative 
new territory. Indeed, Russians smoke 250 billion cigarettes a year 
and there are few restrictions on smoking, While Russian companies 
sell their cigarettes for two to three rubles a pack _ 10 to 13 cents 
_ the cheapest local brands made by Western manufacturers sell for 
six to seven rubles, while these companies' import brands sell for 
20 to 30 rubles. The average Russian earns about 1,000 rubles, or 
$50, a month, and a quarter of the population does not receive its 
pay on time. Declining sales forced Rothman's International to close 
its $88 million plant in St. Petersburg in September. It is tentatively 
planned to reopen early next year. A $150 million new R.J. Reynolds 
factory in St. Petersburg, which opened in July, shut down in September 
for two weeks. And early this month, Reynolds' parent company, RJR 
Nabisco Holdings, announced that it would eliminate about 2,900 jobs 
in the old Soviet republics, most of them in manufacturing, and take 
a $55 million pretax charge. ``There's no denying we're suffering 
like other companies,'' said Axel Gietz, head of media relations for 
R.J. Reynolds International. ``While Russians now have less purchasing 
power, they are smoking just as much as before but downgrading for 
cheaper cigarettes.'' Philip Morris Cos. continue to build a $330 
million factory outside St. Petersburg. While the company acknowledged 
that it had been affected by the nation's financial turmoil, it refused 
to provide details or make any other comment about its operations 
in Russia. But British American Tobacco PLC, which has invested $170 
million in Russia and acquired a venerable Russian brand in 1994, 
stands out as the exception among international tobacco companies. 
It says it is increasing production and gaining in its share of the 
market. ``There is opportunity in every crisis,'' said Sergei Krasnov, 
managing director of British American's unit in Moscow. ``While production 
and sales slumped in August and September, since October production 
is back to pre-crisis levels.` British American, which produced 25 
billion cigarettes in Russia in 1997, has two factories, one in Moscow 
and one in Saratov, south of Moscow on the Volga River. Krasnov attributes 
his company's gain to aggressive distribution and marketing strategies 
and to a popular product. Its Yava brand name, which it bought in 
1994 from the Russian company Yava Tabak, enjoys a 100-year-old reputation 
in Russia for quality. Selling for six rubles a pack _ two to three 
times the cheapest Russians brands _ Yava can still sell well because 
its home cities, Moscow and Saratov, are among the best off economically 
in Russia. U.S. tobacco manufacturers increasingly saw Russia, with 
its chain-smoking population, as a key market. Russian cigarette sales 
totaled $6 billion a year before the financial crisis, and Western 
companies had 40 to 50 percent of the market. The size of the Russian 
market has not been the only attraction for the tobacco sellers. Unlike 
in the United States and Canada, there are few restrictions on smoking 
in Russia, and health consciousness is among the lowest in Europe. 
Heavy smoking is one reason why the life expectancy of Russian men 
is only 59. Western cigarettes, though more expensive, have long been 
popular with Russian smokers. Before the collapse of communism, few 
items were as coveted as Western cigarettes, which were often used 
as hard-currency equivalents to pay taxi drivers or make bribes. Aware 
of the demand for high-quality cigarettes, Western tobacco manufacturers 
moved in force into Russia in the early 1990s. The first cigarettes 
were imported, but many companies quickly began making them locally. 
Today, Western tobacco companies are among the leading foreign investors 
in Russia, with almost $1 billion committed. Since 1992, R.J. Reynolds 
International has sunk the most of any Western company into manufacturing 
in Russia _ at least $400 million, with two major plants in St. Petersburg. 
The one opened in July has a capacity of 50 billion cigarettes a year, 
and it is R.J. Reynolds International's largest. Over all, the factory 
ranks as RJR Nabisco's second largest after the one in Winston-Salem, 
N.C. Despite the recent problems, all foreign tobacco companies say 
the market's potential is too lucrative just to walk away. ``While 
it will take about two or three years to return to pre-crisis levels, 
I think basically it is still a hugely important market for all manufacturers 
and they will remain here and continue to fight for market share,'' 
said John Dowd, head of Rothman's International in St. Petersburg. 
``They've already invested too much, and it is too big a market to 
give up.'' ``Russia is very important for our global strategy,'' Gietz, 
the R.J. Reynolds publicist, said. ``Since Russia opened up to the 
West, this large country with a tradition of smoking has meant great 
business opportunities for us and other tobacco companies. We expect 
things to pick up in the second half of 1999, but we are braced for 
however long it will take.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>