<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981230.2000.2006 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ever since we went on the air three years ago, we've been telling 
you that the German mark, the French franc, the Italian lira and other 
European currencies are going to disappear, to be replaced by the 
euro. We don't blame you for not believing us. It is an amazing story. 
But this weekend, it's finally going to happen. The European Union 
today put the finishing touches on preparations for Friday's launch 
of the single European currency. Britain is one four EU members not 
adopting the euro. But as "The World's" Steven Beard reports, London 
will be working round the clock to help get the euro going. Europe 
is going ahead. Europe doesn't need Britain. Britain does need Europe. 
After much angry debate, Britain has decided not to join the first 
wave of European countries adopting the euro. But London will play 
a major role in the birth of the new currency. London is the world's 
biggest trading center for currencies and foreign shares. During the 
next few days, 30,000 bankers, brokers and computer programmers here 
will race against the clock to get ready for the euro, says Kitt Farrow, 
head of the London Investment Banking Association. KITT FARROW, LONDON 
INVESTMENT BANKING They're going to be changing the values of every 
security in their portfolio, every cash balance that they have with 
all their customers, with all their other intermediaries all over 
the world -- doing that against a very tight time scale. The so-called 
conversion weekend begins at noon tomorrow when many financial markets 
close. The Deutsche mark, the franc, the lira and the rest will then 
be locked together as the euro. Tens of thousands of shares, bonds 
and other fiendishly complicated financial products will have to be 
repriced and all before markets re-open on Monday. To get an idea 
of the scope of the operation, Graham Bishop of Salomon Smith Barney 
has this suggestion: imagine how much work would be involved, he says, 
for one grocery store to cope with an overnight change in food labeling 
laws. You would have to take every single -- packet off the shelf 
and take off the existing label and put a new one on and put it back 
on the shelf, ready for Monday morning's customers. That's the sort 
of scale of why we have such a big problem. The potential for error 
is enormous. Some of the doomsayers predict mayhem when the markets 
re-open next week. But investment banker Kitt Farrow is moderately 
confident. A great deal of planning has gone into trying to ensure 
that this will work. But yes, we will be keeping our fingers crossed. 
London's city government has paid for an extra subway line to stay 
open during the new year's holiday to ferry in the financial workers. 
Thousands of hotel rooms have been booked, caterers have been hired 
to work around the clock, in order to ensure a smooth launch for the 
European Monetary Union, booze has been banned. But John McGowan, 
of Merrill Lynch says he and his colleagues are happy to forgo the 
usual festivities. In fact, he claims, they've been clamoring to work 
during the conversion weekend. People really want to be part of it. 
They're willing to serve coffee, answer phone, input into our terminals. 
People here feel that if they're not part of the EU conversion, they're 
missing out on something and they pretty much agreed that they're 
going to move their celebration to another weekend after the conversion 
is completed. Ironically, while London is playing a key role in the 
launch of the euro and many who work in this city support the project, 
60 percent of British people oppose the single currency and they're 
glad Britain isn't taking part. You've got these different countries 
in Europe, they don't speak the same language. They at loggerheads 
with each other. We're a country on our own; why not paint it that 
way? Why should we have money that's the same as everybody ese? MAN 
#1: We shouldn't have nothing at all to do with Europe. We should 
-- England and Great Britain at one time, but we're not any more because 
we're commandeered and told what to do by everybody else except our 
own people. But if the euro succeeds, it could soon rival the dollar. 
Euroland will have more consumers than the United States and a bigger 
share of world trade. As London prepares to help launch the new currency, 
most Britains believe they'll eventually succumb and adopt the euro, 
too. For "The World," this is Steven Beard in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>