<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981230.2000.2347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Slobodan Milosevic is the Balkan's most powerful and feared leader. 
He presided over the horrific Bosnian war from 1992 to 1995. And this 
year's Serb crackdown against the Kosovo Liberation Army, which claimed 
1500 lives. But while Milosevic monopolizes power in Yugoslavia, he 
does not rule alone. "The World's" Ninet Shevit profiles Mira Markovich. 
38150 NINET SHEVIT, REPORTER: Mira Markovich is the most powerful 
woman in Yugoslavia. That's because she's married to its President 
Slobodan Milosevic. Mira Markovich says there is no such thing as 
truly independent media and if the current crackdown on the news media 
in Serbia continues, she might well turn out to be right. The -- down 
began last summer, shortly after she accused those media of being 
enemies of the nation. Opposition politician Jacques Korich says Mira 
Markovich is moving on to the center stage in Serbian politics. She 
has always been very influential, but like a back-stage player. She's 
always been some kind of a double of Milosevic, certainly very influential 
in decision making process, although he was always on the stage and 
she was somewhere deeply behind. But recently in the past months, 
she became much more visible. For years, Markovich appeared to be 
content with a back-stage role, even though she was inseparable from 
her husband, Slobodan Milosevic. Seshka Stanolovich, who used to go 
to school with them, says that's the way they always were. I remember 
both of them always hand in hand. We called them Romeo and Juliette 
because they love -- love seem to us in that way. Biographer Slovayu 
Jokitch says that Mira played a key role in her husband's career. 
If it weren't for Mira Markovich, there'd be no Slobodoan Milosevic 
as national leader. In the history of Serbia, there's never been a 
woman as powerful as Mira. It's like, you know, Milosevic is running 
with pedals and she's keep the wheel that's -- that's the -- bike, 
how it works. Stan Sarowich is a columnist in the Belgrade Independent 
Weekly, Draima. She is very much anti-Western. She -- whenever she 
speaks about that, she cannot resist to accuse America, Western Europe 
and to express her sort of despise for a Western way of life. Political 
analyst Milos Vasich says Mira Markovich appears to be living in her 
own fantasy world. She thinks that Communism is not defeated. She 
thinks that whatever happened in past eight years of history of Communism 
was just a tragic mistake. She thinks that the future will bring a 
new dawn of -- of real Communism based, very much, by the way, on 
the same ideological and philosophical and economical premises, like 
the type of Communism which corrupts in the meantime. Mira Markowich's 
vision of the Communist future has not exactly endeared her to Serbs, 
according to opposition political Jakovitch. Our research, opinion 
polls we take, very clearly showed she's one of the most despised 
-- despised persons in Serbia and -- and she's extremely important. 
During the -- Milosevic street protest two years ago, much of the 
anger was directed at Markovich. This song, which makes fun of her 
and her policies is an anthem of sorts for the demonstrators. Since 
those protests, Markowich has become not just unpopular, but feared, 
says Korich. She's really, really a very dangerous person and we are 
very greatly concerned, especially because her political ideas are 
real archaic. Markowich initiated the current crackdown on the independent 
news media and the purge of professors at Belgrade University. Political 
analyst Milos Vasich says these actions have shifted even more power 
to members of Markovich's party, the Yul. Very systematically, those 
people take over all key positions in finances, economy, universities, 
government agencies, including the minister of interior very recently. 
And they seem to be penetrating the army, too. Opposition politician 
Jacques Korich says it's just a matter of time under Mira Markovich 
is overthrown. When that day arrives, he predicts Serbs will rejoice. 
To them, she symbolizes the corruption and lunacy of this regime. 
And she will ultimately be a scapegoat for their frustration and their 
anger and the fact that they're living so miserably today. But before 
Mira Markovich is stripped of her power, her husband will have to 
lose his. And, in part, because Markovich is so effective at identifying 
and quashing any opposition, Slobodan Milosevic remains firmly in 
command. For "The World," this is Ninet Shevit in Belgrade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>