<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981230.2000.0378 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Another charming episode in Cambodia's already charming history is 
how one diplomat described it. Another diplomat was less diplomatic. 
It's enough to make you retch, he said. These reactions were among 
the milder international responses to this week's statements by Prime 
Minister Hun Sen that putting two former Kamir Rouge leaders on trial 
would not be in the national interest. Today Cambodia's King Noradam 
Sianuk offered a second opinion, refusing to approve amnesty for the 
two men. Que Sam Pan and Nun Chay were high-ranking officials in the 
movement that caused the deaths of 1.7 million Cambodians in the 1970s. 
Coming up, we'll hear the voices of some Cambodian immigrants who 
haven't forgotten the killing fields. But right now, we turn to Ben 
Kearnen, the director of the Cambodia Genocide Program, based at Yale 
University, which has compiled an archive on the crimes perpetrated 
during the Kamir Rouge's rule. How significant do you think that King 
Sianuk's words are, that he doesn't support an amnesty for these two 
recent defectors from the Kamir Rouge? BEN KEARNEN, DIRECTOR, CAMBODIA 
GENOCIDE I think they're quite significant and I think it probably 
means that there will not be an amnesty. Meaning that there will be 
a full-scale trial? Not necessarily. I think it means that the Cambodian 
government will not give the Kamir Rouge leaders immunity from prosecution. 
And I think that leaves the possibility open for the international 
community to establish an international tribunal. Do you think that 
that is the likely outcome of this, given -- given the posture of 
the international community? Did you think that it contribute such 
unity for an international tribunal along the lines of, say, the Bosnia 
War Crimes Tribunal at The Hague? I think it's quite possible. The 
United Nations has sent a delegation of jurists to examine the evidence 
in the documents left over from the Kamir Rouge regime. And they are 
compiling their report now and they're expected to report in February. 
And they may recommend to the secretary general of the United Nations 
that the U.N. establish an international criminal tribunal for the 
Cambodian genocide. And do you think that that would be preferable 
to, for instance, some kind of a tribunal establishment within Cambodia 
itself or organized by Cambodia? I think it would, for a number of 
reasons. Probably because Cambodians do tend to want international 
recognition of the genocide and international acknowledgment of what 
happened to them during those years. So it's important to many Cambodians, 
I think, that the international community assure justice for the victims. 
Can you explain then -- then perhaps the sentiment on the part of 
-- of the Cambodians that we have heard from who say that, as much 
as they would like to see some sort of reconciliation and perhaps 
these people brought to trial, they're also looking to put the past 
behind them and that some kind of trial would just dig up a past history 
that many of them would rather forget. Well, I think there are two 
issues involved. One is peace and one is justice. And I don't believe 
that they necessarily conflict. It is important for Cambodians to 
move on with a peaceful reconstruction of their country. But it's 
also important to acknowledge what happened and to make sure that 
it doesn't happen again and a legal accounting for what happened could 
well help in both of those processes. To what extent do you think 
that United States policies in the `70s, during the period in which 
the U.S. bombed Cambodia, to what extent have they implicated the 
United States and Cambodia's violent history? In other words, do you 
point a finger at the United States as being culpable in all this? 
Well, the United States were heavily involved in the bombardment of 
Cambodia and, in some ways, helped to create the conditions that led 
to the rise of the Kamir Rouge. And during the 1980s, helped to preserve 
the Kamir Rouge from destruction. However, in the last four years, 
it has been U.S. policy to put the Kamir Rouge on trial and the U.S. 
government has been pursuing that policy. Ben Kearnen is the director 
of the Cambodia Genocide Program, based at Yale University. Professor 
Kearnen, thank you. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>