<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981230.2000.1192 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
the oil-driven wealth of the Middle East has fueled a financial phenomenon 
on the Muslim world: Islamic banking. Although only two decades old, 
it's now the only form of banking allowed in Pakistan, Sudan and Iran 
and is growing faster in other Muslim nations from Malaysia to Bahrain. 
Even some Western banks are getting in on the action. Citibank, for 
example, runs the largest Islamic banking operation in the world. 
Frank Vogel, director of the Islamic Legal Studies Program at Harvard 
Law School says these Islamic banks functions quite differently from 
Western ones. frank vogel, director, islamic legal There are a lot 
of intricate rules that constrain how Muslims conduct commercial activity 
of all kinds and banking especially. One is that interest has been 
prohibited throughout history. And banking, as we know it, is based 
on interest. There are also some restrictions along the lines of what 
you might find in socially conscious investing in this country. Restrictions 
on -- on where the money will go. The bank has to invest its funds, 
Islamically. For example, for sure, they can't invest in a company 
that raises pigs for slaughter, that makes liquor or engages in gambling, 
these kinds of things. Apart from that, though, it has to, more importantly, 
as a more difficult problem, it has to turn around and invest in ways 
that don't, again, involve interest and other problems in the Islamic 
laws. So how viable a way is that of doing banking business? It seems 
to be viable among those for whom it is religiously vital not to invest 
in ordinary banking and there have been enough of those people that 
Islamic banking has not only survived, but is growing... It's growing 
at an... ...and growing rapidly. ...amazing rate. You say 15 percent 
a year for the... yes. ...last five years. Yes. I think Muslims had 
always had a conscientious dilemma about how to engage with Western 
banking. And a hundred years ago, Muslims were avoiding interest-bearing 
accounts. Now they have an option. They have an alternative. There 
are Islamic investment companies here. There are Islamic mortgage 
companies here. Let's talk about where there are loopholes in Islamic 
banking and -- what that allows certain banks to do that otherwise 
they wouldn't be able to do. One form of sale is often pointed to 
as a group hole or as a sort of a shadow shell game that allows them 
to really conduct interest banking. This is called morabha, which 
means markup sale. A customer who wants them to lend it money will 
approach the bank and say, I need a particular piece of equipment 
or a certain type of inventory. The bank will then go and buy that 
inventory or equipment. It will then immediately turn around and resell 
that property or equipment to its customer at a markup. So the net 
result is very similar to an interest loan. Even the banks are beginning 
to feel that this is, although formally in agreement with Islamic 
law, is substantively too shallow. So to what extent does this have 
the ability, do you think, to change the ways that banks conduct business 
on a global level? I think it could become quite important, as Islamic 
banks first grow in size, they take a -- simply a larger quantitative 
piece of the international banking industry. Secondly, they may develop 
specialties in certain fields, dealing with certain countries, like 
Iran or Pakistan or Saudi Arabia or the Gulf. Thirdly, they may develop 
a specialty in certain lines of business, like trade finance, which 
enables them to use the transaction I've just described, this Morabha 
transaction markup. I should mention also a fourth, ordinary customers 
of banks at the retail level are buying mutual funds now that are 
Islamically screened. So that area of investing is growing and growing 
and growing, and think we'll begin to see a lot of Islamic money moving 
in equity markets. Frank Vogel is the director of the Islamic Legal 
Studies Program at Harvard Law School and co-author of the book "Islamic 
Law and Finance: Religion, Risk and Return." Thank you for coming 
to this studio. You're welcome. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>