<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981230.2000.0622 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
About 25 miles northwest of our studios in Boston, in the town of 
Lowell, residents have been watching this week's developments in Cambodia 
with particular interest. "The World's" Jeb Sharpe. The offices of 
the Cambodian Mutual Assistance Association are in an old red brick 
factory building in downtown Lowell. The lobby is crowded with volunteers 
helping to put together a new day care center in the building. Sam 
Kan Kun directs this non-profit organization which caters to America's 
second-largest Cambodian refugee population behind only Los Angeles. 
He dismisses the idea of amnesty for Que Sam Pan and Nu Anchea, saying 
they must be prosecuted for their crimes. SAM KAN KUN, DIRECTOR, CAMBODIAN 
mutual To us, it doesn't make sense to be given any -- to grant any 
amnesty in -- to any. We know that - - you know, that they are responsible 
for that. You know, I don't think they deserve any amnesty. I don't 
think they deserve any, you know, forgiveness. It is us, you know, 
who -- who -- who -- who should be, you know, the witness and also 
be the jury. You know, it's the king alone. It's not, you know, the 
elected government and, you know, one person in the government. Sam 
Kan Kun was a teenager during the Kamir Rouge years and lost many 
members of his family to starvation. He says he and other Cambodians 
were denied food, education and the right to be with their families. 
He wants the perpetrators of those crimes punished. And especially 
while I was that age, to be denied the access to education, to be 
denied to be -- to be a boy, to experience what a boy, you know, what 
a boyhood is all about and -- and to be -- to be leaving under, you 
know, lay in a boot camp, lay -- and wherever you don't feel that, 
you know, that -- why -- why do I have to go through that and why 
-- why this? I mean, you know, why do I deserve it? One of Sam Kan 
Kun's employees at the Cambodian Mutual Assistance Association is 
Arn Chan Pan who lost most of his family under the Kamir Rouge regime. 
He works with young people at the center and says the effects of the 
Cambodian terror continue to ripple through the generations, causing 
havoc, even in children born here to Cambodian parents. Arn Chan Pan 
wants justice, too, but he acknowledges he's not sure it's a simple 
task. ARN chan pan, employee cambodian The killing fields are not 
one particular person or two particular person. It's everybody that's 
-- trying to get -- trying to clean their hands, you know. The King 
Hun San and the Kamir Rouge cliques and the Russian the Chinese and 
the Americans. They would be -- they would have been at the -- long 
ago. They've been out like Noriega, if he wanted to. So why now? As 
he speaks, Arn's face grows taut and his eyes flash with anger and 
old pain. He says, even if the Kamir Rouge leaders are brought to 
trial, the Cambodian people will still have a long and difficult healing 
process ahead. And I see -- I see a lot of blood on myself, my own 
-- my own life, you know. And for a nine and eight -- nine-year-old 
kid, and throughout -- I grew up here now, I have a lot of nightmares. 
I haven't been deal with that. And I think we need a really urgent 
international intervention or whatever, money, you know, to -- to 
-- to -- for healing, for healing -- simple. So I'm screaming for 
that, for all of us to be healed. And I mean, to get back to get revenge, 
I don't think is going to go anywhere. But those who advocate a trial 
aren't necessarily after revenge. Bo Rai Yi who also works at the 
center helping Cambodian's apply for U.S. citizenship says she favors 
a trial because she wants the pain to end and to put the history that 
haunts her to rest. BO RAI YI, EMPLOYEE, CAMBODIAN MUTUAL We cannot 
just heal when, when there is nothing done about it. Something happened. 
You can't forget it. History is there. Two million people died. And 
-- and with something like this, that will bring it to a closure. 
With - - there's a no closure. He died of natural death, well, supposedly. 
But still, that's no closure; he died. But with this, maybe it's something 
for them to hold on to. Nearly everyone we encountered at the Cambodian 
Mutual Assistance Association today was talking about one thing: this 
week's events in their homeland. And nearly everyone agreed that Que 
Sam Pan and Nu Anchea must face justice, as much to prepare for Cambodia's 
future as to come to grips with its past. For "The World," I'm Jeb 
Sharpe. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>