<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981230.2000.1531 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today was the last trading session of the year for the Japanese stock 
market and the Nikkei closed down five points. Most traders in Tokyo 
were happy to see 1998 go, after a year of rocky times for all of 
Asia's economies. "The World's" William Troupe reports. The Nikkei 
stock average ended the year more than 1400 points lower than where 
it started. That's the worst performance in 12 years. And a sign that 
troubling economic times remain ahead for a recession-bound Japan. 
Sagio Takeshta is an economist with Deutsche Morgan Bank. SAGIO TAKESHTA, 
economist, deutsche morgan For example, the jobless rate in Japan 
is now. 4.4 percent and that's the worst figure ever recorded after 
World War II. All the major Japanese -- suggest that Japan is definitely 
in turmoil. We need a structural economic, as well as social change. 
But we're struggling, basically, to make that into the implementation 
stages. And we're just hearing numbers and numbers of bad economic 
figures, that's being confirmed by the sentiment and I think we're 
basically in a very much of a downward spiral move. Takeshta says 
1998 was a devastating year, not just for Japan, but for most of Asia, 
as well. Even Hong Kong, the region's other financial capital, suffered. 
The economy there shrank this year by 5.2 percent, despite the fact 
that the Chinese economy, as a whole, was booming. Beijing announced 
today that during 1998, the Chinese economy grew by 7.8 percent, slightly 
lower than its goal of eight percent. Some economists are skeptical 
of the numbers, saying provincial officials often inflate their figures 
to please Beijing. Still, it's a remarkable contrast to the rest of 
the region's economic woes, according to "The World's" Hong Kong correspondent, 
Michael Swyto. China's economy growing at nearly eight percent, you 
look at Hong Kong. Everywhere else in Asia, they're in recession. 
Hong Kong's economy is contracting by more than 5 percent. Indonesia 
expects its economy to shrink by 15 percent this year. And yet, we 
see that China's economy is still basically rolling right along. And 
China's exports are still running high, as well. Sales to other Asian 
countries may be down, as a result of the region's financial crisis. 
But China managed to make up for that by exporting more to, you guessed 
it, the consumers of last resort: the United States. For "The World," 
this is William Troupe. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>