<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.0500.3193 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Vocalist Diana Crawl, pianist and jazz stylist, Harry Connick, Jr., 
and saxophonist Kenny G led the jazz charts in 1998, while other solid 
musicians like Winton Marsalis and Herbie Hancock gave us some fine 
musical moments. In blues, the return of a master crooner and the 
rise of two young superstars. VOA's Doug Levine has more and these 
highlights of the year in jazz and blues. Saxophonist Kenny G proved 
that he has strong fan support. His greatest hits album topped the 
chart for most of 1998. The CD includes two previously unreleased 
songs, plus a classic medley with the late Frank "All the Way," and 
"One for My Baby." 1998 marked the 100th birthday of popular American 
composer George Gershwin. Gershwin tribute albums by singer Michael 
Feinstein and pianist Herbie Hancock both went to number one this 
year. Eleven years after the release of his album, "Standard Time, 
Volume One," trumpeter Winton Marsalis grabbed the spotlight with 
the "Midnight Blues," "Standard Time, Volume Five." His latest collection 
of standards celebrates traditional jazz and its connection with romance. 
Jazz was in the air at clubs and arenas around the country. Heavy 
promotion by so-called smooth jazz radio stations prompted the sellout 
of multi-artist concerts such as the Capitol Jazz Festival in Washington 
D.C. Sales of blues albums soared with releases by two rising stars: 
17-year-old Johnny Lang and 20-something Kenny Wayne Shepard. Lang 
had one of the top selling blues albums of 1998, "Lie to Me," and 
he closes out the year with his current album, "Wander This World" 
at number one. Veteran blues man, B.B. King, swept "Downbeat" magazine's 
readers poll for blues musician, album, and group of the year. At 
age 73, he put together an all-star CD, "Deuce is Wild," which was 
his fastest selling album ever, and it spawned one of the year's most 
successful tours. Sadly, the blues world said goodbye to harmonica 
great Junior Welles, who died in January at age 63. In March, jazz 
saxophonist George Howard lost his battle to lymphoma. He was 41. 
Jazz also mourned the loss of singers Betty Carter and Dorothy Donogan, 
pianist Kenny Kirkland, and big band leader Mel Powell. Looking ahead 
to 1999, year-long celebrations are already in place for the 60th 
anniversary of Blue Note Records, including a 20 city tour of up and 
coming Blue Note artists. Since 1939, the label's roster has included 
everyone from Sidney Bouche and James P. Johnson, to Bud Powell, Felonious 
Monk, Miles Davis, and Herbie Hancock. I'm Doug Levine. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>