<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.1600.0684 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In South Africa, December 31st is not only New Year's Eve and a time 
for partying, it also is the deadline for South Africans to submit 
claims if they want to regain land unjustly taken from them. VOA correspondent 
Alex Belida reports from Johannesburg. The headline on the front page 
of Wednesday's Johannesburg Star newspaper says it all. A flood of 
claims. In the final hours leading up to the Thursday's deadline, 
hundreds of applications for restitution are pouring in to land claims 
offices around the country. The Department of Land Affairs has already 
received more than 30,000 such applications and officials say they 
expect some 40,000 in all by the time the deadline passes. They note 
South Africans have had four years since the adoption of the Land 
Claims Act to put in their claims, and the deadline has already been 
extended twice to accommodate late comers. Stanley Encozy of the Land 
Affairs Department explains the purpose of the process. The Land Claims 
Act is designed to address the laws that were passed by the past government, 
the previous political dispensation which resulted in many people 
being dispossessed of their land because of either the race or quite 
a number of other things. You know, there was an array of racially 
discriminated, a piece of legislations that were passed. And as a 
result of this, there was this social engineering, and people were 
moved around. But Mr. Encozy says there are limits. If people were 
adequately compensated for their land originally, then they cannot 
claim it back. He also says claims will not be entertained for land 
that was taken for public purposes like a recent case in which a claim 
was made for land that is now the site of Johannesburg's international 
airport. So far, 27 claims involving nearly 250,000 hectares of land 
have been investigated and resolved. Mr. Encozy says one case involved 
land that is part of South Africa's premier game reserve, the Krueger 
National Park. In that claim, the beneficiary, if you've got over, 
say, 10,000 people or households that will benefit from that scene 
and then this is a land that was taken away from this community or 
tribe as a result of racial discriminatory laws, and it was then added 
to what is presently called the Krueger National Park. The settlement 
in that case wasn't as simple as just giving back the land to the 
claimants. Instead, Mr. Encozy says the deal allows members of the 
community to work in the park and to run their section of it jointly 
with the parks board. Another recent case resolved in principle will 
see members of South Africa's son or bushmen Community regain rights 
over thousands of hectares of land in another game reserve, the Kalahari 
Gemsbok Park. Given the volume of claims, especially those made at 
the last minute, officials estimate it may take another five to ten 
years before all the cases have been investigated and resolved. Alex 
Belida, VOA News, Johannesburg. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>