<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.1600.3231 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
North American Major League Baseball made a stunning comeback in 1998, 
just four years after suffering a devastating players strike. As VOA's 
Jim Stevenson reports, baseball reached beyond its die hard fans with 
a home run race that captured the attention of millions. And McGwire 
drives with a deep left. It is a home run, number 62 or Mark McGwire. 
A slice of history and a magical moment in St. Louis. With huge swings 
of the bat, St. Louis Cardinal slugger Mark McGwire shattered one 
of the most hallowed marks in baseball: the single season home run 
record. On September 8th, nearly three weeks before the season ended, 
McGwire passed the 61 total set 37 seasons earlier by New York Yankee 
Roger Marris. It's been awesome. I mean, I tell you what, the last 
week and a half, you know, my stomach's been turning, my heart's been 
beating a million miles a minute. To do it that fast, I don't know. 
I just give thanks to the man upstairs and all of them, Roger Marris, 
Babe Ruth, everybody's watching up there. What a feat. Mark McGwire 
not only passed Roger Marris, but he added four home runs in the final 
two days of the regular season to rewrite the record book with 70. 
Incredibly, Sammy Sosa of the Chicago Cubs also surpassed the Marris 
record to finish the regular season with 66 home runs. Sosa remained 
close to McGwire during the chase, capturing the imagination of baseball 
fans in the United States and in his native Dominican Republic. It 
is an honor for me that I be there together with all the legend that 
was playing this game before me. And I'm so happy that I'm there with 
Mark McGwire. The home run race highlighted a year packed with several 
other record-setting performances. The New York Yankees completed 
a spectacular season with a record of 125 wins and 50 losses, the 
fourth highest winning percentage in baseball history. The Yankees' 
11 and 2 post season included a four game sweep of the San Diego Padres 
in the World Series. Team owner George Steinbrenner thought the 1998 
Yankees proved they were one of the best teams in history. This is 
truly, you can say it now, one of the greatest teams in baseball. 
This team, I have never seen anything like it. They just never quit. 
They seem to be able to overcome everything. One of the best players 
for more than 16 seasons has been Cal Ripken, Jr. of the Baltimore 
Orioles. His incredible record streak of consecutive games played 
suddenly came to an end at 2,632 in September. Ripken simply decided 
the time had come to take a day off. I don't feel a sense of relief, 
not yet. Maybe I will. I feel content about it. I feel that it was 
handled really well. It was celebrated in the right way. It was happy. 
It's not sad. Other highlights of the 1998 season included New York 
pitcher David Welles throwing a perfect game in May in Yankee Stadium. 
This kind of a conscious is too far fetched for me. You know,. I just 
didn't think it would happen to me at all. You know, it couldn't happen 
in a better place to me going up against the. Barry Bonds of the San 
Francisco Giants became the first player in Major League Baseball 
history to hit more than 400 career home runs and steal more than 
Rodriguez of the Seattle Mariners was just the fourth player to hit 
40 home runs and steal 40 bases in a single season. Jim Stevenson, 
VOA sports. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>