<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.1600.3054 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Across Asia, investors and business people are taking a wait and see 
attitude towards the new single European currency, which will launch 
in just a few days. But as Amy Bickers reports, financial experts 
say they new currency could offer a tremendous benefit to Asia, which 
is in the midst of a severe credit crunch. The launch of the euro 
currency on January 1st is a momentous event for Europe. It will unite 
the currencies of 11 nations into one monetary unit. The new euro 
currency zone will account for more than 290 million people, 20 percent 
of world trade, and 20 percent of gross domestic product. The effects 
of the euro will be felt around the world by all nations which trade 
with or invest in Europe. Economists are saying the euro could play 
a positive role in Asia, which remains mired in a financial crisis. 
Their hope is the new euro bond market will provide new sources of 
financing to needy Asian companies and government. The launch of the 
euro will create the world's second largest bond market, as the separate 
debt markets of the 11 euro zone nations merge into one. David Marshall, 
a Hong Kong based managing director for credit rating agency, Fitch 
Ipca, says the results will be a giant bond issuing and trading entity 
with a market capitalization of $7 trillion, second only to the U.S. 
bond market worth $11 trillion. Asian companies have been pretty much 
restricted, you know, to raising money locally than Asian markets, 
which really have been very limited all going to the U.S. market, 
which of course, you know, the biggest and deepest. What we've had 
in Europe up to now is, you know, separate, you know, markets in the 
U.K. and in Germany and in France, but they have tended to be, you 
know, rather sort of parochial. And what the euro means is that suddenly 
you'll have this, you know, huge sort of market really for investments. 
This highly liquid long-term debt market will create a huge pool of 
funds available to borrowers in Asia and other nations. It will also 
make it easier for Asian entities to structure debt deals, since its 
simpler to draw money from one large pool of funds rather than a dozen 
small markets. Still, analysts say borrowing costs on the new European 
market are likely to be steep for Asia, reflecting the high level 
of credit risk for countries like Thailand and Indonesia. China, South 
Korea, Thailand, and the Philippines have already said they will use 
the euro as a reserve currency or seriously consider doing so. Currently, 
the dollar dominates foreign exchange reserves, accounting for more 
than 60 percent of those funds held by Central Banks around the world. 
Amy Bickers for VOA News, Hong Kong. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>