<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.0500.1827 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
United States and Britain say the two no-fly zones in Iraq will be 
strictly enforced in spite Baghdad's threat to fire at patrolling 
allied planes. The comments came in Washington and London Tuesday 
after U.S. jets attacked an Iraqi air defense site in Northern Iraq 
which has fired upon them. VOA's Scott Bob reports on Iraq's continued 
defiance of U.S. and British air patrols over its territory. Iraqi 
Vice President Dahai Yassi Ramadan told reporters Tuesday Iraqi forces 
will challenge the no-fly zones. The zones were established by coalition 
forces following the Gulf War to protect dissident populations in 
the country from Iraqi air attacks. Vice President Ramadan said Iraq 
does not recognize the zones because they are not authorized by the 
United Nations. The Iraqi vice president claimed one western plane 
was shot down by Iraqi defense forces during a clash Monday in Northern 
Iraq. Iraq says four Iraqi soldiers were killed in the clash. U.S. 
officials have confirmed the clash took place but say all their planes 
returned safely to base. Meanwhile, Iraqi newspapers lashed out at 
Arab leaders who it says have failed to support its stance against 
western powers. Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz in a rare front-page 
editorial in the "Al-Khafadiya" newspaper criticized Egyptian President 
Hosni Mubarak for saying the Iraqi government was responsible for 
the problems that had brought suffering to its people. The Iraqi official 
said there was no fair or intelligent person in the Arab world who 
shared the Egyptian president's opinion, and he warned Arab leaders 
of what he called the snowballing Arab wrath which will shake the 
ground under their feet. The U.S. and British air strikes against 
Iraq ten days ago brought angry demonstrations in nearly a dozen Arab 
nations and condemnation Sunday from the Arab parliamentary union. 
Foreign ministers of the Arab League were due to meet Wednesday in 
Cairo but their meeting was postponed for one month reportedly at 
the request of several Gulf states. The postponement led Baghdad's 
"Al-Khafadiya" newspaper Tuesday to accuse Kuwait and Saudi Arabia 
of trying to foil the Arab call for just a meeting. Political analysts 
say the Iraqi government is hoping to take advantage of popular sympathy 
following the air strikes to press for an end to economic sanctions 
against Iraq. It is hoping Arab governments will resume trade with 
it and support its policy of seeking reparations from the U.S. and 
British governments for damages inflicted by the strikes. Scott Bob, 
VOA News Now, Middle East bureau. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>