<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.0500.2695 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last month, the "Journal of the American Medical Association" reported 
that four out of ten Americans are making use of acupuncture, another 
so-called alternative treatment methods. Brian Cislakph) examines 
the history and science behind acupuncture, which increasingly is 
finding a place in western medicine. Traditional Chinese medicine 
says that good health is associated with the balance of Chee, an energy 
force that flows through the body. Chee can be hindered or helped 
by Yin and Yang, opposing forces that when balanced, work harmoniously 
together. According to traditional theory, the goal of acupuncture 
is to promote the flow of Chee by keeping Yin and Yang in balance, 
and this is done by inserting needles at various points along primary 
channels and meridians that criss-cross the body. In the early 1970s, 
western scientists discovered natural brain chemicals called endorphins, 
opiates produced by the nervous system in response to pain. It was 
about that time that a prominent American journalist, James Resden, 
wrote about his appendectomy in China where acupuncture was used to 
alleviate post-operative pain. Could it be, asked western scientists, 
that inserting needles into the body at precise points might stimulate 
nerves that cause the brain to release its natural painkilling chemicals. 
There is sufficient evidence to show a positive effect between the 
technique of acupuncture itself and the release of peptide substances 
within the brain which we know to be associated with the relief of 
pain. David Ramsey, president of the University of Maryland at Baltimore. 
Dr. Ramsey chaired a panel of medical experts convened by the U.S. 
National Institutes of Health which endorsed acupuncture for treating 
certain types of nausea, vomiting, and pain. That is the nausea that 
follows being given an anesthetic for surgery, following chemotherapy, 
the vomiting nausea that accompanies pregnancy, and post-operative 
dental pain. Treatment under these circumstances really did work. 
The principle concern among western scientists in evaluating acupuncture's 
effectiveness has been the so-called placebo effect, the possibility 
that beneficial outcomes derive not from the treatment itself but 
from the patient's belief that it works. Researchers got around that 
problem by measuring brain chemistry during acupuncture. Drugs were 
administered to block the brain's natural opiates while the person 
was undergoing needle stimulation. As a result of the opiate blockage, 
the acupuncture had no effect in stopping pain, proving that there 
is a physiological mechanism to acupuncture that goes beyond mere 
belief. Acupuncture is widely employed in easing cravings and withdrawal 
pains of heroin addicts. Janet Kordafall of the University of Miami 
Medical School explains. Forty percent of the drug courts in the United 
States use acupuncture as part of their therapy. In the Miami system 
alone, there are between 3- and 400 treatments per day. In Sweden, 
they've had successful acupuncture in treating the effects of stroke, 
though stroke patients getting acupuncture, along with physical therapy, 
did a lot better than those getting physical therapy alone. Margaret 
Nazer of the Boston University School of Medicine explains. Those 
differences are significant for walking imbalance activities of daily 
living quality of life at various times, three months, six months, 
12 months. And I think most importantly perhaps is that there was 
a savings of $26,000 for an acupuncture patient because they had reduced 
days in rehabilitation facilities. One of the key benefits of acupuncture 
that seems to be emerging from various studies is that it has few 
if any side effects, and that when used with standard drug treatment 
in anesthesia, for example, it allows physicians to cut back on medication. 
Delivering the same level of benefit with fewer negative effects. 
I'm Brian Cislak. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>