<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.0500.2122 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cambodia's King Norodom Sihanouk has refused to grant an amnesty to 
former Khmer Rouge leaders, Ku Som Pahn and Huan Chia, who defected 
to the government. Both men have apologized for their part in the 
genocide during the Khmer Rouge rule of the late 1970s which left 
up to two million Cambodians dead. However, King Sihanouk says he 
will not renew his grant of amnesty to the "Big Khmer Rouge criminals 
who are against the Cambodian people." VOA's Victor Beady spoke with 
reporter Hugh Watkin in Phnom Penh and asked him what the effect the 
king's statement will have on the government of Prime Minster Hun 
Sen. Even though the king is revered by his people in Cambodia, his 
statement can't be seen as anything more really than a statement of 
principle. The fact of the matter is is that Hun Sen and his Cambodian 
People's Party control the judicial apparatus here in Cambodia. The 
fact that Hun Sen has said that even the prospect of an international 
tribunal is not on means that really the rest of the world, despite 
their outrage, can do nothing about it. I mean, the only option really 
now for anybody like the United Nations, for example, is to come in 
with helicopter gun ships and snatch these people. And, of course, 
I would suggest that that eventuality is highly unlikely. On Tuesday, 
the United States State Department said that both men must be held 
accountable for their actions. Do you think that's going to have any 
bearing on Cambodian authorities in their decision? Well, Cambodian 
authorities, I think, time and time again have shown, shall we say, 
a certain contempt for what the rest of the world thinks, and I think 
Hun Sen's again, unilateral decision, his granting of amnesty by Hun 
Sen decree is yet one more example of that. I really can't see how 
the international community can enforce this decision. It goes back 
to the old problem of, OK, what levers do we have now in Cambodia. 
Those levers, of course, comprise principally of foreign aid and both 
expertise and money. But this debate has raved for the last two years 
in terms of political turmoil here. The only lever you have is you 
withdraw aid, but who does that affect? It just increases the suffering 
of the Cambodian people, because despite the poverty of Cambodia, 
Cambodia's leaders are in fact extremely wealthy. So any sort of sanction, 
for example, is not going to damage people like Hun Sen, but it will 
in fact damage the people who need the help most of all. What happens 
to these two Khmer - former Khmer Rouge leaders now? Well, that's 
the big question, I suppose. I mean, this is not actually unprecedented. 
These guys are the most senior that have come across, but we have 
a rather large number of mass murderers living comfortable lives in 
Cambodia as we speak. One individual in particular, a guy by the name 
of Kapoch, he's implicated by vast volumes of evidence in what was 
called the purge of the East in 1978 in which literally hundreds of 
thousands of people were executed because of their perceived loyalty 
to Vietnam rather than Phnom Penh. And that is just one example. There's 
at least 15, 16 senior Khmer Rouge speakers who survived and who at 
this stage look no closer to being caught or accounted for the terrible 
things that they're responsible for during the 1970s. That is reporter 
Hugh Watkin talking with VOA's Victor Beady. The United States says 
the Cambodian government's actions toward the two guerrilla leaders 
will shape its relations with the United States and the international 
community. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>