<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.0500.0361 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. lawmakers are beginning to lay the groundwork for the first impeachment 
trial of a president in more than a century, and it appears a procedural 
disagreement is in the making. Members of the House of Representatives, 
who will be the managers of prosecutors of President Clinton's impeachment 
trial, say they think witnesses should be called to testify. Some 
prominent Senate members are saying they think the proceedings should 
be confined to evidence already presented, not new testimony from 
witnesses. Appearing on the CNN program, "Late Edition," Republican 
Senator Jon Kyl was asked to weigh in on the issue of witnesses and 
new testimony. I think that they're both right. It depends really 
on what the president wants, because he'll have to defend himself. 
The House will be prepared to call witnesses. They should be in case 
they're required. But it's also true that if it is agreed to by both 
sides, the case could essentially be submitted to the Senate on the 
House record, meaning that the House managers would present the entire 
testimony presented to the House of Representatives, the argument 
about that testimony and so on. They present that to the Senate. The 
president has never really disputed the facts. He has disputed the 
meaning of the facts. And he, of course, would be permitted to do 
that in the Senate trial, basically arguing in his view that they 
didn't constitute a high crime or misdemeanor which should cause his 
removal. The House managers, of course, would argue that it should, 
and then the Senate would essentially base the case on its view of 
that legal argument. House Republican managers asserted their position 
on witnesses Tuesday after they held their first meeting to discuss 
how to conduct a trial. The Senate Majority Leader, Republican Trent 
Lott, and his Democratic counterpart, Minority Leader Tom Daschle, 
both say they prefer a trial based on evidence already available, 
not new testimony from witnesses. Whichever way that issue is decided, 
Democratic Senator Paul Wellstone says the Senate must move forward 
both with dignity and speed. To me, I think what I found breathtaking 
about the decision in the House was whether or not even lying to a 
grand jury, if that's what happened, whether or not that constituted 
a threat to our freedom and liberty, and therefore was an impeachable 
offense. I mean, I think that's the real question. And I think in 
the Senate, you're not going to have 67 votes to remove the president, 
and I think we'll start out with a trial, but I do believe there's 
going to be a pretty strong consensus for a very strong consensus 
- very strong censure resolution. Calls are still being made for Mr. 
Clinton to be censured or condemned for his action instead of facing 
trial. However, Senator Trent Lott said Tuesday the Senate should 
hear a full presentation of the evidence before deciding on whether 
to remove or to censure the president. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>