<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.0500.0851 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ancient Egyptians, Aztecs, and Incas are widely believed to have possessed 
surprisingly advanced knowledge of astronomy and to have used that 
knowledge to measure time and keep track of the seasons. But what 
about other ancient cultures? In Miami, an enormous circular rock 
carving has been discovered that local archaeologists say was the 
handiwork of prehistoric native Indians and may have been used as 
a calendar. VOA's Mike Bowman has details. In downtown Miami, plans 
to construct a high rise building have been placed on hold since surveyors 
stumbled upon a stone formation measuring more than 12 meters in diameter. 
The director of the city's Historic Preservation Division, Bob Carr, 
says the discovery was completely unexpected and could revolutionize 
the scientific community's understanding of ancient cultures in the 
area. This circle was very carefully cut into the bedrock, and there 
definitely seems to be an east-west alignment that is very similar 
to what the Equinox would be. And why this alignment stands out is 
because there are one particular cut on the eastern end which is in 
the form or the shape of what looks to be like a human eye. A loose 
rock has been placed into the center of it like the pupil of an eye. 
Mr. Carr says study of the archaeological find has only just begun, 
but he says the stone formation appears to have been carved by the 
Tekesta Indians who inhabited southeast Florida prior to the arrival 
of European explorers and settlers in the early 1500s. Mr. Carr says 
the formation is unique. Nothing remotely similar has been found anywhere 
else in the region. He says one possible conclusion that could be 
drawn is that numerous native Indian populations, not just the much 
celebrated Aztecs and Incas, possessed some knowledge of astronomy. 
We are seeing some suggestions, some evidence indicating that there 
was an astronomical sense that these people had, and maybe this was 
common for all native peoples in North and South America. We're seeing 
that these people, even though they were fishermen, they were hunters, 
they were gatherers, they still had a very sophisticated sense of 
where they were in relation to their space and time and maybe even 
with the heavens. What is to become of the archaeological find? A 
battle could develop between researchers like Bob Carr and developers 
who purchase the land on which the bedrock carving is located. Mr. 
Carr says he fears it will ultimately be necessary to relocate the 
formation so that construction can resume. Michael Bowman, VOA News, 
Miami. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>