<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.1600.2691 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Between three and five percent of American school children, as well 
as an unknown number of adults, are affected by attention deficit 
disorder, or ADD. So far, the drug called Ritalin has shown the best 
results in alleviating ADD symptoms that range from mild restlessness 
to serious inability to focus. But some professionals in the field 
prefer other solutions. Lanitza Hoke spoke with Dr. George Green of 
Las Vegas, Nevada who treats ADD with biofeedback. Dr. Green, we usually 
talk about attention deficit disorder in connection with children, 
and especially American children. Does that mean that ADD appears 
more in America or is it just more diagnosed in America and it appears 
in the same numbers in other countries? I would say that it appears 
in the same number all across the globe. And what causes it? Now that's 
a really interesting question. It seems to be caused by things like 
fetal alcohol syndrome, or any stress in the uterus, or if one parent 
has it, it can be passed on genetically. So it makes it very common 
if it's that easy to get. In other parts of the world where there 
are dietary stresses on pregnant women, you have low birth rate children 
and there's a chance that they would be ADD as well. So there are 
many ways, at least those two large ways of getting it. And an interesting 
quality of ADD is that in societies that do not depend on schools 
as the most important part of a child's growing up, the kids with 
ADD seem to do quite well. Do they do better one on one than in a 
classroom situation? Usually they do, yes, yes, if it comes to learning. 
And they also do better with hands-on learning instead of just sitting 
there looking at words. And how is ADD different in grown ups? Do 
they cope more easily with it? By the time someone is a grown up, 
they've learned to compensate for it a little bit, but unfortunately, 
by the time they've grown up, they've also already been labeled. So 
they carry labels like lazy and people who are unfocused; they don't 
know what they want to do with their lives, they're shiftless, they're 
dreamers, negative kinds of things that adults attribute in - So the 
hyperactivity is usually not a real problem for adults. Adults who 
are hyperactive tend to work real long hours and they enjoy it, they 
need it. Also, adults learn to self-medicate. By that, I mean they've 
learned that coffee, for instance, is a wonderful thing for ADD. What 
is the best treatment that you would suggest? Well, I believe the 
best treatment is biofeedback. Which is what? Biofeedback is a means 
to actually retraining the brain waves that seem to be associated 
with ADD, and teaching the individual to modify their brain waves 
back toward a more focused type of pattern. I've worked with hundreds 
of people with this, and it's very effective. We've had some wonderful 
results. Can you describe a session, for example? What does it look 
like? Is it conversation or is it something with machines? We have 
an electroencephalograph, a brain-wave measuring device hooked up 
to a computer. And we attach electrodes to the person's head so that 
we can attempt to isolate a certain portion of the brain. And you 
know, the electrodes are just stuck on the outside of the skin; it's 
not - no needles or anything like that. And the signals from those 
wires are processed by the computer so that the individual, the patient, 
can actually look at a computer screen and see what their brain waves 
are doing. And then we teach them how to modify those brain waves. 
It's a lot of work but it works very well. Lanitza Hoke discussed 
attention deficit disorder with Dr. George Green of Las Vegas, Nevada. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>