<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.0500.2457 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
About 400 artists from the Indian subcontinent are holding a five-day 
meeting in New Delhi to counter what they say is a growing threat 
to creativity from fundamentalist forces. From the Indian capital, 
Angela Patricha has a report. The artists say they're concerned that 
the increasing number of attacks on film, books, and paintings fundamentalist 
groups believe do not conform to their culture or religion, whether 
Hindu or Muslim. In the latest attack incident in India, Hindu political 
activists halted the screening of a film on a lesbian relationship 
by storming theaters showing the movies. They called the film an affront 
to Indian values. In Bangladesh, a woman writer faces death threats 
from Islamic extremists for promoting women's rights. In Pakistan 
an abandoned theater was unofficially closed during two decades of 
military rule. The artists say fundamentalism forces a challenge to 
creativity and secular values. They say the trend toward intolerance 
is growing because of political patronage and the failure of government 
to arrest people for attacking art. A leading Indian editor En Jahm 
elaborates. Three cold-blooded political attempt to mobilize chauvinistic 
feelings, backward narrow feelings, and I think we have had several 
specific problems in recent years. We have the problem of the attack 
on the work of the great - the outstanding artists, Anna Fuzen, not 
to mention the fascistic attack on various people, including Muslims 
and Christians. That's a separate thing but culturally, there have 
been specific targeting. Well-known film producer, Shiam Benegal, 
comes from Bombay. Once considered India's most liberal city. She 
says artists are distressed by the wave of cultural intolerance and 
Puritanism sparked by the Hindu nationalist Shiv Sina Party in the 
city. She says the trend must be resisted. It means resistance, because, 
you know, unless we resist it and you have to create a large body 
of people who become conscious of this and must resist it because 
otherwise it will all cave in. Paba Hussein is a painter from Pakistan. 
She says liberals in India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh have failed to 
defend freedom of expression. Fundamentalists are there, will always 
be there, I suppose, but the issue is that they are very, very strong 
and we have to somehow to counteract that. You have to be truly articulate 
in what you want to see and what you want to do. And throughout the 
subcontinent, we have not been able to do that. The artists want to 
build public opinion and organize more active resistance to interference 
with their right to work freely. They say the meeting in New Delhi 
is an attempt to defend secular societies and push back fundamentalist 
forces. Angela Patricha for VOA News, New Delhi. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>