<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.1600.1348 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Over the past year, VOA travel reporter Ted Lanfair has visited more 
than half of the 48 continental United States. We asked him which 
was most memorable. Well, the answer came quickly, since it took him 
three weeks to explore a single state: the Lone Star state of Texas. 
We asked Ted if he'd give us a much quicker tour. Texas is big, bigger 
than France, bigger than Iraq, bigger than all the Japanese islands 
put together, bigger then Kenya, with endless skies and lots of cactus 
and desert. But there's a lot more to Texas than sage brush and cows. 
Let's circle the state. Thanks to air conditioning, Dallas, Big D, 
in north central Texas, has grown from a sleepy little railroad town 
into the state's financial center. You can see its skyscrapers from 
way out on the prairie. Nearby Fort Worth has a totally different 
feel. It's cow town and proud of it. At the end of the day, folks 
slip into cowboy boots and jeans or skirts and enjoy some line dancing 
at a saloon like Billy Bob's. Abilene's on the way to west Texas, 
lots of ranches there, good deer hunting, and thousands of those uppity 
down oil rigs called pump jacks. Amarillo's the big town in the Texas 
panhandle, pure cowboy country, red dust, apple boot stores and rodeos. 
El Paso is way out in west Texas. It's hot, high desert country, heavily 
Hispanic with the oldest Spanish mission in all of Texas. Austin, 
home of the huge University of Texas and a state capital building 
copied from the U.S. Capitol in Washington is the big town in Texas 
hill country where you'll find the LBJ Ranch. That's President Lyndon 
B. Johnson's old spread along the Perdinalis River. Lady Bird Johnson 
still lives there, and it's restful and beautiful. San Antonio is 
just south of Austin. It's the home of the Alamo, the mission where 
a famous battle was fought for Texas independence from Mexico. Texas 
lost that battle but soon won the war. For a little while, Texas was 
even an independent nation. Laredo is south of San Antonio, down along 
the Rio Grande River. Most visitors go there to shop for bargains 
across the Mexican border in Nuevo, Laredo. Sprawling Houston is America's 
fourth biggest city and a world petro chemical giant. It has recovered 
nicely from the oil recession of the late 1980s. Work on the new international 
space station is coordinated at NASA in Houston. Galveston is Houston's 
playground, with wide beaches and beautiful, old south homes. You 
need a refreshing dip in the Gulf of Mexico there because it's so 
hot and humid. Lukenbock, Texas, where the song says "There ain't 
nobody feelin' no pain," is back in hill country. All I found there 
one night was a big, empty dance hall and a rowdy saloon full of good 
old boys slugging down Lone Star beers. If somebody asked, I'd have 
to say my favorite spot in Texas was Fort Worth. Just about everybody 
still wears cowboy boots in that city on the old chissom trail, with 
its fine theater, music, and restaurants have tamed rough edges of 
the wild West. Happy trails. I'm Ted Lanfair. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>