<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.1600.0876 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is a dispute among key Republicans in the Congress over how 
to conduct President Clinton's impeachment trial. The Senate Majority 
Leader Trent Lott says the Senate can reach a fair verdict based on 
the record of evidence. Republican prosecutors from the House of Representatives 
want to call as many as 15 witnesses, including Monica Lewinsky, whose 
affair with the president is at the core of the scandal. Republican 
Senator Thad Cochran of Mississippi will be one of those sitting as 
jurors in the impeachment trial. In an interview earlier today, he 
said he doesn't see the need for witnesses. Personally, I don't think 
we should drag this out and hear things that people already know. 
I think the Senate has had an opportunity to hear a lot of the evidence 
already. We've had an opportunity to review the independent counsel's 
referral to the House of Representatives, and so I don't want to rehash 
a lot of things that are already well known. Republican Congressman 
Bill McCollum of Florida will be one of the managers or prosecutors 
in the Senate trial. From that same broadcast interview, he says he 
believes witnesses may be necessary. Well, there could conceivably 
be facts to dispute because the president says that what Monica Lewinsky 
says is different; they don't agree on it. Also, there's a dispute 
between Betty Currie and Monica Lewinsky about some of the facts that 
are there. So it's quite conceivable that there is a need to determine 
credibility. In fact, that was one of the big debates in the House 
was over credibility. I don't disagree with Senator Cochran. I think 
the Senate has to decide this, and I think that we are going along 
to do whatever is required. If we could stipulate to facts, that would 
be great. In fact that would be the preference I think everybody has. 
But I think the House members who were meeting yesterday that has 
been reported on widely, all believed at that time and still do that 
some presentation of witnesses is needed. However, as one of the majority 
House members who argued and voted for impeachment, Congressman McCollum 
would like to see witnesses take the stand. Normally, the Senate defers 
to the House in history as terms of other impeachment proceedings 
with respect to managing the case, which is what we're supposed to 
do. But let me tell you this right up front, and that is that the 
Senate rules, the Senate process guides us. The senators are making 
this decision not the House members. We're going to do our best to 
comply with whatever they decide. And we're going to be disappointed 
if we can't present witnesses. Those of us who serve as managers believe 
that would be appropriate, and I think we think after yesterday's 
meeting, a very, very good process and a needed process but not one 
to be long, not one to take many weeks or anything of that sort, just 
a few days. Republican Congressman Bill McCollum of Florida. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>