<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.1600.2150 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
1998 was a high profile year for Cuba, as it prepares for Friday's 
observance of the 40th anniversary of Fidel Castro's seizure of power. 
It began last January with a visit by Pope John Paul, a trip which 
marked the beginning of a liberalization of religious freedom in the 
Communist island nation. The year ended with President Fidel Castro 
permitting Christmas observances for the first time in more than three 
decades. The year Cuba opened up is the subject of today's Dateline. 
Here's Pamela Taylor. One of the more remarkable events of 1998 was 
the Rathroshmam between one of the last Communist atheist leaders 
in the world, Fidel Castro and Pope John Paul II. VOA correspondent 
Michael Bowman looks back on that visit and the changes it brought. 
In numerous ceremonies and masses during his five-day visit to Cuba, 
Pope John Paul repeatedly called for freedom of religion, freedom 
of conscience, and freedom of expression. Cuban President Fidel Castro 
made no public promises. He said Cubans respects the pope's beliefs 
but also possess strong beliefs of their own, especially regarding 
the island's 1959 Communist revolution. Mr. Castro said Cubans would 
prefer to die a thousand times before renouncing their convictions. 
He said the Cuban revolution, just like the Roman Catholic Church, 
has many martyrs. Political scientist and Cuba watcher Robert Pasteur, 
who teaches at both Emory and Harvard Universities says the Catholic 
Church has a unique and vital role to play on the island. It's clear 
that the church is the only independent actor within Cuba, and that 
they have played their political strategy very carefully, and as a 
result, they've widened the space not only for the church but for 
the people of Cuba to practice their religion in ways that had been 
difficult if not impossible a few years ago. In private meetings with 
President Castro, Pope John Paul pressed for the release of political 
prisoners and urged the Cuban leader to tolerate domestic criticism 
of his government. In the weeks following the papal visit, scores 
of political prisoners were freed, bringing the number of jailed dissidents 
to its lowest level in years. However, political repression continued 
as authorities arrested other dissenters. The lack of progress on 
political freedom persuaded many critics of the Castro government 
that the papal visit failed to bring about meaningful change in Cuba. 
But Professor Robert Pasteur says those who expected immediate, far-reaching 
political reform have been disappointed. The fundamental changes, 
of course, have to occur within Cuba in terms of economic and political 
reforms. And in those areas, the changes have been very hard to detect. 
The papal visit also focused attention on the longstanding U.S. economic 
embargo of Cuba. John Paul blasted the embargo saying it causes great 
suffering on the island. U.S. officials defended the measure as a 
necessary tool for encouraging democracy in Cuba. But following the 
pope's trip, the Clinton administration softened some of its economic 
sanctions to allow Cuban exiles to send more money to their relatives 
on the island. The Clinton administration also permitted the resumption 
of direct charter flights between Cuba and the United States. Some 
Caribbean leaders like St. Lucius Prime Minister Kenny Anthony applauded 
what they see as the beginning of a U.S. initiative to rethink and 
possibly revise Washington's policy of shunning Havana. I'm very, 
very happy, actually, that we are beginning to see a slight, very, 
very slight change in the approach of the United States. I believe 
that the Clinton administration does have a unique opportunity to 
develop relations with Cuba. I believe very, very firmly that if the 
gates were opened, the process of democratization, the process of 
reform would be accelerated. Struck by drought and a hurricane, Cuba's 
economy grew a mere 1.2 percent in 1998, the lowest growth in four 
years. One bright spot was the tourism sector, which expanded 18 percent 
during the year helping to offset a poor sugar harvest. Cuban authorities 
project a more robust 2.5 percent economic growth rate for 1999. At 
age 72, Cuban President Fidel Castro made several trips abroad in 
1998, visiting neighboring Caribbean states, Europe, and Africa. In 
interviews with foreign reporters, the Cuban leader says he will continue 
as president so long as he has the energy to do so, adding he is confident 
the revolution he led four decades ago will survive long after he 
is gone. VOA correspondent Michael Bowman in Miami. For Cubans around 
the world, those in exile and those at home, 1998 will be a year to 
remember for much more than the revival of religion. In October, 157 
countries overwhelmingly voted in the U.N. general assembly to end 
the U.S. economic embargo against Cuba. Only the United States and 
Israel objected to the nonbinding resolution. It was also a year marked 
by hundreds of visits by Cuban-Americans and ordinary U.S. citizens 
curious about the formally off-limits island. One of the most recent 
trips took place in late November. Sixteen members of a California-based 
Citizens Delegation paid their own way to Cuba to observe firsthand 
the implications of the 37-year-old economic blockade. Reporter Jan 
Sleuser spoke with them on their return to Oakland, California earlier 
this month. The purpose of the Citizen Delegations trip to Cuba was 
to meet with a broad base of people to see how their lives were affected 
by the American imposed embargo. California Democrat Congresswoman 
Barbara Lee led the delegation. She says members found it curious 
that although relations with almost all former Cold War enemies, including 
China and Russia, have been normalized, the Cuban embargo is more 
strict today than ever before and no one seems to know why. Now the 
logic of this policy is increasingly more difficult to comprehend, 
especially given the fact that the Pentagon has stated publicly that 
Cuba presents no national security threats to the United States. At 
a post trip press conference, delegation members said the Cuban people 
looked healthy and food was abundant in outdoor markets. Keith Carson, 
president of the Alameda County Board of Supervisors, was especially 
impressed with the national health care available to all Cubans and 
the lack of homelessness. Every evening, somebody's guaranteed a place 
to stay. The fact that despite their inability to get updated medical 
equipment and to also get medicine that is sorely needed to its citizens, 
that they're still able to insure and guarantee that each of their 
citizens has full access to health care. Reverend Michael Milben joined 
the Citizen Delegation to observe the place of religion in Cuba since 
the pope's visit. Reverend Milben is pastor of the Amos Temple Christian 
Methodist Episcopal Church in Oakland, California. Overall, it was 
an inspiring tour, and we watched the church community care for the 
people beyond measures that we had not expected. Congresswoman Barbara 
Lee contends that Americans would benefit from lifting the embargo 
because if trade and travel restrictions to Cuba were repealed, a 
market would be created for U.S. products only 90 miles away. Barbara 
Lee said the delegation learned that over 160 countries already do 
business with Cuba. Last year, their tourism was over a million people. 
They built five or six brand new hotels. Who's building these hotels? 
The Spaniards, the Europeans, the Canadians. American businesses are 
losing their market share very rapidly. Barbara Lee says 20 senators, 
both Republicans and Democrats, have written President Bill Clinton 
calling for a commission to review U.S.-Cuban policy. The congresswoman 
says that if such a commission was formed, a decision on whether to 
lift the embargo of Cuba could happen as early as next year. Jan Sleuser 
reporting for VOA in Oakland, California. The year Cuba opened up 
was the subject of today's Dateline. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>