<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.0500.1356 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If you happen to drop into the Whitney Museum in New York City, you 
may have a little bit of a difficult time telling the difference between 
fellow patrons of the museum and the works of art that you come to 
see. Their lifelike figures created by the late sculpture Duane Hanson. 
VOA's Martin Bush reports. Several guards are on duty at the Whitney 
Museum but one of them does not move or chat with the spectators. 
From his gleaming brown eyes, his dark blue uniform, his night stick, 
to his automatic pistol, he looks like a living human being. But he's 
not. This guard is one of 24 super realistic statues created by Duane 
Hanson and now on view at the museum. Matthew Yokabaski who installed 
the retrospective exhibit says most museum visitors are taken aback 
when they first see Hanson's realistic figures. Every person that 
comes into the exhibition has that moment where somebody looks so 
familiar to them, or looks like somebody they know that they believe 
for a second that it's real, and then they go up close and they realize 
that it's a sculpture. So there's this magic of Duane Hanson. Tram 
Combs, an art critic for art in "America" magazine, first saw Duane 
Hanson's life-size sculptures 30 years ago. As he inspected the melancholy, 
forlorn figure called "Rita, the Waitress," Mr. Combs recalled his 
initial reaction to Hanson's work. I suppose I would say startled. 
I would say - I chortled, I'll tell you that. I still do. I've been 
walking around the floor giggling to myself whenever a new one came 
into sight. I love them. They are spiritually uplifting. Duane Hanson's 
ultra real statues had a different effect on another visitor to the 
Whitney Museum's Hanson exhibit, Ellen Burlow. Kind of sad I think. 
Very well crafted. There's something about the loneliness and the 
isolation of American life that he does give it. Duane Hanson, who 
was born in 1925 and died in 1996, first gained artistic recognition 
for his abstract human forms. Later, says the Whitney Museum's Matthew 
Yokabaski, the artist altered his style. I think that he felt that 
he didn't have enough engagement with viewers that abstract culture 
in the 1950s was much more - It was more about the shape, it was more 
about a curve that might suggest a body. And he felt that in some 
way that that was impersonal. And so once he began to do the realistic 
work in the late '60s, he wanted people to have more of an engagement 
with the work, more of a recognition that what they were seeing was 
something that they knew and understood. And so that's why he began 
to do more hyper realist works. Using polyester resin and fiberglass 
as molding materials, Duane Hanson chose lower middle class Americans 
as his subjects. One of his figures is a middle-aged, grossly overweight 
man holding a can of soda as he rides an actual gasoline-powered lawn 
mower. He's dressed in a dirty tee-shirt and old purple trousers. 
Another statue titled "House Painter" depicts a young man holding 
a long pole attached to a paint roller, a can of pink paint, and a 
paint tray at his feet. Close to the "House Painter" statue, a video 
screen shows a 1984 documentary film in which Duane Hanson talked 
about his work. I just wanted to express myself in my own way that 
turned out to be a realism, something that sort of surprised me. We 
live in very difficult times with difficult problems. I have tried 
to portray honestly what I see around me in the world. I just want 
to do something of my own. I didn't care what my colleagues thought 
about it or critics or - It's just sort of a personal fulfillment, 
a way of expressing my feelings, my inward feelings. "New York Times" 
art critic Elizabeth Haight says Duane Hanson sought to create a catalogue 
of American social types who are shamelessly realistic and reek of 
pathos. Martin Bush, VOA News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>