<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.0500.0528 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Victims of the authoritarian rule of former Chilean dictator Augusto 
Pinochet are pushing for his prosecution. His case has been the focus 
of an intense international legal battle since he was arrested by 
British authorities in October. They acted on an extradition warrant 
from Spain, where authorities hope to bring General Pinochet to trial 
for crimes against humanity allegedly committed during his 17-year 
rule. The general is currently waging a legal battle to prevent his 
extradition on the grounds that he has immunity from prosecution as 
a former head of state. Former Bolivian president, Gonzalo Sanchez 
Delasava, who now leads the opposition in his country, has mixed feelings 
about Spain's efforts to try Mr. Pinochet. Mr. Sanchez Delasava spoke 
with South America correspondent George Meek. The former Bolivian 
leader says the lesson of the Pinochet case is clear, that if you 
don't pay for crimes in your own country, you will pay for them elsewhere. 
He calls his attitude about this case schizophrenic because he applauds 
efforts to insure justice, but he has concerns about possible consequences 
of the case for international law and undermining authority of governments. 
Mr. Sanchez Delasava does not agree with proposals by human rights 
groups to try his own successor, President Ubo Banzer, for crimes 
allegedly committed when he was a military dictator of Bolivia in 
the 1970s. He says President Banzer's situation is quite different 
from General Pinochet. He has been very active in the democratic process 
since '79; it's been about 20 years. He ran for presidency six times, 
and he's been a member of the coalition governments that have led 
the governments in my country. So he is now a democratically elected 
president and behaving like one. So I think it's not really pertinent 
at this point. Mr. Sanchez Delasava, who was president of Bolivia 
from 1993 to 1997, says President Banzer has followed through on the 
judicial reforms he begun. These include establishment of a judicial 
council, constitutional court, and a new civil and criminal code and 
arbitration procedures. We relatively successful, the drug policy 
where they've been able to comply with eradication and substitution 
and interdiction. I think there's been a lack of solidarity in the 
developed world for what Bolivia has been doing, and I'm not in agreement 
with General Banzer having included the armed forces in the struggle 
with the. I think that's very dangerous. Mr. Sanchez Delasava also 
criticizes his successor for undoing some of his social programs for 
what he considers political reasons. I think there's been a systematic 
policy to undo a lot of things that I did, especially in the social 
area. And turning back as a candidate. The former president says the 
current government abandoned the annual bonus for the elderly, many 
of whom do not have social security and special programs to provide 
health care for the elderly mothers and children. There's a lack of 
a real plan, government plan of action. They never had it. It's a 
coalition based on jobs and pork, and I don't see it as a very coherent 
government, and I think that's been hurting them. Mr. Sanchez Delasava 
says he will run in 1999 for reelection as leader of his party, the 
Nationalist Revolutionary Movement. He considers himself a reformer 
who was respected, if not exactly loved during his first term. He 
says he may run again for Bolivia's presidency in 2002 if the opinion 
polls indicate he has a good chance of winning. George Meek, VOA News, 
Rio de Janeiro. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>