<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.1600.1092 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.S. college football post season continues today with the Nebraska 
Corn Huskers taking on Arizona in the Holiday Bowl. Now the Huskers 
finished the season with nine wins and three losses. Arizona is 11 
and 1. The Wildcats were hoping to go to the Rose Bowl, but when Miami 
beat UCLA in the last week of the season, that hoped got crushed. 
The Corn Huskers will need top performances from quarterback Eric 
Crouch and running backs Cornell Buckhalter and DeAngelo Evans. Meanwhile, 
in the Humanitarian Bowl in Boise, Idaho, the University of Idaho 
Vandals take on the Southern Mississippi Golden Eagles. In games Tuesday 
night, the Purdue Boilermakers pulled off an upset win over Kansas 
State winning 37-34. The Wild Cats led the game with one minute, 24 
seconds left but Purdue managed an 80-yard last-minute drive to win 
the contest. Purdue quarterback Drew Breeze says he had difficulty 
believing the Boilermakers pulled it off. I can't explain a drive 
like that, you know. I had trouble moving the ball all game long. 
But when it really counted, you know, we cashed in, we drove 80 yards 
in 54 seconds to score the winning touchdown. That's - I really can't 
- I can't comprehend what just happened. Kansas State coach Bill Snyder 
says meanwhile the last two games have been frustrating for his Wild 
Cats. Tonight was the culmination of maybe three weeks of disappointments. 
Also, Tuesday, Virginia Tech defeated Alabama 38 to 7 in the Music 
City Bowl, and Miami Florida beat the North Carolina State Wolf Pack 
46 to 23 in the Micron P.C. Bowl in Miami. Elsewhere in college football, 
the Washington Huskies have fired head coach Jim Rambright just five 
days after his team lost to Air Force in the Oahu Bowl. Rambright, 
who has been associated with the Washington program for 30 years led 
the team to a 45-25 loss to Air Force. That left Washington with an 
overall record of 6 and 6 this season, its first without a winning 
record in 22 years. Rambright said today that he will always carry 
the memories of his time at Washington with him. I will leave this 
program with my head up knowing that I didn't bow to anybody on the 
outside as far as making my decisions, as far as who I hire, who I 
get rid of, who I think is competent, who is not, and how I think 
this program is going to get better. Rambright compiled a record of 
44 wins, 25 losses in one draw in six years as head coach. He had 
been the school's offensive coordinator before taking over for Don 
James in 1993. He is also a graduate of the University of Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>