<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981230.1600.0511 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Eleven European Union countries are launching a single currency, the 
euro, on New Year's Day. Britain is not one of them. Many Britons 
consider that such a currency would be a loss for national identity. 
VOA correspondent Laurie Kassman took an unofficial sampling of opinions 
on the sensitive subject. Oxford Street is one of London's most popular 
shopping districts for Britons and tourists alike. Foreign travelers 
shrug their shoulders at the mention of the euro, but one British 
shopper sees a dark and sinister side to a single European currency. 
I think it's demonic because in the Bible it predicts the resurgence 
of Roman Empire as a combination of nations which will gradually rise 
to take over the world. Most euro skeptics do not describe the euro 
in biblical proportions, but a majority of Britons responding to a 
recent survey still say they do not want any part of it. We want our 
own English money. We don't want European money. I don't want euro 
money, no. We're very patriotic here so that's it. We don't want it. 
For now, the euro is mainly a currency of paper transactions. Coins 
and bills will not appear for another three years, but many Britons 
worry already about the loss of fiscal sovereignty if Britain joins 
the euro as the Labor government wants. That would give complete financial 
control, economic control of this country to the main banks in Germany 
and Brussels, and that would be not good. Still, there is a growing 
number of Britons who say they have had enough of the island isolationist 
mentality. The world's so small nowadays, and I think it's just nice 
to belong to Europe, you know. I think the identity of England being 
a big power now is far in the past, and you know, it's time to go 
on, really. Do you consider yourself European? Yes, I suppose I will. 
We all carry European passports here, don't we. We haven't got British 
passport anymore. The more practical minded say the euro will make 
comparison shopping and holiday travel a lot easier, only one currency 
to exchange against the British pound rather than 11. Young Britons 
agree that being a part of the euro zone is inevitable. One Oxford 
Street shopper says it really will not matter much what she thinks, 
and another suggests a compromise. To be quite honest, I'm not for 
it at all. Just not interested. I use a plastic card anyway. The one 
concession will be if they make English the national language, the 
European language. If they do that, then it would be worth it 'cause 
it means we can go around Europe speaking English. British shoppers 
may say sound reluctant about the euro but British business is not. 
Department stores and small shops already are adjusting their cash 
registers to ring up sales in euros. To most, it's just another currency 
to deal with. Laurie Kassman, VOA News, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>