<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981010.0169 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After hours of crisis talks with Yugoslavia's president, U.S. envoy 
Richard Holbrooke flew to Kosovo on Saturday to meet with ethnic Albanian 
leaders as part of a renewed effort toward a diplomatic solution without 
NATO airstrikes. Holbrooke, who talked for more than six hours on 
Friday with President Slobodan Milosevic, had little to say about 
his shuttle mission. But his latest visit to Pristina signaled a glimmer 
of hope in efforts to avoid military intervention, which many have 
viewed as likely. The U.S. envoy was accompanied Saturday by Britain's 
Yugoslav ambassador, Brian Donnelly, a move Holbrooke said was intended 
to show that the European Union was united with Washington in the 
latest diplomacy. Asked about progress in the talks with Milosevic, 
Holbrooke said in Belgrade Saturday morning, ``We never answer that 
question and, speaking frankly, we don't know.'' ``We are in a very 
grim situation, and everybody knows how serious it is. We are not 
anywhere near a point where everyone can be satisfied on either side,'' 
he added. But the flurry of weekend negotiations indicated U.S. officials 
were making a new push for a diplomatic settlement, with momentum 
toward airstrikes on hold pending the outcome. In another hint of 
possible progress, American generals in uniform were seen coming out 
of Yugoslav army headquarters in Belgrade with Yugoslav counterparts 
Saturday morning. It wasn't clear what the two military sides might 
be discussing, but they generally do not communicate frequently. Holbrooke 
met with three ethnic Albanian negotiators _ Fehmi Agani, Iljaz Kurtesi 
and Edita Tahiri _ and then headed for a meeting with political leader 
Ibrahim Rugova. He planned to return to Belgrade later for more talks 
with Milosevic. Philip Reeker, a spokesman, said, Holbrooke and his 
aides were conducting two-track talks _ on a political level and on 
compliance, ``because compliance has got to be full, durable and verifiable.'' 
``This is an intense time,'' he added. Christopher Hill, the U.S. 
ambassador to Macedonia, and Jim O'Brian, a special assistant to the 
secretary of state, apparently were working separately on model documents 
for an interim agreement on Kosovo. Resuming talks between the ethnic 
Albanians and the Milosevic-led government on the future of Kosovo 
is one of the key international demands. But holding talks on self-rule 
would involve concessions by both sides: Milosevic would have to persuade 
the ethnic Albanians his seven-month crackdown on separatist forces 
in the province has ended, and the Albanian side would have to acknowledge 
that it might settle for less than full independence. Hundreds of 
people have been killed and tens of thousands have been driven from 
their homes since Milosevic launched a crackdown Feb. 28 against the 
ethnic Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army, which is fighting to wrest 
Kosovo province from Serbia, the main republic of Yugoslavia. Milosevic 
has defied U.N. orders to withdraw substantial forces from the province, 
maintaining they are needed to prevent new attacks by Kosovo Liberation 
Army ``terrorists.'' After the first round of talks Friday, he called 
NATO threats of airstrikes ``belligerent attempts'' to solve the Kosovo 
problem, adding that he favors negotiations. The international demands 
on Milosevic include an immediate end to hostilities and a withdrawal 
of forces and heavy armaments to levels before March, before the government 
crackdown on Kosovo started. In addition, an international monitoring 
force is proposed in order to oversee compliance. The KLA announced 
a unilateral cease-fire throughout Kosovo starting Friday, a move 
that will add to the pressure on Milosevic to reciprocate. In a statement 
published Saturday in the province's ethnic Albanian dailies, the 
KLA said it would continue to abide by the cease-fire. Serbian media 
reported at least five KLA breaches of their cease-fire Friday, while 
the KLA said it was government troops who were on the offensive. There 
were no casualties. While Milosevic issued no new statements after 
Friday night's talks, a Serbian Foreign Ministry spokesman reiterated 
the government's stance Saturday that intervention is uncalled for. 
``We cannot see any serious reason for airstrikes and any legal basis 
for it,'' the spokesman, whose name was not available, told BBC Radio 
4's Today program. He also voiced objection to the plan to possibly 
include a small NATO troop contingent in a monitoring force. ``It 
is not understandable why foreign troops have to come to Kosovo _ 
to do what?'' the spokesman said. ``We cannot understand this.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>