<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981010.1600.0287 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke is reviving shuttle diplomacy in an attempt 
to resolve the current impasse in Yugoslavia. Richard Blystone has 
the latest. In a day of shuttling, a pause for an overall no-progress 
report. So where are we? Well, we are where we were earlier today. 
We are where we were yesterday -- extremely serious situation. There 
is not change there. The U.S. envoy spoke after meeting ethnic Albanian 
political leader Ibrahim Rugova. The main issue here is the key international 
goal of getting talks started. And that means getting the majority 
of Albanians to accept the prospect of less than total Kosovo independence. 
Holbrooke praised the president of the self-declared republic of Kosovo. 
He continues to represent the important moderate leadership in a situation 
where all sides have increasingly resorted to violence. But he gave 
no details of the talks. The Albanian leader told CNN on Friday he 
still wants independence with an international protectorate in interim 
stage, something that would let Kosovo be demilitarized and create 
a climate for negotiations. But there is little word backing for that. 
The allies favor Kosovo autonomy within Serbia. "It is critical to 
have both air strikes and NATO ground troops here," Rugova said. But 
there, too, he gets no support. One sure benefit of Holbrooke's diplomatic 
marathon -- a United Nations aid convoy that was expected to be canceled 
headed south from Pristina. Blankets, food and soap for 15,000 to 
16,000 refugees in and around urosevac. Aid workers are acutely aware 
that NATO air strikes, if they happen, would interrupt the lifeline 
for nobody knows how long. It is difficult for us at the political 
level to understand what's going on, so we are just trying to hope, 
hoping that this will all be resolved in the next day or two. In this 
area, most aid recipients are living with host families. But elsewhere, 
the agencies fear for what they believe may be tens of thousands still 
in need of warm Shelter for winter. Each day the talking goes on is 
another day to try to provide for the unknown. And that goes not only 
for the international agencies. Pristina shows little sign of panic 
or hoarding of supplies. But both ethnic Serbs and ethnic Albanians 
have been thinking about what bombing would mean. "We must defend 
ourselves," says a Serb girl. "It'll make a lot of innocent victims, 
but we have to anyway." No change from the ethnic line on the Albanian 
side either. "Yes, I'm afraid of a backlash," he says, "but the Serbs 
will kill us anyway. And they can't do more than that." Richard Blystone, 
CNN, Pristina, Yugoslavia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>