<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981010.1130.1495 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jon Lovitz is in a difficult position. He's taking over a role on 
the sitcom "newsradio," following the untimely death of his friend 
Phil Hartman. Sherri Sylvester has more. Farewell. Take care of each 
other, and I'll see you all when you get to wherever it is that I 
am now. There were few dry eyes on the set of "newsradio," as the 
cast began the season with a good-bye to Phil Hartman. The late actor, 
killed in may, anchored the show in more ways than one, according 
to his friend Jon Lovitz. He was like the dad on the show, you know, 
so in a way, it's like we've lost, you know, our king, I've lost my 
older brother, the father figure on the show. So that's why it's so, 
you know, especially hard for everybody, 'cause this is the guy that 
was the -- supporting everybody, the backbone and lifting you up when 
you were down. And now that's the guy that's gone. What if we hired 
someone who was a friend of Bill's? Bill would have wanted that, right? 
As Lovitz steps into the show this season, he insists he is not replacing 
the man he has known since their days in improv. I didn't want to 
do it at first, 'cause I just didn't want to face the fact that he 
was gone. And it was hard, but I -- a lot of my friends, we had the 
same friends, said "no, he'd want you to do it." The comic actor, 
who spoke with us at the Emmy awards, says he agreed to do "newsradio" 
after a call from Hartman's mother. What really tipped it for me was 
when his mother said thank you for, you know, picking up the flag 
and doing it. So then I felt it's okay. Oh, Lisa, I think we need 
more than a quick fix here. It's like throwing water on a fire. You 
know, I don't want to make it look like I'm profiting off my friend's 
death, because they hire you and you get paid and it's confusing. 
Were you guys very close? Oh yeah. Yeah. Great guy. Yes, he was. Did 
you know he was always the first person to call me whenever I got 
fired? Turns out, Lovitz's character was a friend of Bill McNeal's 
and the actor plans to make his Max Louis a tribute to Hartman. I'm 
gonna make my character like how Phil was in real life which was, 
you know, one of the nicest people ever, got along with everybody. 
He was an expert sailor. You know, he had his own plane, he was a 
pilot. He was a graphic artist. He used to design albums for poco, 
Crosby, Stills and Nash. He was an artist, you know, a great artist. 
He was just the best. Emotions are running high on the set. Lovitz 
is taking it one day at a time. Sherri Sylvester, CNN, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>