<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981010.1830.1569 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
finally this evening, the disappearing acts taking place in the wide 
open spaces from coast to coast. sprouting up on farmland in california 
and across the country, something that will never be harvested -- 
a bumper crop of housing developments. conservationists are concerned. 
if we continue to lose agricultural land at higher and higher rates, 
then we're going to have a smaller and smaller farm economy. according 
to the most recent study fresno county, california, the heart of the 
states agricultural industry, lost almost three times as much irrigated 
land to urban sprawl between 1994 and 1996 as was lost the previous 
two years. i guess the closer you are to the zone, the more pressured 
you are to sell. farmer and activist paul bentancourt has watched 
as farmland disappeared acre by acre. the financial margins in farming 
aren't that good right now, and you know, if i look down the road 
in a situation where the grounds increased in value, and the margins 
in farming aren't there, i'm going to be really be tempted to sellout 
and put some houses up. economic pressures and tough environmental 
regulations are driving farmers to sell nationwide. a recent study 
highlights the most threatened agricultural areas from california 
to connecticut. obviously we're loosing a lot of prime farmland across 
the county outside of urban areas. as the urban areas expand we're 
losing those farms and ranches that have been in family farms for 
generations. it's a big problem. even farmers who dig in their heels 
and refuse to surrender, sometimes sell. it's the classic clash between 
residents in new surrounding developments and the farmer. concerns 
that aerial spraying so close to home is too dangerous, odors too 
strong and machines, like tractors just too noisy. shawn stevenson's 
family has been farming in central california for more than 50 years. 
he's part of a new effort -- farmers, developers, business people 
searching for a balance. we need good public policy that provides 
for good planning. already there are tax breaks and land swap proposals, 
incentives aimed at helping farmers stay in business. and stepped 
up efforts to encourage developers into designing more densely populated 
housing projects, instead of so-called "ranchets," big homes on big 
tracts of valuable land. jeff harris represents some california developers. 
some ag land is going to be lost, again as long as the population 
is increasing, we can't stop the growth. but can we make some intelligent 
choices in how we grow? to protect what is grown while making room 
for an expanding population. dan lothian, nbc news, fresno county, 
california. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>