<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0123 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the moments following an eye-opening game that left them with their 
first postseason deficit, the players sat quietly around their clubhouse 
Friday night, mixing pasta and meatballs with their crow. You wanted 
to see how many would look and sound defeated, or defiant. You waited 
to determine, in their hour of crisis, who the leader of the 114-victory 
New York Yankees really was. Throughout a record-breaking season, 
baseball and its fans have been treated to a remarkable performance 
by this most egalitarian bunch, probably the most superlative, superstar-less 
team our generation has seen. From top to bottom, the Yankees have 
been a study in conformity and comportment, a mix of unassuming cornerstones, 
aging former All-Stars blended with younger, burgeoning talents who 
checked their egos at the clubhouse door. This has been Joe Torre's 
team, a reflection of the manager's demeanor that is so stable and 
infectious that it has even becalmed, for the most part, the team's 
destructively volcanic owner. But now the Yankees had somehow made 
a wrong turn off a straight road to the World Series, and a fair question 
to ask was who would be the one to yell, ``This way back?'' Who would 
be the one to dismiss the queasy notion that a different kind of karma 
had taken hold of an American League Championship Series the Cleveland 
Indians were leading, 2-1, going into Game 4 at Jacobs Field? Those 
who watch for ominous signs that suggest fate is working extra hard 
to vanquish form didn't have to look past the pitcher's mound, where 
Doc Gooden was presented with an opportunity to send the team he pitched 
for in similar circumstances here a year ago to the brink of oblivion. 
Friday night, another Yankee castoff, Mark Whiten, doubled and homered 
off Andy Pettitte. New York City's Manny Ramirez hit the first of 
three two-out, fifth-inning home runs that drove the Yankees from 
the game and Pettitte from the mound, making Torre's unyielding faith 
in his sensitive left-hander seem blind. ``We've won three of four 
games this season,'' Torre said after his team's passive 6-1 defeat 
in Game 3, knowing such a percentage was now mandatory for survival. 
``I just hope we swing the bats and everybody has a sense of relaxation. 
That's all it's going to take.'' Then Torre added, ``These guys are 
pretty professional.'' No one could deny that, and maybe their trademark 
steadiness, a few timely hits and six or seven strong innings from 
Orlando Hernandez was all it was going to take to straighten out this 
mess. Yet who can argue, after watching the accumulation of cool efficiency 
known as the Atlanta Braves fall short in all but one season this 
decade, that emotion and leadership are the part of baseball that 
cannot be measured by calling the Elias Sports Bureau? The heart of 
this Yankee team rode a few waves itself past the Braves in 1996, 
but there were subtle but significant differences in that team's makeup. 
Jim Leyritz and his fearlessness, for one. Tim Raines, for another, 
was near the top of the lineup and his game, as opposed to his current 
role as the alternating designated hitter with Chili Davis. Cecil 
Fielder had money on his mind more often than not, but his ornery 
nature was also a weapon against the ennui that can engulf a team 
in a short series. The 1996 Yankees had Darryl Strawberry on the bench, 
not watching from his sick bed. ``People keep talking about Darryl 
motivating us by not being here, but I'll tell you something, Darryl 
motivated a lot of guys on this team more by being on the bench,'' 
Davis said before this series began. This Yankee team could never 
be Reggie and Billy and Thurman, but you looked around the clubhouse 
late Friday night and wondered if doubt had crept into its gentlemanly 
core. David Cone is the Yankees' unofficial spokesman but he is not 
an everyday player. Before long, Derek Jeter will be the Yankee captain, 
their leader, but for now, he remains a valued member of the collective. 
Jeter said there was nothing to do but play harder last night. Tino 
Martinez sat by himself, digging into the pasta, trying to eliminate 
the taste of his postseason swoon. Chuck Knoblauch, Cleveland's new 
favorite player, still had his own Game 2 baggage to deal with. Bernie 
Williams spoke so softly to a small group of reporters you had to 
practically inspect the quality of his teeth to understand what he 
was saying. Paul O'Neill, left at second base as Williams made the 
final out of 1997 in this very ball park, sat with his feet up by 
his stall, calmly discussing the Yankees' plight. ``It's frustrating 
not to come through every time,'' he said. ``But that's just not the 
nature of the game.'' That is what O'Neill says when he steps off 
the field, after throwing his helmet, bat and hat when the balls do 
not drop. He is the most passionate Yankee, their perceived leader. 
``Paul leads by example,'' Torre said. ``He doesn't give speeches.'' 
Torre hoped one would not be necessary. He hoped his Yankees, New 
York's team, would do things their way. He hoped there wouldn't be 
a point where people would have to say a lack of leadership was the 
Yankees' one, fatal flaw. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>