<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0134 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The miracle that qualified Edith Stein for sainthood began with the 
kind of thoroughly avoidable childhood accident that haunts the imagination 
of every conscientious parent. In 1987, when Benedicta McCarthy was 
2 and a half years old, her parents left her for a few days at her 
home in Brockton, Mass., with her 11 older siblings, the eldest of 
whom was 20. Unseen by her brothers and sisters, Benedicta discovered 
the family's cache of free Tylenol samples in colorful plastic packets, 
and took them for candy. When her siblings noticed that Benedicta 
was acting strangely, they took her to the local hospital, where doctors 
discovered that she had swallowed enough Tylenol to amount to 16 lethal 
doses. Benedicta's parents, arriving home, learned that their little 
pigtailed daughter was in a coma, her liver and kidneys failing, her 
body suffering a staphylococcus infection. The McCarthy family decided 
it was time to tell everyone they knew to begin praying to Edith Stein 
to intercede with God to save Benedicta's life. Benedicta had been 
named for Edith Stein, the Jewish philosopher who was killed in Auschwitz 
as Sister Teresia Benedicta, the name she took when she converted 
to Catholicism and became a nun. The McCarthys, educated intellectuals 
and committed pacifists, had named many of their children for martyrs 
and thinkers they admired. Emmanuel Charles McCarthy had left the 
legal profession to become a Catholic priest in the Melkite Church, 
which allows priests to marry. Mary McCarthy schooled her children 
at home. They had a room of their house turned into a chapel, and 
when the children were young the family had said the rosary together 
every day. With Benedicta deathly ill, a chain of people praying to 
Edith Stein spread across the country. Within days, Benedicta walked 
out of the hospital totally recovered, carrying a red balloon. ``I'm 
not saying it was a miracle,'' said Dr. Ronald Kleinman, who treated 
her at Massachusetts General Hospital, in an interview last year. 
``I'm saying it was miraculous. I'm Jewish. I don't believe per se 
in miracles, but I can say I didn't expect her to recover.'' The McCarthys 
say they did not wish to publicize the incident, but the Catholic 
newspaper in Maine heard about it and wrote an article. Eventually 
Roman Catholic Church officials sent a team to investigate whether 
Benedicta's recovery could be legitimately declared a miracle attributable 
to Edith Stein. As a final step, they brought Kleinman to the Vatican 
where, he says, Italian doctors and members of the Congregation for 
the Causes of Saints interrogated him for nearly five hours. Most 
children who swallow huge doses of Tylenol do not become deathly ill, 
but Kleinman said he had to explain that Benedicta's case was unusually 
dire. ``If it was a Catholic doctor,'' said the Rev. Kieran Kavanaugh, 
a Carmelite priest who helped investigate Benedicta's case in Brockton, 
``people would think it was something he just dreamed up. Kleinman's 
willingness to give testimony and witness, to me that was a miracle 
in itself. He had to go and convince all these Italian doctors, and 
it wasn't an easy case.'' Sunday, when Edith Stein is canonized a 
saint, Benedicta, her parents and her 11 siblings will all be at the 
Mass in St. Peter's. So will Kleinman and the three nurses who had 
cared for Benedicta at Massachusetts General Hospital. ``What Edith 
Stein's canonization says to me,'' Benedicta's father said in a telephone 
interview minutes before leaving with his family for Rome, ``is that 
in the end, evil doesn't win. In the end, God prevails, God is victor.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>