<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0025 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the world's finance ministers and bankers argued and strategized 
here last week about the most virulent outbreak of economic turmoil 
in half a century, it often seemed as if they were watching a spectacular 
fire, viewed from the safety of a well-catered picnic just across 
the river. While nibbling on fresh shrimp and sushi, the leaders of 
the global economy marveled at how high the flames were soaring, and 
how quickly they leapt from house to house. But mostly, they talked 
about what an amazing global economic village they planned to build 
some day on the charred landscape. It will be magnificent: Big buildings 
equipped with computer-controlled sprinkler systems that kick into 
action at the first whiff of smoke. A protective shield will descend 
on nearby structures to keep them from going up in flames, too. There 
will be new safety rules: Kindly leave your combustible hedge funds, 
your insolvent banks, and your crony capitalists at the door. The 
only thing that was missing was a plan for putting the fire out. At 
the crisis-wracked annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund 
and the World Bank _ the institutions created 53 years ago to assure 
global stability after World War II _ the 21st-century village was 
termed the ``new international financial architecture.'' President 
Clinton insisted it would be designed ``to tame the pattern of boom-bust 
on an international scale.'' Unfortunately, the groundbreaking ceremony 
is years away. And with 20 million people in East Asia falling back 
into poverty this year, the IMF cutting its estimates for world growth 
by more than half, Muscovites taking to the streets and the dollar 
taking a mysterious 25 percent plunge in two days, it seemed odd that 
the overseers of the global economy were more comfortable talking 
about how to prevent the next crisis than how to survive this one. 
It didn't exactly help when IMF managing director Michel Camdessus 
tried to sound reassuring by declaring, ``We are not in 1928.'' It 
is hardly surprising that everyone wants to talk about long-term solutions. 
New financial architectures sound neat and well-planned, a system 
as thoroughly modern as trading stocks on the Internet. Unfortunately, 
solving the immediate crisis is far messier _ for it involves navigating 
a global economic landscape no one has mapped, complicated by political 
failures no one could have predicted. At the core of the economic 
problem is a classic panic: Fear has overwhelmed greed. The Asian 
crisis caused investors around the world to pull back. But Russia's 
economic collapse last summer signaled that countries really can default 
_ and there is not much their creditors can do about it. Ever since, 
banks and investors have been unwilling to take the normal risks that 
are a necessary part of keeping the world running smoothly. Suddenly 
they see trouble everywhere, and they are simply refusing to lend 
or invest in countries to which, only 18 months ago, they were willing 
to funnel money at astoundingly low interest rates. Now all that money 
has poured out of emerging markets like Southeast Asia and Latin America 
and fled to safe havens, chiefly United States Treasury bonds. The 
resulting shortage of credit is strangling economies around the world, 
and threatening to afflict the American economy, too. ``I've never 
seen anything like this,'' said Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the 
Federal Reserve and no stranger to odd things that happen when a herd 
mentality takes hold. The new architecture everyone is talking about 
is supposed to quell this kind of flight for the exits _ first by 
setting up a system of global smoke detectors that would sound whenever 
a country was courting financial trouble, and then by setting up a 
system of common rules so investors would know that bad debt problems, 
if they arise, would be dealt with sensibly. The thinking is that 
if all nations and their biggest corporations are required to reveal 
far more data to investors, people might think twice about how much 
money they pour in. And building some common legal standards for dealing 
with bad debts, bankruptcies and defaults could prevent a wild stampede 
for the exits as soon as a crisis breaks out. But creating these systems 
takes time. It took America and Europe most of this century to figure 
out how to regulate the markets _ and it is still a work in progress, 
as the near-collapse of a giant hedge fund, Long-Term Capital Management, 
proved just a few weeks ago. Getting nations new to market capitalism 
to embrace these rules could take decades. But the crisis is now. 
In ordinary times, the process of restoring confidence _ a psychological 
feat as much as an economic one _ and persuading people to put their 
money to work again would be hard enough. But these days it is made 
even harder by something that markets and investors hate _ political 
uncertainty, as far as the eye can see. The financial ministers here 
were treated to the extraordinary experience of debating the future 
of the world economy face-to-face with a president who was in the 
opening phase of what promises to be a long impeachment inquiry. ``You 
might find that the leader of the world's biggest economy,'' one European 
finance minister said, ``could spend more time figuring out ways to 
save the world economy if he was not also trying to save his job.'' 
But Europe has its own distractions: a change of government in Germany 
and a preoccupation with monetary union, a process that could be undermined 
if a world recession sets in. Japan was here to reassure the world 
_ again _ that after seven years of dithering, it finally understands 
that its fast-sinking banking system is sucking down its neighbors 
as well. But ask Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin, and he responds 
in a tone of I'll-believe-it-when-I-see-it. Add to this the first 
big investment-house collapse in China, more anti-Chinese riots in 
Indonesia, and a fraying, nuclear-equipped Russia that can't decide 
whether failed capitalism is better or worse than failed communism. 
``In times of uncertainty, when you have a global crisis, you need 
one or two powers with the vision and the reach to act globally,'' 
said Kenneth Courtis, the chief economist in Asia for Deutsche Bank. 
``And yet every day, you see evidence that everyone is preoccupied 
_ either not interested, or interested and unable to move.'' There 
are some steps that many here thought would help. Clinton repeated 
his call for a global movement to promote growth, chiefly by cutting 
interest rates. He was talking largely about Europe, but Germany spent 
the week resisting; it is traditionally preoccupied by inflation, 
even though the threat to the world these days is deflation. In private, 
several officials said, Clinton was fuming. Some Europeans, the least 
affected so far by the chaos, remain unconvinced that things are as 
bad as everyone says: The Swiss finance minister, Kaspar Villiger, 
complained that the problem was in everyone's heads, and that ``many 
speakers tend to overdramatize the situation.'' Clinton had another 
idea: Change the rules of the IMF so it can provide aid to some fundamentally 
healthy countries like Brazil BEFORE the tornado strikes, in hopes 
that this will lessen the chances that investors will panic and pull 
out. Nonetheless, the scope of Clinton's ideas left other countries 
underwhelmed, and wondering whether the president, distracted and 
weakened, has the power to do what he insists the United States must 
do: Lead the way out of the crisis. His two speeches to the finance 
ministers lacked any proposals that involved spending American taxpayers' 
money, because he was still arguing with Congress over coughing up 
$18 billion that the United States has already committed to the nearly 
broke IMF. The dispute between Congress and the IMF has frozen other 
action. For example, Rubin is debating whether to use billions of 
dollars under his control as an American contribution to a pool of 
money to shore up Brazil. But Congress was outraged when that money 
was tapped for Mexico in 1995 (it has since been repaid) and the White 
House is in no mood to anger anyone on the Hill. But the United States 
is hardly the only country where domestic politics make it hard to 
turn the Titanic away from the icebergs. Japan's opposition fears 
that the government will use billions of taxpayer dollars to bail 
out its biggest banks, without firing the managers who created the 
mess, or assuring that the shareholders lose their investment. And 
the banks would rather go under slowly than commit ritual suicide. 
With the world's second-largest economy remaining frozen, the rest 
of the world is reluctant to lend the banks more money, though there 
were signs last week that a logjam in the fragmented Parliament might 
be breaking. Then there are the Russians, who have told the IMF how 
little they think of its economic reform plans, while a new government 
prints money to pay off pensioners and the military. But Russia is 
running out of real money, and a senior IMF official notes that Russia 
is essentially blackmailing the West by saying that without IMF aid, 
political chaos could reign. But most of the political battles that 
are compounding the world's economic troubles are far more prosaic 
_ like rewriting bankruptcy laws. Still, they offer a glimpse of why 
that new international financial architecture could run into some 
building delays. Thailand is a good example. This year borrowers there 
simply stopped paying their debts. But because Thailand has no effective 
bankruptcy law, Thai companies can delay efforts to liquidate reorganize 
them. Essentially, they can hold their lenders at bay for years, while, 
magically, whatever value is left in their companies gets drained 
away. Because their money is unrecoverable, Thai banks have stopped 
lending and the world has stopped lending to Thai banks. So the IMF, 
as part of its aid package, is requiring Thailand to rewrite its bankruptcy 
laws on the Western model. But there's a hitch: Many of the legislators 
are the country's most powerful businessmen. They are resisting, complaining 
that foreign businesses are snatching up Thailand at fire-sale prices. 
Which, of course, is exactly what a few savvy American and European 
companies are trying to do. It's called capitalism, and it's a lot 
more fun in up markets than in down markets. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>