<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0108 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many residents of Westchester County can remember when every city 
and several towns had their own hometown daily newspapers. Papers 
like The Yonkers Herald-Statesman, The Ossining Citizen-Register and 
The Tarrytown Daily News religiously covered school and planning board 
meetings, where the small-scale issues may not have resonated widely 
but were passionately felt nonetheless. They told residents when the 
Lions Club was meeting and whose home had been broken into overnight. 
When a neighbor died, no matter whether it was someone who ran banks 
or cleaned houses, the local paper bid a tender farewell in an obituary 
that offered the highlights of a life. In 1964, these daily newspapers 
fell under the umbrella of Gannett Co., the nation's largest newspaper 
chain, which eventually consolidated many of their operations, from 
offices to presses to sections like food, sports and entertainment. 
Still, for most of the last three decades, the papers have clung to 
their names and identities and continued to focus on community news. 
With Monday's publication, though, Gannett will merge nine newspapers 
in Westchester County, one in Rockland County and an edition in Putnam 
County, into a single morning paper: The Journal News. From now on, 
the company will offer all readers in its 861-square-mile territory 
_ from Pelham, just north of the Bronx, to Patterson, 50 miles farther 
north _ essentially the same front page and the same platter of news, 
feature and service articles. The region will be divided into four 
zones, each with its own local news section. With the new paper, Gannett 
Suburban Newspapers, the Gannett division based in White Plains, will 
be able to offer advertisers a single place to reach 153,000 paying 
readers in 144 communities, rather than a patchwork of 11 different 
newspapers. That merging of readership, along with the Gannett chain's 
growing presence in New Jersey, will make Gannett an even more powerful 
player in the New York City suburbs. What worries many readers in 
Westchester, Rockland and Putnam, though, is that Gannett may lose 
some of its microscopic emphasis as it tries to do more stories with 
regional and countywide interest. Can reporters, these skeptics ask, 
who are told to concentrate on in-depth regional stories about Westchester's 
aging sewer systems or the Tappan Zee Bridge, which binds Westchester 
and Rockland like an umbilical cord, also sustain the zest to cover 
a Monday night meeting of the zoning board? ``The problems facing 
our areas are regional to a great extent,'' said Greenburgh Town Supervisor 
Paul Feiner. ``If there's a shopping mall in Rockland like the Palisades 
Mall, it impacts Westchester business as well. On the other hand, 
a paper has a certain amount of pages and more regional coverage could 
mean there's going to be less local coverage.'' Already, Gannett has 
drawn complaints from some readers because last week it ended its 
policy of publishing obituaries for every Westchester resident who 
dies. Reporters now write obituaries for only the most prominent. 
Other deaths will simply be listed, and families who want longer obituaries 
will have to pay for them. ``I look at my parents and their neighbors,'' 
said Stephen Medwid, a 40-year-old Tarrytown actor. ``These people 
spent their whole lives here and built the community. To not recognize 
what they've done in the obituary column, well, it's criminal.'' Newspaper 
analysts like John Morton and Sig Gissler, a Columbia University School 
of Journalism professor who studied Gannett, say the trick for Gannett 
is to broaden the paper's outlook and achieve economies of scale without 
alienating readers who cherish local coverage. ``There's always a 
risk that you can overconsolidate,'' Gissler said. ``A lot of people 
like their local, local coverage.'' What Gannett is doing reflects 
trends that have been altering the suburbs for more than a generation. 
The image of suburbia made up of an archipelago of closely knit, largely 
white and middle-class villages where the wives shop on Main Street 
while the husbands commute to Manhattan has long been a wistful throwback. 
Men and women do most of their major shopping in vast regional malls 
like The Westchester in White Plains and the Palisades in West Nyack 
and they may pass up a neighborhood hospital for the specialized care 
of a regional hospital like the Westchester County Medical Center. 
Women increasingly commute, and the jobs they and working men travel 
to are increasingly outside Manhattan, in places like Westchester 
and Rockland. Suburban newcomers are often from Latin America or India, 
and may have more ties to their native countries than to the villages 
they live in. Gannett has even noticed that two of every three families 
who buy houses in Westchester have lived somewhere else in the county 
and want to keep up with news of their former towns as well as their 
current ones. Executives at Gannett, which publishes 84 dailies, including 
USA Today, say that as a result of surveying readers through so-called 
focus groups, they have had to rethink their papers for a more cosmopolitan 
and sophisticated age. Obviously, economic considerations played at 
least as big a role in a chain that last year had before-tax profits 
of 31.2 percent, according to an analysis by Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, 
a financial services company. Beginning with Monday's issue, Gannett 
editors will no longer have to remake the paper 12 times a day, reloading 
the presses so each paper carries its own nameplate and several individualized 
pages for hometown news, social calendars and local advertisements. 
Not only has that meant extra editors, but presses in Gannett's White 
Plains headquarters have also had to start rolling as early as 9:30 
p.m., leaving 40 percent of Gannett's subscribers without the results 
of late baseball games or late town meetings. With Monday's newspaper, 
Gannett will revise the paper only four times for four newly carved 
zones _ in southern Westchester, central Westchester, the combined 
area of northern Westchester and Putnam, and Rockland County. While 
the front pages will have virtually identical assemblages of foreign, 
national and particularly compelling local news, a new second section 
of local news will be different for each zone. The southern Westchester 
edition, for example, will have three separate pages of news for Yonkers, 
Mount Vernon and New Rochelle. Aware of the anxieties their merger 
is stirring, Gary Sherlock, president and publisher of Gannett Suburban 
Newspapers, the regional division here, repeatedly promised in interviews 
that the new paper would carry more local news than it does now. But 
he also made a subtle distinction. ``The term local news is more broadly 
defined than just the news of the town I live in,'' Sherlock said. 
As part of this more cosmopolitan approach, Gannett has opened a Manhattan 
bureau to tell readers about New York City decisions that affect the 
northern counties on issues like transportation. And it continues 
to emphasize more in-depth looks at issues affecting the entire region. 
A half-dozen Gannett reporters and editors who spoke on the condition 
of anonymity said they had been assured that the consolidation of 
the newspaper would not mean any job cutbacks, though some editors 
might be reassigned to other positions. People wary of the changes 
contend that a New Rochelle reader accustomed to a steady diet of 
hometown news may not feel satisfied getting more stories about Yonkers 
and Mount Vernon but fewer about New Rochelle. ``People who live in 
Port Chester aren't particularly interested in Yonkers, even though 
they're both in southern Westchester,'' said Sy Schulman, the former 
Mayor of White Plains. Goldie Solomon of Port Chester, the head of 
the village's historical society, who attends most civic meetings 
to let neighbors know her gripes, said she missed the days when Gannett 
kept an office in Port Chester for its Daily Item edition. She could 
regularly drop off notices about upcoming meetings and buttonhole 
reporters with a complaint about a nagging town problem. But Gannett 
closed that office in the mid-1980s and more recently closed offices 
in Yonkers and Yorktown, requiring reporters who cover those locales 
to work out of centralized offices in White Plains and New Rochelle. 
More importantly, Gannett has for the last few years been gradually 
homogenizing its front pages in the Westchester and Putnam newspapers. 
``It's not a local paper anymore,'' Ms. Solomon said of the Daily 
Item, whose 100-year-old nameplate will cease to exist Monday. ``When 
they moved out of Port Chester, it lost its localness.'' Politicians 
with more regional constituencies, like County Executive Andrew Spano, 
heartily applaud the merger, predicting it will bring the same cohesiveness 
to Westchester that Newsday brought to Long Island. ``One of our problems 
in this county is sometimes we're too parochial,'' Spano said. And 
Feiner, who is running for Congress in the 20th Congressional District 
for the seat now held by Rep. Benjamin Gilman, is pleased that a unified 
Gannett will introduce him to potential voters in Rockland. But at 
the same time he laments that four or five years ago Gannett stopped 
covering every town board meeting in Greenburgh. Indeed, many Westchester 
politicians, like Assemblyman Richard Brodsky of Greenburgh, are hoping 
that Gannett holds on to some of its narrow-gauge coverage even as 
it tries to regionalize. ``What made Westchester is that we have kept 
distinct small communities,'' Brodsky said. ``It matters if you live 
in Elmsford and not in Ardsley. The smallness of the communities gave 
the place an intimacy and heterogeneous feel that gets lost in an 
era of malls.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>