<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0033 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Across the river from this city's majestic waterfront, in an area 
that was swampland not long ago, a gleaming collection of skyscrapers 
is emerging. The most impressive, ambitiously named the World Financial 
Center, is scheduled to become the tallest building in the world when 
it is completed in 2001. Boosters hope the area, known as Pudong, 
will become China's Wall Street, with investment banks and other financial 
institutions alongside a stock exchange with state-of-the-art technology 
that opened earlier this year. A new airport is under construction 
in Pudong; so is a $1 billion General Motors plant that will make 
Buick sedans. Despite all the ambitious plans, however, occupancy 
rates in Pudong are only around 70 percent. The Shanghai real estate 
market has gone bust, after years of boom, and pessimists argue that 
it portends a collapse in the spectacularly fast growth that China 
has enjoyed since 1991. So many of its neighbors in Asia are mired 
in financial wreckage that economists and international traders fear 
that China may be the last and heftiest domino. Last week, the government-ordered 
closing of the Guangdong International Trust &AMP; Investment Corp., 
a big investment company swamped by debt, heightened concern about 
the vulnerability of China's rickety financial system, already burdened 
by insolvent banks. Yet Chinese consumers are still spending, construction 
teams are still working 24-hour shifts and planners are moving ahead 
with hugely ambitious development plans. Despite all the ominous reminders 
of the dangers attending the nation's wrenching shift from a planned 
economy to a market economy, there is reason for optimism that the 
economy will grow in the immediate future. In essence, China has escaped 
the worst ravages of Asia's financial crisis because it is still so 
far behind the rest of the world in its efforts to create a modern 
economy; with a striving population of 1.2 billion people, it has 
a per capita income of only about $350 a year. Its incomplete economic 
transition is, oddly enough, something of a blessing now. For one 
thing, China's currency is not freely traded, so speculation isn't 
a big problem. For another, its main stock markets are closed to foreign 
investors and are thus immune to the large-scale withdrawals of capital 
that have plagued other Asian countries. Virtually all of China's 
banks are run by the state, and though they are deeply in debt, the 
banks face no shareholder pressure to account for bad loans. ``They're 
still way behind, so they've got a lot of easy catching up to do,'' 
said Brewer Stone, head of investment banking in Asia for Prudential 
Securities. There is vast potential for improving the efficiency of 
Chinese companies, Stone said, as well as for creating new products 
that Chinese consumers do not yet have. Citing one example, Stone 
pointed to a Chinese company called Hai'er, which has built a remarkably 
successful refrigerator and household appliance business stressing 
follow-up service. At a time when multinational companies are scaling 
back their operations in Asia, Hai'er is planning a big expansion 
into the personal computer market. ``I'm a lot less bullish on China 
after what has happened over the past year,'' Stone said. ``But the 
bottom line is that China still has much to do in terms of productivity 
gains.'' Within China, there is a debate about whether the leadership 
will be able to achieve the 8 percent growth rate that they have promised. 
With a restructuring of state-owned companies turning millions of 
urban workers out in the streets, any serious slowdown could have 
potentially disastrous consequences. Beijing's leaders say they are 
planning a $1 trillion public works program to keep the economy growing 
at a time when exports to neighboring Asian countries are falling 
sharply. Whether or not they succeed, signs point to enough pent-up 
demand among China's consumers to keep things humming for a while. 
General Motors has made a big bet with its plant in Pudong, and plans 
to start assembling sedans there later this year. Although it is debatable 
how much demand there will be for an expensive luxury car in a market 
where both companies and individuals have limited spending power, 
overall car sales are still climbing 4 percent this year. And GM is 
looking for another project to invest in, expecting the market for 
small cars to grow even faster than for larger sedans. ``If you look 
at China as an emerging market, although maybe not as bright as it 
looked two years ago, it still looks very stable,'' said Larry Zahner, 
president of General Motors China. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>