<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0176 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
To ensure the continued growth of commercial maritime activity, public 
and private interests have recently undertaken $278 million in maritime 
development in the 350-year-old port of Boston, some of it just completed 
and the rest under way or in planning. At the same time, $16 billion 
has been invested in on-shore improvement projects such as roads and 
distribution facilities in the last decade that are also considered 
crucial to sustaining shipping activity through the port. In August, 
work started on a publicly financed, $60 million dredging project 
to deepen the harbor for large cargo ships. And last month, a private 
developer started site demolition for construction of a $40 million 
intermodal cargo port to handle freight shipped by land, air or sea. 
Boston's deep-water harbor offers easy access to the city's downtown 
financial district as well as to all the major forms of transportation 
that surround and support it. The waterfront is directly linked to 
New England's major interstate highway by a truck road and to the 
airport by a tunnel, both of which opened last year as part of a $10 
billion project to modernize Boston's downtown transportation infrastructure. 
Planning is under way for a project to provide passage into the port 
for double-stack freight trains to the Middle West. Still another 
project will bring a new rapid-transit line into the 1,000-acre port 
area, called the South Boston Seaport District. As these projects 
go forward, however, critics say that this waterfront property should 
instead be used to develop more hotels, offices and housing in addition 
to the $700 million convention center that was recently approved. 
They also say that Boston has fallen so far behind the commercial 
ports of New York/New Jersey and Halifax, Nova Scotia, that such a 
large investment in the port is wasteful. ``I'd question the double-stack 
rail and the intermodal programs,'' said Leo Donovan, vice president 
of the consulting firm Booz, Allen &AMP; Hamilton Inc. ``Those facilities 
are more appropriate for the North Atlantic ports that handle longer-distance 
cargo like New York, Halifax and Hampton Roads, Va. I don't see reducing 
Boston's port activity, but I'd question expanding it substantially.'' 
In the last decade, many commercial ports on the East Coast have upgraded 
their facilities. As a result, the volume of containerized cargo they 
handle has grown an average of 9 percent a year. In Boston, the volume 
of containerized cargo has been fairly stable, growing from 932,671 
tons in 1987 to 1,114,450 tons in 1997, according to Massport, an 
independent agency that owns and manages the 1,000-acre waterfront 
as well as Logan International Airport. Now, the major East Coast 
ports are vying to become the one or two able to handle a new generation 
of super-large cargo ships, Donovan said. The major cargo carried 
through these ports is oil and its derivatives. In his view, the leading 
contenders are the port of New York/New Jersey, which this fall will 
start a $621 million dredging project, and the ports around Norfolk, 
Va., where $500 million has been invested on marine improvements since 
1985. The secondary niche ports will be Halifax, Baltimore, Philadelphia 
and Boston, he said. But others say that even a second-tier niche 
port is valuable to the region. ``If the port fell out of use, it 
would create a tremendous roadblock that would put us at a great competitive 
disadvantage,'' said Larry Liebenow, president of Quaker Fabric Corp. 
of Fall River, Mass., which expects sales of $280 million this year 
and has a work force of 2,400. Since 1990, this manufacturer of furniture 
fabric, about 50 miles south of here, has invested $80 million to 
modernize its production equipment, mostly with machinery imported 
from Europe. It has also begun an international export business, which 
had sales of $40 million last year. Without the port of Boston, the 
company would lose time, money and its competitive edge, Liebenow 
said. ``The port has been key in our ability to globalize,'' he said. 
Another port advocate, Robert Baldwin, deputy director of industrial 
development for the Boston Redevelopment Authority, noted that energy 
costs for residential as well business customers in the region were 
already among the highest in the country. But they would be even higher, 
he said, if oil products could not be shipped here directly by sea. 
Although containerized cargo volume has remained fairly steady, Baldwin 
said, its value has risen almost 38 percent in a decade, to $6.2 billion 
in 1997, from $4.5 billion in 1987. Bulk cargo, particularly salt, 
jumped from 22,780 tons in 1987 to a million tons last year, according 
to Massport, partly because a major New York terminal went out of 
service last year. Based on this belief in the port's future, Massport 
is overseeing the $278 million improvement program. The $60 million 
dredging project, begun with the Army Corps of Engineers, will make 
the harbor 40 feet deep. An additional $18 million is earmarked to 
build a complex of new fish-processing facilities, the first of which 
will open on the North Jetty in 2002. An additional $110 million has 
been approved by the state Legislature to raise bridges for double-stack 
rail service so that the port can handle more freight going to the 
Middle West, said Michael Leone, Massport's port director. Last winter, 
$50 million in work was completed to upgrade and reorganize three 
terminals. Conley Terminal in South Boston got a new gatehouse, new 
unloading equipment and a 10-gate facility for trucks. Across the 
channel in Charlestown, a terminal was improved to process all Audi, 
Volkswagen and Subaru autos imported for sale in New England, New 
Jersey, Illinois, Michigan, Minnesota and Wisconsin. In East Boston, 
a new pier for lobster boats, a marina for pleasure boats and a park 
were installed. The infrastructure improvements over a decade have 
used federal, state, city and Massport funds. Interstate 93, the key 
regional access route, is being rebuilt. The new haul road from the 
interstate into the port was added and a third tunnel under the harbor 
that connects the port area to the airport opened last year. An additional 
$4 billion has gone into cleaning the harbor waters for fishing and 
recreational use. About $2 billion more in improvements are under 
way at Logan Airport. A $300 million rapid transit line and bridge 
are being developed for the port area, Leone, the port director, said. 
Craig Moore, professor of economic development at the University of 
Massachusetts, hailed the improvements, saying Boston Harbor was ``an 
irreplaceable element'' of the region's economic infrastructure. On 
a 10.7-acre site near Conley Terminal, International Cargo Port-Boston 
L.L.C. is developing a new $40 million cargo facility. Jacob Citrin, 
vice president, said that when the facility is completed in the fall 
of 1999, it will provide 400,000 square feet of space, with offices 
atop a modern freight facility designed by Arrowstreet Inc., a Boston 
architectural firm. M. John Vickerman, a principal in VZM/Transystems 
of Reston, Va., a national transportation consulting concern, said 
that the investments that Boston was making were needed if it was 
to maintain any working port at all. In the next 20 years, growth 
in international trade could double or triple the volume of cargo 
handled by American ports, Vickerman said. ``What Boston is doing 
is critically important if it is to maintain any working waterfront 
at all,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>