<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0078 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
To many Serbs in this frightened capital, the threats of air strikes 
against the Yugoslav leader, Slobodan Milosevic, are producing one 
result that Washington says it does not want: strengthening rather 
than weakening Milosevic's control. In the end, they say, Milosevic 
may accede to some of the demands on Kosovo and avert the calamity 
of NATO bombs. But as the pressures of outside military action have 
accelerated in the past week, Milosevic has introduced new repressive 
measures to halt foreign broadcasts, close an independent radio station 
and hound academics at the University of Belgrade. With the assistance 
of the far right leader of the Radical Party and deputy premier of 
Serbia, Vojislav Seselj, Milosevic has whipped up an atmosphere of 
victimization that has turned smoldering anger about his miserable 
economy into anger at the West, and at the United States in particular. 
``He is very good at creating a xenophobia inside the country and 
using that as an instrument to step down on any kind of democratic 
process,'' said Milan Protic, a Serbian historian. ``So what he has 
done in the past few weeks is declare an informal state of war and 
used that to jump on the university and the independent media.'' After 
Milosevic signed the peace agreement that ended the war in Bosnia 
three years ago, the situation in the southern Serbian province of 
Kosovo remained the last unfinished piece of business in Milosevic's 
failed vision of a Greater Serbia. In the late 1980s, Milosevic used 
Kosovo as the cause that propelled him to power, whipping Serbs into 
an emotional frenzy about the need to protect the Serbian province, 
the touchstone of Serbian culture and home to the finest Serbian Orthodox 
churches and monasteries. From 1991 to 1995 he rallied Serbs around 
him in his losing fight for Croatia and Bosnia. In the last six months 
he has played a similar card with Kosovo. Although Serb fervor has 
proved harder to stoke now, the hostility to ethnic Albanian dominance 
of Kosovo remains acute among Serbs. That dominance makes it increasingly 
difficult for Milosevic to justify to the outside world his abrogation 
of the province's autonomy in 1989 and the imposition of Serbian police 
control. Serbia and Montenegro are the last republics in Yugoslavia, 
with Serbia dominant. In Belgrade in the last few days, as homemakers 
have stocked up on essential supplies and drivers have tried to find 
scarce gasoline for their cars, many worry not so much about a NATO 
bombing itself as about the aftermath. The public has been warned 
that an outside attack would result in a declaration of a state of 
war by the government, giving the authorities wide powers of mobilization, 
arrest without charges, and introduction of food rationing. ``I'm 
not afraid of the bombing; I know they won't bomb me,'' said Brigitte 
Miladinovic, a receptionist. ``I'm scared of what happens afterward 
_ and all the crazy Serb men who will want to go to Kosovo and fight 
the Albanians.'' On Thursday night, Seselj appeared on a call-in show 
on Palma Television, a station owned by a government supporter, appealing 
for volunteers to go to Kosovo in the event of air strikes. In order 
to squelch dissent, the Serbian government issued a decree on Friday 
officially banning the rebroadcast of the Serbian-language reports 
by Radio Free Europe, British Broadcasting Corp. and Deutsche Welle. 
These news services were broadcast by more than 30 independent radio 
stations in Serbia, including Radio B-92, the most influential of 
the nongovernment stations. Ominously, said the managers of the radio 
stations, the decree appears to be open-ended in effect. On Thursday 
night, Radio Index, run by university students was ordered to vacate 
the studios it rented in the building of the state-controlled television. 
Transmission was cut, Radio Index said. At the University of Belgrade, 
Milosevic has continued a campaign started last spring of stripping 
professors who are not members of his ruling Socialist Party of their 
posts in the law, electronics and linguistics faculties. Opposition 
politicians in Serbia complain that the laserlike attention that Washington 
has devoted to Milosevic has reinforced his position, even though 
his real popularity is far less than it was a few years ago. In the 
last few weeks, as diplomats have poured into Belgrade to plead with 
Milosevic about Kosovo, few of them have sought out anybody else. 
An outspoken priest of the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo, the 
Rev. Sava Janjic, said in an interview that he believes the approach 
of Richard Holbrooke, who has been engaged in increasingly intense 
negotiations with Milosevic as NATO steps up its threat of air strikes, 
is ``encouraging the regime.'' ``For a good settlement, you need all 
representatives on the Serb side, but Milosevic is the only who is 
asked,'' he said. Intellectuals and opposition leaders insist that 
by concentrating on Milosevic, Western leaders play into his hands. 
Virtually the only time Milosevic appears on television in Serbia 
is during the visits of foreign dignitaries, when he is filmed sitting 
in an armchair in front of a bowl of flowers, listening sphinxlike 
to his important visitors. ``People here watch him and think: `If 
the international community supports him, who are we to oppose him?''' 
said Protic. Underneath the xenophobia stirred up by media controlled 
by Milosevic, however, there is far less enthusiasm for the cause 
in Kosovo than there was for the earlier war in Bosnia. ``I personally 
don't know one person who is willing to go and fight in Kosovo but 
I have a lot of friends who volunteered to go to Croatia and Bosnia,'' 
said a university student, who declined to give his name for fear 
of retribution. If the bombing did go ahead, some here predict, Milosevic 
would emerge triumphant. ``Both ordinary people and intellectuals 
would turn against the outside world,'' said Mladjan Dinkic, a young 
economist who heads Group 17, a confederation of economists. ``In 
that case the country would sink into complete isolation that would 
perfectly suit Milosevic and his hard-line socialists, Seselj radicals 
and the part of the Yugoslav left run by his wife, Mira Markovic.'' 
The teetering Yugoslav economy is Milosevic's most vulnerable point 
and, say his critics, the threats from NATO distract attention from 
the general misery. The gross domestic product of roughly $15 billion 
is about half what it was in 1989. Nearly half the work force is unemployed, 
and pensioners, who make up a large percentage of the population, 
are now receiving their monthly checks of about $100 three months 
late. ``Milosevic doesn't know what to do with the economy and he 
needs NATO to explain why everything is bad,'' said Gordana Igric, 
a researcher with the Humanitarian Law Center, which compiles reports 
on atrocities by both sides in the Kosovo conflict. One of Milosevic's 
longtime critics charged that the Yugoslav leader would continue to 
provoke crises for the sake of staying in power. ``The West struck 
a deal with the regime in Belgrade and the war ended, but the hope 
for a real democratic reform was put on hold when the regime received 
credibility and recognition,'' said Prince Alexander of Yugoslavia, 
exiled scion of the country's pre-World War II monarchy, in an appeal 
from his base in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>