<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0069 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Clark Clifford, the silver-haired Brahmin of the nation's political 
establishment who advised presidents across half a century of American 
history, died Saturday morning at the age of 91 at his home in Bethesda, 
Md. A secretary of defense for one president, friend and confidant 
of three others, Clifford frequently played the role of capital wise 
man in inner-sanctum crises, helping President Harry S. Truman find 
peace with labor and warning President Lyndon B. Johnson about the 
folly of the Vietnam war. With a gentle drawl and an insider's run 
of the halls of power, Clifford was consulted as well by Presidents 
John F. Kennedy and Jimmy Carter, bridging the nation's postwar political 
era until he ran into legal troubles in high-finance brokering. For 
all the roles he played in presidential history, Clifford faced a 
rigorous ordeal in his final years, insisting on his innocence to 
the end as he faced charges of fraud, conspiracy and taking bribes 
in the biggest banking scandal in history, the collapse of the Bank 
of Credit and Commerce International. It was only earlier this year 
that Clifford and his law partner, Robert A. Altman, reached a $5 
million settlement with the Federal Reserve Board, after federal prosecutors 
had whittled down the case against them. Altman had been acquitted 
in 1993 in New York state court of charges of bank fraud; indictments 
against Clifford had been set aside because of his failing health. 
Clifford considered his role in extricating the United States from 
what he called that ``wretched conflict in Vietnam'' to be his finest 
moment; the day he was indicted and fingerprinted like a common criminal, 
he said, was ``the worst.'' Few people in Washington, let alone Clark 
Clifford himself, could have imagined so inglorious an end to so glorious 
a career. From the time in World War II when he went to Washington 
as a naval aide to Truman, Clifford was a highly respected lawyer 
and public servant about whom scarcely an unkind word was ever uttered. 
He was a symbol of elegance _ 6 feet 2 inches tall, trim, wavy-haired, 
his french cuffs always a {-inch longer than the sleeves of his impeccably 
tailored double-breasted suits. There were a few who saw in him a 
little too much smoothness, a touch of the riverboat gambler, perhaps. 
But to most people who knew Clifford, he was a symbol of probity, 
even a legend in his own time. Except for Spiro Agnew and a lone article 
in Ramparts magazine, nobody had a bad word to say about him in public, 
at least not until the BCCI scandal. Counsel Given to Four Presidents 
Whether in the White House or in his law offices across the street 
from the White House, Clifford was the man politicians and business 
leaders turned to for advice. Johnson, beleaguered by the Vietnam 
War, turned to him to be his secretary of defense, and Carter called 
on him to be a White House adviser. Kennedy asked him for legal help 
and put him at the head of his transition team, and Truman appointed 
him special counsel. Few people in government were as familiar with 
as many of the nation's problems as Clark Clifford. He helped articulate 
the policies for the reconstruction of Europe after World War II. 
He wrote the basic legislation establishing the CIA and the Defense 
Department. On the domestic front, he wrote some of Truman's most 
important speeches and helped keep labor peace in the postwar period. 
With a thriving private law practice, Clifford liked to think of himself 
as a bridge between business and government. But he was more than 
that. Like many lawyers who made up the Washington establishment, 
he advised corporations on how to navigate their way through laws 
and regulations. For each new client he had the same well-rehearsed 
speech that he offered to one of his first clients, Howard Hughes. 
As Clifford recounted it in his memoir, ``Counsel to the President'' 
(Random House, 1991), he said his firm had no influence and would 
not represent anyone before the president or any of his staff. ``If 
you want influence you should consider going elsewhere,'' he would 
tell prospective clients. ``What we can offer you is an extensive 
knowledge of how to deal with the government on your problems. We 
will be able to give you advice on how best to present your position 
to the appropriate departments and agencies of the government.'' He 
gave the same speech to the Arab investors who came to see him in 
1978, the same investors who, it turned out, were front men for the 
Bank of Credit and Commerce International. The bank, which was chartered 
in Luxembourg and the Cayman Islands and had offices in 70 countries, 
was shut down in July 1991 in a worldwide swoop by banking regulators. 
BCCI was accused of fraud, laundering drug money and bribing bank 
regulators and central bankers in 10 developing countries. It was 
reported to have $20 billion in assets shortly before the shutdown, 
but liquidators have been unable to find many of its assets. The Importance 
of Credibility In an interview in the mid-1980s, Clifford said his 
concept of the practice of law ``is that through the years you conduct 
yourself in such a manner that the staffs of the government agencies 
have confidence in your integrity and your credibility.'' He added, 
``I've never contended that I have influence, felt I had influence 
or attempted to use influence.'' It was precisely his reputation for 
integrity and credibility that led the group of Arab investors to 
seek Clifford's help in the late 1970s when they wanted to acquire 
an American bank. The Federal Reserve Board approved the takeover 
in 1981, reassured by Clifford that there would be no control by BCCI, 
which he also represented. The fact that Clifford himself was to become 
chairman of the new bank provided further reassurance to the regulators. 
The bank, with Clifford as its chairman, was called First American 
Bankshares and became the largest in Washington. Ten years later, 
Robert Morgenthau, the district attorney in New York City, disclosed 
that his office had found evidence that the parent company of Clifford's 
bank was secretly controlled by BCCI. The district attorney convened 
a grand jury to determine whether Clifford and his partner, Altman, 
had deliberately misled federal regulators when the two men assured 
them that BCCI would have no control. Clifford's predicament worsened 
when it was disclosed that he had made about $6 million in profits 
from bank stock that he bought with an unsecured loan from BCCI. A 
New York grand jury handed up indictments, as did the Justice Department. 
Clifford's assets in New York, where he kept most of his investments, 
were frozen. Clifford said the investigation caused him pain and anger. 
If the regulators had been deceived about any secret ownership by 
BCCI, he said, he too had been deceived. But if he was deceived, it 
would have been an aberration. While Washington lawyers like Clifford 
say they do not ``sell'' influence, what they do offer is sophistication, 
experience and knowledge of the mechanics of government. That is why 
it was so difficult for people to believe that Clifford, who was so 
experienced at seeing around corners and anticipating problems for 
his clients, could have been duped by front men for BCCI. ``It's easy 
to say I should have known, but a client tells his lawyer what the 
client wants the lawyer to know,'' Clifford said. ``I have to admit 
that they came to me because of my standing and reputation. If you 
think of that, then you'd understand better that I'd be the last person 
they'd divulge this stuff to. I gave them standing. Why would they 
jeopardize that? They knew if they told me, I'd be out the door.'' 
A `Wretched' War: Pride and Regrets Although he spent a total of only 
six years in government service, those were the years that he liked 
to dwell upon. Looking back one day in the mid-1980s as he was preparing 
to publish his memoirs, he said in his customary measured tones, ``I 
believe the contribution I made to reversing our policy in that wretched 
conflict in Vietnam is very likely the most gratifying experience 
I have had.'' There was no sense of self-congratulation. ``I was part 
of the generation that I hold responsible for our country's getting 
into that war,'' he said. ``I should have reached the conclusion earlier 
that our participation in that war was a dead end.'' Clifford added: 
``I've been quite severe with myself that I didn't make a greater 
issue of it with President Johnson. I permitted myself to be lulled 
into a false sense of optimism over reports that came back from Vietnam.'' 
But in the nine months that he headed the Defense Department, succeeding 
Robert McNamara in 1968, Clifford used everything he had ever learned 
about the levers of power, all his skill as an advocate and all his 
political capital to persuade the president not to further escalate 
the role of American ground troops in South Vietnam. U.S. military 
involvement in Southeast Asia, Clifford argued, was sapping the nation's 
strength as a world power. In his later years, no longer in government 
service, he sought to end the arms race as he had once tried to end 
U.S. participation in the Vietnam War. When he began in government, 
the world had two atomic bombs. Within four decades the world had 
24,000 nuclear bombs, and that awesome fact continued to preoccupy 
him long after he left public office. In the Truman years, Clifford 
wrote that the language of military power was the only language the 
Soviet Union understood. He was nevertheless a consistent advocate 
of finding a way to coexist with the Russians, and urged the adoption 
of arms agreements and a nuclear freeze. He often said he was haunted 
by a remark Winston Churchill had made about the superpowers and the 
arms race: ``All they're going to do is make the rubble bounce.'' 
Old World Grace, Midwestern Openness Trim and disciplined _ he kept 
his weight at 180 pounds and allowed himself dessert only when he 
fell below that, and he smoked one cigarette a day, proving to doubters 
that he could do it _ Clifford was the personification of Old World 
grace combined with a kind of Midwestern openness. To close the door 
on entering Clifford's office meant to close out the hurried pace 
of the 20th century and to return to the more measured rhythm of the 
19th. In the cauldron of the Vietnam-era Pentagon or in the paneled 
luxury of his Connecticut Avenue office, there was always time for 
the niceties of gentlemanly conversation. He would inquire after one's 
spouse, and ask whether the children were writing from college. The 
quintessential insider, Clifford had access to the corridors of power 
and to the private clubs that were the marks of success. He tried 
to play golf at Burning Tree Country Club in Maryland every weekend, 
but he liked to take his lunch at the People's Drugstore around the 
corner from his office. He said he could have a sandwich and a glass 
of skim milk in 22 minutes at the lunch counter there, while his occasional 
visits to the Metropolitan Club meant an hour and 22 minutes. His 
office kept a car and chauffeur at his disposal, but until his health 
declined, he liked to drive himself to work from his 150-year-old 
house on Rockville Pike in Bethesda, Md. No one can recall a time 
when Clifford raised his voice. What Washington veterans do remember 
was his ability, even into his 80s, to speak, seemingly extemporaneously 
and without notes, for 40 minutes. In fact, Clifford prepared every 
statement carefully and then memorized it. ``The mind is a muscle,'' 
he said. ``The more I use it, the better it gets.'' Clifford had a 
way of taking his listeners step by step through an argument, pausing 
every now and then to ask rhetorically, ``Do you see?'' as he ushered 
them along with careful logic. ``Clark was so smooth that when you 
lost with him, you thought you'd won,'' said Phil Goulding, an assistant 
secretary of defense under Clifford. His Father's Words: `To Live 
Is to Work' Clark McAdams Clifford was born in Fort Scott, Kan., on 
Dec. 25, 1906. He was named for his mother's brother, Clark McAdams, 
a crusading editor of The St. Louis Post-Dispatch. His mother, Georgia 
McAdams Clifford, was, as her son remembered her, a great storyteller, 
very dramatic and ``beautiful beyond belief.'' His father was an official 
of the Missouri Pacific Railroad, a man who, Clifford said, ``instilled 
in me the precept that to live is to work.'' ``He developed in me 
habits of industry _ too much, my wife thinks sometimes,'' Clifford 
said. He was given chores to do when he was a boy, and as he got older 
the tasks increased. When the family moved to St. Louis, he was a 
delivery boy for a grocery store and in the summertime was a night 
delivery boy for a drugstore. He also remembered earning $30 a month 
for singing in a choir. ``I had an extremely happy childhood _ it 
was ideal,'' Clifford said. ``I thought everybody loved his mother 
and father and would go to the wall for his sister. Boy, was I naive!'' 
Clifford attended college and law school at Washington University 
in St. Louis. On graduating in 1928 he entered law practice there. 
In the summer of 1929, while traveling in Europe, he met a Boston 
woman, Margery Pepperell Kimball. They were married on Oct. 3, 1931. 
In addition to his wife, he is survived by their three daughters, 
Faith Christian, of Chico, Calif., Joyce Burland, of Halifax, Vt., 
and Randall Wight, of Baltimore; 12 grandchildren and 17 great-grandchildren. 
From Naval Aide to Truman Adviser Although Clifford was over the draft 
age and was already a father when the United States entered World 
War II, he volunteered for the Navy in 1943 and was accepted as a 
lieutenant junior grade. After an assignment to assess the state of 
readiness at naval bases on the West Coast, he was drawn into the 
White House in 1944, where he began a career, as the columnist James 
Reston once put it, of rescuing American presidents from disaster. 
In July 1945, when Truman attended the Potsdam Conference near Berlin, 
Clifford found he did not have enough to do. ``You're kind of a potted 
plant when you're a naval aide,'' he recalled. ``So I offered to be 
helpful to Judge Samuel I. Rosenman, the special counsel, who had 
more work than he could handle.'' When the president returned, Rosenman 
said, ``Let's keep that young fellow here.'' As a speechwriter, and 
later as special counsel to Truman, Clifford helped articulate the 
Truman Doctrine, a program proposed in 1947 to help Greece and Turkey 
resist potential communist expansionism, and related innovative programs 
for assisting underdeveloped countries. Clifford also participated 
in the creation of the Marshall Plan for the rehabilitation of Western 
Europe and in the formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. 
It fell to Clifford to be Secretary of State George Marshall's adversary 
on the issue of recognition of Israel. ``President Truman said he 
would like me to prepare the case for the formation of a Jewish homeland 
as if it were a case to be presented to the Supreme Court,'' Clifford 
said. Marshall, who opposed recognition, became almost apoplectic 
at a White House meeting when Clifford made his points _ points that 
he could still reel off in detail 40 years later. When Truman decided 
in favor of immediate recognition of Israel, Clifford said, there 
were some tense days until Marshall relented. Clifford insisted that 
Truman acted out of conviction and humanitarian considerations, not 
for domestic political advantage as Marshall had suggested. Kitchen 
Cabinet and Poker Games In his years in the Truman White House, Clifford 
was a poker-playing regular of the kitchen cabinet; he even played 
a hand or two with Churchill. Clifford was an important architect 
of the president's ``give 'em hell Harry'' whistle-stop campaign in 
1948, when Truman won an upset victory over the Republican nominee, 
Thomas E. Dewey. Clifford was also one of the principal architects 
of the National Security Act of 1947, which unified the armed services 
and established the CIA. Amendments that he framed two years later 
greatly strengthened the authority of the secretary of defense. In 
his memoirs, he expressed regret that he had not made a greater effort 
to kill the loyalty program instituted to root out communist subversives. 
But he has been criticized for contributing to the climate of fear 
by the proposition that ``the United States must be prepared to wage 
atomic and biological warfare if necessary.'' Clifford left the White 
House in 1950 to open a law firm in Washington, hoping to repair his 
personal finances, which had been tattered by his years in the government, 
most of them at an annual salary of $12,000. When Truman discussed 
with him the possibility of a seat on the Supreme Court, Clifford 
said he would not be happy there. In 1949 he turned down an offer 
from a group of prominent Missouri Democrats to run for the Senate. 
``I'd been in the Navy and the White House for almost seven years,'' 
he said, looking back at that period. ``I had three growing daughters 
reaching the age when daughters become expensive, and going through 
this economic ordeal again that I'd been through was an obstructing 
factor I could not overcome at that time.'' Making Millions as a Superlawyer 
After leaving the government, Clifford overcame his economic problems 
so quickly that within four months he was able to move his family 
from a rented house in Chevy Chase, Md., to the historic house on 
three acres outside Bethesda that was his home for the rest of his 
life. Clients lined up outside his door. One of the first was Hughes, 
who asked Clifford to be the Washington counsel for Trans World Airlines. 
There followed a clientele that represented blue-chip America and 
included General Electric, AT&AMP;T, ITT, RCA Corp., ABC, DuPont, 
Hughes Tool, Time Inc., Standard Oil, Phillips Petroleum and El Paso 
Natural Gas. In time, the man whose early ambition was to be the finest 
trial lawyer in St. Louis became the first Washington lawyer to make 
a million dollars a year _ because it was thought that he could fix 
things for his clients as a result of his political connections. Clifford 
said he always found this concept deeply disturbing. But the legend 
of his influence had grown so that a favorite story around Washington 
was that whenever Clifford had occasion to go to a government office 
on behalf of a client, the meeting would be interrupted by the announcement 
that the president was calling Clifford. ``That happened exactly once,'' 
he protested. The president, he said, was Kennedy, and there was a 
genuine emergency at the White House. In the Eisenhower years Clifford 
was not called by the White House, but he remained active in Democratic 
politics. He was also the personal lawyer for Kennedy, then a young 
senator from Massachusetts. In 1960, when Kennedy won the Democratic 
nomination for president over Stuart Symington, whom Clifford had 
supported, Kennedy asked Clifford to prepare an analysis of the problems 
Kennedy would face in taking over the executive branch. Clifford wrote 
a detailed assessment and, after the election, was named to head the 
transition team. At a dinner shortly after his election, Kennedy paid 
tribute to Clifford for all the work he had done and for asking nothing 
in return. ``All he asked was that we advertise his law firm on the 
back of one-dollar bills,'' the president-elect quipped. After the 
abortive invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, an operation 
supported by the CIA, Kennedy again turned to Clifford, who in 1947 
wrote the legislation establishing the agency. The president asked 
him to become a member, and then chairman, of the newly created Foreign 
Intelligence Advisory Board. Kennedy also turned to Clifford a year 
later, when the nation's major steel companies refused to honor an 
agreement that the president thought he had with them not to increase 
prices. The companies backed down several days later, after Clifford 
convinced them that it would be in their best interest to rescind 
the increases. Johnson was hardly in office 24 hours when he called 
for Clifford. Faced with the sudden and enormous task of running the 
country after Kennedy's assassination, Johnson talked with Clifford 
for two hours, then three, then four. It was late in the evening, 
Clifford remembered, when Lady Bird Johnson entered the Oval Office 
and reminded her husband, ``Just because you're president now doesn't 
mean you don't have to eat dinner.'' Rift Over Vietnam Strains a Friendship 
Clifford's warm relationship with Johnson became strained and almost 
broke over Vietnam in 1967, when Johnson asked him to be secretary 
of defense. Clifford's first assignment was to determine how to meet 
Gen. William Westmoreland's request for 206,000 more U.S. troops in 
Vietnam. The special panel Clifford set up to study the issue soon 
became a forum for debating the rationale for the war. Because he 
then had the complete confidence of the president, whom he had known 
for more than 20 years, and because he had the luxury of not being 
bound to previous official positions on Vietnam, Clifford was able 
to ask the difficult questions. He did not like the answers. No one 
could say whether the 206,000 troops would be enough. No one could 
say whether the war would take another six months, a year, two years 
or more. Clifford finally came to the conclusion that there was no 
plan for military victory in Vietnam and that the United States was 
in what he called ``a kind of bottomless pit.'' He said he realized 
that ``we could be there year after year, sacrificing tens of thousands 
of American boys a year, and it just didn't add up.'' When Clifford 
began to oppose Johnson on the war, a rift opened. Clifford remembered 
a ``sense of personal hurt that I was doing this to him.'' To help 
heal the breach, Clifford asked Johnson to have lunch at his home 
on his final day in Washington, the day Nixon was inaugurated as president. 
Johnson accepted and, as one of his last official acts, awarded Clifford 
the Medal of Freedom with Distinction, the highest award given to 
civilians in the United States. Having persuaded Johnson to cut back 
the bombing and negotiate an end to the war, Clifford spent the next 
years trying to urge Nixon to end the war. His efforts led Vice President 
Spiro Agnew to accuse him of being ``a late-blooming opportunist who 
clambered aboard the rolling bandwagon of the doves when the flak 
really started to fly.'' Except for Agnew's comments and a broadside 
from Ramparts magazine at the other side of the political spectrum, 
Clifford's more than 40 years in Washington passed with a relative 
absence of criticism, until the bank scandal broke. At the time, no 
one paid much attention when Ramparts called Clifford a ``curious 
hybrid of Rasputin, Perry Como and Mr. Fix,'' in an article that depicted 
him as an architect of U.S. States economic imperialism and linked 
that role to his legal work representing major multinational corporations. 
Only once in his long career did he step out of character, and that 
was when he referred to President Ronald Reagan as an ``amiable dunce.'' 
The remark was made at a private dinner party but, unknown to Clifford, 
a tape recording had been made so that the hostess, who was ill with 
the flu and unable to come to her own party, could hear what was expected 
to be some sparkling conversation. Excerpts from that tape were published 
out of context. Clifford explained his remark this way: ``In the fall 
of 1982, President Reagan said he would cut taxes by $750 billion, 
substantially increase defense expenditures and balance the budget 
in the 1984 fiscal year. Those were public promises. I made a comment 
that if he would accomplish that feat, he'd be a national hero. If, 
on the other hand, it did not work out after such a specific and encouraging 
promise and commitment, I thought the American people would regard 
him as an amiable dunce.'' Given the opportunity some time later to 
retract his remark, however, Clifford declined to do so. In time, 
even Carter, who kept his distance from the Washington establishment, 
turned to Clifford for advice _ when Carter's budget director, Bert 
Lance, came under attack for his banking practices in Georgia. A former 
Kennedy aide later remarked, ``They ran against Washington, but when 
the water comes up to their knees, they call for Clark Clifford.'' 
A New Challenge in His Later Years It was Lance who introduced Clifford 
to the Arab investors who sought to take over the bank in Washington 
that was to become known as First American Bank. Clifford and his 
young partner, Altman, structured the deal that led to the takeover 
of the bank and, according to prosecutors, the success of the Bank 
of Credit and Commerce International in the United States. Clifford 
said to the end that he did not know that BCCI had been behind the 
purchase of the bank. For him, the bank became a new challenge for 
his later years. He looked at his contemporaries who had retired, 
and did not like what he saw, he said in an interview in The Washington 
Post. ``Some of them would go with their wives each morning to the 
market and help with the marketing, pushing those carts and all,'' 
he told the interviewer. ``Well, I didn't find that very appealing.'' 
And so he accepted the clients who are now known to have been associated 
with BCCI, and agreed to become the chairman of First American Bank. 
In itself, some lawyers saw his wearing of two hats as a conflict 
of interest. Clifford was called before congressional committees and 
had his lawyers send reams of material to the prosecutors in an effort 
to show that his work for BCCI and First American was proper. How 
will history judge Clark Clifford, he was asked by a visitor to his 
office several months before he was indicted. ``It depends on the 
ultimate result,'' he said. ``If it comes and goes and nothing else 
happens, gradually it gets swallowed up in history. If it turns out 
badly, as far as history is concerned, I've taken a bad tumble.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>