<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0020 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Law-enforcement officials announced the indictments Friday of 102 
members of a sophisticated drug operation that discreetly sold millions 
of dollars' worth of crack cocaine to white-collar workers in midtown 
Manhattan over the last decade. Investigators said the seven gangs 
involved catered to what the dealers called the ``S and T crowd'' 
_ the suit and tie crowd. At a news conference, District Attorney 
Robert Morgenthau said the suspects were indicted on felony charges 
of conspiracy, narcotics sales, weapons possession, attempted murder 
and assault. He said 77 of the gang members were in custody and 25 
were being sought. Police Commissioner Howard Safir, who also appeared 
at the news conference, said the drug operations were among the largest 
in the city. Twenty-seven of the suspects identified themselves as 
members of subgroups of the Bloods street gang, based in Los Angeles, 
investigators said. But Safir said the gangs appeared to have no link 
to the Bloods. Law enforcement officials said the gang members' practice 
of selling drugs indoors and the fact that they shunned firearms showed 
the evolution and adaptability of the drug trade under the Giuliani 
administration's crackdown on quality-of-life crimes. They said a 
continuing demand for drugs fueled the operation. Half of its $5.5 
million in annual sales were made to white-collar workers, investigators 
said. Business was most brisk in the early morning, when office workers 
arrived for work, and at noon, when they went on lunch breaks. Walter 
Arsenault, assistant Manhattan district attorney, said the white-collar 
workers ``bought big and they paid twice as much.'' In a shift from 
the aggressive, gun-toting drug gangs of the early 1990s, the five 
gangs involved apparently shunned confrontation with other gangs to 
avoid drawing police attention. Initially, the gangs operated out 
of the former Evans Hotel at 273 W. 38th St. near Eighth Avenue, and 
then worked around the corner in the Mammoth Pool Hall at 550 Eighth 
Ave., officials said. To avoid warfare, dealers declared a truce and 
worked out a shift schedule among themselves, officials said. Dealers 
from different gangs shared customers and drug supplies and even warned 
each other when police approached, investigators said. In a major 
shift that law-enforcement officials said helps explain the city's 
plummeting homicide rate, disputes among the gangs were settled by 
slashings and stabbings, not by gun battles. Gang members told the 
police that they no longer carry guns because they fear that they 
will be stopped by police officers enforcing the city's crackdown 
on low-level crimes, authorities said. In the arrests of the gang 
members, only four guns were seized, law enforcement officials said. 
Arsenault said he believed that the small number of guns seized and 
the small number of shootings involving the gangs, two since 1996, 
showed that the police crackdown is getting guns off city streets. 
Fewer guns means that confrontations among drug dealers result in 
stabbing wounds instead of fatal shootings, he said. ``We've been 
doing drug gang cases for 10 years,'' he said. ``I've had one other 
case with one stabbing. This case had five.'' The decade-long gold 
rush for the drug operations ended in January, when renovations forced 
one of the gangs, the Dog Pound Gang, to move out of the West 38th 
Street building. The gang tried to move into the Mammoth Pool Hall, 
where four other gangs _ the Green Team, the Blueberries, the Yellow 
Bags and the Clear Team _ had been cooperating with one another, investigators 
said. The gangs took their names from the color of the bags they used 
to package the crack, investigators added. The Dog Pound Gang refused 
to take part in the existing operation, and in January, two Dog Pound 
members shot and wounded a Blueberries manager, law enforcement officials 
said. The shooting drew the authorities' attention and eventually 
led to Friday's indictments. ``They got greedy,'' Safir said. Two 
factions of a neighborhood gang known as the Gangsta Killa Bloods 
then moved into the pool hall, establishing a truce with the Clear 
Team and Yellow Bags gangs. The Dog Pound, Green Team and Blueberries 
gangs were forced out. Owners of nearby businesses said they were 
pleased that the drug operations had been dismantled. Andrew Scheman, 
owner of Scheman &AMP; Grant Hardware, said the drug trade has been 
a long-running problem. ``Drug dealing really affects my business,'' 
he said. ``You can get killed around here if you don't know what you're 
doing.'' Police investigators said the office workers were apparently 
uncomfortable buying their drugs on the street. During surveillance 
operations, office workers described by investigators as ``men and 
women in suits carrying briefcases'' were seen buying their drugs 
in the stairwell leading to the Mammoth Pool Hall on the building's 
third floor. A few office workers immediately smoked the crack in 
the pool hall's bathroom, investigators said, but most left with the 
drugs. The dealers took advantage of their prime location and raised 
their prices accordingly, Arsenault said. ``It was a very lucrative 
operation,'' he said. ``What was sold for $5 dollars to an addict 
was sold for $10, $15 or $20 to the suit-and-tie crowd.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>