<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0102 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A first-round pick in the National Football League's annual college 
draft is a prized commodity, the cornerstone of a franchise's talent 
base. Players chosen in the first round who become stars for the franchise 
that selected them highlight the roster of most NFL teams. But two 
NFL teams have made little of their first-round choices this decade, 
so little that they are the only two teams in the league to have just 
one starting player whom they chose in the first round of the draft. 
And Sunday night, they play each other at Giants Stadium. The New 
York Giants and the Atlanta Falcons are those two teams, having either 
picked that poorly in the first round or been that unlucky with their 
picks. For the Giants, the one probable starter this weekend is wide 
receiver Ike Hilliard, taken by the team in the first round in 1997. 
For Atlanta, it's tackle Bob Whitfield, a first-round selection in 
1992. The league average is nearly four first-rounders _ 3.93 to be 
exact. The average among playoff teams from last season is even higher 
(4.42). Three teams _ Minnesota, Buffalo and New Orleans _ have seven 
starters taken in the first round. And in Minnesota's case, that does 
not even include the Vikings' first-round pick this year, wide receiver 
Randy Moss, who is technically not a starter. Tampa Bay has six first-round 
starters. The Giants have one. Their 1995 top pick, running back Tyrone 
Wheatley, has not even been active for three games. Six other Giants 
first-round picks in the 1990s are no longer with the team. This is 
more than a lesson in the vagaries of the college draft. The 2-3 Giants 
and the 3-1 Falcons, it would seem, have been doing it the hard way. 
On most teams, the first-round selections have become vital team leaders. 
All but seven NFL teams have a first-round choice leading the team 
in either passing, rushing or receiving. Hilliard, for example, is 
the Giants' receiving leader. Nine NFL teams have first-round selections 
who are leading in two or more of those key statistical categories. 
In last season's Pro Bowl, 14 starters in the game were first-round 
picks still playing for the team that drafted them. Where have the 
Giants gone wrong? It has been a combination of misfortune and misjudgment. 
Consider the team's 1989 first-round pick, center Brian Williams. 
He was on the verge of a Pro Bowl berth when he was accidentally poked 
in the eye last year. Double vision has prevented him from resuming 
his football career. The Giants' 1990 pick, running back Rodney Hampton, 
was certainly a valuable pick. Hampton, released by the team this 
spring, became the franchise's career leading rusher. But then there's 
the Giants' first pick of the 1991 draft: running back Jarrod Bunch. 
A complete bust, he played just three seasons with the Giants and 
is now out of football. The 1992 pick, tight end Derek Brown, never 
blossomed for the Giants either. Unprotected in the expansion draft, 
he went to Jacksonville. The 1993 top pick, quarterback Dave Brown, 
was a starter for parts of four unceremonious seasons before the team 
gave up on him last year. Wide receiver Thomas Lewis was the first-round 
selection in 1994. He frustrated two coaching staffs with myriad injuries 
and inconsistencies in four seasons. When he became a free agent this 
past winter, the Giants ignored him. Wheatley, buried deep on the 
Giants' depth chart, was taken in 1995. Cedric Jones was the Giants' 
first-round choice, and the fifth overall pick, in 1996. Jones is 
a backup defensive end for the Giants with one career sack. Then came 
Hilliard and now this year's pick, safety Shaun Williams, who has 
played in nickel defenses this year but is currently sidelined because 
of a hamstring strain. Ernie Accorsi, in his first year as the Giants' 
general manager, acknowledged the obvious: that the team hasn't received 
much production from its first-round picks. ``We know that,'' he said. 
``There's no rationalizing it in our offices. Usually you can't overcome 
that. But we've had success last year and hopefully again this year 
because of what's been done in the other rounds of the draft. That's 
what has saved us.'' Referring to his predecessor, George Young, and 
the Giants' scouting staff, Accorsi said: ``They did a great job with 
a bunch of later-round picks. Charles Way, Michael Strahan, Keith 
Hamilton, Jason Sehorn, Jessie Armstead _ those are all guys who are 
really first-round picks in terms of talent and what they've done 
in the league.'' But Accorsi understood that Giants fans might expect 
more than one starter out of nine first-round draft picks this decade. 
``There's no arguing that,'' Accorsi said. What makes this situation 
most peculiar is that the Giants have been built through the draft, 
even if it hasn't been in the first round. All but six of the team's 
starters tonight were Giants draft picks. But when you watch a Giants 
offense that is 29th in the league and dead last in production on 
third down _ when big plays are made _ remember the Giants' first-round 
woes. Explosive talent is what teams seek in the first round of the 
college draft. It's what the Giants, outside of Hilliard and a few 
other players, have lacked. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>