<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0153 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Stephane Barthe is only one of the many fine French riders who will 
not be competing Sunday in the world championship bicycle road race 
in Valkenburg, the Netherlands. While most of the others are ineligible 
because they have been accused of doping, Barthe is staying away to 
make a public protest. ``I do not want to represent France after what 
happened in the Tour de France,'' Barthe, the 25-year-old former national 
champion, said last week. He is not protesting the use of illegal 
drugs, however, such as the artificial hormone EPO or the human growth 
hormone that give his rivals an edge over him in races. Barthe's complaint 
is against the fact that the others were caught. ``I do not want to 
represent a country that treats riders like dirt,'' he said. ``To 
hear people say that bicycle racing is the most corrupt sport is pitiful.'' 
More than two months after the Tour staggered to its finish with the 
stigma of the Festina Affair _ the world's top-ranked team expelled 
from the race because of systematic doping _ Barthe's attitude is 
common among riders and officials. The French police and courts are 
still being blamed for their conduct in uncovering the affair, few 
riders have been disciplined, almost no sponsors have rebelled at 
the notoriety and, at the highest level of the sport, little appears 
to have been accomplished outside a few conferences and study groups. 
In a series of interviews, riders and officials agreed with the words 
of Chris Horner, an American racer with the Francaise des Jeux team, 
which has had three riders and its directeur sportif called in for 
questioning in the last few weeks, after a masseur was taken into 
custody and charged with distributing illegal performance-enhancing 
drugs. ``That's just part of professional sports now,'' Horner said 
of drugs. ``Every sport has some problems like that. You just have 
to deal with it, in one ear and out the other, and keep training and 
keep racing. It bothers you, of course, when your directeur is called 
in by the police, but what can you do?'' The directeur sportif, Marc 
Madiot, was released after he acknowledged that although some of his 
riders used the drugs, the team had not imitated Festina and established 
a formal program of drug distribution. That is a criminal offense 
in France although drug use is not. ``This whole summer has been a 
disaster,'' said Lance Armstrong, who is a favorite in Sunday's world 
championship, even though his U.S. Postal Service team has not had 
any problem. ``No one has any answers. These drugs are completely 
undetectable. What are you going to do?'' Theo de Rooy, the directeur 
sportif of the Rabobank team from the Netherlands and a fine rider 
a decade ago, is another who is stumped for an answer. ``The stuff 
we're talking about now cannot be traced in blood or urine,'' he said. 
``So there's no instant solution. We have to keep searching.'' Like 
so many others, de Rooy is also defensive. ``We're trying to solve 
problems for the whole sports world,'' he said. ``Are there no problems 
in other sports? We're on the firing line, as always cycling is. We 
are the sport that started drug testing, that started blood controls. 
We're starting a whole new system of a health-maintenance book on 
every rider next year. If you think that sports in general can be 
or must be the purest form of entertainment while the whole world 
is rotten _ that's utopia.'' Rabobank has not come under suspicion. 
As De Rooy pointed out, the standard contract says that any rider 
who fails a drug test will be fired. The Cofidis team in France has 
an identical clause in its contracts. When Francesco Casagrande, the 
team's leader, was reported to have failed two medical tests because 
of an excess of the male hormone testosterone in his blood this spring, 
he was told by the team not to race further this season. Casagrande 
was sentenced to a six-month suspension by his Italian federation 
last month, a few weeks after he won the esteemed San Sebastian Classic. 
His victory stands since he passed the medical inspection in that 
race. According to the rules of the sport, a rider is permitted to 
continue competing while he appeals a positive finding _ often a matter 
of several months. Christophe Moreau, a French rider with Festina, 
was allowed to ride in the Tour de France this summer, for example, 
after he tested positive in a race in March; he dropped his appeal 
only last month after he was also implicated in the Festina Affair. 
Those are the rules, as enforced by national federations under the 
International Cycling Union, the guiding body of the sport and a subject 
of general derision. Mention of its name _ it is known as the UCI 
from its initials in French _ is usually met with a smile and a shrug. 
``I love the UCI,'' said one rider mockingly. ``They're all afraid 
of lawsuits. That's the main goal: Let's not get sued today.'' Hein 
Verbruggen, the president of the UCI, admitted as much this week when 
he tried to explain why his group had reduced the suspension of three 
Swiss riders for Festina from eight months to seven. Verbruggen conceded 
that the International Olympic Committee advocates a two-year suspension, 
but, he noted, ``a ban for two years for a rider means a ban for life.'' 
Such a sanction, he added, could lead to costly legal battles. Verbruggen 
made no friends among the riders when he continued to attend a UCI 
conference in Havana as the Festina Affair became public, then merely 
dropped in on the Tour before spending the rest of July in India on 
vacation. Nor did he impress anybody with his most draconian ruling 
of the fall: He told Laurent Jalabert, the Frenchman who ranks first 
among the riders, that unless he apologized for describing the UCI 
as a dictatorship and its officials as half Draculas and half neo-Nazis, 
he could not ride in the world championships. Jalabert, who was weary 
at the end of the season and dubious about representing France, declined 
to ride. So Sunday's road race will be conducted without Jalabert, 
Laurent Dufaux, Armin Meier and Alex Zulle, the three Swiss riders. 
Laurent Brochard, the defending world champion, will not be there 
since he faces charges in the Festina Affair. Richard Virenque, another 
Festina star, will also be absent although he continues to deny his 
guilt despite public testimony by his masseur that he took illegal 
drugs. Under the rules, however, Brochard and Virenque are still appearing 
in other races. And their sponsor, Festina, reported that the scandal 
had a positive effect on sales of its watches and that it would pay 
the team's $5 million expenses again next year. TVM, a Dutch team 
sponsored by an insurance company, will also continue to be supported 
next season although its directeur sportif has not been allowed to 
leave France since July. For their own legal protection, TVM riders 
no longer appear in races in France. The only team that appears to 
have lost sponsor support is Casino, a French team that is ranked 
second in the world. Its $5 million budget was cut in half for next 
season when the supermarket chain decided there was nothing positive 
in the photos of Rodolfo Massi, the Tour's king of the mountains, 
being taken to jail on charges of using and distributing drugs. ``Next 
year will be a rebuilding season,'' said Vincent Lavenu, the team's 
directeur sportif. ``We're losing a lot of riders. The Festina Affair 
shook our sponsor. It will probably withdraw completely in a while. 
The doping obviously wasn't good for us, but life goes on.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>