<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0118 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Throughout Thursday's impeachment debate in the House you could hear 
the uncharacteristically low-keyed voice of the GOP's chief inquisitor. 
``The gentleman from Missouri is recognized for three minutes,'' Newt 
Gingrich would say. Or he would rap his speaker's gavel for quiet 
and ask, oh so formally and respectfully, ``Does the gentleman move 
the previous question?'' Every now and then he would smile hideously, 
reminding us that hypocrisy is as abundant in Washington as fertilizer 
on the farm. It was, frankly, chilling. Newt Gingrich presiding over 
the possible impeachment of a Democratic president, even one as spectacularly 
vulnerable as Bill Clinton, is insane. This is the same Newt Gingrich 
who several years ago told a group of young Republicans: ``I think 
one of the great problems we have in the Republican Party is that 
we don't encourage you to be nasty. We encourage you to be neat, obedient 
and loyal and faithful and all those Boy Scout words, which would 
be great around the campfire but are lousy in politics.'' The Republican 
Party, refashioned by Gingrich and his right-wing cronies, no longer 
has that problem. Since winning control of Congress in 1994, it has 
consistently pursued a mean-spirited extremist agenda and is now determined 
to turn the self-inflicted wounds of Bill Clinton into an even larger 
majority. Try to imagine the implications of a bigger, more powerful, 
more aggressive, more right-wing regime of Republicans in Congress. 
This is a party that is not content with trying to roll back abortion 
rights. It is fighting on several fronts against contraception. Just 
last week the Republican leadership in the House, under pressure from 
the right, killed a measure that would have required federal health 
plans that cover prescription drugs to cover the cost of contraceptives. 
No one seemed to think it was crazy to have abortion foes opposing 
a measure that would reduce the need for abortions. This is a party 
that tried to eliminate federal nutrition standards for school meals 
and fought hard against a meat inspection system designed to protect 
the public from the deadly E. coli bacteria. It's a party that attacked 
Medicare and Medicaid and went out of its way to trash the environment. 
Clean air? Clean water? Forget about it. Rep. Tom DeLay of Texas, 
the majority whip and a sharp critic of Clinton, denounced the Environmental 
Protection Agency as the ``Gestapo of the government.'' You want ethics? 
Pull the clips on Gingrich and learn how not to behave. Or check out 
John Boehner of Ohio, chairman of the House Republican Conference. 
I wrote a column in 1996 describing how he took money from tobacco 
lobbyists and handed it out to certain of his colleagues on the floor 
of the House, while the House was in session. These are men who couldn't 
find the high road if they approached it by parachute. There is no 
doubt that Bill Clinton brought his problems on himself. He destroyed 
his own presidency. But there are consequences to be paid if the Republicans 
are allowed to feast too ravenously on the political spoils. Democrats 
have already lost the opportunity to control the campaign season with 
discussions of such issues as the rights of patients in the era of 
managed care, the need to move boldly to rebuild the public school 
system, the concerns of working Americans in a chaotic economic environment 
and the outlook for Social Security. Having been handed the gift of 
Monica Lewinsky, the Republicans are running with her. She conceals 
their real agenda. If they can parlay the Monica madness into substantially 
increased majorities in the House and Senate, they can renew their 
conservative assault on government and their subversion of the interests 
of ordinary working Americans and the poor. Keep in mind that this 
is a party that crafted extraordinary tax breaks for billionaires 
while claiming the sky would fall if the minimum wage was raised to 
$5.25 an hour. Bill Clinton and the Democrats fended off the most 
extreme aspects of the so-called Republican revolution of the mid-'90s. 
Now Clinton has given the right-wingers the opportunity to take care 
of their unfinished business. Only the voters stand in the way. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>