<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0158 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is no question that voters are upset here in Washington, a state 
that has been a particularly accurate electoral bellwether in recent 
years. It broadly backed President Clinton and congressional Democrats 
in 1992, turned to Republicans with spectacular vengeance in 1994, 
then returned to Clinton in 1996. Now, in 1998, the state's voters 
are again distressed over events in Washington, D.C., where the House 
of Representatives has decided to begin a historic inquiry that could 
lead to the president's impeachment. But three and a half weeks before 
election day, it is also clear that many voters are not at all sure 
where to direct their anger _ and thus whether they will do so in 
any distinct fashion in the voting booth. ``I wish they'd take the 
whole bunch _ Clinton, that woman, Ken Starr, the Republicans in Congress, 
the media _ I wish they'd take the bunch, put them on the Queen Mary, 
tow it away and sink the whole thing at sea,'' said William H. Stout, 
a retired machine operator in this Columbia River port town. ``But 
no, I can't really tell you who I blame the most for how out of control 
this thing has gotten.'' Frances Rheaume, a 55-year-old nurse at St. 
John Hospital here, was also embittered by the scandal but perplexed 
about where to pin the blame. ``Democrats and Republicans both, they're 
having their little soap opera over there, and it's costing me $40 
million and counting,'' she said. ``It really makes me furious.'' 
Precisely because of this uncertainty, many political experts here 
detect a great degree of volatility in the electorate, just as Congress 
is recessing and campaigns are kicking into high gear. The impeachment 
issue could possibly congeal as a major factor in the final weeks, 
they say, perhaps affecting turnout. But it could just as possibly 
become a curious non-factor in the elections _ a major matter on people's 
minds, to be sure, but not one that they will translate into a reason 
to punish one party or another. ``The whole sense of anger out there 
is very real, but it's also like a heat-seeking missile that's missing 
a target,'' said Robert Gogerty, a Seattle-based political consultant 
who usually works for Democrats but is not involved in any state races 
this year. ``It's really complicated, and people don't quite know 
who to blame. But if they do lock onto something in these next few 
weeks, God help the target.'' Gogerty and many of the candidates running 
this year also agree that in a very general way, 1994 represented 
a referendum of sorts on Bill Clinton (even though he was not on the 
ballot), while 1996's congressional elections represented a referendum 
on House Speaker Newt Gingrich and his fellow Republicans' handling 
of their first majority in Congress in 40 years. But the 1998 elections, 
they say, are not necessarily being seen by voters as any sort of 
referendum on whether the president should be impeached. For one thing, 
none of the forces that seem to inspire the most ire among dozens 
of voters interviewed here _ Clinton, Kenneth Starr and his team of 
prosecutors, the news media, even Monica Lewinsky _ are on any ballot 
in any congressional election in the country. It is still possible 
that people could train their sights on the Republicans who control 
Congress, who were broadly seen as inclined to push for the president's 
removal, or the Democrats, viewed as more lenient. And there are candidates 
of both parties trying to seize such ground: in at least four races 
in the state involving congressional incumbents, the challengers _ 
two from each major party _ are urging voters to send a message about 
the impeachment matter by voting for them. Ron Taber, the Republican 
challenger to Rep. Adam Smith, a Democrat, said a vote for him would 
send a message that the president should be made to pay for ``illegal 
and immoral deeds.'' Jay Inslee, a former Democratic representative 
running against Rep. Rick White, a Republican, said that he would 
work to bring the whole matter to a close and let Congress focus on 
other issues. But many other candidates said that they saw no evidence 
the inquiry was a ``swing issue'' among voters, and that they were 
not pushing it on the campaign trail. ``I think this race is and should 
be and will be about local issues,'' said Brian Baird, the Democratic 
candidate for an open seat in the state's third congressional district, 
which covers much of southwest Washington, from the fast-growing, 
white-collar and Republican-leaning suburb of Vancouver, Wash., to 
more traditionally Democratic, working-class strongholds like Longview. 
Neither Baird, a psychology professor at Pacific Lutheran University 
in Olympia, nor his Republican opponent, state Sen. Don Benton, have 
made the impeachment inquiry an overt issue in the campaign, though 
they acknowledge that voters care about the matter. ``What I'm hearing 
from people is that there's shame enough and blame enough to go around,'' 
said Baird, who came within 887 votes two years ago of defeating the 
Republican incumbent, Linda Smith, who is now giving up the seat to 
run for the U.S. Senate. ``They're disappointed in the president,'' 
Baird added. ``They're angry at Kenneth Starr. They're upset with 
the Congress. They're frustrated with the media. But I don't think 
it all points in a particular direction.'' Benton, who said he had 
not read ``one whit of the Starr report'' because he had been so busy 
campaigning, said he did not raise the issue of impeachment proceedings 
in his standard pitch to voters, though he did say it could be a factor 
in his and other races. ``I think it's very relevant,'' said Benton, 
``not that particular case per se, but it has certainly brought the 
issue of morality and integrity and honesty of our public servants 
more to the forefront.'' One distinct possibility, of course, is that 
many disaffected voters will simply stay home. In 1994, many traditionally 
Democratic voters did so, a critical factor in the Republicans' stunning 
success here. But turnout was by no means close to historic lows in 
the recent round of primary balloting in Washington. And with several 
controversial initiatives and a closely fought Senate race between 
Ms. Smith and Patty Murray, the incumbent Democrat, on November's 
ballot, most political observers here doubt that turnout will be as 
low as it was in 1994, when 51 percent of registered voters went to 
the polls. John Kornbrust, a 32-year-old truck driver in Longview, 
said that he voted for Clinton in 1992, ``didn't get around to voting'' 
in 1994, probably because he felt vaguely disillusioned with the president 
at the time, then did turn out in 1996 for Clinton again because he 
felt the Republican-controlled Congress was not interested in looking 
out for working-class people like him. ``Oh, I'll vote this year,'' 
Kornbrust said. ``I think it's important.'' He said that he had not 
made up his mind on either the Senate contest or the local congressional 
race, but that Clinton's personal conduct and the impeachment proceedings 
were not a factor. ``To me it basically comes down to the same old 
thing it always does,'' he said. ``With Republicans, you'll probably 
get your taxes cut and they'll stop at least some of the giveaways, 
but then they'll nail you on stuff like Social Security and health 
care,'' programs he thought Democrats were more likely to protect. 
Indeed, some of the dynamic he outlined is clearly present in the 
congressional race. Benton promotes himself as a champion of smaller 
government and tax cuts while Baird promises that he will fight to 
protect programs like Social Security and to improve education. Voters 
in Washington state have zigzagged in recent elections in a way that 
reflects the national electorate. In 1992, voters here backed Clinton 
and returned their traditional Democratic majority in the state's 
congressional delegation. In 1994, though, they turned on Democrats, 
booting House Speaker Thomas Foley out of office and handing seven 
of the nine congressional seats to Republicans, the biggest such switch 
of any state. But in 1996, just as in the country at large, they backed 
Clinton for re-election and gave Republicans a diminished majority, 
as one of the state's seats switched back to the Democrats and two 
others nearly did. This time around, many voters in the third congressional 
district said they would be satisfied to continue with a Clinton presidency 
and a Republican-controlled Congress. ``What I see right now looks 
pretty good,'' said Byam Youngman, a medical-equipment dealer in Vancouver. 
``They're balancing the budget. There's a surplus, probably a tax 
cut. I guess the president gets some of the credit for that, just 
because he's the president, but I think the Congress is mostly responsible 
for the good things happening.'' But others said the president's conduct 
weighed on their minds. ``I was brought up in a Democratic family, 
and a lot of my relatives would still vote for Jack the Ripper if 
he was the Democratic candidate on the ballot,'' said Pat Taylor, 
a 50-year-old glassware dealer from the town of Pe Ell. ``But I don't 
think we should just say forget it, let the president get away with 
it, which is what I think Democrats want to do. I listened to Ross 
Perot the other night, and he's right _ what kind of message is that 
sending to our kids?'' And, said Tom Bert, a Longview contractor still 
making up his mind about the elections, ``I guess I'm in a situation 
where, depending what happens, if a vote for the Republicans is a 
vote against what the president has done, I probably would do that.'' 
But Judy Broxton, 45, the manager of a Longview tile company, said 
she would be a firm Democratic vote this year, in part because she 
thought party leaders would press for a ``somewhat quicker resolution'' 
of the Clinton matter. ``It's just dirty pool, the way the Republicans 
are making too much out of all this,'' Ms. Broxton said. ``They went 
too far, way too far, and all it's done is hurt the United States. 
This process makes us look bad.'' Candy Kennedy, 42, a welder and 
construction worker who usually votes Democratic but passed on voting 
at all in 1994, said she thought the Republicans were behaving ridiculously 
by going after the president. ``Obviously this is between him and 
Hillary, and if I were Hillary I'd slap him silly,'' she said. ``But 
it's not the Republicans' business to be slapping him silly over this.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>