<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0137 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a decision that could seriously undercut the Justice Department's 
campaign finance prosecutions, a federal judge has ruled that the 
department misinterpreted election laws that restrict contributions 
by foreign nationals. The ruling, issued Friday by Judge Paul Friedman 
of U.S. District Court, appeared to threaten the department's effort 
to investigate fund-raisers, Democratic Party officials and White 
House aides for their role in soliciting millions of dollars from 
overseas contributors in the 1996 election campaign. Friedman's order 
came as part of the pretrial skirmishing in the case of Yah Lin Trie, 
a former Little Rock restaurateur and longtime friend of President 
Clinton who became an important Democratic fund-raiser and brought 
in hundreds of thousand of dollars, much of it, congressional investigators 
say, from his business contacts in Asia. In his ruling, Friedman found 
that the law, which bars foreign nationals from contributing to federal 
elections, applies only to hard money contributions. These are regulated 
by federal election law and can be used to finance campaign activities 
that directly benefit candidates for federal office. The judge found 
that the contribution law permits foreign nationals to make donations 
known as soft money, which is money that cannot be spent on behalf 
of candidates like hard money, but may be spent on generic party activities, 
like paying for state party efforts or advertisements focused on issues. 
Friedman wrote that the government argued that the federal limit on 
foreign contributions ``applies to soft money donations as well as 
to hard money contributions.'' But the judge added, ``The court disagrees.'' 
He concluded that ``the statute does not on its face therefore proscribe 
soft money donations by foreign nationals or anyone else.'' The judge 
did not dismiss any counts related to soft money, but said that the 
government would be required to prove in Trie's trial, scheduled to 
begin on Feb. 1, that overseas contributions were deposited into hard 
money accounts. His decision suggested that prosecutors would also 
be forced to prove that fund-raisers who solicited the contributions 
knew that the donations would be divided between soft and hard accounts, 
a potentially insurmountable hurdle. A Justice Department spokesman 
said Saturday that lawyers were considering an appeal of the decision, 
which was first reported Saturday by The Washington Post. Friedman's 
order was the second ruling in a month to attack the government's 
approach. Earlier, Friedman dismissed five of six counts against another 
Democratic fund-raiser, Maria Hsia, accusing the government of an 
``Alice in Wonderland'' interpretation of the law because of an indictment 
charging her with causing campaign committees to make false statements. 
Friedman also dismissed three similar counts against Trie. Taken together, 
Friedman's rulings in the Trie and Hsia cases represent a potentially 
serious judicial setback for the Justice Department. The judge's order 
could affect other pending cases like one against Pauline Kanchanalak, 
a Thai entrepreneur who has been accused of bringing in nearly $700,000 
in possibly suspect donations to the Democrats. More broadly, the 
rulings underscore the difficulty confronting prosecutors in trying 
to bring criminal cases using election laws that the judge has said 
were intentionally engineered by Congress to be weak and permit the 
kind of excesses at the heart of the campaign finance case. Justice 
Department officials said they were feeling trapped between Friedman 
and Republicans in Congress, who have assailed Attorney General Janet 
Reno, not for bringing legally flawed cases, but for failing to aggressively 
prosecute cases involving higher-ups at the Democratic Party and the 
White House and for her refusal to ask an independent prosecutor to 
take over the inquiry. Trie seemed to typify the kind of fund-raiser 
that Republicans said corrupted Democratic fund-raising. When questions 
about the source of his contributions surfaced after the election, 
the Democratic National Committee returned $645,000 that Trie raised, 
concluding that the money came from questionable or possibly illegal 
overseas sources. Clinton's legal defense fund also returned $640,000 
contributed by Trie. In January, Justice Department prosecutors obtained 
a 14-count indictment against Trie, accusing him of illegally making 
contributions reimbursed by wealthy overseas donors, setting up fictitious 
donors who made contributions financed by overseas nationals and conspiring 
to conceal the identities of donors. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>