<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0082 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1966, Willie Bies Jr. became a police officer in this university 
city, assigned to the poor black neighborhood on the west side where 
patrol cars were often pelted with rocks. He did such a good job that 
the police chief made him the training officer who taught rookies 
the ropes. In 1991, Bies, then a corporal, retired, becoming one of 
only two Tuscaloosa police officers to work for 25 years without getting 
a pension. Like the other officer, Herbert Harris, Bies is black. 
Since 1968, which was when, the two officers said, they realized that 
they were being excluded from the pension plan, they have pleaded 
their case with every public official who would give them an audience 
as well as sued the city, all to no avail. The board of the Tuscaloosa 
Police and Firemen's Pension Fund, which is controlled by white officers 
and firefighters, has argued in court papers that the Bies and Harris 
are not entitled to pensions because they did not make contributions 
to the pension plan. Instead, the two paid Social Security taxes, 
from which other officers were exempt. Members of the pension board 
and their lawyer declined to comment. The case of the two officers' 
fight for police pensions illustrates how a third of a century after 
the civil rights movement extended equal treatment under the law to 
all Americans, people employed under the rules of the segregationist 
South are still battling for justice. Many cities in the South classified 
laborers, or ``outdoor workers,'' as temporary employees, letting 
them go for one month each year. So these workers, most of whom were 
black, have been legally denied pensions, said Richard Seymour, who 
directs the employment practice project of the Lawyers Committee for 
Civil Rights Under Law. Hiring temporary and part-time workers to 
avoid paying benefits has again come into fashion and affects all 
ethnic groups. But the practice is under scrutiny from the NAACP Legal 
Defense and Educational Fund Inc., which suspects the practice is 
used to discriminate against some workers on the basis of race, said 
Steve Ralston, a lawyer for the fund. Bies, 62, and Harris, who retired 
in 1992 and died of pancreatic cancer on Sept. 28 at the age of 65, 
both said that when they and two other black men were hired in 1966 
and 1967 they were hired outside the civil service system, but were 
promised that if they completed a year's probation they would have 
permanent jobs with full benefits. (The third officer was dismissed 
after confessing to a robbery. The fourth died two decades ago.) But 
in 1968, Social Security taxes were still being withheld from their 
checks, instead of pension contributions. The rest of the police force 
was exempt from Social Security taxes. Six current and former city 
officials and three local civil rights leaders familiar with the case 
confirmed the two officers' accounts of the hirings. In 1969, a year 
after they started seeking inclusion in the pension plan, the badges 
of all four officers were replaced with badges reading ``special police 
officer.'' Inspector Dan Burroughs, now retired, said recently that 
he hated taking their badges. ``Bies and Harris left my office and 
went back out and did exactly the same work as every other police 
officer _ faced the same dangers,'' Burroughs said. ``And they did 
a fine job.'' In 1973, Bies and Harris sued the city to be given equal 
pay and rank for equal work. In 1975, U.S. District Judge Sam Poynter 
ordered their badges returned. But the judge accepted the city's contention 
that the officers' Social Security benefits would roughly equal the 
value of any police pensions, said Jack Drake, a Tuscaloosa lawyer 
who represented them in that case. Bies and Harris also approached 
local officials for help, including David Andres, a young white lawyer 
who, in 1977, had just been elected the city commissioner for public 
safety. ``What happened to these men is wrong,'' Andres said recently. 
As chairman of the pension fund's board of trustees, he tried to add 
the two men to the plan in 1980, but found white officers were firmly 
opposed. The police and fire chiefs voted with Andres, but the four 
elected representatives of the police officers and firefighters opposed 
the action and the motion failed, 4-3. ``When I told Bies and Harris 
the vote, they couldn't believe it,'' Andres recalled. ``I arranged 
to have another vote, and this time I invited Bies and Harris to the 
meeting, so that they could see for themselves that they were being 
lied to.'' In 1993, new lawyers retained by Bies and Harris brought 
their battle for a pension back to Poynter because, since 1991, the 
pension of a retired officer or firefighter had been worth $1,880 
a month, three times the value of the Social Security benefits that 
neither man was then old enough to collect. The city agreed to give 
both men full police pensions, and Poynter ordered that they be ``retroactively 
placed on the rolls of the Police and Firemen's Pension Fund.'' But 
the judge also ordered both men to pay the pension fund the amount 
that would have been deducted from their paychecks over 25 years, 
even though similar amounts had been withheld for Social Security 
taxes from their checks, but not those of other police officers. Bies 
would have had to pay $36,270 _ a sum equal to his gross pay for a 
year and a half _ when he retired in 1991 without any type of pension. 
But the pension fund challenged the ruling, saying the city had no 
right to settle on its behalf. The judge then voided his ruling. Dan 
Turberville, a lawyer from Birmingham, Ala., who brought the case 
for the two officers, said the pension fund's lawyer, Robert Prince, 
had told him the fund would litigate the case until it drove Turberville's 
firm into bankruptcy, if necessary. The case was not pursued. Prince 
said he was not authorized to comment. The three pension fund trustees 
who could be reached declined to comment. Kay Laumer, a lawyer who 
worked for Turberville at the time, said that in 1993 she took Bies 
and Harris to a meeting with two dozen Tuscaloosa police officers 
in an attempt to settle the matter, only to encounter racial hostility. 
``I felt like I was at a meeting of the Ku Klux Klan,'' she said, 
recalling whispered epithets. ``One of the police officers said, `You 
all got off the garbage truck and that's what you wanted, so what 
are you complaining about?''' Neither Bies nor Harris had worked on 
garbage trucks, though both had been laborers. The case is in the 
hands of Norman Stein, a professor at the University of Alabama Law 
School who runs a federally financed clinic to help people deprived 
of pensions, and Sue Thompson, a Tuscaloosa lawyer who runs a practice 
helping poor people in civil disputes. Ms. Thompson said, ``Nobody 
here wants to deal with the real issue, which is that the city leaders 
and white officers did not think they should have been hired and did 
not believe they should be paid equally because they do not believe 
that they are equal.'' The city, she said, could simply pay the retired 
officers what they would have gotten since they retired, less their 
Social Security benefits and a modest pension for city laborers that 
is paid starting at age 65. Harris said a month before he died that 
he had not received his laborers' pension, either. Ms. Thompson said 
the Harris family should receive the money he should have been paid 
since 1992, plus survivor's benefits. Mayor Alvin DuPont, who calls 
Tuscaloosa ``the most progressive city in Alabama,'' was chairman 
of the pension fund in 1993, when the case was last in federal court. 
When asked recently whether he believed that the two police officers 
had been treated fairly, he said: ``If you put it on a question of 
fairness, well, it's kind of self-incriminating if I say that it isn't 
fair, isn't it? They represented the city real well, those two. To 
get caught in this after they served the city so well is, well, unfortunate. 
So I'd like to see them get something. Yes. Something. They should 
get something.'' All of Tuscaloosa's black officers hired after the 
first four are in the pension plan. There are now about three dozen 
blacks out of 225 officers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>