<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0065 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John David Podesta, the lean, wry roller-coaster enthusiast who senior 
White House aides say is likely to become their next chief of staff, 
keeps an unusual photograph of President Clinton on his office wall. 
It is there, he told a visitor last summer, to remind him of one of 
his failures as deputy chief of staff, his current job. ``I let the 
president of the United States pat a 1,000-pound white tiger,'' he 
said, chortling as he looked up at the shot of Clinton grinning beside 
the beast on a visit to Las Vegas. The tiger did not bite, the Secret 
Service agents took their hands off their pistol butts, and Podesta 
did not have to deliver the message to the first lady that flashed 
through his mind: ``The president's missing a few digits.'' Podesta 
had good reason to kick himself for not intervening. For several years, 
the president's lamented impulse to pat tigers has caused him far 
more heartache than amusement. A lawyer with interests in policy matters 
ranging from the environment to computer privacy, Podesta has found 
himself repeatedly dragged back to a damage-control post. He has led 
efforts to defend the president against accusations over the Whitewater 
land deal, dismissals at the White House travel office and, most recently, 
Monica Lewinsky. One of his rewards was to be lied to by the president 
about Ms. Lewinsky more thoroughly than any other aide, judging from 
grand jury testimony disclosed recently. Another reward, senior White 
House officials say, will be to replace his boss, Erskine Bowles, 
when Bowles steps aside in the next couple of weeks. Podesta, 49, 
will have the task of energizing an administration rocked by an impeachment 
inquiry. Some commentators have argued that the president should hire 
an eminent Democratic wise man _ provided he can find and persuade 
one _ to serve in a senior post, to bring dignity and maturity to 
a tarnished White House. For example, when Ronald Reagan was struggling 
to contain the arms-for-hostages inquiry known as Iran-contra, he 
hired former Sen. Howard Baker as his chief of staff. But even some 
critics of the White House call Podesta as good a choice as any. ``In 
all honesty, I think John's just as heavyweight as any of them,'' 
said Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, who got to know Podesta when he was 
minority counsel to the Senate Judiciary Committee, from 1981 to 1986. 
``They'd be stupid not to put him in there, because he's got all the 
ability in the world. He's a very loyal, dedicated man.'' Some White 
House aides acknowledged that hiring an outsider might be good public 
relations. But several said that Podesta was popular with the staff, 
substantively equipped for the job and not in need of on-the-job training. 
``I can't think of a job here he couldn't do,'' said Douglas Sosnik, 
the White House counselor, ``and I can't think of anybody else I could 
say that about.'' He added with a laugh, ``I hope he thinks well of 
me for saying that.'' White House officials cautioned that Clinton 
had made no final decision about his next chief of staff. With some 
exasperation, one aide said the president did not like to make up 
his mind about personnel matters until he found himself in the Rose 
Garden standing beside his new appointee. But several senior officials 
said they had heard no names mentioned besides Podesta's. Clinton 
in recent years has promoted only people he knew well and trusted 
into senior White House posts. ``That's what the president needs more 
than anything, a known quantity,'' said Leon Panetta, the former chief 
of staff. No one has quit the White House or the administration over 
the president's affair with Ms. Lewinsky or his lies to his staff 
and the public. Yet the White House staff is going through an abrupt 
transformation, which Podesta will have to smooth. Mike McCurry, the 
former press secretary and public face of the administration for three 
years, left last week; Rahm Emanuel, one of the president's senior 
advisers and a scarred, seven-year veteran of the Clinton wars, is 
planning to leave this month, and Bowles, whom the president has called 
his closest friend in the White House, is making his long-desired 
return to North Carolina, possibly to run for governor. At the same 
time, Clinton has brought in several new aides to protect him from 
impeachment. White House aides call the turnover normal, a result 
of burnout from 16-hour days and six-day weeks. ``You've got a pretty 
worn-out group of people,'' a senior White House aide said. ``We need 
some new blood in here; we need some energy in here.'' Podesta has 
served two tours in this White House, first as staff secretary during 
the first term and then as a deputy to Bowles. In between, he was 
a law professor at Georgetown University, where he still teaches a 
class during the summer on congressional investigations. From his 
years on Capitol Hill, Podesta has solid ties to Democrats and Republicans, 
particularly in the Senate. With some White House aides, said Sen. 
Patrick Leahy, D-Vt., ``you almost count your fingers after they left, 
if you shook hands with them.'' But, he said, ``everybody who's ever 
dealt with John is left feeling that he treated them honestly.'' Leahy 
predicted that Podesta ``will be more directly involved with us on 
strategy than we've seen since Leon,'' a reference to Panetta, who 
is a former congressman. Podesta declined to comment, except to say, 
``In response to my unavailability to deal with this profile, I've 
discovered that the secret to having good press relations is to have 
no press relations.'' Unlike anyone else in the White House, including 
Podesta, Bowles has cultivated a respectful relationship with Speaker 
Newt Gingrich. But White House aides said they were far more worried 
about currying favor among House Democrats. Steven Elmendorf, chief 
of staff to the House minority leader, Rep. Dick Gephardt, D-Mo., 
said Podesta was unlikely to establish the kind of relationship with 
the speaker that Bowles had. ``From our perspective, that's fine,'' 
Gephardt said. ``We'd prefer that deals not be cut with these people.'' 
Unlike Bowles, Podesta is not a close friend or golfing buddy of the 
president, whom he met in 1970. During one of his three trips to the 
grand jury here, Podesta said that he had a ``close relationship'' 
with Clinton, but that ``mostly I deal with him in a professional 
way.'' Podesta, his associates say, is inspired to work at the White 
House out of commitment to the president's goals rather than out of 
personal affection. As a result, they say, he was less upset about 
the president's lies than some who were closer personally to Clinton. 
Podesta testified that, shortly after the Lewinsky furor broke, the 
president assured him during a talk in his private study that ``he 
had never had sex with her in any way whatsoever,'' including orally. 
Where Bowles, a Southerner, is warm and seemingly open, Podesta, a 
Chicagoan, is more reserved, with a bone-dry and at times astringent 
wit. Aides who do not know him well can have trouble understanding 
his shorthand instructions. Some people, one White House adviser said, 
``don't understand him, can't relate to him or can't break the code 
and get through.'' In fact, White House advisers, including Bowles, 
like to joke that Podesta is two people: his pleasant, mild-mannered 
self and a dark, evil twin, whom they call Skippy. It is Skippy, they 
say, who icily dresses down underlings for shoddy work. But it is 
also a measure of how comfortable his colleagues are with both versions 
of Podesta that they are so willing to joke about Skippy. Emanuel 
declined to comment about Podesta for this article, saying, ``I'm 
waiting for the profiles on Skippy.'' Podesta, who has been at the 
heart of what critics regard as a White House conspiracy to obstruct 
justice, is himself a devotee of conspiracy theories. He maintains 
what he calls a ``shrine'' in his office of books, magazines and photographs 
related to the ``X Files,'' near a book about his beloved roller coasters, 
``Roller Coasters of America.'' ``Where else but the White House would 
someone grab onto the `X Files' in a desperate attempt to cling to 
reality?'' he asked in a commencement address last June at his alma 
mater, Knox College. In his three appearances before the grand jury, 
Podesta referred several times to the ``X Files.'' At one point, he 
was asked if he was ``the same John David Podesta who testified in 
front of us last week.'' After some brief byplay, he replied, ``Was 
that a trick question?'' He added that he had seen the ``X Files'' 
over the weekend, and as a result was not certain of the answer. With 
glee evident even in the transcript, Podesta testified about the conspiracy 
theories of a senior White House communications aide, Sidney Blumenthal. 
He said Blumenthal had noticed reports that Air Force One occasionally 
vanished from air traffic radar screens, usually shortly before a 
claim of alien abduction. So, he told the grand jurors, ``We have 
a new theory or a new defense that this whole matter is somehow linked 
to alien abductions.'' He added that, while he could never be sure, 
he thought Blumenthal was just kidding. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>