<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0122 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
State health insurance regulators are reporting surging numbers of 
formal complaints from patients and doctors against health insurers, 
primarily health maintenance organizations. They say they doubt that 
the rise implies a deterioration in care. They tie much of it to greater 
public readiness to fight HMOs and to the insurance commissioners' 
efforts to encourage people to file complaints. ``We are beating the 
bushes,'' said Neil Levin, New York state's insurance superintendent. 
What troubles the commissioners more than the volume of complaints 
is a broad shift in the nature of them. Disputes with insurers have 
changed from conflicts over who should pay for care, usually after 
it has been provided, to conflicts over denials and delay of care 
and over medication and forms of treatment. ``Before it was about 
who pays,'' said Patricia Butler of Boulder, Colo., a health care 
analyst and consultant to insurance commissioners. ``Now it's about 
whether you get the service at all. You might have your health hanging 
in the balance, so it's a little more frightening.'' Commissioners 
say the formal complaints represent possible violations of law and 
health-plan provisions, and are culled from many more trivial and 
unsupportable claims. Depending on the state, 40 percent to 80 percent 
of the complaints are resolved in favor of the patient or the physician. 
No one records national trends in the number of complaints, but the 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners predicts that 35,000 
will be filed by the end of this year. In interviews with 12 insurance 
departments of mostly populous states with dense concentrations of 
managed care, those of New York, Connecticut, Illinois, Texas, Ohio 
and Maryland said complaints had grown at least 50 percent over the 
last one to three years, far faster than the growth of enrollment 
in managed care plans. Only one state, Minnesota, reported a decline; 
other states with increases included Arizona, Florida, New Hampshire, 
Oregon and Washington. New York reported a sixfold increase in claims 
against managed care organizations from 1996 through September of 
this year. It said that 76 percent of the 20,089 claims filed over 
the period had been settled in favor of the consumers and doctors 
bringing them. Levin ascribed much of the increase to the travails 
of one leading HMO, Oxford Health Plans, and to fee disputes with 
physicians. In Texas, complaints from consumers have been climbing 
for several years, to 846 in 1996 from 131 in 1993. In the fiscal 
year ended in August, the number leaped to 4,914, largely because 
of a new law allowing complaints by physicians. Insurance industry 
executives say that in spite of the rise, independent surveys regularly 
show that 80 percent to 90 percent of managed care organizations' 
enrollees are satisfied with their care, a figure that has changed 
little over the last decade. ``It's way too simplistic to equate'' 
the rise in complaints with the quality of care and reach the conclusion, 
```Aha! Things are getting worse,''' said Bill Pierce, spokesman for 
the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, which represents 55 organizations 
that sell both managed care and fee-for-service plans. And as enrollees 
become accustomed to HMOs, he said, they find less to complain about. 
Pierce said candidates for state and federal office had fanned public 
fears of HMOs. Charles Kahn, chief operating officer of the Health 
Insurance Association of America, said that 35,000 complaints a year 
from the 77 million enrollees whose insurance is subject to state 
regulation was not a large number. ``You should have zero tolerance 
for problems,'' he said. ``Inevitably there are going to be some.'' 
That 80 percent of managed care enrollees are satisfied with their 
care obscures the views of a less satisfied 10 percent or 15 percent 
who make much use of the organizations, said Karen Pollitz, an analyst 
at the Institute for Health Care Research and Policy at Georgetown 
University. ``In any health plan,'' Ms. Pollitz said, ``the vast majority 
are healthy and are not using the services.'' Commissioners add that 
dwelling on the number of complaints masks an issue they say is more 
ominous: the changing nature of complaints. Kansas, for instance, 
had only 145 complaints through September. ``But I'm not sure numbers 
are the best indicator,'' the state insurance commissioner, Kathleen 
Sebelius, said. ``A mother called us,'' Ms. Sebelius said. ``Her 15-year-old 
son had attempted suicide and was going to be released from the hospital 
in 24 hours. She was absolutely frantic. ``She was afraid he'd be 
dead if he were released. We got him permission to stay an additional 
week with extra evaluation and to have a plan in place prior to any 
release.'' Charles Blossom, New Hampshire's insurance commissioner, 
cited a woman who had had a mastectomy under a fee-for-service plan. 
After switching to an HMO, she needed another mastectomy, but was 
not allowed to see the same doctor. ``We got involved and they permitted 
it,'' Blossom said. In Oregon, which reports a comparatively small 
17 percent increase in complaints from 1996 to 1997, Joel Ario, consumer 
protection manager for the Oregon Insurance Division, sees two forces 
at work. ``There are more genuine problems in the marketplace,'' he 
said, and ``people are more aware of us.'' Many insurance commissions 
have installed consumer hot lines and many have put complaint forms 
on their Web pages. Some publish ``report cards,'' disclosing HMO 
accreditation levels, levels of patient satisfaction and details of 
charges and services. ``The public is learning to use the system,'' 
said Kip May, deputy director of the Ohio insurance department. Through 
August, 17 states had also opened a new channel for complaints in 
creating courts of third-party review _ nonpartisan arbitrators, unaffiliated 
with the industry. Commissioners also report wide variations in complaints 
from company to company. Using ratios of complaints and plan enrollments 
to permit fair comparisons, the Texas Department of Insurance reports 
that last year, Foundation Health received three times the complaints 
brought against Cigna Healthcare and 10 times those against the Kaiser 
Foundation Health Plan. Some small HMOs had no recorded complaints. 
One striking exception to the surge in complaints is Minnesota, which 
has had HMOs for more than two decades. After years of tight regulation, 
complaints have dropped over the last few years to 600 or 700, from 
an average of 1,300 a year in the late 1980s, said Kent Peterson, 
director for managed care systems in the Department of Health. ``Every 
member has had the phone number of this office on their membership 
card for 10 years,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>