<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0136 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Sunday, Oct. 11: The world's 
economic situation is perilous, and there is little doubt that there 
will be pain and suffering in many countries during the next few years. 
But the problems need not lead to world recession, let alone depression. 
With time and wisdom, the problems can be overcome. The gathering 
in Washington of the world's financial leaders last week proved to 
be long on alarming rhetoric and short on action. The dismal forecasts 
contrasted sharply with what the visiting central bankers and finance 
ministers could see around them in a prosperous country where it is 
lies, not layoffs, that dominate the news. But the United States is 
beginning to feel effects of the Asian collapse, particularly in manufacturing, 
and has reason to worry as Latin American economies are damaged by 
high interest rates imposed to slow the exodus of foreign investors. 
Similarly, Western Europe's export-led growth is threatened. It is 
easy _ and partly correct _ to blame market excesses for the problem. 
Investors poured money into emerging markets with little concern for 
risk, and then fled when the Asian crisis and Russia's default led 
to large losses. Only now are we learning the extent that leverage 
_ that is, borrowed money _fueled the great bull market of the 1990s. 
The collapse of John Meriwether's Long-Term Capital hedge fund opened 
eyes, and there are likely to be more surprises, and failures, as 
the leverage is unwound. That means financial markets probably will 
continue to have a bumpy ride, but in some ways this is good news. 
Much of the leverage came from speculators borrowing Japanese yen 
and investing the money in other countries. Now those yen are being 
repaid, pushing up the value of the yen and easing the pressure on 
Asian currencies. While there are no magic wands, and the process 
will be slow, necessary steps to protect the world economy have emerged. 
Pro-growth policies will be needed in Europe and the United States. 
Central banks will have to lower interest rates, and major countries 
may have to cut taxes or raise spending to provide fiscal stimulus. 
Fiscal reforms are required in Latin America, particularly in Brazil. 
Countries that had relied on overseas investors to finance large trade 
and budget deficits must deal with a newly hostile investment climate. 
Adequate resources must be provided for the International Monetary 
Fund. With private capital running scared, the role of public money 
is all the more important. Some of it will be needed to alleviate 
suffering in poor countries. Some countries that have tied their currencies 
to the dollar will have to let them float. There are advantages to 
fixed exchange rates, but over time they can create imbalances that 
lead to big _ and unforeseen _ currency moves that can devastate economies 
and businesses. Finally, Japan, which has fallen into a deep recession, 
must reform its banking system and stimulate its economy. But even 
if Japan makes the necessary changes, it will take years for its financial 
system to recover from a mountain of bad loans, and growth may be 
sluggish. The world will have to get along without a Japanese engine. 
At the same time, there are some policy prescriptions that should 
be avoided. The United States is running a huge trade deficit, as 
exports to Asia fall. There are cries for protectionism, particularly 
in steel and agriculture, that must be resisted. The trade deficit 
is a major reason that the dollar has started to decline, a fall that 
will help to ameliorate the problem over time. A weaker dollar can 
lead to higher reported inflation. If it does, that will not be a 
good reason for the Federal Reserve to back off from trying to stimulate 
the economy. It is deflation, not inflation, that threatens the world 
now, and that will not change until low commodity prices begin to 
move up in a convincing way. It is tempting for countries that have 
been buffeted by international capital flows to adopt capital controls, 
and they conceivably could help by giving a country breathing room. 
But they will work only if the countries involved use the respite 
to pursue good policies. That does not seem to be happening in Malaysia, 
whose government appears more interested in repression than reform. 
There is nothing new about markets going to excess, with bouts of 
unreasoned enthusiasm followed by equally illogical fear. World growth 
in the mid-1990s was pumped up artificially by floods of capital into 
countries and companies that were ill equipped to handle them. Now 
world growth is likely to be held back by fearful investors and by 
stringent credit standards imposed by banks newly concerned about 
the risk of loss. That is unfortunate, but it is something that can 
be dealt with if countries pursue growth-oriented strategies. It is 
obviously true that market failures were a prime cause of the world's 
problems, and improved regulatory mechanisms should be sought. But 
no one should forget the benefits that markets have brought to world 
growth, and will bring again when investor fear subsides. A return 
to allowing governments to allocate capital would be no improvement. 
To paraphrase Winston Churchill, markets are the worst way to allocate 
capital _ except all those other ways that have been tried from time 
to time. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>