<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0055 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The first clue was right there on the day our furniture arrived from 
New York. Though I had spent the whole day directing traffic _ the 
couch goes there, the Chinese piece here _ along about 5 p.m. the 
foreman approached me with his clipboard and said ``Where's the boss?'' 
Drunk with the power of being The New York Times' new Johannesburg 
bureau chief, I grinned. ``I'm the boss,'' I said with glee. He looked 
at me blankly. Then, he looked annoyed, really annoyed. ``No,'' he 
said ``I mean the master.'' All he wanted was a signature acknowledging 
that we had received our belongings, but mine would not do. Never 
mind that, technically, the moving company was working for me, that 
every box had my name on it and that my husband's name did not even 
appear on the contract. I shrugged. ``He's in the back,'' I said. 
Getting ready to cover southern Africa, I had shopped for hiking boots 
with perhaps more care than needed. In the small ways that you have 
of trying to brace for huge life changes, I had spent a lot of time 
looking for just the right shoes. But what I really needed was a Wonderbra. 
I had expected snakes, elephants and malaria. I had expected racism, 
bug-filled hotel rooms and the heartbreak of watching children die. 
But the status of women here, the level of sexism, astonished me. 
Some of South Africa's most prominent women, including Ramphela Mamphele, 
who runs the University of Cape Town, argue that sexism is actually 
a bigger problem in Africa than racism. Here a woman is a babe first, 
last and foremost. The better-looking she is, the easier life is. 
At least you get some attention. No wonder most of the other middle-aged 
moms dropping off their darlings at my children's school are in full 
makeup and cleavage by 7:20 a.m. (I no longer get out of the car.) 
Of course, women in many countries, including the United States, have 
to deal with terrible sexism. Japanese women are groped on the subways. 
Some Muslim countries deny women education and make them wear virtual 
tents. But South Africa is in the midst of a social revolution defined 
by its emphasis on equality and has the most liberal constitution 
in the world. Suggest, however, that it is somewhat demeaning to hear 
constant jokes about women as chatterbox shoppers or wily spendthrifts, 
and eyes roll. I must have brought a half-dozen dinner parties to 
an uncomfortable silence before I realized that the indignities of 
being a woman here were not up for discussion among any group _ black, 
white or colored, rich or poor, young or old. A look of, ``Another 
obnoxious American woman'' ran across their faces, like the news zipper 
in Times Square. Resistance to change in the status of women might 
be explained by cultural factors _ whether one grows up as an African, 
whose tribal laws treat women as children, or as a Dutch-descended 
Afrikaner, whose church teaches that men must rule the home. The social 
revolution of the 1960s largely bypassed even South Africans of English 
descent. After all, under the international sanctions of the apartheid 
era, this country spent decades as an isolated, pariah state, and 
didn't even allow television until 1976. At the bank that first week, 
we found there was no such thing as a joint checking account. My husband, 
I was told, could give me permission to use his account, but it would 
carry only his name and he could withdraw that permission at any time 
without notifying me. No one there could understand why I found this 
objectionable. As I arranged for phones and bought office equipment 
every payment form and service contract asked my marital status _ 
and often, they wanted my husband to co-sign. And slowly I came to 
another realization. I was expected to wait. Store clerks routinely 
abandoned helping me when a man walked into the store looking the 
least bit anxious. If I approached a man behind a counter to pay a 
bill and he was talking to a friend of his, I could wait 10 minutes 
for him to take the money. The worst was in airports. At car rental 
counters, men positively glower if they are in a hurry and aren't 
waited on first. Not long ago, I finally confronted the female clerk 
at an Avis counter who had left me in mid-transaction to help a demanding 
Afrikaner male. ``Why did you do that?'' I asked, trying to sound 
gentle. ``I'm in a hurry too, you know.'' ``Well, there is not much 
you can do about these things,'' she said in a tone that suggested 
I was unfairly bothering her. And how's this for a run of humiliations 
in front of your boss, who's here on a visit? First we go to see President 
Nelson Mandela. The brief courtesy visit has been incredibly difficult 
to arrange. But here we are. Ten minutes of chitchat pass. Mandela 
leans over to my boss. ``You know,'' he says to him, pointing at me, 
``in my day, if you had a wife who looked like that, you would be 
embarrassed. In my day, a woman needed a little more meat on her bones.'' 
(Where was that Wonderbra?) The next day was a meeting with the leader 
of the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party, Mangosuthu Buthelezi. My 
husband, Donald G. McNeil Jr., who is also a correspondent in the 
Times bureau, came along. As we were leaving, I tried to give Buthelezi 
my card. He took it without looking and sidled up to Donald. ``I see 
you have a good Zulu wife who carries your cards for you.'' he said. 
Ah, how sweet. They were bonding. At dinner that evening at the house 
of Harry and Bridget Oppenheimer, the country's wealthiest family, 
the servants were clearing dessert when Mrs. Oppenheimer stood: `Ladies,'' 
she said. Everyone else seemed to know _ the ladies were to leave 
the room now so the men could smoke cigars and talk politics. ``But, 
but,'' my boss protested, thinking that as a journalist I shouldn't 
be missing out on talking politics with some of South Africa's most 
powerful executives. ``She's the bureau chief.'' That silence again. 
I meekly followed the other wives out. Early on a black woman journalist 
here complained of the way she was treated and told me that she was 
thinking of having new business cards made up saying she was her paper's 
bureau chief. She thought the disdain for her really had to do with 
being black. But I could match her slight for slight, and my card 
said bureau chief. I can't count the number of times I have been asked 
who is chief correspondent for The New York Times in South Africa 
by men who were holding my business card in their hands. I've asked 
women why they put up with all this. Outside a courtroom recently 
an attractive young reporter was struggling with a soda machine. A 
middle-aged lawyer walked up, stroked the machine and said. ``Oh, 
it's just like a woman: You put in money and it gives you nothing 
back.'' He wanted applause for this amazing wit. She laughed obligingly. 
I wondered how she could stand it, and asked. She agreed the remark 
was demeaning, but objecting outright was too much trouble, she said, 
and besides, he got the machine to give her the Coke. ``I'm just waiting 
for guys like that to die out,'' she said. I marvel at this patience. 
In the meantime, I have learned a few tricks for getting by. One, 
I can wiggle my way out of almost anything with these few words. ``I'll 
have to ask my husband.'' Even got rid of the pushy neighbor who had 
an ``emergency'' and wanted to dig our yard up to find his pipes. 
``Of, course,'' he said with great understanding. In fact, I'm leaning 
on that phrase quite a bit these days. It's so handy. And my husband 
swears that I now wear much tighter shirts. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>