<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0156 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is tempting on meeting Ted and Sherry Scofield to slot them into 
a New York stereotype of the Young Southerners: innocent and naive, 
just arrived in the big city, ready and waiting to be marked by fate. 
But even before moving here, they figured out something many people 
never really understand: It's a waste of time to ask other people 
where to live, because the answers will always be biased. ``Everyone 
is loyal to their neighborhood,'' Scofield said. Instead they set 
out on their own, using Web sites while still living in Nashville, 
Tenn., to figure out which neighborhood, which building and which 
apartment met their non-negotiable list of demands: a lot of space, 
a terrace, and a washer and dryer. They were used to big places, to 
a horizontal life, to a bathroom that was 250 square feet with two 
sinks and a Jacuzzi. So they knew they couldn't just arrive in August, 
when Scofield, after graduating from Vanderbilt University's joint 
program in law and business, would start as an associate at the law 
firm of Orrick, Herrington and Sutcliffe. They came up with a plan, 
which isn't surprising from two people who are happy to say that their 
furniture in New York is arranged just as it was in Nashville. As 
he clicked on sites, Scofield compiled data on sales prices and decided 
it made more sense to buy than rent, partly because he believed from 
charts he developed that prices might still go up, that the peak had 
not yet been reached. After deciding to buy, he became e-mail friends 
with Paul Purcell, the relocation manager at Douglas Elliman, who 
quickly advised them about things like the differences between co-ops 
and condos. Purcell did not think they would be approved by any co-op 
board, Scofield said. ``We have a good income, but nothing in the 
bank,'' he said. Condos, which do not require board approval, became 
their focus. The decision vastly narrowed their search, because condos 
make up a lesser proportion of the available housing. The Scofields 
downloaded market data, floor plans and descriptions of condominium 
buildings. They used general sites, like www.nyrealty.com and www.nyc-condos.com, 
as well as those of individual brokerage companies, like www.elliman.com, 
to help amplify the skimpy and sometimes misleading information they 
said they found in classified ads. Scofield printed out dozens of 
floor plans to examine with his wife. One of the first buildings whose 
plans they liked was Evans Tower, a condo at 171 East 84th St., which 
they eventually chose, because it was relatively near Central Park 
and had a health club, roof deck and pool. Mrs. Scofield, a nurse 
who worked in sports medicine in Nashville and is just beginning her 
job hunt here, likes to run. Their e-mail adviser at Elliman connected 
them with Kerry Martin, a Douglas Elliman broker he believed they 
would like. They had heard stories about ``odd, snippy'' New York 
brokers, but Ms. Martin's charm and helpfulness _ perhaps cultivated 
by some time spent in the South _ proved a pleasant surprise, they 
said. They faxed floor plans back and forth, getting her advice, narrowing 
their list. By spring break, Ms. Martin had two dozen places to show 
them.They liked Evans Tower best, but nothing was available. So they 
kept looking, still using the Internet but conscious of its limitations. 
The Web sites of the brokerage firms were useful for only a general 
overview, they said, because the sites were often out of date. ``You 
couldn't trust them for shopping,'' Scofield said. Finally, just before 
they would have had to choose someplace else, an apartment in Evans 
Tower became available. Like an already-sold unit they had seen, it 
had a large bedroom, plentiful storage, a washer and dryer, a small 
terrace, parquet floors and an L-shaped living room/dining area with 
a galley kitchen. They put in a bid for $342,500 _ just below the 
$345,000 asking price _ without ever seeing it, and signed a contract. 
The monthly total of common charges and taxes is $1,093. Unable to 
get a mortgage from a New York bank for the amount they wanted, they 
turned to National City Bank in Louisville, Ky., which had given Scofield 
a car loan when he was 16. A few hours after taking the New York bar 
exam in August _ he will get the results next month _ and just an 
hour before the closing, Scofield saw the apartment for the first 
time. Fortunately, with a nonrefundable deposit at stake, he liked 
it. But they weren't surprised. ``We trusted Kerry to come over and 
look and say it was good,'' Mrs. Scofield said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>