<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The bloody struggle over the future of Colombia, raging between shadowy 
groups of men and women with masks and false names, is closing in 
on Calamar, a main transit point in the coca trade scratched out of 
the jungle 20 years ago by the refugees of earlier conflicts in this 
stricken country. Many residents have not left the town, less than 
a square mile, in a year. The only road out is controlled by paramilitaries, 
who have established a checkpoint a few miles from the nearest military 
base and charge coca growers and food suppliers simply to get their 
products in and out of town. Residents here fear that checkpoint. 
They fear dying for simply coming from Calamar, which the paramilitaries 
label a rebel support base. In the last year, residents say, more 
than 100 local people have been executed by the paramilitaries. Recently 
an entire family disappeared from that road, first the son, then the 
father who went looking for him, and finally the boy's mother, who 
went searching as well. ``We're calm, but we're all very tense,'' 
said Amparo Gomez, 43, whose family owns a bakery and billiard hall. 
``We're surrounded.'' Patrolling the streets a few hours each day 
and controlling the surrounding forests are rebels of the Revolutionary 
Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, Latin America's oldest and most 
powerful insurgency. The rebels have battered government military 
bases over the last two years, and the newly inaugurated government 
of President Andres Pastrana has pledged to open peace talks with 
them by early November. But the insurgents have vowed to fight on 
until an agreement is reached, and the military is fighting back. 
Just before Pastrana took office in August, the rebels leveled military 
and police counternarcotics bases nearby at Miraflores, killing 40 
police officers and soldiers and abducting 129. This region produces 
65 percent of Colombia's coca. The people of Calamar do not grow coca, 
but their economy depends on it. Trucks laden with gasoline to process 
coca leaves into paste rumble through, pulling over to observe the 
guerrilla-imposed 7 p.m. curfew on road travel each night. Peasants 
come to sell coca paste. Pilots stop to rest and load up for the next 
flight out from a clandestine airstrip, charged $3,000 a time by the 
insurgents. ``We're not the authors of the conflict, but we are its 
victims,'' said Luiz Eduardo Betancourt, the local official responsible 
for denouncing human rights violations by government employees. State 
officials have warned Betancourt that he is on paramilitary hit lists, 
perhaps because of his work. Terror began a year ago, after hundreds 
of paramilitaries invaded the town of Mapiripan, 80 miles northeast 
of here, killing at least 14 people during a five-day siege, according 
to the Colombian Commission of Jurists, a human rights organization 
here. Survivors told government investigators and others that the 
paramilitaries seized peasants they accused of leading protests against 
aerial fumigation of drug crops, torturing and mutilating their victims 
before dumping them into the Guaviare River. The paramilitaries beheaded 
two men and kicked their skulls through the streets, survivors said. 
Two civilians and two lower-ranking officers of the regional antinarcotics 
base have been arrested in connection with the massacre, although 
witnesses said 200 paramilitaries terrorized the town. Carlos Castano, 
leader of the paramilitaries in Colombia, said he regretted only the 
incidents with severed heads. He threatened ``many more Mapiripans.'' 
In May Castano's men massacred 14 peasants in Puerto Alvira, east 
of Mapiripan. Two months ago they appeared just north of Calamar, 
in Guacamaya. Rumor spread that uniformed army and police officers 
were among the paramilitaries. Panic spread. ``They call us auxiliaries, 
but what are we supposed to do?'' said Mrs. Gomez. ``I'm here to sell 
bread. How am I supposed to check if somebody is a guerrilla or not?'' 
Now, any helicopter that passes overhead drives residents to the streets 
with radios, madly tuning to the helicopter's radio frequency to see 
if troops are flying in. Others dash for the forest. Newcomers, seen 
as possible informers for the paramilitaries, are allowed to move 
here only if a local resident vouches for them. In conversation, people 
avoid blaming one side or the other for the terror that circumscribes 
their lives. ``We're talking right now,'' said the Rev. Ramon Giraldo, 
the local parish priest. ``If somebody took us outside and shot us 
dead, nobody would say a word.'' Though heavily armed, the rebels 
appear respectful, paying for purchases and chatting with locals over 
soda. But the commander of the rebel contingent declined to talk to 
a reporter, saying he did not have permission. In a town that has 
long suffered from government neglect, the rebels impose a harsh order. 
They banned commercial fishing in the Guaviare River to replenish 
fish stock, persuaded residents to plant trees in the park and cracked 
down on unruliness. Men no longer get away with killing, beating or 
throwing out their wives, women in the town said. ``People run to 
them to settle every little dispute they have,'' said Giraldo. ``They 
are the authority here.'' Rebel justice can run crude. On one recent 
morning, a pilot waited at the airport for a cadaver he was to transport 
out. The man had resurfaced after killing a neighbor, and was swiftly 
executed by insurgents. Calamar has never been easy. Mrs. Gomez arrived 
25 years ago, when there were no roads and only a tractor could get 
through the rain forest. To sell produce, the entire family would 
trek 30 miles to the state capital, San Jose del Guaviare. ``I had 
one baby in my belly, another on each arm, and one on my back,'' she 
said.``We had nothing, but it was peaceful.'' Mrs. Gomez and her husband, 
Carlos, who had come here after nearly starving elsewhere in Colombia, 
started out planting yucca, corn, rice and other subsistence crops. 
They ventured into coca, but said they failed to make a decent living. 
Still, six years ago, they had enough money to open the bakery and 
buy a few pool tables. ``Do we leave it all now?'' Gomez said. Betancourt's 
family first fled death threats from assassins, then called pajaros, 
or birds, in 1965. They abandoned their small coffee plantation in 
northwestern Colombia, and arrived in Calamar in 1981 after trying, 
and failing, to eke out a living in the next province north, Meta. 
``There were no roads, no schools,'' Betancourt said. ``We started 
to plant coca because that's what people would buy from us.'' Estimates 
of the guerrilla profit on the coca trade vary wildly, from $100 million 
a month to $100 million a year. Around Calamar, paramilitaries and 
insurgents benefit. The paramilitaries charge $1,000 to $1,500 to 
allow trucks bearing coca's precursors past their checkpoint, drivers 
and growers say. Some residents say they feel safer with the insurgents 
nearby to fend off any paramilitary raid. ``We're more vulnerable 
when they think we're weak and unprotected,'' said Carlos Pedrozo, 
an agricultural adviser to local farmers. ``This is a town of people 
who have already been displaced from other areas. Nobody is about 
to run again.'' For all its hardships, Calamar has a feeling of community 
that is hard won in Colombia, and not easily abandoned. Tatiana Rubio, 
a 20-year-old waitress and single mother, arrived here a year ago. 
``People here watch out for each other,'' she said. ``It's not like 
that everywhere.'' Few here trust the military to protect them. The 
central government says it has tried to crack down on military connivance 
with death squads, but most residents here believe the paramilitaries 
include active or retired security officers. ``How else is it that 
you'll have a military checkpoint on one road, and a few hundred meters 
away have a paramilitary roadblock?'' Mrs. Gomez said. ``Why doesn't 
the military shut them down?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>