<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981113.1830.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We begin tonight with Saddam Hussein's search for wiggle 
room. There is every expectation in official Washington tonight that 
the U.S. intends to attack Iraq, perhaps as soon as tomorrow. But 
today, for the first time since the U.S. began to apply the screws, 
the iraqi leader has sent a signal that maybe, just maybe after pushing 
the U.S. to the brink again, he might be ready to talk about it. It 
is classic Saddam Hussein, so we go first to Baghdad and ABC's Sheila 
macVicar. The first hint that Iraq's leader may be looking for a way 
out of this crisis came tonight at a meeting with the Russian ambassador. 
According to the Iraqi news agency, he told the Russian -- Iraq is 
prepared to positively respond to any initiative which would meet 
its just and balanced demands. It is not clear how much of a compromise 
Saddam Hussein is seeking, if any. The Russian ambassador also brought 
a letter from to the Kremlin, warning that force will be used if a 
political solution is not found. Here's the catch. Iraq is also saying 
tonight that the U.S. must commit itself to what it calls a legal 
interpretation of security council resolutions. Resolutions that call 
for a lifting of sanctions after Iraq's prohibited weapons have been 
destroyed. Iraq says it has complied. The U.S. says it has not. Sheila 
MacVicar, ABC News, Baghdad. Saddam Hussein has played this game with 
the United States before, but this time, there isn't much hope that 
diplomacy will resolve very much. ABC's Sam Donaldson is with us from 
the White House tonight. sam. Peter, the administration continued 
its hard line against Iraq today, pushing aside that suggestion from 
Baghdad that perhaps things can be worked out and appeared set on 
a course that could see military action come at any time. President 
Clinton noting Saddam's expulgs of U.N. weapons inspectors repeated 
the message that -- This is unacceptable. None of us can tolerate 
an Iraq free to develop weapons of massive destruction. And Madeleine 
Albright America wants a peaceful said -- outcome that get UNSCOM 
back on the job, but we are prepared to act if that doesn't happen. 
As to Saddam's reported overture for negotiations, White House press 
secretary Joe Lockhart dismissed that out of hand. There's nothing 
new in what he's saying. He's talking about an initiative based on 
his terms and based on his conditions, which he knows are not starters. 
Lockhart said again, the time for negotiation is over. And when U.S. 
secretary-general Kofi aan met with the security council, iraq's ambassador 
to the U.S. complained that Washington isn't serious about a peaceful 
settlement. Late today at the White House, top officials met once 
again to assess plans, and it seemed evident they weren't talking 
about diplomacy. Against all this, the president prepared to leave 
tomorrow for anationian economic summit. He's been telling people 
today he intends to go. White House officials say plans could change. 
Even if he goes, that does not necessarily preclude action. Saddam 
should now understand it could come at any time without warning. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>