<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981113.0882 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
GELSENKIRCHEN, Germany (AP) - Russians world champions led the opening 
two events Friday at the Nations Cup with Alexei Yagudin showing juggling 
skills as well as skating. Yagudin used a circus theme that included 
portions of juggling motions while entering into jumps to leap into 
first in the men's event after the short program. Yagudin did all 
his elements cleanly -- including a high triple axel-triple toe loop 
-- to score marks between 5.7 and 5.9 despite being the first skater. 
Another Russian, Alexander Abt, was second. Abt had a more difficult 
routine that Yagudin but missed a triple axel-triple loop slightly 
and two footed a quadruple attempt. Quads are now allowed in the short 
program. which is one-third of the total mark. Still he took second 
with Andreas Vlacenko of Germany third. Russian ice dance world champions 
Angelika Krylova and Oleg Ovsiannikov made their season's debut and 
comfortably led after the initial portion In the compulsory dance, 
the Tango Romantica, they skated first and scored mark mostly of 5.7 
and 5.8 with a pair of 5.9s, unusually high with the rest of the field 
to come. Canadians Shae-Lynn Bourne and Victor Kraatz were in second 
but were at least two-tenths behind on nearly every judge. Third was 
the German couple of Kati Winkler and Rene Lohse. The original dance 
to the waltz tempo is later Friday along with the opening short program 
of the pairs event. The men have their long program Saturday night 
and it will be hard for Yagudin to better his performance at Skate 
America when he did nine triple jumps -- one more than legal. With 
three-time world champion Elvis Stojko of Canada still slow in coming 
back from a groin injury, Yagudin looks to dominate the season. Yagudin 
is now coached by Tatiana Tarasova, who guided Ilia Kulik and ice 
dancers Pasha Grishuk and Yevgeny Platov to Olympic gold medals in 
Nagano, Japan. The women's competition begins Saturday with Russians 
looking to continue winning. European champion Maria Butyrskaya is 
the favorite. With Olympic champion Tara Lipinski leaving the eligible 
ranks and world champion Michelle Kwan taking the year off from these 
competitions the women's field is wide open this year. Winners of 
the events receive dlrs 30,000. The next event is the Lalique Trophy 
in Paris next week. The series culminates with the March final in 
Russia, two weeks before the world championships in Finland. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>