<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981113.0227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At least three people were killed when Indonesian security forces 
opened fire with plastic bullets, water cannons and tear gas on rock-throwing 
protesters trying to march on Parliament on Friday. Student activists 
said more than 50 of their number had been injured. At least two were 
hospitalized in critical condition. It was the bloodiest day of protest 
in a week of student demonstrations against a special government assembly. 
Friday's violence erupted at several points near the legislature and 
followed similar street battles in Jakarta on Thursday night that 
killed another two people. Mobs burned tires as baton-wielding soldiers 
and troops dispersed an angry crowd on a major road about two kilometers 
(one mile) west of the legislature. Armored personnel carriers, meanwhile, 
rumbled along Jakarta's main boulevard after more fighting and stone-throwing 
also broke out. Troops fired warning shots and chased thousands of 
protesters through Jakarta's downtown area where offices and shops 
were closed. Soldiers were seen firing what appeared to be blanks 
and plastic bullets into buildings at Atama Jaya Catholic University. 
Several students, some bleeding, were later taken out on stretches. 
Tosik Sutina, a morgue official at the nearby Jakarta Hospital said 
two bodies, both of male students, had been brought in from the university. 
They had gunshot wounds to their chests. Other hospitals reported 
a steady and bloody stream of injured. In East Jakarta a rampaging 
mob beat a third man to death in a street as soldiers looked on. Trouble 
broke out soon after weekly Islamic prayers ended. Students marched 
from several campuses in the capital in defiance of military warnings. 
The students were blocked from reaching Parliament where a special 
government assembly was putting the final touches to a new political 
blueprint for the troubled Southeast Asian nation. On Thursday, a 
high school student and a police officer died in hospitals after 20,000 
students were blocked by security personnel from reaching Parliament. 
At that time, troops and police also dispersed the crowds with baton 
charges, tear gas, rubber bullets and water cannons. More than 100 
students were hospitalized, some with serious injuries. Military commander 
Gen. Wiranto called for calm Friday and warned that an estimated 30,000 
police and troops deployed across the capital would take ``sterner 
and firmer action'' if student protests got out of control again. 
In an interview with private radio station Trijaya, Wiranto suggested 
people stay at home and that offices not open. Wiranto defended the 
tough action taken by his men to put down the protests, which he said 
had been an ``unlawful attempt to forcibly occupy the parliament by 
mobs.'' Foreign embassies in Indonesia warned their citizens of the 
likelihood of more unrest. Thursday night's violence was the worst 
outbreak of unrest in Jakarta since riots forced Indonesia's former 
President Suharto to quit in May after 32 years in power. The students 
oppose a special government assembly convened by his successor, President 
B.J. Habibie, to map out a new political system as Indonesia battles 
with it worst economic crisis in decades. Inflation, unemployment 
and poverty rates are soaring. Habibie, a former protege of Suharto, 
says the People's Consultative Assembly will pave the way for free 
elections next year. Critics say the assembly delegates are Suharto 
holdovers intent on preserving their political privileges. The assembly 
is expected on Friday to announce a date for the elections and to 
support new laws to legalize many political parties. The students 
demand greater democratic change, including an end of military involvement 
in politics. They also want Suharto put on trial for corruption and 
human rights abuses. In concession to student demands, factions in 
the assembly have agreed to name Suharto in a decree calling for an 
investigation into past corruption. The assembly continued its deliberations 
on Friday apparently oblivious to the chaos nearby. A spokesman at 
St. Carolus Hospital said Lukman Firdaus, a male 18-year-old high 
school student, died before dawn Friday after being beaten around 
the head. He had initially been treated at a navy hospital. Earlier, 
the military said an officer, identified as Pvt. Prayitno, died after 
falling from a truck. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>