<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981113.0238 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
BEIRUT, Lebanon (AP) _ U.S. Commerce Secretary William Daley on Friday 
urged American businesses to get more involved in the multibillion 
dollar postwar reconstruction of Lebanon, a country once synonymous 
with hijackings and hostage-taking. ``The message I brought is that 
the United States is back and wants to do more business in Lebanon,'' 
Daley said after a meeting with President-elect Emile Lahoud. ``I 
look forward to encourage U.S. businesses to participate in a new 
and much improved Lebanon,'' he said. Although the United States is 
Lebanon's second-biggest trading partner, Daley is the first senior 
American trade official to visit this small nation wedged between 
Israel, Syria and the Mediterranean Sea. But, as in the rare previous 
stops by senior U.S. government officials in recent years, his visit 
was shrouded by tight security measures _ an ironic counterpoint to 
a mission aimed at fostering a positive atmosphere for American investors. 
Instead of landing at Beirut's gleaming new international airport, 
a U.S. military helicopter ferried Daley from the nearby island of 
Cyprus to the heavily fortified U.S. Embassy compound north of Beirut. 
This is the route taken by U.S. diplomats for more than a decade because 
of terror attacks on Americans in the mid-1980s. Before leaving Washington, 
Daley said he'd seek a share of Lebanon's dlrs 13 billion reconstruction 
program for American companies. Daley planned to see Prime Minister 
Rafik Hariri, chief architect of the program. U.S. companies have 
been shut out of major reconstruction projects after the 1975-90 civil 
war because of a decade-old U.S. government travel ban that was lifted 
last year. Most contracts went to European and Asian companies. But 
private American business involvement in the Lebanese free-market 
economy has surged in the last few years, especially in the service 
sector for such things as air couriers and restaurants. McDonald's, 
the American fast-food giant, opened its first restaurant in Lebanon 
in September. Demand is so high that the normal wait for burgers and 
fries is a half-hour. Last year Lebanon bought dlrs 550 million worth 
of goods from the United States and exported merchandise worth dlrs 
80 million, making America its second-largest trading partner after 
Italy. The travel ban on American passport holders was imposed after 
a series of bombings of military and diplomatic compounds in the 1980s 
that killed about 270 Americans, including 241 military servicemen. 
Seventeen Americans also were held hostage in that period. Security 
for foreigners has drastically improved in recent years, but American 
precautions remain. Daley's visit got a boost Thursday when a Parliament 
committee approved an intellectual property legislation against widespread 
piracy of computer software. The bill, long demanded by the United 
States, still requires a Parliament vote to become law. Daley's Middle 
East tour began in Jordan on Wednesday. He is also expected to visit 
Egypt, Israel and the Palestinian areas to promote regional economic 
cooperation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>