<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981113.1169 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two Yugoslav soldiers were killed Friday in a new outbreak of violence, 
further fueling tensions in the strife-torn Kosovo province. Duncan 
Bullivant, an international official, said according to information 
from the Yugoslav Army and foreign Ministry, an incident occurred 
at around 2 p.m. (1300 GMT) in the village of Dulje on the road connecting 
Pristina, the capital, and Prizren near the Albanian border. Bullivant, 
a spokesman for the 54-nation Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe, quoted the Yugoslav officials as saying that one soldier 
died on the spot and the other succumbed to his injuries. Another 
two wounded soldiers were taken to a hospital in Pristina. Though 
details were still unclear Friday night, a crew for Associated Press 
Television News said earlier they had heard bursts of gunfire coming 
from the region, between Suva Reka and Stimlje villages. Traffic was 
backed up in the area. The APTN crew saw two tanks and several trucks 
full of soldiers in the vicinity. Meanwhile, in the central Kosovo 
village of Mlecane, eyewitness said Friday Serb police on Thursday 
opened fire on a group of ethnic Albanian men and children, killing 
one of the men and injuring another. The Kosovo Information Center, 
close to the Albanian leadership, also carried the report. Journalists 
visiting Mlecane Friday saw two pools of blood amid 15-20 scattered 
machine gun shells where the incident reportedly took place. Male 
villagers, who only recently returned to the homes they left earlier, 
said all the women and children had fled again. The Yugoslav Foreign 
Ministry reported Friday that ethnic Albanian rebels opened fire Thursday 
at a police vehicle traveling the main road, near Mlecane. No causalities 
were reported and it was not immediately clear the incident was linked 
to the shooting in the village. The continued shootings have chipped 
away at hopes for a solution to the Kosovo crisis between Serbs and 
Albanians, ushered in by an Oct. 12 agreement. The Serb crackdown 
on ethnic Albanian separatists in the province has left hundreds dead, 
mostly ethnic Albanians, and made refugees of hundreds of thousands 
more. Meanwhile, a statement issued by Deputy Premier Zoran Lilic 
and carried by the Tanjug news agency excluded participation of the 
militant Kosovo Liberation Army in the peace process, saying ``there 
is no place for extremists, terrorism, abductions, killings, armed 
attacks.'' Alluding to the Oct. 12 agreement signed by Yugoslav President 
Slobodan Milosevic pledging a pullback of Yugoslav army and Serb police 
forces from Kosovo, he said: ``An agreement respected only by one 
side stands no chance.'' At talks in Belgrade with European Union 
envoy Wolfgang Petritsch, Lilic said authorities are abiding by the 
agreement, meant to set up a deal designed to restore autonomy to 
Kosovo, an Albanian-majority province of Serbia, the dominant Yugoslav 
republic. Also in Belgrade, U.S. envoy Christopher Hill handed Serbian 
President Milan Milutinovic ``a new and updated draft paper'' but 
that this is a daily, ongoing process, his spokesman said. Earlier 
Friday, armed Serb civilians swapped hostages with ethnic Albanian 
guerrillas, defusing a local standoff. The Serbs seized as many as 
100 Kosovo Albanians starting Wednesday, by stopping vehicles on a 
road from neighboring Montenegro, which along with Serbia makes up 
Yugoslavia. The exchanges took place at Leposavic, a village close 
to the boundary with Montenegro, shortly after midnight, sources said. 
Members of a still-forming 2,000-strong team meant to monitor the 
October agreement mediated in the releases. In Brussels Friday, NATO 
ambassadors approved plans Friday for a French-commanded rapid reaction 
force that will stand ready to rescue the unarmed civilian ``ground 
verifiers'' in Kosovo should they come under threat. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>