<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981113.0525 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the worst violence since riots toppled President Suharto in May, 
at least five people were killed Friday when Indonesian security forces 
battled rock-throwing protesters and street mobs attacked suspected 
police informers. Student activists said more than 50 of their number 
had been injured in clashes with police, who used plastic bullets, 
tear gas and water cannon on the protesters. At least two were hospitalized 
in critical condition. It was the bloodiest day of protest in a week 
of student demonstrations against a special assembly meant to reform 
the government left behind by Suharto's authoritarian 32 years in 
power. Clashes continued after dark as security personnel fired repeated 
volleys of warning shots into the air. Thousands of students and others 
ran for cover and threw rocks and bottles at riot police and troops. 
Friday's violence erupted at more than five points near the legislature 
and followed similar street battles in Jakarta on Thursday night that 
killed another two people and injured more than 100. In both cases, 
agents were blocking protesters from converging on the Parliament. 
Two armored personnel carriers rumbled by office blocks and three 
small tanks drove down a toll road taken over by marching students. 
Mobs burned tires as baton-wielding soldiers and troops dispersed 
an angry crowd on a major road about two kilometers (one mile) west 
of the legislature. Troops fired warning shots and chased thousands 
of protesters down Jakarta's main boulevard where offices and shops 
were closed. Soldiers were seen firing what appeared to be blanks 
and plastic bullets into buildings at Atama Jaya Catholic University. 
Several students, some bleeding, were later taken out on stretches. 
Tosik Sutina, a morgue official at the nearby Jakarta Hospital, said 
two bodies, both male students, had been brought from the university. 
They had gunshot wounds to their chests. Students at the hospital 
identified the dead by the single names, Ridwan and Teddi. In East 
Jakarta a rampaging mob beat a third man to death in a street as soldiers 
looked on. Witnesses reported dozens of other mobs attacks against 
individuals accused of being police informers. Syaiful, a morgue attendant 
at Cipto Mungunkusomo Hospital, said it had received the bodies of 
one male student and civilian security guard. Both had gunshot chest 
wounds. Other hospitals reported a steady and bloody stream of injured. 
Trouble broke out soon after weekly Islamic prayers ended. Students 
marched from several campuses in the capital in defiance of military 
warnings. The students were blocked from reaching Parliament where 
a special government assembly was putting the final touches to a new 
political blueprint for the troubled Southeast Asian nation. On Thursday, 
a high school student and a police officer died in hospitals after 
20,000 students were blocked by security personnel from reaching Parliament. 
At that time troops and police also dispersed the crowds with baton 
charges, tear gas, rubber bullets and water cannons. More than 100 
students were hospitalized, some with serious injuries. Military commander 
Gen. Wiranto called for calm Friday and warned that an estimated 30,000 
police and troops deployed across the capital would take ``sterner 
and firmer action'' if student protests got out of control again. 
In an interview with private radio station Trijaya, Wiranto suggested 
people stay at home and that offices not open. Wiranto defended the 
tough action taken by his men to put down the protests, which he said 
had been an ``unlawful attempt to forcibly occupy the parliament by 
mobs.'' Foreign embassies in Indonesia warned their citizens of the 
likelihood of more unrest. The students oppose a special government 
assembly convened by Suharto's successor, President B.J. Habibie, 
to map out a new political system as Indonesia battles with it worst 
economic crisis in decades. Inflation, unemployment and poverty rates 
are soaring. Habibie, a former protege of Suharto, says the People's 
Consultative Assembly will pave the way for free elections next year. 
Critics say the assembly delegates are Suharto holdovers intent on 
preserving their political privileges. The assembly is expected on 
Friday to announce a date for the elections and to support new laws 
to legalize many political parties. The students demand greater democratic 
change, including an end of military involvement in politics. They 
also want Suharto put on trial for corruption and human rights abuses. 
``Suharto's whole regime should be brought to trial for their crimes,'' 
said one student activist Martin Sirat. In concession to student demands, 
factions in the assembly have agreed to name Suharto in a decree calling 
for an investigation into past corruption. The assembly continued 
its deliberations on Friday apparently oblivious to the chaos nearby. 
A spokesman at St. Carolus Hospital said Lukman Firdaus, a male 18-year-old 
high school student, died before dawn Friday after being beaten around 
the head. He had initially been treated at a navy hospital. Earlier, 
the military said an officer, identified as Pvt. Prayitno, died after 
falling from a truck. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>