<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981113.1191 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
BEIRUT, Lebanon (AP) _ U.S. Commerce Secretary William Daley on Friday 
urged American businesses to get more involved in the multibillion 
dollar postwar reconstruction of Lebanon, a country once synonymous 
with hijackings and hostage-taking. ``The message I brought is that 
the United States is back and wants to do more business in Lebanon,'' 
Daley said after a meeting with President-elect Emile Lahoud on his 
one-day visit. U.S. companies have been virtually shut out of major 
reconstruction projects after the 1975-90 civil war because of a decade-old 
U.S. government travel ban that was lifted last year. Most contracts 
went to European and Asian companies. But private American business 
involvement in the Lebanese free-market economy has surged in the 
last few years. The United States is Lebanon's second-biggest trading 
partner, selling goods worth dlrs 550 million and importing dlrs 80 
million worth of merchandise. In a speech to U.S. and Lebanese business 
executives, Daley delivered a veiled criticism of the way contracts 
have been awarded in the dlrs 13 billion program of reconstruction. 
``When American companies bid on projects, whether they win or lose, 
they expect the bidding process to be transparent and to be fair and 
open,'' he said. Lebanese politicians have frequently leveled charges 
of kickbacks and underhand tactics in the awarding of contracts. Daley 
is the first senior American trade official to visit Lebanon. As with 
previous trips by senior U.S. government officials, security was tight. 
Instead of landing at Beirut's gleaming new international airport, 
Daley took a U.S. military helicopter from Cyprus to the fortified 
U.S. Embassy compound north of Beirut. This is the route taken by 
U.S. diplomats for more than a decade. The United States banned travel 
to Lebanon after a series of bombings of military and diplomatic compounds 
in the 1980s that killed about 270 Americans, including 241 troops. 
Seventeen Americans were kidnapped and held hostage during that period. 
The State Department replaced the ban in July 1997 with an advisory 
warning Americans to stay away from Lebanon as it remains dangerous. 
American aircraft have been forbidden to land at Beirut airport since 
the TWA hijacking in 1985. Asked whether the embargo of Beirut airport 
was not giving a negative signal to potential American investors, 
Daley told The Associated Press: ``We are trying to give a positive 
signal. At the same time, there are difficulties and they have to 
be acknowledged and we have to be frank about them.'' He said there 
had been a ``tremendous improvement'' in security in Lebanon. Among 
the immediate fruits of Daley's visit was a dlrs 7.5 million deal 
signed Friday between Continental Electronics Corp. of Dallas, Texas, 
and the Lebanese government to build a new radio station. The U.S. 
Export-Import Bank will finance the contract. Daley welcomed a parliamentary 
committee's approval Thursday of an intellectual property bill on 
piracy of computer software. The bill, long demanded by the United 
States, now goes to the full legislature for a vote. Daley arrived 
in Egypt late Friday. He will be visiting Israel and the Palestinian 
areas on his tour, which aims to promote regional economic cooperation. 
He has already been to Jordan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>