<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981113.0246 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For ages, the Great Pyramid has been without its apex, the pointy 
stone top that completes its triangular shape. Now, Egypt plans to 
make the Pharaonic structure whole again by affixing a gold-encased 
capstone _ if only for one night _ to celebrate the advent of the 
third millennium on Dec. 31, 1999, the pyramid's custodian, Zahi Hawass, 
told reporters Thursday night. At the same time, he proposed closing 
entry into the Great Pyramid forever to prevent it from being damaged 
beyond repair by the salty breath and curious fingers of 4,000 visitors 
a day. Hawass said the millennium ceremony, to be telecast live to 
a world audience, will mirror the pomp and revelry that must have 
accompanied the installation of the capstone by the pyramid's builder, 
Pharaoh Cheops, in a national celebration about 4,600 years ago. ``You 
know it was built in third millennium B.C. We are celebrating third 
millennium A.D. Therefore, we should have something important to mark 
the occasion,'' Hawass said. Cheops' pyramid has lost 9 meters (30 
feet) of height. Missing stones at the top give it a craggy flattened 
appearance like the opening of a small volcano. This is not evident 
from the ground because of the pyramid's size _ it is 137 meters (452 
feet) high or as tall as a 13-story building. The stones are believed 
to have fallen off many centuries ago, and there is no record how 
it happened. It could have been due to erosion, vandals or grave robbers. 
Hawass said engineers do not intend to fill all the missing portion 
with stone. A steel frame will cover most of the empty area and a 
small capstone wrapped in thin gold foil will complete the top, he 
said. The stone will be lowered by a helicopter and removed after 
the ceremony, he said without elaborating. Hawass said he got the 
idea from a relief stone carving from another pyramid near Cairo. 
It depicted workers dragging a capstone shining like gold. Another 
relief showed people dancing and singing following the setting of 
the capstone, indicating the king installed the last piece of masonry 
on the pyramid to mark the end of a national project, he said. Hawass 
said the Great Pyramid will be reopened to public on Feb. 15, 1999, 
after nearly one year of closure for restoration. During this time, 
a new ventilation and lighting system has been fixed inside the sepulchral 
chambers, deep inside the pyramid. Graffiti has been erased from the 
tomb's walls, and workers also are removing a layer of salt left by 
the breath of daily visitors, he said. But the best way to preserve 
the pyramid's interior, which includes Cheops' tomb, would be to close 
it forever, Hawass said. ``Why do you want to visit a tomb? The magic 
is from the outside. Not from the inside,'' he said. If the flood 
of visitors continues, ``in 10 years you will not find the tomb exists,'' 
he warned. However, the decision to close the pyramid can only be 
taken by a 25-member committee, which fears the loss of tourism revenue. 
The Great Pyramid and two other pyramids on the Giza Plateau are among 
the world's most recognizable and most visited monuments. The second 
pyramid of Chephren will be closed for restoration on Feb. 15, Hawass 
said. Cheops' pyramid is estimated to contain 2.3 million stone blocks 
each weighing an average 2.5 tons. Some weight as much as 15 tons. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>