<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981113.1130.1471 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
prince charles celebrates his 50th birthday tomorrow. although much 
as been said and written about the heir to british throne, few know 
the private man. margaret lowrie talked with two people who do. just 
about everyone knows, or thinks they know, just about everything there 
is to know about prince charles -- his early years, his bachelor days, 
his courtship, the marriage to diana, and, of course, the divorce. 
but those who track his fortunes and failures say the public picture 
is far from complete. he is a very complex individual. he is at one 
level, a very private, rather introspective person -- intensely serious 
with a core of spiritual purpose, which has given him strength, i 
believe, during some of the worst times. the worst of the worst -- 
diana's death. some believed charles the architect of her unhappiness, 
but veteran journalist ann leslie says he's had a raw deal. i think 
he's a brave man and a good man. but he has big ears and he's bald 
and he is not a star. and that i think says more about us, i.e., our 
celebrity/oprah winfrey-obsessed age than it does about prince charles. 
never before has a member of the royal family spoke so frankly. jonathan 
dimbleby, to whom the prince confessed his adultery in a tv interview, 
believes that is changing. instead of seeing him as the monster in 
a drama of the media's creation, they're seeing him through the media 
as someone who works hard, who clearly loves his children, and who 
has a sense of humor. and is very dedicated. "dedicated" to a host 
of causes -- organic agriculture, urban architecture. his prince's 
trust, which helps inner city youth, is the largest such independent 
charity in britain. but charles' good works get only a fraction of 
the attention diana's did. at the time when she really acquired her 
queen of hearts reputation, she did 40 official engagements working 
with the disadvantaged. and he did 500. the british press and therefore 
the public, tend to folk yus not an charles' public appearances, but 
his private life. in particular, his relationship with longtime love 
camilla parker bowles. people have begrudged his friendship with mrs. 
parker bowles because they set it against their fantasy version of 
what the royal marriage should have been. i can see them, when camilla 
parker bowles and the prince of wales, when they're sort of in their 
60s, having a quiet little marriage and nobody minding. by then, charles 
may also be closer to his destiny -- the throne. but some say that, 
too, preoccupies the press more than the prince. people have said 
he's hanging around waiting for the real job. what is the real job? 
he's doing a lot of the real job now. the fact is, charles likely 
will not become sovereign until his mother dies. in the meantime, 
at 50, he serves his princely title well, which is, some say, only 
fitting, for the man who will one day be king. margaret lowrie, cnn, 
london. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>