<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981113.2100.2487 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last June a 15-year-old boy was shot outside the children's hospital 
in chicago, right joult side the emergency room, and died outside 
in part because no one from the emergency room would go outside to 
help him. You might have seen the story. It made the national media. 
It was, we were told at the time, against hospital policy to go out 
and help people who there. People who saw it were outraged. Tonight 
"Dateline" correspondent Steve Daniels has the latest. Frantic calls 
for help as 15-year-old -- this 15-year-old lay bleeding to death 
just outside a Chicago hospital. This past weekend the Chicago hospital 
red to help a young shooting victim who lay outsides its doors. It 
was a story that stunned the nations, ergency room workers refusing 
to go outside to treat a dying teenager. As "Dateline" reported in 
June, Chris was hat a friend's birthday party when he got into a confrontation 
with gang members outside. Words were exchanged, which escalated into 
fighting, and then gunshots. Chris was shot. Fortunately, you would 
think, he was right outside this hospital, right next door to help. 
But when his friends ran into the hospital, they were astonished by 
the staff's response. They said that to call 911 and wait for an ambulance 
and be patient. They can't do anything about it. But why? Why wouldn't 
doctors and nurses who work every day saving lives run outside to 
help Chris? The hospital says its own policy prevented staff from 
leaving the emergency room, even to treat a dying boy just outside 
its ors. The policy was designed to protect E.R. personnel in a possible 
crime scene and at the same time ensure the proper treatment of patients 
already in care at the E.R. the hospital was forced to take another 
look at the policy and rescinded it just a few days@ after Chris died. 
But was it just this hospital that failed the young man? "Dateline" 
decided to return to Chicago to take another look. We obtained 911 
tapes which appear to show other problems -- an emergency system in 
a state of confusion, delays in sending ambulances, emergency workers 
who didn't seem to understand the most bassic parts of the system. 
The calls started at 6:15, just after the boy was shot. I have an 
merge. They came in one after another. I heard gunshots. Friends, 
neighbors. The gun went off and there's a whole bunch of kids. Six 
calls in less than six mbts, including this one from a Chicago police 
officer. I just got waved on to the hospital. There's an individual 
that's En shot in the head. An injury so serious you would think an 
ambulance would automatically be sent out. But no ambulance was dispatched. 
why? According to a spokes person for Chicago's 911 center, it was 
unclear one was needed. And nobody actually asked for an ambulance. 
Listen to this call from a ravenswood neighbor. My kids say that somebody's 
shot or something like that. You don't err on the side of being cautious 
when people's lives are at stake. This man heads the citizens' watchdog 
group better government's association, highly critical of Chicago's 
911 system. If the system had worked properly after those first three 
phone calls, there anan been an ambulance dispatched. The better G 
association says most people calling 911 with ggivivenen emergency 
are in too much shock or just don't know to specifically ask for an 
ambulance. By now, Chris had been bleeding to death for more than 
six minutes. With no help from the hospital, police radio in with 
a desperate blee. We got to have a paramedic even though we're right 
behind the hospital. Those words would get action. An ambulance started 
to roll. But as the mbts passed -- Put a rush on that ambulance here. 
-- The wait would take its toll. Right at the doorstep of the hospital. 
They won't come out. Police officers battle with hospital workers 
to get some type of first aid to Chris. Contact the emergency room 
and ask if they can come out with a gurney. But to no avail. Fally, 
at 6:29, afterwaiting 14 mbts for help, police officers grabbed a 
Wheel care and took Chris inside the E.R. themselves. But would their 
efforts to help him actually make things worse? What the officers 
didn't seem to realize is they were taking him into a Hospital not 
equipped to care for such a serious wound. You got to get into the 
trauma center. The whole system is set up around it, yet the people 
working in the system don't understand that. And it's proven by the 
conversations. The hospital called 911 too seemingly upset at the 
police who were trying to get help for Chris. These people, the cops, 
talking about they want to bring the kid here. But this kid looks 
like trauma. Trauma is the key word. Only certain Chicago hospitals 
have surgeons on staff around the clock with operating rooms prepped 
and ready to treat gunshot wounds like Chris'. Ravenswood is not among 
them. And the 911 dispatcher should know that. Yet at one point the 
9 operator advises police not to wait for the ambulance. Policemen 
can take a person into the hospital. We asked Chicago emergency officials 
about events on the ght of Chris' death. No one from the city's 911 
system would agree to an on-camera interview. But in a letter to "Dateline," 
they maintained they saw nothing wrong with the way they responded. 
That's a great argue. It's like saying, you know, once we got the 
ambulance going it got there on time. But the barn has already learned 
down. The horse has left the barn. It's over. In another almost incredible 
irony, the ambulance was dispatched from a Station only nine blocks 
from wh (S(S S)S) sercye lay dying. The paramedics arrived just as 
police were taking Chris into the E.R. the ambulance turned around 
and left. The city of Chicago has its own policy. The fire department 
ambulance could not transport droice a trauma center because he was 
now inside the ravenswood E.R. at 7:33, one hour and 18 minutes after 
he was shot, Chris sercye was pronounced dead. When the test comes, 
the system has to work. And in Chicago, that system failed and it 
cost sercye his life. That report from "dateline NBC" correspondent 
Steve Daniels. We should tell you the family of Chris sercye is planning 
to sue ravenswood hospital and possibly the city of Chicago as well. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>