<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981113.2100.0208 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We are joined this evening by the national security advisor to the 
president from the White House north lawn. Sandy Berger is with us. 
Mr. Berger, can you confirm a report in this morning's "Washington 
Post" that, of the big four advisors in this case, Albright, Cohen, 
and general shelton, and yourself, you were the one saying we can't 
go, we shouldn't do this, because we have a substantial and credible 
peace overture or at minimum we owe it to the Iraqis to hear them 
out? Well, Brian, I'm not going to get into advice that was given 
to the president. I would say that during that period, when we heard 
that there was about to be an announcement from Iraq, there was a 
good deal of discussion. I think people saw both reasons to go forward 
and reasons to -- to pause. I think in the final analysis, the president 
decided that -- that having said that the -- that the Iraqis could 
avert a military strike by essentially capitulating and let UNSCOM 
back in, that we had an obligation to hear what they had to say. Having 
then heard that and ultimately it being essentially a capitulation, 
that we should -- we should stop the action for now, test the proposition 
of whether, in fact, he will let UNSCOM in, certainly a preferable 
way to get at Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. But if, in fact, 
he does not comply, as the president has said, we're ready to take 
action. Well, what is our threshold right now? Let's say that somewhere 
in backwoods Iraq tomorrow an inspector is about to go into a Bunker 
and suddenly his minder says, let's go and look at this one instead. 
Is that a violation? Are we on a hair trigger status? We give a few 
minutes before an attack? Well, first of all, UNSCOM's a very professional 
organization. International arms inspectors from around the world, 
headed by chairman butler from Australia. I think the real question 
is whether chairman Butler bieves there is cooperation and whether 
he's able to do his job. He's not felt that for the past three months. 
And so, I think he'll go back in, his inspectors will go back in, 
they'll resume their work, and he will quickly or hopefully at some 
point know wheth he's getting cooperation or not. Let's remember one 
thing, Brian -- the obligation here is on Iraq to comply. It's not 
-- it's not on UNSCOM to find the needle in the haystack. It's on 
the Iraqis to put the haystack out, in a sense, on the lawn and let 
the world see it. So, we'll see whether or not there is affirmative 
compliance and cooperation from the Iraqis. And of coursely, we will 
rely very heavily on the judgment of the professions. Can you confirm 
something else that's been repeated today almost as fact? And that 
is the operating premise you were using in your debates over whether 
or not to strike, was that there would be 10,000 casualties in iraq. 
Well, planning this strike, let me say it would have been a substantial 
strike. The president was -- instructions to the military in planning 
the strike was to try to minimize collateral damage, that is, damage 
to innocent civilians. But there's no question in a military action 
such as this there will be casualties. And of course American -- any 
time one puts American military people in harm's way, there are -- 
there are risks. But the fact is the president decided that it was 
appropriate to proceed. He was ready to go forward. In fact, he had 
essentially told the military to begin the operation. When they heard 
the -- essentially the engines of the planes warming up and saw how 
ice lated they were in the world, even their traditional friends -- 
the Russians and French and others -- saying no, no negotiations, 
no compromises, you've got to comply, they made a decision to agree 
to comply. Now we have to test that because it's not the words that 
matter. It's the actions that matter. We have a few seconds left. 
Last question. Yore ready to go in and do this anytime. You're ready 
to launch the same attack that was planned any time? We will be ready 
if there is not compliance on the part of Saddam Hussein. Sandy Berger, 
national security advisor at the White House after what was a Very 
long weekend. Thanks for being here. Thanks, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>