<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981113.2100.3095 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> MISCELLANEOUS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Monday night, time for our usual first-of-the-week look at the big 
three weekly magazines just now hitting newsstands and mailboxes across 
the United States. "U.S. news" talks about miracle vaccines. Time 
magazine, the herbal medicine boom. And Bill Ford, the latest generation. 
Ford is in search, aren't they L, of the supercar. Inside "U.S. news," 
Washington whispers, the article about Bob Livingston, the speaker 
apparent. Manufacturers don't recommend that while driving. "U.S. 
news" as well -- this is true, ladies and gentlemen. The rats don't 
touch any of those journalists out of professional courtesy. "U.S. 
news" -- "time" magazine, God, I'd like to forget all this. "Time" 
magazine -- "time" -- "Newsweek" -- "Newsweek" runs one their famous 
maps. This subject is prayer. Virtual atheists we're led to believe 
here, all of Alaska, New Hampshire, vermont, New Jersey, all the fun 
places. "Newsweek" -- and "Newsweek" -- When we return, a look at 
tomorrow morning's newspaper headlines tonight. Introducing the remarkably 
innovative GE profile performance range with a Revolutionary bridge 
that connects burners, so you can cook any size dish. And its truetemp 
oven is the most accurate in America, so you can also bake and broil 
like a gourmet. It's so versatile, you could get carried away. Uh, 
dad. I usually just have cereal for breakfast. Rarely can we show 
you the actual front page from tomorrow morning, but people in Europe 
are waking up to this -- ""international Herald tribune,"" gore's 
speech stuns Malaysia. The speech shunned and infuriated Malaysian 
government officials. It's the most disgusting speech I've ever heard, 
the trade minister of malaysia. Protesters are tearing a lot of Asia 
apart right now. On the web site, good and evil from the meteor storm. 
Tomorrow night, once every 33 years. Spectacular show. They're worried 
about 500 satellites orbiting the earth. Fothose in the U.S., where 
best to see it? Asia. If you're on the west coast, the the best time 
is :34 eastern time tomorrow, but that is on the west coast. That's 
when it peaks. In the "Denver post," if you know any world war I veterans 
not found or recognized by the French government, they're looking 
for them. They have discovered some. They are giving out the Le onof 
honor, their highest award, 80 years after the fact as they did to 
101-year-old lieu they are Hickman today. Before we go, MSNBC will 
have live coverage tomorrow morning as the Linda tripp tapes are released, 
featuring the voice of Monica Lewinsky. Crucial evidence in this case 
beginning at 9:30 eastern time. That is our broadcast for this Monday 
evening. Hope to you see -- see you again tomorrow evening. I'm Brian 
Williams. Two of the biggest stars of the 1990's, Leonardo DiCaprio 
and Brad Pitt. I'm Jane pauley. This is "time & again." 73 television 
cameras. President Clinton -- Nixon. Hello and welcome to "time & 
again." Acting is a tough business. Good looks and talent don't guarantee 
success. Most aspiring actors find themselves settling for something 
short of their dreams. Not so for Leonardo DiCaprio and Brad Pitt, 
our subjects on this episode of "Time & again." Two young act yoffers 
of 
</TEXT>
</DOC>