<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981113.1830.1041 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Planning any military operation is always complicated. But this time 
around, the people who plot strategy and give the orders are contending 
with something beyond their control -- the equivalent of a Hurricane 
in space. Our "in depth" reporting continues with NBC's Robert Hager. 
300 military satellites in the line of fire, not from Saddam hussein, 
but from a huge meteor storm next week. Blame it on the Comet temple 
tuttle and the long trail of dust it leaves in space as it sweeps 
by once every 33 years. Earth will pass near that dust storm next 
Tuesday creating a spectacular light show of shooting stars, like 
this, for Asia, where it will be most visible and fears of damage 
for the U.S. military satellites crucial to guiding a military attack 
on Iraq. This one has a history of producing the biggest meteor showers 
that have ever been observed. The danger? The military relies on satellites 
to relay orders to attack, to guide it's missiles and planes, to pinpoint 
targets, to assess damage, to spy on the enemy -- watch and listen, 
and to provide early warning of any Scud missiles fires in retaliation. 
At a satellite command post in Colorado, the air force gets ready 
for the meteor shower. Something that we're concerned about. We don't 
know if it's going to be a gentle shower or a thunderstorm or a Hurricane, 
so we're prepared for whatever comes. The particles shed by the Comet 
are no bigger than beans. In fact, most are no bigger than grains 
of salt. But they travel at tremendous speeds. It's a 150,000 miles 
an hour. That's about 40 miles per second, something like that. At 
the University of Dayton, scientists simulated what can happen when 
an object that speed hits. Watch again, in slow motion. And this is 
the damage of that impact. But the real danger is electronic. When 
these solid particles strike a satellite, they can create a charged 
cloud, a cloud of particles. Like a small lightening strike on a satellite, 
and that charged cloud can affect the satellite systems. NASA's so 
concerned, it made sure the shuttle's not in space during the shower. 
In the Soviet "Mir," cosmonauts will position themselves for a quick 
escape if there's trouble. And there are concerns for commercial satellites 
that handle our phone calls, television signals and computer links. 
What then can satellite managers do? Mostly, they'll try to maneuver 
satellites so sensitive equipment faces away from the storm and slant 
big solar panels into the meteoroid dust so the panels won't take 
the shots broadside. By doing that and being ready to switch to backup 
satellites if there is trouble, officials hope to escape without disruption. 
Hope the meteor storm in the sky doesn't interfere with the pending 
military storm in the desert. Robert Hager, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>