<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981113.1830.0075 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the White House tonight, President Clinton was dealing with a wide 
range of issues. He settled one personal legal battle, while he continues 
to work on the saddam Hussein problem. The question of when to launch 
a military attack. We'll begin with Iraq tonight in Baghdad. We can 
only imagine what Saddam Hussein must be thinking. He's never been 
more isolated in his defiance of the rest of the world. Key Arab states, 
including his hard-line neighbor, Syria, have warned him he's on his 
own. At the same time, a vast armada of American military power is 
assembling in the Persian gulf preparing for a sustained attack against 
key Iraqi targets if that becomes necessary. We have NBC's Ron Allen 
in Baghdad tonight and David Bloom at the White House. We'll begin 
with David in Washington. Tom, tonight, NBC news learned if President 
Clinton gives the final go-ahead for "operation desert thunder" as 
it's being called, the United States could fire as many as 300 cruise 
missiles against Iraq in the first 24 hours of any attack. Additionally, 
the White House still maintains President Clinton plans to travel 
to an Asian economic summit. NBC news learned air force II is also 
being readied for the trip. The vice president staff and security 
team have been told to travel in the president's place. At the White 
House, the president's national security team met for a sixth straight 
day in Iraq. And Mr. Clinton said Saddam Hussein "has it within his 
hands to end this crisis" if the Iraqi leader allows U.N. weapons 
inspectors to immediately resume their work. None of us can tolerate 
an Iraq free to develop weapons of mass destruction with impunity. 
With American forces in the gulf poised to strike, secretary of state 
Madeleine Albright held out little prospect for a peaceful resolution. 
One by one, the diplomatic options have been rebuffed. Iraq has a 
simple choice -- reverse course or face the consequences. In Baghdad, 
Saddam Hussein seemed to be looking for wiggle room, saying in a written 
statement that, "he'll accept anything as longs it leads to a lift 
of economic sanctions to Iraq." If that was an olive branch, the United 
States rejected it. He's talking about an initiative based on his 
terms and conditions. The message that he needs to get is, this has 
to be done based on the conditions and terms of the international 
community. Tom, White House officials insist President Clinton himself 
could still travel to Asia, but just moments ago, the president's 
national security council issued the following statement. "Our position 
remains clear, Iraq must thor tateively publicly and unconditionally 
rescind its condition of August 5 and of course 31 and cooperate fully 
with UNSCOM, the U.N. weapons inspectors. It must accept unconditionally 
and publicly the letter of October 31. The public commitments must 
be followed by concrete action." Tonight, Tom, all signs point to 
imminute military action. Thanks, David. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>