<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0393 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the announcement Friday of nearly $42 billion in aid to stabilize 
Brazil, the United States is taking two gambles: that its own part 
of the aid _ $5 billion in taxpayer money _ is a safe investment in 
a country in need of rapid reform, and a separate wager that its new 
strategy to calm the global financial jitters will succeed where others 
failed. Neither one is a sure bet. When the United States committed 
$12 billion to Mexico in 1995, it compelled the Mexican government 
to offer up collateral. Virtually all Mexico's oil revenues were deposited 
through the New York Federal Reserve Bank, until the loan was paid 
back. Brazil is offering nothing but its word, and the assurance, 
Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin said at the White House on Friday, 
that it ``still has $40 billion in reserves.'' The bigger risk, though, 
is a strategic one. Until now, the International Monetary Fund and 
the U.S. Treasury have stepped in to help countries only after they 
were in full economic arrest, out of money and on the brink of default. 
Together, the IMF and the Treasury slowly doled out money, one payment 
at a time, as the Koreans, the Thais, the Indonesians and finally 
the Russians imposed austerity measures and met a tough regime of 
economic goals. Now Korea and Thailand are stable, but trapped in 
deep recessions. Indonesia and Russia are still falling like stones, 
their political chaos worsened by economic collapse, which in turn, 
provokes deeper political troubles. Brazil is a totally different 
case, the administration says, deserving of the new approach first 
outlined by President Clinton last month to head off financial crises 
early, before they overwhelm countries and spread elsewhere. Brazil's 
problems are only partly of its own making. Investors fled after Russia's 
troubles caused convulsions in emerging markets around the world. 
The solution offered Friday was a ``precautionary'' aid program, and 
the Brazilians will have access to more than half of the $42 billion 
in the next few months, as long as they are moving toward the reforms 
they have promised. The strategy is to convince private investors 
around the world that the Brazilian government has both the will to 
reform and the cash to fight off speculators and nervous bankers. 
``This is a totally noncomparable situation to what happened in Russia,'' 
Rubin insisted Friday, referring to a country that embraced IMF reforms 
for all of three weeks in August, until the currency was devalued, 
Parliament refused to pass an austerity plan, and President Boris 
Yeltsin dismissed the reformers who had negotiated the bailout deal. 
``While there are no certainties,'' Rubin said, ``we believe that 
this is the right program both for the people of Brazil and for the 
economic well-being of the American people.'' If there is a lesson 
from the last four bailout efforts, though, it is that the best-negotiated 
plans can run afoul of domestic politics and unpredictable economic 
winds. And the plan for Brazil is fraught with similar risks. The 
first and smallest risk is that the Brazilians will not be able to 
pay back its lenders _ the IMF, the World Bank, and the 20 countries 
that have contributed to the bailout, led by the United States. The 
$40 billion in currency reserves still sitting in Brazil's central 
bank reduces that risk in just the way a bank is more comfortable 
lending to someone with money in the bank than to someone without. 
But in the last few months Brazil saw $30 billion in reserves washed 
away, as it tried to defend its currency. If its reserves were a real 
solution, it would not need to borrow money in the first place. But 
Rubin knows that his best protection is political. The United States 
is Brazil's biggest trading partner and the architect of the bailout 
plan. And one of the unspoken rules of the financial markets is that 
powerful creditors get paid back first _ because the borrower may 
need them again. The second risk is that the plan Brazil agreed to 
Friday could stabilize its currency, but worsen its recession. ``The 
biggest reason why this is a huge gamble is that we are knowingly 
sending Brazil into recession,'' said Jeffrey Sachs, the Harvard economist 
who has emerged as one of the IMF's harshest critics. The cutbacks 
in government spending, the high interest rates to defend the currency 
and Brazil's refusal to devalue that currency _ which would make its 
exports less expensive _ ``show that the policy has not responded 
to a year in which we've discovered the downside of IMF bailouts,'' 
Sachs insists. The fund said Friday that it had learned plenty. Its 
plans for Brazil, it insists, include the preservation of crucial 
programs to help the poor. And it is already pressing private banks 
to keep open their lines of credit to Brazil, rather than to use the 
bailout to get their money out of the country. ``Every effort has 
been made to spare basic social programs from the expenditure cuts 
that fiscal discipline requires,'' Michel Camdessus, the managing 
director of the IMF, said Friday. Perhaps the biggest risk is that 
the plan will take the pressure off the Brazilian Congress to act. 
For while the United States and the IMF could threaten to hold up 
their aid money, the fact is that any such move would signal to the 
markets that Washington had lost confidence in Brazil's commitment 
to reform. And that, in turn, could easily fuel the panic that Rubin, 
Camdessus and leaders around the world have been trying to quell. 
In short, with the commitment to help Brazil, there is no easy exit 
if things go bad. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>