<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0394 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a bid to outstrip the United States in economic growth next year 
despite the uncertainties in global markets, Mexico proposed one of 
the leanest federal budgets in its history on Friday and said it would 
impose some unpopular taxes to keep the deficit down. If the Congress 
accepts the basics of the 1999 budget announced by Finance Minister 
Angel Gurria, Mexico will have cut $10 billion in federal spending 
in five years. But officials said they were betting on tight government 
finances to bring down inflation and keep the investment environment 
stable so that the country, led by a thriving export sector, will 
grow by 3 percent next year. That is about twice the expansion they 
expect to see in the neighbor to the north. Mexico is one of the United 
States' largest trading partners. Demand for goods from the United 
States this year in its surprisingly resilient economy did much to 
make up for the plunge in U.S. exports to ailing Asian nations. Mexican 
officials believe their 1999 goal is realistic, because despite world 
turmoil, the country will close out 1998 with 4.6 percent growth. 
They project that inflation will decline next year to 13 percent, 
down from 17.6 percent in 1998. The stern fiscal discipline practiced 
by President Ernesto Zedillo contrasts with the loose ways of Brazil, 
Latin America's biggest economy, where a federal deficit of 7 percent 
generated waves of financial instability that threatened in recent 
weeks to radiate to all of the emerging markets. Gurria said he would 
try to hold Mexico's deficit to 1.25 percent of the gross domestic 
product next year even though federal revenue will decline because 
of persisting record-low petroleum prices. Mexico calculates that 
it will get no more than $11 a barrel on average for its oil next 
year. Because of lost oil income in 1998, the country will post a 
1.42 percent deficit for the year. Though officials expect foreign 
investment to remain strong, perhaps as much as $10 billion next year, 
they also foresee that international credit will be severely limited, 
increasing the costs of borrowing money and servicing the foreign 
debt. The government plans $2.25 billion in spending cuts next year. 
``We are down to the bone,'' Undersecretary of Finance Martin Werner 
said Friday. In coming days officials will announce the first increase 
since 1995 in gasoline and diesel prices, in order to collect more 
taxes on fuel sales. Gurria also proposed a 15 percent tax on local 
and long-distance telephone calls. To sweeten the package for wary 
opposition lawmakers, the government wants to raise income taxes from 
34 percent to 37 percent for the wealthiest Mexicans. Officials decided 
not to eliminate subsidies on electricity, a move that was dreaded 
by business. Gurria's $101.7 billion budget proposal, and the carefully 
conciliatory speech he gave to present it, drew mildly favorable initial 
responses in the lower house of Congress. But one item that is certain 
to arouse opposition is the government's request to double the funds 
next year, to $2.43 billion, for financing its bailout of banks. The 
acrimonious congressional debate over the $65 billion bailout, now 
in its eighth month, went into a full stall last week. Opposition 
lawmakers have accused government officials of violating the Constitution 
and squandering the treasury to rescue failed or corrupt bankers. 
Werner said Friday that the prolonged feud over the bailout had given 
investors doubts about the stability of Mexico's financial system, 
resulting in an increase in interest rates. ``The discussion has wandered 
far away from the central issue of lowering the cost to the government 
of the bailout,'' Werner said. ``We have seen a lot of magical formulas 
for solving the problem which do nothing more than deceive people.'' 
He acknowledged, however, that the government had absorbed losses 
of $11.5 billion over the last five years to save and revive institutions 
left behind by just three failed Mexican bankers. The three, Jorge 
Lankenau Rocha, Angel Isidoro Rodriguez Saez and Carlos Cabal Peniche, 
bought banks from the government during its privatization campaign 
in the early 1990s. Lankenau is in jail and Rodriguez is out on bail, 
both of them facing multimillion-dollar fraud charges. Cabal, a fugitive 
for four years, was arrested last week in Australia and is wanted 
in Mexico on 21 counts of fraud. Werner said he was confident that 
opposition lawmakers, who won a majority in the lower house of Congress 
in 1997 and will approve a federal budget for only the second time 
in Mexican history, would understand that the government was offering 
the lowest possible budget. ``We have been at this for 10 or 15 years,'' 
Werner said, referring to government technocrats like him. Congressional 
deputies, he added, ``don't have the kind of fresh experience that 
we do.'' Nevertheless, he said, government officials, taking a lesson 
from setbacks in the long debate over the bank bailout, took ``hours 
and hours'' to discuss the budget with key legislators before presenting 
the final version. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>