<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of the biggest questions facing anyone interested in understanding 
American society, indeed the modern condition generally, is why conservative 
evangelical Christianity not only persists in the United States but 
positively thrives. By now, it is no secret that evangelicals are 
growing in number. Less well known is that evangelicals outrank even 
fundamentalists in their adherence to traditional doctrines, their 
defense of the Bible, their rate of churchgoing, their personal evangelizing 
and their financial support for efforts to spread the Gospel. And 
when it comes to believing in social change, participating in politics, 
voting or volunteering in community programs, evangelicals leave mainline 
Protestants, as well as Roman Catholics, in the dust. But wait a minute. 
Wasn't this kind of straightforward Bible-based faith banished to 
the nation's cultural backwaters 73 years ago by the anti-evolution 
excesses of the Scopes trial in Dayton, Tenn.? And if that didn't 
do the trick, shouldn't the certainties of the old-time religion have 
long since fallen victim to the corrosive effects of modern pluralism? 
These are questions not to be answered by pundits' obsession with 
charting every last twitch of the religious right, which is only one 
facet of conservative religion in the United States. Nor can they 
be answered by a couple of popular theories. One is that evangelical 
Christianity flourishes only in sheltered zones where geography, demography, 
ignorance or homogeneity shields it from contact with what Walter 
Lippmann, in 1929, called the ``acids of modernity.'' The other is 
that evangelical beliefs appeal to anxious people who feel their social 
status threatened and yearn for security in a world of rapid change. 
Neither theory fits the facts. By most standards measuring contact 
with this elusive thing called modernity _ level of higher education, 
employment patterns, income, urban vs. rural residence _ people who 
identify themselves as evangelical Christians are barely different 
from other Americans. They are more highly educated, for example, 
than are those calling themselves religious liberals or nonreligious, 
and only slightly less likely to have a graduate education than mainline 
Protestants. Nor is there evidence that evangelicals are any more 
economically anxious or threatened by downward mobility than other 
Americans. Although they do feel that traditional values are under 
siege, they appear to be more worried about the danger this poses 
to others than to themselves and their own families. These findings 
are from a careful new study, ``American Evangelicalism: Embattled 
and Thriving'' (University of Chicago Press), by Professor Christian 
Smith, a sociologist at the University of North Carolina. Smith's 
conclusion, based on extensive polling and interviews, is that evangelical 
Christianity is thriving not merely in the face of modern pluralism 
but precisely because of it. A zest for conflict and for drawing up 
religious battle lines is deeply embedded in the ``cultural DNA'' 
of American evangelicalism, Smith says, and pluralism is just the 
environment where it can flourish. Evangelicals are confident that 
they possess an ultimate truth, although Smith found that they ``are 
not particularly arrogant or triumphalistic'' about it. They are similarly 
convinced that they have a superior morality to guide them through 
life and a mission to bring these gifts to the world. Pluralistic 
modernity may implicitly challenge such claims. But this condition 
of ``sustained dissonance,'' rather than undermining evangelical identity, 
Smith believes, only sharpens and strengthens it. His book offers 
a theory of religious subcultures that supplements the theory that 
evangelical success owes primarily to its entrepreneurial competitiveness 
in the nation's ``free market'' of religions. He also amends the theory 
emphasizing strictness of belief and practice as the key to the religious 
groups' vitality: if that were the case, evangelicals would not be 
enjoying greater vitality than their more unbending theological cousins, 
the fundamentalists. In fact, American evangelicalism has created 
a subculture managing to maintain ``both high tension with and high 
integration into mainstream American society simultaneously,'' he 
writes. ``Contemporary pluralism creates a situation in which evangelicals 
can perpetually maintain but never resolve their struggle with the 
nonevangelical world.'' That last sentence, of course, points to a 
problem. The vibrant evangelical Christianity of the last century 
not only flourished in the interstices of personal and family life 
but also moved the whole culture and shaped the nation's institutions. 
It inspired social reforms, from abolitionism to temperance. It founded 
colleges, built hospitals, created charities and molded national sentiment. 
Now, however, Smith points out, the very factors that assure the continuing 
vitality of evangelicalism also appear to cripple its hopes of transforming 
the world. Many Americans, for example, are turned off by some of 
the traits _ ``personal conviction, confident evangelism, moral rectitude, 
fervent devotion'' _ that Smith cites as part of evangelicalism's 
distinctive identity. Even more of an obstacle, he argues, are the 
practical limits of evangelicals' preference for a strategy of changing 
society through individual conversions, personal influence and strictly 
voluntary action. Smith does not say so, but there may be something 
still more basic operating here. Has evangelical Christianity grown 
unconsciously fond of the cultural gridlock that has become a chief 
precondition of evangelicalism's continuing vigor? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>