<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0406 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton agreed Friday to pay Paula Jones $850,000 to drop 
her legal claim that he crudely propositioned her seven years ago. 
The payment settles a lawsuit that Clinton's advisers had once mocked 
but that, by forcing his intimate life into public view, had begun 
threatening his hold on the presidency. To reach the agreement, Mrs. 
Jones dropped what she had once called her most important demand: 
that Clinton apologize and admit wrongdoing. She had wanted him to 
acknowledge that in 1991, when he was governor of Arkansas and she 
a clerk employed by the state, he had her summoned to a Little Rock 
hotel room and made a lewd advance. Through his lawyer, Robert Bennett, 
the president continued Friday to call Mrs. Jones' accusation baseless. 
But by settling, he was able to eliminate the risk that an appeals 
court would prolong the case, which was dismissed in April by a U.S. 
District Court judge in Little Rock. Clinton's advisers had feared 
that Mrs. Jones would win her appeal, and that her lawyers would be 
able to depose the president once again. White House officials believe 
that the settlement will also help congressional Democrats protect 
him from impeachment. It was in a deposition in the Jones case on 
Jan. 17 that Clinton denied a sexual relationship with former White 
House intern Monica Lewinsky. Out of the president's efforts to conceal 
that affair from Mrs. Jones' lawyers, Independent Prosecutor Kenneth 
Starr built a case for possible impeachment on perjury, witness-tampering 
and obstruction-of-justice charges that the House Judiciary Committee 
is now considering. ``The president has decided he is not prepared 
to spend one more hour on this matter,'' Bennett said in announcing 
the settlement. Clinton's busy schedule aside, even his allies had 
long viewed the expense to him of not settling the case sooner _ in 
prestige, political capital and perhaps his place in history _ as 
incalculable. Even after the settlement was announced Friday, some 
Clinton loyalists lamented the for-want-of-a-nail element. One adviser 
just groaned when asked if he wished the president had settled earlier. 
Another Clinton associate said that if the case had been settled earlier, 
``no one would know who Monica Lewinsky was.'' John Whitehead, one 
of Mrs. Jones' lawyers, said, ``The settlement brings to a conclusion 
four long years of seeking justice for Paula.'' ``The suit has raised 
a lot of important issues that the American people and their leaders 
will have to deal with for years to come,'' Whitehead added, ``such 
as the importance of protecting powerless women from workplace harassment 
and the role of the rule of law in our highest offices.'' The terse, 
seven-point agreement, filed Friday with the Little Rock judge, Susan 
Webber Wright, calls for Clinton to pay Mrs. Jones within 60 days. 
Advisers to the president said that the money will come from a legal 
defense fund established for the Clintons. In a separate agreement 
that was not disclosed, Mrs. Jones' lawyers said that she renounced 
any intention to accept money from Abe Hirschfeld, a New York City 
real estate magnate. White House advisers said they hoped that the 
$850,000 could be covered by Clinton's personal insurance policies. 
But if the two companies who have insured the president declined to 
pay, the advisers said, the money would come from the president's 
legal defense fund, which now has a balance of more than $2 million. 
Hillary Rodham Clinton, who is said by associates to be particularly 
concerned about her family's mounting legal bills, had been worried 
that a settlement might make too big a dent in the defense fund. But 
the Clintons' fund-raisers assured her that they could easily replenish 
any funds used toward a Jones settlement. Mrs. Clinton had also been 
opposed to any settlement that included an apology, aides said, since 
it would have carried an acknowledgment of conduct the president denied. 
The agreement filed Friday states: ``Nothing in this agreement shall 
by construed to be an admission of liability or wrongdoing by any 
party.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>