<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0108 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was last January at the Detroit auto show, and Toyota had just 
pulled the wraps off its Camry Solara. The gleaming coupe, yet unseen 
by the public, spun slowly on a turntable. But a glance over one's 
shoulder, across the convention center, found a strikingly similar 
car rotating on another turntable a couple of displays away. That 
coupe, a Honda Accord, was already of sale. Given the two cars' close 
resemblance, from the lines of their front ends to the flow of sheet 
metal along their sides, a casual onlooker could be forgiven for thinking 
these were two versions of the same car. And just as Honda executives 
had explained their game plan months before, Toyota officials were 
saying that coupes, which commanded a huge share of the American market 
in the 1960s, but lost their lead to more practical sedans by the 
1980s, could yet make a comeback. Both companies are betting that 
affluent, aging baby boomers _ their children grown, their nostalgia 
raging _ are ready to climb out of four-door cars, mini-vans and even 
sport utilities, if they were only offered a dash of style; roomy, 
comfortable accommodations, and a reasonable price. The formula worked 
for Honda with the Accord coupe and for Acura with its CL models. 
Now Toyota has borrowed that recipe for its 1999 Camry Solara. Toyota 
officials say the Solara (pronounced so-LAHR-uh) will appeal to baby 
boomers entering their peak earnings years who are ``nostalgic for 
the sports car of their youth but need more room and comfort than 
a sport car can provide.'' Indeed, Honda says buyers of the Accord 
coupe are equally divided between single people and married couples, 
between women and men. Buyers' median age is 46 and median income 
is a relatively high $73,000. Data on initial buyers of the Solara, 
which went on sale this fall, will not be available until early next 
year, but its demographics are likely to be similar. (Although Toyota's 
marketing efforts suggest that the Solara is particularly aimed at 
women.) At once sleek and conservative, the Solara is slightly sporty, 
but its styling does not break any new ground. Designed at Toyota's 
studio in California and built in Cambridge, Ontario, the Solara has 
tapered flanks defined by a distinctive crease that runs from the 
front fender along the length of the car to a swoopy rear end with 
narrow taillamps. Inside, the Solara cabin is more elegant and comfortable 
than those of most sporty coupes, befitting the expanding physiques 
of aging boomers. The test car, a top-of-the-line SLE _ a less expensive 
SE is also available _ was outfitted in attractive beige and taupe 
leather. Clean and uncluttered, the interior was reminiscent of a 
Camry sedan, though definitely upgraded. Controls and instruments 
were simply and logically laid out, with one glaring exception: The 
power control for the outside mirror is on the dash, hidden behind 
the steering wheel. Toyota is usually more careful about such things. 
The Solara technically seats five adults, but four will feel much 
more comfortable. Rear headroom and legroom are relatively generous 
for a coupe. The rear seat splits and folds to expand the roomy 14.1-cubic-foot 
trunk. The lid is also lower, making it friendlier to aching backs 
than the Accord coupe, which has a very high liftover because of its 
uplifted rear end. Like the Camry sedan, the Solara can be ordered 
with a four-cylinder engine (a 2.2-liter, dual-overhead-cam unit producing 
135 horsepower) or a V6 (3 liters, dual-overhead cams, 200 horsepower). 
The Accord's four-cylinder is more powerful than the Camry's, but 
the Honda V6 has less torque). Both engines can be paired with either 
a four-speed automatic transmission or a five-speed manual. I usually 
favor a manual, but after driving V6-powered Solaras with both, I 
decided I would opt for the automatic. The stick shift was notchy 
and imprecise, and the clutch was not smooth. No matter: Few buyers 
are likely to be bothered with a manual transmission. Based on its 
styling, one might expect the Solara to perform in a somewhat sporty 
fashion. Yet the looks are deceiving: despite a suspension tuned to 
be tighter than the Camry sedan's, and the availability of a sport 
package with larger tires and an even firmer suspension, the Solara's 
handling is unremarkable. In aggressive driving on curving mountain 
roads, the Solara felt nervous and confused. And although the steering 
has been tuned to provide more road feel than one gets from the sedan, 
the Solara seemed slow to respond to the driver's commands, with a 
lag between the turning of the steering wheel and the car's response. 
To be sure, a lot of Solara buyers will not notice. Target customers 
are unlikely to be aggressive drivers; indeed, many will be moving 
out of Camry sedans that handle similarly. And like the Camrys they 
traded in, the Solara provides a comfortable, quiet ride. It is well-suited 
to crosstown travel and downright comforting in highway cruising. 
The excellent V6 has plenty of pep. The level of quality in the Solara 
is predictable as well. The overall fit and finish are as close to 
perfection as any manufacturer achieves. You can bet that reliability 
will be superb, as it is with all Toyotas. Prices start at $19,000, 
with standard features like a cruise control and power windows, locks 
and mirrors. The premium SLE, at $25,408, has the V6, antilock brakes, 
leather trim, power driver's seat, automatic climate control, a Homelink 
transmitter for garage doors and security gates, keyless entry, a 
security system and a 200-watt stereo with cassette and CD players. 
Options include side air bags up front. The price range, which tops 
out at $27,000, is close to the Accord's. And in nearly every other 
way, the two cars' hardware is so similar that a shopper could make 
a choice on ``software'': brand loyalty, dealer preference, even the 
feel of the seats. Both are safe bets, offering a little style and 
a dab of sport without sacrificing comfort or room. INSIDE TRACK: 
A middle-of-the-road coupe for the comfortable middle class. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>