<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A friend with a newly dug flower bed wanted advice last spring on 
what to plant in it. She wanted something that would not only bloom 
profusely from spring to fall, with little care, but would also come 
up again of its own accord the following year. The best idea I could 
offer was plastic posies. It is in the nature of gardeners to wish 
for attributes that their plants do not have, like a longer season 
of bloom, and it is in the nature of plant breeders to provide as 
many of those attributes as their art can manage. But so far no horticultural 
wizardry has been developed that will turn an annual _ the best choice 
for a steady supply of blooms _ into a perennial. So we may as well 
learn to live with the distinction. Annuals are plants that live for 
one season. They germinate, flower, produce seed and die in less than 
a year. Most common bedding plants _ petunias, marigolds, impatiens, 
zinnias _ are annuals. If you want them in the garden, you must plant 
them afresh each spring. What an annual lacks in winter-hardiness 
it more than makes up for in flowering prowess. That is because its 
raison d'etre is to produce seed. Since the plant itself will die, 
its only method of perpetuating itself is through seed. It blooms 
and blooms, and if you keep thwarting its reproductive efforts by 
removing the blossoms as they fade, it blooms and blooms some more. 
A few annuals will come back the following year, but from the seed 
they manage to produce, not from their own roots. Alyssum, annual 
hollyhocks, cosmos and cleome are among these, and in some protected 
sites they are so reliable that they may as well be perennials. Perennials, 
for that matter, may not come back at all. They are defined as plants 
that live for at least three seasons (to set them apart from biennials 
like sweet William, which live for two seasons, producing foliage 
in the first, and flowers and seed in the second). But the definition 
doesn't take into account that some are perennial only in climates 
that suit them. The lovely late-blooming Mexican sage, for example, 
is perennial, as are English daisies, but the sage is too tender for 
my frigid winters in Pennsylvania, and the daisies cannot tolerate 
my hot, humid summers. Trees and shrubs are perennials, too, but the 
perennials under discussion here are herbaceous perennials rather 
than woody ones. Woody perennials, like lilacs, azaleas and maple 
trees, leaf out and bloom on the skeleton of last year's plant. Herbaceous 
perennials die to the ground each winter and come back from their 
roots in the spring. The ability to survive from one year to the next 
means that perennial species are far less bent on progeny than are 
annuals. Notwithstanding that the flowers of many perennials are voluptuous 
to the point of licentiousness, perennials are quite chaste, in contrast 
to annuals' promiscuity. A perennial's bloom period, which is a plant's 
equivalent of a sex life, is typically short, and occurs at the same 
time each year. This is an inconvenience for gardeners who want the 
Oriental poppies to bloom all summer, or the Japanese iris to flower 
with the pink turtlehead, because they would look so good together. 
Alas, it is not to be. Endless tinkering by scientists has produced 
some hybrid perennials that bloom more than once a year or for longer 
periods than normal for the species. Many modern-day lilies are repeat 
bloomers, for example, and a few, including the famous Stella de Oro, 
flower all season long. In most cases, however, the breadth is achieved 
at the sacrifice of the depth. Perennials bred for an extended flowering 
season tend to be stingy with their blossoms, producing a few at a 
time, albeit for a long time. If I am to see only 100 blossoms all 
season on my dianthus, then let me see them all at once, in a show 
that will take my breath away, rather than a half-dozen each week 
that I will scarcely notice. It is the artful blending of perennials 
with different bloom periods that makes a perennial garden appear 
to be in full flower all season. If the perennials are young and have 
not yet spread to fill their allotted space, or even if they have, 
it is no breach of garden etiquette to use a few drifts of annuals 
as insurance. But even the best annuals will not bloom from earliest 
spring to frost. Petunias come closest, because of their frost-hardiness 
and the fact that some have been bred to set no seed or only sterile 
seed. They bloom and bloom, satisfying the gardener but not their 
reproductive urges. For the longest show from annuals, it is wise 
to plant hardy and tender ones. Hardy annuals, like snapdragons and 
calendula, can handle late spring frosts and will flower gleefully 
by the time it is safe to plant the impatiens and coleus. Hardy annuals 
tend not to like the heat of midsummer, and in any case will probably 
have bloomed themselves out by then. They can be pulled out and replaced 
with annuals that will be hardy at the other end of the season, like 
annual chrysanthemums and petunias. None of this completely answers 
my friend's wish for a steadily blooming flower garden that requires 
little care. But to be a gardener presupposes some tolerance of, even 
some desire for, working in the soil and getting a little dirt under 
the fingernails. Without these, there is still the option of vinyl 
violets and plastic petunias. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>