<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0441 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hemmed in by large windows overlooking St. Peter's Lutheran Church 
in midtown Manhattan, the fourth-floor library shared by the two men 
running the world's largest financial services concern is a study 
in contrasts. In part, the library's design is coolly modern and restrained, 
in keeping with the personality of one of Citigroup's co-chief executives, 
John S. Reed. But it also reveals a certain baronial excess _ in keeping 
with the urges of Reed's counterpart, Sanford I. Weill _ such as a 
wall-sized fireplace painstakingly installed for about $100,000. Yet, 
despite the sort of differences in style on which many a megamerger 
has foundered, Reed and Weill have only grown closer in the seven 
months since they announced the biggest merger in history _ a tumultuous 
period that has included wrenching financial upheaval and the departure 
two weeks ago of the executive considered their heir apparent. ``You 
never really know until you get married what it's going to be like,'' 
said Weill, 65, seated on a plump leather sofa in his private office 
abutting the library as he spoke of his partnership with Reed. ``And 
I would say this marriage is off to a very good start. And we lived 
in the engagement period through one of the most volatile times in 
the history of financial markets.'' Reed, 59, whose office is on the 
other side of the library, agrees. ``We are getting along fine,'' 
he said. ``Better probably than each of us in the secret hideaways 
of our brains thought would be the case.'' The bonhomie seems genuine 
_ a rarity when titans go into business together, rarer still when 
their first act is to duck the tough decision to put one person clearly 
in charge. But for all the personal warmth, Weill and Reed preside 
over a company severely shaken by executive turmoil and struggling 
for direction in corporate banking, one of its two main businesses. 
In separate interviews, each acknowledged the problems _ indeed, Weill 
promised that crucial decisions would be made within the next two 
weeks. ``What we're doing now is horrible,'' he said of the corporate 
banking operation, ``and we're going to end up losing the best of 
the people.'' Others share his impatience. Employees complain that 
they get conflicting marching orders from the company's senior executives. 
Fundamental decisions about the future of the company remain unmade, 
with the results of this month's congressional elections threatening 
to upset a regulatory environment that seemed ready to welcome Citigroup's 
blending of financial services. And analysts say they need more proof 
that Weill and Reed can lead the behemoth they created into calmer 
times. ``The situation has forced them to be more engaged than they 
probably wanted to be when this thing was announced,'' said David 
Berry, an analyst with Keefe, Bruyette &AMP; Woods. ``They have to 
make this thing get off the organizational charts and work in the 
real world.'' The vision presented when Reed's Citicorp and Weill's 
Travelers Group merged in April remains grandiose _ that of a global 
financial superstore selling everything from mortgages, credit cards 
and automobile insurance in its consumer business to stocks, bonds 
and loans to big companies in its corporate business. But unsettling 
events in the real world have trampled on part of that vision. While 
the consumer business is off to a crisp start, the forced resignation 
on Nov. 1 of James E. Dimon, Citigroup's president and Weill's longtime 
protege, laid bare how little progress has been made in bringing together 
strong-willed executives and disparate product lines in Citigroup's 
corporate banking business. Previous attempts by other companies to 
wed the relatively staid, buttoned-down world of traditional commercial 
banking to the more free-wheeling world of investment banking have 
also run into trouble. Commercial bankers tend to work hard at building 
relationships with clients, are accustomed to working within a corporate 
bureaucracy and receive modest salaries by Wall Street standards. 
Investment bankers work deal to deal, cultivate their independence 
and are lushly compensated. All of this makes commercial and investment 
bankers strange bedfellows in even the best of circumstances. And 
in Citigroup's case, the blending has been made tougher by the fact 
that Travelers had only begun the job of digesting its acquisition 
of Salomon Brothers, the bond-trading giant, when merger discussions 
began with Citicorp. For Citigroup, the tension came to a head three 
weeks ago, when tempers flared and complaints were loudly aired at 
a retreat at the Greenbrier resort in West Virginia. ``Going there, 
we knew we didn't have our act together,'' Weill said. ``We had made 
many more decisions on coming together on the consumer side of the 
business _ people decisions, cost-cutting decisions _ and we were 
not really at the same place on the corporate side. So we knew that 
was an issue.'' One result of the confusion and conflict was the unceremonious 
ouster of Dimon, 42, whose duties included helping make Citicorp's 
and Travelers' corporate businesses work together. The ouster was 
roundly criticized by analysts and Citigroup employees, primarily 
former colleagues from Travelers. Of Dimon's departure, Weill would 
say only that ``this was a unique relationship for more than 15 years,'' 
adding that ``it was a week I would not want to relive.'' ``I think 
we shocked a lot of people a week ago,'' Weill said on Tuesday. ``And 
I think we want to create stability and let people get a feeling of 
where we're going and how we're going to handle things.'' Reed, noting 
that he liked Dimon ``personally and professionally,'' added that 
he nonetheless considered Dimon's ouster ``the right business decision.'' 
He and Weill, he said, are not making rash decisions as they try to 
move Citigroup forward. ``Sandy and I are pretty serious people,'' 
Reed said. ``We're not cavalier, and if we did a reorganization, you've 
got to assume we did it for semireasonable reasons, and it wasn't 
just, we got up one morning and decided we'd sort of shoot people 
at random.'' These two men, who elected to rope themselves together 
in an attempt to scale a merger of Alpine proportions, are the most 
unlikely of soul mates. Weill, a self-made billionaire, is the Brooklyn-born 
son of immigrants from Poland. He began his career as a shy Wall Street 
messenger, and after decades of voracious deal-making emerged as the 
portly and jocular head of Travelers and a fixture in rarefied Manhattan 
social circles. Reed, who was raised in Argentina and Brazil, is by 
training a cerebral and methodical engineer who spent his entire career 
at Citicorp, ascending to chief executive in 1984. By nature as reserved 
as Weill is effusive, Reed survived Citicorp's near-collapse several 
years ago in part because he is abundantly skilled in the sometimes 
vicious art of corporate politics. Weill is a homebody who has cultivated 
a coterie of loyal executives, while Reed is a globe-trotter and, 
for the most part, has operated as a loner. Yet the two men seem to 
authentically enjoy each other's company. And they are clearly determined 
to make their merger a success; among the goals they have set together 
is a doubling of Citigroup's profits by the end of 2002, from $6.7 
billion last year. ``John's incredibly intelligent, and he has decades 
of experience in this global marketplace that I do not, so I learn 
a lot from him,'' Weill said. ``He doesn't take any of my space, and 
I don't think I take any of his. He has a real interesting thought 
process that he goes through to come to a decision. I'm maybe more 
intuitive, but 99 percent of the time we come to the exact same place.'' 
Reed countered: ``He always says 99 percent. I haven't hit the 1 percent 
yet. One of these days I'll have to find out where we differ.'' In 
fact, Reed readily cites one clear difference: ``He gets things done 
through a web of people relationships, which is very different than 
the sort of process orientation that I've had.'' In addition, Reed 
said, ``He's an instinctive manager, and I probably hadn't fully appreciated 
that, so I've learned to listen to some of his instincts, which are 
pretty good.'' Still, other differences emerge from conversations 
with the two men _ differences directly relevant to the problems that 
Citigroup is having in getting its feet on the ground. For one thing, 
Weill does not share Reed's sense of urgency about the importance 
of anointing and grooming a successor in the wake of Dimon's departure. 
For another, Reed voiced a skepticism about investment banking that 
Weill did not. All of this, of course, is layered on top of continuing 
unrest on the corporate side of Citigroup's business. The co-chief 
executives have appointed Michael A. Carpenter and Victor J. Menezes 
to run the corporate business, now that Dimon is gone. Carpenter will 
oversee the investment banking operations inherited from Travelers, 
as well as Citicorp's private banking and foreign exchange operations 
and other capital markets activities. Menezes will look after the 
company's emerging-markets operation and commercial banking. Reed 
and Weill said they planned to let these business operate somewhat 
independently in markets where Travelers and Citicorp each had ``critical 
mass'' before the merger _ primarily North America. They will be consolidated 
where such mass did not exist _ almost everywhere else. But Citigroup 
employees say they are getting conflicting signals about exactly how 
all of this will proceed, and analysts remain skeptical about where 
things are headed. ``I think they have to do something more profound,'' 
said Judah Kraushaar, a Merrill Lynch analyst. ``They have to do something 
about the pay structures and the egos and show a more rational organizational 
structure. I'm still waiting to hear something new and different.'' 
Reed and Weill said they did not plan to adjust compensation to reduce 
friction between commercial bankers and investment bankers. But Weill 
acknowledged that because of Wall Street's troubles this summer, bonuses 
would be much lower this year than last. On Friday, Citigroup announced 
that bonuses, typically awarded in December, would be delayed until 
January. Some analysts speculate that a flood of talent could leave 
Citigroup after those lower bonuses were awarded. It is still unclear 
how big a role investment banking will ultimately play in Citigroup. 
Weill sees the company becoming the world's top investment bank over 
the next five years, eclipsing rivals like Merrill Lynch and Morgan 
Stanley Dean Witter. But Reed's interests lie mainly in the consumer 
side of the merged business, where he says Citigroup can outflank 
its competitors by pursuing business through more ``channels'': credit 
cards, branch offices, the Internet, insurance agents and stockbrokers, 
for example. Reed said recent conversations with overseas clients 
had convinced him that many were now wary of dealing with investment 
bankers. ``I think banks have a more healthy relationship on the corporate 
side with their customers than do the traditional investment banks,'' 
Reed said. Investment banking giants like Merrill and Morgan Stanley, 
he said, ``sort of fly in and fly out'' of markets and ``are very 
fee-oriented and very transactional-oriented.'' This much is certain: 
Investment banking has been the most troublesome part of Citigroup's 
business. Reed noted that it was problems in Salomon's free-wheeling 
bond-trading business, battered by global financial upheaval, that 
first raised his and Weill's concerns that third-quarter earnings 
were going to plummet. Discussing the matter in August at a home Weill 
owns on Upper Saranac Lake in upstate New York, Reed recalled, ``We 
became aware that our interest-rate-arbitrage business or whatever 
you call it was hanging out there.'' ``We were sort of relaxed and 
carefree,'' he added, ``but when we saw the quarter deteriorating 
in front of us, I think it forced us to concentrate.'' The Greenbrier 
retreat and the management shake-up soon followed. So now what? In 
the next two weeks, Weill said, Citigroup will focus on the best ways 
to expand and on fixing the problems on its corporate side. Among 
other things, he said he intended to ``kill this bureaucracy that 
doesn't give the people in the field the authority to make decisions.'' 
There are other big strategic and tactical choices to make. One is 
how to advance long-stalled legislation needed to keep Citigroup's 
insurance and banking businesses under one roof, given the ascension 
of Phil Gramm, a Texas Republican considered unfriendly to the cause, 
to the chairmanship of the Senate Banking Committee. Another is how 
soon someone will be selected to take Dimon's place as the company's 
likely future leader _ someone who will be associated primarily with 
Citigroup, not Weill's Travelers or Reed's Citicorp. ``It's extremely 
important that somebody be groomed,'' said Reed, who expects Citigroup's 
board to address the issue soon. ``I was working on that with my board 
before the merger'' _ at Citicorp, few apparent successors lasted 
long _ ``and I would think the merger would simply accentuate it because 
neither Sandy nor I are kids. ``Also, I think _ and here Sandy and 
I would have a slightly different description, I think _ my own view 
is that it's quite important to the evolution of this merger that 
at some point Sandy and I step back and allow integrated management 
to take over.'' With co-chief executives, Reed said, it can be hard 
for employees to figure out who is really in charge, and to whom they 
report. Weill is, indeed, of a different mind on the topic of succession. 
``It's less urgent because we have co-CEOs,'' he said. ``We have an 
agreement that we're going to have this place running like a finely 
tuned machine and doing incredibly well before we go.'' So much is 
to be done, yet Weill, at least, can joke about how the duties will 
be divvied up. Strolling through the library that separates his office 
from Reed's, Weill points outside to a small terrace where the wood 
for his fireplace will be stacked. ``Who will cut the wood?'' he is 
asked. ``John will,'' Weill responds with a grin. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>