<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0320 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
``We are not trying to hit home runs,'' said Benjamin Thorndike, lead 
portfolio manager of the Scudder Pathway Series of funds. ``We are 
trying to do well and sleep well at night.'' That's a diversified 
money manager talking about an investment style that has not always 
fared well in the era of double-digit annual gains in the Dow Jones 
industrial average and the Standard &AMP; Poor's 500-stock index. 
Although the stock market has rallied sharply recently, the memory 
of the third-quarter selloff should make diversification attractive 
to investors. In the 12 months through the end of the third quarter, 
which marked the recent low point for the outlook for the world economy, 
some diversified funds outperformed more focused bets on the stocks 
in the Dow and the S&AMP;P 500. The idea is simple. If your investments 
are spread around _ in stocks, in bonds, in foreign stocks, in different 
kinds of bonds and different kinds of stocks _ you have a good chance 
of getting a cushioning rise in one area while another is plunging. 
In the third quarter, for example, the return from government and 
corporate bonds was 4 percent while the Dow, the S&AMP;P 500 and the 
Nasdaq index fell 10 percent or more. Diversification is not the way 
to big stock returns because it reduces risk in exchange for lower 
returns. But it is a way to survive the volatile swings of the stock 
market, which have become much more common over the last year. Investors 
should ``find the comfort zone'' between return and risk, said Gary 
Brinson, chief executive of Brinson Partners, which manages a diversified 
mutual fund. Diversification, he said, means ``the path of that return 
is much less bumpy.'' For conservative investors, diversification 
is also a way to take a dip into stocks. In fact, Scudder is focusing 
on 401(k) investors who have kept too much of their retirement money 
in bonds. But deciding to be diversified is not enough. Investors 
must decide how much risk to take on, which means looking closely 
at the mix of investments in their fund or portfolio. One of the better-performing 
diversified funds is MFS Global Total Return, which has returned 11.8 
percent this year, through October. It slipped 3 percent in the third 
quarter, faring better than the top stock indexes. Over the last 12 
months through October, the return was 14.3 percent, while the Dow 
was up 15.5 percent. The Brinson Global I fund has returned 4.2 percent 
for the year, through October, with two-thirds of its money in bonds. 
The balanced fund of the Scudder Pathway Series is up just 2.4 percent; 
it had more invested in declining emerging markets. Sixty percent 
of the MFS fund is in stocks, and 40 percent in bonds. The stocks 
are spread across sectors and many of them are from abroad. But they 
all tend to be large-capitalization stocks of high quality, said Frederick 
Simmons, the portfolio manager. The bonds, both American and foreign, 
are all government issues. Simmons said the fund's success this year 
was based on several factors. The government bond holdings meant the 
fund was already ``there'' when investors fled to the haven of the 
bond market this summer. The fund had a very small exposure to emerging 
markets, although up to 10 percent of the fund had been invested in 
these markets in the past. Simmons had sold most economically sensitive 
stocks because he feared that economic growth was slowing. And, he 
said, ``I stayed away from shark-infested waters.'' This meant almost 
no technology stocks, except for IBM. Among his major stock holdings 
are Philip Morris; Tyco International, the maker of security systems; 
Pinault-Printemp, the French department store operator, and British 
Petroleum. Despite the good performance this year, Simmons said his 
fund was for conservative investors, including himself. He has put 
a lot of his own money into the fund. But the diversification it provides 
would also suit many other investors because, although the returns 
are lower than focused bets that work, they come with less risk. And 
that means it is, as Thorndike said, easier to sleep at night. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>