<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0316 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Students, thugs and soldiers fought in the streets of Jakarta Friday 
night, as parliament adopted a series of decrees intended to nudge 
this suffering nation toward a more democratic future. It was the 
worst violence since President Suharto resigned last May. At least 
five people were killed, and scores were injured as well-ordered soldiers 
and riot policemen fired volley after volley above and directly into 
throngs of demonstrators and into the grounds of a university. For 
hours Friday night, as the parliament voted to hold general elections 
next spring and to begin a series of reforms, the streets were filled 
with shouts and screams and gunfire and the sting of tear gas. Like 
the students whose protests helped bring down Suharto, the people 
throwing rocks and gasoline bombs Friday night were pressing, with 
the passion of the young, for immediate change. But unlike those earlier 
protesters, their demand that Suharto's successor, President B.J. 
Habibie, step down immediately was less representative of the national 
mood. Apart from the violence of the streets and the country's painfully 
shrinking economy, Indonesia seems in the past six months to have 
settled into a tentative course aimed at real reforms on which both 
the government and its opposition generally agree. But the fury on 
both sides of the battle Friday night showed the depth of anger Suharto 
left behind him in the country he built but also ruined over his 32 
years in power. The volleys of gunfire Friday night set off rattling 
echoes on the glass walls of tall office buildings which, along with 
the violence itself, are among Suharto's legacies. Throughout the 
night, small white ambulances with flashing red lights drove in and 
out of the grounds of Atmajaya Catholic University as the fighting 
surged around them. Many of the casualties had gunshot wounds, but 
it was unclear if these had been inflicted by live ammunition or by 
rubber bullets, which can be fatal at close range. ``I am sorry for 
my country,'' said Eky, a student journalist who like many Indonesians 
uses only one name. ``This is brutal, too brutal. I don't understand 
why the military is doing this.'' There was no clear explanation for 
the harsh tactics of the security forces. Jakarta was filled with 
rumors Friday of a possible coup involving the military and opposition 
politicians who might be using the protests as a pretext. For their 
part, the students _ joined by young men from nearby slums _ seemed 
driven by an unslaked anger over the abuses of the Suharto years and 
an impatience with the deliberate pace of parliament. The young thugs 
had their reasons too. ``Everybody hates the police,'' said Andri, 
17, who had just thrown a plastic bottle of water toward the police 
lines. ``I see the police officer as a cruel person and I hate him.'' 
A Western diplomat watching the demonstrators Friday night said: ``They 
are sick of being poor. They are sick of being at the bottom.'' But 
it is notable, he said, that the students are essentially leaderless 
and that even the newly assertive democratic opposition no longer 
shares their urgency for change. The electoral outline presented to 
parliament by Habibie suits both those in power today and those who 
hope to gain it in the future. The students, with their vague demands 
for immediate change, have been left to shout and throw stones in 
the streets alone. The pressure of their passions and potential violence 
may have helped push the parliament toward reforms, but the decrees 
enacted Friday night were modest. A vote is to be held next year for 
an electoral assembly that will name a new president at the end of 
1999. The military's powerful role in politics is to be phased out, 
but only gradually. And past corruption _ including that of Suharto 
_ is to be investigated. In a sign that a form of democracy is dawning, 
the parliamentary decrees issued Friday night were the product of 
the first contested votes in more than three decades. At one point, 
one of the parties staged a brief walkout. But still, as in the Suharto 
years, the work of the parliament was carried out in something of 
a political vacuum, insulated from the passions of the streets outside. 
nn Clearly under orders to keep the demonstrators far away, the military 
stood in massed formations along the roads leading to the parliament 
building. When the session ended near midnight, scores of legislators 
were stranded in the area, unable to cross the battle lines to go 
home. Though the demands voiced by various student groups vary, the 
parliamentary decrees failed to satisfy many of them, and the possibility 
of further violence hung over the nation Friday night. Whatever the 
motives of the students and the tactics of the military, the violence 
Friday night moved far beyond the realm of policy or politics and 
became a visceral struggle between enraged demonstrators and enraged 
soldiers. ``The students are crazy now,'' a plainclothes security 
officer muttered to a reporter. ``Maybe because since the afternoon 
they have nothing to eat. And the police are the same. They have gone 
crazy too.'' Amid the gunfire, foreign diplomats paced the streets 
with cell phones to their ears, reporting the action to their embassies. 
They said they were angered and shocked by what they were seeing. 
``What's the game?'' said one of them. ``What's the objective of this 
military operation? To wound the students? The kids are inside the 
campus now. The shooting should stop.'' At one point, six truckloads 
of riot police officers drove along the white iron fence that surrounds 
the university, standing and firing their weapons from the back. The 
officers jumped from their trucks and began running and shooting among 
the bushes by the side of the university. One turned and shot an Indonesian 
journalist in the back; his colleagues carried him to an ambulance. 
Later the police, in their heavy, padded helmets, formed a tight line 
only 30 yards from the university's fence and began firing point blank 
into its grounds from behind their tall plastic shields. Some broke 
ranks to hurl back rocks that the students had thrown at them. An 
officer stood behind them with a megaphone, directing their fire. 
From inside the campus grounds came a constant and extraordinary roar 
of animal rage: shouts, yelps, snarls and inarticulate cries, along 
with the sound of smashing glass and a relentless banging of sticks 
and stones against iron railings. In the main foyer, dozens of casualties 
were laid out on the floor and medical workers performed surgery without 
anesthetics. ``It hurts, it's hot!'' moaned a young student named 
Imelda, who had a gunshot wound to her inner thigh. ``Jesus Christ, 
help me, I don't want to die!'' Other students shouted and wept in 
shock and anger and fear. They washed their faces with wet rags to 
clear away the tear gas. They ran to the iron fence and shouted at 
the soldiers: ``You are killers! You are dogs!'' On the street outside, 
lined with banks and office towers, as many as 10,000 demonstrators 
surged, taunting the military. The leaped up and down in the light 
of burning gasoline bombs, running forward occasionally to hurl stones 
and then retreat. They chanted, ``Killers! Killers!'' Soldiers chased 
some of them into an alley and an officer shouted after them: ``Whoever 
doesn't live here, please go home. Go home! But if you want to take 
us on, please, come ahead.'' Then in the midst of this, at just about 
the hour the parliamentary session ended, a police officer walked 
into the no-man's land outside the university's gate. He stood amid 
the rubble of stones bits of brick and offered a truce over megaphone. 
A student ran from the gate and embraced him. Hundreds more poured 
out, shouting, leaping, uncertain whether to fight or cheer. They, 
too, embraced the startled riot policemen, some trying to kiss them 
through their heavy visors. ``Thank you! Thank you!'' one young man 
shouted over and over again. Negotiations began over whether the students 
would be allowed to march to the now-empty parliament building. A 
light rain began to fall. In a widening circle, students and policemen 
lowered themselves to the ground in the thin yellow light of the street 
lamps. They sat together and after a while they began to sing the 
national anthem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>