<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0372 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two months ago Myron S. Scholes made a sentimental journey to the 
steel-manufacturing city of Hamilton, Ontario, to be honored as a 
local boy made good. He had recently been awarded, with Robert C. 
Merton, the Nobel Prize in economics, for breakthrough work in finding 
a way to value risky financial investments known as options. Those 
formulas, devised 25 years ago, made sophisticated investing more 
of a science and less of an art, encouraging the growth of a host 
of new securities markets. Many people made millions of dollars. The 
trip home was one of a number of personal appearances that amounted 
to, in Scholes' words, a victory lap. As the star guest at a cocktail 
party in Hamilton, he described his trip to Sweden to accept the Nobel 
and spoke fondly of the local people who had looked after him in his 
youth. At the end of his reminiscences, he nearly broke down in tears. 
No one in the crowd knew it. But the situation back home was grave. 
The giant investment fund in which Scholes and Merton were partners, 
Long-Term Capital Management, was teetering on the edge of financial 
ruin. The fund had made a variety of big, risky bets that had gone 
terribly wrong. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York would within 
a week organize a private takeover to prevent the fund's outright 
failure and a rout in the world's financial markets. In the end, the 
very thing that the two economists had taught the world to understand 
_ managing investment risk _ proved to be their undoing. Indeed, that 
a fund with so much brain power could crash so ignominiously is the 
decade's most powerful reminder yet of the vast chasm between devising 
investment models and turning them into profitable trades. Neither 
Merton, 54, nor Scholes, 57, agreed to comment for this article. But 
interviews with dozens of friends, academics and people close to Long-Term 
Capital paint a picture of two economists who after years in academia 
were hired by some former students who had made it big on Wall Street. 
The credibility of the two economists made the firm something of a 
legend, attracting heavyweight investors, lenders and trading partners. 
Scholes, who had the charisma of an ace salesman, went on the road 
to help the firm raise money. But for all the brilliance of their 
theory, it was based on an assumption that the future performance 
of bonds would mirror their past movements. When Russia decided to 
stop paying its debts in August, investors in many markets panicked 
in a way that a mathematical model could not have anticipated. And 
for all their prominence as architects of the theories on which traders 
placed their bets, Scholes and Merton in fact were not even directly 
involved in the firm's trading; they were therefore somewhat removed 
from the firm's daily operations. And they were ultimately powerless 
to stop the fund from running aground. Suddenly, the economists were 
each worth much less. Scholes is a natural salesman with a penchant 
for taking risks. He was born in 1941 in Timmins, a small mining town 
in northern Ontario. His father, a dentist, moved the family south 
to Hamilton when Myron and his little brother, David, were young. 
Myron met his future wife, Bonnie Levy, at the public high school 
and received a bachelor of arts from the local McMaster University 
in 1962. He then headed to the University of Chicago, where a master's 
in business was his stepping-stone to a doctorate in finance and economics, 
awarded in 1970. Even while pursuing an academic career, Scholes was 
an avid investor. In an interview with The Ottawa Citizen a year ago, 
he recalled a sobering experience speculating on stocks in the late 
1960s. ``I would take my salary and invest it in the stock market,'' 
Scholes told the newspaper. ``Then I'd use the securities to borrow 
from the bank to live. I always told my wife that we were investing, 
not borrowing.'' A bear market in the early '70s ravaged his stock 
portfolio. With his loans coming due, he recalled, he pleaded with 
his banker for an extension and got it. Stock prices recovered, allowing 
him to repay his debts. In the early '70s, he was on the faculty of 
the Sloan School at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Scholes 
elicits tales of brilliance from colleagues and students at MIT, as 
well as the University of Chicago, where he taught finance and banking 
from 1973 until 1983, and Stanford University, where he was a professor 
in the business and law schools. ``He was very charismatic,'' said 
Carol Levenson, a University of Chicago graduate who is now editor 
of Gimme Credit, a high-grade corporate bond investment advisory service 
in Chicago. ``He was so far over our heads that nobody was smart enough 
to have any interaction with him. We felt like we were studying with 
Einstein.'' At MIT, Scholes teamed up with Fischer Black, an economist 
who had his own consulting firm. The two developed a formula for valuing 
stock options, pioneering work that gave rise to an explosion of futures 
contracts, options and other securities known as derivatives, whose 
value is derived from some other instrument like a stock or a bond. 
At the time, though, the men could not get their work published. Merton, 
also an economist at MIT, examined their formula, applied some high-powered 
mathematics and produced an elegant elaboration that was quickly accepted 
for publication. Ordinarily, the story would end there _ publication 
would have led the formula to forever bear Merton's name. But Merton 
refused to publish his effort until the work of Black and Scholes 
was published, which happened in 1973. So the formula for placing 
a price on stock options is now known throughout the financial world 
as Black-Scholes. This formula, with Merton's elaboration, produced 
Nobel prizes for Scholes and Merton. Black died in 1995, and the Nobel 
is not awarded after death. The work of the three economists ``created 
an entire new industry,'' said Zvi Bodie, a finance professor at Boston 
University and a textbook author with Merton. They devised a trading 
strategy that could take the risk out of buying and selling stock 
options. An investor with a stock option could offset the ups and 
downs of its market price by buying and selling shares of the underlying 
stock in a precise manner. The combination of options and stock described 
by Black-Scholes is riskless, but also theoretical, since it does 
not account for such things as transaction costs. In the process of 
devising this strategy, the economists demonstrated how to put a market 
price on options, futures and other derivatives. Once traders had 
that knowledge, they began aggressively trading stock options on the 
Chicago Board Options Exchange, and began creating hundreds of other 
derivative securities, like those backed by the stream of payments 
from home loans. One of Scholes' former students marvels at the fact 
that the men who came up with the options pricing formula did not 
sell it to the private sector or trade with it themselves. While the 
formula made their reputations, the three economists initially were 
content to carry on their academic pursuits, consulting here and there, 
but largely ignoring the sirens of Wall Street. Merton looked for 
order all around him, whether in the stock market or on the poker 
table. Known for his integrity and brilliance, he has spent his career 
applying high-powered mathematics to the real world. Born in 1944, 
Merton has had a lifelong fascination with numbers and markets. By 
the age of 10, he was dabbling in the stock market. He is the son 
of Robert K. Merton, a renowned professor at Columbia University, 
who founded the sociology of science and coined such phrases as deviant 
behavior, self-fulfilling prophecy and role model. Robert C. Merton 
and two sisters, Stephanie and Vanessa, grew up in the Westchester 
County town of Hastings-on-Hudson. The young Merton received an undergraduate 
degree in mathematical engineering from Columbia and pursued mathematics 
studies at the California Institute of Technology. But his interest 
in stocks and other securities led him to drop mathematics in favor 
of economics. The idea was to apply the mathematical machinery he 
had mastered to complex situations. Because his background was not 
in economics, several graduate schools rejected him. MIT accepted 
him in 1967 only after Harold Freeman, a statistician and the only 
member of the economics department without a Ph.D., intervened on 
his behalf after taking note of the recommendations from impressive 
mathematicians. There Merton quickly hooked up with Paul A. Samuelson 
to work on pricing financial securities. Samuelson, America's first 
Nobel laureate in economics and the leader of the university's economics 
department, said, ``Bob was one of the best graduate students we've 
ever had and one of the youngest people we have ever tenured.'' Samuelson 
_ who pioneered the application of mathematics to economic analysis 
_ added: ``Bob and I were working on some of the same problems. One 
of the joys of teaching was to watch him surpass my work.'' After 
earning a Ph.D. in economics, Merton taught at MIT's business school, 
where Scholes had been appointed assistant professor of finance after 
leaving the University of Chicago. Among others, Merton taught Lawrence 
Hilibrand, David Mullins and Eric Rosenfeld. All of them would later 
become partners of Long-Term Capital. Merton and Scholes did research 
on options pricing and other projects at MIT, and became close friends. 
They also did some consulting, including a project for Donaldson, 
Lufkin &AMP; Jenrette to develop models for pricing options for the 
over-the-counter market and for the new Chicago Board Options Exchange. 
They even had a joint mutual fund venture in the mid-1970s. It was 
not ``a commercial success,'' Merton said last year, but ``a broadening 
experience.'' Of the two economists, Scholes is clearly the extrovert 
and loves telling jokes and stories. Unlike many in academia, he does 
not take himself too seriously. Friends say he would be more likely 
to be mistaken for a salesman than an academic. Scholes can also be 
impetuous. Richard Roll, Allstate chair of finance at the Anderson 
School at UCLA, recalled an incident in 1970, when Scholes spoke at 
Carnegie Mellon in Pittsburgh. ``I'd just bought a new motorcycle,'' 
Roll said. ``He wanted to get on it to see how it felt to drive. I 
said, `Wait a minute, that's a big engine there,' and before I knew 
it he had laid rubber, hit a curb and landed in my neighbor's yard 
in a mangled heap.'' Later that afternoon, Scholes sprained his ankle 
diving into his friend's swimming pool. Merton, who built cars and 
drag-raced in his youth, spends his spare time playing poker _ so 
seriously, says a colleague, that he tries to throw off his opponents 
by looking into a light bulb to constrict his pupils before playing 
his cards. Good players are said to be able to determine by the dilation 
of their opponents' eyes whether their cards are a blessing or a curse. 
The ideas of Scholes and Merton had an immense influence on Wall Street. 
Still, the two economists did not work for a big investment firm until 
late in their careers. Marrying top economists to top traders was 
the idea of John W. Meriwether, a managing director of Salomon Brothers 
in the 1980s and the leader of the firm's bond arbitrage group. In 
1988, one of Meriwether's lieutenants, Rosenfeld, helped bring Merton 
to Salomon as a consultant to John Gutfreund, then the chairman. Merton, 
who also moved from MIT to Harvard University that year, provided 
advice on business matters and changes in global financial markets. 
While Merton remained at Harvard full-time, Scholes took a sabbatical 
from Stanford two years later to join Salomon as a senior adviser 
to the bond arbitrage group, a group that had had great success. Although 
Scholes had met Meriwether socially, it was Rosenfeld who persuaded 
the academic to come to Salomon. Scholes subsequently became a managing 
director. He worked not on trading strategy but on a problem the firm 
had: Salomon's management was disturbed that it was losing derivatives 
trades to rival firms. The reason? Some competitors _ such as J.P. 
Morgan and American International Group _ had top ratings from the 
big credit rating agencies; Salomon did not. A top-notch rating provides 
comfort since one of the biggest risks in a derivatives trade is that 
the firm entering into the transaction will not be solvent or able 
to meet its financial obligations when the contract expires. Over 
about two years, Scholes figured out a way to use some of Salomon's 
capital for a separate subsidiary that landed a top rating from the 
agencies. The stamp of approval cleared the way for a greatly expanded 
derivatives business at Salomon. Scholes was also interested in identifying 
tax strategies. He scoured the world for ways to turn an investment 
that generated income into a capital gain, since gains are taxed at 
a lower rate than income. He also looked for ways to turn pre-tax 
losses into after-tax profits. ``He saw that as a new frontier,'' 
said a partner at a rival Wall Street firm who recalled discussing 
the strategies with him. ``By sheer dint of his brilliance, he could 
be in a position to take advantage of tax loopholes or create some 
himself that would open up vast opportunities even if the trades didn't 
look so profitable on the surface.'' After a scandal involving fraudulent 
bids for Treasury bonds in 1991, Meriwether and other top executives 
resigned from Salomon. Three years later, when Meriwether started 
his own firm, Long-Term Capital in Greenwich, Conn., Scholes and Merton 
joined him as founding partners. Some friends of Scholes' noticed 
his growing affluence. ``He led a higher lifestyle, the vacation houses, 
the cars he drove,'' said a friend who spoke only on the condition 
that he not be identified. ``There were changes when he went to Salomon 
that were magnified when he went to Greenwich.'' Scholes was divorced 
from his wife, Bonnie, with whom he has two daughters, in 1990. He 
married Jan Blaustein, a California lawyer, in New York in September. 
The couple live in Greenwich in a white clapboard house overlooking 
Long Island Sound. He also maintains a home in Palo Alto, Calif., 
and a vacation retreat in Park City, Utah. Friends of Merton's say 
that his lifestyle appeared to change little after his Wall Street 
endeavors, even when Long-Term Capital was riding high and raking 
in profits. Merton was separated two years ago from his wife, whom 
he met just before he turned 17, and with whom he has three grown 
children. In Long-Term Capital's early days, Scholes acted as a salesman, 
meeting with potential clients. ``When they first started out, he 
was instrumental in helping them raise funds, go out on the road,'' 
said Matthew Richardson, associate professor of finance at the Stern 
School of New York University and a research assistant to Scholes 
at Stanford. By all accounts, Scholes was a natural. ``Myron is always 
talking,'' said Roll, the professor of finance at UCLA. ``If you met 
him on the street, the last thing you'd think was he won the Nobel 
Prize for academic research.'' In just a few months, Scholes and others 
raised $1 billion for the fund. Once the money was in hand, however, 
Scholes became less active in day-to-day operations. He did not sit 
on the trading desk, but in the back of Long-Term's offices, contemplating 
the big picture. In the last couple of years he and Merton had been 
studying ways to expand into other businesses, like managing money 
for individuals. From the beginning, Merton was even more distanced 
than Scholes from the fund's daily operations, venturing to Greenwich 
from his office at Harvard once every two weeks or so. Often, his 
contributions to the firm's operations were made by e-mail. Many outsiders 
have assumed that the economic models used by Long-Term Capital to 
identify trading opportunities were the creation of Merton and Scholes. 
But even there, the academics did not dominate. People close to the 
fund said that while Scholes and Merton laid the foundation for the 
models through their early work, most of the refinements were done 
by the traders, who also determined how much in securities to buy 
and when to sell. As any academic will attest, implementing investment 
models is far different from creating them. The Black-Scholes option-pricing 
model, as extended by Merton, is a theory based on assumptions that 
stock and other trades can be executed without cost and _ crucial 
to the fall of Long-Term Capital _ that the volatility of stocks and 
bonds can be known from their past movements. Unexpected events in 
the real world _ like Russia's decision in August to stop paying its 
debts _ can wreak havoc on these models. In fact, the spread in prices 
between similar securities rose to three times their historical levels 
after the Russian debt moratorium. Long-Term Capital had made bets 
that these spreads would ultimately narrow; the fact that they widened 
caused giant losses. While Merton and Scholes were not responsible 
for building Long-Term Capital's models, they did serve as a sounding 
board for the fund's traders. As members of the firm's risk management 
committee _ all the partners were _ they questioned the trades and 
discussed the size of various positions. The risk management committee 
met every Tuesday, and Merton sometimes communicated by conference 
call from Cambridge. Scholes, who serves on the board of several mutual 
funds in the American Century family, is described as always asking 
the most demanding questions at board meetings there. Randall Merk, 
managing director for fixed-income investing at American Century, 
said: ``He'd make us think outside the box, think of things that might 
have gone wrong that you might not have thought of before. Have you 
thought of all the wild cards, if you will.'' According to people 
close to Long-Term Capital, Scholes and Merton posed such questions 
to their partners. For instance, they asked about the size of specific 
trades and whether getting out of them would be difficult if investors 
fled certain markets for safety. But operations like Long-Term Capital 
Management do not run by consensus. Disagreements over policy are 
a way of life. So even if the economists asked tough questions, it 
is likely that they got reasonable answers in return. After all, if 
a trader has taken a position, he ought to know how to defend it. 
It is a bit surprising that the firm had risk management meetings 
only once a week. For a firm its size, daily meetings would be more 
typical. But having made so much money for so long, the partners could 
easily have been lulled into complacency. The first realization that 
they were in trouble came in June, when the fund lost 15 percent of 
its value. Emerging markets were starting to look dicey; in mid-June, 
the Russian government canceled two if its planned debt sales owing 
to lack of investor interest. July was quiet. Then, on Aug. 14, disaster 
struck. Markets everywhere froze as it became clear that Russia was 
about to default on its debt. Many of the firm's partners were out 
of the office, either on vacation or away on business. Meriwether 
was on a plane to China, Rosenfeld was on Nantucket, Mass. Hilibrand 
was out. Scholes was in the office, part of a skeleton crew who watched 
in horror as markets around the world tumbled. According to people 
close to the firm, the partners returned to Greenwich as soon as they 
could. Their capital was dwindling fast, and there was no sign of 
relief from the markets. Nevertheless, the traders continued to believe 
that their positions were sound and would ultimately be profitable. 
It did not take long, however, for them to realize that the large 
size of their positions presented an insurmountable problem in markets 
seized up by fear of risk. But no one at the firm realized how many 
other firms across Wall Street had mimicked the broad outline of Long-Term's 
trades for their own accounts. As a result, when Long-Term tried to 
liquidate some positions to raise capital, it found few buyers. Everyone 
on the Street was trying to sell at the same time. ``A series of events 
occurred that were outside the norm,'' said Martin Gruber, Nomura 
professor of finance at NYU's Stern School and a friend of both men. 
``These catastrophes happen. The fault isn't with the models.'' Rather, 
it was what can be called an organizational flaw: the firm had simply 
become too big. The Long-Term partners decided that raising money 
was the only way out of the mess. They wanted more cash not to abandon 
their trades _ though they did jettison some of what they called nonessential 
positions _ but to see their bets through, according to people close 
to the fund. Fresh money failed to materialize in an acceptable form, 
despite talks with several investment firms and such moneyed investors 
as Warren Buffett and George Soros. Unable to meet calls for more 
collateral from its trading partners, Long-Term sought help from the 
Federal Reserve and a Wall Street consortium. To save their fund, 
the partners sold 90 percent of their equity to a group of banks and 
brokerage firms for $3.6 billion. The personal fortunes of the partners 
were immediately wiped out. Some partners, having borrowed to invest 
in their firm, are facing bankruptcy; Scholes and Merton are not. 
While Long-Term's near collapse does not look good on a resume, the 
economists remain well regarded in academia and will surely be in 
demand as consultants. Scholes had hoped to set up a foundation and 
retreat somewhat from the firm. Those plans are on hold now. What 
Merton and Scholes are learning first hand is just how humbling markets 
can be. It is a lesson that investors repeatedly learn but always 
manage to forget. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>