<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0242 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After three tough years, it seems that things are looking up in Chip 
Land. The first bit of good news came from the industry bellwether 
Intel, which said late Tuesday that fourth-quarter sales and gross 
profit margins would be better than it had expected. A day later, 
the Semiconductor Industry Association predicted that sales next year 
would increase by more than 9 percent from 1998 levels. Since the 
current year will likely see industry sales decline by nearly 11 percent 
from 1997, the worst year-to-year performance in more than a decade, 
it is hard to characterize the association's forecast as wildly bullish. 
Still, chip stocks, like Advanced Micro Devices, Micron Technology 
and Altera, went on a tear last week. Ron Bohn, director of semiconductor 
research at Dataquest in San Jose, Calif., talked about the issues 
facing investors, and the industry, in the coming year. Q. This year 
was a tough one for the business. How have companies addressed the 
problems that confronted them? A. We think the industry made two major 
adjustments this year. First, personal-computer manufacturers have 
adopted better inventory management, moving them toward just-in-time 
inventory techniques. Going forward, the industry now knows that inventories 
at PC manufacturers will be lean. Second, the industry has adjusted 
pretty well to the sub-$1,000-priced personal computer, and won't 
have to make that adjustment again. Q. Presumably, some companies 
have fared better at facing these challenges than others. In your 
view, which companies look the strongest coming out of this? A. We 
don't talk about individual companies, but the big names have been 
through the worst, and are pretty sound. Investors should limit themselves 
to one company in each of the various groups within the industry. 
But there are going to be lots of ups and downs, and there are no 
sure things. Q. Expectations of a good holiday selling season seem 
to be the launching pad for optimism about next year. Are there good 
reasons to expect the positive momentum to continue in 1999? A. Right 
now, unit shipments look good, D-RAM (dynamic random access memory) 
chip pricing has improved and microprocessors look good. In terms 
of personal-computer consumption and cell phone production, Europe 
looks good. And the United States looks OK in terms of PC consumption 
and digital electronics. In terms of the consumer market, other regions 
of the world do not look so good. We still have concerns about Japan 
and the rest of Asia, which collectively were responsible for about 
45 percent of the $138 billion in worldwide revenues generated by 
the industry this year. Some parts of Asia, like Indonesia, are not 
that important as semiconductor consumers. But countries like Korea, 
Taiwan and Singapore, which are important, still have problems. Meanwhile, 
the outlook for Japan is not really positive. The banking crisis there 
will probably limit consumption. The one potential bright spot is 
China, which looks like it will remain a strong buyer of personal 
computers and communications equipment. If that forecast holds, it 
will be good news. Q. Aside from worries about regional weakness, 
what are the other issues confronting the industry in 1999 and beyond? 
A. The Internet is a big top-level issue, one that is positive for 
manufacturers, especially communication semiconductor makers, and 
companies building systems or servers that will facilitate the Internet. 
Right now, the other unanswered question revolves around the Year 
2000 problem. We are not sure what the impact of Y2K will be, if it 
will slow down purchases. I think we will know the answer to that 
by the middle of next year. By then, we will see if companies are 
confident enough about it to be buying new personal computers and 
communication systems, or if they will postpone those purchases. Q. 
Despite your cautious optimism about the business, the last few years 
must have done some damage to the industry. Do you see consolidation 
in the business? A. Yes, but it will be difficult for investors to 
play it. Acquisitions usually involve buying a big factory or a division 
that gets sold off, and it is difficult for investors to determine 
what those parts are worth to a competitor. But there is definitely 
going to be some consolidation. Lots of companies lost lots of money 
in their semiconductor businesses, particularly in their memory business. 
You will see more of what Texas Instruments did earlier this year, 
when it sold its memory business to Micron Technology. The microprocessor 
businesses, like Intel and Advanced Micro Devices, will continue to 
stand alone. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>