<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0115 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During a lunch break at work this summer, Allen Crane tapped into 
the Internet on his desktop computer, looking for life insurance. 
Within half an hour, Crane, a recently married computer programmer 
in Fort Worth, had looked at prices from a couple dozen companies. 
Later, he talked with his wife, Laura, and then, on another lunch 
break, went back to an Internet site called Quickquote and bought 
a $500,000 policy. ``I liked being able to comparison-shop,'' Crane 
said. Internet shopping is booming these days, and shares in companies 
like Amazon.com, which peddles books, and Ebay, an online auction 
service, are surging. But it is not just books, collectibles and electronic 
gear that are popping up on computer screens. As Crane's experience 
shows, more and more people are searching the Internet for good deals 
in insurance as well. Forrester Research in Cambridge, Mass., says 
it expects Internet insurance sales to approach $155 million this 
year and to soar to $4 billion within five years. Two years ago, when 
insurance sales were just beginning on the Internet, about the only 
kind you could buy was term life, the least complicated form of life 
insurance. But now, several Internet distributors are offering auto 
insurance _ listing various companies' offerings on a single Web site 
_ and some have added homeowners', health and disability policies, 
too. The pricing of auto insurance, with its many variables, is difficult 
to translate over the Internet. But because it is mandatory in almost 
every state, it holds the most potential. ``Eighty million households 
have to buy or renew auto insurance each year,'' said Linda Maurer, 
a spokeswoman for Insweb, an Internet distributor in Redwood City, 
Calif., that is betting heavily on auto insurance. ``About four million 
people buy term life.'' For most people, shopping for insurance is 
not quite as onerous as major surgery. But it is a long way down the 
pleasure list from planning a vacation in the tropics. Many customers 
say they just want to see what is available, know how much it will 
cost, make decisions and pay. Right now, the Internet can handle most 
of those desires for comparison-shopping. Closing the deals is another 
matter _ few can actually be completed on line. And most companies 
still refuse to lop off the commissions they would otherwise pay an 
agent. Information on life insurance seems to be easiest to come by. 
Customers can peruse a wide range off offerings and choose coverage 
with the click of a mouse. But customers must sign and return an application, 
and the policies generally will not take effect without a visit from 
a paramedic who takes blood and urine samples and checks blood pressure. 
For other insurance, distributors are not yet able to do more than 
provide a handful of prices. Shoppers often have to wait to get prices 
in a return e-mail or telephone call from an agent. Even so, some 
people say the Internet saves them time and money. In about an hour, 
Shirley Mathews, a retired commercial insurance administrator in Cincinnati, 
lined up full coverage for the three cars that she and her 28-year-old 
son drive. She got a price of $1,400 a year, $300 less than for her 
current policy. Ms. Mathews is an experienced Web surfer. But it still 
took a while to find a distributor _ in her case, Insweb.com. Punch 
in the words ``life insurance'' or ``auto insurance'' and hundreds 
of Internet sites will pop up, representing individual companies or 
agents, distributors with multiple listings and billboards. Without 
an Internet address from an article or an advertisement, there is 
little alternative to trial and error. ``That's one of the biggest 
problems with the Internet,'' said Dan Wager, an insurance agent who 
runs Quickquote in Incline Village, Nev., which provides prices for 
28 companies. ``But it's still a lot better than going through endless 
interviews with agents who typically represent only one or two companies.'' 
Larry Laurence, the chairman of Itech Automated Life Insurance Quotation 
Systems in Point Richmond, Calif., which sells policies from 60 companies 
through a combination of the Internet and agents, warns that shopping 
for life insurance by computer is not without pitfalls. People with 
medical conditions like high blood pressure, for example, are apt 
to apply for the lowest-priced coverage, then, when they are turned 
down, accept a more expensive policy from the same company even though 
better deals may be available elsewhere. An agent, Laurence said, 
could help these customers find alternatives. Another company that 
combines research on the computer with an agent's advice, Answer Financial 
Inc. in Los Angeles, sells exclusively through workplace groups. It 
offers life, auto and homeowners' insurance from 55 companies. To 
be sure, agents can be helpful. But Jay Angoff, a former Missouri 
insurance commissioner, cautioned that agents will be agents, however 
well-intentioned. ``The legal duty of the agent to the customer is 
very, very minimal,'' he said. ``The agent does not have a duty to 
inform the customer about other coverage that is available or that 
might be beneficial. The agent is the company's agent and not the 
customer's agent.'' The Internet, of course, is hardly going to make 
agents disappear. Steven Aldrich, the president of Quicken Insure 
Market in Alexandria, Va., sees a combination of machines and agents 
well into the future. ``About a third of the people are going to be 
very comfortable buying online, without any human contact,'' said 
Aldrich, whose company is owned by Intuit Inc., the financial software 
concern. ``Others are going to be happy to finish up with a telephone 
conversation. And another third are going to use the Internet to find 
an agent who will walk them through the entire process.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>