<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0413 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the Clinton administration again called on Iraqi President Saddam 
Hussein to back down, the U.S. Air Force scrambled Friday to send 
dozens of additional warplanes to the Persian Gulf, steadily building 
a force large enough to carry out what Pentagon officials described 
as a sustained bombing campaign. The first of 139 aircraft that President 
Clinton ordered to the region Wednesday left the United States, while 
the bulk of the fighters and bombers, including F-117 ``stealth'' 
attack fighters, are now scheduled to leave on Saturday or Sunday. 
An ``air expeditionary wing'' _ comprising 42 F-15s, F-16s, B-1 bombers 
and other support aircraft and led by the 1st Fighter Wing out of 
Langley Air Force Base in Virginia _ is headed to bases in the gulf 
states of Qatar and Oman, two officials familiar with the planning 
said Friday. The Pentagon has refused to disclose the destination 
of most of the jets ordered to the region, respecting the wariness 
of the gulf states to be seen as openly supporting a U.S.-led strike. 
But the willingness of those states to allow U.S. forces to use their 
territory as bases for potential strikes underscored how isolated 
Saddam has become compared with previous confrontations. Saudi Arabia 
has agreed to accept additional aerial refuelers for use in a strike, 
the officials said, but has refused to allow attack jets based in 
Saudi Arabia to take part in any attack on Iraq. The refuelers will 
join others based at Prince Sultan Air Base, which the United States, 
Britain and France use to patrol the ``no flight'' zone over southern 
Iraq. It was unclear when strikes would begin, and officials at the 
White House and the Pentagon refused to give any indication they were 
imminent. But the buildup of forces suggested that a decision to resort 
to force was simply a matter of waiting until all the forces are in 
place, as soon as next week. The new forces will bolster an already 
formidable force in the gulf, which includes 170 aircraft and 14 warships, 
led by the aircraft carrier Dwight D. Eisenhower and armed with 250 
to 350 Tomahawk cruise missiles. The Pentagon has also ordered another 
carrier, the Enterprise, to speed up its arrival in the gulf by three 
days, to Nov. 23. When all the reinforcements arrive, U.S. forces 
in the region will be nearly as large as they were during last winter's 
confrontation with Iraq, when 44,000 troops, more than 400 aircraft 
and 34 warships were in position to strike. Although Defense officials 
have said the options before Clinton include an immediate quick strike 
with cruise missiles, the Pentagon's planning appears to have shifted 
to a larger, more sustained barrage against targets that would include 
military bases, communication centers and factories involved in the 
making or stockpiling of chemical or biological weapons. ``You're 
not talking about a strike,'' a Pentagon official said, requesting 
anonymity. ``You're talking about a sustained campaign.'' That is 
why, this and other officials said, the new deployments included the 
heavier bombers and strike aircraft. A senior administration official 
said Friday that the United States was prepared to follow up any strike 
with additional strikes to make sure Saddam did not rebuild chemical 
or biological weapons or pose new threats to his neighbors. Six B-52 
bombers, loaded with air-launched cruise missiles with 2,000-pound 
warheads, prepared to leave Barksdale Air Force Base in Louisiana. 
Along with six others from Minot Air Force Base in North Dakota, they 
are expected to arrive at the British base on Diego Garcia, an island 
in the Indian Ocean. A dozen F-117s, whose ``stealth'' technology 
allow them to evade radar and attack with precision, are scheduled 
to leave Holloman Air Force Base in New Mexico on Sunday, headed for 
Kuwait. Altogether, squadrons from 17 bases in the United States have 
mobilized following Clinton's order Wednesday, the largest single 
deployment to the Persian Gulf area since October 1994, when the United 
States responded to the movement of Iraqi forces to the Kuwait border. 
Nearly 4,000 soldiers from three Army bases _ Fort Stewart in Georgia, 
Fort Drum in New York and Fort Bliss in Texas _ have also been ordered 
to the gulf. Gen. Anthony Zinni, the commander of U.S. forces in the 
region, decided to send the forces, officials said, as a reassurance 
to the Kuwaitis in the unlikely event Iraq invaded Kuwait. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>