<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0433 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Saturday, Nov. 14: Common 
sense set in after Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel urged 
clemency for Jonathan Pollard in the final hours of the peace talks 
in Maryland last month. George Tenet, the director of central intelligence, 
promptly threatened to resign if President Clinton complied, bracing 
the president to reject the misplaced plea. Then Republican congressional 
leaders made it clear to the Israelis that clemency was unacceptable. 
Pollard gravely damaged American interests during the 1980s by selling 
some of America's most sensitive intelligence information to Israel. 
To release him now would compound that harm and not greatly advance 
peace in the Middle East. At first glance, Pollard's crimes might 
appear less reprehensible than other Cold War spying incidents. He 
gave information to an American ally that was already receiving American 
intelligence through official channels. But that argument, popular 
in Israel and among many American Jews, misses several critical points. 
American and Israeli national interests are not identical and not 
all American intelligence is suitable for transfer to Israel. While 
serving as a naval intelligence analyst in the mid-1980s, Pollard 
delivered boxes full of highly sensitive documents to his Israeli 
handlers. The material included secretly obtained details of Soviet 
weapons designs, American encryption codes and manuals, spy satellite 
photos and information gleaned from American electronic eavesdropping 
stations. It also included material gathered by covert American operatives. 
Some of the material may later have fallen into Russian hands through 
KGB operatives in Israel. Whoever saw these documents would know what 
America had learned about Soviet and Arab military forces and plans, 
and possibly how the information was gathered, endangering informants. 
The full damage caused by Pollard remains unknown, in large part because 
of Israel's inexplicable refusal to return the most sensitive documents 
he gave them. For years the Israeli government denied any association 
with Pollard's activities. For Netanyahu now to seek his release as 
a condition for peace in the Middle East is unreasonable. Justice 
was served by Pollard's conviction and imprisonment and should not 
be upended to placate his sympathizers in Israel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>