<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some call it an addiction. They must have it once, twice or three 
times a week. The truly indulgent need it twice a day, before and 
after work. Do it once, they say, before a special occasion, and you 
will never be able to stop. That works out well for Robert Lyon, a 
hair stylist at the Peter Coppola salon on Madison Avenue, who because 
of his magic fingers and upper-arm strength is in constant demand. 
On Halloween night, Lyon, who is in his 20s and has a soothing English 
accent, had to get to bed early for an 8:30 house call the following 
morning, a Sunday, to a woman on Park Avenue. Why? To blow out her 
hair before she went to church. For all the New York women, whether 
heading to the Park Avenue Methodist Church or to Moomba, who love 
to sport a straight, shiny, smooth-hair look, with just the right 
flip and swing, there is an army of people like Lyon. They will tug 
on their locks with big, round brushes for 20 to 40 minutes and dry 
them with a jet blast of hot air. The demand for the talents of blow-dry 
specialists, who charge from $20 (Astor Place Hair Stylists) to $275 
(John Sahag salon on Madison Avenue), seems to be at an all-time high. 
That is because the long curl-free look, as flaunted by women from 
Jennifer Aniston on ``Friends'' to Hillary Rodham Clinton on the cover 
of the coming December Vogue, bespeaks power and unassailable style 
at this moment, especially in New York. It has led to a virtual cult 
of the blowout, as the blow-dry is often called. ``Eighty-five percent 
of my business is from blow-drying,'' said Renato Vasconcellos, owner 
of Color and Cut on East 43rd Street, an economy-class hair salon 
that does a land-office business weekday evenings in the hour preceding 
cocktail parties and dinners. Around 6 p.m., ``the place is a nightmare,'' 
Vasconcellos said, filled with clients from midtown office buildings, 
their heads wrapped in towels after a quick shampoo or just a wet-down 
_ but generally not a hair cut _ awaiting their blowouts. Before last 
week's charity reception for the Lenox Hill Neighborhood House, held 
at the Chanel store on East 57th Street, the Frederic Fekkai salon 
in the same building was packed with partygoers waiting for a blowout 
by Ronald Braso, a stylist who is a favorite of the preppy set. ``We 
had a cocktail party before the cocktail party,'' Braso said, describing 
how the women gossiped and sipped soda as he twirled his round, natural-bristle 
brushes into their hair, working the brushes like rollers. Just as 
women who dyed their hair once had a secret that ``only their hairdresser 
knew for sure,'' many devotees of the blowout conceal it. They want 
friends and colleagues to think their hair is naturally straight and 
full. (Some blow-dry specialists are also secretive, because they 
do not fully report earnings. One such stylist, who spoke on the condition 
that his identity not be revealed, said, ``You can't believe how much 
money we're making just to blow out hair.'' He charges $60 a house 
call, $100 to $150 on weekends, and admitted making more than $1,000 
a week off the books.) But other women are proud of the fact that 
they are getting their hair blown out regularly, since it smacks of 
a luxury once available only to the rich. In the 1960s and '70s, Jacqueline 
Kennedy Onassis had her hair blown out two or three times a week, 
either at home or at Kenneth, the salon in the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. 
``If she had things to do, things that mattered, she wanted to look 
polished and together,'' Kenneth Battelle, the salon's owner, said. 
It was an era when the approach many women took to styling was to 
visit a salon once a week to have their hair set, then to petrify 
it with spray so they wouldn't have to touch it until the next visit. 
Now, many more women avail themselves of a beauty treatment once the 
exclusive preserve of the super-chic. ``All those girls, models, have 
their hair and makeup done before they go to parties, and that's why 
they look so good _ not because they're models,'' Candace Bushnell, 
the author of ``Sex and the City,'' said. ``Who knew? How come no 
one ever told us to do this before?'' Now Ms. Bushnell gets her hair 
blown out two to three times a week. ``The problem is you get addicted 
to blow-drying because your hair looks so much better instead of the 
ratty mess before,'' she added. Stephanie Greenfield, 31, owner of 
the hip clothing store Scoop, has standing appointments two mornings 
a week at Color and Cut to get her long, wavy hair blown out by Bernadette 
Brady (although only Brian Devine at Garren New York is allowed to 
cut her hair). With someone holding her toy poodle, Annabelle, Ms. 
Greenfield does paperwork while getting her hair blow-dried. Cheryl 
Kramer, 29, a beauty director at Fitness magazine, is also usually 
in a hurry, so she goes to the John Frieda salon, where two people, 
at the same time, blow out her reddish-brown hair. One person directs 
the air and someone else holds the brush. She calls it her ``menage 
a trois blow-dry.'' And Lizzie Grubman, 27, owner of a public relations 
agency, has her hair blown out four times a week by four different 
stylists _ at home, in her office and in the salon. ``No one has ever 
seen me with curly hair,'' she said, ``and they never will.'' Why 
all the fuss about a salon blow-dry? The home blow-dryer, after all, 
has been around for decades, so presumably most women would have learned 
to master it by now. But devotees say an expert can do a better job. 
When the hair is wet, a stylist with a blow-dryer pulls out sections 
of hair with a round bristle brush and stretches the hair until it 
dries straight inch by inch. ``The obsession is that since hair has 
gotten longer and less layered, and the finishing has gotten smooth 
and straight, women can't do that on their own,'' said Garren, owner 
of the Garren New York salon at Henri Bendel, where a blowout is $70 
to $110. ``Since the clothes have become more minimal and the hair 
has become simpler, there isn't a lot going on. It's smooth and simple, 
shiny and swings. Women love hair that swings.'' Hair experts say 
the blow-out-only salon visit is mainly a New York phenomenon, although 
it is also found in Los Angeles. Elsewhere, it is almost unknown. 
In Washington, where Braso of Fekkai worked until recently, he said 
stylish women dress in evening gowns with beautiful jewelry, but leave 
for parties with their hair still wet from the shower. Why such a 
difference between the two cities? New York women, he surmised, are 
more image-conscious, thanks to all the photographers snapping them 
at parties for magazines. Many women in a hurry press salons to speed 
their blowouts, and the salons in turn are using hotter dryers, which 
leads to hair damage, says Dr. Steven Victor, a dermatologist at Lenox 
Hill Hospital, who has a private practice on the Upper East Side. 
``Remember, 10 years ago the blow-dryers were 500 or 700 watts,'' 
he said. ``Now I think I've seen one for 2,000 watts.'' ``Hair is 
dead protein that has moisture and water,'' Victor added. ``When it's 
moist, it's bendable and pliable. When you dry it out, you take out 
all the moisture and it's basically burning it and it breaks.'' He 
said hair can endure regular blow-drying, but that practitioners should 
slow down, use less heat and apply a hair conditioner with animal 
protein twice a week. At a party on Wednesday night for the shoemaker 
Sergio Rossi at Simply Caviar, a restaurant on Park Avenue, an informal 
survey revealed that one out of 10 women had had her hair blown out 
that evening. Randy Spendlove, 33, a vice president for music and 
soundtracks at Miramax Films, recalled his surprise at discovering 
the love affair of New York women for the blowout. He had no idea 
so many of the women he met really had curly hair. He recalled one 
day coming across an acquaintance at the gym, when her hair was curled 
from sweat. ``I had no idea who she was,'' he said. The woman probably 
didn't want him to. Because, like the Wicked Witch of the West, there 
is one thing that instantly spells the demise of blow-dried hair, 
no matter how expensively styled. ``Water is our enemy,'' Ms. Grubman 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>