<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0445 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Florida prosecutors filed criminal charges Friday against the Church 
of Scientology in connection with the death of a church member while 
she was under the care of Scientologists three years ago. The church's 
Flag Service Organization, its chief operating arm in Clearwater, 
Fla., was charged with abuse or neglect of a disabled adult and with 
the unauthorized practice of medicine in the death of the church member, 
Lisa McPherson, 36. The felony charges were filed in Clearwater, which 
is the church's spiritual headquarters, by the state attorney for 
Pasco and Pinellas Counties, Bernie McCabe. Ms. McPherson, who had 
spent half her life as a member of the church, died on Dec. 5, 1995. 
She had spent the previous 17 days under 24-hour watch in a church-owned 
hotel in Clearwater after suffering an apparent nervous breakdown 
following a minor traffic accident. Church records said she had suffered 
dementia and had to be restrained at the hotel. The Pinellas County 
Medical Examiner said Ms. McPherson had been deprived of water for 
5 to 10 days before her death and ruled that she had died of a blood 
clot brought on by dehydration. Clearwater police and the Florida 
Department of Law Enforcement conducted a two-year investigation that 
led to the charges filed Friday. Ms. McPherson's death has become 
a rallying point for critics of Scientology and was the subject of 
a long article in The New York Times last December. They contend that 
her death reflects the coercive nature of the church, which has been 
a lightning rod for criticism since it was founded 48 years ago by 
L. Ron Hubbard, the late science fiction writer. Scientology has grown 
into a worldwide movement that boasts eight million members, although 
critics say the number is much smaller. The church was granted tax-exempt 
status in 1993 after a bitter 25-year battle with the Internal Revenue 
Service. Church officials and organizations have faced charges in 
foreign countries in recent years, but the charges in the McPherson 
case are believed to be the first criminal allegations against a Scientology 
entity in the United States since 11 of its leaders were imprisoned 
20 years ago for breaking into government offices. The Clearwater 
charges are similar to those brought against nursing homes accused 
of providing inadequate treatment to elderly patients who die in their 
care. The abuse or neglect charge accuses the church of knowingly 
or negligently causing harm to Ms. McPherson. Church officials and 
lawyers have maintained that Ms. McPherson was cared for properly 
under Scientology's beliefs and that her death was unrelated to her 
stay at the church's Fort Harrison Hotel. Laura L. Vaughan, a lawyer 
for the church, said the charges did not accuse the church or any 
of its members with intentionally harming Ms. McPherson. ``There was 
no charge of manslaughter and no charge that the church caused her 
death,'' Ms. Vaughan said. Kennan Dandar, a lawyer for the McPherson 
family in a civil lawsuit against the church, said the family was 
pleased by the criminal charges. The family's wrongful-death suit 
against the church is scheduled to go to trial next summer. Under 
Florida law, the maximum penalty is a $5,000 fine for each charge, 
but courts may impose additional penalties, including forfeiture of 
property. McCabe and Clearwater police officials declined to comment 
on the charges. However, an 18-page affidavit by A.L. Strope, a special 
agent with the Florida Department of Law Enforcement, which was released 
with the charges, provided a chilling portrait of Ms. McPherson's 
final days. Ms. McPherson worked as a sales representative at a Clearwater 
firm owned by other Scientologists. After the accident in which she 
appeared to have been uninjured, she stripped off her clothes on the 
street and began to mumble. She was taken to a local hospital and 
a physician there wanted to provide psychiatric treatment. But several 
church members went to the hospital and took Ms. McPherson to the 
church hotel. The Church of Scientology prohibits psychiatric treatment 
for its members. Over the next 17 days, according to Strope's affidavit, 
Ms. McPherson was hyperactive, delusional and hallucinating. He said 
she tried to harm herself and others and was repeatedly restrained 
and prevented from leaving her room. After the first week, she routinely 
urinated and defecated on herself and rarely slept, Strope said. She 
had conversations with people who were not there, claimed to be people 
she was not, sang and danced around the room as if giving a performance, 
crawled around on the floor, stood on the toilet, got in the shower 
fully clothed, tried to walk out of the room in a state of undress 
and on at least one occasion drank her own urine. Strope said Scientology 
staff members administered injections of magnesium chloride in an 
effort to get her to sleep and gave her numerous doses of vitamins, 
herbal sleep remedies and prescription drugs. One staff member who 
treated Ms. McPherson, Dr. Janice Johnson, had been a practicing anesthesiologist 
in Arizona before she ran into disciplinary trouble and let her medical 
license lapse, Strope said. Several other people who cared for Ms. 
McPherson also had some medical training, he said. On the evening 
of Dec. 5, 1995, Ms. McPherson's condition had deteriorated to the 
point where Dr. Johnson telephoned a Scientologist working as an emergency 
room physician at a hospital 45 minutes away. The physician, David 
I. Minkoff, told investigators that he suggested Ms. McPherson be 
taken to the nearest hospital if she was very ill. Instead of going 
to Morton Plant Hospital, which was just a few blocks away, Ms. McPherson 
was driven 45 minutes to the hospital where Minkoff worked. She was 
pronounced dead shortly after arriving. Minkoff said he was shocked 
by her horrific appearance. The medical examiner later estimated that 
she had lost as much as 40 pounds and been without water for up to 
10 days, allegations disputed by church lawyers. Strope said that 
the delay in seeking emergency care deprived Ms. McPherson of her 
only opportunity for survival. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>