<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0397 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Further large mergers are likely among automakers because of a worldwide 
excess of assembly plants and the just-completed marriage of Daimler-Benz 
AG and Chrysler Corp., industry leaders said in interviews this week. 
Automakers around the globe have the ability to produce 70 million 
vehicles a year. But global demand has been around 50 million vehicles 
a year even in good times, and is eroding now with economic slumps 
in East Asia and Latin America. This week's creation of DaimlerChrysler 
AG, in an industry in which big cross-border mergers have historically 
been hard to accomplish, has forced every auto manufacturer to reassess 
its strategic options. ``With the world economy in the situation it 
is, and the fact that only about 10 out of the 40 manufacturers in 
the world are making money, there's going to be a dramatic restructuring,'' 
said Robert Eaton, now one of the two co-chairmen of DaimlerChrysler 
AG. ``Everybody's talking to everybody in the auto industry,'' said 
William Clay Ford Jr., the chairman-elect of Ford Motor Co. ``What 
may come of it, I don't know, maybe nothing actually, but there are 
a lot of people that are talking and it'll be very interesting _ I 
think it'll be very interesting a year from now.'' The two companies 
most talked about by industry executives as potential acquirers are 
Ford Motor, which has $22 billion in cash and will soon have a new 
management team, and Volkswagen AG, which already bought Rolls-Royce 
this year. The three companies most discussed as potential targets 
are Nissan Motor Co. of Japan, AB Volvo of Sweden and Bayerische Motoren 
Werke AG of Germany. The automaker attracting the most attention, 
particularly as a potential merger partner for Ford, is Nissan. Japan's 
second-largest automaker has lost money for six of the last seven 
years and has had difficulty this year finding banks to lend it money, 
particularly after its credit rating dropped again this summer. The 
government-run Japan Development Bank agreed this week to lend 100 
billion yen, or $817 million, to Nissan, a move with some parallels 
to the government loan guarantees that helped rescue Chrysler in 1980. 
Nissan's troubles have left many auto industry leaders convinced that 
a merger or some other deal is likely for Nissan, although Nissan 
officials insist that their company has a plan for recovery and is 
better off than Chrysler was a generation ago. Only five global automakers 
are likely to have the resources to cope with Nissan's $35 billion 
debt: Ford, Volkswagen, DaimlerChrysler, General Motors Corp. and 
Toyota Motor Corp. But GM and Toyota already work together closely, 
so a bid by either of them for Nissan could raise antitrust problems. 
And top executives of DaimlerChrysler have ruled out any further big 
mergers until they work out the details of this week's transaction, 
which could take years. That leaves Volkswagen and Ford Motor. Volkswagen 
chairman Ferdinand Piech has indicated an interest in Volvo and BMW. 
Volvo has shown little enthusiasm, while the Quandt family, which 
owns 45.6 percent of BMW, moved most of its stake into holding companies 
last month to improve defenses against any hostile takeover bid. But 
so far, Volkswagen has shown little interest in East Asia. Volkswagen 
did not even participate in this autumn's auctions of Kia Motors Corp. 
of Korea. Ford Motor has been trying to expand in East Asia. It lost 
to Hyundai Motor Co. in the final Kia auction, although Hyundai has 
mentioned an interest in taking Ford Motor as a partner. Now, Ford 
Motor is eyeing the Japanese market. Asked whether his company might 
do a deal with Nissan, Ford was cautious. ``We would certainly look 
at anything, but given the balance sheet and the off-balance sheet 
problems that exist in a lot of the Japanese companies, you have to 
be very careful any time you went into any kind of venture there,'' 
he said. ``We all believe at Ford that it's going to emerge as a very 
important market from their troubles, so we would like to have a stronger 
Japanese presence, but what form it takes has yet to be determined.'' 
Some Wall Street analysts have criticized Ford Motor for holding so 
much cash, but Ford said that he refused to be rushed. ``I'm not going 
to let it burn a hole in our pocket,'' he said. ``I think that we're 
not in any hurry to spend it. We're always looking at things like 
buybacks and dividends and acquisitions.'' If Ford decides to do a 
deal in Asia, he will not have to look far for investment banking 
expertise. John Thornton, the chairman of Goldman Sachs Asia, joined 
Ford's 11-member board two years ago. Nissan is trying hard now to 
turn around its troubled North American operations, and will soon 
introduce a series of new cars and sport utility vehicles. Jason Vines, 
a Nissan spokesman, said the goal was improved operating results, 
not preparation by the company for a sale. Renault and Peugeot are 
struggling in France, but French nationalism has discouraged international 
automakers from seriously considering them as takeover candidates. 
But Fiat SpA of Italy persuaded Renault on Monday to agree to a merger 
of most of the two companies' foundry operations, which cast heavy 
metal parts. Even as automakers study possible merger options, they 
are looking at ways to profit from rivals' mergers. Ronald Zarrella, 
the president of GM's North American operations, said the difficulty 
of combining Chrysler and Daimler-Benz might be useful. ``I hope they're 
very distracted and we can take some market share from them,'' he 
said. Thomas Stallkamp, the president of DaimlerChrysler and formerly 
the president of Chrysler, said the German and U.S. automakers had 
been able to work together with even fewer difficulties than anticipated 
when the merger was first announced last May. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>