<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0450 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton agreed Friday to pay Paula Jones $850,000 to drop 
her legal claim that he crudely propositioned her seven years ago. 
The payment settles a lawsuit that Clinton's advisers once mocked 
but that, by forcing his intimate life into public view, ultimately 
threatened his hold on the presidency. To reach the agreement, Mrs. 
Jones dropped what she had once called her most important demand: 
that Clinton apologize and admit wrongdoing. She had wanted him to 
acknowledge that in 1991, when he was governor of Arkansas and she 
a clerk employed by the state, he had her summoned to a Little Rock 
hotel room and made a lewd advance. Through Robert Bennett, his lawyer, 
the president continued Friday to call Mrs. Jones' accusation baseless. 
But by settling, he was able to eliminate the risk that an appeals 
court would prolong the case, which was dismissed in April by a U.S. 
District Court judge in Little Rock. Clinton's advisers had feared 
that Mrs. Jones would win her appeal, and that her lawyers would be 
able to depose the president once again. White House officials also 
believe that the settlement will help protect him from impeachment 
by eliminating a source of possible legal reversals and further embarrassing 
disclosures about his private life. It was in a deposition in the 
Jones case on Jan. 17 that Clinton denied a sexual relationship with 
former White House intern Monica Lewinsky. Out of the president's 
efforts to conceal that affair from Mrs. Jones' lawyers, independent 
prosecutor Kenneth Starr built a case for possible impeachment on 
perjury, witness-tampering and obstruction-of-justice charges that 
the House Judiciary Committee is now considering. ``The president 
has decided he is not prepared to spend one more hour on this matter,'' 
Bennett said in a statement announcing the settlement. But Clinton's 
busy schedule aside, even his allies had long viewed the expense to 
him of not settling the case sooner _ in prestige, political capital 
and perhaps his place in history _ as incalculable. Even after the 
settlement was announced Friday, some Clinton loyalists lamented the 
for-want-of-a-nail element. One adviser just groaned when asked if 
he wished the president had settled earlier. Another Clinton associate 
said that if the case had been settled earlier, ``no one would know 
who Monica Lewinsky was.'' Mrs. Jones cried upon receiving the news 
of the settlement, Susan Carpenter-McMillan, a Jones adviser, told 
reporters gathered outside a New York City hotel where her friend 
was doing a television interview Friday. ``It's over and I'm glad,'' 
she quoted Mrs. Jones as saying. John Whitehead, one of Mrs. Jones' 
lawyers, said, ``The settlement brings to a conclusion four long years 
of seeking justice for Paula.'' ``The suit has raised a lot of important 
issues that the American people and their leaders will have to deal 
with for years to come,'' Whitehead added, ``such as the importance 
of protecting powerless women from workplace harassment and the role 
of the rule of law in our highest offices.'' The terse eight-point 
agreement, filed Friday with Susan Webber Wright, the judge who dismissed 
the suit in April, calls for Clinton to pay Mrs. Jones within 60 days. 
The agreement requires Judge Wright's approval, but that is considered 
likely, since she had long urged a settlement. As part of Friday's 
agreement, Mrs. Jones also dropped her claim against Clinton's co-defendant, 
Danny Ferguson, an Arkansas state trooper who Mrs. Jones said escorted 
her to the governor's hotel room. In a separate agreement, which was 
not made part of the filing, Mrs. Jones' lawyers said she renounced 
any intention to accept money from Abe Hirschfeld, a New York City 
real estate magnate who had said he would pay her $1 million to settle. 
White House advisers said they hoped that the $850,000 would be covered 
by Clinton's personal insurance policies. But if the two companies 
that have insured the president decline to pay, the advisers said, 
the money will come from the president's legal defense fund, which 
now has a balance of more than $2 million. Mrs. Jones has her own 
financial trouble to resolve. She has had as many as six sets of lawyers, 
whose bills total nearly $3 million. Yet she is hoping to net $300,000 
to 500,000 from the agreement. Hillary Rodham Clinton, who is said 
by associates to be particularly concerned about her family's mounting 
legal bills, had been worried that a settlement might make too big 
a dent in the defense fund. But the Clintons' fund-raisers assured 
her that they could easily replenish any funds used toward a Jones 
settlement. Mrs. Clinton had also been opposed to any settlement that 
included an apology, aides said, since it would have carried an acknowledgment 
of conduct the president denied. The agreement filed Friday states, 
``Nothing in this agreement shall by construed to be an admission 
of liability or wrongdoing by any party.'' But plainly, the settlement 
can only bolster public sentiment, as demonstrated in opinion polls, 
that Mrs. Jones told the truth. From the moment she first made her 
accusation against the president, in a televised news conference on 
Feb. 11, 1994, his advisers dismissed her as a gold digger in league 
with his conservative enemies. At the same time, but more quietly, 
his lawyers were trying to settle the lawsuit. Their efforts initially 
foundered on Mrs. Jones' demand for an apology; Clinton said he had 
nothing to apologize for. Over time, Mrs. Jones expanded her legal 
claims, arguing that Clinton had harassed her, caused her emotional 
distress and damaged her career. But in April, Judge Wright found 
that the plaintiff had offered no ``tangible'' evidence of damage 
and dismissed the case, saying it presented ``no genuine issues.'' 
The ground shifted dramatically when Clinton admitted on Aug. 17, 
in grand jury testimony and in a brief televised address to the nation, 
that he had had an intimate relationship with Ms. Lewinsky. Mrs. Jones' 
advisers said she no longer required an apology, since, they said, 
most people would now believe her. Further, Clinton's advisers now 
had more reason to settle. They worried that the president's admission 
about Ms. Lewinsky might strengthen Mrs. Jones' appeal. And with impeachment 
proceedings pending, they believed that taking the Jones lawsuit off 
the table would help reassure congressional Democrats that there would 
be no further nasty disclosures or legal reversals for the president. 
That would increase the Democrats' confidence in defending him. Several 
weeks ago, Bennett reopened settlement talks, offering $700,000. The 
Jones lawyers countered with a request for $1 million, and the two 
sides started haggling, slowly. They seemed tantalizingly close when 
the offer last month from Hirschfeld, who said he believed that a 
settlement was in the interests of the country, threw the negotiations 
into chaos. The White House was concerned over any sense that Hirschfeld, 
who is under indictment on tax fraud charges, was bailing out the 
president. To seal the agreement, William McMillan, Ms. Carpenter-McMillan's 
husband and Mrs. Jones' lead negotiator, wrote in a letter to Bennett 
this week, ``I further represent to you that the money from Abe Hirschfeld 
is no longer on the table, and that there will be no payment from 
Hirschfeld as a part of the settlement with Mr. Clinton.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>