<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0408 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With his sex and lies case against President Clinton losing momentum 
on Capitol Hill, Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, Friday returned 
to the Whitewater investigation, his original mandate, and indicted 
Clinton's longtime friend, Webster Hubbell, for his role in the real 
estate scandal. Hubbell, a former chief justice of the state of Arkansas 
and once the number three official in the Clinton Justice Department, 
was charged with 15 counts of fraud, false statements and trying to 
impede two federal regulatory agencies as well as perjury before a 
Congressional committee. The indictment Friday marked the third time 
Starr brought charges against Hubbell in his five years of investigating 
the president and his wife. Hubbell pleaded guilty and spent two years 
in prison for bilking his law partners, but a later indictment, for 
tax fraud, was dismissed by a federal judge earlier this year. Speaking 
to reporters outside his Washington home, Hubbell denied the charges 
leveled Friday and said they were part of what he described as a continuing 
effort by Starr to force him to provide evidence against Clinton and 
his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton. He said that when he left prison 
two years ago after the earlier conviction by Starr, he hoped to begin 
life anew. ``I'm now of the belief that I may never be able to do 
so. I just do not know what it's going to take to make this matter 
end,'' Hubbell said. ``What I do know is that I don't know of any 
wrongdoing on behalf of the first lady or the president, and nothing 
the independent counsel can do to me is going to make me lie about 
that.'' The indictment Friday demonstrated that Starr is continuing 
with his work, despite the increasingly cool response both from the 
nation and from Congress to his investigations of the president. Public 
and political reaction has been particularly harsh in response to 
his report to Congress suggesting that Clinton may have committed 
impeachable offenses in trying to cover up his affair with Monica 
Lewinsky. As he was indicting Hubbell, Starr also sent new material 
to Congress Friday about his investigation into whether Clinton lied 
under oath about whether he made unwanted sexual advances in 1993 
to Kathleen Willey, a White House volunteer. Willey has alleged that 
Clinton groped her just outside the Oval Office when she went to him 
seeking a full-time job, a charge he has denied. But unlike the report 
to Congress, delivered in September, in which he asserted that Clinton 
may have committed impeachable offenses to conceal his relationship 
with Ms. Lewinsky, a White House intern, Starr Friday made no such 
claim in submitting the material on the Willey matter. In effect, 
Starr appeared to acknowledge that he was unable to determine who 
was telling the truth. Both the Hubbell indictment and the apparent 
disposal of the Willey matter came only days before Starr is expected 
to face a withering partisan cross-fire when he appears as the principal 
witness before the House Judiciary Committee. The committee, which 
is considering whether to vote impeachment charges against Clinton, 
is scheduled to question Starr Thursday. Hubbell spent nearly two 
years in prison after pleading guilty to bilking his partners in the 
Rose Law Firm of Little Rock, Ark., where he had once practiced law 
with Mrs. Clinton. But Starr was unable to obtain what it seemed he 
was really after from Hubbell _ incriminating evidence against the 
Clintons. Starr then brought a wide-ranging indictment for tax fraud, 
which Hubbell again protested was an effort to get him to testify 
against the Clintons. But a federal judge dismissed the tax fraud 
case, adding a stinging rebuke of Starr, accusing the prosecutor of 
overstepping his authority. Judge James Robertson said that the independent 
counsel's pursuit of Hubbell was a ``quintessential fishing expedition.'' 
Earlier he called some of Starr's constitutional views ``scary.'' 
Robertson said that the tax case was too far removed from Starr's 
original mandate of 1994 to investigate the Clintons' business dealings 
in Arkansas more than a decade ago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>