<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0421 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
All that remains of the cruise ship are two life rafts, seven life 
jackets, part of a wooden staircase, crew members' photographs clutched 
by mothers at a vigil and, eerily, images of the ship in full sail 
posted on the Internet by its passengers, as though they were flowers 
tossed on water to honor the dead. Fantome, the ship itself, once 
regal and filled with rum-spiced laughter and steel-drum songs as 
it plied the Caribbean, lies on the bottom of the sea off the coast 
of Honduras. The 30 West Indian crew members, along with their 32-year-old 
British-born captain, disappeared with it in one of the worst tropical 
storms in history. The ship's final hours as Hurricane Mitch slammed 
into Central America with 180-mph winds, devastating four countries 
and killing more than 11,000 people, is the subject of lawsuits filed 
this week in Miami by families of crew members. The suits charge that 
the ship's owner, Windjammer Barefoot Cruises of Miami, sent the sailors 
on a suicide mission by ordering the ship out to sea in the face of 
the storm to save the vessel. Company officials, who continue to search 
for crew members and clues to the sinking, say their decision was 
correct at the time, and was standard marine practice, but the storm 
changed course and enveloped the ship as it was on the verge of safety. 
The standard marine practice in such a case would be for a ship to 
go to sea to avoid being battered against the dock, experts say, and 
in the Caribbean trying to sail south of the storm. Wherever sailors 
gather now along the Eastern seaboard and in maritime schools, the 
Fantome debate is raging, as participants try to imagine being at 
the helm of a ship as long as a football field in the strongest type 
of hurricane, category five, with waves 50 feet high and the ship 
rolling to 40 degrees. While questioning the decision of the company 
and the captain, tall-ship captains and experts on hurricanes and 
sea safety agree that no matter how good the ship and crew, sometimes 
storms win. In the case of Fantome, they say, it is almost as if the 
hurricane hunted it down. Fantome's regular six-day cruise from Omoa, 
Honduras, to Belize and back was a normal milk run for Fantome. Passengers 
were promised visits to rain forests and Belize's coral reef from 
the 282-foot steel-hulled four-mast schooner Fantome, built in 1927 
for the duke of Westminster. It had been owned by Guinness Brewing 
and Aristotle Onassis. Windjammer officials found the ship rusting 
in Kiel, Germany, in 1969 and after rebuilding it at a cost of $6 
million, made it the flagship for a small fleet of vessels carrying 
vacationers on cruises in which formal wear was a clean T-shirt. The 
price of Fantome's cabins ranged from $875 to $1,075 a week. The normal 
crew of 45 men and women were from Guyana, Grenada and other East 
Caribbean countries. Their salaries of $300 to $700 a month made them 
affluent in their villages. Under Capt. Guyan March, a boyish Cornwall 
native, the ship had a fun-loving crew, former passengers say. But 
on the night of Oct. 25, a Sunday, as 97 passengers were ferried out 
to Fantome in Omoa for what they thought would be the start of their 
cruise, rain was coming down in sheets. Though queasy, Karen Rutledge 
of West Chester, Pa., remembers the sight of the ship. ``It was beautiful,'' 
Ms. Rutledge said, ``lit up in the rain. Looking back, it is a haunting 
vision.'' The crew members had drinks and dinner on the table. March 
told the passengers that Hurricane Mitch, which had formed in the 
Caribbean the previous Thursday, was moving northwest. Fantome would 
go east, he said, to Honduras Bay Islands. But by the time the ship 
set out at midnight, March and his boss, Michael Burke, the president 
of Windjammer, who was at the company's headquarters in Miami, had 
decided to cancel the cruise. Burke, 42, said Friday that it had been 
decided that March would sail north 12 hours to Belize City, where 
the passengers would get off and board a charter flight for Miami. 
As the passengers went down the gangplank in Belize, Hurricane Mitch 
became the fourth-fiercest storm in history, according to the National 
Hurricane Center, and it was headed straight for Belize. Ten crew 
members, including all the women, also disembarked. Fantome was cornered 
by the storm. If it stayed, Burke said, it could have sunk or run 
aground. Burke said he and March decided to go to sea and take what 
they thought were their best chances in deep water. In hindsight, 
some experts say, the company chose the ship over the crew. ``I could 
not have gotten under way in any direction except to the airport and 
the hell out of there,'' said Andy Chase, who teaches tall-ship captains 
at the Maine Maritime Academy. As Fantome cleared the Belize reef 
at 3 p.m. on that Monday, Burke said he and March talked on satellite 
telephone, plotting the storm's forecast track and their possible 
escape routes. They decided to run 120 miles southeast to hide behind 
Roatan, a long skinny Bay Island 25 miles off the Honduras coast. 
Forecasters had said the storm would stay north and that Roatan would 
reduce its force. Fantome arrived at 5 a.m. the next day, Oct. 27, 
and began tacking back and forth. Seas were rough and the wind was 
gusting to 60 mph. The storm was 75 miles away. But at 1 p.m. the 
storm turned southwest, confounding computer models at the National 
Hurricane Center. ``That's when things turned bad,'' Burke said. ``It 
was just not an option to stay in the path of a storm with its power.'' 
The ship would have been blown on shore, he said. At 1:15, Burke said, 
he and March decided that their only hope was to go east and thread 
a 25-mile reef-strewn passage between the island of Guanaja, 10 miles 
away, and the Honduran shore. The waves were 15 feet high and the 
winds 70 mph, and Fantome was rolling heavily, Burke said. The storm 
was 45 miles away, with 180-mph winds. At 4 p.m., Fantome was south 
of Guanaja and heeling 40 degrees in 100-mph winds. March talked to 
Burke on a satellite phone line they were keeping open. The captain, 
Burke said, ``was in a battle for his life.'' The storm and Fantome 
were then on the same longitude, 85.4 degrees west, and the wind was 
shifting to the west. The ship, with sails down, was entering what 
is called the navigable quadrant of a storm, Burke said, with winds 
at its back that could have blown it to safety. At 4:30 the telephone 
went dead. Not until 7 p.m., when the National Hurricane Center issued 
a new storm position, did Burke find out that the hurricane had jogged 
southeast and cut Fantome off. As dark fell, the storm had been 10 
miles in front of the ship. At 10 p.m. the eye reached Guanaja. ``Then 
the worst thing happened,'' Burke said. The storm stalled for the 
next 30 hours. There had been no mayday call from the ship or signals 
from an emergency beacon that is supposed to go off automatically 
when a ship capsizes. Fantome had been through two smaller hurricanes, 
one of them on Guyan March's first cruise, when he was a mate under 
Capt. Paddy Shrimpton. But Fantome was 71 years old when it encountered 
Hurricane Mitch. Shrimpton said the ship leaked when he ran it 10 
years earlier. The ship is registered in Equatorial Guinea, in Africa, 
in order to avoid taxes, Burke said. This has also allowed it to avoid 
U.S. Coast Guard inspection. But Burke said the ship had been remodeled 
in 1993, and last May the ship was certified by an Equatorial Guinea 
agent as meeting the standards of the Safety of Life at Sea Compact. 
Burke said he believed the ship would have passed a Coast Guard test. 
But few ships have gone through what Fantome encountered, experts 
said. ``It's one thing for a ship to take a hurricane for six hours, 
but 36 hours?'' said Peg Brandon, a captain and marine superintendent 
of the Sea Education Association of Woods Hole, Mass. ``Clearly they 
did the very best they could. The storm tracked them down.'' Burke 
called families of the crew members. Eight families of sailors began 
a prayer vigil. They have been holding photographs of the men in their 
arms for three hours nightly in the vigil that is to end on Saturday. 
Arthurlene Brusch, whose son, Vernon, was a Fantome electrician, said, 
``I think there is hope it is somewhere.'' But as the Coast Guard 
searched fruitlessly, hope dimmed, and a Coast Guard plane spotted 
objects from the ship on Nov. 1. They were retrieved by a British 
ship. After determining that no person could live in the water more 
than a week, the Coast Guard called off its search on Nov. 5. Burke 
said the company had provided families of the crew members with two 
months' pay until a long-term settlement could be reached. But William 
Huggett, a Miami lawyer who represents mariners, filed lawsuits for 
the families of five crew members, seeking $1 million for each family. 
He said more suits would be filed. ``Why didn't they just beach the 
ship and get the men off?'' Huggett asked. ``That's just putting the 
value of the vessel over the lives of the men. It's incredibly greedy.'' 
Burke said he had hired jeeps, planes and skin divers to keep looking 
for survivors or victims. ``There remains a glimmer of hope that they 
are in the mud of a village someplace, no phone booth, wandering around,'' 
he said. In Par, England, on Friday, March's mother, Jenny, 57, commodore 
of the Porthpean Sailing Club where her son learned to sail, said 
her hope was gone. ``It would be a miracle,'' Mrs. March said. She 
said that she had no plans to sue Windjammer. ``Guyan wouldn't have 
sailed if he didn't think it was safe,'' she said. In West Chester, 
Pa., Ms. Rutledge, whose Fantome voyage was canceled, called to make 
reservations for a replacement cruise. ``March was incredibly brave,'' 
she said. ``He saved my life.'' But her next cruise, she said, would 
``not be in hurricane season.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>