<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0195 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
So you have this 73-foot Norway spruce that has to get from Cleveland 
to New York. Hauling it 500 miles in a tractor-trailer or a boxcar 
isn't an option: It would arrive in no shape to wow crowds as Rockefeller 
Center's Christmas tree. And a ship would be too slow. That leaves 
air freight. But who has a plane big enough to handle a seven-ton 
conifer? Heavylift Volga-Dnepr does. It's the Antonov An-124 Ruslan, 
the biggest cargo plane in civilian service _ bigger than a 747 or 
even a C-5. The company, a little-known Russian-British joint venture, 
has seven of the 20 or so An-124s available for charter worldwide, 
and they have helped it carve out a niche at the exotic end of the 
air cargo business, carrying things too big or too awkward for other 
airlines to manage. Last week, the company carried this season's Rockefeller 
Center tree. The Heavylift half of the partnership, owned by Kvaerner, 
a British-Norwegian conglomerate, and based at London's Stansted Airport, 
handles marketing, sales and logistics. Volga-Dnepr, a Russian cargo 
line, owns, staffs and services the planes; its largest shareholder 
is the aircraft's builder, Aviastar. The An-124s were designed to 
transport supplies and equipment for the Soviet military. Lately, 
Russia has been working to develop commercial uses for them. Heavylift's 
An-124s usually carry cargo like satellites, electric generators and 
aircraft engines. But they have also transported paper-mill machinery 
from Finland to Kentucky, a whole Coca-Cola bottling line from Atlanta 
to Russia and the equipment for an entire oilfield from one side of 
Colombia to the other, recalled Vince Jones, the London-based Heavylift 
load-planning manager who traveled with the tree this week. And then 
there were race cars, yachts and even the stage for a Michael Jackson 
concert tour. On the An-124, a giant Christmas tree is carry-on baggage. 
The jet's tail and nose cone flip open, and its front end kneels down, 
allowing up to 120 tons of cargo to be driven directly in and out 
of a hold measuring 20 feet across, 16 feet high and 120 feet long. 
David Murbach, the Rockefeller Center executive responsible for finding 
this year's tree, described the An-124 as ``a flying section of the 
Lincoln Tunnel.'' Although Heavylift operates around the world _ with 
offices in Singapore, Britain and Russia as well as in Kansas City, 
Mo., and maintenance bases in Ireland and Abu Dhabi _ nearly a third 
of its business comes from American clients. Charter rates are quoted 
case by case, and the company would not discuss prices for specific 
cargo like the tree. But its managing director, Michael Hayles, said 
a typical charter runs at least $250,000. ``Essentially, you're offering 
someone a whole airplane,'' he said. ``And airplanes cost about $12,000 
or $13,000 an hour.'' Not surprisingly, Heavylift doesn't spend much 
time on mass marketing. The company advertises in trade journals and 
relies heavily on referrals from existing customers and from carriers 
unable to accommodate particular cargoes. Repeat clients include General 
Electric, British Petroleum and Boeing. Hayles said the An-124 charter 
business is booming. ``We've taken it from nothing in 1991 to $85 
million a year,'' he said, adding that each plane now logs about 6,000 
flight hours a year. The only other company offering An-124 charters 
in the United States is Air Foyle of Britain, which also has a Russian 
joint-venture partner. The planes usually must be booked months in 
advance. But in a pinch they can be called up in less than 24 hours, 
said Heavylift's commercial manager, Vince Seeger. They delivered 
electric turbines and repair equipment to Puerto Rico after Hurricane 
Georges and food and supplies to Nicaragua and Honduras after Hurricane 
Mitch. Besides carrying the tree, Heavylift spreads other holiday 
cheer. Every December since 1992, the company has flown toys donated 
by English children to areas like Bosnia and Romania. The children 
wrap the toys and mark them with suggested ages for recipients. Last 
year, they filled five An-124s with 350,000 boxes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>