<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0411 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ending nearly three months of uncertainty here, the International 
Monetary Fund on Friday announced a $41.5 billion rescue package for 
Brazil that will require a level of sustained economic discipline 
that Latin America's largest nation has never demonstrated in the 
past. Brazilian officials and economic experts responded with restrained 
relief and confidently predicted that their country would be equal 
to the tough challenge it will face over the next three years. Under 
the terms of the accord made public in Washington Friday, President 
Fernando Henrique Cardoso is obliged during that period to carry out 
a combination of spending cuts and tax increases adding up to a whopping 
$84 billion. One goal, which had not been spelled out before Friday, 
is to bring the federal budget into a surplus next year equal to 2.6 
percent of the economy. The program calls for the surplus to increase 
to 2.8 percent and 3 percent of the economy by 2000 and 2001, respectively. 
The surpluses are determined before any interest or debt payments. 
Otherwise, the main elements of the plan are in line with reports 
that had leaked out before the official announcement: The IMF will 
provide $18 billion in funds, and $4.5 billion more will come from 
the World Bank, with a similar contribution from the Inter-American 
Development Bank. The United States and 19 other countries will supply 
$14.5 billion, of which Washington kicks in the largest amount, $5 
billion. ``This is not a definitive solution,'' Carlos Kawall, chief 
economist for Citibank in Sao Paulo, Brazil, said Friday. ``But it 
is a decisive step toward restoring credibility and reducing the risk-aversion 
problem we have been having as a result of crises elsewhere, especially 
in Russia.'' With 20 governments plus various international lending 
organizations having done their part, the situation now ``has to be 
resolved internally,'' he added. ``We have a difficult year ahead 
of us, following a year that already has not been so good, but it 
won't be a total waste if we can just reverse the negative tendencies 
we've seen.'' Carlos Geraldo Langoni, a former president of the Brazilian 
central bank, said the package announced Friday ``pulls Brazil out 
of the eye of the hurricane'' that descended on the country after 
the collapse of the Russian economy in August. ``But there are still 
important reforms that have to be implemented,'' he said. ``Now Brazil 
has to overcome the credibility gap and show it is able to put these 
austerity measures into practice quickly.'' To a large extent, the 
success or failure of the bailout plan will depend on Cardoso's ability 
to persuade a fractious Congress to approve the tax, administrative 
and other reforms required by the agreement. The president has been 
able to assemble a majority in both houses, but only by making costly 
concessions to allies that have slowed the pace of reform. ``The problem 
for the president is not the opposition _ it's his friends,'' said 
Alexandre de Barros, a political analyst in Brasilia. ``This coalition 
he has behind him charges a high price for its support. Most of them 
will agree to do what has to be done, on the theory they will get 
their reward later. But others are going to demand their pork barrel 
now.'' At a news conference in Brasilia Friday, Finance Minister Pedro 
Malan opened the government's campaign with an appeal to the patriotism 
and better instincts of legislators. ``I would like to express my 
confidence that Congress will know how to rise to the challenges of 
the present moment, having already demonstrated it can do so in the 
past,'' he said. But in one clear indication of the difficulties Cardoso 
will face, the governor-elect of the state of Rio de Janeiro, Anthony 
Garotinho, is seeking a $250 million loan from the federal government 
to pay an obligatory Christmas bonus to state employees. Brazil's 
problem, Garotinho recently argued, ``is not that it has too many 
civil servants, but that it has too few.'' Under Brazil's complicated 
federal system, the governors of the 27 states often have more influence 
over legislators than the president. The tax reforms Cardoso has pledged 
to carry out would severely crimp both the power of and the flow of 
money to governors and mayors, and in similar situations in the past, 
legislators have tended to vote not along party lines, but in the 
interests of their home state. ``The markets are counting on a lot 
of things being passed with reasonable majorities in the next four 
weeks or so, which is not unreasonable,'' said Riordan Roett, director 
of the Latin American Studies program at Johns Hopkins University. 
``But it is slowly dawning on people that state governors and mayors 
will have to be whipped into shape, and that that is not easily done 
with the snap of anyone's fingers.'' Even in Cardoso's Cabinet there 
have been signs of resistance. Health Minister Jose Serra last week 
prepared a study complaining that spending on health has grown at 
a rate only one-third that of the overall budget since 1994; the study 
was then carefully leaked to the press. But economic and political 
experts here were quick to draw a distinction between Cardoso's situation 
and that of his crippled Russian counterpart, Boris Yeltsin. Elected 
to a second term last month with a resounding majority, Cardoso will 
be inaugurated in January with a high level of popular support after 
having reduced inflation from annual rate of 941 percent in 1994 to 
a current level of zero, dramatically increasing purchasing power 
for the working class. Cardoso's success in vanquishing inflation, 
experts said, made Brazil's 165 million people more willing to accept 
the economic recession and increased levels of unemployment that are 
predicted for the near future. ``We're probably going to have record 
levels of unemployment in the first half of next year,'' said Mailson 
da Nobrega, a former minister of finance, but if Cardoso succeeds 
in reducing interest rates and holding the exchange rate steady, complaints 
will be relatively few. The Sao Paulo stock market reacted gratefully 
in anticipation of lower interest rates _ now at more than 40 percent 
_ and an improvement in foreign reserves, which have dropped by nearly 
half since the collapse of the Russian economy in August. After declining 
by more than 3 percent on Thursday, the Bovespa index rose 2 percent 
Friday. ``This is not the first time Brazil confronts this type of 
crisis,'' said Marcus Vinicius Pratini de Moraes, a former Cabinet 
minister who is now president of the Brazilian Foreign Trade Association. 
``But it is the first time it is confronting this type of crisis with 
a stable economy.'' Nevertheless, there were also voices warning that 
the country should not feel too cocky about its prospects. ``There 
is no reason for Brazilians to exchange the pessimism of the last 
two months for the excessive optimism of recent days,'' the newspaper 
Jornal do Brasil admonished in an editorial Friday. ``Above all, caution 
is necessary.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>