<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0263 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Western capitals there is a rush to rethink the world. At issue 
is the end of the so-called Washington consensus, which has held more 
or less unchallenged since the end of the Cold War: that more open 
markets, freer trade and larger international capital flows are necessarily 
good. The catalyst has been disaster that no rally on Wall Street 
can quickly undo. The global financial crisis has thrown 20 million 
Asians back into poverty in the last year, made 40 percent of the 
Russian population poorer than ever, and produced growing unemployment 
in Brazil, a country already racked by some of the greatest disparities 
between rich and poor in the world. ``International volatility has 
been such that free-market capitalism is on the defensive,'' said 
Robert Hormats, vice chairman of Goldman Sachs International. In place 
of the old certainties lies disquiet. At the heart of the disquiet 
is the growing sense that however fecund the global exchange of trade, 
information and money has been in recent years, this unbridled flow 
can also be capriciously destructive. Forms of intervention to control 
or direct the flow are therefore being heatedly discussed. ``A very 
important debate has begun, sparked by the general realization that 
you cannot leave people unprotected before the global market,'' said 
Anthony Giddens, the director of the London School of Economics. ``There 
is a will to recognize the need for some new governance of the world 
economy.'' The question of just what that new governance should be 
is creating a world of unusual intellectual flux, one comparable to 
the post-1945 era in its quest for some overarching design for equitable 
development. Just as the development of the New Deal and the European 
welfare state rescued industrial capitalism from its interwar collapse, 
so a similar and equally critical quest has now begun at a global 
level for cushions to the harsher effects of electronic capitalism. 
Prominent economists have suggested a global taxation on currency 
speculation, the establishment of a second United Nations Security 
Council for economic affairs that would act to avert disaster in the 
economic field, limits on international flows of capital, and setting 
target zones for exchange rates. But such steps, which have fairly 
wide support in Europe, tend to provoke deep suspicion in the United 
States, although the danger that further volatility could lead to 
spreading protectionism and possible political upheavals is widely 
recognized in Washington. At the center of the disagreement between 
Americans and Europeans lies the nature of today's instantaneous world. 
Has this new global society amounted to an electronic energizer, as 
the Clinton administration has tended to argue, a revolutionary generator 
of new wealth, new job possibilities and greater freedom? Or has the 
brave new world, as many European intellectuals have insisted, been 
no more than a slick reincarnation of the unfettered capitalism of 
the 19th century, using new technology to atomize societies, isolate 
the poor and advance a new ideology of exploitation upheld by an ever-wealthier, 
online global oligarchy? ``We live in an increasingly unequal world,'' 
said Elmar Altwater, a political scientist at the Free University 
of Berlin, ``and what we have now understood is that this will continue 
as long as there is no political correction. Incomes based on labor 
simply have not grown in real terms, even as income based on the global 
application of capital has soared. What is needed is more political 
intervention.'' Jean-Paul Fitoussi, an economist and adviser to French 
Prime Minister Lionel Jospin, said: ``If there are systematic losers 
from today's global economy, we could be overwhelmed. A way must be 
found to bring the Frankenstein of deregulated global financial markets 
under control.'' Such references to ``Frankenstein'' in the same breath 
as ``markets'' makes many American economists grimace. After all, 
the United States under Bill Clinton has seen the creation of millions 
of new jobs, a vigorous economy that derived 30 percent of its growth 
from international expansion and, until recent volatility, consistently 
soaring share prices. In Europe, by contrast, high unemployment and 
increasingly strained social security systems have bolstered a far 
darker vision, popularized by a best seller called ``The Economic 
Horror'' by French writer Viviane Forrestier. It has sold more than 
310,000 copies and been translated into 17 languages. ``Shame should 
be quoted on the stock exchange for it is an important element of 
profit,'' Ms. Forrestier writes in one of the milder phrases of her 
uniformly bleak catalog of contemporary devastation. Pierre Bourdieu, 
a French intellectual with a large and passionate following, a man 
who is perhaps the nearest figure that France now has to a Jean-Paul 
Sartre, has made his name with relentless and more sophisticated attacks 
against what Europeans and Latin Americans generally call ultraliberalism, 
that is, unfettered free-market orthodoxy. A dapper, soft-spoken man, 
Bourdieu argues that the central aim of ``the pure logic of the market'' 
has been to weaken every collective group _ the nation itself, the 
state, labor unions, cooperatives, associations _ to install what 
he calls a worldwide ``reign of absolute flexibility'' in which international 
capital and multinational corporations dictate terms of employment 
and wages. ``Ours is a Darwinian world of insecurity and stress, where 
the permanent threat of unemployment creates a permanent state of 
precariousness,'' he has written. The quest for fairness has been 
strengthened in Europe by the arrival of governments whose intellectual 
inspiration comes from the left: Tony Blair in London, Lionel Jospin 
in Paris, Massimo D'Alema in Rome and Gerhard Schroeder in Bonn. It 
has also been reinforced by the ravages that the rapid, often herd-like 
daily movement of money across frontiers has recently inflicted on 
such societies as Indonesia, Thailand and Brazil. The abrupt unmasking 
of Russia's sham capitalism _ with its ``stock market,'' its ``financiers'' 
and its privatized companies beside zero regulation, almost zero tax 
collection, rampant asset-stripping and a general absence of the rule 
of law _ has also brought home the danger of exporting a modern capitalist 
market economy to a society unready for it. Reviewing this and other 
fiascos, World Bank president James Wolfensohn said last month, ``We 
have to learn to have a debate where mathematics will not dominate 
humanity.'' Clinton, too, has noted recently that a quarter of the 
world's population now lives in countries with declining growth. He 
has begun to talk about the need to ``lift the lives of ordinary people.'' 
Still, what form of regulation the market needs and in what degree 
remain matters of sharp dispute. Blair talks about the ``rebirth of 
progressive politics,'' by which he seems to mean that the state has 
an active role to play after the Thatcher years but one that is highly 
disciplined and ultimately aimed at giving everyone a stake in the 
national economy. Clinton has proposed a ``third way,'' between capitalism 
and socialism. The term ``third way'' is not new, however, and has 
been applied during this century to everything from German social 
democracy through Yugoslav economic experiments to attempted reforms 
in the Soviet Union during the Gorbachev era. What both Blair's and 
Clinton's formulations have in common, though, is the notion that 
highly disciplined public entities can bring the necessary balance 
to market forces. So far, Western governments have instructed the 
World Bank to direct extra funds to ``the most vulnerable groups in 
society'' and provided an extra $90 billion to the International Monetary 
Fund to be used to try to pre-empt crises. But these are essentially 
short-term band-aids. More sweeping measures are certain to meet resistance. 
``The last thing the world needs is an economic Security Council at 
the United Nations,'' said Hormats of Goldman Sachs. ``If you really 
want to undermine confidence, that would do it.'' He added that limits 
on flows of capital through controls or regulations should be approached 
warily. Paul Krugman of MIT has argued in The New Republic, however, 
that pressure to constrain or limit international capital flows seems 
certain to grow if the response to crises continues to be governed 
by the need to ``mollify market sentiment.'' Krugman says that cutting 
interest rates is what is really needed to revive these economies 
and give poor people in countries like Brazil a better chance to make 
their way. Such limits on capital flows would be a body blow to the 
spirit of American capitalism, which has been so buoyant and dominant 
since the Cold War's end. This capitalism has been revolutionary, 
introducing millions of people to stock-holding both directly and 
through mutual funds. But capitalism elsewhere has also had a much 
crueler face as rising poverty rates in Asia, Latin America and Russia 
show.``Capitalism survived after World War II,'' said Fitoussi, the 
French economist, ``because we invented a system where there were 
no consistent losers, everyone gained a little.'' The problem, he 
said, is that that is no longer the case. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>