<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0201 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Big, whitewashed art galleries in low industrial buildings, their 
garage-style doors giving onto broad, sunny streets that are dead 
quiet except for the fit-for-life types who are in-line skating westward 
toward the water. Is this a description of the latest art district 
in Los Angeles? In fact, it is West Chelsea, which strikes many people 
as an unlikely New York neighborhood. That may be because it is virtually 
a replica of the art scene that took root 10 years ago on the industrial 
fringes of Santa Monica, Calif., where big, white galleries feature 
garage-door entries. Here it is. A little slice of Los Angeles on 
the Hudson. And wait. There's more. What is that something in the 
air? The healing bouquet of an aromatherapy candle? The scent of a 
double-decaf espresso with a side of foamed skim milk? The sharp tang 
of blondifying peroxide from a hair-color salon? The qcent of new 
leather on a Range Rover's seats? There's a little whiff of Los Angeles 
on nearly every New York street corner these days (especially the 
ones where you can get a ticket for jaywalking). From the New Age 
spirituality embraced by Donna Karan to the mania for yoga classes, 
from the movie-star residents of Central Park West to the seaside 
sprawl of the Hamptons, New York has morphed into its onetime cultural 
antipode, Los Angeles. Apples and oranges? Fuhgeddaboutit. If Woody 
Allen were to remake ``Annie Hall'' today, with all its sniping about 
Los Angeles' inferiority to Manhattan, he'd have a hard time making 
it stick. Instead, Allen's latest film, ``Celebrity,'' which opens 
this week, is about a curious place where nearly everyone works in 
entertainment, gossip is the coin of the realm and star culture has 
produced a spoiled heartthrob played by Leonardo DiCaprio. Sounds 
like Los Angeles. But the setting is Manhattan. Speaking of DiCaprio, 
what is Hollywood's latest iteration of Troy Donahue doing night after 
night at Moomba and Verukka, instead of trawling on Sunset Boulevard, 
like the many Hollywood It Boys who preceded him? Maybe DiCaprio has 
simply accepted the fact that there is little difference between the 
two cities today. Both have the same chic restaurants, like Indochine 
and Le Colonial; similar chic hotels from Andre Balasz and Ian Schrager, 
and branches of Barneys New York, selling interchangeable wardrobes 
now that black is the bicoastal color of chic and ``seasonless dressing'' 
is a fashion-industry mantra. (``Now we can wear cashmere and wool 
in summer _ thank God!'' Ellen DeGeneres quipped at the VH-1 Fashion 
Awards last month.) Irma Zandl, the president of the Zandl Group, 
a trend-spotting company in Manhattan, said that her research showed 
an East-West mind meld. ``You find people wearing black out there, 
and you have the whole New Agey thing happening here,'' she said. 
``And in terms of restaurants, there are lots of places here that 
seem very L.A., and more things out there that have a more bistro 
feel.'' Tom Ford, the designer for Gucci, who has homes in New York 
and Los Angeles, said: ``When I moved to New York in the late 1970s, 
there seemed to be this whole East Coast WASP-y thing that was the 
top of the pyramid in terms of what you could achieve. Now, New York 
is a lot flashier. Everyone's in entertainment. The media have never 
been more powerful.'' The look of mid-century modernism, so in vogue 
in furniture and decorative design, has many of its roots in Los Angeles, 
Ford pointed out, citing the hillside houses designed by Richard Neutra, 
one of which Ford has bought for himself. Out in the Hamptons, Malibuization 
encroaches a little more each summer. The Hamptons in the '90s have 
given Manhattanites their first taste of a full-fledged car culture, 
typified by status symbols like the Range Rover (the craze for which 
began in Los Angeles). The Hamptons are also the locale for sightings 
of Steven Spielberg and Barbra Streisand, a film festival, and unbearable 
Los Angeles-style traffic jams on the way to the beach. ``No. 1, every 
kid graduating from an Ivy League school wants to go to work in Hollywood, 
as if it's the only place in the world to work,'' said William Norwich, 
a society columnist for The New York Observer, ticking off the ways 
in which the Left Coast has conquered New York. ``No. 2, everyone 
here said they'd never eat designer pizza and California cuisine, 
and now they eat designer pizza and California cuisine. And 3, everyone 
in New York said they would never use cell phones. Look around. It's 
the new earring.'' Only last year, 42nd Street was magically whisked 
off to Southern California (Anaheim, to be exact) via a special performance 
by Disneyland's Main Street Electrical Parade. Walt Disney Co. is 
the parent of such seemingly quintessential New York institutions 
as a pair of Broadway musicals; Seventh Avenue's beloved trade paper, 
Women's Wear Daily, and the latest magazine from the former editor 
of The New Yorker Tina Brown. As Ms. Brown has described the new venture, 
which she is creating under the aegis of Disney-owned Miramax Films, 
it will seamlessly integrate the signature industries of New York 
and Los Angeles _ publishing and entertainment. And there it is. The 
E-word. More and more, the capital of the East Coast and the capital 
of the West Coast share the same industry: entertainment. ``Wonderful 
Town: Big Apple Booms as Major Movie Site,'' proclaimed The Daily 
Variety on Nov. 6. The article's first paragraph said a lot: ``While 
location shooting has fallen sharply in Los Angeles this fall, Gotham's 
booming film and TV production business shows no signs of slowing 
down.'' Revenues from location filming in New York City nearly doubled 
between 1994 and last year, from $1.4 billion to $2.4 billion. In 
that same period, motion picture services provided the most robust 
job-growth engine in New York, adding more jobs to the city in three 
years than any other industry, according to the New York City Mayor's 
Office of Film, Theater and Broadcasting. Those figures speak only 
to actual production. But where entertainment ends and tourism _ now 
at an all-time high in the city _ begins has become an increasingly 
blurred line. ``I just read somewhere that New York has become the 
No. 1 tourist destination in the country, which is not a good sign,'' 
writer Fran Lebowitz said. ``I moved to New York because it had all 
the things that the rest of America hated. Now, it has become the 
most densely populated suburban environment in the history of the 
Western World, and I have repaired to the countryside.'' (She would 
not say where.) There are others, too, who bemoan the submergence 
of New York's identity in that of its onetime polar opposite. ``I 
miss the old days, when it was like a sports rivalry, like the Lakers 
and the Knicks,'' said Michael J. Caruso, the editor in chief of Details 
magazine, who used to be the editor of Los Angeles magazine. ``New 
York was tough as nails. You had to eat glass to live here, and L.A. 
was lotus-land, soft and sweet and stupid. It was fun to hate L.A. 
There's too much cross-pollination now.'' Neal Gabler, the cultural 
critic whose latest book is ``Life, the Movie: How Entertainment Conquered 
Reality'' (Knopf, $25), said New Yorkers and Angelenos not only create 
similar entertainment products, but also share that industry's values. 
``They prize the same things now, and I don't mean that only in terms 
of the clothes they wear and the cars they drive, but in the value 
of appearance,'' Gabler said. ``There's the great story of the producer 
David Begelman, who had not a stick of food in his fridge, but still 
had someone coming to polish the Rolls. Everything was about how the 
Rolls looked, even if you starved, and that's now just as true of 
New York as California _ the sense that you're nothing if you don't 
look good. Both of them prize stardom, that's what binds the two communities.'' 
The old joke used to be that America was a vast plain tilted leftward, 
so all the loose nuts rolled to California. But these days New York 
is losing, and California is gaining, in many of the areas in which 
New York has traditionally prided itself. According to the latest 
Forbes magazine list of the 400 Richest Americans, New York has fewer 
and California has more of the share of wealthy individuals. This 
reversal of fortunes has taken place only in the last 10 years. The 
fashion industry, once wholly New York-centric, has gone ga-ga for 
Hollywood star power, competing to dress the nominees on Oscar night. 
And the $1 billion Getty Center, opened last December with the largest 
endowment of any museum in the country, has dealt a blow to New York's 
hegemony as national art capital. On its 110-acre site, the Getty 
complex of museums is ``the greatest billboard in the world for culture,'' 
said Larry Gagosian, the Manhattan-based art dealer, who recently 
opened a second gallery in Beverly Hills. ``You don't even have to 
go _ just seeing it from the 405 freeway, taking up most of a hill 
in Brentwood, is enough. It's the second Hollywood sign.'' Someday, 
perhaps, the two cities will completely flip-flop. Los Angeles will 
be a cultural Shangri-La, isolated from the vulgarities of mass culture, 
and New York will be remade as Gotham, the city of superficial spectacle. 
And who's to say that would be such a bad thing? In Allen's new film, 
Judy Davis plays one of his archetypal angst-ridden New Yorkers, but 
one who is transformed into a bottle-blond television personality 
in the peppy image of Mary Hart. ``I've become the kind of woman I 
always hated,'' she reflects. ``And I feel better.'' Already, the 
Los Angeles ethos seems to be consolidating its hold on New York and 
moving on, spreading to other cities. ``What's really amazing to me 
is how London is getting so L.A.,'' Ford of Gucci said. ``They've 
got the whole L.A. beauty thing, the blond hair, the implants and 
collagen lips, decked out in the latest fashion. If you ask me, L.A. 
is taking over the world.'' Now if only we could make a right turn 
on red. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>