<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0186 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The trend is painfully evident in the statistics. Over the last quarter 
century, the incomes of millions of Americans have grown farther apart, 
so much so that a phrase, income inequality, has been coined to describe 
what has happened. Income inequality has persisted, undented so far, 
through the economic expansion of the 1990s. Now social scientists 
are beginning to assess the damage that it inflicts on Americans _ 
the rich as well as the much less rich _ in their daily lives. The 
initial findings are sometimes startling, if still inconclusive. Life 
expectancy, for example, appears to be adversely linked to income 
inequality. Americans live longer than they used to _ someone born 
today can expect to reach 76 _ but still not as long as people in 
Japan, Germany and Switzerland, where incomes are similarly high but 
are more equally distributed. Other factors besides income play a 
role in life expectancy: differing rates of highway deaths, for instance, 
and the prevalence of AIDS. But in any attempt to understand American 
social problems, enduring income inequality must now be considered 
as well, said Christopher Jencks, a professor of sociology at the 
Kennedy School of government at Harvard University. ``If you had asked 
me a year ago if there was evidence that income inequality had some 
social consequence, I would have said, `Gee, I don't know,''' said 
Jencks, who recently began a study of the subject with two other academics. 
``But the data seem to say that if you are of average income, living 
among people of average income, you are less likely to have a heart 
attack than if you live more stressfully in a community where there 
is you in the middle, and a bunch of rich people and a bunch of poor 
people. That seems hard to believe, but it is the direction in which 
the evidence seems to point.'' For years, economists have been expecting 
egalitarian America to revert to the pattern of the early postwar 
years, when spreads in income were much smaller between people like 
office workers, teachers, mechanics, bus drivers and factory workers 
on the one hand, and doctors, lawyers, investment bankers, engineers 
and executives on the other. The assumption was that families would 
soon migrate back to middle income, earning between $30,000 and $80,000 
a year in today's dollars _ a category that represented 63 percent 
of all families in 1973 but only 50 percent today. If income inequality 
did persist, then many economists hoped for relief from a re-emergence 
of a second egalitarian characteristic of American life that has all 
but disappeared. Before 1973, salaries and wages rose faster than 
the inflation rate for most workers; janitors and chief executives, 
office workers and their bosses, shared in this progress. But wages 
for most Americans earning less than $75,000 a year have either stagnated 
since 1973 or lost ground to inflation _ even after taking into account 
an across-the-board increase in wages since 1996, a trend now threatened 
by the slowing economy. Wage stagnation changes perceptions. When 
the boss, to take a fanciful example, gets a big enough raise to buy 
a digital television set to replace his old color TV and his subordinates 
get enough of a raise to afford color TV's in place of black-and-white 
sets, that is progress in America. But when the boss' raise buys a 
digital TV but a meager increase for subordinates leaves them stuck 
with black and white, a social problem is born _ resentment. ``Income 
inequality and wage stagnation exacerbate each other; the inequality 
would not be such a problem if incomes were going up for everyone,'' 
said Frank Levy, a labor economist at the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology who deals with this issue in an updated version of his 
1988 book, ``Dollars and Dreams'' (Russell Sage). Inequality isn't 
all bad. The pursuit of better jobs with higher pay and regular raises 
has induced men and women to get more education. They are postponing 
marriage while they prepare, and, once they do marry, the men spend 
much more time on household chores than in the past, some new studies 
show. And they seek as spouses women who are likely to be good earners 
rather than simply good homemakers. But men and women also marry with 
the expectation that both parties will work hard indefinitely, and 
that is turning out to be untenable. Women in particular spend much 
more time at work, in part because their status in the workplace is 
growing closer to that of men, but also because it means extra family 
income in times of wage stagnation. The problem is that when children 
come, the women, and increasingly the men, want to reduce the time 
they spend at work _ and they find that they cannot. More and more 
studies make this point. That is partly because families need the 
money. And it is partly because so many jobs that pay well require 
long hours. ``Most of the people caught in this stressful situation,'' 
said Rosalind Barnett, a psychologist at Brandeis University, ``are 
managers and professionals who fear the negative career repercussions, 
the strain in their marriages and the loss of too much income if they 
cut back and follow their hearts.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>