<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0189 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just before 9 on Tuesday morning, if tradition holds, Alan Greenspan 
will stride through a doorway behind the desk in his private office 
and into the Federal Reserve's ornate board room. He will take his 
seat at the head of the 27-foot-long mahogany and granite table and 
then, for the 91st time in his 11 years as chairman of the central 
bank, call to order a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, 
the group that sets interest rate policy. The process is almost ritualistic. 
But with much of the world reeling from the financial shocks set off 
last year in Asia, and with the markets and the economy at home in 
flux, the situation now confronting Greenspan and his colleagues is 
anything but predictable. Greenspan ascended to icon status through 
his success at the monumental, but well-defined, task of extinguishing 
inflation. The question now is whether he can guide policy as successfully 
through a period in which both the economy and the threats to it are 
changing with blinding speed. At stake is a business expansion in 
the United States that in December will become, at seven years and 
nine months, the longest in the nation's history, aside from the 1960s 
boom fueled by spending on the Vietnam War. For Greenspan, there is 
also a legacy at stake. He is 72. And though he has not indicated 
whether he wants to be reappointed when his current term, his third, 
expires in the summer of 2000, today's economic crosscurrents have 
created a challenge whose outcome will shape how he is remembered 
in the history books. Just what is Greenspan thinking amid the swirl? 
He rarely answers questions directly, as anyone who tries to parse 
his public comments soon discovers. So his is a mind that economists, 
investors and politicians have been trying to read since he was appointed 
to replace Paul Volcker as the Fed chairman in 1987. They have learned 
to pick up any major shifts in policy _ and, often, to guess the next 
interest rate move. The guessing now is that he intends to trim rates 
Tuesday by another quarter-point, to make sure that the gradual economic 
slowdown does not become a recession next year. But in his speeches, 
congressional appearances and private conversations with economists 
and government officials in the past few years, Greenspan has also 
been laying out a broader and still evolving framework for his thinking. 
At its heart are the financial markets. Where Greenspan once obsessed 
over small-bore indicators for clues to emerging inflationary bottlenecks, 
he now cites the spread between ultra-safe Treasury bonds and corporate 
debt to illustrate his concern that investor psychology could derail 
the economy. Long viewed as a single-minded, perhaps narrow-minded, 
inflation fighter, Greenspan has been careful not to suggest any diminution 
of his commitment to price stability, which he calls the ``essential 
precondition'' for a healthy economy. But with inflation having receded 
for now, he has also become more fascinated with how advances in technology 
are affecting the economy _ and how the combination of technology 
and more powerful markets can instantly bring prosperity or wreak 
havoc around the world. Productivity growth, a key to better living 
standards, appears to be improving, in Greenspan's view, reflecting 
a delayed payoff from the huge investments by business over the years 
in computers and other new technology. Elements of the economy that 
are most prone to recession-inducing imbalances _ like industrial 
capacity and inventories _ can now be managed much more efficiently, 
he believes, helping to dampen the business cycle. But while the finances 
of both businesses and individuals are tied more closely to the markets 
than ever, even the most powerful policy-makers can do little to control 
the markets, Greenspan contends. His bottom line is this: Global forces 
are making monetary policy trickier, but they are advancing a sometimes 
painful, yet ultimately beneficial, shift toward market capitalism 
_ a cause he has promoted since his days as a saxophone-playing disciple 
of Ayn Rand in the 1950s. ``For good or ill, an unforgiving capitalist 
process is driving wealth creation,'' Greenspan said in a speech earlier 
this year. ``It has become increasingly difficult for policy makers 
who wish to practice, as they put it, a more `caring' capitalism to 
realize the full potential of their economies. As a consequence, increasingly, 
nations appear to be opting to open themselves to competition, however 
harsh, and become producers that can compete in world markets.'' Greenspan 
has as many critics as ever. Some think that he continues to focus 
unduly on inflation at the expense of jobs and higher wages, and that 
his failure to cut U.S. interest rates sooner has exacerbated the 
global crisis. Others think that in his fixation on the markets, he 
is paying too little attention to warning signals of inflation, like 
rapid growth in the money supply. Another group thinks he is drawing 
sweeping conclusions from what is no more than a temporary period 
of good economic luck. And the rise of left-leaning governments in 
Western Europe, along with the resistance to free-market capitalism 
in capitals from Kuala Lumpur to Moscow, challenge his conclusions 
about economic history. Greenspan, of course, does not set policy 
by himself, and his colleagues at the Fed have their own ideas about 
what is happening. But his evolving thinking helps explain why the 
Fed stayed largely on the sidelines in the last few years as the U.S. 
economy exceeded the ``speed limit'' imposed by traditional forecasting 
models and rules. It serves as the foundation for the concerns he 
has expressed recently about the risks to the economy from the near-panic 
in the bond markets _ and suggests that he remains extremely concerned 
about the financial market problems even as the panic begins to subside. 
It also helps to shape an impression _ by no means universal _ that 
Greenspan is more willing to rethink his approach than he gets credit 
for, and that he is not as preoccupied with economic minutiae as many 
have long believed. ``What's impressive about Greenspan is that he's 
open-minded to the fact that each business cycle is different and 
the economy is changing and we don't know as much as we think we know,'' 
said William Dudley, an economist at Goldman, Sachs. Translating the 
Arcane Early one morning last January, Greenspan took a three-block 
stroll along Vermont Avenue in South Central Los Angeles, ground zero 
in the 1992 riots. Along with members of Congress and other federal 
regulators, he passed empty lots, boarded-up stores and other evidence 
that the boom that had brought prosperity to much of the nation had 
done little to help restore that ravaged community. ``We regulators 
are swamped with all sorts of data, which we pore through day after 
day,'' Greenspan told reporters later. ``I think it is terribly important 
to look at what is under the data. It's important to put a face on 
the numbers.'' Yet that brief excursion into a pocket of poverty was 
uncharacteristic for Greenspan, whose approach to his job is fiercely 
intellectual and dispassionate. He is the ultimate economic wonk, 
immersing himself in official statistics, raw data, Wall Street numbers 
and anecdotal information passed along to him directly or indirectly 
by business executives. His briefcase is often full of trade publications 
like Aviation Week. He rarely gets out to factory floors or fast-food 
kitchens, and, other than occasional visits with labor leaders, rarely 
seems to interact much with anyone but the elites in government, economics, 
business and finance. But he can draw on the 30 years he spent as 
a consultant advising a wide range of industries for a sense of what 
all those arcane facts and statistics mean in the real world. In a 
book, ``Economic Puppetmasters: Lessons from the Halls of Power'' 
(AEI Press), due out in February, Lawrence B. Lindsey, a Fed governor 
from 1991 to 1997 who is now a resident scholar at the American Enterprise 
Institute, cites a board meeting at the Fed a few years ago in which 
the discussion turned to flooding that had rendered all but one of 
the bridges across the Mississippi River impassable, creating a logjam 
for freight. ``Greenspan not only knew the location of the bridge, 
but also the various reroutings that could be used to get merchandise 
there,'' Lindsey writes. The sheer breadth of Greenspan's data-gathering 
has always dissuaded him from relying on a particular forecasting 
model or rule-driven approach to monetary policy. He is skeptical 
about the existence of a ``natural'' rate of unemployment, a level 
below which inflation will inevitably take root if the economy is 
growing at a healthy pace. He does not put any particular stock in 
the Phillips curve, which purports to establish a link between inflation 
and unemployment. And he views growth in the money supply, which monetarists 
see as the main determinant of inflation, as just one indicator, and 
not a terribly reliable one at that. Yet while Greenspan shies away 
from reading immutable patterns in past performance, he is a keen 
student of history. ``There's a scholarly dimension to him,'' said 
David Hale, an economist at the Zurich Group. ``A lot of people in 
our business are consumed by money-market gibberish. He can see the 
sweep of history.'' The Technology Twists It is to history that Greenspan 
has looked to explain why the computer revolution and all the other 
technological advances of the last few decades were accompanied not 
by a spurt in productivity, as would be expected, but by a decline 
that began around 1970 and is only now showing signs of reversing. 
He frequently cites work by two economists at Stanford University, 
Paul David and Nathan Rosenberg, who have shown that it often takes 
decades before new technology is fully absorbed and exploited by businesses. 
Factories built to use steam power, for example, could not capture 
the advantages offered by the development of electricity; it was only 
when new plants were built with electricity-driven machinery in mind 
that their productivity improved. ``What we may be observing in the 
current environment is a number of key technologies, some even mature, 
finally interacting to create significant new opportunities for value 
creation,'' Greenspan said in a speech last year, citing as an example 
the use of decades-old laser technology in fiber optic cable to carry 
traffic on the Internet. If technology has begun to improve productivity, 
that would help explain a big mystery of the last several years: why, 
with low unemployment and steady growth, there has not been inflation. 
The likelihood that productivity is increasing more than official 
statistics show seems to be a key reason Greenspan held off on raising 
interest rates over the last several years. Greenspan thinks that 
technology is also altering the business cycle. He contends that by 
allowing businesses to adjust their inventories more rapidly and reducing 
the time it takes to put newly ordered equipment into service, technology 
is dampening the major imbalances usually associated with a recession. 
Yet it is also behind the growing size and power of the financial 
markets, which in turn are having an ever more direct and powerful 
impact on the economy, he believes. Consumers spent somewhat more 
freely as the stock market climbed relentlessly the last few years; 
in his view, it is only common sense to believe they will retrench 
somewhat if the market goes into a sustained fall. Businesses have 
increasingly turned to the stock and bond markets to raise money; 
just as the easy availability of capital has fueled business expansion, 
a credit squeeze in the market could halt that growth. Moreover, with 
technology allowing investors to send money screaming from one place 
to another, no country can wall itself off from financial shocks. 
``New technology has radically reduced the costs of borrowing and 
lending across traditional national borders,'' Greenspan said in a 
speech last spring, as Asia's financial problems threatened to spill 
over to the rest of the world. While the globalization of finance 
has helped raise living standards, it also ``exposes and punishes 
underlying economic weakness swiftly and decisively,'' he said. But 
in being forced to heed market fluctuations, policy-makers immediately 
confront the complexities of investor psychology, a variable that 
not even Greenspan can fully grasp, much less control. He has been 
ruminating in public about how to deal with the markets since his 
famous reference to ``irrational exuberance'' in a speech nearly two 
years ago. He has tried talking the market down, with only temporary 
success, but in the end seems to have concluded that there is no way 
to deflate an asset bubble in an orderly way. In his book, Lindsey 
quotes from an interview with Greenspan in April, before both the 
stock market's summer tumble and its fall rebound, after the Fed started 
cutting rates. ``There is a fundamental problem with market intervention 
to prick a bubble,'' Greenspan said. ``It presumes that you know more 
than the market.'' The Alter Ego A guest at a party a few months ago 
on the South Lawn of the White House remembers seeing Greenspan and 
his wife, Andrea Mitchell, the NBC News correspondent, standing not 
far from President Clinton. Clinton happily posed for pictures; Ms. 
Mitchell chatted with friends. Greenspan stood awkwardly, as if dreading 
the possibility that someone would approach to ask if it was a good 
time to refinance. Yet Greenspan's dour public face is to some degree 
a mask. Born in New York in 1926, he was a baseball fan and a talented 
musician; after attending the Juilliard School, he signed on with 
a swing band and toured the country playing saxophone before receiving 
an economics degree at New York University. ``There's a tremendous 
difference between the public image that he so carefully creates and 
the personal guy, who is kind of fun to have dinner with,'' said Rep. 
Joseph Kennedy, D-Mass. ``He tells great stories and has lived a life 
_ he was blowing a horn in New York City _ that bears very little 
resemblance to what he does today.'' Much has been made of Greenspan's 
membership during the 1950s in Ayn Rand's inner circle. Rand's novels, 
especially ``Atlas Shrugged,'' presented a vision of individualism 
and laissez-faire capitalism that became a guiding light for many 
libertarians. Greenspan has always minimized her influence on his 
current thinking, and while there are few economic conservatives more 
pure than he in Washington, he also has a strong pragmatic streak. 
Consider his close working relationship with the Clinton administration, 
where he has far more influence than he ever did with the president 
who first appointed him, Ronald Reagan, or with George Bush, whose 
1992 defeat is often attributed by Republicans to Greenspan's slow 
response to the short recession of 1990-91. Clinton's place in history 
will owe much to Greenspan's stewardship of the economy over the last 
six years and how well the economy holds up over the next two. Some 
would argue, in fact, that Clinton's political survival this year 
was due in large part to the contentment that the prosperous Greenspan 
era has induced in the electorate. As a result, Greenspan can almost 
certainly count on Clinton to nominate him to a fourth term in 2000 
if the Fed chairman decides he want to stay on. Will Greenspan have 
had enough of the pressures and the criticism? Will he find it too 
hard to pull his head out of the national income accounts and let 
go of the economy's levers? Today's indispensable man is not saying. 
But while Wall Street and Washington have a hard time imagining a 
post-Greenspan world, it is worth remembering that they could not 
imagine a world without Paul Volcker running the Fed, either. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>