<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0224 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The British philosopher Isaiah Berlin was knighted during his lifetime, 
but since his death a year ago he has achieved a peculiar kind of 
intellectual sainthood. The tributes are still reverential, but there 
are signs of debate and disagreement over the nature of his intellectual 
legacy. Many of his weighty essays can be sampled in a new epic-length 
collection, ``The Proper Study of Mankind'' (Farrar, Straus &AMP; 
Giroux). In addition, a much-awaited biography by Michael Ignatieff, 
``Isaiah Berlin: A Life'' (Metropolitan Books) has just been published, 
based on a decade of intimate conversations with Berlin: The portrait 
is affectionate, admiring and sometimes inspiring, but it also raises 
questions about the limits of Berlin's achievement. And recently, 
the New York Institute for the Humanities at New York University sponsored 
a two-day symposium devoted to his ideas that was as full of criticism 
as praise. Of course, this reassessment is still shot through with 
the recollected touch of the Master, invocations of what Ignatieff 
calls his ``deep, mumbling, tumbling whisper'' that poured forth anecdotes 
and insights, virtuosically juggling philosophical references while 
charming colleagues, rivals, high society in London and the High Table 
in Oxford. The philosopher Michael Oakeshott, with a bit of an edge, 
spoke of the fluent lecturer as a ``Paganini of the platform.'' So 
in the midst of discussions of Berlin's main ideas about liberalism 
and liberty, nationalism and pluralism, there are always plenty of 
anecdotes. Some, in Ignatieff's book, are fairly fresh: the meeting 
with Freud (``I see you are not a snob,'' said the psychoanalyst) 
or the postcard from Virginia Woolf (``If you knock on my little gray 
door, I shall open it''). Others are more familiar: Winston Churchill 
inviting the wrong I. Berlin to dinner and hearing about the writing 
of ``White Christmas,'' or Berlin spending a night in Leningrad with 
the poet Anna Akhmatova in 1945 _ a meeting, she piously believed, 
that unwittingly unleashed Stalin's fury and began the Cold War. During 
Berlin's lifetime there were many who believed that his great genius 
for friendship inflated his scholarly reputation; he wrote no magnum 
opus and made no systematic attempt to tie together the arguments 
made in various lectures and essays. Berlin felt so himself: ``I live 
much more on the surface than people suppose.'' But the re-evaluation 
of Berlin's work by his closest colleagues stresses how many different 
strains in Berlin's thought were held together by force of his presence. 
The kinds of qualifications now being raised by his advocates also 
show how unresolved the issues were in his lifelong project. That 
project was an attempt to redefine political liberalism in the wake 
of this century's tyrannies. How, Berlin asked, again and again, could 
the great utopian hopes of the 18th and 19th centuries _ the hopes 
that helped define liberalism _ have given way to the 20th-century 
horrors of Nazism and Soviet Communism? (Members of Berlin's family 
were sacrificed to both.) These tyrannies, he argued, were not freak 
accidents; they rose out of ideas _ quite distinguished ones, once 
thought to be innocent. At the risk of simplification (a caution Berlin 
made again and again): Berlin argued that modern tyrannies did not 
develop despite the triumphs of reason and science; they developed, 
in large part, because of them. The ideas that a perfectly just society 
could be created and that reason could be its unshakable foundation 
were the very ideas that led to communist tyranny. Berlin argued that 
any unified ideology that promises to reconcile all contradictions 
ends up imposing that presumably enlightened vision on its citizens 
as an oppressive form of what he called ``positive'' liberty. A liberal 
government should recognize that all values conflict, and all conflicts 
require negotiation. The best hope is that there might be liberty 
without undue imposition, a form of ``negative'' liberty. Berlin's 
favorite maxim was from Immanuel Kant: ``Out of timber so crooked 
as that from which man is made, nothing entirely straight can be built.'' 
These arguments, with their measured vision of tragic liberalism, 
have inspired scores of other arguments over the last half century, 
some of which pointedly came to the fore at the recent New York University 
conference. Mark Lilla, for example, a professor of political science 
there, suggested that Berlin went too far in denigrating the Enlightenment 
thinkers of the 18th century. Their emphasis on reason and objective 
judgment actually made modern liberalism possible by recognizing humanity's 
shared rights and liberties. Instead, he said, Berlin celebrated the 
Counter-Enlightenment, thinkers who were ``hostile to the liberalism 
Berlin represented.'' Others argued about whether Berlin's pessimism 
was overblown. The legal scholar Ronald Dworkin disagreed with Berlin's 
idea that all political values _ like notions of equality and liberty 
_ must end up in conflict. Yes, Dworkin argued, a man might think 
that high taxes, levied for the sake of social equality, were a serious 
constraint on his liberty. But that man's notion of liberty should 
then be argued with, showing him that there really is no conflict. 
Dworkin suggested that there might be a way to create a liberal society 
in which all values ``hang together in the right way.'' But these 
two scholars' criticisms of Berlin _ coming from vastly different 
perspectives _ are united in suggesting that in his opposition to 
the evils of an imperial rational system, Berlin went too far. After 
all, doesn't liberal democracy rely on notions of reason and consistency 
to guarantee liberty? The problem, such criticisms suggest, is that 
Berlin too sharply outlined a ``negative'' liberalism, a characterization 
of what liberalism should not be. What Berlin also thought liberalism 
should not do is attempt to eradicate nationalism: a ``basic human 
need'' that he was aware of because of his own commitment to Israel. 
(David Ben-Gurion asked him to become director of the foreign office 
of the fledgling state.) At New York University, the political scientist 
Michael Walzer agreed with Berlin that a ``liberal nationalism'' was 
possible, but a number of speakers said that the two were at odds. 
The philosopher Richard Wollheim, a friend of Berlin's, went furthest, 
arguing that the only rationale justifying Zionism in particular was 
anti-Semitism, and the primary reason for anti-Semitism was the persistent 
way Jews identified themselves as Jews. (He was taught, he said, by 
his German Jewish father ``that thinking of oneself as a Jew was one 
way to insure anti-Semitism.'') This argument suggests that a pluralistic 
society demands certain compromises, including the elimination of 
differences. Berlin, though, welcomed such differences, treating them 
as necessary signs of liberty. His notion of a liberal society was 
almost defined by difference and contradiction. He wanted a pluralistic 
society that took into account both the invariant qualities of human 
nature and varied cultural preferences, that negotiated conflicting 
values while causing minimal human suffering. But the problem is in 
the details: How can such pluralism be attained? When should liberty 
give way to obligation? When should diversity give way to unity? What 
is the acceptable minimum for human welfare and what sacrifices should 
be demanded to attain it? ``The need to choose,'' Berlin wrote, ``to 
sacrifice some ultimate values to others, turns out to be a permanent 
characteristic of the human predicament.'' But Berlin's arguments 
provide no easy guide to deciding which sacrifices should be made 
and why and in the name of what authority. In Berlin's portrait, modern 
liberalism is inherently ambiguous and potentially dangerous; alternatives 
are even less savory. The ambiguities of liberalism, Ignatieff's biography 
shows, may have even haunted Berlin's political life. Berlin first 
supported British intervention in the 1956 Suez crisis, then opposed 
it. He believed in the domino theory of communist expansion in Southeast 
Asia but opposed U.S. entrance into Vietnam and then opposed its quick 
exit. He supported New Deal liberalism but worried about governmental 
paternalism. In 1970, he compared himself to Turgenev: ``Constantly 
attacked by both sides, constantly anxious to please the young and 
yet, when the crisis comes, unable to commit himself totally.'' In 
his famous essay, ``The Hedgehog and the Fox,'' Berlin argued that 
Tolstoy was torn between the desire to find a coherent system in which 
to believe (the hedgehog's unified vision) and his stunning awareness 
of the contradictory ``texture of human life'' (the fox's multiplicity 
of vision). The conflict, Berlin suggested, was painful and tragic. 
A version of it belonged to Berlin as well _ and perhaps even to the 
nature of liberalism. Berlin saw very clearly the trauma of liberalism 
after totalitarianism's triumphs. He saw less clearly how a liberal 
society could negotiate such a world without embracing absolutes, 
so the debates over his legacy may continue to grow. His final offering, 
after all, was no more hopeful than this: a limit to human suffering, 
then struggle and negotiation, uncertain futures and occasional inconsistencies, 
much crooked timber and nothing entirely straight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>