<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0472 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
She has listened to more than 70 witnesses describe the most minute 
details of her son's murder. She has stared at the man accused of 
the crime throughout his three-week trial. And she has heard some 
of the city's best prosecutors and defense lawyers lay out their explanations 
of why it happened. But Carol Levin is still haunted by the question 
of why her son had to die. ``It's totally puzzling to me how somebody 
could do this to someone who did represent a very unique figure in 
his life,'' she said. ``Someone who cared.'' Two days after a jury 
found Corey Arthur guilty of second-degree murder in the slaying of 
a former teacher, Jonathan Levin, Levin's mother still wrestles with 
the simple question of why the 20-year-old turned on Levin. In an 
interview Thursday in her one-bedroom apartment on the Upper West 
Side of Manhattan, Ms. Levin said she had hoped that the trial might 
produce some sense of justice, some knowledge of what her son endured 
in his final moments. And she had also hoped for a token of contrition 
from Arthur. But she said she was disappointed on all three counts, 
and angrily criticized defense lawyers for suggesting that drugs played 
a role in her son's death. Ms. Levin said crime victims or their families 
should have the right to protect a victim's reputation during a trial, 
and defense lawyers should not be allowed to pursue theories in court 
that are not based on fact. Arthur's lawyers have defended their conduct, 
saying they had to raise the drug issue to provide their client with 
the high-quality defense that he deserved in a first-degree murder 
case. But they said they had few answers as to why Arthur committed 
the crime. Anthony Ricco, one of Arthur's lawyers, said Thursday that 
in the 18 months since the killing, Arthur had not given his lawyers 
a consistent account of what occurred that night. Furthermore, Ricco 
said, the defense team found no evidence during its 16-month investigation 
of the murder that the teacher had somehow wronged his former student 
before the shooting. ``Levin showed an interest in him and I'm sure 
that Levin's interest was only to help this kid,'' Ricco said. ``Corey 
has never said the relationship turned bad.'' During the two-hour 
interview, Ms. Levin speculated on the motives, including drug addiction 
and greed, that could have led Arthur to kill her son on May 30, 1997, 
in his Upper West Side apartment. She rejected the suggestion of defense 
lawyers during the trial that one or two more people were involved 
in the crime. ``I am totally convinced that Corey Arthur's evil was 
responsible for this,'' she said, ``from the conception of the plan 
through its execution, both literally and figuratively.'' Ms. Levin, 
a petite, soft-spoken woman with graying hair who warmly greeted friends, 
relatives and former students of Levin who attended the trial, shifted 
from joyous to angry to bereft while discussing her son's childhood, 
adult life and murder. She said she planned to follow in his footsteps 
and become a public school teacher, consummating a goal she nearly 
pursued 20 years ago, one that Levin encouraged before his death. 
She expressed disappointment with Tuesday's verdict in state Supreme 
Court in Manhattan. Jurors acquitted Arthur of first-degree murder 
but found him guilty of second-degree murder and two counts of armed 
robbery. After the verdict, jurors said they chose the lesser murder 
charge because they were not convinced that Arthur had fired the fatal 
shot. Arthur could face 25 years to life in prison. If convicted of 
first-degree murder, he would have been sentenced to life in prison 
without parole. Ms. Levin said that while she was frustrated by the 
verdict, she was not angry with the jurors and respected their decision. 
Her regret, she said, is that no one person will be held accountable 
for firing the shot that killed her son. Montoun Hart, 26, Arthur's 
co-defendant, is scheduled to be tried in January on second-degree 
murder charges. Prosecutors have said Hart assisted in the robbery 
but did not fire the fatal shot. In his first public comments on the 
case since the verdict, the Manhattan district attorney, Robert Morgenthau, 
said Friday that prosecutors were not aware that their lead witness, 
Carlethia Weeks, had had any psychiatric problems before she testified. 
He said prosecutors did not notice any problems before her testimony 
and did not want to turn Ms. Weeks against them by asking for access 
to her medical records. ``When you have a fragile witness, fragile 
in the sense that they could turn against you, you don't want to antagonize 
them,'' he said. Ms. Levin said she would concentrate on writing a 
10-minute statement to read to Judge Marcy Kahn at Arthur's sentencing 
in December. She says summing up her son's life so neatly will be 
agonizing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>