<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0324 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This city has been chosen as the first site of a new international 
competition to help cities develop innovative visions in architecture 
and planning. Architects are to be invited to come up with plans for 
pivotal sites in major cities around the world. The program, called 
the International Foundation for the Canadian Center for Architecture 
Prize Competition, offers a $100,000 prize and will take place every 
three years in a different city. Phyllis Lambert, the founding director 
of the Canadian Center for Architecture in Montreal, said the architects 
selected in this initial cycle of the competition will be asked to 
focus on a 12-block area on the west side of midtown Manhattan between 
30th and 34th Streets. The architects will be free to imagine how 
the site should be used, but the goal is to generate new urban concepts 
that look toward the 21st century. The prize comes at a time of lively 
public debate over recent proposals for major civic projects in New 
York, like Yankee Stadium, Governors Island, Columbus Circle and the 
expansion of Pennsylvania Station into the old post office building. 
For the most part, discussion of these projects has focused on issues 
of economic development, or in the case of Penn Station, historic 
preservation. The prize competition provides an opportunity to lift 
public discussion of civic architecture in New York into the realm 
of architectural excellence or cultural significance. The proposals 
will center on the area bounded by the Hudson River and Eighth Avenue, 
between 30th and 34th Streets, a district now dominated by a tangle 
of roadways, rail lines, tunnels, ramps and other pieces of transportation 
infrastructure. The site is owned by a myriad of private interests 
as well as by public entities. The district includes a Metropolitan 
Transportation Authority rail yard at 33rd Street and 11th Avenue, 
which has been mentioned as a possible site for a new Yankee Stadium. 
Ms. Lambert said the architects would be challenged to propose innovative 
solutions for linking large-scale infrastructure with smaller urban 
spaces, not for vast swaths of urban renewal. She imagined something 
far more lively than a purely residential zone or a district of new 
office towers. ``Many developers are horrified by this site, because 
of all the roadways and tunnels,'' she said, ``but they're what's 
so good about it. Because of the existing infrastructure, and the 
riverside location, the site is connected to the rest the city and 
beyond. We want to see how architects might turn it into a place for 
people.'' While there is no assurance that the winning design will 
be realized, the inclusion in the competition jury of Charles Gargano, 
chairman of the Empire State Development Corp., and Joseph Rose, chairman 
of the New York City Planning Commission, increases the likelihood 
that the competition will be more than an academic exercise. Five 
architects, to be chosen by a distinguished international jury, will 
be invited to compete. They are to be be chosen in February from a 
list of nominations submitted by major architectural institutions 
in the United States and abroad. To qualify for consideration, nominees 
must have achieved a significant and original body of work in architecture 
or urban design. In addition to Ms. Lambert, the jurors are Frank 
Gehry, architect of the Guggenheim Museum, Bilbao, and the Walt Disney 
Concert Hall in Los Angeles; Arata Isozaki, architect of the Sant 
Jordi Palace Gymnasium for the Olympic Games, Barcelona, Team Disney 
Headquarters in Buena Vista, Fla. and the master plan for the Brooklyn 
Museum of Art; Rafael Moneo, architect of the Atocha Railway Station, 
Madrid, the Museums of Art and Architecture, Stockholm, and the Potsdammer 
Platz Hotel and Office Building, Berlin; Elizabeth Diller, associate 
professor of architecture, Princeton University, and co-founder of 
Diller &AMP; Scofidio, an interdisciplinary studio in architecture, 
print and performance; Gargano; Rose, and Gary Hack, a city planner 
and dean of the Graduate School of Fine Arts at the University of 
Pennsylvania. Ralph Lerner, dean of the School of Architecture at 
Princeton University, is director of the competition, which is intended 
to support the Canadian center's mission of making architecture a 
public concern. (The Pritzker Prize, established 20 years ago and 
widely regarded as the highest honor in the field, also carries a 
$100,000 grant.) The center, a major study facility, library and museum, 
will publish all the projects and will mount an exhibition in New 
York City in autumn 1999. A winner is to be announced early in 2000. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>