<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0460 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States' four biggest cigarette makers and officials of 
eight states have reached agreement on the outlines of a settlement 
designed to resolve all remaining state claims over health costs related 
to smoking, attorneys general and industry lawyers involved in the 
talks said Friday. The plan, drafted to cover the 46 states that have 
not already made individual settlements with the industry, would cost 
the tobacco companies $206 billion over 25 years and would restrict 
cigarette advertising and marketing. It would eliminate the industry's 
most significant financial and legal threat: state suits seeking to 
recover the Medicaid costs of treating people with smoking-related 
illnesses. The plan would cost the industry far less than a $368.5 
billion agreement with state attorneys general last year that eventually 
grew into a $516 billion bill in Congress under which the federal 
government would also have gained regulatory authority over nicotine. 
Unlike the earlier state proposal, however, this new plan does not 
shield tobacco companies from personal and class-action liability 
suits. If companies finance the plan's cost by raising cigarette prices, 
the cost of a pack would increase 35 cents over the next five years. 
Some makers, however, for competitive reasons, may choose to raise 
prices less and absorb the cost themselves. Under the plan, which 
is expected to be completed Saturday and announced as early as Monday, 
the producers have agreed to an array of marketing restrictions such 
as a ban on billboard and transit advertisements as well as the sale 
of clothing and merchandise with brand logos. The proposal also calls 
for cigarette makers to pay $1.45 billion over the next five years 
to finance smoking-cessation programs and advertisements to counter 
underage tobacco use. Producers will pay an additional $25 million 
a year over the next decade to underwrite a foundation that will research 
ways to reduce youth smoking and legally pledge that they will not 
market to those under 18. The producers participating in the plan 
are Philip Morris Cos.; R.J. Reynolds Tobacco, a subsidiary of RJR 
Nabisco Holdings Corp.; Lorillard Tobacco, a subsidiary of Loews Corp., 
and Brown &AMP; Williamson Tobacco, a subsidiary of BAT Industries 
PLC. The eight states involved are California, Colorado, New York, 
North Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania and Washington. 
``We have reached an agreement on all the issues,'' said Washington 
state Attorney General Christine Gregoire said in a telephone interview. 
``We are in the final drafting stage and hope to have a settlement 
sometime Saturday. Last-minute disputes could delay or derail the 
settlement but those involved said they did not consider such problems 
likely. Once the eight states and the companies agree, the plan will 
be sent to officials of the other 38 states that have lawsuits pending 
or have yet to file one. Those states will have about one week to 
join; under its current terms, the plan would take effect once states 
representing about 80 percent of the nation's Medicaid population 
sign on. Because the plan is designed to be a national settlement, 
the tobacco companies could withdraw if not enough states join. If 
enough states join for the plan to take effect, but some states do 
not participate, the cost of the plan would be reduced proportionately. 
The tobacco industry was first struck by state lawsuits seeking to 
recover Medicaid funds spent treating smoking-related illnesses in 
1994. As anticipation of a final settlement grew over recent weeks, 
the stocks of cigarette makers have risen on Wall Street. If completed, 
the $206 billion proposal would represent the largest settlement of 
civil lawsuits in U.S. history. In large part, it would effectively 
codify on a national level the marketing and advertising concessions 
made by the tobacco industry over the past year in settling smoking-related 
lawsuits brought by four states _ Florida, Minnesota, Mississippi 
and Texas. The national counter-advertising campaign and the new foundation 
would also expand on those agreements. Tobacco industry lawyers agreed 
Friday that the slow-moving talks, which have covered five months, 
had reached a final stage. ``The parties have finished their negotiations 
and they are reviewing final versions of the papers,'' said Arthur 
Golden, a lawyer representing RJR Nabisco. The plan does not contain 
legal protections for cigarette makers and does not require congressional 
approval. The proposal also does not contain restrictions on fees 
for plaintiffs' lawyers who were hired by state attorneys general 
to pursue those claims, which are to be paid by the industry in addition 
to the plan's costs and are expected to total billions more. But the 
industry would not have to pay more than $500 million in fees in any 
one year, a cigarette company lawyer said. The attorneys general of 
the eight states involved in the talks are expected to announce the 
plan in Washington, D.C., on Monday. Officials of the remaining 38 
states who either have pending smoking-related lawsuits or have not 
filed such claims will then have about a week to decide whether to 
join the settlement plan or proceed with legal actions. The vast majority 
of those states are expected to join. But some states, including Connecticut, 
Massachusetts, Michigan and Wisconsin, have previously pressed for 
stronger public health provisions in the plan. And in recent days, 
officials of some states have been discussing the possibility of taking 
a unified stand in order to wring greater concessions from producers. 
``A number of us are very definitely undecided,'' said Connecticut 
Attorney General Richard Blumenthal. Anti-smoking advocates did not 
participate in crafting the proposal and their reactions Friday varied. 
``The more we know about the agreement, the we more know it is not 
a comprehensive national plan,'' said Matthew Myers, a lawyer for 
the Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids, an advocacy group. Myers and other 
anti-smoking advocates, who were far more critical of the plan, said 
they were particularly concerned that the public would only have a 
week to review it. Ms. Gregoire said she understood that the plan 
would come under attack but added that attorneys general had a legal 
duty to measure would could be achieved both inside and outside the 
courtroom. ``Our role was to decide whether the settlement could get 
as much as we could achieve in the courtroom,'' she said. Industry 
lawyers said they will not finalize the agreement until a specified 
number of states agree to the accord. They have declined to disclose 
that figure but a document posted Friday by the Arizona Republic on 
its Internet site and described by the newspaper as a draft summary 
of the plan states that participating states must account for at least 
80 percent of the total settlement for it to become final. Under a 
formula developed by the attorneys general, each state will receive 
a portion of the settlement based on factors like its percentage of 
the nation's Medicaid population. The plan's value would also be proportionally 
reduced if it goes forward but some states do not join it. The settlement 
plan, which follow five months of drawn-out talks and missed deadlines, 
comes as something as anti-climax to a lengthy national debate over 
smoking. Last year, the industry and state attorneys agreed to a $368.5 
billion settlement proposal under which cigarette makers agreed to 
marketing restrictions, to federal regulation of nicotine and to other 
measures in return for legal protections against smoking-related lawsuits. 
That proposal mushroomed earlier this year in that $516 billion tobacco 
bill sponsored by Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz. But the bill, which would 
have raised the price of cigarettes by $1.10 cents a pack and stripped-away 
the legal protections sought by producers, ran into a maelstrom of 
industry opposition and collapsed. As a result, a new round of settlement 
talks began five months ago between industry officials and state aimed 
at reaching a new agreement that would not require congressional approval. 
If it resolves the state claims, the industry would erase its biggest 
legal challenge. But it continues to face lawsuits from others like 
individual smokers, trade unions and foreign governments. Under the 
new plan, the participating states would receive about the same amount 
of money as their share the $368.5 billion accord that failed. But 
the proposal is not as rich as the $6.1 billion settlement won in 
May by Minnesota. As a result of that settlement, producers also increased 
their payments to Florida, Mississippi and Florida, bring the total 
of the payments to the four settling states over 25 years to some 
$40 billion. Along with bans on billboard and transit ads, producers 
also agree to refrain from using cartoon figures in ads, to bans on 
sponsorship of youth-orientated sporting events and concerts and to 
refrain from lobbying against state initiatives that make it more 
difficult for underage smokers to buy cigarettes. Under the agreement, 
producers would be able to continue to sponsor one sporting event 
using the brand name of a cigarette and there would be no limits on 
sponsorships that utilize a cigarette company's corporate name. The 
agreement also does not provide for restrictions on cigarette advertising 
in retail stories or in magazines and other print media. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>