<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981113.0475 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With his sex and lies case against President Clinton losing momentum 
on Capitol Hill, Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, returned 
Friday to the Whitewater investigation, his original mandate, and 
indicted Clinton's longtime friend Webster Hubbell for his role in 
the real estate scandal. The indictment charged that Hubbell sought 
to conceal from federal regulators the role he and Hillary Rodham 
Clinton played in a complicated land transaction in Arkansas that 
helped lead to the collapse of a savings and loan institution. It 
was not clear from the indictment whether Starr was suggesting that 
Hillary Clinton, who was not named but was described as ``the billing 
partner'' in the Rose Law Firm, had done anything improper or illegal. 
Hubbell, a former chief justice of the state of Arkansas and once 
the No. 3 official in the Clinton Justice Department, was charged 
with 15 counts of fraud, making false statements, and trying to impede 
two federal regulatory agencies, as well as with committing perjury 
before a congressional committee. The indictment Friday was the third 
time Starr brought charges against Hubbell in the five-year investigation 
of the president and his wife. Hubbell pleaded guilty and spent two 
years in prison for bilking his law partners, but a later indictment, 
for tax fraud, was dismissed by a federal judge earlier this year. 
As he was indicting Hubbell, Starr also sent new material to Congress 
Friday about his investigation into whether Clinton lied under oath 
about accusations that he made an unwanted sexual advance in 1993 
to Kathleen Willey, a White House volunteer. Speaking to reporters 
outside his Washington home Friday, Hubbell denied the newest charges 
and said they were part of what he described as a continuing effort 
by Starr to force him to provide evidence against the Clintons. He 
said that when he left prison two years ago after the earlier conviction 
by Starr, he hoped to begin life anew. ``I'm now of the belief that 
I may never be able to do so. I just do not know what it's going to 
take to make this matter end,'' Hubbell said. ``What I do know is 
that I don't know of any wrongdoing on behalf of the first lady or 
the president, and nothing the independent counsel can do to me is 
going to make me lie about that.'' The indictment Friday demonstrated 
that the independent counsel is continuing with his investigation, 
as he has said he would, despite the increasingly cool response both 
from the nation and from Congress to his investigations of the president 
and his conclusion that Clinton may have committed impeachable offenses 
in trying to cover up his affair with Monica Lewinsky. Both the Hubbell 
indictment and the apparent disposal of the Willey matter came only 
days before Starr is expected to face a withering partisan crossfire 
when he appears as the principal witness before the House Judiciary 
Committee. The committee, which is considering whether to vote impeachment 
charges against the president, is scheduled to question Starr Thursday. 
Hubbell spent nearly two years in prison after pleading guilty to 
bilking his partners in the Rose law firm of Little Rock, where he 
had once worked with Mrs. Clinton. But Starr was unable to obtain 
what it seemed he was really after from Hubbell in the plea agreement 
_ incriminating evidence against the Clintons. Starr then brought 
a wide-ranging indictment for tax fraud, which Hubbell again protested 
was an effort to get him to testify against the President and Mrs. 
Clinton. But a federal judge dismissed the tax fraud case and added 
a stinging rebuke of Starr, saying the prosecutor had overstepped 
his authority. Judge James Robertson said that the independent counsel's 
pursuit of Hubbell was a ``quintessential fishing expedition.'' Earlier 
he called some of Starr's constitutional views ``scary.'' Judge Robertson 
said that the tax case was too far removed from Starr's original mandate 
of 1994 to investigate the Clintons' business dealings in Arkansas 
more than a decade ago. The indictment dismissed last July accused 
Hubbell, his wife, Suzanna, and two advisers of scheming in the last 
four years to avoid paying taxes and penalties of more than $850,000. 
Prosecutors had contended that a large part of the taxes owed stemmed 
from money Hubbell had embezzled and from hundreds of thousands of 
dollars in income from jobs referred to him by friends and supporters 
of the president. The indictment said those jobs required little work 
from Hubbell and suggested they might have been arranged to discourage 
him from cooperating with investigators. The indictment Friday seemed 
intended to be insulated from Robertson's charge. Most importantly, 
the newest charges are tied directly to the original topic Starr was 
supposed to investigate _ the Clintons' connection to a complicated 
and sprawling web of real estate transactions in Arkansas before they 
occupied the White House. The indictment concerns a real estate development 
known as Castle Grande that was funded by Madison Guaranty, a savings 
and loan owned at the time by James and Susan McDougal. Madison Guaranty 
eventually failed, and federal regulators have attributed part of 
the failure to its involvement in the Castle Grande development. The 
indictment does not mention Hillary Clinton by name but refers more 
than 20 times to the ``1985-86 billing partner'' on the Madison Guaranty 
account, a description of Mrs. Clinton's role in the transaction. 
Federal regulators had described the Castle Grande transaction as 
a sham, and Hillary Clinton had for a time denied any involvement 
with the matter. But when long-missing billing records from the Rose 
law firm were discovered in the White House book room two years after 
they had been subpoenaed by Starr, Mrs. Clinton said she remembered 
having done legal work on the account but knew it by a different name. 
The indictment charges that Hubbell ``schemed to falsify, conceal, 
and cover up the true nature'' of the role he and Mrs. Clinton played 
in the Castle Grande transaction. The indictment charges that what 
he was attempting to conceal was the effort to defraud the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corp. and the Resolution Trust Corp., the federal 
agency set up to coordinate the savings and loan bailout. ``Legal 
work performed on'' Castle Grande ``was performed by defendant Webster 
L. Hubbell'' and other lawyers, including ``the 1985-1986 Rose billing 
attorney,'' the indictment said. The indictment noted that regulators 
from the two federal agencies concluded that Castle Grande involved 
``insider dealing, fictitious sales and land flips.'' Regulators estimate 
the failed development cost taxpayers nearly $4 million. The indictment 
said Hubbell took steps to assist his father-in-law, businessman Seth 
Ward, in keeping hundreds of thousands of dollars in loans that he 
obtained from Madison Guaranty. Ward, according to regulators, was 
a ``straw'' buyer of parts of the Castle Grande tract. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>