<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981113.2000.0380 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The leaders of the United States and Iraq held out hope today that 
military force may not be required to end a showdown between Baghdad 
and the United Nations. President Clinton said Saddam Hussein still 
has it within his hands to end this crisis now. And the Iraqi ruler 
said he's ready to accept any initiative that would guarantee his 
demands. Still, U.S. troops, ships and planes are converging on the 
Persian Gulf at this hour, and Mr. Clinton says he's ready to use 
force to make Baghdad submit to UN weapons inspections. The World's 
Andrew North reports on the options the president is considering. 
If Bill Clinton orders military action against Iraq, it will be the 
fourth time he's done so in his presidency. The administration would 
want this time to be the last time. Today, Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright said that if force is employed, the aim would be to degrade 
Saddam Hussein's ability to develop weapons of mass destruction that 
threaten his neighbors. I have said a number of times, as have others, 
that we would look forward to working with a post-Saddam regime. And 
that we are -- have been and will even more actively work with opposition 
groups. Congress has passed and the president has signed a law that 
allows more intensive activity, and we will pursue that. But Tony 
Cordesman of Washington Center's for Strategic and International Studies 
says hopes of getting rid of Saddam Hussein are wishful thinking. 
There are some people talking about hunt Saddam down and kill him 
using air and missile power. I don't know of anyone in the U.S. military 
who believes it is possible. It might happen out of sheer luck, but 
it certainly isn't a goal. That's the sort of thing that armchair 
strategists call for. Other analysts are also advising against high 
expectations from military action. Kenneth Pollock, a former Persian 
Gulf defense analyst with the CIA, says force can only be part of 
a larger strategy. Ultimately, we're going to have to figure out what 
kind of a strategy of containing Iraq we want to pursue, and we should 
only execute a military strike against Iraq that will help us to achieve 
those goals. If President Clinton does order military action against 
Iraq, analyst Tony Cordesman says there are two main options being 
considered by Pentagon planners. One is a series of high-intensity 
strikes without pause for diplomacy until Saddam Hussein backs down. 
The option which may be a bit more likely is what has become strike-pause-strike. 
And that would be a very intense initial strike, but one with much 
less force and volume, and then they would be given a relatively short 
time in which to concede -- not negotiate -- just unconditionally 
concede. If he didn't do it in that time, the strikes would begin 
again. This time, they'd be more intense. They'd shift away from air 
superiority to a much fuller range of targets, including the weapons 
of mass destruction sites, but also hit conventional forces, more 
of the symbols of his regime. The second set of strikes could last 
up to two weeks and would do massive damage to Saddam Hussein's weapons 
programs. But today, the Iraqi leader appeared to be searching for 
a way to avoid an attack, saying that he's ready to respond to any 
initiative to end the crisis, as long as it meets his demand that 
the UN Security Council lift the 8-year-old embargo on his country. 
For The World, I'm Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>