<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981113.2000.2623 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today would be the last day you'd want to hang out in a haunted Jamaican 
city, for today is Friday the 13th. And the spirits are out in full 
force. We stay in Jamaica for this spooky story from The World's Boris 
Maximov. Remember those evenings when lights were low, friends spaced 
out and Bob Marley played in the background. And all you could think 
of was, what on earth is he saying? I'm a duppy conqueror, conqueror. 
"I'm a duppy conqueror." What could that mean? Let's ask a true Jamaican. 
Duppy is our force. When someone die, they might say duppy might be 
our own. D-u-p, et cetera, is something like a ghost, a spirit of 
a dead person. When outsiders come to Jamaica, all they can see are 
the mountains, the beaches, the teeming cities. The locals see all 
that, too, but they also see duppies -- spirits, ghosts, if you like. 
They may well belong to a church or two, no matter. The belief in 
duppies is quite pervasive. Not many Jamaicans, though, are prepared 
to talk about it to an outsider, except for Roy, the gardener in Kingston. 
So, do duppy spirits exist on the island? Some people say yes. Some 
people say no. But you must remember. Spirit is real. Duppy exist. 
"Spirit is real," says Roy. Duppies exist as far as he and countless 
other Jamaicans are concerned. So what kind of spirit is duppy? Well, 
it's a long story. The word itself goes back to the tree language 
from West Africa, meaning the roots of a tree. The tree people believe 
that humans have two souls -- after death, one goes to see the maker 
for final judgment. But the second one lingers here on earth, scaring 
Jamaicans. Before you get too scared, duppies, the spirits inhabiting 
Jamaica, are not necessarily evil -- just listen to Roy. ROY has been 
part of we African heritage, so it will always continue. Some ghosts 
are good, some bad, but they will always be there, says Roy, since 
it is part of Jamaica's African heritage, part of tradition. I'm a 
duppy conqueror, conqueror. A friend, a friend, a friend... By the 
way, you can catch a duppy. Apparently, they really, really like cream 
soda. Just put some on the table, and the duppy might appear and do 
your bidding. If you are, after all, scared of them, there is a remedy 
for that, too. Duppy spirit in Jamaica are very, very bad at mathematics. 
They can only count to three, and they also are deeply curious. So 
if you see one, drop four objects on the ground, and the spirit will 
start counting them, one, two, three -- and it will stumble on the 
fourth and start again and again and again, giving you time to run 
away. A lot of rural Jamaicans still walk around with a few matches 
or pebbles just in case. I'm a duppy conqueror, conqueror. Well, personally, 
I haven't seen any ghosts about. But then, who am I to question other 
people's beliefs? And of course, I wasn't wandering around Jamaica 
on Friday the 13th. For The World, this is Boris Maximov. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>