<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981113.2000.2905 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Tony Kahn. Last month, after four years in 
exile, Nigeria's most prominent dissident flew home. 1986 Nobel literature 
prize winner, Wole Soyinka, a critic of former ruler Sani Abacha, 
fled Nigeria in 1994. He since lived in Atlanta, teaching at Emory 
University. Five months ago, Habacha died, and his successor, General 
Abdulsalam Abubakar, has eased the military stranglehold. Wole Soyinka 
intended his return to Nigeria to be a show of support for democratization, 
and he says the Nigerian people showed their support for him. I was 
overwhelmed by the reception. It was really stunning. I'd forgotten 
how we do these things in Nigeria. So it was quite -- it was a very 
warm reintroduction to the country. Now, having said that, you know, 
the strange thing was that I did not feel anything at all. It was 
like I'd never left, and the explanation for it that I've always carried 
that benighted country in my head every waking moment since my departure. 
In your head and in your heart, as well, I would imagine. In order 
to be the great writer that you are, you can't just speak from a simple 
intellectual understanding. I'm afraid as far as this struggle has 
been concerned, I've had to restrict myself to carrying it in my head. 
I couldn't afford to carry it in my heart at all, because then that 
will create nostalgia, longing, regrets and so on. Whereas I have 
to approach a very hard-headed approach to the situation in Nigeria. 
Let me ask you just a question about your own image of Nigeria. We 
hear so many things about it, those of us who have not experienced 
it directly are often confused to hear that it is, on the one hand, 
a united country with generally the world's best soccer team. A benighted 
country, as you say, subject to a lot of political tragedies. But 
also, a nation made out of perhaps as many as 300 tribes that perhaps 
wouldn't otherwise have been a nation if it hadn't been forced to 
be a nation. What is your image of Nigeria? Yes, it's a nation space, 
as I like to call it, trying to become a nation. Whether that's a 
viable project or not, I think we'll be seeing over the next few years 
because we are really under a crisis now. If we want to continue as 
one nation, it has to be a concerted act of will. In other words, 
for the first time, Nigerians have a chance now to be a nation on 
their own self-dictated terms, self-accepted terms rather than an 
externally dictated condition. As you said yourself, Mr. Soyinka, 
you're no supporter of General Abubakar, no fan of his. But do you 
feel that he is doing something to at least move the Nigeria that 
you love in that direction? Yes, let me say quite clearly that we're 
watching this regime very, very closely. Well, what do you -- let 
me ask you then, just to be fair to you, what are you looking for 
and what have you seen so far that perhaps you approve of? Well, first 
of all, of course, naturally, I approve of the release of prisoners. 
At the same time, however, there are still a number of political prisoners, 
the victims of political injustice, who are still in prison. Some 
of whom have died, they have since died in prison. I approve of the 
easing of the stranglehold on the newspapers, although that strikes 
me as being quite serious about wanting to retrieve the looted millions 
which you've heard about by Abacha and all his cronies. This is something 
which we have not experienced in that country for years. Well, one 
of those -- one of those steps is proposed elections, I would imagine. 
Do you think that the military, should it lose the elections, would 
step back and give up power? Well, what we, in my democratic association, 
demanded in fact was the immediate departure of the military, leaving 
behind a government of national unity. This program, and it's difficult 
for me personally to be overenthusiastic about anything outside of 
that, because this is still leaving the central problems plaguing 
the nation unsolved. Nobel laureate Wole Soyinka speaking with us 
from Los Angeles about his recent return to his native Nigeria. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>