<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981113.2000.1194 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the wake of Hurricane Mitch, Central America is looking to the 
United States for help, and Washington is responding with $80 million 
of emergency aid for the region. But the hardest-hit countries, Honduras 
and Nicaragua, are seeking another form of assistance they claim would 
be at least as helpful -- debt relief. Yesterday, the president of 
Honduras urged the United States and other countries to forgive his 
nation's $4.3 billion debt. Jeffrey Sachs is the director of the Harvard 
Institute for International Development. He's with us now. Professor 
Sachs, I gather you are basically someone in support of debt relief 
for this area. It's a big area with an enormous disaster. Explain 
to us how debt relief or debt forgiveness really fits in as something 
that can help. The debt that is owed by Nicaragua and Honduras is 
enormous relative to the size of their economies. It's also debt that 
is owed by the governments. So if the governments have to spend their 
very scarce resources paying back foreign debts, they won't have the 
money to undertake the absolutely vitally needed rebuilding and even 
the emergency assistance that's needed right now for their people. 
So it's a pretty simple tradeoff. Where are the country's resources 
going to go? To pay foreign creditors or to help this disaster-stricken 
region to rebuild? Now, critics of just that kind of reasoning say 
as far as you've gone, that's correct. But there's really no guarantee 
that the money that the governments might get if there were debt relief 
is actually going to go into the kind of rebuilding that's needed. 
That it's going to end up in the pockets of the people and on the 
fields, the destroyed fields of the people who need it the most. Rich 
and comfortable people often make that argument, and it's very nice 
for them to say, "Let's not do it." Here, you have poverty stricken 
people hit by one of the worst disasters perhaps in hundreds of years, 
certainly in this century, saying, "Well, we're not sure." At the 
same time, the U.S. has just given $41 billion together with other 
countries in loans for Brazil. That helps a lot of investment bankers. 
And where's the skepticism there? Well, that I guess is the point 
that if you follow the money trail, very often in cases like this, 
the money ends up in some room -- some back room or some deposit account 
rather than in the intended target. Of course, as a general principle, 
that's true that there's a risk. And so, one wants to make sure that 
Honduras and Nicaragua would use this desperately needed breathing 
space to help rebuild. The good news for both of those countries is 
that since the early 1990s after a generation of devastation from 
civil war, part of which the U.S. was involved in, these countries 
have had democratic governments, carrying out under constitutional 
means, real economic change, which has been lifting the people out 
of their utter poverty until this disaster hit. So there's a track 
record here, and I assume that any emergency assistance and debt relief 
that is given would also be given with conditions that that track 
record be sustained into the future in real economic change and democracy. 
Are you personally satisfied, though, and this really goes almost 
to the question of human nature as much as it does to economics, that 
there really is the will nowadays to think very long-term investments 
of this kind to build up the infrastructure of a country? In a sense, 
you could say that the amount of damage that was done by the hurricane 
was an indication of the extent to which very little planning had 
been going in in the long run to make sure that there was some defense 
against disasters of this kind. I am absolutely convinced that the 
rich of the world live in almost complete oblivion of the poor of 
this world, and that the real understanding in the United States of 
the tenuous nature of life in most of the rest of the world is so 
shockingly poor that we can't get this right except to live with our 
glib platitudes here. So with all due respect, I think that these 
countries are struggling out of poverty against great odds, and that 
we ought to give them a hand and take a risk on the side of the poor 
rather than just saying, well, it might be wasted. Let's think much 
harder about how to make sure that we do it. Opponents of debt relief, 
in all of their splendid comfort, sit and say it might be wasted rather 
than thinking very hard about how to do it right. I can tell you that 
without doing it, there's no chance. With doing it, some of it could 
be squandered. Much of it could be squandered. But to counsel against 
the relief is to counsel for the sure stagnation of these countries 
and impoverishment and misery of the people in the future. Thank you, 
Professor Jeffrey Sachs, director of the Harvard Institute for International 
Development. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>