<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981113.2000.0598 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
To learn how others are following the Iraq crisis, we check in with 
two U.S.-based foreign correspondents, as we do every Friday. From 
New York, Raghida Dergham is a correspondent for Al-Hayat, a London-based 
newspaper which is targeted to a Middle East audience. And in Washington, 
John Andrews reports for The Economist. Let's start off with your 
headlines. Raghida, how are you capturing this worsening confrontation 
over Iraq's decision to end its cooperation with UN weapons inspectors? 
In my column, I try to explore what would happen should there be a 
strike, what next. My headline was... ... which means, "Will the military 
strike accomplish what the sanctions failed to accomplish?" As you 
know, we were told that the sanctions are aimed at weakening the regime 
in Iraq and bringing down the regime, which, of course, has not happened. 
And the Iraqi people have paid the price of the sanctions for seven 
years. And now, I was trying to explore that should there be a military 
strike that does not bring down the regime in Iraq, what would be 
the next stage? And I had said in this column that it will be a new 
stage in the relationship between Iraq and the United Nations. I don't 
believe that the long-term monitoring system will be restated easily. 
I feel that the military strike might undermine the possibility of 
a return for such a long-term monitoring. And John, how are you reading 
what seems to be, compared anyway to the war three years ago, a lack 
of debate about the issue, publicly and in Congress, for that matter? 
I think America has a short attention span for foreign news. You know, 
it's a big country. It's almost self-sufficient in its perception 
of itself, not, of course, in its reality. And as long as bodies don't 
come back in bags to the American continent, then I think it's remarkable 
how comfortable and resilient the American people can feel with overseas 
operations about which they know very little. In other words, when 
you say "comfortable and resilient," it could also translate as "numb"? 
Well, numb implies a certain degree of pain. I think... Ignorance? 
... perhaps apathetic is a better word. I mean, you can have disaster 
such as the killing of the Marines in Beirut or the killing of American 
soldiers in Somalia and so on. They grab the headlines for a few days, 
and they do, in fact, change American policy in the region. But then, 
when you have the -- if you liked the Colin Powell idea of military 
action overseas. This is to use overwhelming force and very high technology, 
but not to risk manpower. And you see this, you know, in the Desert 
Storm war, there is a reluctance to risk American lives. John, what 
about also -- I wonder how you think of this. What about the Iraqi 
lives? I don't think that figures that much. It's not body bags coming 
back home. Absolutely. I think, you know, Americans will only worry 
about that if they see it on CNN. But I have a feeling -- if I may 
take your question in a wider sense -- I have a feeling that whatever 
it was that made the American public opinion back in February stand 
and say, no, we have to stop this pattern of military strikes whenever 
there is a problem in Iraq, I have a feeling that it can't totally 
disappear, that once there is a military strike and once we know that 
lots of civilians -- Iraqi civilians have died and that we don't know 
what's the exit strategy, I think the pressure will mount again. There 
were at times to bring the United States into considering the possibility 
of having a dialogue with Iraq, and I'm one of those who believe that 
it was really not in the interest of the United States to go on only 
with the whip and let the others benefit from the dialogue. But such 
questions as the sanctions. Don't forget that UNICEF tells us 5,000 
Iraqi children still die a month. Five thousand Iraqi children die 
a month as a consequence of the sanctions. I think... This really 
hits hard in the Arab world, and it's not coming out clearly now. 
But it will be in the next few days. Should the bombs fall, should 
the fighting begin, what are your personal plans for how you're going 
to be covering this and where you're going to be? OK, for me, should 
the bombs fall, I suppose I will stay here at the United Nations, 
and I will speak to every ambassador from every country and to the 
secretary-general. I will cover the diplomatic front, unless -- which 
is quite unlikely -- before the bombs fall, unless the secretary-general, 
Kofi Annan, goes to Baghdad, then I definitely plan to try to go with 
him. And John, from what angle and what bunker will you be covering 
the story? We'll be looking at the White House and the State Department 
here. And of course, Capitol Hill, because if America does take action, 
then it will need the support -- the White House will need the support 
of important people in Congress. It's not necessary immediately. I 
mean, the president can take action, but he will need to foster that 
support in the days ahead. Thank you both. Thank you. Thank you. Raghida 
Dergham, speaking to us from New York. She's the correspondent for 
Al-Hayat, an Arabic newspaper. And in Washington, John Andrews, the 
correspondent for Britain's The Economist. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>