<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981113.2000.3182 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A lot of people still don't consider rap musicians real artists. So 
don't hold your breath waiting for Congress to pass a law declaring 
the likes of Snoop Doggy Dog a real musician. Well, that's exactly 
what the French government has done. Along with a proposed $6 million 
of support for France's music industry, the ministry of culture has 
officially declared deejays and rappers artists. The World's Marco 
Werman has been sounding off in response. Rap music in France, like 
this current hit by Oxmo Puccino, is now officially art. Most of the 
mainstream people in the street don't recognize house music or rap 
music as important as the traditional music chonteau and things like 
that. Olivier Delande is a deejay and music journalist. If you should 
look at the French charts over the last two years, and most of the 
records are done with samples. They would be house music. They would 
be all kinds of dance compilations. This is a creative and a very 
powerful medium now in France. I mean, lots of monies is done by all 
these people, those deejays, those radios and those record companies. 
And they can't just, you know, say it doesn't exist. The French culture 
ministry's recognition of French rappers and deejays as artists reflects 
a change of attitude toward popular music. But so far, Olivier Delande 
says France's alternative music community is giving the plan a cold 
shoulder. All the deejays, all these people in that, you know, scene 
would argue, and they are actually saying, "Listen, we've been doing 
that music for ages. We didn't need you and, you know, we're not waiting 
for you to give us some venues or some money to do anything." You 
know, when a government do such a thing, the movement is not underground 
anymore. The scene is not creative anymore. It's kind of the government 
takes over, and then it's not the same. So the reaction is not like, 
you know, overwhelmed by that proposal. A few years ago, the government 
approved another proposal mandating that French radio stations play 
a minimum ratio of French music. All the radios in France are to play 
40 percent of French music, French-produced music. So that's why all 
the radios suddenly thought, "Oh, we haven't got enough French music 
to play to fill in those 40 percent. So we need to look into new talents," 
and that's where they picked up the rap artists. And you know, the 
more they get paid the more artists came up. It's like Oxmo Puccino 
or Stoney Bugsy. Hip-hopper Stoney Bugsy now joins the revered ranks 
of Edith Piaf, Charles Asnavoule, and Eve Montagne. Now, who's going 
to sing ? For The World, this is Marco Werman. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>