<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981113.2000.2010 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was the worst violence to hit Indonesia since May, when massive 
rioting led to the resignation of former president Suharto. Government 
troops battled students and other protesters in the streets of the 
capital, Jakarta, killing at least six people and wounding scores 
of others. An estimated 20,000 demonstrators hurled stones, bottles 
and Molotov cocktails and screamed insults at their country's leaders. 
This is not -- it's not in this country. Liars, always liars. Liars, 
liars! Bullshit! They're talking in bullshit. Indonesia's top legislative 
body acted today to appease the protesters, approving 12 reform decrees 
aimed at giving the Southeast Asian nation a semblance of democracy. 
But when we reached the BBC's Jonathan Head earlier today, he made 
it clear that the students were anything but satisfied. It's been 
a battlefield. There's a lull in the fighting at the moment. But it's 
not an exaggeration to call this a completely pitched, unrestrained 
battle with troops wading into the students, opening fire with tremendous 
barrages of gunfire, using blanks, rubber-coated bullets and possibly 
live rounds. We've seen a lot of injuries. The students have been 
taking a terrible punishment. They've been locked into their university. 
People have been throwing Molotov cocktails and rocks out of the university 
campus, and the police have been coming back in with their riot shields 
firing more and more rounds. This has been going on for hour after 
hour now, this battle. It's left this part of the city very battered. 
And for the moment, the students have come out. They're talking to 
one of the commanders. They're trying to see if there is a settlement 
to this. But after the bitter feelings created by this violence, it's 
hard to see how this issue can be sorted out. Jonathan, when did the 
demonstrations turn violent and why? They turned violent for the same 
reason, I guess, that they always do. The students were determined 
to break their way through. Patrols at this time were determined they 
shouldn't. And the soldiers used unrestrained violence. I had guns 
pointed at me by soldiers. One of my colleagues was put through a 
mock execution. Journalists have been beaten. I've seen a lot of injured 
people, many unconscious, many with very bloody wounds going in and 
out of the university. We have heard from the opposition leader Amien 
Rais, who says that the country is on the verge of civil war. It sounds 
as if, from what you've seen so far, you wouldn't disagree with that? 
Well, certainly in this bit of Jakarta, there's been a terrible battle. 
It hasn't spread that much wider, though we do know of clashes elsewhere. 
There are the students cheering again. They're showing their defiance. 
They do not want to leave the road where they are now. It's hard to 
know how we can avoid further clashes. There is simply no meeting 
of minds between these two sides. And the soldiers are willing to 
use very large levels of violence to try to disperse these students. 
Jonathan, we have learned that the top legislative body in Indonesia 
has passed a series of decrees aimed at reform, including the scheduling 
of elections for the next year, that the role of the military and 
parliament will be reduced, that presidential terms will be limited 
to two 5-year periods. Are the students aware that this has been passed? 
And if so, is it the kind of reform they're willing to settle for 
at this point? Well, you know, the assembly, of course, was the focus 
for these protests. But it seems to have become rather irrelevant 
now. The violence on the streets has been so much higher than we expected. 
And in many cases, so shocking. Whatever this assembly comes up with, 
whatever reforms, even if there are more of them expected, simply 
don't really sort out what's happened here. Listen to these students 
singing. They're singing one of the patriotic songs and cheering here. 
They believe they've won a moral victory. They've taken a terrible 
punishment. Indonesia's image has taken a punishment. In a way, I 
don't know why the security force has used such massive force today. 
But it has, in effect, made the assembly seem irrelevant. It distracted 
attention from what's gone on inside that building. Now, are you hearing 
anything from the protesters that would give you an idea if they're 
no longer in favor just of reform of what it is they do want now? 
Well, they're calling for Habibie to resign. They're calling for Suharto 
to be hanged. I mean, their language, their dreams, their feelings 
are running very high. We're beyond the stage of rational negotiations. 
I don't believe that anything the assembly does now will be accepted 
by this younger generation of Indonesians who, after all, for years 
and years, were oppressed by former president Suharto and now believe 
they should have a proper free and clean democracy and not the kind 
of compromised government they've got at the moment. I hear singing 
now in the background, Jonathan. Yes, they're singing what's supposed 
to be a song of national reconciliation. I'm standing behind row upon 
row of riot police. Only 30 minutes ago, these people were shooting 
directly at the young people now standing just 10 yards across from 
them. Now the young people are out. They're showing their defiance. 
We just have to wait to see whether there will be another clash. The 
BBC's Jonathan Head speaking with us from Jakarta, Indonesia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>