<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981113.2000.2313 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In London today, Augusto Pinochet continued to await a ruling on his 
future. Last month, the former Chilean dictator was arrested in the 
British capital on a warrant for his extradition to Spain on charges 
of murder, torture and kidnapping. The House of Lords is now hearing 
an appeal of his case, and Pinochet's lawyers are arguing that the 
ruling by London's high court that he is immune from arrest as a former 
head of state should stand. The principle of legal immunity applies 
to more than former national leaders. Diplomats are also protected 
-- protected too much, according to some. From Washington, The World's 
Emily Harris reports. Almost two years ago, 16-year-old Joviane Waltrick 
was killed on this Washington street corner by a drunk driver. The 
driver, a diplomat from the former Soviet republic of Georgia, initially 
claimed diplomatic immunity. But a public outcry ensued. Georgia then 
waived the man's diplomatic immunity. He eventually pleaded guilty, 
and he's now serving time in jail. But the story doesn't end there. 
Congress responded with a bill recently signed into law to try to 
reform diplomatic immunity without hurting U.S. diplomats stationed 
abroad. Republican David Drier of California sponsored the House version. 
Diplomatic immunity is a very important tool. But having said that, 
it seems to me that getting a full accounting of how diplomatic immunity 
is used and, at the same time, exploring ways to begin negotiations 
with nations so that the people in the United States who are diplomats 
would face responsibility in their home country seem to be a very 
balanced and appropriate way to deal with the problems of abuse of 
diplomatic immunity. The law requires the secretary of state to report 
annually to Congress on the criminal cases involving persons with 
diplomatic immunity. But a similar list is already published annually. 
It's sent to the House and Senate Foreign Affairs Committees. In fact, 
the Joviane Waltrick case was included on that annual list. But the 
name of the diplomat involved was not and likely wouldn't be under 
the new law. And that's a problem, says the lawyer for Joviane Waltrick's 
family, George Doumar. If the diplomats knew that they or family members 
who have DWI convictions or shop-lifting convictions where something 
is going to come out in the public domain, I think those situations 
would be less frequent, and diplomats would be even more careful about 
keeping to high standards of conduct when they're overseas. The vast 
majority of diplomats do follow U.S. law. But Doumar says naming offenders 
would still make a difference. Increasingly, U.S. judges are turning 
to public shaming to punish shoplifters, tax evaders and drunk drivers. 
But does this make sense for foreign diplomats? Criminologist Lawrence 
Sherman of the University of Maryland doesn't think so. I think the 
likelihood that stigmatic shaming of diplomats doing any more good 
than their own embassies knowing what happened, which they already 
know, presumably, is very low. The fact is that if the case is embarrassing 
enough, most embassies are going to pull the diplomat and send him 
home. Sending diplomats home may not sound like an effective punishment 
for someone who has committed a crime here. But trying international 
diplomats in the U.S. would make American diplomats vulnerable to 
facing charges abroad. Still, Doumar believes simply sending diplomats 
home will have a limited impact. I don't think that's going to be 
satisfactory, because what you'll see in a lot of those circumstances 
is that countries will bring their diplomats back and then engage 
in half-hearted efforts at prosecution. Doumar wants to see distinctions 
among crimes. For example, killing someone while driving drunk would 
automatically trigger an immunity waiver. According to State Department 
records, criminal allegations were made last year against 32 U.S.-based 
foreigners with full diplomatic immunity. The alleged crimes ranged 
from drunk or reckless driving to marijuana possession to burglary. 
For The World, I'm Emily Harris in Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>