<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981113.2000.0952 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The baseball season is over, but the fans have plenty of action to 
follow in the offseason marketplace. Baltimore signed up pitcher Mike 
Timlin today. San Francisco locked up outfielder Ells Burkes. And 
here in Boston, our Red Sox are trying to replace slugger Mo Vaughn, 
who says he won't return to Fenway Park next year. The Japanese have 
it better than we do this week. They're watching the real thing -- 
a week-long series pitting Japan's best against a team of U.S. all-stars. 
From Tokyo, The World's Lucy Craft takes us out to the ballgame. Twenty-eight 
of the best and brightest men in American Major League Baseball are 
in Japan now. Superstars like relief pitchers Trevor Hoffman and Tom 
"Flash" Gordon, National League strikeout leader Curt Schilling and 
Padres hitter Greg Vaughn. But as far as most Japanese spectators 
are concerned, there's only one American here who counts. Sammy Sosa 
was a household word here even before his plane touched down last 
week at Narita airport. Sportswriter Dan Moskau of the Japan Times 
says fans here love nothing better than a homerun chase. You've probably 
heard of Oh -- Sadahara Oh, who is the all-time homerun king. He broke 
Hank Aaron's career record. So they're pretty obsessed with homerun 
records and so on. So they really follow the chase closely. And probably 
a little disappointed that McGwire's not here. But I think they'll 
settle for Sammy. Homerun king Mark McGwire, who opted to sit out 
the Japan tour, is apparently more marketable. At the souvenir tables 
at the Tokyo Dome, home ground for the local favorite Tokyo Giants, 
you have to look hard to find a T-shirt or a jersey with Sosa's image 
on it. McGwire-obilia is far and away the best seller when it comes 
to the merchandising of foreign ball players. Yet spectators milling 
before the start of the series shared a fondness for the Chicago Cubs 
slugger. They marveled not only at his 66 homeruns, but his legendary 
graciousness off the field, such as collecting relief funds to help 
the hurricane-battered Dominican Republic. Whenever Sosa hits a homerun, 
he does these gestures that show his appreciation to the fans. He 
also really cares about his mother, and he collected money for his 
hometown in the Dominican Republic. McGwire has lots of problems. 
I saw on the news the other day that he uses performance-enhancing 
drugs, which kind of makes me question his personal ethics. But Sammy 
Sosa comes from a poor family. He's had to struggle to get to the 
top. I think that's cool. Sosa did not disappoint, smashing one over 
the fences his very first time at bat. Sportswriter Dan Moskau says 
fans aren't the only ones with Sosa fever. Not only for the fans, 
it looks like the media have been swarming him in the same kind of 
way that hysterical fans would. I saw people getting autographs and 
so on, and they didn't all look like just fans. The seven-game Japan-U.S. 
baseball series runs through Sunday. For The World, this is Lucy Craft 
in Tokyo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>