<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981113.0500.1822 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hello again, I'm Charlene Porter, with Les Carpenter, on News Now 
in Washington. By sea and air, US forces are moving in to striking 
distance of Iraq. The move comes as the US Defense Secretary said, 
Thursday afternoon, that he has no evidence that Iraq is helping to 
defuse the crisis by complying with UN weapons resolutions on weapons 
inspections. US ships left for the Gulf earlier this week. Military 
planes started taking off from US bases Thursday afternoon. President 
Clinton is attempting to shore up international support for the use 
of force. But political support in the United States is uncertain 
as we hear from White House correspondent Dave Gulles. The President 
telephoned several European leaders Thursday, including German Chancellor 
Gerhardt Schroeder as the United States continued its military buildup 
in the Gulf. Even though some major powers, notably France, Russia, 
and China have expressed misgivings about a resort to force, Clinton 
spokesman Joe Lockhart said, what the President is hearing in his 
calls is a united international community. Mr. Lockhart stressed the 
significance of Thursday's joint statement by Egypt, Syria, and six 
members of the Gulf Cooperation Council that Saddam Hussein would 
be to blame for any consequences that might result from his continued 
defiance of the UN inspection's regime. The closest neighbors of Saddam 
Hussein made a clear statement, that he is in violation, and he must 
change his course. And that he alone, Saddam Hussein alone is responsible 
for the consequences of non-compliance. So, I think what you heard 
was a lone voice that is completely isolated. Mr. Lockhart said that 
the administration has set no deadline or ultimatum for Iraq to resume 
the inspections. But he said the present situation can not go on indefinitely 
since without inspections Saddam Hussein could recover a chemical 
or biological weapons capacity within months. The spokesman said the 
administration has been consulting Congress in its preparations and 
that the President has the necessary authority to launch attacks if 
it comes to that. However Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Arlen 
Spector told reporters here, the President should not act without 
the prior approval of legislators. I voted for the use of force in 
1991, and as I say I'm prepared to do it again. But I'd like to see 
the matter come before the Congress. I'd like to know what the plans 
are, and I think there is a very, very serious erosion of congressional 
authority in this matter. You have a check and balance of the President 
cannot act on his own or act unilaterally. Senator Spector says he 
is worried the administration has given little thought to the aftermath 
of an air campaign, including Iraqi casualties and possibly anti-American 
backlash in the Arab world. Another Senate Republican, Richard Luggar 
said a long-term strategy is needed. And said the United States might 
have to consider a ground campaign to drive Saddam Hussein from power. 
While declining specifics, officials here have defined the US military 
goals as degrading the Iraqi leader's ability to reconstitute weapons 
of mass destruction, and to threaten his neighbors with them. David 
Gulles, VOA News, the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>