<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981113.0500.2056 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And in the face of these conflicting events, the senior US Middle 
East Mediator, Dennis Ross arrives in Israel, and the Palestinian 
territories later today. VOA's Al Pessin reports from Jerusalem. The 
announcement published in a national newspaper, says Israel's land 
authority and the housing ministry are inviting offers for the constructing 
of 1025 homes on a hill Israel calls Har Hommah and the Palestinians 
call Jabba Labouganamh. When the Israeli government began infrastructure 
work on the hill, a year and a half ago, it sparked a crisis in the 
peace process, which was only solved last month at the Wye River talks. 
After finishing the earth work, Israel suspended the project. But 
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has promised that Israelis 
will be living on Har Hommah by the year 2000. The government chose 
the morning after the cabinet ratified the Wye River agreement to 
publish the advertisement. The move is being seen as an effort to 
pacify right wing Israelis who oppose the accord. Senior Palestinian 
official Nibil Abordenie does not want this latest move on the Har 
Hommah project to spark another crisis. But he says the more construction 
Israel does in disputed territory, the more difficult the peace process 
will be. Concerning any kind of settlement, it's a unilateral act, 
which has a violation to the agreement, which was signed in Washington. 
As long as there is confiscation of land and there is building of 
settlement, this would be a negative sign, which will be reflected 
negatively on the whole region. Israeli government spokesman Moshe 
Fogel says Israel has the right to build in any part of Jerusalem 
including parts it captured from Jordan in 1967. What are we supposed 
to do freeze all building in Jerusalem until we come to the end of 
the entire peace process. I don't think that is acceptable to the 
people of Israel. And indeed we are going to go ahead, not only, in 
building in Har Homman but in building in other neighborhoods to the 
benefit of the Jewish and Arab residents of Jerusalem. While the controversy 
over Har Homman was renewed on Thursday, there was also renewed hope 
that the Wye River agreement might get back on track. Israel's cabinet 
ratified the accord Wednesday night, and the Israeli Parliament will 
take it up on Monday. But the cabinet placed several conditions on 
Israeli implementation insisting that its interpretation of various 
clauses be followed. The Palestinian official Nabil Abordenie says 
he's not too concerned. The most important thing is that they did 
ratify the agreement. The conditions we have nothing to do with them. 
They are not written in the agreement, and President Clinton has signed 
this agreement, and already it is implemented as it was designed. 
Israel says it is only asking for what was agreed on at the Wye River 
talks, most importantly a formal revocation of the anti-Israel Palestinian 
charter, and a Palestinian crackdown on violent militant groups. Al 
Pessin, VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>