<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981113.0500.0395 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Meanwhile, Israel's army has opened gas mask distribution centers. 
That move is in preparation for possible Iraqi retaliation for any 
US airstrikes against Baghdad. Ross Gunn reports from Jerusalem. When 
the gas masks distribution centers opened across the country, a few 
hundred British tourists in the Red Sea resort of Elate decided it 
was time to go home. The British tour operator Thompson, who had 600 
customers in Elate arranged four flights with rooms for 150 passengers 
each to take their customers out of Israel. This, however was not 
the scene in Jerusalem where hotels remained fully booked. And barring 
an Iraqi attack, hotel managers say they accept things to remain that 
way. Iriq Kazeet is the Public Relations Officer for the King David 
Hotel, the city's most famous and prestigious accommodation center. 
We've done away only to cancellations, and we hope it will stay a 
little bit. We are fully booked. It tomorrow something happens, well, 
maybe tomorrow the fax will be full with cancellations. But right 
now, only two private cancellations Hopefully, you know, things will 
be relaxed and people will do come. Because we are expecting a very 
big convention starting on Sunday in Israel. It's a general assembly 
of all the Jewish organizations in the United States, and it's the 
first time it is in Israel. And while the hotels were full, the gas 
mask distribution centers were not. There is not the same sense of 
panic that existed during the 1991 Gulf War, when Israel was hit by 
a barrage of Scud missiles from Iraq. But among those who did show 
up, there was a sense that it is better to be safe than sorry. Among 
them was Leslie Oodwin, an immigrant from South Africa who has lived 
in Israel for a quarter-century. He brought along his nine-month old 
son to be outfitted with a gas mask. Fatherhood, he says, has focused 
his mind on taking greater precautions for his family than he perhaps 
would have done for himself. Another event, another war that's really 
all it - its not such a big deal after a while. But when you bring 
a new generation in, all of a sudden your responsibilities increase 
tremendously. And your cavalier attitude seems to evaporate. And so 
that's why I've come over here, mostly for my son to make sure everything 
is all right with him. Because it would be intolerable if something 
had happened, just because our attitude has hardened over 25 years. 
One of many who seemed less concerned is Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu. Asked at a news conference if he had a gas mask, Mr. Netanyahu 
replied that he was not sure, and would have to check. And he indicated 
it would be troublesome for him to search through a closet at home 
to find one. Ross Gunn for VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>