<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981113.0500.2932 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's time now for a look at the business news and here is Paul Westpheling. 
Share prices in Tokyo managed to recover some but not all of what 
they lost on Thursday. Pretty good day in Tokyo to end the week. The 
Nikkei Index finishing the week, gaining 193 points to 14,026. Analysts 
describe the session as volatile, although on light volume. Everybody, 
it seems, is waiting to see what the government's latest economic 
stimulus contains, and whether the ruling Labor Party will cut a particularly 
controversial consumption tax. That plan will be based on a proposal 
drawn up by the ruling liberal democratic party that was unveiled 
on Thursday. Except the governments plan may be larger. Both packages 
will include tax cuts and spending increases on public works projects. 
Many economists believe that it was the increase from 3 to 5 percent 
in the consumption tax, in April of 1997 that put the Japanese economy 
into a recession. The tax hike severely cut consumer spending, which 
is about two-thirds of the Japanese economy. Japanese Finance Minister 
Kiyiki Miyazawa says resistance is growing in the Democratic Party 
to cut the consumption tax, and some economists agree. Russell Jones, 
the Chief Economist at Leyman Brothers in Tokyo says there are both 
political and economic reasons why a roll back in the tax is not likely. 
On the political level, it would be an enormous loss of face, both 
to the ruling liberal Democratic Party and the Ministry of Finance 
which is the most powerful part of the bureaucracy here in Japan, 
to do a U-turn on it. In economic terms, the arguments are that over 
the longer term, Japan needs a much higher indirect taxation rate 
rather than lower rate. The Japanese economy is aging, all the Japanese 
population is aging more rapidly than anywhere else in the world. 
The proportion of tax revenue, which is taken through indirect taxes, 
is very low. The current system is not balanced enough. If Japan doesn't 
raise more money through indirect taxes, say over the next 15 or 20 
years, well then simply the budget numbers will never add up. Now 
to take out this indirect tax hike now, would make it almost impossible 
politically, to raise it again later. And raise it again later, they 
must do. There is just no exit from that conclusion. Chief Economist 
Russell Jones of the Leyman Brothers Office in Tokyo. Prime Minister 
Ekeizu Obuchi plans to hold discussions on Monday with senior opposition 
lawmakers on the sales tax issue and other matters. Several opposition 
politicians have also been urging the consumption tax hike be rolled 
back. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>