<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981113.0500.0772 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
United States is now part of the global warming treaty under negotiation 
at the United Nations' Conference on Climate Change in Buenos Aires, 
Argentina. The pact was signed by a US representative to the United 
Nations in New York, Thursday. But the Chief US Negotiator in Argentina, 
Steward Isenstatt made the formal announcement of the US decision 
to sign on to the treaty that came out of last years meeting on climate 
change in Kyoto, Japan. This action is expected to help US negotiators 
in their effort to convince developing nations to make commitments 
to cut the greenhouse gas emissions. From Buenos Aires, VOA's Greg 
Flakus reports. Speaking in the Plenary Session of the Ministerial 
Meeting of the Climate Change Conference, Ambassador Issenstatt said 
that the United States would live up to the promises made in Kyoto 
last year. In taking this action, the United States reaffirms our 
commitment to work with the nations gathered here to address the challenge 
of climate change. And we are guided by the firm belief that signing 
will serve our environmental, economic, and national security goals. 
Speaking to the Voice of America shortly after his presentation, Mr. 
Issenstatt expressed the hope that this action by the United States, 
following commitments made by Argentina and Kazakhstan on Wednesday 
to make emissions cut commitments might motivate other developing 
nations to make their own commitments. We don't expect that there 
will be additional commitments actually made here. But clearly the 
ball is moving in the right direction. And we are really beginning 
to break the ice, in terms of getting developing countries engaged. 
Meaningful participation in the Kyoto Agreement by developing nations 
is one of the key requirements set forth by the US Senate to allow 
the treaty to be ratified. US Senators observing here in Buenos Aires 
said, much more will have to be done by developing nations before 
the treaty could be ratified. US opponents of the Kyoto agreement, 
present here in Buenos Aires said the Clinton Administration decision 
to sign the accord was premature. In that no real progress had been 
made with key developing nations like China and India, where greenhouse 
gas emissions are expected to exceed those of the United States within 
less than 20 years. Greg Flakus, VOA News, Buenos Aires. Thursday's 
US signing of the Global Warming Treaty may be only symbolic, since 
the accord still would need approval from the US Congress. And Opposition 
there is strong. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>