<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981113.0500.3202 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1995, Canadian singer-songwriter Alanis Morrisett made her debut 
in the United States with "Jagged Little Pill". That album sold a 
record-setting 16 million copies here, making it one of the biggest 
selling collections in pop music history. Last week, Reprise Records 
released Morrisetts much anticipated follow-up album. VOA's Mary Morningstar 
reports, the album has broken the US record for first week sales, 
by a solo female artist. Supposed former infatuation junkie is the 
long awaited new album from Alanis Morrisett. The 24-year-old singer 
collaborated on the collection with song writer and producer Glen 
Ballard who co-wrote and co-produced Morrisette's previous album, 
"Jagged Little Pill". Sales of that CD have now surpassed 28 million 
copies world-wide. Morrisette says she is surprised that so many listeners 
identify with her songs. I'm in the public eye, it's inevitable that 
people are going to have their opinions, you know. And I can't go 
out there and sit inside everyone else's mind. So, it's nice when 
people relate to what I write. You know it's actually kind of comforting, 
because I thought a lot of things that I was going through were things 
that isolated me. It made me feel like I, you know, I was alone in 
them. So the fact that so many people related to this is actually 
very comforting. Following a world tour in support of "Jagged Little 
Pill", Morrisette took an 18- month break from recording and performing. 
She spent her time off reconnecting with friends and family in Canada, 
and also traveled throughout Cuba and India. Morrisette says comparisons 
of western philosophies and Indian cultures inspired many of the songs 
on her new album, "Supposed Former Infatuation Junkie". Alanis Morrisette 
is known for writing autobiographical songs. Her new album focuses 
on such things as lost love and self acceptance. One critic described 
the CD as "a relentlessly confessional journal of a women, age 24, 
going on 39." "Supposed Former Infatuation Junkie" entered Billboard's 
Top 200 Chart at Number One, after selling 469,000 copies its first 
week in stores. There's two separate world's for me. There is the 
external world, which is the reception to what I create, whether it 
is music or anything else. And there's this more internal world which 
is my personal development or my creative development, and my spiritual 
development. And that's the only one I can keep control. I can control 
how much knowledge I feed myself, and beyond that I cannot control 
what happens around me, with people's perception of it. Next month, 
Alanis Morrisette will make special appearances at the Amnesty International 
Benefit Conference in Paris, France, and at the Nobel Peace Prize 
Concert in Oslo, Norway. A Major concert tour in support of her new 
album, "Supposed Former Infatuation Junkie" is being planned for 1999. 
I'm Mary Morningstar. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>