<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981113.0500.1385 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Talented people from three east Asian countries have collaborated 
to produce a new theatrical work in New York. Peaks my interest. VOA's 
Martin Bush can tell us all about it. A new dance theater work just 
premiered here in New York, brought together three Asian artists. 
One is the choreographer, dancer and director Yin May, born and trained 
in China and now a New York resident. Her dance partner is San Ji 
Jon of Tibet. The third artist is an Indonesian composer, Tony Pravolo, 
leader of the New Jakarta ensemble, made up of ten traditional Sumatran 
musicians. Mr. Provolo has studied Indonesian music. But since he 
prefers to write in a predominately western style, in his score for 
the new work called, "Empty Tradition, City of Peonies" there are 
hints of his admiration for such composers as Anton Van Weburn and 
Toro Takamitsu. Yin May and Tony Provolo got together two years ago 
at an Indonesian International Dance Festival. Each admired the other's 
work. We met and we talk, and then we were trying to make a collaboration. 
And then we work together. The mixed-media theater project on which 
they collaborated is called, "Empty Traditions, City of Peonies". 
Yin May danced the piece against the background of a thousand-year-old 
Chinese legend. In the story, an empress walking on a winter's day 
spots a lone plum blossom poking through the snow. The empress is 
so moved by this beautiful sight, that she decrees that all the flowers 
in her garden must bloom by dawn of the next day. Well, all the flowers 
emerge as ordered except the peonies. To punish their rebelliousness, 
the empress banishes these lush perennials to China's deep interior, 
to Loo Yang, which became known as the City of Peonies. Loo Yang is 
Yin May's home town and it was there, as a little girl, that she felt 
some of the harsh restrictions the Chinese government imposed during 
China's cultural revolution. The time that I grew up, that is during 
the Cultural Revolution, even the peony was forbidden to grow in the 
City of Peony, because I think, the flower is too exotic - the color 
is too exaggerated, too colorful. So probably it would give people 
bad ideas, too many ideas. So, the peony was not allowed to grow, 
only to keep the roots for the traditional Chinese medicine. So it's 
kind of like, to me, a message. Yin May never speaks on stage. But 
on a loud speaker, her recorded voice outlines the tribulations of 
childhood, and the problems of living under autocratic rule, while 
her dancing reflects the inner conflicts she felt in the City of Peonies. 
I am really use this vehicle as my own voice. It's about a tradition 
and the changing. And it's about personal experience, growing up in 
China, and living in America. It's about individual standing in front 
of the big, great culture, and where you find your own place. Empty 
Tradition, City of Peonies was commissioned by the Asia Society, a 
private non-profit group, and presented at the theater in its New 
York headquarters. Yin May, former principal dancer with the Hong 
Kong Dance Company has created her own dance style, drawing on Chinese 
tradition and western Avante Garde theater. Empty traditions City 
of Peonies concludes on what one observer calls a note of healing 
and joy. Martin Bush, VOA News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>