<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981113.0500.0560 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United Nations is increasing emergency shipments of food to victims 
of Hurricane Mitch in Central American. The UN World Food Program 
says it is beginning a $58 million operation to bring food to people 
in Honduras, Nicaragua, Guatemala, and El Salvador. The organization 
says the aid will provide six-months of nutritional relief for victims 
of the storm, which has left more than 11000 people dead. VOA correspondent 
Michael Bowman is in the Honduran capital Tegucigalpa. He spoke with 
VOA's Tom Crosby and Kent Cline about the grim situation there. Two 
weeks after Hurricane Mitch struck Central America, the situation 
in Honduras remains extremely chaotic. Here is Tegucigalpa, all along 
the river that runs through the city people continue to dig through 
tons and tons of mud and rubble to salvage anything that they can 
that was buried as a result of these flood waters that came through 
the city. A while ago I went down to the river bank and I met a 19-year-old 
young man who said that the mud pile where I was standing used to 
be the location of a music conservatory where he had taken piano lessons 
for the past five years. Tegucigalpa is 200 Km from the Caribbean 
coast and is somewhat protected by a very high hill. Now as the devastation 
is this bad here, one can only imagine what it must be in coastal 
towns and villages. There is a curfew in effect at night here in Tegucigalpa 
to prevent looting, and during the day, people line up for blocks 
to get rations of purified water, which is in very short supply. Now 
Mike, it's been more than a week since the storm hit, how are the 
people withstanding all this? Well when you talk to the people, many 
of them say that there spirits are as good as one could expect. They 
recognize that they are facing great hardship, and many of them wonder 
around the city looking for anything that they can to eat, or food, 
water. Many of them have virtually no clothes, walking around barefoot. 
Yet, when you speak to the people, they have a sense that perhaps 
now they can reconstruct the country. And perhaps now they have a 
chance to start from scratch and perhaps build a better country than 
the one they had before. About 24 hours ago, President Flores, President 
Carlos Flores made a national address to announce the creation of 
a special cabinet for reconstruction. Now, while speaking about the 
devastation, he said Honduras has an opportunity to rebuild itself 
into a better nation. The way he put it was, a nation that is modern 
and vigorous and efficient. Meanwhile as you just mentioned, aid and 
assistance does continue to pour in from the United Nations, other 
countries in Latin America, the United States, the European Union 
and elsewhere. And when one speaks with Hondurans here in Tegucigalpa, 
they give the impression that they do not feel abandoned by the international 
community. And they don't feel that they have to go at this alone. 
Correspondent Mike Bowman in Tegucigalpa, Honduras speaking with VOA's 
Tom Crosby and Kent Cline. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>