<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981113.0500.2659 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You're tuned to VOA News Now in Washington. I'm Charlene Porter along 
with Les Carpenter. Well, a $66 million public health program has 
been launched to reduce the incidence of trachoma the leading cause 
of preventable blindness though out the world. VOA Science Correspondent, 
Jessica Burman reports. During the wave of European immigration into 
the United States at the turn of the century, millions of people were 
turned away from Ellis Island and other American ports because of 
trachoma infection. Today, trachoma has largely been eradicated throughout 
the Northern Hemisphere. But a blinding form of the disease, which 
is spread through hand contact, and unsanitary conditions is widespread 
throughout Northern and Central Africa. And there are pockets of trachoma 
in China, the Middle East, as well as Central and South America. Experts 
say women and children are particularly vulnerable to trachoma because 
it is highly contagious, especially when individuals are in close 
proximity to each other the way mothers and children are. Michael 
Ballin is President of the Edna McConnell Clark Foundation, which 
has been concerned about trachoma for a number of years. The impact 
of trachoma in the developing world simply can't be overstated. Nearly 
6 million people are blinded already, or maybe blinded soon by the 
disease. Another 150 million are infected with the disease. And there 
are more than half a billion people who are at risk of contracting 
it. Trachoma is a bacterial disease that causes blindness through 
repeated infection of the upper eyelid. Without adequate treatment, 
the inner lid eventually becomes so scarred it turns inward. Once 
that happens, the eyelashes rub against the white part of the eye, 
or cornea, which can lead to blindness. To tackle this preventable 
cause of blindness, the Clark Foundation has established the International 
Trachoma Initiative or ITI in partnership with the drug maker Fizer. 
Fizer has agreed initially to donate a two year supply of the antibiotic 
Zithromax. Fizer Senior Vice President, Joe Fetchco says Zithromax 
is superior to the old antibiotic treatment for trachoma. Up until 
now the standard treatment has been topical application of tetrasychlin 
ointment, applied twice daily for six weeks. This is difficult to 
complete, and is of particular concern in trying to treat children. 
Zithromax is an oral dose given once a year, administered under trained 
supervision. And is a major step forward, simply because it is so 
much more likely to happen and be taken. Before the kickoff of ITI, 
Fizer and the Clark Foundation treated over 10,000 patients in Morocco, 
as part of a highly successful pilot project. Morocco will be one 
of five countries that is first targeted by the Trachoma Initiative, 
The others are Mali, Ghana, Tanzania, and Vietnam. Joseph Cook is 
the head of the Clark Foundation's tropical diseases research program. 
We believe we can launch an effective program in those five countries 
and we are committed to do so over the next two years. If we are successful 
in the next two years, we will certainly go forward on a broader scale. 
This is not a one shot short-term deal, certainly on the part of Fizer, 
and I believe certainly not on the part of the Clark Foundation. Because 
of the high risk of re-infection with the trachoma bacterium, ITI 
will oversee a comprehensive effort to reduce infection and blindness. 
The strategy will include offering patients a brief surgical procedure 
to remove blinding scar tissue. And people at high risk for trachoma 
will learn about the importance of face washing and making other environmental 
changes to combat the eye disease. The estimated cost of the International 
Trachoma Initiative is $66 million. Of that the Clark Foundation and 
Fizer will each donate more than $3 million along with Fizer's contribution 
of Zithromax. Jessica Burman, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>