<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981031.0816 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At least 231 people have been confirmed dead in Honduras from former 
hurricane Mitch, bringing the storm's death toll in the region to 
362, the National Emergency Commission said Saturday. Authorities 
in neighboring Nicaragua reported 121 dead from heavy rains and flash 
flooding there. Another 151 people are listed as missing, the National 
Civil Defense System reported. Mitch _ once one of the strongest hurricanes 
to hit the Caribbean _ was downgraded to a tropical depression, but 
continued to dump heavy rain on the region. At least 131 people were 
reported killed in Tegucigalpa after floodwaters rose to the third 
floor of some buildings in the Honduran capital Saturday. Army helicopters 
rescued some flood victims clinging to rooftops. ``This is a national 
catastrophe without any comparison,'' said Gen. Mario Hung Pacheco, 
head of Honduras' armed forces. Hundreds of houses were washed away, 
seven of Tegucigalpa's ten bridges were knocked out and patients were 
evacuated from the third floor of the city's Social Security hospital 
after the Rio Grande river overflowed its banks Saturday. ``I lost 
everything, I wasn't able to rescue a thing,'' said Maria Lopez, 46, 
whose home near Tegucigalpa's international airport disappeared without 
a trace in the flood waters. Hundreds of thousands of people in Honduras 
and Nicaragua had fled or lost their homes. Failing communications 
prevented authorities from issuing damage estimates _ Honduras' transportation 
ministry said almost all the country's roads had been cut _ but banana 
producers said they had lost their entire crop. ``Superhuman efforts 
are under way to aid the flood victims,'' said Honduran President 
Carlos Flores Facusse, after he traveled to the city's international 
airport aboard a U.S. military aircraft based at the nearby Palmerola 
airbase. The terminal is closed to regular air traffic. Flores Facusse 
declared the city ``a disaster zone.'' Honduran authorities asked 
the United Nations for aid in assisting flood victims. Food and medicine 
were in particularly short supply. ``The government does not have 
the capacity to help all the victims,'' said Health Minister Marco 
Antonio Rosa. At sea in the Caribbean, two U.S. Coast Guard C-130 
planes continued the search for a tourist schooner with 31 people 
that had reported being rocked by then-Hurricane Mitch on Tuesday. 
By late Saturday, Mitch's winds _ once near 180 mph (288 kph) _ had 
dropped to 35 mph (55 kph) and the storm was located about 75 miles 
(120 kms) south of Santa Rosa de Copan, Honduras, moving west at 7 
mph (11 kph), the U.S. National Hurricane Center reported. Neighboring 
El Salvador _ where four people died in flash floods _ declared a 
state of emergency Saturday, as did Guatemala, where five people died 
when floodwaters swept away their homes. Mexico reported one death 
from Mitch on Monday. Police fanned out across Tegucigalpa to stem 
what National Police Chief Col. Napoleon Flores Ponce said were hundreds 
of people robbing stores in the capital. Police had orders to ``take 
drastic action'' to stop the looting, he told a local radio station. 
The Coast Guard reported that two Swiss citizens were rescued from 
a life raft after their 33-foot yacht (10.5-meter) yacht went down 
Monday in the Caribbean, but there was still no sign of a 258-foot 
(77-meter) schooner, the Fantome, missing since Tuesday. The Antigua-registered 
Fantome, once owned by Aristotle Onassis, is operated out of Miami 
by Windjammer Barefoot Cruises. After dropping its tourist passengers 
off in Belize Monday morning, the crew headed toward Roatan Island, 
off the north coast, to escape the hurricane _ which for two days 
was centered near that island. In their last communication, the crew 
of the Fantome said they were experiencing 100-knot winds and 40-degree 
rolls, said Windjammer spokesman James Canty. The ship carried an 
emergency transmitter, but no signal has been received from that transponder, 
according to the Coast Guard. With rainfall of 4 inches (10 cms) an 
hour at the height of the storm, downed bridges, rampant rivers, toppled 
trees and mudslides had isolated hundreds of communities where food, 
water and medicine were in short supply. A Nicaraguan army helicopter 
set out to investigate reports that many more people may have drowned 
in the northern town of Posoltega, near the Honduran border, but turned 
back because of bad weather. In Tegucigalpa, thousands sought refuge 
in government shelters. About 30,000 had been taken Friday to shelters 
in the nation's second city, San Pedro Sula in the north. The British 
Ministry of Defense said that it sent a Royal Navy frigate based in 
the West Indies to Honduras Saturday to help in assisting flood victims. 
In small coastal communities near San Pedro Sula army troops and fire 
fighters moved in with small boats to rescue people still clinging 
to roof tops. Clara Bonilla, a 31-year-old mother, spent the night 
in a school bus near San Pedro Sula with her four children. ``It got 
very cold in the night, and no one has given us much help,'' Bonilla 
said as she clutched her youngest daughter. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>