<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981031.0766 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At least 231 people have been confirmed dead in Honduras from former 
hurricane Mitch, bringing the storm's death toll in the region to 
362, the National Emergency Commission said Saturday. Authorities 
in neighboring Nicaragua reported 121 dead from heavy rains and flash 
flooding there. Another 151 people are listed as missing in Nicaragua, 
the National Civil Defense System reported. Mitch _ once one of the 
strongest hurricanes to hit the Caribbean _ was downgraded to tropical 
depression status but continued to dump heavy rain on the region. 
One hundred and thirty-one people were reported killed in Tegucigalpa 
after floodwaters rose to the third floor of some buildings in the 
Honduran capital Saturday. Dozens of houses were washed away, seven 
of the Tegucigalpa's ten bridges were knocked out and patients were 
evacuated from the third floor of the city's Social Security hospital 
after the Rio Grande river overflowed its banks Saturday. Hundreds 
of thousands of people in the two countries had fled or lost their 
homes. Failing communications prevented authorities from issuing damage 
estimates, but banana producers said they had lost their entire crop. 
``Superhuman efforts are under way to aid the flood victims,'' said 
Honduran President Carlos Flores Facusse, after he traveled to the 
city's international airport aboard a U.S. military aircraft based 
at the nearby Palmerola airbase. The terminal is closed to regular 
air traffic. Flores Facusse declared the city ``a disaster zone.'' 
At sea in the Caribbean, two U.S. Coast Guard C-130 planes continued 
the search for a tourist schooner with 31 people that had reported 
being rocked by then-Hurricane Mitch on Tuesday. By late Saturday, 
Mitch's winds _ once near 180 mph (288 kph) _ had dropped to 35 mph 
(55 kph) and the storm was located about 75 miles (120 kms) south 
of Santa Rosa de Copan, Honduras, moving west at 7 mph (11 kph), the 
U.S. National Hurricane Center reported. Heavy rain continued to fall 
in Tegucigalpa and parts of northern Nicaragua, but weather began 
to clear on Honduras' northern coast, lashed for much of the week 
by rains and high winds. Neighboring El Salvador _ where four people 
died in flash floods _ declared a state of emergency Saturday, as 
did Guatemala, where five people died when floodwaters swept away 
their homes. Mexico reported one death from Mitch on Monday. Police 
fanned out across Tegucigalpa to stem what National Police Chief Col. 
Napoleon Flores Ponce said were hundreds of people robbing stores 
in the capital. Police had orders to ``take drastic action'' to stop 
the looting, he told a local radio station. ``Almost everything is 
damaged or destroyed and it will be difficult to recover from such 
a tragedy,'' said Col. Anael Perez, spokesman for Honduras' Permanent 
Emergency Commission, describing the damage in this country of 6 million. 
The Coast Guard reported that two Swiss citizens were rescued from 
a life raft after their 33-foot yacht (10.5-meter) yacht went down 
Monday in the Caribbean, but there was still no sign of a 258-foot 
(77-meter) schooner, the Fantome, missing since Tuesday. ``There's 
still not a lot we can do with the way the weather is down there,'' 
said Jeff Hall, spokesman for the U.S. Coast Guard. The Antigua-registered 
Fantome, once owned by Aristotle Onassis, is operated out of Miami 
by Windjammer Barefoot Cruises. After dropping its tourist passengers 
off in Belize Monday morning, the crew headed toward Roatan Island, 
off the north coast, to escape the hurricane _ which for two days 
was centered near that island. In their last communication, the crew 
of the Fantome said they were experiencing 100-knot winds and 40-degree 
rolls, said Windjammer spokesman James Canty. The ship carried an 
emergency transmitter, but no signal has been received from that transponder, 
according to the Coast Guard. While tropical storm warnings were discontinued 
Saturday, states of emergency remained in effect in Honduras and Nicaragua. 
With rainfall of 4 inches (10 cms) an hour at the height of the storm, 
downed bridges, rampant rivers, toppled trees and mudslides had isolated 
hundreds of communities where food, water and medicine were in short 
supply. In Tegucigalpa, the capital's airport was closed and more 
than 30,000 people had been evacuated. An equal number had already 
been taken to shelters in the nation's second city, San Pedro Sula 
in the north. The British Ministry of Defense said that it sent a 
Royal Navy frigate based in the West Indies to Honduras Saturday to 
help in assisting flood victims. In small, 23rd graf pvs 
</TEXT>
</DOC>