<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981031.0525 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With Western powers trying to get a 2,000-member verification mission 
started in Kosovo, a U.S. official said dozens more Americans would 
start arriving Saturday. Richard Huckaby, spokesman for the U.S. portion 
of the Kosovo Diplomatic Observer Mission, known as KDOM, said 13 
Americans were expected in Pristina on Saturday and another 70 would 
come by the middle of next week. The new arrivals join 48 Americans 
working for KDOM, Huckaby said. The ultimate makeup of the verification 
mission isn't known, as it is still being assembled, but the OSCE 
has said that Russia, Germany, France, Italy and Britain will each 
provide about 200 people. Other nations, including the former Soviet 
bloc states of Romania and Czech Republic, have offered personnel. 
The overall number of contributing nations was not yet known. Norway 
has promised dlrs 26 million for security, housing and communications 
for the first year. Also Saturday, assistant U.S. Secretary of State 
Julia Taft was expected in Pristina to start a trip that was to include 
visiting villages and meeting with relief and refugee agencies. The 
United States has led the Western effort to pressure Yugoslavian President 
Slobodan Milosevic to halt a seven-month crackdown on ethnic Albanian 
separatists in Kosovo. Hundreds of people have died in fighting that 
sent an estimated 300,000 people fleeing as refugees in the troubled 
southern Serbian province where ethnic Albanians outnumber Serbs 9 
to 1. Serbia is the dominant republic in Yugoslavia. Under the threat 
of NATO airstrikes, Milosevic agreed to withdraw troops and police 
he sent into Kosovo when he launched the crackdown in February, and 
to allow relief agencies full access to refugees. The agreement he 
reached with U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke also called for the 2,000-member 
observer mission run by the Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe to verify Milosevic's compliance. Many of the observers 
now working for KDOM are expected to become verifiers in the OSCE 
mission, which is still setting up its headquarters in Pristina, the 
provincial capital. ``Gradually we are going to be under the umbrella 
of OSCE but the schedule and details are still being decided,'' Huckaby 
said An OSCE spokesman has said the mission is still at least a few 
days away from bringing in its first observers to work in the field. 
Kosovo's main ethnic Albanian leader, Ibrahim Rugova, on Friday urged 
the United States and Europe to speed up the verification mission 
because large numbers of Serb forces remain in Kosovo. The Serb police 
and Yugoslav soldiers continue to maintain a visible presence in many 
areas of the province. A few police checkpoints continue operating 
near strongholds of the ethnic Albanian guerrilla movement, the Kosovo 
Liberation Army, and police vehicles still regularly patrol some regions. 
Most of the estimated 50,000 refugees who had been living in the woods 
of Kosovo are believed to have moved to villages, and thousands of 
refugees have returned to their homes. But the continued police and 
military presence in some areas scares others from going back. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>