<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981031.0310 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The chairman of South Korea's largest conglomerate returned Saturday 
from a meeting with North Korean leader Kim Jong Il with exclusive 
rights to develop a tourism project in exchange for dlrs 906 million. 
Kim approved other businesses ventures with longtime rival South Korea, 
said Chung Ju-yung, 84, founder of the Hyundai group, and the first 
known outsider to meet with Kim since he took absolute power over 
North Korea in September. Kim welcomed Hyundai's plan to send up to 
2,000 tourists a week on luxury cruise ships for tours of Diamond 
Mountain, a scenic attraction on the North's east coast, Hyundai officials 
said. In exchange for the right to develop Diamond Mountain with tax 
exemptions, Hyundai agreed to pay North Korea dlrs 906 million over 
the next six years in monthly payments, they said. The sightseeing 
tour would be the largest inter-Korea joint venture since the peninsula 
was divided into the communist North and the capitalist South in 1945. 
The first cruise ship will sail for the North on Nov. 18, Hyundai 
said. ``General Kim Jong Il and I agree to do everything that will 
benefit both countries,'' Chung told journalists in the neutral village 
of Panmunjom after coming home across the heavily guarded border from 
his five-day visit. Chung described the 56-year-old leader, whom he 
met at a Pyongyang guest house late Friday, as a ``very kind and respectful 
young man.'' Other Hyundai-North Korea deals called for building a 
power plant and gymnasium in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital, 
as well as a ship repair yard, and hotels, spas, golf courses and 
ski slopes near Diamond Mountain. North Korea and Hyundai also agreed 
to drill for oil on North Korea's west coast and if successful, to 
lay an oil pipeline to South Korea. Hyundai will also build an industrial 
complex where South Korea can relocate idle facilities to use North 
Korean labor _ estimated at one-eighth the cost of South Korean labor. 
President Kim Dae-jung has taken a ``sunshine policy'' toward the 
North, in which South Korea push for contacts with North Korea outside 
the government, with hopes that will help open up the North. Kim Jong 
Il had been widely expected to welcome badly needed outside capital 
to revive his country's economy. The impoverished North now depends 
on outside aid to feed its 23 million people. His blessing to Hyundai's 
plans to send tourists to the North and other projects may signal 
a greater openness from the North. North Korea has already opened 
its remote northeast corner of Rajin-Sonbong as a free economic zone. 
But some of Hyundai's projects called for foreign investment in the 
isolated country's heartland. South Korea's chief presidential Park 
Jie-won called Chung's meeting with Kim ``a very significant development'' 
but refused further comment. Experts have expressed reservations about 
Hyundai plans because joint-venture projects between the two Koreas 
have always been vulnerable to political and military tensions. Still, 
Chung's extremely rare meeting with the North Korean leader has set 
off a media sensation here. Major TV stations interrupted their regular 
programming to carry special reports on the meeting, and newspapers 
carried front-page articles. North Korean newspapers also carried 
front-page reports with photos, the North's official Korean Central 
News Agency said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>