<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981031.0338 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Maintaining its tight restraints on unofficial political activities, 
the government has banned a private group set up by dissidents to 
combat corruption, a human rights group said Saturday. The group also 
reported that border police detained a prominent intellectual when 
he attempted to leave the country Saturday evening. Peng Ming, a founding 
member of the China Development Union, an independent association 
of intellectuals, had been invited to visit Harvard University and 
planned to visit Hong Kong en route to the United States, according 
to the Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement 
in China. On Monday, Beijing police ordered the disbanding of the 
China Development Union, searched its offices and confiscated a fax 
machine, computer and documents. They questioned Peng and two other 
organizers of the group and told them the group's activities were 
illegal because it was not registered with the government. China requires 
all organizations to register with the authorities and in most cases 
applications are turned down, foiling efforts by dissidents to promote 
reforms through independent, legal channels. The Hong Kong-based Information 
Center also reported that dissidents associated with the unofficial 
group Corruption Watch, founded in September by nine activists in 
seven provinces, had been detained and interrogated by police over 
the past few days, Police in Xinyang, in central China's Henan province, 
told dissident An Jun, a founding member of Corruption Watch, Friday 
that the group had been deemed illegal, the Information Center said. 
The authorities said the group was not needed because the government 
already had agencies working to fight corruption. Meanwhile, a group 
of 51 people issued a letter of protest against a government decision 
to freeze funds collected by Chinese students in Germany to help victims 
of the 1989 military suppression of pro-democracy demonstrations, 
Human Rights in China said Saturday. The letter demanded the government 
release the money, saying they would take legal action against ``robbery'' 
of the funds, the New York-based group said. The protest followed 
reports earlier this week that bank officials in Wuxi, in eastern 
China's Jiangsu province, had refused to cash a check worth 11,620 
German marks (dlrs 7,000) that had been entrusted to Ding Zilin, the 
mother of a victim. Bank officials told Ding, a retired professor 
whose 17-year-old son died in the 1989 crackdown, that the money was 
frozen for six months on orders from the State Security Bureau. Ding 
has led efforts by families of victims to ask the government to re-examine 
the June 4, 1989, assault on demonstrators and account for the hundreds, 
possibly thousands, killed in the crackdown. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>