<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981031.0562 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's Cabinet may not vote on the latest 
Mideast peace deal in time to meet its Monday starting date. Netanyahu's 
Cabinet convenes Sunday but the premier said he would not show his 
ministers the agreement until the Palestinians had submitted a security 
document on fighting terrorism. And without his Cabinet's approval, 
the premier has said he would not begin implementing the accord which 
calls for Israel to cede 13.1 percent of the West Bank to Palestinian 
control. Still reeling from a suicide bombing attack in which 40 Israeli 
children narrowly escaped death, Netanyahu said the Palestinian Authority 
must arrest Mohammed Deif, a military leader of the Islamic militant 
group Hamas. ``Israel has a clear expectation ... that Deif will be 
arrested within the next several days,'' Netanyahu said. Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat's Cabinet approved the peace accord Friday and 
said it would present its action plan on fighting terrorism to the 
Americans as promised by Monday. ``We are committed next week to sharing 
our security plan with the Americans. This does not mean submitting 
the plan to Israel or to anybody else,'' said senior Palestinian negotiator 
Saeb Erekat. Saturday, Arafat said he would do everything in his power 
to fight militants and curb terrorism. ``As you know, there have been 
military, terrorist attacks. The latest was aimed at a school bus,'' 
Arafat said. ``Thank God, an armored jeep received the blow,'' and 
not the bus, Arafat said, speaking to reporters in the West Bank city 
of Ramallah. Hamas claimed responsibility for Thursday's attack, in 
which an explosives-laden car drove towards a school bus before it 
was blocked by a military escort jeep. An Israeli soldier was killed 
in the attack but the children were unharmed. Arafat's Authority government 
launched an aggressive campaign against Hamas after the attack, placing 
its spiritual leader Sheik Ahmed Yassin under house arrest and rounding-up 
over 100 activists. An aide to Arafat also said the authority had 
discussed Netanyahu's request to arrest Deif, who is considered to 
be behind several deadly attacks against Israelis and has been hiding 
in Gaza for the past three years. But after the two-day sweep, Palestinian 
forces unexpectedly released began releasing several militant leaders 
Saturday. Ismail Hanieh, a senior Hamas activist was released after 
being held two days. Reached by a reporter on his mobile phone, Hanieh 
said he was out of jail and would not discuss his case. A Palestinian 
police official, who spoke on condition of anonymity said that Nafez 
Azam, a senior figure in the smaller Palestinian Islamic Jihad group 
had also been released. A third man who heads the National Islamic 
Salvation party was released. The official gave no reason for the 
releases. Israel has accused the Authority of a revolving-door policy 
of rounding up militants and then releasing them without punishment. 
Netanyahu's senior adviser David Bar-Illan said Israel had adopted 
``wait and see attitude,'' to the arrests. ``Let's see if it's the 
first step in a real battle against the terrorist infrastructure or 
a repeat of the same maneuvers designed to placate world opinion after 
terrorist bombings,'' Bar-Illan said. Under the new peace agreement, 
the Palestinians are obligated to taking stronger measures against 
militants and their infrastructure. Without concrete steps, Israel 
has said it would not go through with its half of the agreement to 
cede more land to Palestinian control. Palestinian Communications 
Minister Imad Falouji, a former member of Hamas, who voted against 
the new peace accord with Israel, paid a visit to Yassin Saturday. 
Falouji told The AP that Yassin was ready for serious dialogue with 
the Palestinian Authority. Falouji did not give specific details but 
said he would carry a message from the sheikh to Arafat. Hamas opposes 
peace with Israel and has claimed responsibility for killing scores 
of Israelis in deadly attacks since peace-making began in 1993. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>