<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981031.0130.0567 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The spookiest night of the year is almost upon us, and the scariest 
thing for some people might be -- the political ads. Bill Schneider 
takes a look. It's almost halloween, and do you know what the biggest 
theme of this year's campaign is? Scare the voters. Candidates know 
the voters are pretty satisfied with the way things are going. So 
how are you going to get 'em to vote? Answer?-- scare 'em. If you 
don't come out and vote for the right candidate, terrible things are 
gonna happen. Like what? Well, just look at these ads. Here's one 
that says, "my opponent's so bad, he scares the police" -- State senator 
Peter Fitzgerald, he voted to let people carry concealed weapons in 
public -- in the mall, on the playground, anywhere they choose. Governor 
Edgar says Fitzgerald's plan has police scared to death. In the Michigan 
governor's race, republicans are implying the democrats a bigot, a 
religious bigot. Do we want a governor who attacks our values? Newspapers 
report trial lawyer Geoffrey Fieger called the leader of the catholic 
church in Michigan "A nut." He compared the Detroit counsel of orthodox 
Rabbis to Nazis. Fieger said, "Jesus Christ was just some goofball 
that got nailed to the cross." Now here's a switch. This ad, being 
run in the Alaska governor's race, accuses a candidate of being too 
tolerant of homosexuals. Driven by blasphemy since his first election, 
he has worked diligently for full acceptance of the homosexual way 
of life. He introduced and fought for the hiring of homosexual teachers 
for our elementary schools. Blasphemy? You don't hear that one much 
these days. This ad from the Kentucky Senate race was widely condemned. 
People said the republican was trying to make his opponent look like 
hitler. Notice the music by Richard Wagner, Hitler's favorite composer. 
The deepest cut for current beneficiaries in the history of social 
security. How far can they go? How about suggesting your opponent 
is complicit in murder like this ad in missouri? -- James Chambers, 
murderer. Emmitt Foster, set free, murderer. A few of the hundreds 
of convicted felons and murderers kit bond set free. a state Senate 
candidate in Tennessee took the notion of attack politics to a whole 
new extreme. He's in custody, charged with murdering his opponent. 
Ghoulish? Of course. We're gonna give this week's political play of 
the week to the bogeymen of both parties, who have turned the 1998 
campaign into the worst horror show ever this halloween. Bill Schneider, 
CNN, Atlanta. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>