<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981031.1000.1488 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prairie dogs have lost 98% of their habitat and their numbers are 
dwindling, but millions of them still roam the range, and that's prompting 
a debate over protection. Natalie pawelski reports. City slickers 
hunkering down on the dusty prairie. See anything? Pumping soap suds 
into holes. They're hoping to find somebody home. In suburban Denver, 
prairie dog relocators are chasing the animals from their holes and 
finding them new homes before this lot is turned into a Shopping mall. 
It's the same story throughout the fast-growing west, as civilization 
spreads, wildlife habitat shrinks. Add that to a century or so of 
ranchers, farmers and the government targeting prairie dogs, and you've 
got a critter some say is in trouble. The national wildlife federation 
is asking the government to list the black-tailed prairie dog as a 
threatened animal under the endangered species act. If we don't do 
something now, the continued decline of prairie dog population is 
gonna lead to the decline of other species as well. Prairie dog Burrows 
can be 15 feet deep and 100 feet long. They provide houses for animals 
like burrowing owls and the endangered black-footed ferret. Prairie 
dogs are food, too, for ferrets, Hawks, Eagles, foxes and other animals. 
Looking around the west, prairie dogs hardly seem scarce. With as 
many as I see, I can't imagine 'em being threatened or endangered, 
but I think -- I think they'll always be here no matter what you do. 
I think if you nuked this country they'll still be here. Nobody really 
knows how many prairie dogs there are. Most experts would agree to 
a number in the millions, far fewer then there used to be, but from 
the ranchers' perspective, there are more than enough left, competing 
with cattle for food. Cattlemen say putting the prairie dog on the 
threatened list and keeping farmers and ranchers from killing them 
when they take over fields and range land, is no way to handle a plentiful 
pest. Why would you tie the hands of the farmer and rancher to be 
able to stay in business? Because once that lot is paved over, that 
can't be good for prairie dog habitat. By the end of this month, the 
government is supposed to decide whether to even consider protecting 
the black-tailed prairie dog. If the answer is yes, there will be 
months of debate before a final decision. If the answer is no, prairie 
dog fans will have to find another way to protect what they see as 
biological building blocks, and what others see as the rats of the 
range. Natalie pawelski, CNN, Adams county, Colorado. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>