<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981031.1300.1493 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the early years of television, women were usually portrayed as 
happy, in-control moms. Later they successfuly added a career to their 
list of accomplishments. Sherri Sylvester reports, the '90s is introducing 
a differnt kind of woman. There are smart women -- I don't have my 
mental health. I don't have my mental health. Making foolish choices 
-- My therapist, go to her. -- in prime time. This is not normal therapy. 
You're not a normal person. That's sort of a double-edged sword. I 
mean, I certainly don't want to be type-cast as Ally McBeal forever. 
Ally McBeal is a successful attorney, but her personal life is a Mess. 
Forget the notion of having it all, she's not even emotionally stable, 
and she's not alone. It scares me with "felicity" and -- and "Ally 
McBeal." It's like the most popular women on TV are in desperate need 
of a Therapist. "felicity" dumps her dreams of becoming a doctor to 
follow a high school hunk to his college. She doesn't know him, but 
he signed something nice in her yearbook. Is she neurotic? At times. 
But the great thing is she has her intellect to kind of back her up. 
And when she's in that crazy situation to step outside herself and 
say, "I'm acting like a freak and I know that. And I want you to know 
that I know that." I'm here now, you know, because I'm here. Well 
spoken, articulate in some scenes, these women are reduced to a stumbling 
bundle of insecurities when talking to the men in their lives. With 
the -- with the -- the thorns from the -- the flower. Grace of "will 
& grace" runs her own business. Veronica of "Veronica's closet" built 
an empire marketing lingerie. I don't have my bathroom! And I don't 
have my bathroom any more! I have nothing! They are far from their 
prime time predecessors who could juggle career and family, or the 
happy homemakers before them. We're doing a better job of capturing 
the intricacies and the nuances of people. And if that means that 
we show them to be a little more neurotic then we do. "Ally McBeal" 
appeals on many levels. It appeals -- she appeals as a fantasy character 
for some. She appeals a role model for others. She appears, I think 
mostly as a vulnerable, three-dimensional human being -- Clearly flawed, 
but always with a great good heart. But Jenna Elfman believes her 
character on "Dharma & Greg" is three-dimensional, yet balanced. Ours 
has not a neurotic Tone, or a neurotic couple or a neurotic girl. 
Ours has healthy people in it who are doing their best to try and 
make life great. If flawed females are a trend, it may just be a case 
of equal opportunity. After all, guys such as Garry Shandling and 
Jerry Seinfeld played their neuroses for laughs. Sherri Sylvester, 
CNN, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>