<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981031.0130.0047 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
"CNN Headline News." From Atlanta, I'm David Goodnow. NASA is investigating 
why an aluminum panel fell off space shuttle "Discovery" during launch. 
Mission controllers say the mishap could have been disastrous, and 
they want to know if the missing piece will have a safety impact when 
the shuttle lands next week. In space Friday, the shuttle crew, including 
John Glenn, began its experiments. Tony Clark reports. The first full 
day on orbit was a busy one for the crew of "Discovery" -- setting 
up experiments like the advanced gradient heating furnace, designed 
to create alloys in microgravity, as well as a system designed to 
grow crystals in space, and trying out an electronic nose, a Device 
to check for various gases in the shuttle. There are also a number 
of medical experiments under way on the astronauts themselves. What 
I've been involved with here is a body core temperature measuring 
device, where I take a pill about the size of the biggest vitamin 
pill you ever saw, and it monitors my -- monitors my core body temperature 
and it's recorded on a little device that you can see right here on 
my waist. Friday, the crew unhooked the shuttle's remote manipulator 
arm and slowly maneuvered it up and around, in preparation for Sunday's 
deployment of the Spartan satellite. The arm will be used to lift 
a satellite out of the shuttle's payload bay and leave it in space 
for two days of observations of the sun's corona. Just about 40 seconds 
away from deploy of pansat. The astronauts also deployed the Navy's 
small pansat communications satellite. It will be used for educational 
purposes by the naval postgraduate school in California. The satellite 
will be used as a space bulletin board, very similar to e-mail except 
it uses amateur radio. There also was a bit of nostalgia, as the shuttle 
orbited 343 miles above earth. Residents in perth, Australia, turned 
on all the lights in town, just as they did 36 years ago when John 
Glenn passed over in his Mercury capsule. And once again, Glenn was 
able to look down and see Australia's city of lights. We got a good 
view of perth, a nice glow. And it's spread out. And it's been a long 
time ago I looked at the same thing from a little lower altitude, 
but it looks beautiful up here, and you can pass that along to the 
people of perth. Everything appears to be running smoothly on "discovery." 
NASA engineers are still trying to figure out why the door covering 
"Discovery's" drag chute fell off during launch. They believe the 
chute is still packed in its compartment and will not affect the mission 
or the landing. The only other real problem the shuttle has experienced 
has been a leaky hose in a drinking water system that was being tested. 
The astronauts changed back to their old water processor, so all in 
all, this shuttle mission has gotten off to an excellent start. Tony 
Clark, CNN, Johnson space center. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>