<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981031.1830.0071 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today Saddam Hussein announced he would stop all cooperation with 
U.N. weapons inspectors. Security council members condemned irans 
decision. If this situation escalates, there are still plenty of American 
ships and planes in the gulf region, along with about 18,000 military 
personnel. NBC's David Gregory has been monitoring details from the 
White House. Len, late today, the president's national security team 
met here at the White House to discuss U.S. options in response to 
Saddam's latest move -- what an administration official calls an "affront 
to the United Nations and the international community." Another showdown 
with Saddam that the White House says could lead to military action. 
On the streets of Baghdad today, anger toward the U.S. -- the burning 
of an American flag, and tough words from Iraqi officials after saddam 
decided to immediately stop the work of U.N. weapons inspectors. This 
is for the people of Iraq and the leadership of Iraq to save the sovereignty 
of Iraq and the right of the people to live. The ban was in response 
to a U.N. security council decision friday to reject Iraqi demands 
that cooperation with inspectors automatically lead to the removal 
of sanctions imposed on Iraq after the gulf war. We want the council 
to look in fairness and in justice and those issues that relate to 
Iraqi sanctions. Though sanctions would have to be lifted as soon 
as possible chblt The last major showdown with Saddam was back in 
February when his refusal to allow inspectors into the presidential 
palaces for th led to the threat of military action by the U.S. and 
Britain. Air strikes were avoided after U.N. secretary-general Kofi 
Annan brokered a Compromise calling for unrestricted access for inspectors. 
This summer, another flare-up -- Iraq barred teams from the U.N. special 
commission or UNSCOM from conducting surprise inspections of suspected 
weapons sites. Today's move renews the crisis. The monitoring system 
is our last hope of discovering the resumption of iraq's nuclear program, 
chemical program, it's the last detection system. If that's turned 
off, we become deaf dumb and blind. So what now? Former inspection 
team chief Scott Ritter who resigned in protest this summer after 
accusing the U.N. of going easy on Saddam. There should be no doubt 
Saddam is hiding weapons of mass destruction. It's time to stop sidestepping 
the issue and take Iraq head on. Tonight, after a close-door meeting, 
the U.N. security council president had these comments. We wish to 
see the work of the agencies continued, and we will decide over the 
next few days what further steps are to be taken. Tonight the White 
House maintains this is not yet a full blown crisis. The president 
spent the afternoon on the golf course not taking part in the meeting 
with the security staff. He is now getting briefed by Sandy Berg ger 
as the administration plots its next move. len? NBC's David Gregory 
at the White House, thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>