<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981031.1830.0268 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
All systems are go aboard space shuttle "discovery," where today, 
77-year-old John Glenn did something he is quite used to doing on 
earth -- giving interviews. NBC's Robert Hager is monitoring things 
from NASA's mission control in houston tonight. Good evening, Robert. 
Well, what senator Glenn did along with commander Curt brown was answer 
questions from students. They were gathered at two mu seems. And also 
at John Glenn's high school. The questions were just fascinating, 
all about every day life in space. Here is how it all transpiered. 
350 miles above earth as they worked on experiments, students beamed 
up their questions from below. Senator Glenn, do you feel younger 
whechb you are in space? I guess I feel young all the time. That's 
the reason I volunteered to come up here. Of course, I'm the oldest 
on the trip here. I guess it's an advantage up here for older folks 
because in zero G, you can move around much more easily. Senator Glenn, 
does food taste differently up in space? It has not tasted differently 
to me here in space. Although some people have talked about after 
a while up in space your body seems to adapt. So there's a tendency 
to spice it up a little bit up here in space, but I haven't run into 
that yet. Commander brown, how are everyday experiences, such as sneezing, 
different in a microgravity environment? With seven people here in 
the Orbiter, it's a kind of small compartment and if you get ready 
to sneeze, we definitely recommend putting your hand over your mouth 
and, as you know, that stuff will not fall to the floor. Senator Glenn, 
since you're experimenting to observe the effects of space on the 
elderly, what about observing the effects of space travel on the young? 
I think you have to be careful because, you know, we're talking about 
for younger people, really young people, we're talking about their 
bones being formed and their bodies changing very rapidly as part 
of the growth process. And up here that might be interfered with rather 
drastically. Have either of you had difficulty sleeping? Brown said 
he'd slept well both nights. As for Glenn -- I was pleasantly surprised 
the first night up here, I probably got five of hours of sleep. Last 
night, I had about the same amount of sleep. A little shorter than 
occurs on earth, but I don't know that you need quite the same amount 
of sleep up here, you're floating around and maybe aren't quite as 
tired -- tired from excitement, I guess. Senator Glenn, was it worth 
waiting 36 years to fly in space again? yes, Senator Glenn gave blood 
today. And tomorrow, the crew of the shuttle, will release a satellite 
into space to study the sun. Robert, what more can you tell us about 
this sleep experiment we have been hearing about? The big thing happens 
tomorrow when senator Glenn puts on this amazing headset and it has 
21 different leads that monitor eye movements, how the muscles twitch 
and brain waves. You might say with a gadget like that on your head, 
how can you sleep? In truth you can sleep better in space than you 
can on earth. On earth your head clunchs down on a pillow but in weightlessness 
it is not so kum bersome. NBC's Robert Hager in mission control, thank 
you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>