<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981031.1830.1028 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In "focus" this evening, putting people in touch with their inner 
feelings about race. NBC's Dan Lothian has our report on a test some 
say can do just that. On your Mark, get set, go. This is a classroom 
test where timing is everything, how fast one responds by tapping 
a knee or raising a hand which gives a visual indication of unconscious 
feelings of prejudice. It took me a little bit longer to react to 
them in general. Psychology students at the University of Washington 
is helping this professor demonstrate what they say is a proven test. 
What this test measures is something that is happening automatically. 
From a classroom to a web site where anyone can do a Self-examination, 
this is how the examination test works. The idea to quickly classify 
a list of names as being black or white, and then to classify words 
as either good or bad, and finally to match white names and good words 
and black nams and good names. What researchers said they found is 
that it takes whites longer to match black names with good words than 
it takes to match black names. An indication that they believe is 
an uncouldn't shous prejudice against blacks. I did find I had a harder 
time when I had to put the white names with the unpleasant names and 
I don't know why that is. This student has a doubt. I'd like to see 
more research to profit. This started off as a test so far taken by 
100,000 on the web. Some that have responded are troubled by the results, 
even refusing to believe that what they are being confronted with 
can really be true. This expert has doubts, too. Finding the truth 
between black and white is complex, he says, even for a Computer. 
I'm not sure, if it can, especially if it is done in such a mechanical 
way through a web site. But greenwald has no doubts. He says it can't 
even be fooled by someone that is cheating or confused. Someone that 
is confused or having trouble, what will happen the computer will 
not tell them you have a preference for one race over the other. The 
results of this buy as test stand in Stark contrast to what most Americans 
say in public opinion polls. A report on race last year concluded 
whites seem to view themselves as having little prejudice against 
blacks. Blacks claim they have little prejudice against whites. The 
test shows that both races have more buy as then they admit T. professor 
says what he has designed should serve as a tool to raise awareness 
about sub ston shous attitudes. He says he found surprising results. 
I didn't know that was in me. I don't want that to be in me. I may 
not be able to get rid of it but I can take it into account when I 
go out into the world and deal with people. Dan Lothian, NBC news, 
Seattle. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>