<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0234 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is a busy time for real estate brokers in the picture-perfect 
small towns of the Northeast as they race from closing to closing, 
getting customers into weekend houses in time to inaugurate the new 
lodgings with a Thanksgiving turkey. It is also, by and large, a rich 
time. Some brokers have had their best year ever as affluent buyers 
have increasingly come to view the second home as an integral part 
of life, an accessory as necessary as a sports utility vehicle. Surprisingly, 
many brokers say, the volatile stock market has so far had a minimal 
effect on sales. Although in some areas there has been a lessening 
of interest in properties costing more than $1 million, there is no 
widespread indication that the market for second homes is being affected. 
With interest rates at some of their lowest levels in 30 years, even 
buyers who are nervous about the direction of the economy are seduced 
by the financing opportunities. While prices in many areas rose significantly 
from last fall through the spring, they have leveled off, many brokers 
say, making this seem an opportune time to buy. Asking prices are 
not, however, generally being cut. The sale of a second home is often 
discretionary, and if there are no takers, the owner can just hold 
on to it or rent until the market seems more favorable. While buyers 
can still find houses within three hours of New York that offer a 
few acres, and maybe even access to a stream or lake, for less than 
$120,000, prices of substantial houses in the sought-after communities 
are well over $250,000, and sales have been brisk, with some brokers 
saying that their sales for the year are up 40 to 50 percent. As a 
result, inventory is depleted, and there is much less for sale than 
there was a few years ago. Some brokers now say their biggest problem 
is finding homes to show. Sales of second homes take place most often 
in the spring and fall, but they are increasingly occurring throughout 
the year because the homes are no longer merely seasonal retreats. 
Houses in ski country are used in the summer because there are usually 
nearby lakes and golf courses. Beach houses in towns with the bookstores, 
restaurants and other services that city people want are increasingly 
drawing year-round visitors who are also pleased by the peacefulness 
of a fall day at the beach. Weekend houses, too, are no longer strictly 
weekend houses, now that time away from the office can, for increasing 
numbers of the fortunate, be stretched to three or four days as e-mail, 
faxes and voice mail make it possible to work from any location. Take, 
for instance, Madison, Conn., a lovely town of about 15,000 on the 
water about 20 minutes east of New Haven. Twenty years ago, summer 
visitors tended to come from Connecticut, from landlocked cities like 
Hartford, an hour to the northwest. But increasingly, New Yorkers 
have discovered Madison, which is a two-hour drive from New York City. 
They are drawn by the pretty main street and its mix of stores, by 
the great homemade meat loaf at Sweet and Savory, and readings by 
well-known authors _ among them Judy Collins, Joan Lunden and Anne 
Rice _ at the bookstore R.J. Julia. And they are drawn by a peaceful 
waterfront on Long Island Sound that seems to offer blue vistas at 
every turn, as well as down the town's many small streets that end 
at the water's edge. There are few garish houses here. Many are from 
the end of the last century and the beginning of this one, cottages 
that sit cheek by jowl on small lots. They have been winterized and 
now sell for $250,000 for small houses and up to $800,000 or more 
for waterfront homes. Margaret Muir, who began visiting Madison as 
a child, has been selling real estate in the town for nine years. 
Prices have risen substantially in the last year, she said, as ``people 
discover that, as nice as it is to be here in the summer, this is 
New England.'' ``In the fall there is cider making, and sitting in 
front of a fire,'' she said. The popularity of Madison seems to be 
growing, too, in anticipation of a new high-speed rail line, due in 
2000 or so, that will cut the travel time to 80 minutes _ 60 minutes 
to New Haven, and a 20-minute drive. Large sums of money are being 
invested, primarily by families from New York, to renovate and winterize 
the old cottages. Still, as in other communities where some houses 
sell for more than $1 million, Ms. Muir, a broker at Page Taft on 
Wall Street in Madison, has noticed less interest in the very expensive 
properties since the stock market's volatility began. ``I think there's 
a response to the stock market,'' she said. ``I think there's a hesitation 
and an overall anxiety.'' On the other hand, she said, ``I don't think 
we've fallen apart here.'' The strong market for second homes in the 
New York region has sent many people to mortgage brokers for financing. 
``The last 12 months have been one of the busiest times we've seen 
in the vacation home market,'' said Steven Schnall, the president 
of New York Mortgage Corp., a mortgage broker that handles loans in 
Connecticut, New York and New Jersey. The strong economy and the rising 
stock market contributed, he said, but so did greater flexibility 
by lenders, who now allow buyers to put down just 10 percent, compared 
with 20 percent or 30 percent in the past. After the stock market 
drop in the summer, he said, action in general in the city and in 
the second home market slowed down a bit, but the volume of sales 
did not significantly change. ``They just weren't jumping as quickly,'' 
he said. Now, with the market seeming more stable, he said, people 
are buying, but in a more measured, less frantic way than they were 
earlier in the year. While sales of second homes vary from market 
to market, and while they are naturally affected by the economy, the 
country in general is likely to have more people with second homes 
because the number of people in the age categories most likely to 
buy vacation homes is growing. Patrick Phillips, a senior vice president 
at Economics Research Associates, a consulting firm in Washington 
that focuses on recreational real estate, said that people in their 
early 50s were most likely to buy second homes, in part because they 
are in their peak earning years, and in part because their children 
are likely to be older and they have more free time. As the baby-boom 
generation moves into its 50s, ownership of second homes is likely 
to increase, he said. And in fact, it is already happening. While 
there was no growth through the first half of this decade in the purchase 
of second homes, the number of second homes nationwide increased by 
more than 200,000 in 1996, and again by the same number in 1997, according 
to the Census Bureau. People looking for a second home often start 
by thinking about whether they want the mountains, farmland or the 
beach, regardless of whether they plan to use their house primarily 
in summer or winter. And if they are attracted to mountains, an obvious 
first place to look is Vermont. Some devotees of northern Vermont, 
which attracts people from all over the world, will sneer that the 
southern part of the state is just a suburb of New York City. There's 
a reason for that. While northern Vermont is a six-hour drive, southern 
Vermont is just three-and-a-half to four-and-a-half hours away. For 
much of the last decade, properties in many parts of Vermont were 
relative bargains, and many towns have still not recaptured the house 
prices they saw during the boom days of the mid-1980s. Condos meant 
for skiers were particularly slow to recover. But even the condo market 
has strengthened significantly. Although prices are not as high as 
they were just before the stock market collapse of 1987, sales have 
been booming. As an example of how well things are selling, Paul Sherwood 
of Century 21 Carriage Realty in West Dover, in the southern part 
of Vermont, singled out one of his favorite condo complexes, Timber 
Creek, in West Dover directly across from Mount Snow. With 212 units, 
it has swimming pools, saunas, cross-country trails, a clubhouse, 
weight rooms, racquetball courts, firewood delivered to the door, 
and shuttle-bus service to the ski lift. The condos, between 2,000 
and 2,900 square feet, are priced from $139,000 to $189,000 and are 
selling extremely well, he said. But Sherwood remembers 1990 and 1991, 
when 52 units were for sale, about a quarter of the complex. Now, 
only seven are for sale. ``I'm begging owners to list with me,'' he 
said. The last month, Sherwood said, has been his busiest time. ``October 
is when we have our World Series,'' he said. Buyers start ``kicking 
the tires'' in June, then start getting serious after Labor Day, so 
they can be in their new homes by Thanksgiving, he said. Usually, 
he said, ``when the last leaf hits the ground, the last buyer disappears.'' 
But that has not been the case this year. ``It's remarkably busy,'' 
he said. ``The people are still coming. This past weekend, I didn't 
have enough time to see all the people.'' A typical buyer, he said, 
is a single man in his late 20s who works on Wall Street. Places are 
selling twice as quickly as they did last year, in an average of 60 
days, he said. As of mid-October, Sherwood said, he had closed more 
than $8 million in sales this year, up from $7 million for all of 
1997, and his best quarter is typically the fourth, which is still 
to come. Sales have not been hurt by the stock market or by by a new 
statewide property tax system, meant to equalize education spending, 
that has raised many assessments, some by as much as 30 percent. Still, 
he said, prices are far below what they were at their height in the 
'80s for condos, and houses are 30 percent to 35 percent less. In 
those wild days, he said, people were buying investment property; 
now they are picking out houses they plan to use, although they will 
sometimes rent them out in summer to defray costs. ``We have been 
in a buyers' market for 10 years,'' said Sherwood, a retired New York 
dentist who has been selling real estate in Vermont for 11 years. 
``We're not yet in a sellers' market, but inventory is depleted, and 
prices are tending to go up.'' Business is also booming in other parts 
of Vermont that attract many New Yorkers. Terry Hill, president of 
the South Central Vermont Board of Realtors, which represents brokers 
in Stratton, Weston, Dorset and Manchester, said that ``business has 
been very good for the last year, and especially for the last six 
or seven months.'' Ms. Hill said she expected that sales volume for 
the year would be 40 percent higher than last year. Buyers tend to 
be families in their mid-30s who see their homes as year-round retreats. 
``In past years, you might only see the owner from Christmas to March,'' 
she said. ``Now, you're seeing them year-round, because there are 
so many things to do in southern Vermont. We have fly fishing, and 
beautiful golf courses.'' While Dorset may be a four-hour drive from 
New York City, Stowe is much farther north, a six-hour drive or a 
one-hour flight to Burlington, 35 minutes away. Pall Spera, who has 
been selling real estate in the area for 30 years, said that there 
are more conversations now about the stock market, but it doesn't 
seem to be a factor in the sale of homes in the $300,000 to $400,000 
range. ``We have such absolutely provocative rates,'' he said, ``and 
we are still very cheap as resort real estate goes.'' His company's 
sales were 50 percent higher this year, he said, in part because Vermont's 
isolation is countered by technology. ``They can be there and not 
feel disconnected,'' he said, because of e-mail and the like. ``People 
are coming Thursday night and leaving Monday. The weekend is three 
to four days.'' The biggest problem now, he said, is a lack of houses 
for sale. ``We've cleaned out the pantry,'' he said. The most sought-after 
type of property in Stowe these days, he said, is a contemporary Vermont 
farmhouse, which has clapboards and an angled roof. ``It's like Norman 
Rockwell, but the windows are larger, and it is cathedralized inside, 
with an open conversation area from the living room to the kitchen,'' 
he said. The old houses in the village are less popular, he said, 
because although they are quaint, they are ``rabbits' warrens of small 
rooms.'' While people may initially be drawn to Stowe by the skiing, 
he said, it is a year-round resort where the local shops are busier 
in spring, summer and fall than they are in the winter. A similar 
evolution has occurred in the Hamptons, where restaurants no longer 
shut down in the winter and social life no longer stops after Labor 
Day. ``It's not a seasonal resort anymore,'' said Frank Newbold, a 
vice president of Sotheby's International Realty and manager of the 
East Hampton office. For the last few years, Newbold has been renting 
houses in the fall, from September through December, ``when you don't 
have to wait in line to buy a tomato,'' and when a house within walking 
distance of the beach that would be $25,000 for August is only $2,000 
a month, he said. Although Newbold used to find that his busiest times 
were in the spring and September, spring is now far more important, 
he said. Wall Street people in New York receive their bonuses in January 
and February, so they are ready to shop seriously in the spring. By 
September, and especially this fall, they may not be so certain of 
their future economic status, and they wait for the next bonus. So 
people who shop for houses in the fall may have a better chance of 
getting a good deal, he said, because there are fewer buyers to compete 
with and some sellers want to unload their properties before winter 
begins. The recent volatility of the stock market, he said, has not 
affected prices of the better properties, but it has brought out people 
who are apparently hoping that this is the time to find a deal. ``The 
prices are absolutely the same'' in the prime areas, he said, although 
in less prestigious sections, prices have fallen by about 5 percent, 
in a ``little bit of a wave of reality.'' In the first part of the 
summer, with the stock market booming, brokers were willing to put 
on high prices, thinking they might get them. But how, he said, ``we 
are encouraging people to be more realistic.'' Litchfield County, 
the wealthy northwest corner of Connecticut, is also finding relatively 
little impact from the stock market, brokers said. It's a place that 
likes to think of itself as the un-Hamptons, as restrained and refined 
as the Hamptons are showy. Prices in Litchfield County have gone up 
about 10 percent in the last year, and sales have been brisk, said 
Carolyn Klemm, whose company, Klemm Realty in Washington, Conn., recently 
sold the Warren home of the best-selling romance novelist Barbara 
Taylor Bradford for $2.5 million. Even after the stock market collapse 
in 1987, she said, ``we only had a few deals that went south.'' This 
year, she said, ``We've had our best year ever.'' Similarly pretty 
country views, with lower prices, are found in Dutchess and Columbia 
counties in New York, on the east side of the Hudson River. Sales 
have also been booming, but prices are not as high as they were before 
the stock market collapse of 1987, brokers said. Susan Lott, a broker 
in Chatham who covers most of Columbia County, said that houses for 
sale include $123,000 for a ``dollhouse'' on a pretty half acre in 
North Chatham and $345,000 for a center-hall Colonial with four bedrooms 
and an artist's studio on seven acres in Spencertown. Sometimes, she 
said, she will try to tempt New Yorkers to go farther out, into Rensselaer 
County, for instance, where prices are lower, but most people do not 
want to drive more than two hours. The Taconic Parkway ends in Columbia 
County, in Chatham, she said, and ``people don't want to go that extra 
distance.'' Andrea Gabel said that most of the houses she sells in 
Columbia County go for between $250,000 and $600,000 and that some 
customers are becoming frustrated by the lack of properties available. 
``We have so many buyers we're selling out of everything,'' she said. 
Not much is being built, either, in part, she said, because many New 
Yorkers, when they have a chance to buy land contiguous to their properties, 
snap it up so they can be sure it doesn't end up being developed. 
Less expensive country retreats have always been found on the west 
side of the Hudson River, around Woodstock and New Paltz, and west, 
in the Catskill Mountains. While there are certainly pockets of wealth 
in those areas, there are generally many lovely houses to be found 
for less. But in those areas, inventory is low because sales have 
been strong, brokers said. Gale Brownlee, a broker at Century 21 Eichhorn 
Realty in the center of Woodstock, said that many self-employed people 
are buying houses in the area because it is two hours from New York 
and they can easily go into the city when they need to for business. 
They are attracted by the town's history as an artists colony, Ms. 
Brownlee said. Usually, she said, they start out by saying they want 
seclusion _ but what they really want is reasonable privacy and quiet. 
George Danskin, a broker at Julien J. Studley Inc. in nearby New Paltz, 
said it was still possible to buy a cottage near the Mohonk Preserve 
for $125,000. Danskin said he recently sold an 18th-century stone 
house with great valley views, on two and a half acres, for $185,000. 
``People can establish a foothold here and have a weekend retreat 
and not have a king's ransom to pay'' and still be just 90 miles from 
the city, he said. Recreation, not chic stores, draws people to Ulster 
County, he said. In fact, Danskin said, ``I don't think you can get 
off the Thruway without a bicycle rack on your car.'' Farther west, 
in Delaware County, about three hours from New York City, there is 
fishing in the summer, and skiing in the winter at Belleayre. Prices 
have gone up, but they are still relatively low, brokers said. A ski 
house with three bedrooms and two baths, on five acres, is for sale 
at $125,000. A three-bedroom log house on 10 acres just sold for $154,000, 
while a farmhouse with a barn and a pond on 46 acres went for $240,000, 
according to Ed Ludde, a salesperson at Terra Real Estate in Margaretville. 
Thomas Anderson, a senior vice president at Sotheby's International 
Realty, is one of the few real-estate specialists who have a perspective 
on a large geographic area. He supervises an 11-state region, from 
New York, New Jersey and Connecticut down through Kentucky and Tennessee. 
He has been struck in recent years by the number of sales he sees 
at the higher end of the price range for vacation homes. ``I have 
been surprised at how many of these more-expensive homes are secondary 
homes,'' he said. The buyers are younger than in the past, as young 
as 28, he said. He is just as struck, he said, by the lack of impact, 
so far, of the volatility in the financial world. ``The stock market 
is bouncy,'' he said. ``The real estate market is not.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>