<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0259 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The pleasures of their lives were admittedly simple _ baking peanut 
butter cookies, growing tiny plants in window boxes, making the occasional 
trip to the mall. Others were no longer able to bake or even read, 
and contented themselves in wheelchairs on the boardwalk. While some 
people generally regard nursing homes as depressingly unwelcome places, 
many of the residents of city-run Neponsit Health Care Center in the 
Rockaways, poor and chronically sick, got their first taste of stability 
and community at the beachfront nursing home. But that stability and 
community came apart in September when the city suddenly closed the 
home and scattered its 282 residents throughout the health care system, 
where 53 are still waiting for permanent homes. Two have since died 
and one is missing, and advocates are embroiled in a fierce debate 
with the city's Health and Hospitals Corp. over whether the move hastened 
those developments. Some former residents, like the many Alzheimer's 
patients, are simply bewildered. Others, who had grown accustomed 
to a life peppered with daily activity, are simply bored. Others still, 
especially those who came to Neponsit from considerably worse places, 
fear for their future. When the city hospitals agency closed the 85-year-old 
home on Sept. 10, officials said its deteriorating buildings had been 
made unsafe by a Labor Day storm. And last week, saying that the estimated 
$51 million price tag on repairs was too high, they announced that 
the home would be closed and bulldozed and the land turned into a 
park. On Friday, the Legal Aid Society and the law firm Kaye, Scholer, 
Feirman, Hays &AMP; Handler succeeded in enjoining the city from demolishing 
the center, pending a Wednesday hearing. The closing has attracted 
the attention of regulators, politicians and advocates for the elderly 
and poor, all of whom have criticized the way the residents were moved 
_ on the fly and without many of their belongings _ and the way they 
have been housed since. The Federal Health Care Finance Administration, 
which runs Medicare and Medicaid, is fining the city $3,050 a day 
until all the residents are placed in long-term homes. At the same 
time, local politicians and advocates say the closing underscores 
a lack of commitment to medical care for the poor as the city tries 
to cut costs and make the sprawling public hospital system pay for 
itself in an increasingly cutthroat health care market. For their 
part, city officials say they remain committed to the public health 
system, but simply could not let Neponsit stand. ``I had to balance 
the potential for the stress associated with the sudden change in 
environment with the real risk of physical harm to residents, employees 
and visitors,'' said Dr. Luis Marcos, president of Health and Hospitals 
Corp. And the corporation is fighting the fine, contending that the 
state and federal governments have not assisted in the problem as 
promised. Like the city's four other long-term care centers, Neponsit 
was something akin to a shelter for the poor and sick, people who 
could not live on their own but had nowhere else to go. Many were 
only in their 50s but had cancer or other disabling diseases. Marie 
Converse, who said she was beaten so badly by a former roommate that 
she required spinal surgery and depends on a wheelchair, built herself 
a social system at Neponsit based around resident committees that 
would decide things like how the laundry would be done or what would 
be served for dinner. Hermi Miranda, who had lived on the couches 
of friends in upper Manhattan for several years before being diagnosed 
as having stomach cancer, loved the privacy of his own room, to which 
he could retreat when he was feeling poorly. ``Neponsit is beautiful,'' 
Miranda said. ``We lived there together as friends, and now everybody 
is separated. All because the building has some little cracks.'' Interviews 
with several residents and Neponsit workers paint a picture of 48 
hours in September of confusion and misery during which elderly and 
sick people were given a few hours notice to pack their belongings 
into plastic bags before they were shepherded to a bus to go to hospitals 
or other temporary nursing homes. Some went by ambulance, still in 
sleeping gowns. Most of the patients found their first stop at a public 
hospital like Elmhurst Hospital Center or Bellevue Hospital Center, 
and that is where things started to unravel. Karen Lee's father, who 
has suffered for many years from Alzheimer's disease, was moved to 
Bellevue. ``The first thing I heard was that he fell out of a chair 
and bumped his head,'' she said. ``Now, he has bruises all over his 
legs.'' His next stop was the Susan Smith McKinney Nursing Home in 
Brooklyn, where many patients were transferred. The state and the 
Federal Health Care Finance Administration have contended that residents 
were placed in homes where there is not enough proper care or appropriate 
recreation. The state Department of Health's report on the relocation 
of the residents ticked off dozens of infractions, ranging from a 
lack of rehabilitation therapy to Jewish residents' having no place 
to go for Rosh Hashanah. But city hospitals officials say they long 
ago asked the Federal Health Care Finance Administration and the state 
for assistance that never came. This led to difficulties finding appropriate 
placement for residents, they say. Officials at the federal agency 
say that is not the case, and that they were not even informed that 
Neponsit was being evacuated until after the fact. Neponsit's residents 
referred to one another as family, and their active recreational lives 
gave them succor in their less-than-perfect circumstances. They read 
the Bible and Patti LaBelle's autobiography in a book club. There 
were weekend barbecues and daily meetings to cook, paint, garden and 
make crafts. On a recent day, Miss Converse was found sitting in her 
wheelchair in her room at Susan McKinney, listening to a Sony Walkman. 
``I've got to get out of here,'' she said. ``This is a nice place, 
but there is nothing to do. I had more freedom over at Neponsit. I 
can't get around here, and I get bored. I finally have a little wood 
project but there is really nothing to do.'' Rockaway residents, who 
will get a park out of Neponsit's destruction, seem to be sympathetic 
to its former residents. ``The whole neighborhood suspects an ulterior 
motive,'' said Jose Fernandez, 68, a retiree whose back yard faces 
the center. ``Moving these people in the middle of the night was a 
very underhanded way of doing things.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>