<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0221 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After devoting 30 years to building upscale homes, Toll Brothers, 
based in this Philadelphia suburb, has formed a real estate investment 
trust to build and manage apartments, offices and stores in and near 
its communities. The REIT _ Toll Brothers Realty Trust _ broke ground 
last April on its first venture, Dulles Greene, an 800-apartment complex 
on a 55-acre site in the Washington suburb of Herndon, Va., in Fairfax 
County. In adjacent Loudoun County, it has embarked on another venture, 
a planned community on a 1,045-acre site called Belmont Country Club, 
which is expected to include 1.8 million square feet of office space, 
200,000 square feet of retail space and 1,900 residential units, as 
well as a private golf course. ``The nasty part of the home building 
business is that when you sell the house, you're done,'' said Robert 
Toll, chief executive officer at Toll Brothers. ``We've wound up with 
a lot of ground for apartment and office projects. There are several 
million square feet of space to build. And some of these related businesses 
are in lockstep with the development, so we've gotten into the security 
and landscaping businesses. We can put in landscaping and charge less 
than a contractor.'' Toll Brothers, which posted sales of $971 million 
last year in 16 states, created its REIT by turning over to it the 
ownership of developable land it has acquired over several years. 
Instead of selling off some of the land not zoned for homes, as has 
been customary, Toll has chosen to develop all of his land and capture 
fees for development services and rental income from retail and office 
projects. As a REIT, the commercial venture can avoid corporate taxes 
as long as 95 percent of the trust's earnings are distributed to shareholders 
as dividends. Large-scale development can then be financed by shareholders 
instead of banks or insurance companies. The shares are usually, but 
not necessarily, offered to the public. A REIT has great flexibility 
in executing its business plan, said Gerard Sweeney, president of 
Brandywine Realty Trust, a REIT based in Newtown Square, Pa., that 
owns about 18 million square feet of office and industrial properties 
in the mid-Atlantic region. Many publicly held development companies 
consider this form of financing more secure than the institutional 
financing they were receiving a decade ago, Sweeney said. At that 
time, many banks were unable to sustain projects they had financed, 
undermining development ventures in their early stages, he said. On 
the other hand, when share prices are weak, REIT's may find the door 
to capital closed and continued growth difficult. Toll Brothers is 
not alone among publicly held development companies that have diversified 
to find income from new sources. Some have gone overseas seeking new 
customers or into new businesses at home. Most new ventures support 
the core home-building operation _ landscaping for new homes, pest 
control services, home-security installation. Then there are subsidiaries 
or related companies to provide financial or insurance services, such 
as mortgage lending, mortgage insurance and home equity loans. Last 
fall Lennar Corp., of Miami, spun off its real estate-investment business 
and combined its mortgage-underwriting and building operations with 
Pacific Greystone, a California builder. That merger catapulted Lennar 
into the California markets, beyond its traditional bases in Texas 
and Florida. Centex Homes, based in Dallas, entered the manufactured-housing 
industry in 1997 to serve its own projects and supply other builders. 
It also owns Texas Trust Savings Bank and Centex Mortgage Co., among 
the country's largest originators of mortgages for new-home buyers. 
Some builders have their own security, landscaping or extermination 
staffs. Others, such as Pulte Corp., contract with service providers, 
preferring to rely on existing companies from which they can gain 
volume discounts, said James Zeumer, vice president for investor and 
corporate relations at Pulte, the nation's largest home builder with 
$2.54 billion in overall revenue last year. ``Home builders are looking 
at how to leverage the relationship with the consumer and to develop 
other revenue streams that are less cyclical,'' said Zeumer. Pulte's 
income from home loans to buyers represented only 5 percent of its 
revenue last year, Zeumer said, although it is growing internationally 
with loans to buyers in Mexico and Puerto Rico. The Toll Brothers 
Realty Trust is currently a nonpublic investment vehicle in which 
Toll Brothers expects to hold a 40 percent stake, with a pension fund 
taking the rest. The trust's initial capitalization provided money 
to pursue construction on existing land, plus acquisition of other 
sites and buildings. Toll said he hoped to offer shares to the public 
within five years, after the portfolio reaches the scale of ``a few 
hundred million dollars.'' Directing the trust is Kevin McAndrews, 
who previously worked for Trammell Crow, the Dallas-based development 
company, and later formed McAndrews Realty Advisers, a consulting 
firm for developers in the Washington metropolitan area. Both the 
Dulles Greene and Belmont Country Club sites were purchased by Toll 
Brothers Realty Trust from a bank that had foreclosed on a previous 
developer, he said. Dulles Greene is a gated rental community with 
tennis courts, a business center and pool. It is on Innovation Avenue 
at Route 28 in Herndon, three minutes from the Washington-Dulles International 
Airport. The first residents in the 390-unit first phase of the development, 
which consists of garden apartments or town-house rentals on 22 acres, 
are scheduled to move in this weekend, , said Webb Koschene, vice 
president of Toll Brothers. Belmont Country Club is on Route 7 near 
Leesburg, Va., on land once owned by the Lee family, which included 
two signers of the Declaration of Independence. The 1790 manor house 
is being restored as part of the golf course clubhouse. The first 
houses to rise on the site will be built and sold by Toll Brothers, 
not the trust, McAndrews said. In the future, McAndrews said, the 
trust may pursue projects independently of Toll Brothers. ``The REIT 
has the flexibility to acquire existing properties or land on which 
to build,'' he said. ``We're focusing on markets where we already 
know the area.'' In the residential business, the two companies may 
work together or in partnership with other builders, he added. Real 
estate investment trusts are just one factor in the re-emergence of 
large-scale development nationwide. The home construction boom of 
recent years, the lowest borrowing costs for builders in a decade 
and the growth of networked nationwide computer systems have all helped 
large builders grow geographically and economically, said Gopal Aluwalia, 
director of research at the National Association of Home Builders 
in Washington. ``The level of cyclicality in the industry has been 
reduced,'' he said. ``In previous years, if a homebuilder faced a 
slowdown they would shift to light commercial work or remodeling and 
renovation. But builders are looking to enter new markets and find 
different sources of revenue.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>