<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0232 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Back in 1996, Ohio State clinched a Rose Bowl berth here in Memorial 
Stadium, sending a wave of Buckeyes fans on to the field to tear down 
the south goal post. Insulted, Hoosiers players sprinted to the other 
end, circled the north post and dared anyone to come get them. But 
Indiana needed to take more than umbrage to keep the Buckeyes' offense 
out of the end zone Saturday. Ohio State rolled over the Hoosiers, 
38-7. On Halloween afternoon, Ohio State came dressed as a football 
powerhouse. But the Buckeyes' costume showed the occasional tear in 
the form of 124 yards in penalties and a fumble near the goal line, 
that only bolstered critics' arguments that a soft schedule and some 
lackadaisical lapses in play earned them the No. 2 spot in the new 
Bowl Championship Series ranking behind UCLA. But it was hard not 
to be impressed by the array of weapons Ohio State deployed to maul 
a much improved Indiana team. Ohio State quarterback Joe Germain passed 
for more than 300 yards for the fourth straight game (the fifth time 
this season) and threw for three touchdowns. Wide receiver David Boston, 
a Biletnikoff award candidate, returned a punt 70 yards for a touchdown 
and caught two passes for scores on a 110-yard day. His teammate Dee 
Miller grabbed 11 passes for 159 yards. Tailback Michael Wiley ran 
for 80 yards and a touchdown. And the Buckeyes' defense proved as 
persistent and painful as the most lethal strain of killer bees by 
swarming all over Indiana quarterback Antwaan Randle El. The redshirt 
freshman quarterback titillated the capacity crowd of 52,049 with 
jitterbug moves down the line of scrimmage as he ran the option. With 
eight seconds left in the first half, he rolled left and heaved a 
37-yard touchdown pass across his body to Levron Williams that gave 
Indiana its first points and threatened to make a game of it at 21-7. 
But Randle El _ who threw for 218 yards but rushed for only 27 _ will 
have to take his revenge out on the Buckeyes on the basketball court 
this winter, when he will try to become the first Indiana player to 
start in both sports as a member of Bob Knight's team. He looked like 
a scout team quarterback Saturday compared to Ohio State's Germaine 
who, in stealth fashion, is piling up yardage and insinuating himself 
into the Heisman Trophy race. Germaine was a junior college transfer, 
who worked his way into a part-time starting role last year, and this 
year has become Ohio State's most valuable player. He threw for 351 
yards on 31-of-45 passing Saturday, leading scoring drives of 50, 
75, 69, 43 and 60 yards. But the most telling statistic was his 7-for-11 
accuracy on third-down passes. If there was any doubt that the Buckeyes 
have been transformed into a passing team and Germaine is among the 
best quarterbacks in the nation, it was dispelled on a 75-yard scoring 
drive late in the first half that put away the Hoosiers for good. 
Germaine went to the air 7 times, completing 5, including a crucial 
third and 10 pass to Miller for 16 yards. On fourth and less than 
a yard on the Hoosiers' 6-yard line, Cooper sold Indiana the old Woody 
Hayes 3-yards-and-a-cloud-of-dust but gave them Houdini-In-The-Air. 
Germaine took the snap, tucked the ball behind his back with his right 
hand and offered tailback Joe Montgomery his empty hand. The Hoosiers, 
their fans _ even Coach Cam Cameron _ followed Montgomery into the 
pile. But Germaine tossed a soft pass to John Lumpkin wide open in 
the end zone. Cooper relied on Germaine's play action passing again 
in the first drive of the second half, and this time the quarterback 
turned a third and goal into a 3-yard touchdown pass to Boston in 
the flat to go up by 28-7. On their next scoring drive, Cooper crossed 
up the Hoosiers again by going over them rather than through them. 
On third-and-1, inside Indiana's 25-yard line, Wiley threw a halfback 
option to Lumpkin to keep the drive alive. Special teams put the Buckeyes 
on the board first when David Boston picked up a low punt on one bounce 
at his own 30 and found the right side of field rolled out like a 
red carpet. The Buckeyes' return team sealed out the Hoosiers so effectively 
that Boston didn't even see a red jersey until he stiff-armed punter 
Drew Hagan at the Indiana 28-yard line and skipped into the end zone. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>