<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0162 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With a bus trip across upstate New York and a visit to a bustling 
kosher delicatessen on Manhattan's Lower East Side, Rep. Charles Schumer 
and Sen. Alfonse D'Amato wrestled through the final weekend of their 
campaign Saturday, closing out a contest notable for its absence of 
discussion on the policy differences between them. Schumer rolled 
confidently in his Blue Bird motorcoach through some of the most Republican 
parts of New York _ upstate _ while his campaign released a new television 
advertisement that sharply attacks D'Amato's ethics, describing him 
as ``the most investigated senator in New York history.'' D'Amato 
campaigned in his own back yard, Nassau County, where he assailed 
Schumer for ``voting against the interests of middle-class families,'' 
before driving into New York City to have lunch with former Mayor 
Edward Koch at the Second Avenue Deli. Both candidates seemed inclined 
to let their commercials attend to their harsher attacks _ which is 
not unusual for the end of a campaign _ as they set out on a bright 
and chilly Halloween day to lay out the closing arguments of what 
has become one of the nation's most competitive races. ``I said it 
before and I'll say it again: You may not agree with me on everything,'' 
D'Amato said as he heaped slabs of corned beef onto his plate as television 
cameras jostled for a shot at the famous delicatessen. ``Not even 
Mamma does. Not even the great mayor does. But one thing they know: 
Al D'Amato gets it done.'' Schumer, wearing a jacket and tie as he 
stood next to Democratic Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the state's 
senior senator, for a rally at the Irish Center in South Buffalo, 
returned to the theme that has defined his campaign since he declared 
victory in the Democratic primary on Sept. 15. ``New Yorkers deserve 
a senator who we can trust, a senator who will not embarrass this 
state,'' the Brooklyn Democrat said. ``And whether the yardstick is 
trust or whether the yardstick is delivering on matters of critical 
importance to working families, Al D'Amato does not measure up.'' 
Both sides view the outcome as impossible to predict. Thus, the question 
of who will actually vote on Tuesday _ and how to assure that their 
supporters turn out _ became a matter of consuming interest to both 
sides. The Democrats seemed particularly concerned, given years of 
declining turnout in New York City and uncertainty about how, or if, 
President Clinton's difficulties in Washington would affect the turnout 
in high-profile races like this one. Clinton spoke by phone to about 
150 party workers and district leaders Saturday in a conference call 
arranged by Judith Hope, the state's Democratic Party chairwoman. 
``Chuck is looking like a winner, talking like a winner, and we have 
to make sure he is a winner,'' said Clinton, who campaigned twice 
in New York on behalf of Schumer. The day's recriminations captured 
the tone of a campaign that even the candidates' supporters have come 
to describe as largely devoid of a discussion of issues _ even though 
D'Amato, a Republican seeking a fourth term, and Schumer hold strongly 
divergent views on issues including fighting crime, abortion rights 
and regulating the nation's welfare system. Neither man had delivered 
a single major policy speech in the 46 days of the general election 
race through Saturday. Of the two, only Schumer had offered any new 
proposals on what he would do in the Senate _ making college tuition 
tax deductible for most families. And with few exceptions, their television 
advertisements in the second-most expensive Senate race in the nation's 
history have been attacks, with D'Amato assailing Schumer for missing 
votes in Congress, and Schumer consistently calling D'Amato a liar. 
In interviews, advisers to both candidates offered the same response 
when asked about the tone of the campaign: They blamed the other side. 
``It's not only the case that he has been more negative _ it's that 
we have been more substantive,'' said Howard Wolfson, who is Schumer's 
spokesman. Kieran Mahoney, who is one of D'Amato's senior advisers, 
asserted that D'Amato tried to discuss issues of concern to New Yorkers. 
``Sen. D'Amato has consistently laid out his plans and his positions 
on the issues, and Chuck Schumer has consistently attempted to evade 
them,'' Mahoney said. ``And I don't blame him.'' In truth, several 
analysts noted, as a matter of politics, it was in D'Amato's interest 
to avoid discussing many issues in this campaign _ as he has in past 
campaigns _ because some of his views are not in keeping with those 
of most New Yorkers. For almost all of October, D'Amato built his 
campaign around attacking Schumer for missing votes while he was running 
for Senate _ a line of attack he has moved away from after the disclosure 
that he did the same thing when he first ran for Senate in 1980. By 
design or not, D'Amato's emphasis on those attacks meant that he tended 
not to discuss some of the differences he has with Schumer. And Saturday, 
D'Amato repeatedly suggested that New Yorkers look beyond his views 
and instead consider his record and seniority as a member of the majority 
party in Congress. ``We're going to carry this campaign to every region 
letting them know I make a difference in their live, that I've been 
fighting for them,'' D'Amato said at the Nassau Coliseum. Schumer 
has sought to exploit some issues on which D'Amato might be vulnerable: 
For example, he has attacked the senator for opposing gun control 
and abortion rights, and for supporting measures pushed by House Speaker 
Newt Gingrich that would have resulted in cuts in social spending 
programs, including education and Medicare. But Schumer's campaign 
has been built around an effort to question D'Amato's character _ 
``Too many lies for too long'' _ and through the last weekend, it 
continued to pound D'Amato with advertisements questioning his ethics. 
D'Amato last week raised a 1980 investigation into whether Schumer 
used state workers for his first congressional campaign _ he was never 
charged with any wrongdoing. Schumer responded with an advertisement 
that is hard-hitting even by the standards of this campaign: assailing 
D'Amato ethics by recounting, with the use of newspaper headlines, 
virtually every question that has ever been raised about his ethics, 
including the time he was faulted by the Senate Ethics Committee for 
allowing his brother, Armand, to use the senator's stationery. ``Desperate 
Al D'Amato just won't stop his negative attacks and distortion,'' 
the announcer says. ``Now, D'Amato, the most investigated senator 
in New York, who was rebuked by the Senate ethics committee, who has 
a 30-year pattern of ethical transgressions, who has embarrassed us 
again and again, is dredging up 18-year-old charges against Chuck 
Schumer.'' The advertisements were very much in keeping with what 
has been the strategy of his campaign this whole fall: To let none 
of D'Amato's attacks go unanswered. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>