<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0122 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was the gruesome pictures of bodies and bones that caused Pierre-Richard 
Prosper to give up a comfortable lawyer's life in Los Angeles for 
the rigors of Rwanda, a war-ravaged country with unreliable electricity 
and water. Prosper, a New York-bred lawyer, said he wanted to ``make 
a difference,'' and he did. At the United Nations court established 
for the victims of the mass killings in Rwanda in 1994, Prosper, 35, 
became the first prosecutor to get a verdict of genocide in an international 
tribunal. After a 14-month courtroom battle, he secured the conviction 
of Jean-Paul Akayesu, who was mayor of the Rwandan village of Taba 
when 2,000 people of the Tutsi minority were killed there. Prosper 
also succeeded in persuading the judges to include rape among the 
crimes that constitute genocide. This is the first time rape has been 
recognized as an instrument of genocide in international law, and 
the Rwandan former mayor was held responsible for the rapes committed 
by militia members under his charge. Prosper's odyssey began in 1994 
in Los Angeles, where he worked in the district attorney's office. 
A colleague who had just come back from a State Department mission 
to Rwanda showed slides of corpses rotting in mass graves, victims 
of mass killings. ``I was moved,'' Prosper remembered. The colleague, 
who had a wife and children, did not want to move to Africa to work 
with the new Rwanda tribunal, but told Prosper that he would be perfect 
for the job. The son of doctors who moved from Haiti to Saratoga County, 
N.Y., Prosper studied romance languages at Boston College and got 
his law degree at Pepperdine University. In the Los Angeles district 
attorney's office, he was promoted to the special unit prosecuting 
gang members in South Central and East Los Angeles, two of the city's 
toughest neighborhoods. ``I remember one day having 22 cases on my 
desk, all homicides and double homicides,'' he recalled. He, too, 
was reluctant to move to Africa, but he first went on a six-week mission 
to study Rwanda's criminal justice system. What he found was a country 
in crisis, with more than 10 percent of the population's having been 
killed and 30,000 suspects awaiting trial in overcrowded jails. ``I 
realized it was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to make a difference 
in the world,'' he said, explaining why he finally decided to put 
aside his doubts and move there. Having seen ``ruthlessness on the 
streets of America,'' as Prosper put it, helped prepare him for what 
he encountered in Rwanda. Except for the rape. During the three months 
of killing in Rwanda in the spring of 1994, thousands of women and 
girls were publicly gang-raped, often before being killed. ``It's 
a particularly cruel way of carrying out a genocide _ destroying the 
group by devaluing them in the eyes of the community,'' said James 
Stewart, a senior trial attorney with the Rwanda tribunal. ``Pierre 
felt very strongly that this kind of systematic rape was part of genocide. 
You can't overstate his contribution in that regard.'' Most of the 
women who survived the ordeal were terrified of traveling from their 
rural villages to neighboring Tanzania, where the tribunal is located, 
and on top of that could not bear to tell strangers in public how 
they had been violated. But Prosper, who speaks French, a major language 
in Rwanda, slowly won their confidence. When members of the prosecution 
team suggested appointing a woman attorney to question witnesses about 
the rapes, the victims refused and insisted that Prosper handle their 
testimony in court. The Rwanda tribunal has met criticism for disorganization 
and slowness, and Prosper has worked hard to convince skeptical Rwandans 
that it can deliver justice. After the Akayesu case was over, he traveled 
to Taba to tell villagers about the guilty verdict against their former 
mayor. When the tribunal sentenced Akayesu to life in prison, Prosper 
began packing his bags for Washington, where he says he hopes to find 
a job that will allow him to continue promoting the rule of law in 
other countries. At his send-off here last month, colleagues spoke 
movingly about what Prosper had already accomplished. ``Those of us 
who are still alive, or at least not completely dead, we thank you,'' 
a Rwandan man who worked as an interpreter at the tribunal said. One 
woman brought a message from the people of Taba: ``Even if you go, 
we will say that you have never left us.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>