<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0111 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The National Institutes of Health used to feel like a bucolic college 
campus. Now it is a giant construction project, with cranes and bulldozers 
erecting new laboratories, a new research hospital and a new center 
for vaccine research. The activity here is the tangible symbol of 
a huge new federal investment in biomedical research. Congress is 
providing far more money than President Clinton requested because 
congressional leaders of both parties have vowed to double the agency's 
budget over five years _ a process that began with the 1999 appropriations 
bill, which just became law. The institutes have always enjoyed respect 
on Capitol Hill. But lawmakers said they had increased the agency's 
budget more than usual because they believed that researchers were 
on the threshold of a new era. Discoveries in many fields _ especially 
genetics, neuroscience and cell biology _ promise to save lives and 
transform the practice of medicine in the next decade, they said. 
Congress provided $15.6 billion for the 1999 fiscal year, which began 
on Oct. 1, up from $13.6 billion in the prior year _ an increase of 
$2 billion, or 15 percent. That rate of increase, sustained and compounded 
over five years, would double the institutes' budget by the year 2003. 
The 322-acre campus of the institutes is a beehive of activity as 
construction crews reroute traffic, tear down trees, build new roads 
and excavate a maze of underground tunnels to deliver steam, water 
and electricity to the buildings. But scientists here receive just 
10 percent of the agency's budget. The rest is distributed to universities, 
medical schools, teaching hospitals and private nonprofit research 
institutes. Most of the money goes for basic research, to investigate 
fundamental properties of genes and cells, or to test new methods 
of treating diseases and disabling conditions. Among the priorities 
recommended by Congress are mapping the human genome, preventing Alzheimer's 
disease and finding better ways to detect ovarian cancer. Congress 
also provided $30 million this year for renovation and construction 
of biomedical research laboratories around the country. Sen. Tom Harkin 
of Iowa, the ranking Democrat on the appropriations subcommittee responsible 
for the National Institutes of Health, said he would seek much bigger 
increases for such construction spending in the next couple of years. 
He is likely to find allies among Republicans, including Sen. Arlen 
Specter of Pennsylvania, chairman of that subcommittee. ``The $2 billion 
increase for NIH is simply breathtaking,'' said Donna Shalala, secretary 
of health and human services. ``It's extraordinary, the single largest 
dollar increase in NIH history.'' In his budget request in February, 
Clinton sought a more modest increase, $1.14 billion, or 8.4 percent, 
which would have been financed through an increase in tobacco taxes. 
But Congress never approved the tobacco proposals. A congressional 
aide who works on the institutes' budget said the big increase this 
year resulted mainly from lobbying by public health groups and advocates 
concerned about specific diseases like breast cancer, AIDS, diabetes 
and Alzheimer's. These groups work closely with scientists and medical 
schools in lobbying Congress. ``NIH stood on the sidelines,'' said 
the congressional aide, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. ``NIH 
didn't lobby hard for this.'' In an interview last week, Dr. Harold 
Varmus, director of the National Institutes of Health, said: ``I'm 
a team player. We are part of the administration, and we supported 
the president's budget request. We don't have to advocate. We have 
advocates, very strong advocates, in the disease groups and professional 
organizations.'' In the last two years, the institutes' budget grew 
an average of 7 percent a year, and with that money the agency was 
able to prepare for the construction now under way. Clinton is directly 
responsible for one project, the five-story vaccine research center, 
being built at a cost of $29 million. In a speech at Morgan State 
University in Baltimore in May 1997, Clinton declared a national goal 
of developing an AIDS vaccine within 10 years. Much of the work to 
achieve that goal will take place at the center. Researchers there 
will also work on vaccines for other diseases like malaria and tuberculosis. 
Varmus, who won a Nobel Prize in 1989 for his research on cancer-causing 
genes, said he was pleased that Congress had generally resisted the 
temptation to earmark money for specific research projects at specific 
universities. The windfall comes just as the agency is trying to give 
patients and ordinary citizens a bigger voice in setting research 
priorities. The National Academy of Sciences gently chided the agency 
this summer, saying it had not sought enough public comment on these 
important decisions. Varmus said he was searching for ways to ``enhance 
public participation in NIH activities,'' as the academy recommended. 
While Congress did not dictate precisely how money should be spent 
in the new appropriations law, it did offer advice in a report that 
accompanied the legislation. Over the years, officials of the institutes 
have won the trust of lawmakers by closely following such recommendations 
whenever they could. This year, for example, Congress urged the institutes 
to support more research on progressive supranuclear palsy, a disabling 
condition similar to Parkinson's disease; Behcet's syndrome, a rare 
chronic inflammatory disorder, and brittle bone disease, an inherited 
condition that leaves people susceptible to fractures throughout their 
lives. The Senate Appropriations Committee initially earmarked $175 
million for prostate cancer research, a cause of great interest to 
the committee chairman, Sen. Ted Stevens, R-Alaska, who had surgery 
for prostate cancer in 1991. House and Senate negotiators dropped 
the explicit mandate. But their conference report says, ``NIH is strongly 
urged to make prostate cancer a top priority'' and to ``accelerate 
spending'' on the disease. Congress also urged the institutes to begin 
``a full-scale initiative'' to find ways of preventing Alzheimer's 
in people who, because of their family history or other factors, are 
likely to develop the illness. Over the objections of some government 
scientists, Congress this year upgraded the status and authority of 
a small unit at the institutes that studies alternative medicine, 
including acupuncture, chiropractic care and homeopathic remedies. 
It also urged Varmus to step up research on dietary supplements, including 
the possible value of chromium in fighting diabetes, and it said he 
should establish several new centers to highlight the benefits of 
``mind/body medicine.'' When Republicans took control of Congress 
in 1995, they skeptically scrutinized the institutes' budget and told 
scientists to expect substantial cuts, as part of the Republican effort 
to balance the federal budget. But Speaker Newt Gingrich of Georgia 
and other Republicans have become strong supporters of the agency, 
in part because they see it as an engine of economic growth. Moreover, 
they say, research financed by the institutes is extremely important 
to plant genetics and promises to increase the productivity of seeds 
and agriculture. Carl Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology Industry 
Organization, a trade group, welcomed the big increase in the agency's 
budget. He said many biotech companies had licensing arrangements 
that allowed them to develop prescription drug products using scientific 
discoveries made by the institutes and its grantees. The companies 
pay royalties to the government or the universities where the discoveries 
were made. ``This is a partnership between government and industry 
that really works,'' Feldbaum said. ``It's the envy of many other 
nations, to be able to take basic research and turn it into therapies 
and cures.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>