<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Sunday, Nov. 1: Until a 
few days ago, the possible impeachment of President Clinton was the 
campaign issue of which few dared speak. Republicans have been afraid 
to be seen exploiting the subject. Democratic candidates did not want 
to be seen defending the president or even standing near him, except 
in a few party strongholds. Both parties seemed to believe that voters 
wanted a respite from the scandal. Now, however, Republicans have 
injected the issue into several races, and Democrats have responded 
with ads calling for Congress to move on. There is some logic to putting 
Clinton back on the agenda. The 106th Congress, after all, will have 
no more urgent priority than deciding his fate. The Republicans designed 
the ads to energize their core vote in selected districts without 
stirring a backlash among the Democrats and independents they want 
to stay home. If the strategy helps produce a Republican gain greater 
than 20 seats, the hunkered-down Republican leadership will take that 
as a signal to push hard on impeachment. Democrats say that if they 
can hold the losses to 10 or so seats, Republicans will want House 
Speaker Newt Gingrich to resolve impeachment proceedings quickly, 
with a censure, before the State of the Union message in January. 
The Washington Post reported that Gingrich personally approved the 
last-minute commercials about the president's affair with Monica Lewinsky, 
and the speaker is under enormous pressure to prove to congressional 
Republicans that he has not overplayed their cards. Although Democrats 
are tormented by turnout worries and intramural squabbles about how 
to finance their congressional candidates, the party and Clinton's 
standing are not the shambles they might have been. Two and a half 
months ago, just after the president's grand jury appearance and his 
sullen television performance that evening, many Democratic lawmakers 
were hoping privately that he would resign to spare them what they 
feared would be a historic debacle at the polls in the fall. Now Clinton's 
approval ratings are as high as ever, and he scored political victories 
on the budget, the Middle East peace agreement and an apparent withdrawal 
of Serbian forces in Kosovo. Few speak any longer of a president unable 
to get things done at home or abroad. But the Democrats in Washington 
also know that there is little enthusiasm for this president, even 
among his supporters. Everyone remembers that in the 1974 election 
just after Watergate, the huge Democratic gains occurred less because 
of a swing among voters than a massive trend of Republican voters 
staying home. Moreover, the polls according Clinton high ratings for 
his job performance also show strong disapproval of his personal character. 
Except for New York and California, Clinton has been careful this 
campaign not to barnstorm the country for himself or the Democrats 
(though there have been plenty of fund-raisers). Ever the campaigner, 
Clinton is said to be chafing at his advisers' restrictions, but they 
believe the happy-warrior conduct would not be seen as consistent 
with his ``journey of atonement.'' The absence of a full debate about 
impeachment is not the only example of a detached and unsatisfying 
campaign, divorced from the issues. The candidates exchanged platitudes 
about abortion, gun control, adding teachers and enacting a patients' 
bill of rights. The next Congress will have to deal with nothing less 
than shoring up the global economy and devising a plan to save Social 
Security in the next generation, and to get to these issues, impeachment 
will have to be dealt with. The Republicans' own mixed feelings about 
engaging the issue on the campaign trail should tell them that the 
public wants the issue resolved. Similarly, Clinton's own bunkered 
existence should tell him that he should not try to tough it out, 
even if the Democrats perform respectably in the election. A move 
by Clinton to admit lying under oath, combined with a censure by Congress, 
is still the best way out of the presidential crisis. Through the 
poll numbers, that seems to be what the voters are saying as well. 
As for Clinton and Gingrich, they will be looking at another set of 
numbers _ their parties' gains or losses in Congress _ to decide whether 
to go to war or sue for peace. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>