<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0023 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Saturday, Oct. 31: Here 
are our endorsements for some competitive congressional races in Connecticut. 
1st District (Greater Hartford): Kevin O'Connor, a 31-year-old Wethersfield 
attorney who became a Republican less than three years ago, is giving 
the Democratic nominee, John Larson, a run for his money in this traditionally 
Democratic seat. With the harsh conservative rhetoric coming out of 
the majority party in the House of Representatives, it is hard to 
pass up an attractive moderate like O'Connor. But Larson, the former 
president pro tempore of the state Senate, is a good candidate too. 
He was one of those rare leaders in the state Legislature who had 
a vision that went beyond day-to-day politics, particularly when it 
came to issues regarding children. He was a chief proponent of family 
resource centers for preschoolers and the law guaranteeing workers 
unpaid leaves to take care of new babies or ailing family members. 
A moderate, Larson has demonstrated that he has the temperament and 
political skills to be effective, even if he is operating in the minority. 
O'Connor, on the other hand, has never held public office, or even 
taken an active part in community affairs. Voters have no clue how 
he would respond to the tugs and pressures of life in a Republican 
Congress, whose agenda is on many points contrary to the pro-city, 
socially moderate platform he adheres to. We hope O'Connor runs for 
office again, but in this contest, our endorsement goes to Larson. 
4th District (Greenwich to Bridgeport): Rep. Christopher Shays is 
not facing serious opposition. The Democratic nominee, Jonathan Kantrowitz, 
a businessman, bravely volunteered to run so that his party could 
provide voters with a choice. But we endorse Shays, and take this 
opportunity to praise his perseverance in the cause of cleaner politics, 
even in the face of strenuous opposition from the leaders of his own 
party. As sponsor of the Shays-Meehan campaign finance reform bill, 
Shays did what most people thought was impossible, forging a bipartisan 
coalition that passed legislation to limit the ability of big-money 
special interests to influence elections. The measure died in the 
Senate, but it will be back next year _ as, we hope, will Shays. 5th 
District (Danbury, Waterbury, Meriden and surrounding towns): Republicans 
have targeted the seat held by Rep. Jim Maloney, a first-term Democrat. 
Anticipating a tough re-election campaign, Maloney has voted for several 
Republican initiatives, including a proposed $80 billion tax cut, 
the impeachment inquiry and the ``partial birth'' abortion ban. We 
disagree with him on some of those issues, and we are also concerned 
about what seems at best a sloppy attitude toward campaign finance 
regulations. But we appreciate his good work on environmental bills, 
particularly his successful effort in concert with Shays to clean 
up polluted industrial sites. He has also worked hard to improve constituent 
services. His opponent, state Sen. Mark Nielsen, has run an aggressive 
campaign. But he has failed to demonstrate that he could represent 
the district better than the incumbent. We endorse Maloney for re-election. 
6th District (Northwest Connecticut): This race is a rematch between 
the longtime Republican incumbent, Nancy Johnson, and Charlotte Koskoff, 
the feisty Democratic activist who almost unseated her in 1996 by 
stressing Ms. Johnson's disappointing performance as chairwoman of 
the House Ethics Committee during its investigation of Speaker Newt 
Gingrich. Along with Ms. Koskoff, we remain dismayed by Ms. Johnson's 
role in the Gingrich case, beginning with her inexcusable dawdling 
in appointing a special counsel and ending with her unwillingness 
to insist that Gingrich pay with his own funds the fine the House 
levied along with a reprimand. But Ms. Johnson's tenure on the Ethics 
Committee ended almost two years ago, and this term has provided numerous 
reminders of the thoughtful, bipartisan approach to legislating that 
has normally been her hallmark. She plays a particularly valuable 
role as a senior Republican moderate trying to counter the instincts 
of a right-wing GOP leadership on social issues like welfare reform 
and abortion. The case for Ms. Johnson is bolstered by a practical 
consideration. In light of Barbara Kennelly's departure from Congress 
to run for governor, Ms. Johnson's defeat would leave Connecticut 
without a senior representative on the Ways and Means Committee, leaving 
the state at a real disadvantage in the competition for federal dollars. 
Impressed as we are by Ms. Koskoff's energy and knowledge of the issues, 
we endorse Ms. Johnson. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>