<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0218 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ah, fall in New York, when the leaves turn, the apples ripen and legislators' 
thoughts turn to a pay raise. Not that anyone will say so openly, 
of course. Senate and Assembly members have plenty of distractions 
these days, what with running for re-election and watching the races 
for governor, U.S. senator, comptroller and attorney general. Yet 
the subject that keeps cropping up in conversations with legislators 
is a pay raise, albeit on background, off the record and every other 
way that won't have anyone's name attached. In Albany, it seems, the 
love that dare not speak its name is the lust for a larger paycheck. 
``It should be a subject that people ought to be able to talk about 
intelligently, that isn't taboo,'' said Assemblyman Richard Brodsky, 
a Westchester County Democrat. ``Instead, it's like talking about 
sex in 1954.'' Lawmakers fear that talk of higher salaries will anger 
voters. They also worry that being too aggressive on the issue will 
anger Gov. George Pataki, who has quashed proposed raises in the past. 
Legislators earn a base salary of $57,500 a year, plus stipends handed 
out by the leaders of the two houses that raise the average to more 
than $66,000. The salaries of the state's elected officials and department 
heads have not changed since 1988. For several years, legislators 
have quietly clamored for an increase, a call that gains greater urgency 
every two years, just after they have stood for re-election and will 
not have to face voters for another two years. But the issue is of 
more than mere pecuniary interest. A raise is often held out, by both 
legislators and aides to the governor, as possible trade bait. In 
other words, the Legislature might be willing to give Pataki something 
it had resisted in the past, in return for his approval of higher 
salaries. The most frequently mentioned candidate is charter schools, 
specialized schools that operate outside the usual constraints and 
hierarchy of a school district. Also, Democrats in the Legislature 
contend that some of their colleagues are refraining from public attacks 
on Pataki and from ardent campaigning for his Democratic opponent, 
Peter Vallone, for fear that the governor will retaliate after the 
election by quashing a raise once again. ``The spineless factor here 
is very high, and no one wants to be tagged as the guy who got a pay 
raise killed by sticking it to the governor,'' said one Democratic 
Assembly member from New York City. And what has that member said 
publicly about Pataki lately, or done for Vallone? ``Umm,'' he said, 
``give me a minute.'' The salary issue rests in Pataki's hands, and 
although he has said repeatedly that he sees no need for a raise, 
he has not ruled one out, either. In the absence of actual negotiations 
on the subject, that has left legislators parsing his public statements 
with the care once given to Kremlin missives, finding subtle clues 
that may or may not be products of their imaginations. Recently, when 
asked about a raise, the governor told The Daily News, ``I would not 
support it.'' But legislators were quick to note that he did not use 
the word ``veto,'' and speculated that he might allow a bill to become 
law without his signature. Of course, the people making such guesses 
had never discussed the subject with Pataki. A pay-raise bill would 
also increase salaries for the governor and the lieutenant governor, 
the comptroller, the attorney general and department heads. Salaries 
for aides to the governor are set separately and have seen regular 
increases, with many of them topping $100,000 a year. Though he opposes 
a pay increase, Pataki has said he cannot support his family on his 
$130,000 state salary, and that this is why he gives speeches at a 
fee of $17,000 each. Lt. Gov. Betsy McCaughey Ross, Comptroller H. 
Carl McCall and Attorney General Dennis Vacco are paid $110,000 each. 
Assembly Democrats say that Speaker Sheldon Silver has been particularly 
cautious not to offend the governor while the issue is hanging over 
his head. Silver has refused recent requests to talk to reporters 
about the governor's record, and his office did not return calls on 
the subject of a raise. Two years ago, legislators in both parties 
accused Silver of fumbling a chance at a pay increase in a squabble 
with Pataki over unrelated matters. And they say that if Silver is 
blamed for losing it again, his hold on the leadership will be undermined. 
Other factors add to the pressure on Silver to deliver a raise. Most 
of the Assembly Democrats are from New York City, where the cost of 
living is highest, and because of the vagaries of the stipend system, 
Assembly Democrats are the lowest-paid legislators, on average. And 
a serious case of paycheck envy took hold last year, when the salaries 
of California's state legislators, already the highest in the nation, 
jumped to $99,000. Republicans are also lobbying for a raise _ though 
perhaps not with the same energy as the Democrats _ and they, too, 
are afraid to say so. Last year, Joseph Bruno, the Senate majority 
leader, disavowed authorship of a proposal to tie salaries to the 
cost of living, producing annual increases. When asked whose idea 
it was, if not his, Bruno, 69, said: ``I can't recollect. I'm getting 
early senility.'' For many Democrats, the matter of stipends, doled 
out for leadership positions and committee chairmanships, adds to 
their discontent over their earnings. All 61 senators, Republican 
and Democrat, and all 53 Republicans in the Assembly receive stipends, 
but there are not enough to go around for all 97 Assembly Democrats. 
So of the 211 legislators, 33 earn the $57,500 base salary and no 
more. All 33 are Democrats in the Assembly, and most are from New 
York City. Under state law, a Legislature cannot raise its pay during 
its two-year term. So any increase approved this year would take effect 
on Jan. 1, the first day of the next term. If that window is missed, 
there will not be a raise until 2001, at the earliest. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>