<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Since Alberto Salazar's last victory in 1982, U.S. runners have largely 
been also-rans in the New York City Marathon while winners have come 
from New Zealand, Italy, Kenya, Britain, Tanzania, Mexico, South Africa, 
Norway, Poland, Australia, Germany and Romania. That foreign runners 
should perform so well in America's biggest marathon simply underscores 
the larger story of the race's vibrant ethnic roots in New York. What 
the city's ethnic groups contributed was a vital marathon culture 
that emphasized widespread participation and personal achievement. 
Indeed, well before Fred Lebow _ a Romanian-Jewish immigrant himself 
_ transformed the New York City Marathon into a major international 
sports spectacle, running and marathoning in New York were activities 
primarily supported by various ethnic groups. The first great marathon 
champions were Irish and Italian. In 1908, John J. Hayes, an Irish-American 
New Yorker, won the Olympic marathon in London, but only after Dorando 
Pietri, an Italian who finished ahead of Hayes, was disqualified because 
he had been aided by officials. Back in New York City, home to large 
Irish and Italian populations, the disputed Olympic finish set up 
a professional match race between Hayes and Pietri. On Nov. 25, 1908, 
the two ran on a 26.2-mile course in Madison Square Garden, and Pietri 
won. From November 1908 through May 1909, former amateur runners such 
as Pietri, Hayes, Thomas Longboat (an American Indian and winner of 
the 1907 Boston Marathon), Henri St. Yves, a Frenchman, and others 
were paid to compete in foot races over the 26.2-mile distance. Intense 
gambling accompanied these marathons, which drew large, vocal crowds 
from the city's ethnic communities. The 26.2-mile distance was accepted 
as the standard for the marathon probably because it was contested 
so often in the New York City area during these years. On Nov. 26, 
1908, the day after the Pietri-Hayes matchup, 4,000 spectators watched 
145 amateur runners start the second Yonkers Marathon; 20,000 fans 
packed the town's Empire City track for the finish. James F. Crowley 
won, saying, ``I did it for the Irish-Americans.'' There were also 
amateur marathons the day after Christmas, on New Year's Day, on Lincoln's 
Birthday, on Washington's Birthday. In 1925, Bricklayer Bill Kennedy 
of Port Chester, N.Y., who had won the Boston Marathon in 1917, and 
Tommy McNamara, a Port Chester sportswriter, staged a local marathon 
on Columbus Day, Oct. 12, to honor the town's Italian-Americans. It 
started from Columbus Circle, not far from the finish line of the 
current New York City Marathon, then ran up Central Park West and 
through the Bronx to end in Port Chester. The Port Chester Marathon 
became an annual event that lasted through 1941, with teams of African-Americans 
and Jewish runners distinguishing themselves year after year. In 1928 
Arthur Gavrin, a recent Jewish immigrant from Poland, won. The Jewish 
presence in metropolitan marathons reached a peak in the early 1930s, 
when the coach Max Silver put together a winning team of long-distance 
runners for the German-American Athletic Club, guiding them to victory 
in the 1935 Amateur Athletic Union national marathon championship. 
Among ``Max Silver's Boys'' were Bill Steiner and Joe Kleinerman, 
now registrar of the New York Road Runners Club. But when the German-American 
Athletic Club's leaders openly acknowledged Nazi sympathies, the Jewish 
athletes left for other clubs, and the championship marathon team 
scattered. In 1936, three Harlem businessmen, Joe Yancey, Robert Douglas 
and William Culbreath, started a track club for men and boys who did 
not have the experience or membership fees to join one of the city's 
other clubs. The New York Pioneer Club accepted all boys regardless 
of athletic ability. Soon, the Pioneers, who began as a wedge against 
segregation for primarily black and minority runners, attracted so 
many white athletes who wanted to train with them _ especially Jewish 
athletes faced with discrimination at other clubs _ that by 1942 they 
were officially integrated. By 1945 the New York Pioneer Club had 
won a substantial number of individual Metropolitan and National AAU 
Championships as well as many team awards. Civil rights remained a 
bedrock of the Pioneers' agenda. In 1946, club members voiced criticism 
of the AAU National Track and Field Championships in San Antonio because 
black athletes were not permitted to stay at the same hotels as white 
athletes. As an integrated team, the Pioneers also faced residential 
segregation at the 1950 AAU Nationals, where they could not stay together 
at any hotel in Maryland or in the dormitories of the University of 
Maryland, where the meet was held. The New York Pioneers Club 800-meter 
runner, Roscoe Lee Browne (now a television and movie actor), arranged 
lodging for them at Lincoln University in Pennsylvania, where he was 
teaching, and the Pioneers commuted to the Nationals. Ted Corbitt 
was a member of the Pioneers when he became the first African-American 
Olympic marathoner in 1952. The Pioneers won the team title in the 
AAU National Marathon championships in 1954 and 1955 and took the 
1955 Boston Marathon trophy with an all-black team. Corbitt later 
became the first president of the New York Road Runners Club. Nat 
Cirulnick, another Pioneer, also served as road runners club's president. 
In the ethnic history of the New York City Marathon, some of the runners 
were good, some were very, very good, but most ran the distance for 
their own reasons. Through their efforts, New York City led the way 
in reorganizing race procedures and logistics to include ever-increasing 
numbers of runners, and in celebrating all runners regardless of finishing 
time. And the New York City Marathon has remained true to its roots 
in that fully a third of the field come from countries around the 
world. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>