<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0118 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yves Sauz, a motorman on the Paris rapid-transit system, says he likes 
everything about the job except the increasingly tough customers. 
``You aren't even safe here in the cab,'' he said on a fast underground 
train headed to St.-Germain-en-Laye. ``A little while ago, on a day 
when there was a tie-up for some reason, a guy tapped for me to open 
the side window. `I hope you're happy you've made me 15 minutes late,' 
he told me, and started punching me in the chest.'' Sauz shook his 
head. On Monday, thousands of the 40,000 bus and train drivers, ticket 
agents and other employees of the French capital's municipal transit 
system plan to strike back, with a work stoppage from 10 a.m. to 2 
p.m. to press demands for better security in the face of rising violence. 
Crime on public transport generated scores of smaller transit strikes 
all over the country last month, with employees refusing to work unless 
transit authorities hire more personnel to deal with troublesome passengers, 
particularly youths, who are implicated in about a quarter of all 
such incidents. ``There once was a time when young people behaved 
themselves, but society's changed,'' said Pierre Sauvanet, a representative 
of Force Ouvriere, or Workers' Force, Sauz's union. ``That's no reason 
to expect us to bear the entire burden of dealing with violence,'' 
he said. Americans may not consider France a country much plagued 
by urban crime. By the standards of New York City, where the crime 
rate has fallen dramatically in recent years, Paris still seems pretty 
safe. Jean-Pierre Vigouroux, a colleague of Sauvanet, says there is 
an average of one attack a day against employees of the Paris transit 
system, which unlike New York's shuts down from about 1:30 a.m. to 
5 a.m. But there remains a perception of social breakdown, especially 
in a country with chronic unemployment. The rate is stuck at 11.7 
percent nationwide, but it is much higher in outlying sections of 
French cities with large concentrations of alienated youths, particularly 
from North African immigrant families. A poll of a thousand Parisians 
by the IFOP organization last spring found that only 47 percent felt 
safe on the RER, Paris' suburban commuter network, compared with 62 
percent who felt secure in the Paris subway system. Crime was rated 
the city's third-most-urgent problem, behind homelessness but ahead 
of drug dealing and illegal immigration. And vandalism, graffiti and 
violence are not limited to Paris. Bus drivers in the southern part 
of the Mediterranean port city of Marseilles struck briefly Friday 
after a passenger attacked one of them for refusing to make an unscheduled 
stop. Even in Chambery, a placid place in the foothills of the Alps, 
bus service was interrupted in mid-October after an attack on a driver. 
So Monday's Paris protest will have national overtones. What sparked 
it was an incident a week ago in a commuter tunnel near the western 
Defense station, when a passenger became enraged to learn that his 
train was reversing direction. The motorman walked through the car 
on his way to the cab at the other end of the train, officials said 
later, and the passenger smashed a fire extinguisher into the door 
window as the driver passed through it. The motorman suffered superficial 
cuts and was excused from work for a few days. But fellow drivers 
refused to work the next day, crippling service on the train's A line. 
``Once you leave the cab at one end,'' Sauz said, ``there's no way 
to call for help or sound a safety alarm until you get to the other 
end of the train. There ought to be that much protection, at least.'' 
Police patrols in the Paris rapid-transit tunnels were stepped up 
in 1995 after a series of terrorist bombings, and for a while juvenile 
delinquency decreased as anti-riot specialists and Foreign Legionnaires 
prowled the platforms. But in the past year, petty crime in the capital 
rose by nearly 4.5 percent, and police union officials attributed 
the increase to the budget, which cut the size of the force by about 
1,000 officers. So, too, with the transit workers, some of whom plan 
to march on the Finance Ministry on Monday to demand more protection 
and more money. Understaffing and lack of security are two sides of 
the same coin, union officials say. ``We shouldn't have to be our 
own police force, but we often are,'' said Jean-Noel Jacquet, another 
motorman, who has found that good psychology sometimes works best. 
``I told a guy in the car behind me to stop smoking,'' Jacquet said, 
``and he waited until we came to the last stop and then came up and 
threatened me. I told him that if hadn't said anything to him, other 
passengers would have complained to my bosses and I would have been 
in trouble. `Really? Those no-good sons of guns!' the guy said, and 
left me alone.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>