<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0147 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Instead of understanding who and what he is now, Lawrence Taylor thinks 
of himself too often as what he was. He still refers to himself as 
``L.T.,'' as if he were still wearing a Giants jersey with No. 56 
on it, as if he were about to put on his blue helmet for the Giants' 
game with the Redskins, as if he were still compiling his resume for 
Pro Football's Hall of Fame. Throughout his Giants career, the Hall 
of Fame, in Canton, Ohio, inspired him. In his early years, he would 
ask, ``Am I good enough to make it?'' In his later years, he wondered, 
``Will I make it my first year of eligibility?'' But that was when 
he was L.T., the outside linebacker who defined that position. What 
Lawrence Taylor hasn't learned, or doesn't want to learn, is that 
as soon as he took off his Giants uniform for the last time after 
the 1993 season, L.T. ceased to exist. Lawrence Taylor is just Lawrence 
Taylor now, a person instead of a player; a person whose image keeps 
staining all that he accomplished as a player. Lawrence Taylor has 
found life tougher than anybody who tried to block L.T. Hoping to 
avert foreclosure on his home in Upper Saddle River, N.J., where he 
is reportedly $350,000 in arrears in mortgage payments and other fees, 
Lawrence Taylor, not L.T., declared Chapter 7 bankruptcy Thursday, 
four days after he entered an unidentified drug rehabilitation clinic 
in New Jersey. On Oct. 19, Lawrence Taylor, not L.T., was arrested 
in St. Petersburg Beach, Fla., on crack-cocaine charges; in May 1996 
he was arrested in Myrtle Beach, S.C., on similar charges. Last year, 
Lawrence Taylor, not L.T., pleaded guilty in U.S. District Court in 
Camden, N.J., to filing a false federal income tax return; he failed 
to report $48,000 in income from a now-shuttered New Jersey restaurant 
and sports bar known as ``LT's.'' Since 1993, he has been questioned 
by a state grand jury investigating organized crime, had his driver's 
license suspended because of outstanding parking tickets, and received 
three traffic summonses for leaving the scene of an accident. But 
on the same day that Lawrence Taylor the person declared bankruptcy, 
the ghost of L.T. the linebacker appeared. In his first year of eligibility 
for the Hall of Fame, he was listed among 76 candidates up for election 
on Jan. 30, five days before his 40th birthday. Arguably as good a 
football player as anybody already bronzed in Canton, he deserves 
to be a virtual unanimous choice of the 36 selectors. And maybe he 
will be. If I had a vote, he'd get it. And he'll get plenty of votes. 
But will he get enough votes? His drug-related image is sure to influence 
some selectors not to vote for him. Of the 75 candidates on the preliminary 
ballot, Taylor must finish among the top 15 vote-getters to qualify 
for consideration in the selection meeting on Jan. 30 in Miami. After 
being discussed in the selection meeting, he would need the support 
of at least 80 percent of the 36 selectors, or 29 votes. Whenever 
Taylor has been asked how his image might influence his candidacy, 
he has said, ``Why should how I live my life make any difference?'' 
It shouldn't. His football skills should be the determining factor. 
But not every voter will think that way. Even before his recent arrests, 
he will be the first Hall of Fame candidate with a drug-related asterisk 
on his resume. During his Giants career he acknowledged entering a 
rehab center after the 1985 season. He was suspended for four games 
at the start of the 1988 season for violating the National Football 
League's substance-abuse policy, reportedly for using cocaine. And 
now that he's in rehab again, he could be in Hall of Fame purgatory. 
Paul Hornung had to endure that purgatory for his 1964 suspension 
for gambling on pro football. After losing out by only six votes in 
1979 and five in 1980, he finally was elected in 1986, two decades 
after his final season as a Packers' running back. Inexplicably, Fran 
Tarkenton, who then held all the NFL career passing records, was turned 
down, 17-12, in his first year of eligibility, when there were fewer 
voters; he didn't make it until his third year. Joe Namath was spurned, 
17-11, in his first year and 21-8 in his second before being elected 
his third time around. Whatever Taylor did or did not do in St. Petersburg 
Beach will emerge in court, but even his innocence wouldn't really 
change his image for the voters, one for each of the 30 franchises 
plus at-large selectors. No more than six candidates (plus the Oldtimers 
Committee candidate, the former Bills guard Billy Shaw this year) 
can be elected in any one year, along with a minimum of four. As final-ballot 
names who didn't quite make it early this year, Dan Rooney, the Steelers' 
president, and Ozzie Newsome, the former Browns tight end, are assured 
of being among the 15 finalists. In addition to those who have been 
finalists in recent years, such as Lynn Swann and Jack Youngblood, 
the list includes several worthy first-year names: Marv Levy, Phil 
Simms, Eric Dickerson, Howie Long, Joe Jacoby, Roger Craig and Mark 
Clayton. Unanimous choices are rare at Canton. In the decade before 
the results of the voting began to be tabulated secretly by an accounting 
firm in 1985, the only unanimous choices were the quarterback Johnny 
Unitas, the middle linebacker Dick Butkus, the running back Gale Sayers 
and the cornerback Dick (Night Train) Lane. L.T. had a chance to be 
unanimous, too, but Lawrence Taylor kept staining the image. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>