<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0173 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The positive signs for Penn State from its victory Saturday should 
come with an asterisk and the footnote: ``Played Illinois.'' The Fighting 
Illini are as bad as that. They have 10 first-year starters and an 
offense that poses a threat only to itself. The Nittany Lions rose 
to the subdued occasion enough to record their first shutout since 
1996, a span of 29 games, 27-0, before 96,508 fans at Beaver Stadium. 
The burnt oranges and golds covering the hills around Happy Valley 
provided a pleasant distraction from the mismatch. The stakes will 
jump a notch this week when the Lions, No. 10 in both The New York 
Times computer ranking and The Associated Press poll, visit Michigan. 
The Lions (6-1, 3-1 Big Ten) deserve credit for preventing overconfidence 
from seeping into their execution. Quarterback Kevin Thompson threw 
for a career-high 269 yards and a touchdown. Receiver Chafie Fields 
had receptions of 47 and 53 yards to set up touchdowns as Lions built 
a 21-0 halftime lead. ``We thought our wideouts could get open,'' 
said coach Joe Paterno. Illinois' ineptitude was evident from the 
first drive. Rocky Harvey sprinted 53 yards with the kickoff to put 
the Illini (2-7, 1-5) at the Penn State 45-yard line. But two sacks 
by Penn State and two Illinois offsides penalties later, the drive 
was over. It should have come as no shock. Illinois had scored a total 
of 12 points in its last three games and was 106th in the nation in 
offense. Then the Illini gave a stalled Penn State possession new 
life with two more offsides penalties on the punt. Thompson capitalized 
by throwing a 47-yard bomb into the cradling fingertips of Fields 
at the Illinois 7. Aaron Harris bulled 2 yards standing up for the 
touchdown. Penn State's defensive harassment quickly got the ball 
back for the Lions. Thompson found Fields again on a 53-yard play 
to the 27. On both long pass plays, Fields simply outran the secondary. 
After a pass-interference call, the freshman running back Eric McCoo 
picked his way on a sweep for a 2-yard touchdown and Penn State took 
a 14-0 lead. The Illinois response was three plays and a punt. The 
linebacking trio of LaVar Arrington, Mac Morrison and Brandon Short, 
and the defensive ends Brad Scioli and Courtney Brown took turns harassing 
quarterback Kirk Johnson. The Illini rode bursts by Elmer Hickman 
and Steve Havard from its 2 to the Penn State 40 but fizzled. On the 
Lions' next series, Cordell Mitchell grabbed a shuttle pass from Thompson 
and raced 36 yards to the 11. Penn State scored on Thompson's 10-yard 
pass to Corey Jones, who ran an out pattern in the left-front corner 
of the end zone. Despite the ease with which Penn State won, one note 
of concern emerged: The regular running backs produced little on the 
ground. Mitchell had 50 yards on 15 tries; Harris managed just 8 yards 
on four carries and McCoo, the freshman who rushed for 163 yards against 
Purdue two weeks ago, stumbled to 6 yards on five carries. The Lions' 
defense, already one of the nation's toughest, tightened even further 
Saturday. Fifth in the nation in scoring defense entering the game 
(13.3 points), the Lions harassed Johnson into an unproductive afternoon. 
He completed 13 of 26 passes for 91 yards and an interception. The 
Illini rushed for 122 yards. Arrington, a sophomore, had five tackles, 
two pass breakups and a sack _ nothing extraordinary for the Butkus 
Award semifinalist. But he made an eye-popping play in the first half 
to stop Illinois on fourth down with the Illini, trailing by 21-0, 
at the Penn State 35. Arrington soared over a lineman to smash into 
running back Elmer Hickman and stop him cold. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>