<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0086 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Like President Clinton, Rep. Melvin Watt is a graduate of the Yale 
Law School, and he ranks among the president's most steadfast defenders 
in Congress. When the House Judiciary Committee begins hearings on 
the impeachment of Clinton, Watt, one of the most articulate of the 
committee's Democrats, is expected to play a major role. But first 
he must win re-election, which is no cinch, although he remains a 
slight favorite. Two things have conspired against Watt: redistricting 
and a single vote that even he has come to consider unwise. Together, 
they have turned him from a sure thing into a prime Republican target. 
Watt has represented North Carolina's 12th Congressional District 
for three terms, and for all of that time it was one of the nation's 
most derided districts because of its peculiar shape. It snaked more 
than 150 miles northeast from Charlotte to Durham, roughly along the 
path of Interstate 85 and in some places not much wider than the highway. 
It may not have been exactly a gerrymander, but it certainly walked 
and talked like one. The district contained a black majority; it was 
designed that way in response to political pressure, and it gave thumping 
majorities to Watt, a black man who fought his way from a house with 
no running water to the University of North Carolina to Yale to Capitol 
Hill. But then the courts soured on the district, declaring the race-based 
lines unconstitutional, and it has been redrawn twice since, most 
recently last spring. The new, more compact 12th (whose borders are 
still under challenge in the courts) stretches only from Charlotte 
to Winston-Salem. Politically speaking, it is an altogether different 
animal, only 34 percent black and only 55 percent Democratic in terms 
of registration. As an opponent, Watt has drawn Scott Keadle, a 33-year-old 
dentist from Salisbury who has never held public office. He won the 
six-way Republican primary with only 28 percent of the vote, and at 
first he was woefully underfinanced, lending his own campaign half 
the $169,000 it raised by Sept. 30. But then, about two weeks ago, 
dollars started rolling in from Washington and elsewhere. Keadle (the 
name is pronounced to rhyme with ladle) spent a lot of the money on 
a commercial that grabs everyone's attention. It is based on what 
one Democrat here called ``a typical Mel Watt vote.'' A committed 
civil libertarian, Watt has voted against bans on guns in urban housing 
projects, against the fence along the U.S. border with Mexico, against 
the anti-terrorism bill and against ``Megan's Law,'' the measure that 
requires states to notify local authorities when sex offenders move 
into an area. Watt cast the only vote against Megan's Law. The vote 
is devastatingly dramatized in Keadle's spot. A small, blonde girl 
is shown skipping along a sidewalk, turning into a playground and 
climbing onto a swing. A forbidding-looking man emerges from behind 
a tree and walks toward her. Just before he reaches her, the picture 
is replaced by the words, ``Mel Watt _ the only vote against our children.'' 
In his third and final debate with Keadle here on Tuesday, Watt at 
first defended his vote, asking: ``Would the next step be to register 
everybody who committed a murder?'' But he later conceded that the 
vote had been wrong and said he had since voted twice for money to 
cover the cost of state compliance with the law. When Watt complained 
about ``scare tactics,'' calling the spot misleading, Keadle responded: 
``We feel like it's a very good ad, and frankly, it's meant to scare 
you.'' In his public appearances, Keadle has shown little of the polish 
and legal and legislative knowledge Watt displays. ``Keadle's not 
that impressive in person,'' said Tom Kazee, chairman of the political 
science department at Davidson College, ``but he's giving Watt a run 
for his money anyway. These days, you know, very few people see the 
candidates in person. It's all in the TV ads, and if the African-Americans 
don't come out and vote, Watt could very well lose his seat.'' In 
an interview, Watt said he did not see the contest in racial terms. 
His problem, he said, was to reach the 55 percent of the voters whom 
he had never represented, and to convince them that he could represent 
their divergent interests, ``just as I have represented the interests 
of inner-city black people along with big banks and finance houses 
in Charlotte.'' Charlotte is the nation's second-largest banking center, 
after New York, and Watt has used his banking friends here to reach 
out to conservatives. One important new backer this year is Tom Smith, 
chief executive of Food Lion, a big supermarket chain based in Salisbury, 
Keadle's hometown. Smith, a frequent contributor to conservative Republicans, 
sponsored a $100-a-head Watt fund-raiser. But in earlier days Watt 
sometimes complained bitterly about the prejudices of white North 
Carolina voters. When the Supreme Court ruled his district's lines 
unconstitutional, he said, according to The Almanac of American Politics: 
``You go down into North Carolina, and you take a poll, and 30 to 
35 percent of the population will tell you under no circumstances, 
no matter how qualified, will they ever vote for a black candidate.'' 
Ferrel Guillory, director of the Program on Southern Politics, Media 
and Public Life at the University of North Carolina, commented: ``You 
have a nice philosophical question here. Are blacks better off controlling 
a few districts or influencing a lot and winning fewer? I come down 
against the idea of packing all the blacks into a few districts.'' 
Clinton's tribulations have gone largely unmentioned by the candidates 
so far. But the political air in North Carolina is saturated with 
Clinton, not only because of the new national Republican spots but 
also because Sen. Lauch Faircloth is bombarding his Democratic opponent, 
John Edwards, with commercials linking him to the president. In one 
frequently shown spot, the two Democrats grow Pinocchio noses as the 
announcer describes them as ``two tobacco-taxing liberals who have 
a habit of stretching the truth.'' Watt said he half-expected something 
like that from Keadle over the campaign's final weekend. Sonny Scott, 
the Republican's manager, said, ``The president is relevant to us 
only in that Mel Watt has leaned over backward to protect him'' _ 
which sounds a little like a line from a commercial. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>