<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0174 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The swagger went out of the New York Giants defense on Aug. 20 in 
a very public moment of vulnerability. When Jason Sehorn jumped into 
the air to avoid a defender with the opening kickoff on that warm 
evening at Giants Stadium, the Giants defense was young and invincible. 
For three weeks at the team's summer training camp, they had coalesced 
_ tackles, linebackers, safeties _ and it seemed nothing could ever 
penetrate the will or the confidence forged by this Giants defense. 
When Sehorn came down that night, his right knee bowing awkwardly, 
the Giants defense buckled with him. It would be accurate, though 
not entirely fair, to say they haven't been the same since. In fact, 
the 1998 Giants have done more with less since Sehorn's injury. It 
just doesn't feel like it. Sehorn's loss was a punch to the heart, 
but it was just the first of a series of body blows. While Sehorn's 
replacement Conrad Hamilton filled in ably, the Giants defense in 
quick succession lost five other starters. Linebacker Jessie Armstead, 
the catalyst to most of the chaos the Giants created last year, was 
playing on one leg. Before they could learn to play without Sehorn, 
the Giants defense was overwhelmed by other problems, which included 
an inept offense that gave the opposition points and left the Giants 
defense on the field forever. The Giants defense absorbed these hits 
like a boxer trapped in a corner. But lately, it's as if the Giants 
defense has fought its way out to the middle of the ring. Its head 
is clearing. The swagger, so evident in summer training camp, is in 
rebirth. The Giants' defense, which hopes to prey on winless Washington 
on Sunday at Jack Kent Cooke Stadium, might seem less fearsome this 
year than last year, but it might surprise Giants fans to know that 
the production is remarkably similar. Turnovers are the currency of 
success for a National Football League defense and last season's Giants 
hit the jackpot. Their riches were greater than any in the league, 
with 44 take-aways in 16 games. But through seven games last season, 
the Giants defense had produced 13 turnovers. They had 23 quarterback 
sacks, another measure of a defense's disruptive influence. This year 
after seven games, the Giants defense has forced 15 turnovers. It 
has 30 sacks. As defensive coordinator John Fox said Friday: ``You 
don't replace a Jason Sehorn. When you take a personality out of the 
defense, the personality of the defense changes. There are new voices 
and new faces. But I'm proud of what we've done. I'm not proud of 
the results, which is a 3-4 record.'' Other Giants are growing more 
defiant about the defense's image. ``We're still standing here and 
we've got as good a chance at winning our division as anyone,'' Armstead 
said. ``We haven't lost anything we can't overcome. And we're healthier 
now. I hope all the teams on our schedule think we've lost something. 
They'll be sorry.'' There's some swagger in those words. Armstead's 
sprained ankle has all but healed. Equally important, his replacement 
and the team's vital nickel linebacker, Scott Galyon, has overcome 
the Achilles heel soreness that kept him out of three games. Galyon 
has become one of the Giants most valuable players. With him on the 
field in passing situations, Armstead feels the freedom to roam. And 
Armstead's best attribute is his football instincts, which have been 
inhibited by injury and a lack of familiarity with the players who 
filled in for Galyon. ``I'll take some chances because I know he'll 
cover for me,'' Armstead said of Galyon. ``We read off each other 
really well.'' A similar dynamic seems to have evolved at defensive 
tackle. Robert Harris recently missed three games with a chest injury, 
and while his replacement Christian Peter played well, it was Harris' 
counterpart at defensive tackle, Keith Hamilton, who seemed out of 
sync. Just as Sehorn's substitute played well there was a collective 
effect, a loss of cohesion. Harris returned against Arizona two weeks 
ago and recorded 2.5 sacks and a team-leading nine tackles. Hamilton 
was rejuvenated, too, with 1.5 sacks and five tackles. These defensive 
pairings of players point to the importance of chemistry within a 
team or a specific unit within a team. It took a few weeks to regroup 
from the loss of Sehorn, if not recover. Then Armstead was hobbled. 
Then Harris. Then safety Sam Garnes. Then cornerback Phillippi Sparks. 
All but Garnes and Sehorn are back now. It is a young defense, one 
promising resilience. They are adjusting to their new selves. ``The 
changes have been as much mental as they've been physical,'' Fox said 
last week. ``I think we're learning we can play the same way. Even 
if we don't have all the same guys.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>