<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0133 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On Jan. 19, 1996, heavy rains and melting snow caused ruinous flooding 
in the Catskill Mountains. The many fine rivers that make the Catskills 
the heart of Eastern trout fishing, among them the East and West Branches 
of the Delaware, the Beaverkill and the Esopus, rose to claim their 
natural flood plains and everything unnatural that lay within them. 
In the rubble-strewn aftermath, it was not surprising that some people 
looked upon the rivers with resentment and distrust. What happened 
next quickly escalated into a kind of eco-scandal whose impact on 
the streams is only now, more than two years later, starting to be 
corrected. Determined not only to clean up from the floods but to 
make sure the unruly streams behaved in the future, landowners and 
public road crews went to work on them with bucket loaders and bulldozers. 
Channels were dredged and straightened, banks denuded and reshaped. 
Tributaries were turned into glorified roadside ditches. Because of 
all the work, which was financed by more than $8 million in federal 
and state disaster relief, the typically lucent Catskill streams often 
ran brown. The state Department of Environmental Conservation, in 
particular its regional sub-office in Delaware County, was severely 
criticized by Trout Unlimited, a national conservation group, for 
rubber-stamping hundreds of permits for such work and not acting on 
reported violations. After Trout Unlimited threatened to sue, the 
two adversaries embarked on long negotiations that ended with a signed 
agreement to restore the damaged streams. ``There was a lot of bitterness 
and negativity over the last couple of years,'' said Jock Conyngham, 
an ecologist for Trout Unlimited. ``But that's all evaporating now 
and we're starting to work together.'' Work toward the first goal 
of the agreement, the restoration of several tributaries of the legendary 
Beaverkill, has begun. Probably the worst effect of the post-flood 
stream work was the mangling of tributaries and the blocking of access 
to them by trout, which use them for spawning and for the relief their 
cooler temperatures provide when main rivers turn dangerously warm 
in summer. The environmental department committed $125,000 to get 
the tributary project under way, and in September it secured $500,000 
from the state's Clean Water/Clean Air Bond Act to expand the project 
to tributaries of the East Branch of the Delaware. Conyngham, who 
leads restoration work for Trout Unlimited, said commitments to help 
with financing had been made by a number of public and private sources, 
including the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the National Parks Service 
and Orvis Co. The aim of the tributary work, according to Conyngham 
and others, is to rebuild and stabilize damaged areas by replicating 
sections of the streams that survived the violent flood currents intact, 
thus demonstrating their natural structural soundness. ``The idea 
is to try to establish something that may not look exactly as it did 
before the flood but that has the physical characteristics and geometry 
of areas that survived the flood,'' Conyngham said. These characteristics 
pertain to bends and meander patterns; the width and depth of channels; 
riffles, pools and plunges, bank vegetation and the flood plain. This 
``natural channel'' approach to stream restoration is based on the 
principle that the natural structure and design of a river provides 
not only the esthetic and ecological ideal but also the best flood 
control. It thus departs radically from the view that rivers can and 
should be controlled with artificial barriers and channelizations, 
which may seem to work over the short term but leave banks and channels 
so destabilized that they are certain to blow out one day. The agreement 
between Trout Unlimited and the environmental department will remain 
in effect until the work is finished or 2004, whichever comes first. 
In the meantime, nature has been doing its own part to restore the 
Catskill trout habitat. In the season after the floods, hatches of 
the delicate aquatic insects that trout need for food were sparse 
or nonexistent, the fierce January currents having scoured the river 
bottoms so thoroughly that countless insect larvae dwelling there 
were destroyed. The assault of the heavy machinery doubtless killed 
more. In the season now ending, though, the hatches have generally 
been described as good to excellent. Fisheries experts say outstanding 
hatches are not surprising in the third season after a major flood. 
In churning up the river bottoms, blowing out sediment, overturning 
stones and loosening gravel, the same currents that destroy so many 
larvae and pupae leave behind well-scrubbed, more commodious stream 
beds in which mayflies and caddis can re-establish themselves and 
thrive. Trout do not bounce back so quickly. Virtually the entire 
issue of wild trout that would have hatched from eggs in the spring 
of 1996 was wiped out by the flood waters. This year, as 2-year-olds, 
those fish would have become a significant presence in the rivers, 
ranging in size from a mere seven or eight inches to upwards of a 
foot. Fortunately, the following spring seems to have yielded an unusually 
high number of wild baby trout, according to Kay Sanford, a fisheries 
biologist with Region 4 of the environmental department One possible 
explanation is that the scouring of the river bottoms that ultimately 
led to fine insect hatches had similar consequences for the propagation 
of trout, whose eggs incubate in stream bed gravel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>