<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0256 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Traditional real-estate lenders, largely forced to the sidelines in 
recent years by Wall Street firms, are moving to take advantage of 
the virtual shutdown of the public market for commercial mortgage-backed 
securities. These lenders, which include banks and insurance companies, 
had been largely displaced by Wall Street concerns such as Lehman 
Brothers, Credit Suisse First Boston and Nomura Securities. But with 
the lending squeeze caused by the drying up of the commercial mortgage-backed 
security pipeline, the real estate industry's traditional lenders 
sense an opportunity. ``Frankly, this is good for my business,'' said 
John Bralower, the president of Sonnenblick-Goldman Co., a real estate 
investment bank. ``When people could pick up the phone and get 90 
percent financing from Lehman, it was hard to compete. Now the market 
needs us.'' ``We are seeing deals that were being done by investment 
bankers coming back to commercial banks,'' said John Cook, president 
of the New York division of the Buffalo-based M&AMP;T Bank. And with 
billions of dollars of loans sitting unsold on Wall Street's books, 
he said, there may be an opportunity for commercial banks to buy some 
of them, presumably at a discount. Cook said the bank was looking 
at eight to 10 specific pieces of business, including a $55 million 
mortgage loan from an investment bank, but had not yet concluded the 
transactions. ``This is a good time to be a commercial banker,'' he 
said. The public credit markets became a huge force in real estate 
starting in the mid '90s as investment banks lent money for mortgages 
and pooled the loans into securities that they sold to institutional 
investors, such as pension funds. The value of the mortgage-backed 
securities placed by companies called conduits, which are institutions 
that make loans they intend to pass on to investment bankers for sale, 
has grown rapidly, from a total of $700 million in 1993 to $23 billion 
last year, according to Whitney Wilcox, the New York area president 
of Holliday, Fenoglio, Fowler, LP, a real estate investment bank. 
This has connected real estate to Wall Street as never before. One 
result is that volatility in financial markets is quickly felt in 
real estate, which reacted much less directly to market fluctuations 
in the past. The conduit part of the overall mortgage-backed securities 
market, which includes insurance companies and other property owners 
who sell securities, has grown rapidly, from a $700 million share 
of an overall market of $17 billion in 1993 to a projected $60 billion 
share of an anticipated overall $80 billion market this year, Wilcox 
said. In September, economic turmoil in Asia and Russia made bond-market 
investors less tolerant of risk and so they began demanding higher 
interest rates on all debt investments. This caught investment bankers 
holding billions of dollars of loans that, pooled and turned into 
securities, could only be sold at a loss. As a result they stopped 
making new loans, causing a tightening of credit in real estate. The 
pileup of loans is substantial, according to estimates. ``I think 
the number is close to $50 billion,'' said John Lyons, executive managing 
director of Granite Partners, a real estate investment firm. ``There 
are $20 billion to $30 billion in loans that have not been sold and 
another $20 billion in the pipeline that have been already been purchased 
to be sold.'' But many people in the real estate industry say that 
with the re-entry of traditional lenders, such as commercial banks 
and insurance companies, the real shortage is limited to overly leveraged 
projects, those that have a very high proportion of debt to equity, 
and new development. ``There is still financing available for cash-flow 
properties,'' or those with established incomes, said Howard Michaels, 
chairman of Carlton Group, a sales brokerage and finance company. 
But, he added, ``the market is very difficult for development properties.'' 
Some real estate executives said the return of established real estate 
lenders and efforts on Wall Street to restart the market for mortgage-backed 
securities should largely solve the problem by the beginning of next 
year. ``The industry will work out of this situation,'' said Dennis 
Yeskey, the regional managing partner of Deloitte &AMP; Touche Real 
Estate Services. ``The guys who were doing the underwriting will take 
a beating, but long term it won't rattle the markets.'' In addition, 
institutional investors who may have exhausted their yearly investment 
allocation in the frenzied market this year, will be back with fresh 
allocations as of Jan. 1, said Jeffrey Cooper, a senior director at 
Cushman &AMP; Wakefield, a financial services company. And, real estate 
executives note, the Wall Street companies who are currently holding 
loans that can only be sold at a loss have years of profits from trading 
the mortgage-backed securities to absorb the losses. ``People are 
coming back to the market because they believe the risk has been underwritten,'' 
or discounted, said Lyons of Granite Partners. ``Three to four weeks 
ago, it was a standstill. But now the free fall has ended. The amount 
of money available for real estate has not changed. The price of it 
has changed.'' Real estate and finance executives said vast amounts 
of money that was invested in Treasury securities during September 
and the early part of October for safety are beginning to trickle 
out as investors are enticed by the higher interest rates available 
on other forms of debt. Many real estate executives say the temporary 
lack of liquidity may actually have a beneficial effect, by preventing 
overbuilding before it happens and by preventing overeager buyers 
from doing highly leveraged deals. Because they do not have the risk 
of holding loans, since they are usually sold shortly after being 
assembled, investment banks were much more aggressive in their financing 
than traditional lenders, supplying up to 95 percent of a property's 
price. ``A bank or insurance company will not lend more than 75 percent,'' 
said Michaels. ``The rest is equity.'' Pending deals based on obtaining 
85 percent or 90 percent financing have been put on hold, executives 
say, because would-be buyers are unwilling or unable to come up with 
more equity. The match between real estate, which is a long-term business, 
and the short-term trading culture of Wall Street was always an odd 
one in many ways, executives say. ``The world is a lot different than 
it was 10 years ago,'' said Barry Gosin, chief executive of Newmark 
&AMP; Company Real Estate. ``In the past, when a bank or insurance 
company lent money it was for the long term.'' The lender would stay 
in contact with the borrower and collect payments. Developers and 
lenders had relationships that endured from project to project. Investment 
bankers, on the other hand, wanted to make loans, sell them and collect 
a fee with little regard to the individuals involved. ``A developer 
or an owner sees real estate as an asset, and they concentrate on 
improving the value of that asset,'' said Martin Kravet, the president 
of Royal Abstract, a New York title insurance company. ``Wall Street 
guys don't care about asset values, they just want to generate fees.'' 
The problems with the mortgage-backed securities market may also provide 
some opportunities to buyers with cash in their pockets, as planned 
highly leveraged transactions fall short on financing. ``Some people 
who have access to equity are taking advantage of failed transactions,'' 
said Cooper of Cushman &AMP; Wakefield, discussing the market for 
commercial buildings. ``A lot of bids were received in late August, 
just before the credit market problems. The next round of bids was 
lower.'' Cooper and other real estate executives said that the reductions 
in the bids ranged from under 5 percent for top-quality properties 
to as much as 20 percent for lower-grade buildings. Among the buildings 
reported by real estate executives to have been taken off the market 
since the mortgage-backed securities market tightened are the Revlon 
Building at 625 Madison Ave. and buildings at 717 Fifth Ave. and 450 
Lexington Ave. The liquidity shortage is affecting more than building 
sales, brokers report. In addition to hesitation on the part of tenants 
to move or take added space because of economic uncertainty, landlords 
are hampered in their ability to close transactions because of their 
own need to access capital. ``Building owners need money to pay commissions 
and for tenant installations,'' which include interior renovations, 
said Peter Riguardi, an executive vice president of Collins ABR, a 
real estate services company. ``That kind of money has dried up and 
the velocity of deals has slowed. The market is going to be quieter 
for the rest of the year.'' Real estate executives continue to point 
out that, despite gyrations in financial markets, the fundamentals 
of New York real estate remain solid. Employment is high, office space 
vacancy rates are low and rental rates are holding. ``The good news 
is there is no space,'' said Gosin, the Newmark chief. Unlike the 
'80s when a building boom left vast amounts of space vacant, almost 
nothing has been built in the '90s, so supply is in line with demand. 
``There is nothing wrong with real estate,'' said Kevin Haggarty, 
an executive managing director of Insignia/ESG's capital market group. 
``We did not cause the problem by overbuilding.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>