<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0201 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For her first New York City Marathon in 1994, Tegla Loroupe of Kenya 
received some simple, prescient advice from Anne Roberts, the race 
coordinator: Start slowly. Don't worry about the leaders as long as 
you can see them. You will be able to catch them later on. Loroupe, 
who had never run a race of 26.2 miles, followed the advice so perfectly 
and stealthily that the front-runners never even saw her in the final 
miles as she surged into the lead. With its bridges and laborious 
hills in Central Park, Sunday's New York City Marathon certainly will 
not produce another world record for Loroupe, who ran an unprecedented 
2 hours 20 minutes 47 seconds in April in Rotterdam, Netherlands. 
Nor are there likely to be four men breaking 2:08, as there were three 
weeks ago at the Chicago Marathon. Records are set on flat courses 
like Rotterdam and Berlin, not on the difficult, potholed terrain 
of New York, where it is more important to win than to get an impressive 
time. Perhaps more than any other major marathon, New York requires 
as much strategy as speed, and can resemble a chess match as much 
as a foot race. ``I think more about strategy here than other races 
because it's New York and because everybody wants to win,'' said German 
Silva of Mexico, who, like Loroupe, won in 1994 and 1995. Said Franziska 
Rochat-Moser of Switzerland, who won the women's race in 1997: ``It 
is important to win. If you want to make a good time, don't come to 
New York.'' The course offers the same treachery for elite runners 
in the field of 32,000 as for first-timers looking to finish within 
four hours, or simply to finish. It is easy to succumb to the siren's 
song of cheers along Fourth Avenue in Brooklyn and along First Avenue 
in Manhattan. More than one favorite has been lured into a premature 
surge at 16 or 17 miles, only to be left dehydrated and exhausted 
for the grinding finish. In 1996, Loroupe was on world-record pace 
at one point, but her start had been suicidally fast, and she crumpled 
into seventh place. A year ago, she made the opposite mistake, starting 
too conservatively. She was dropped by Rochat-Moser at 21 miles and 
finished seventh again. This year, she has focused on her speed, running 
a personal best of 14:57 for 5,000 meters. ``I learned my lesson,'' 
Loroupe said. ``This year I'm going to run my own race. I'm not going 
to watch other people. I was watching last year and I was the loser.'' 
The men's race was essentially a death sprint last year as a pair 
of Kenyans, Shem Kororia and Kenneth Cheruiyot, attempted to destroy 
the rest of the field for teammate Joseph Chebet. Cheruiyot went through 
the half marathon in a blistering 1:03:29 then he and Kororia dropped 
out beyond 20 miles. Though they deny it, Kororia and Cheruiyot have 
been accused of running a cynical race, never intending to finish. 
Silva tried to stay with the Kenyans, but he paid dearly in Central 
Park, suffering severe dehydration and finishing fifth. ``I don't 
know if it was me they were trying to destroy,'' Silva said of Kororia 
and Cheruiyot, who, like him, represent the Fila shoe company. ``I 
understand when they have designated rabbits, but when you don't know, 
it bothers you and it damages the field. But it's a challenge and 
you have to decide what to do. You can either finish in the medals 
or you can finish the way I did.'' The group of Kenyans representing 
Fila are coached by Gabriele Rosa, an Italian doctor. This year, Rosa 
said, he believes that a pace of 64 minutes might be more suitable 
than the 63 minutes of last year. Chebet could not maintain the searing 
pace, losing to another Kenyan, John Kagwe. Chebet said that all of 
the Kenyans in the Fila group intended to finish this year. A slower 
first half will conserve energy for the enervating, decisive second 
half. Still, Rosa intends to push the pace. He believes that a time 
of 2:07:40 is possible on a day that is expected to be overcast with 
temperatures in the 50s. That would shatter the course record of 2:08:01 
set in 1989 by Juma Ikangaa of Tanzania. ``My idea is to push the 
pace for everybody,'' Rosa said. ``This is a long-distance race for 
marathoners, not half-marathoners. If you don't push early, it is 
better for the half-marathoners.'' His biggest concern is Abel Anton 
of Spain, the 1997 world marathon champion who prefers to sit behind 
the leaders and make his break near the end with a ferocious kick. 
The idea is to melt his legs so that he will not have a passing gear. 
``He is very fast the last kilometer,'' Rosa said of Anton. ``You 
must fight him and push the pace.'' Kagwe ran the second-fastest race 
ever in New York last year, winning in 2:08:12, despite having to 
stop twice to tie his loose shoelaces. This year, he will not run 
in a pair of new shoes. He said his strategy would not change because 
of Anton's kick, but he also candidly admitted that he was not particularly 
confident about his chances. Kagwe fully knows how any tactical miscalculation 
can be disastrous. Two years ago, he keyed on more seasoned marathoners 
such as Cosmas Ndeti of Kenya and Martin Fiz of Spain, but they were 
not among the leaders when Giacomo Leone of Italy put his foot to 
the accelerator in the final two miles. ``Everybody has expectations; 
everybody has come here expecting to win,'' Kagwe said. ``Everybody 
has some tension. You cannot say you have confidence.'' Even more 
important than confidence in New York is patience. In most marathons, 
the final miles are flat or even slightly downhill. In New York, the 
hills come at 23{ miles, when the race enters Central Park and the 
body enters a state of extreme fatigue. The key is to relax for the 
first three quarters of the race, Silva said. He was composed enough 
in 1994 to win despite making a wrong turn into Central Park in the 
final mile. Just remember, said Grete Waitz of Norway, who won the 
women's race nine times, most winners in New York come from behind 
late instead of pulling away early. ``The first 18 or 20 miles are 
just transportation,'' Waitz said. ``Then you really start running.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>