<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0145 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three years ago, the same pro basketball superstars who are currently 
negotiating a luxury tax with David Stern tried to decertify their 
union after learning their representatives were negotiating a luxury 
tax with David Stern. Three years ago, Michael Jordan and Patrick 
Ewing subverted Simon Gourdine's and Buck Williams' leadership while 
contesting the very collective bargaining agreement they wish they 
could now preserve. Now Jordan and Ewing are discovering how much 
harder it is to run the government than to stage a revolution. ``It's 
become obvious now that, except for not raising the minimum salary 
more, the 1995 deal was an excellent one for the players,'' Williams 
said from his Greenwich, Conn., home. ``I'm not looking to say, `I 
told you so.' I'm not that kind of person. But it's gratifying to 
hear some of them say, `Let's get back to the status quo.' '' Mostly, 
what Williams wants to hear is that the locked-out players are getting 
closer to an equitable deal that would allow him to proceed with the 
final season of an 18-year National Basketball Association career, 
possibly not with the Knicks. He roots for an agreement before too 
many games are lost and too many players are desperate and Billy Hunter, 
a tough, earnest man he admires, finds himself back on defense, trying 
to cover his players, not to mention the owners and Stern, the NBA 
commissioner. This would be most unfortunate, said Williams, in a 
league that is 80 percent black and more than ever needs a strong 
players' advocate, a voice and ego equal in stature to Stern's. ``Billy 
was hired because he is competent and intelligent,'' Williams said. 
``He also happens to be black, and I think, even if you just look 
at the history of our own union, black leadership is held to a higher 
standard. You see it all the time; blacks don't believe that another 
black man can do for them what a white man can. Race is an issue, 
a subtext, in this fight.'' Winning the fight is one thing; losing 
perspective is another. This is the fine line Hunter walks. Three 
years ago, Williams couldn't collect dues, much less get players like 
Jordan and Ewing to stop counting their money and shoot for the union. 
Now Jordan engages in shouting matches with owners, and only he knows 
how much of this has been inspired by his ubiquitous agent, David 
Falk. ``Michael and Patrick didn't care until Falk told them to get 
involved,'' Williams said. ``But Billy has done a great job insulating 
himself with some really big megastars.'' Hunter won't be immune to 
what befell Williams, Gourdine and Charles Grantham before them if 
this goes on much longer. The modern pro basketball player has never 
ridden fume-filled buses in the minor leagues, or plugged his way 
through the frozen tundra of junior hockey. He holds poolside news 
conferences and doesn't recognize the public-relations folly of holding 
a rank-and-file meeting in Las Vegas. Hunter has to play his cards 
so that he doesn't put his less-leveraged players in the cash-strapped 
position to panic, while Stern pontificates and the NBA continues 
to be perceived as a one-genius league. It has been this way since 
Larry Fleisher ran a tight union ship, in no small part because he 
doubled as the agent for the league's activist players. Isiah Thomas 
emerged a decade ago to contest this arrangement, and the union has 
since been a mix of apathy and anarchy, which only inspires Falk to, 
as he says, ``roll up his sleeves'' for players at the top end. ``It's 
all perception,'' said Williams, remembering how easy it was for Falk 
to ridicule the 1995 deal that drove the players' percentage of the 
pie from 52 percent to 57 percent. ``But the result has always been 
all these white attorneys on both sides, and in the middle you have 
black players questioning the intelligence of their black union leaders.'' 
Even after Jordan and Ewing stepped in to block the first version 
of the 1995 deal until the luxury tax was removed, Falk and other 
agents promoted decertifying the union, ultimately losing a vote that 
was more lopsided than the worst NBA blowout. When Stern locked the 
players out last July, everyone knew the owners hadn't exercised their 
contractual right to reopen negotiations over pennies. This union 
had all summer to explore what it preached last time _ decertification 
_ and didn't. Hunter knows his consensus is less interested in chasing 
lawyer-driven dreams in court, more determined to cut a deal and get 
paid. So a milder version of the luxury tax that supposedly meant 
Armageddon in 1995 went on the table. Hunter said on the radio the 
other day that he has offered to roll back unrestricted free agency 
for rookies, following their first contracts, to right-of-first-refusal 
free agency. Owners would get leverage they should have when dealing 
with players who demand $100 million for potential, not production. 
``That's a tough one to give back,'' Williams said. Again, three years 
ago, he was hammered by Falk for simply allowing a rookie wage scale. 
Ask Kevin Garnett how that agreement worked out. Ask Alonzo Mourning 
and Allan Houston and, of course, Ewing if Buck Williams' deal was 
so bad. As Williams said, this is always about point of view, about 
power, about who gets the biggest payday. Billy Hunter has a chance 
to alter the perception of who represents all the players, who drives 
the NBA with Stern. Hunter's window of opportunity is now, or maybe 
never. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>