<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0178 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was an unseasonably warm fall Saturday, but Imani Webb had donned 
her Teflon coat. Impervious to indifference, ignorance and outright 
hostility, she was spreading the word in the Ingersoll Houses, a public 
housing project in Brooklyn, about an unlikely road to salvation. 
``Come out and vote for the Working Families Party,'' she called to 
one man. ``I don't vote,'' he said stonily. ``That's the problem,'' 
she retorted. The party that Ms. Webb has made her cause was founded 
this year by an alliance of labor unions, politicians, and the Association 
of Community Organizations for Reform Now, or Acorn, an advocacy group 
with low-income members. With Peter Vallone, the Democratic candidate 
for governor, on its line as well, the party hopes to win 50,000 votes 
from union members, workfare recipients, immigrants, the working poor 
and other traditionally liberal constituencies. If it succeeds, the 
party will have a place on the ballot in the next election and some 
leverage over major-party candidates wanting to run on its line. It 
won a line in this election by collecting 57,000 signatures, though 
only 15,000 were required. New York State has a long history of minor 
parties with influence disproportionate to their numbers, starting 
with the Liberal Party in the 1930s and the Conservative Party in 
the 1960s. In 1994, the Conservative Party gave George Pataki his 
margin of victory in the gubernatorial race, and the Right to Life 
Party helped re-elect Sen. Alfonse D'Amato in 1992. ``We saw all these 
parties pulling the debate toward the interests of the wealthy, or 
Christian right, but no one was pulling the debate toward working 
people or progressive ideas,'' said Bob Master, the political director 
for New York and New Jersey of the Communications Workers of America 
and one of the party's masterminds. Its supporters say that the Working 
Families Party has the potential to energize apathetic or apolitical 
New Yorkers, especially poor ones, and to keep issues like health 
care and a living wage prominent on the Democratic agenda. And they 
point with pride to their largely grass-roots campaign in an era of 
advertising-driven candidacies. The party sometimes seems a coalition 
of competing interest groups and goals, at least one of which seems 
to be avenging personal grudges against both New York City Mayor Rudolph 
Giuliani and Raymond Harding, the chairman of the Liberal Party, which 
began supporting Giuliani in 1989. Three of the new party's leading 
lights are David Dinkins, the former mayor who lost to Giuliani in 
1993; Sal Albanese, the former city councilman who sought the Democratic 
nomination to challenge Giuliani last year; and Ruth Messinger, the 
former Manhattan borough president who won that chance and was soundly 
defeated. But past politics did not concern Ms. Webb; getting out 
the vote did. The party does not have the money for television advertising 
and has to rely on leaflets in English, Creole and Spanish, and on 
e-mail, raucous rallies, phone banks and radio. It does have a means 
of getting out the vote in the several hundred thousand members of 
its constituent unions, which include the United Auto Workers and 
the Amalgamated Transit Union. But because many union members are 
Republican, not registered or not inclined to vote, it must reach 
beyond them. So Ms. Webb trooped up and down the graffiti-scarred 
and trash-marred six-story buildings, attaching fliers to doorknobs 
and talking to potential voters. More than once, her enthusiasm was 
challenged by the cold cloth of self-interest. ``Oh, oh, Vallone, 
good guy,'' said a resident, Maria George, 68. ``But what does he 
do for the senior citizens? That's my topic.'' Ms. Webb sighed. ``They 
always ask, `What can you do for me?' '' she said. ``They never ask, 
`What can we do for ourselves?' '' She believes that one of the things 
they can do for themselves is to vote. The Working Families Party's 
formation started last year when Albanese and the unions who had supported 
him saw that Pataki might win re-election by a large margin. Masters 
said the unions wanted to light a political fire in the bellies of 
their members, many of whom were disappointed that Democrats did not 
fight harder against the governor's 1995 budget cuts and his efforts 
to reduce workers' compensation rates. If the unions are focused on 
statewide elections, others involved in the new party are looking 
closer to home _ the next mayoral election, and the 45 City Council 
seats that term limits will open in the next few years. Bertha Lewis, 
a party co-chairwoman and director of Brooklyn organizing for Acorn, 
said the previous two mayoral races angered Acorn members. When several 
Democrats on the City Council and in Congress supported Giuliani, 
Ms. Lewis said, ``My membership was appalled.'' For Dinkins, the new 
party sometimes seems to be in part a vehicle for his long-running 
feud with Giuliani and the Liberal Party's Harding. As part of his 
hope that fewer Democrats will be drawn to the Liberal line in the 
future, the former mayor concluded his speech at a Working Families 
Party rally last week by saying that if the party wins a ballot line, 
``We won't have to deal with Ray Harding, thank God.'' Dinkins said 
on Friday that the Liberal Party has strayed from its roots. ``I don't 
intend to support anyone in the future who runs on the Liberal Party 
line,'' he said, and implied that he would not be upset if the Liberal 
Party failed to gain 50,000 votes this year, which would knock it 
off the next ballot. Harding, in turn, said that Dinkins and others 
were misinterpreting the Liberal Party's history. ``The idea that 
we have served as some sort of left umbilical cord to the Democratic 
Party is false _ it has never been the case,'' he said, referring 
to the party's early motto to ``keep Republicans liberal and Democrats 
honest'' and noting it had supported Republicans in the past, citing 
Fiorello La Guardia and John Lindsay. Harding said he thought the 
Working Families Party would win 50,000 votes, but he said the Democratic 
Party is already ``under-defined'' in voters' minds. ``For people 
to suggest that the remedy is to push that party further left, in 
my opinion, is to seek to make that party more irrelevant,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>