<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0171 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jacki Crooks did not look like a man who should share playing time 
Saturday at Rutgers Stadium. With his legs churning, his hips shifting 
and his body spinning, Crooks displayed the skills of a featured runner, 
a 30-carries-a-game back. Recognizing this, coach Terry Shea scrapped 
his plans to platoon halfbacks and gave Crooks the opportunity to 
be the showcase. The Rutgers junior responded with a touchdown and 
career highs of 159 yards on 32 carries, leading the Scarlet Knights 
to a 21-10 victory over their Big East rival Temple. The victory, 
Rutgers' seventh in its last eight meetings with Temple, improved 
the Knights' record to 4-4, giving them their best mark this late 
in the season since 1994. It also moved them to 2-3 in the conference, 
dropped Temple to 1-7 and 1-3, and proved that the Owls' 28-24 upset 
of nationally ranked Virginia Tech two weeks ago was an aberration. 
A first-stringer a year ago, Crooks splits starts and carries this 
season with the redshirt freshman Dennis Thomas. The system had left 
Crooks, who ran for more than 100 yards three times as a sophomore, 
with single-game highs of 11 carries and 68 yards this year. But early 
Saturday, Crooks' hard running and pinpoint dodging made it clear 
that this was his afternoon. That being the case, Shea sat Thomas 
down. By enlivening Rutgers' offense with 88 yards on 14 carries in 
the first half, Crooks forced Temple's defenders to focus more on 
the run after intermission and thereby opened things up for quarterback 
Mike McMahon. McMahon, four for 15 passing for 43 yards at the half, 
completed seven of 11 second-half tosses for 111 yards and a touchdown. 
McMahon's touchdown, a 10-yard bullet that split two defenders before 
landing in Tosh Riddick's hands, gave the Knights a 12-10 lead midway 
through the third quarter and set the tone for the rest of the game. 
The score was set up moments earlier when Rutgers tackle Mike Belh 
pounced on a fumbled pitch by Temple's Carlos Johnson at the Owls' 
9. The Knights completed the scoring with Steven Barone's third field 
goal, a 32-yarder early in the fourth quarter, and Crooks' 2-yard 
touchdown run that was set up by a 47-yard pass from McMahon to Jermaine 
Robinson in the final minutes. Things were dull through a first quarter 
that included seven punts and saw neither team move within 37 yards 
of the opponent's goal line. But on its opening possession of the 
second quarter, Rutgers' offense awoke to put the game's first points 
on the board. With Crooks rambling for good yardage, the Knights marched 
58 yards on 13 plays over five minutes to set up a 48-yard field goal 
attempt by Barone. A freshman, Barone converted the kick, posting 
a career high for distance on his fifth straight boot this year. If 
Rutgers thought it had the momentum, it was mistaken as Temple, seemingly 
charged by the challenge, answered immediately. The freshman quarterback 
Devin Scott, who was magnificent in passing for two touchdowns and 
running for another against Virginia Tech, opened the ensuing drive 
with a 17-yard keeper to the Rutgers 46-yard line. Two plays later, 
Scott slipped through an attempted arm tackle and sprinted 25 yards 
to the Knights' 20. Scott fumbled upon contact and, though he recovered, 
was pulled by coach Bobby Wallace in favor of the backup Mac DeVito. 
Another freshman, DeVito scored moments later on a 10-yard option 
to put the Owls up by 7-3 with 3 minutes 17 seconds left in the half. 
Rutgers, behind two McMahon passes for 26 yards, responded with a 
56-yard drive to set up a 32-yard field goal by Barone at the 1:22 
mark. Hoping to head into the locker room trailing by a point, the 
Knights instead were blitzkrieged over the final minute by runs of 
39 and 19 yards by halfback Stacey Mack and a 19-yard completion from 
Scott to Rahsaan Harrison. Suddenly, Temple had the ball at the Rutgers 
2-yard line with 12 seconds remaining. Finally, the Knights' defense 
stiffened, holding Scott to no gain on a keeper and forcing the Owls 
to settle for a field goal, which gave them a 10-6 halftime lead. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>