<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0085 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By day, this seaside resort town in southern Italy is a shuttered 
ghost town, with fewer than 700 inhabitants in the off-season. At 
night, the population mysteriously swells. When the sea is calm, as 
many as 500 boat people reach the neighboring coast. Many of the fugitives 
from Albania, Iraq and Kosovo are pushed or thrown from bobbing rubber 
rafts by ruthless Albanian smugglers eager to escape the police. Some 
manage to flee through the woods to seek their fortune as ``clandestini,'' 
or illegal aliens. Those who are rounded up are dried off, patched 
up and temporarily interned on the grounds of Regina Pacis, a former 
children's summer camp in San Foca. Others are less lucky. Last Saturday, 
two rubber rafts collided as they left the Albanian port of Vlore, 
about 45 miles away, across the Adriatic. Six people were killed, 
including a 6-month-old baby. The growing number of refugees and would-be 
immigrants, their uncertain fate, and concern over the mafia-controlled 
and highly dangerous route they take to reach Italy have brought matters 
to a critical point in a country that has become the preferred port 
of entry into the European Union for desperate people fleeing war, 
political unrest and economic distress. ``This is is the exact point 
where the poverty and wealth of the world collide,'' said the Rev. 
Cesare Lodeserto, 38, a Roman Catholic priest who runs Regina Pacis, 
Italy's largest refugee processing center. Built to house a maximum 
of 250 people, on some nights Regina Pacis crams in more than 600. 
It is run by the Catholic diocese of Lecce, the provincial capital, 
relying on volunteers and a state contribution of $18 a person _ significantly 
less than what the church, other charities and local authorities spend 
to feed, house, clothe and transport their charges. ``The Italian 
state is everywhere, and it is nowhere,'' Cesare said sarcastically, 
as volunteers ladled out macaroni and roasted chicken prepared by 
local nuns to a long line of refugees. ``But what are we supposed 
to do, leave them in the water?'' In the first first big exodus of 
boat people from Albania, in 1991, thousands of refugees were welcomed 
with vats of spaghetti by local Italians who viewed their arrival 
as an exciting and short-lived moment in history. That euphoria has 
worn off, and Italians increasingly view the constant new waves of 
refugees, some seeking asylum from war zones and many more fleeing 
poverty, as a national emergency and a direct local threat. So far 
this year, more than 10,000 refugees have been processed in the province 
of Lecce alone. On a hot July day, seven Kurdish refugees washed up 
on the beach of a popular Club Med in Otranto, startling the tourists 
who came out to sunbathe. ``At the beginning, they came by the hundreds, 
and we could help them,'' said Niceta Petrachi, 31, who as the watchman 
of the local fishing port has a nightly front-row view of rafts being 
pursued by Coast Guard helicopters and navy ships. ``Now there are 
too many.'' ``We already have huge unemployment here,'' he added. 
``We cannot handle any more foreigners.'' Actually, almost all the 
refugees waiting to be processed at the Regina Pacis center expressed 
no desire to stay in southern Italy, where jobs are scarce and government 
handouts scanty and available only for a limited time. Most said they 
had left Kosovo or Iraq or Afghanistan with Germany, Switzerland or 
Britain as their goal, and Italy merely the Ellis Island through which 
they had to pass. Nevertheless, Italy has many more refugees and immigrants 
now than ever before. In 1997, there were 1.2 million registered foreigners. 
The University of Milan's Institute for Statistics recently estimated 
that in April this year there were at least 235,000 illegal aliens. 
Many other experts suspect that there are many more. In southern Italy, 
where unemployment reaches 23 percent and the mafia is deeply rooted, 
immigrants are viewed as stealing jobs and bringing in more organized 
crime. Some local politicians and many residents say they want the 
government to crack down hard on the smugglers who make a fortune 
by ferrying passengers across the Adriatic with the same ruthless 
efficiency they smuggle arms and marijuana. When the Italian police 
boats close in on them, the smugglers sometimes escape by throwing 
children into the water to force their pursuers to stop for rescue 
operations. Gianni Vergari, 41, a San Foca bar owner suggested grimly 
that authorities ``shoot at the rafts from helicopters after they 
unload their passenger. ``The next time,'' he said, ``those smugglers 
would think twice before coming back.'' The Italian government is 
beginning to heed the rising tide of domestic panic. On Wednesday, 
the new minister of the interior, Rosa Russo Jervolino, flew to Tirana, 
the Albanian capital, and signed an agreement with her counterparts 
there to allow Italian police officers to work alongside Albanian 
law enforcement officials at the port city of Vlore, where most of 
the smugglers operate in full view of local policemen. But Italian 
refugee law _ or rather the lack of a clear one _ further complicates 
efforts to deal with the influx. Italy has an agreement with Albania 
that allows it to reject and repatriate Albanian illegal emigrants. 
Anyone can apply for political asylum, although ethnic Albanians from 
Kosovo stand a better chance than most because of the unrest there. 
A new asylum law drafted to help integrate refugees into society is 
stalled in Parliament. To deal with the waves of immigrants from Albania, 
the former Yugoslavia and now Kosovo, the government has passed a 
series of temporary measures granting refugees short-term aid and 
asylum on humanitarian grounds. Longer term help comes from the church, 
private charities and the refugees' own survival skills. ``I made 
it this far,'' said Fatmir Mustafaj, 25, a high-school teacher whose 
long, dangerous escape from Kosovo included being robbed at gunpoint 
by Albanian policemen before he took the boat. ``I'll ask for political 
asylum or I'll become a clandestino, but somehow I'm going to Germany 
to start a new life.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>