<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0121 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Vladimir Vodinelic has been teaching law at Belgrade University for 
27 years, and his own experience, reinforced by reading the history 
books, tells him that times have never been so bad in Yugoslav academia. 
Four months ago, Vodinelic, a specialist in civil law and the author 
of many texts and articles, was dismissed. In an official document, 
new officials of the law school said they would not ``dare'' to reappoint 
Vodinelic in the annual and, until recently, largely pro forma procedure. 
Vodinelic, 50, who calls himself ``opposition minded,'' is more blunt. 
``The real reason is the revival of the old Communist category of 
the politically correct person,'' he said. In recent months, as President 
Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia was allowing his troops to storm 
through the towns and villages of ethnic Albanians in Kosovo, he was 
also conducting a quieter operation at Serbia's universities to still 
the voices of teachers he considered troublesome. At Belgrade University, 
Milosevic used his coalition partner, the far-right Vojislav Seselj 
of the Radical Party, and officials of his wife's far-left political 
party, known as the Yugoslav Left, to clean out those deemed unfaithful 
to the government. This left-to-right coalition _ what critics call 
Serbia's ``pluralistic totalitarianism'' _ has not been created for 
ideological reasons but more on the basis of personal loyalties. And 
loyalty to that triumvirate of political parties is now the ticket 
to academic promotion, say professors at Belgrade University who are 
sympathetic to the opposition. Four law school professors were dismissed, 
25 professors in the philology department were forbidden to teach 
and two professors in the mathematics department were banned from 
the classroom. The purges, and reorganizations of most departments 
according to political loyalties, were carried out by new deans and 
rectors appointed by the government. Under a new law on universities, 
one of the most cherished notions of academic freedom was abolished: 
Professors no longer have any say in the choice of their deans. Instead, 
deans are chosen by the government. The new dean of the philology 
department, for example, is Radmilo Marojevic, a professor of Russian 
morphology and a member of the Radical Party. One of Marojevic's first 
decisions in his new post was to make Russian a compulsory subject 
for all postgraduate philology students, no matter what their specialty. 
And in one of the boldest moves against the university, which since 
before World War I has more or less held its own against government 
intrusiveness, Seselj was made a member of the executive board of 
the law school. The executive board holds critical powers on how money 
is spent within the school. As well as leading the clampdown on the 
university, Seselj was the main force in closing down independent 
newspapers and radio stations. On Oct. 21, the government said that 
the closed newspapers could reopen but that they were subject to a 
new media law that gives broad powers to the government to shut them 
down again. The new law bans broadcasts of Serbian language programs 
by foreign media, including the Voice of America, the BBC and Radio 
Free Europe. Milosevic's campaign at Belgrade University _ people 
here refer to it as ``pacification'' _ is part of a concerted effort 
to snuff out one of the last cells of criticism of the government. 
The university has been as important as the independent media, perhaps 
more so, in showing resistance to Milosevic. The campus was the incubator 
of the 88-day street demonstrations against Milosevic two years ago. 
The academics say they are particularly despondent because Milosevic 
seems to believe that after giving concessions to Washington on military 
and political matters in the Serbian province of Kosovo, he has a 
free hand to do what he wants elsewhere. Thus, the academics say, 
Milosevic is extinguishing the last possibilities for his opponents 
to hang on to any democratic institutions. ``The international community 
can press Milosevic to do some things in Kosovo and sooner or later 
he will do them,'' said Milo Arsenijevic, a professor in the philosophy 
department. ``But without pressing him to democratize _ this is a 
mistake. It encourages him to feel that he's a good boy, and he interprets 
it to mean that he can do what he likes in Serbia with no consequences 
to himself.'' Vodinelic said he learned of the real reasons for his 
dismissal from the law school from an interview that the new dean, 
Oliver Antic, recently gave to a Serbian newspaper. ``He said, `I 
will bring order to the law faculty, which is a breeding ground of 
the Civic Alliance,''' Vodinelic recalled. The Civic Alliance is one 
of three opposition parties that led the street demonstrations. Vodinelic 
said he is not a member of the Alliance. The dean told other law school 
professors, Vodinelic said, that there was a ``very thick file in 
the secret service on me.'' Vodinelic, who is a Croat, said he also 
suspected that he was dismissed because of his nationality. ``Without 
being asked about my nationality, the dean said, `I did not sack him 
because he is a Croat.''' Vodinelic said he was suing the university 
for illegal dismissal. He is arguing in court, he said, that he meets 
all the academic requirements for reappointment and that his dismissal 
was a discriminatory act that violated his constitutional rights. 
In many campuses around the world, students would quickly organize 
protests against the stifling of academic freedom. But in Serbia there 
are two reasons why they have remained silent. In an effort to blunt 
demonstrations, an extra round of exams was introduced at the time 
that the purges were taking place. And Seselj announced that students 
who did not attend class would be expelled from the university. As 
for support from international colleagues, Vodinelic said several 
American professors had spoken out. German and French university authorities 
have also expressed solidarity. But so far, he said, the support from 
abroad has brought no practical results. Vodinelic is now without 
his monthly $600 salary. Even so, he said, the ``moral value'' has 
been vital. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>