<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0188 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Everyone told my brother Gary he should run a marathon someday. We 
all knew he had it in him. He'd run two hours in the morning to warm 
up for an all-day bike ride through the mountains around Salt Lake 
City, where he lived. He ran in the dark, and in the snow, and in 
the blazing heat. He pushed his body hard to see where he could take 
it. And Lord knows he had the right temperament. His whole being radiated 
with the deep mellow alpha wave of a natural endurance athlete. He 
seemed enfolded in what I thought of as a kind of Zen-like pocket 
of inner peace _ a permanent runner's high for which I envied him. 
He even ate like a man with one eye on the thousand-yard horizon, 
slowly chewing and savoring every bite until eventually, after the 
rest of us in the family had gobbled like sprinters, there he'd be, 
and nothing left for us to do but sit there and watch him finish. 
But he never took the step of committing to do a marathon. He always 
waved the idea off as something he didn't have time for. I think the 
larger reason, though, was that he felt it would be too selfish, too 
pretentious, too great a claim on the spotlight, which, in his eternally 
self-effacing way, he always felt should be directed at someone else. 
Undertaking a marathon is an act of hubris, a statement of bald self-assertion 
and ego that Gary couldn't quite bring himself to make. So I am running 
for him. When I cross the finish line of the New York City Marathon 
Sunday afternoon, my race will be his _ I will complete the marathon 
he should have run. I will continue on to the place where he could 
not. Indeed, if there's a single phrase that sums up and captures 
my yearlong journey to a first marathon at age 40, that is probably 
pretty close to it: I will continue on. Gary, for reasons I think 
we will never know, took his own life in August 1997 _ suddenly, shatteringly 
and without explanation. He left everyone who loved him grasping at 
questions that dissolved at the touch into other questions that were 
even worse. His death threw my belief in the order and predictability 
of the universe into a place of dark and groaning uncertainty. Gary 
was the most stable, centered person I knew. If he could take such 
a course, then what was stable? What could be counted on? What was 
worse, most people in our family thought that Gary, the oldest of 
five children, and I, the youngest, were most alike. More than 16 
years separated us in age, and for many years most of a continent 
as well, but we stayed connected. For a long time that was a gift 
_ suddenly it became a threat: Was the sense of stability I felt in 
my own life a fragile facade as well, as Gary's seemed to have been? 
What could I trust, even in myself? My response to all that, rational 
or not, was to put on my running shoes and take off. I returned from 
Gary's funeral a marathoner _ in spirit and determination if not yet 
in fact _ bound and determined by forces I could neither fully describe 
nor control to run the 26.2-mile New York City Marathon in 1998. I 
had been a casual two- or three-times-a-week runner before that _ 
rarely more than 15 miles a week total mileage, often less. But I 
suddenly needed more _ I needed my body to take me to a new place. 
I needed to run in a way I never had before in my life. A word of 
advice: Grief running is probably not very wise for the body. I severely 
overtrained in the first months _ doubling my weekly mileage, and 
then tripling and quadrupling it until I was hobbled and limping every 
morning with plantar fasciitis, a straining of the tendon that connects 
the heel to the ball of the foot. So I iced and I limped, and popped 
Advil, and ignoring the looks of strangers on the streets of New York 
or wherever I happened to be, I would stop everything and do stretching 
exercises right on the sidewalk when it started to act up, and I kept 
going, and slowly over the months it mostly healed. But my high dive 
into long-distance running has also taken me to a new place where 
the questions about my brother's life and death have become _ if not 
quite answered _ at least more focused. Pushing the envelope into 
longer distances opened a door for me: Out there beyond 20 miles I 
felt I had passed a threshold into a kind of undiscovered country 
of the mind and body. As my former physical limits faded behind me, 
I began to wonder if the limits I had perceived about thought and 
consciousness might be elastic as well. What makes a human being go? 
What makes a person run, climb, try hard, get up in the morning, and 
what makes him stop? That, I realized with a blinding flash one morning 
on a long run through the suburbs of central New Jersey, was what 
still bound Gary and me: He had stopped short, and I had accelerated. 
We were still linked. It was simple old Newtonian physics _ inertia 
and momentum. So much of our lives is propelled by the things that 
are already in motion around us, all carrying us along, for better 
or for worse, in rhythms that are outside our control. The flow of 
jobs and commitments and family life and friends rolls on _ it's natural 
and easy to let the march of days push us forward as it will. We all 
match our own stride, in varying degrees, to the pace around us because 
we're social animals. Gary broke his stride, stopped the machine. 
He halted the momentum of life and asserted his will to stop; in a 
way I still don't quite understand, that triggered my will to go. 
And when I look around the vast field of runners Sunday in New York, 
I will still be raking over some of these same questions: Why are 
we doing this thing _ because we are strong and chasing a goal, or 
because we are scared and weak and fleeing a demon? Are we running 
toward something, or running away? Was Gary right _ is running a marathon 
an act of unjustifiable selfishness, or can it be more? Am I running 
because I am like Gary, or to reassure myself that I'm not? Perhaps 
I've contracted a kind of runners' dementia, but I believe there are 
answers out there _ reachable, perhaps, just down the road. There's 
a spiritual realm at the frontiers of endurance that calls to me with 
the promise, or the possibility at least, of illumination about all 
the things that are rattling around inside me. But Sunday I run for 
Gary. I run with a swatch of his old worn-out running shorts _ a treasured 
gift from his wife _ pinned to my shirt, and with bib No. 15515 Blue 
dedicated to his memory. Sunday he will finish the race. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>