<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0216 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Yankees' victory parade ended and another parade immediately 
began _ the parade of superstars supposedly linked to the Yankees' 
future, from Barry Bonds to Roger Clemens to Albert Belle to Randy 
Johnson to Kevin Brown. It may be that the Yankees will land a big 
name. The principal owner, George Steinbrenner, may not be willing 
to give Bernie Williams as much as the Mets gave Mike Piazza, but 
maybe he will give big dollars to Belle or Johnson. But assuming that 
Williams signs elsewhere and that David Cone cannot reach a settlement 
that will keep him with the team, these names make sense for the Yankees: 
Todd Stottlemyre for the rotation and Rondell White for center field. 
Steinbrenner is in Florida this weekend and had plans to see Williams 
play guitar, part of the owner's effort to smooth over his relationship 
with the center fielder. But Williams is deeply bitter about the way 
the Yankees handled past negotiations, and does not appear interested 
in giving them a discount. He wants big money, and Williams figures 
to land a seven-year deal from somebody _ maybe Boston, perhaps Colorado 
or Texas _ for $12 million to $15 million a year. Unless Steinbrenner 
wakes up one day feeling unusually generous, the Yankees' offer might 
be about 30 percent to 40 percent less. Many in the Yankee organization 
have assumed all year that Williams will leave. Cone and his agent 
were expected to meet with Steinbrenner and general manager Brian 
Cashman in Florida Saturday. Cone has a $5.5 million option for 1999, 
but coming off a 20-victory season, he wants more and could get more 
elsewhere, from Baltimore or Los Angeles. The Yankees, who know better 
than anyone what Cone's physical condition is, may not want to give 
him more if they believe he won't remain healthy. If they can't find 
middle ground, they will move on. Steinbrenner will sit down Monday 
with his advisers and discuss the best ways to replace Williams and 
Cone. With the players they have in hand, the Yankees have committed 
about $57 million to next year's team; it figures that at some point, 
they will reach a multiyear agreement with third-baseman Scott Brosius 
for around $5 million a season. To sign Belle, a left fielder, the 
Yankees would have to offer perhaps $12 million a season _ and while 
they would get a big right-handed bat for the middle of their lineup, 
they still wouldn't have a true center fielder. (Ricky Ledee would 
shift from left to center.) Brown wants a six-year deal, and could 
get $11 million to $12 million a year, so he's not really a viable 
option. Johnson is a dominating pitcher and could command a four- 
or five-year deal, but he is 35 and has demonstrated great petulance, 
sulking through the first half of last season when he wasn't happy; 
do you want him to be your highest-paid player? Clemens, the likely 
American League Cy Young award winner, would be terrific, and he has 
the contractual ability to force Toronto into trading him. But the 
Blue Jays, a division rival, would presumably insist on a staggering 
package of prospects in return for Clemens. If Cone and Williams leave, 
the Yankees will need solid, relatively affordable players who fit 
their needs _ Stottlemyre and White. The Yankees don't need an ace; 
they need another experienced starter to add to David Wells, Orlando 
Hernandez, Andy Pettitte, Hideki Irabu and Ramiro Mendoza. Stottlemyre 
is a free agent coming off a year in which he went 14-13 with a 3.74 
earned run average for the St. Louis Cardinals and Texas Rangers. 
He is 33, the son of the Yankees' pitching coach, Mel Stottlemyre, 
and extraordinarily competitive, and he will cost perhaps 30 percent 
to 40 percent less than Brown or Johnson. White, a right-handed hitter, 
has two years remaining on a moderately priced five-year contract 
_ $3 million for 1999, $4 million for 2000 and a $4 million option 
for 2001 _ and is a rising star who hit .300 with 17 homers and 16 
stolen bases before a July finger injury ended his '98 season. He, 
too, is regarded as a serious competitor. White is, in many ways, 
like Williams _ but three years younger, and already under contract. 
The Expos are rebuilding again and would be willing to move White. 
They need a third-baseman; the Yankees could offer the prospect Mike 
Lowell, who will be expendable if Brosius re-signs. The Expos need 
a pitcher; the Yankees could offer Ryan Bradley or Mendoza. The teams 
have a history of dealing together. (Remember John Wetteland?) Assume 
they will talk, once the parade of superstars passes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>