<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0056 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Life in Israel has the jangled energy of a bad traffic jam, and public 
debate is led by the guys who lean on their horns. The volume is high, 
the emotions are high and the stakes are high. Maybe that is why Israeli 
political discourse is world-class vitriol _ one part rank ad hominem 
insult, one part invective-laden rhetoric. One day, leaders issue 
witheringly insulting personal remarks against each other only to 
join hands in alliance the next. Against this backdrop comes an interesting 
and even poignant sensitivity to the relationship between language 
that incites and actual violence. The topic has dominated the public 
conversation here for the last week, as Israelis have grappled with 
the idea that their democracy exists in a special, fragile context 
that might be at odds with their visceral impulse toward the freest 
of speech. Since Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu returned from Washington 
with a signed peace agreement, he has been the subject of rabid protest 
and threats from the far right, particularly the radicals of the Jewish 
settler movement. In demonstrations, on the radio and at a funeral 
for a terrorism victim, the language used to attack the prime minister 
has had a creepy echo for most Israelis. The words are the same ones 
that were used against Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin after he brought 
home the Oslo interim peace accord in 1993. Specifically, Netanyahu 
has been called a traitor, a betrayer, a perpetrator not only of treason 
but of ``a blunder unlike any in the history of Zionism.'' Settlers 
have called for ``revenge.'' They blamed him for ``spilling the blood'' 
of an Israeli murdered by a terrorist. And they used loaded references, 
comparing Netanyahu's relationship with Yasser Arafat to Neville Chamberlain's 
with Hitler, just as they once greeted Rabin by holding black umbrellas, 
a la Chamberlain, over their heads. Three years after Rabin's assassination 
on Nov. 4, 1995, with a nationwide memorial service scheduled for 
Sunday, this unnerves people here because there is a lingering sense 
that this kind of language incited his assassin, Yigal Amir _ that 
it roused him and led him to believe he was justified in committing 
a murder on behalf of the nation. And there is an unresolved guilt 
that no one took the threats against Rabin seriously enough, not the 
Government, the media or the General Security Services. In the last 
week, all have decided that it would be more prudent to risk overreacting 
this time. The ring of bodyguards surrounding Netanyahu and his ministers 
has expanded and tightened. Commentators noted that the General Security 
Services will let Netanyahu visit Arafat in Gaza, but won't let him 
go near Hebron, home of an angry Jewish settlement. Even the chief 
rabbis weighed in, publishing an official statement on Thursday that 
prohibits the use of ``insults such as traitor,'' terming them ``dishonorable 
to the Bible.'' And the attorney general opened several criminal investigations 
into threats and slander, dusting off a legal statute that has been 
on the books since the days of the British mandate. It allows prosecutors 
to bring charges of incitement against those who use particularly 
strong language against public officials, but, even in the wake of 
the Rabin assassination, they were loath to use it. Many Israelis, 
even as they fear prosecution of speech as a bridle on their free-tongued 
society, endorse some kind of rein on the vehement language of the 
protesters and on their right to organize. ``Without hysteria, and 
without giving up on the bedrock of democratic government, now is 
the time to make use of the laws that allow for the arrest, until 
their anger subsides, of people who threaten not only law and order, 
but also the lives of the leaders of the state,'' Yosef Lapid, a veteran 
columnist for the newspaper Maariv, argued last week. ``The General 
Security Services and the police need to take off their kid gloves 
and strike at the dens of the inciters, before we are all sorry it 
was not done soon enough.'' The discussion about words and deeds in 
Israel resembles one that takes place in the United States and elsewhere 
when zealots turn to violence amid an especially inflamed debate. 
That happened in upstate New York last week after a doctor who performed 
abortions was murdered. But in Israel the issue carries a particular 
double edge. A commitment to almost raucous discourse is seen as a 
hallmark of a society that considers itself the only democracy in 
the Middle East. But Israelis have a deep-seated fear, based on experience, 
that the connection between hate speech and violent acts is an intimate 
one: In a Maariv poll, 81 percent of those surveyed said they believe 
there has been incitement against Netanyahu and 60 percent believe 
it likely that someone will try to assassinate him. Underpinning this 
concern is a concomitant belief that the tone is set from on high, 
by politicians who routinely call each other liars, crybabies and 
cretins. Some have suggested that the ugly language of the far right 
is just the end of a continuum that begins on the marble floor of 
the Parliament. Justice Minister Tsahi Hanegbi in fact, called on 
the Parliament to police its own oratory, warning that the political 
debate sounds like that which spilled out into the streets in the 
months before Rabin's assassination. ``Who would have believed,'' 
Lapid asked, ``when the whole state shuddered in the wake of the Rabin 
murder, that three years later the public memorial service in his 
memory would be a security danger for the public figures attending?'' 
This carries a final irony, since some Israelis, notably Leah Rabin, 
the late prime minister's widow, believe that it was Netanyahu himself 
whose charged rhetoric created the climate of incitement that inspired 
Amir. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>