<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0163 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If there is a definition of political panic, it's Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, 
R-N.Y., running ads attacking an opponent for ethics violations. At 
a time in the election cycle when most candidates are reverting to 
warm and fuzzy pictures of their families, D'Amato has decided to 
bring up an 18-year-old charge that his opponent, Rep. Charles Schumer, 
once put members of his Assembly staff to work on his first congressional 
campaign. This is like the pot calling the kettle a pot. Any half-conscious 
voter who hears talk about politicians' misusing their offices cannot 
help but recall D'Amato's old connection to a Nassau County kickback 
scheme or his brother Armand's writing letters on behalf of a lobbying 
client on the senator's official stationery. Then there was the Puerto 
Rican developer who was charged with illegally funneling campaign 
contributions to D'Amato, and the Senate Ethics Committee investigation 
into said contributions that was stymied when nearly half the witnesses 
decided to plead the Fifth. There was also the miraculous one-day 
profit of $37,125 that D'Amato made on stock trades handled by a much-investigated 
securities firm. None of these misadventures led to criminal convictions, 
and Schumer's legal problems had an equally quiet ending. A Justice 
Department official named Rudolph Giuliani rejected the idea of indicting 
D'Amato. (Giuliani later became a friend of D'Amato, then an enemy 
of D'Amato and then a political ally. Truly, there are only four people 
in this world, and three of them are now the mayor of New York.) Since 
D'Amato has a dozen fishy stories in his background for Schumer's 
one, unleashing the ethics genie has to be one of the more peculiar 
political tactics of this election year, right up there with the decision 
by a California Senate candidate, Matt Fong, to have his mom go on 
television and tell Barbara Boxer to stop picking on her son. But 
this has not been a great campaign for D'Amato. His early assaults 
on Schumer as a liberal fell flat. The main effect of his attempts 
to depict the Brooklyn congressman as an urban enemy of agriculture 
was that Schumer began wearing plaid shirts in his commercials. Mid-campaign, 
the senator hit on what looked like a more promising tactic, hammering 
away at Schumer's House attendance record. D'Amato worked that vein 
to the point of parody, and voters might well have inferred that he 
was running for re-election solely because his opponent failed to 
show up for a routine vote on safe mammogram equipment. Schumer was 
clearly thrown off stride, until he discovered how many noncritical 
but nonetheless resonant votes on the Nassau County Board of Supervisors 
D'Amato missed in 1980 when he was first running for the Senate. (``Votes 
to Protect Seniors and Domestic Violence Victims!!!'') Somehow, D'Amato 
had forgotten the most basic rule of modern campaigning, which is 
that the candidate must begin by searching his soul for sins on which 
the opposition could capitalize, and admit them first. Whatever the 
outcome on Tuesday, one result of this race has been to deflate the 
senator's reputation as a killer campaigner. The truth is that D'Amato 
has made his career by running against different variations of a political 
marshmallow. The Democratic nominee six years ago was Attorney General 
Robert Abrams, a sweet man with the killer instincts of a hamster. 
The time before that, D'Amato's opponent was Mark Green, whose campaign 
had about as much money as a Russian pensioner. Meanwhile, between 
races, he forged nonaggression pacts against high-profile Democrats 
with sharp tongues, like Edward Koch and Mario Cuomo. D'Amato's first 
big race, the one that made his reputation, was the 1980 campaign 
against Sen. Jacob Javits and Rep. Elizabeth Holtzman. He won the 
Republican primary against Javits with an infamous campaign in which 
he depicted Javits as an aging politician in poor health. That created 
the legend of Al D'Amato the ferocious attack dog. But Javits actually 
was in ill health, suffering from a fatal degenerative disease that 
took his life before the next Senate term was up. Ms. Holtzman was 
a woman of many fine qualities, none of which involved being a likable 
politician. In the end, with Javits running on the Liberal line, D'Amato 
beat Holtzman with 45 percent of the vote. As a campaigner, D'Amato's 
real strength is his shamelessness _ he would take credit for the 
tide coming in _ and his desperation. He gives the distinct impression 
that he would do anything for a vote, change his ideology, make funny 
faces, clean out your cellar. It is an unnerving, but rather compelling 
quality for New York voters, whose normal electoral choices involve 
a phlegmatic incumbent and a sacrificial-lamb opponent who is possibly 
under indictment or living in a different state. But Schumer, who 
would walk a mile barefoot to do a two-minute interview with a 100-watt 
radio station, is right up in D'Amato's league when it comes to manic 
self-promotion. The senator specializes in surprise last-minute surges 
in popularity, perhaps from supporters too embarrassed to tell pollsters 
they plan to vote for a man whose most memorable campaign quote was 
``putzhead.'' But the fact that D'Amato is harping on Schumer's antique 
ethics charge at this late hour suggests he is worried that the hidden 
D'Amato voters might not surface this year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>