<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0140 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Julie Hiatt Steele is only a peripheral figure in the investigation 
of President Clinton. But she is still attracting a lot of attention 
from Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel. Last week, Starr's office 
called Ms. Steele's daughter and brother before a grand jury in Alexandria, 
Va., questioning them for hours. Her former lawyer has also been summoned, 
as has her accountant. Ms. Steele herself has made two grand-jury 
appearances. Starr's office has subpoenaed her bank records and credit 
history, while FBI agents working for the independent counsel questioned 
her neighbors and have tracked down friends as far away as Colorado. 
Ms. Steele, 52, is divorced and lives with her adopted son in Richmond, 
Va. She has found herself in Starr's investigative cross hairs because 
of her association with Kathleen Willey. Ms. Willey, herself a secondary 
figure in the Starr investigation, is a former White House volunteer 
who accused the president of making an unwelcome sexual advance toward 
her at the White House in 1993. Ms. Steele initially confirmed aspects 
of Ms. Willey's account, but now disavows it and swears that her former 
friend asked her to lie. Lawyers involved in the case said Starr was 
actively exploring whether anyone associated with Clinton, who has 
denied the Willey encounter, has intimidated Ms. Willey or tried to 
influence her testimony. Ms. Steele has become a subject of that investigation 
_ Starr wants to know why she changed her story _ and is worried that 
she may be charged with perjury. Starr is investigating whether Clinton 
lied when he denied the Willey matter both in his deposition in the 
Paula Jones sexual misconduct suit and in his grand jury testimony. 
Starr could refer additional impeachment charges to Congress, according 
to recent correspondence between his office and the House Judiciary 
Committee. ``For me it's been more than I can handle,'' Ms. Steele 
said during an interview in her lawyer's office, explaining how she 
stands in the way of a possible Starr referral. ``You feel like an 
entrapped animal.'' That Starr would go to such lengths to investigate 
a relatively minor player like Ms. Steele struck some lawyers as illustrative 
of what Starr's critics call his overzealous approach, although several 
former prosecutors said such questioning of former associates and 
relatives was routine. Charles Bakaly III, a spokesman for the independent 
counsel's office, said, ``We cannot comment on the grand jury investigation 
and neither confirm nor discuss particular witnesses nor the course 
of the investigation.'' During a four-hour interview, Ms. Steele described 
her intensifying problems, frequently referring to six color-coded 
notebooks that contain documents relating to her case. She has nicknamed 
the notebooks ``Pandora,'' and said they illustrated how Starr's investigation 
had taken over her life. Ms. Steele described the last year as ``a 
thoroughly despicable experience'' because of the investigation. During 
her last job earlier this year, as a part-time employee for a small 
communications company, Ms. Steele said she was told not to use her 
last name when she made customer calls. ``I've always been proud of 
my name,'' she lamented. Ms. Steele's lawyer, Nancy Luque, who has 
been representing Ms. Steele on a pro bono basis since March, said 
Starr's investigators had been asking questions about the adoption 
arrangements for Ms. Steele's son. Investigators have also been examining 
Ms. Steele's finances. Ms. Steele said she was aware of rumors that 
she was paid to challenge Ms. Willey's story, and rumors that she 
was being threatened with a disclosure suggesting that her son's adoption 
was illegal. Ms. Steele said there was no truth to any of this. She 
said that she had received no financial inducements for her testimony 
and that she legalized the adoption of her son in both Romania and 
the United States. Ms. Steele said she had no association with the 
White House and did not even vote for Clinton. She conceded that it 
was wrong of her to lie for Ms. Willey and to sell a photograph of 
Ms. Willey and Clinton to The National Enquirer for $7,000. But Ms. 
Steele said Starr's dogged pursuit of her was ``invasive and scary.'' 
Her problems began in March 1997, Ms. Steele said, when Ms. Willey, 
who had been her close friend in Richmond since the late 1970s, asked 
her to speak with a Newsweek reporter, Michael Isikoff. Isikoff was 
pursuing an article about a possible encounter between Ms. Willey 
and Clinton. Ms. Steele said Ms. Willey called her and begged her 
to tell Isikoff, who was on his way to Ms. Steele's house, that the 
president had groped her. She said that Ms. Willey wanted her to say 
that she was so upset about the encounter that she told Ms. Steele 
about it the night it happened, four years earlier. Ms. Steele now 
says none of that was true. She said she had lied for Ms. Willey about 
other relationships and agreed to again. ``I never thought it would 
get into print or become the god-awful thing it's become,'' Ms. Steele 
said. Ms. Luque, her lawyer, added, ``Julie wouldn't minimize the 
stupidity of lying to Michael Isikoff, but she never imagined in her 
wildest dreams that all of this would be visited on her.'' Five months 
later, as Isikoff was proceeding with an article about the Willey 
matter, Ms. Steele recanted. Isikoff reported Ms. Steele's initial 
account and her recantation in his Newsweek article. In January, Ms. 
Steele was drawn into the Jones case when one of Clinton's lawyers 
called her and asked if she would provide an affidavit stating that 
Ms. Willey had asked her to lie. Ms. Steele agreed. She said she felt 
she had hurt the president by lying to Isikoff and felt obliged to 
correct the record. Then, in March, two FBI agents from Starr's office 
appeared at her door. ``I didn't think they believed me,'' she recalled. 
``They wanted to believe Kathleen.'' In June, she was subpoenaed to 
appear before Starr's grand jury in Washington. After being questioned 
for almost a day, Ms. Steele told reporters that she had made a mistake, 
and that as a result, ``my good name has been damaged, my health has 
deteriorated, I have had to hide myself and my child from the news 
media in my driveway, and I have been called here today.'' She said 
she had testified truthfully and added, ``Hopefully, this ends my 
involvement in the matter.'' That was not to be. She was subpoenaed 
again. In August, Ms. Steele's lawyer, Ms. Luque, received a letter 
from one of Starr's deputies, David Barger, informing her that Ms. 
Steele's status in the investigation had changed, from witness to 
subject. At that point, Ms. Steele became more aggressive. She filed 
a breach-of-contract lawsuit against Isikoff and Newsweek, charging 
that they had violated a promise that Ms. Steele's interviews with 
the reporter were off the record, a contention the magazine denies. 
``Her claim is pure fantasy,'' said Newsweek's Washington bureau chief, 
Ann McDaniel. Ms. Steele also appeared on the ``Larry King Live'' 
show with her lawyer in the Newsweek suit, John Coale, who complained 
that she was being ``bullied'' by Starr. Ms. Steele's more defiant 
posture did little to dampen Starr's interest in her. ``They were 
now out to discredit her,'' said Ms. Luque, who was concerned that 
Ms. Steele might be charged with perjury if any of her answers during 
her second grand-jury appearance conflicted with her earlier testimony. 
Ms. Luque insisted that her client cite her Fifth Amendment rights 
against self-incrimination, advice that Ms. Steele said she followed. 
On Sept. 23, she agreed to take a lie-detector test, which both Ms. 
Luque and Ms. Steele said she passed. Since Ms. Steele's second grand-jury 
appearance, her brother, daughter and former lawyer were subpoenaed. 
On Thursday, her daughter, Liza Steele, was questioned for six hours 
before the grand jury. It remains unclear whether Starr will charge 
Ms. Steele, but he has collected evidence that she told at least one 
other person that Ms. Willey had told her she was groped by the president. 
Bill Poveromo, a one-time friend of Ms. Steele, said in an interview 
that at dinner in 1997, Ms. Steele told him that Ms. Willey was ``flattered'' 
by the pass. Poveromo was subpoenaed and testified before the grand 
jury in Alexandria in July. Last week, a representative from Starr's 
office questioned Poveromo's boss at a Richmond television station. 
Ms. Luque said Ms. Steele did not recall discussing the matter with 
Poveromo. Ms. Steele's version of events is only one of several accounts 
of the Willey matter. There is Ms. Willey's accusation of a pass and 
the president's absolute denial. There are the accounts of two friends 
of Ms. Willey, Linda Tripp and Harolyn Cardozo, who have both said 
that Ms. Willey was happy about a pass she described from the president. 
As for their one-time close friendship, Ms. Steele and Ms. Willey 
no longer speak. Months ago, they had an angry encounter at a market 
in Richmond. Of all her mistakes, Ms. Steele said, believing that 
Ms. Willey was her friend was the biggest. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>