<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0167 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the first time in a pro football life that would harden the heart 
of most quarterbacks, a mellow Vinny Testaverde will take the field 
here Sunday undefeated and ranked by any measure as one of the top 
quarterbacks of the season. He is 4-0 as the Jets' starter, with 11 
touchdown passes and just one interception. Statistically, he is the 
most dangerous quarterback in the American Conference inside the red 
zone, the most effective on fourth down, the second-best on third 
down. Yet how much should be made of this after only four games, especially 
considering the history of unrealized potential that Testaverde also 
will be carrying into the noisy atmosphere at Arrowhead Stadium? Coming 
into this season, his career record as a starting quarterback was 
48-83-1, a painfully low winning percentage of .367 _ not the kind 
of performance expected of a player who emerged from college as the 
Heisman Trophy winner and the overall No. 1 draft choice in the National 
Football League in 1987. The team that drafted him, the Tampa Bay 
Buccaneers, gave up on him and so did the Baltimore Ravens after last 
season. As a measure of how far expectations had fallen, the Jets 
signed him as the presumed backup to Glenn Foley. It was only Foley's 
injuries and ineffectiveness that turned Testaverde into the starter, 
but now, two weeks from his 35th birthday, he is playing the way it 
always seemed he could. ``If he had one flaw in most of his career, 
it was that he didn't look at the whole field,'' said an NFL front-office 
official who asked not to be identified. ``He'd be forcing the ball. 
Now, he seems to know that about himself.'' Indeed, any and all receivers 
are targets. Keyshawn Johnson and Dedric Ward downfield. Wayne Chrebet 
across the middle. Curtis Martin or Leon Johnson flaring out of the 
backfield. Keith Byars or Kyle Brady floating into the flat. Testaverde 
completed passes to seven players in last Sunday's 28-3 thrashing 
of the Atlanta Falcons that improved the Jets' record to 4-3. He hit 
nine receivers in the previous Monday night's 24-14 upset of the New 
England Patriots. In his four starts and one relief appearance before 
he became the starter, he has completed passes to 11 players. His 
11 touchdown passes have gone to six players. ``Don't go back to when 
the kid was 21,'' coach Bill Parcells said. ``Now I think he likes 
our system. The systems he used to be in primarily used three receivers. 
It was a down-the-field passing attack. We have people who can run 
the ball. Through most of his career he's been trying to sling the 
ball to his wide receivers. And when I was watching films of his past 
games, I told him many of his problems came when he was on the run.'' 
Tellingly, Sunday will be the first time in Testaverde's 12-season 
career that he will enter a game having thrown more touchdown passes 
than interceptions, with 186 touchdowns to 184 interceptions. He has 
been trying to get on the positive side of that benchmark statistic 
since the second game of his career, when he threw his first interception. 
He finally did it when he threw two touchdown passes and no interceptions 
against the Falcons last Sunday in his 136th game as a starter. ``Plus 
two, right?'' he said after the victory. True, but what a tortuous 
route along the way. The burden to produce has been with Testaverde 
since the day he was drafted. Minutes after the Bucs selected him, 
they traded away a quarterback named Steve Young. The Bucs were certain 
they had their future in the strong-armed, 6-foot-5-inch Testaverde, 
and so Young was unloaded to the San Francisco 49ers. Not many quarterbacks 
can carry a team by themselves, though. At the University of Miami, 
Testaverde was surrounded by future NFL players whom he led to a 21-1 
record in two years as a starter. When he joined the Buccaneers, though, 
victories were much harder to come by. ``Everyone's trying to explain 
what happened when he was younger,'' said Jets quarterback coach Dan 
Henning, who had his own simple explanation for it: ``He went with 
a team that was awful.'' The Bucs never won more than six games in 
any of Testaverde's six seasons, but despite their many flaws, more 
attention was paid to Testaverde's than his team's. In part he was 
followed by the lingering image of the five interceptions he threw 
in his final game as a collegian, when his top-ranked Miami team was 
upset by Penn State; in part it was because he did nothing to erase 
that memory by throwing 81 interceptions in his first 49 games in 
the NFL. ``We were building, we didn't have a very good club,'' said 
his first coach with the Buccaneers, Ray Perkins. ``We didn't have 
a lot of good people. When you're playing with teams that aren't doing 
well, some competitive quarterbacks have enough confidence in themselves 
they can put a ball somewhere, force it.'' Steve DeBerg, the starter 
Testaverde replaced at Tampa Bay, said it is important to understand 
what Testaverde was going through. ``The defense is giving up a lot 
of points, you feel that throwing 6-yard routes to the backs isn't 
doing it enough,'' DeBerg said. ``You've got to score real fast because 
the other team is doing that. You develop some thick skin as a quarterback, 
because you get criticized for a lot of things that aren't your fault. 
I give him a lot of credit. He never really finger-pointed.'' He certainly 
could have. In four games with the Jets, he has already seen more 
100-yard rushing performances than he did in his first two seasons 
with Tampa Bay. As much as he was criticized for throwing 112 interceptions 
and only 77 touchdown passes in his six seasons with Tampa Bay, it 
wasn't until his final year there that he had a 1,000-yard running 
back to support him. By that time the atmosphere in Tampa Bay had 
gone stale. The Buccaneers decided not to re-sign him and in 1993 
he moved on to Cleveland, where coach Bill Belichick anointed him 
to replace the entrenched Bernie Kosar in what was to become the overriding 
controversy of Belichick's regime. Yet Testaverde's football life 
began to change for the better. He produced his first plus season 
in touchdowns, throwing 14 and only nine interceptions. The next season 
became his first winning campaign when the Browns went 11-5 and made 
the playoffs as a wild-card team. He and the Browns defeated a Parcells-coached 
Patriots team, 20-13, but then lost to the Pittsburgh Steelers, 29-9, 
in a game in which Testaverde completed only 13 of 31 passes and threw 
two interceptions. A year later, word leaked out that the team was 
leaving for Baltimore. The season ended disastrously, with a 5-11 
record and the firing of Belichick. Testaverde's statistics were respectable, 
though, with 17 touchdowns and 10 interceptions, and his resurgence 
continued in Baltimore. Playing under a new coach, Ted Marchibroda, 
he put together his best season, passing for 4,177 yards and 33 touchdowns 
with 19 interceptions. He went to the Pro Bowl despite the team's 
4-12 record. But the Ravens were also an unsettled team. After a 6-9-1 
season last year, Testaverde's contract was up and so was his stay 
there. Before Testaverde became a Jet, Parcells studied him on tape. 
He knew he had to give Testaverde delivery options he never had before. 
Testaverde said Parcells encouraged him to consider other options 
beyond the wide receivers: ``Bill told me all through camp: `Use your 
backs more. They can catch the ball.''' And perhaps most important, 
Testaverde doesn't have to do it just with his arm. He can hand the 
ball to Curtis Martin, who has rushed for more than 100 yards in each 
of Testaverde's starts. Parcells has been especially happy about Testaverde's 
decision-making. In the Monday night victory at New England, Parcells 
said: ``He had nine pivotal choices _ do something good, something 
awful, something to negate a bad situation. Vinny made the right choice 
seven times.'' In Sunday's victory against the Falcons, Parcells said: 
``Vinny only had three minuses on 65 plays. On the gradeable plays 
Vinny was involved with, there were only three minuses, so that's 
pretty good.'' ``I try to approach every day the same way,'' Testaverde 
said. ``Two years ago with Baltimore, I had to make plays offensively. 
See, I'm not going to force a third-and-10 pass that might get picked 
off.'' Testaverde's only interception in 132 attempts this season 
came on the last play of the first half in a blowout victory against 
the Indianapolis Colts. It was a long pass thrown on the off-chance 
the Jets would get lucky and score. ``I don't think Vinny's skills 
diminished at all,'' said Perkins, his old coach at Tampa Bay. ``He's 
playing with some pretty good people right now.'' Testaverde concurred, 
crediting his cast of receivers for much of his success. ``As a group 
_ this is the best I've ever been around,'' he said. Perhaps because 
of the spotlight that was thrown on Testaverde's poor early touchdown-to-interception 
ratio, it is easy to overlook that in his last five seasons, Testaverde 
has consistently been on the positive side of that statistic, with 
98 touchdowns to 71 interceptions. It's worth noting, too, that a 
quarterback should be judged on more than his statistics. Joe Namath, 
for example, had only two seasons in which touchdowns outnumbered 
interceptions. If Testaverde can continue producing victories, no 
one will care what his numbers are. Around the league, there is still 
plenty of respect for Testaverde's talent. Ask Packers general manager 
Ron Wolf about Testaverde, who faced Green Bay twice a year when he 
played with the Bucs, and Wolf recalls with awe a 1992 performance. 
``He completed 22 of 25 passes, and the three he didn't hit were dropped 
balls,'' Wolf said. ``I know we wanted him when he became a free agent 
in 1993, but he wanted to be a starter and we had Brett Favre.'' ``I 
don't think there's any question about his passing ability,'' Marchibroda 
said. ``I remember the first time going over film and I said to him, 
`This is how we prepare for a ball game.' He told me, `Coach, this 
is the first time anyone ever told me how to watch film.' That was 
an unusual thing _ that may have had something to do with earlier 
problems.'' These days Testaverde is surrounded by a support system 
of people who care for him and put him in comfortable situations on 
and off the field. He is back home, living not far from the house 
in Elmont, N.Y., where he grew up with Namath's picture on his bedroom 
wall. His football advisers include Belichick, now the Jets defensive 
coordinator; Scott Pioli, the pro personnel director who became his 
friend in Cleveland, and Henning, the quarterbacks coach who likes 
his attention to detail, his no-excuses attitude and an arm he contends 
is unmatched in the game. ``I put him in with a Namath and a Bartkowski 
in terms of accuracy,'' Henning said, referring to the legendary Jet 
quarterback and the former Atlanta Falcons star Steve Bartkowski. 
``He is very meticulous in his studies.'' Quietly, Testaverde has 
become a significant Jet. In typical fashion, he showed his appreciation 
last week. With no fanfare he had portable stereos delivered to his 
offensive linemen. ``Who sent this?'' asked one. He should not be 
surprised any longer. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>