<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0087 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is a certain feeling of deja deja vu about the congressional 
campaign here, north of Boston, in the 6th District of Massachusetts. 
One of the dozen or so races that political analysts spotted early 
on as worth watching for a possible flip from one party to another, 
the contest here is a re-rematch between the Republican, Peter Torkildsen, 
the district's delegate to the House of Representatives from 1992 
to 1996, and John Tierney, its current congressman, who squeaked into 
office by just 360 votes last time around. This time, however, the 
race does not look so close. Polls show Tierney, the Democratic incumbent, 
with a double-digit percentage point lead, and predictions are that 
the 12-member Massachusetts delegation to Congress will remain pristinely, 
unanimously Democratic. But the 6th District campaign is interesting 
for another reason. With each candidate a proven commodity, it comes 
about as close to a fight between two incumbents as a campaign can 
get, each man defending his own congressional record and attacking 
his opponent's. At times, the dueling accounts of each candidate's 
record reach such heights that they call to mind the adage, ``Everyone's 
entitled to his own opinion, but not to his own facts.'' And perhaps 
the most striking aspect of the clashing facts is that in essence, 
each candidate is making almost exactly the same claims: that he is 
the best advocate for education; that he is most committed to reforming 
campaign finance and the health care system; that he best defended 
Medicare and Social Security from cuts; that he best brought federal 
defense and transportation dollars into the district. In the last 
campaign, Tierney said in an interview, Torkildsen ``was sort of belittling 
the whole idea that I was focusing on education; now we hear education 
is his number one issue, which is the co-option of all time.'' He 
added, ``Whenever Newt Gingrich needed him to cut an education program, 
he was there.'' Torkildsen acknowledged that the thrust of both campaigns' 
arguments was similar, but disagreed that he had co-opted anything 
in his emphasis on education, Medicare and campaign finance: ``I don't 
mind if he wants to run on my issues,'' he said of Tierney. ``America's 
a free country.'' Tierney accuses Torkildsen of being disingenuous 
about their records in Congress, saying that Torkildsen denies or 
plays down his own votes to cut Medicare or education while projecting 
such votes onto Tierney. Torkildsen denies that he is denying or projecting. 
The truth tends to revolve around the complexity of congressional 
votes in which sometimes a ``no'' vote is meant to stop a whole package 
or to defend a bill against dilution. It is this kind of campaign 
that causes political commentators to note the striking erosion of 
the differences between Republicans and Democrats around election 
time, and to compare the race in the 6th to something closer to a 
Democratic primary than a general election. But there are real differences 
between the two candidates, as well. At a debate here in this Boston 
suburb, Torkildsen emphasized that he favored returning 5 percent 
of the federal budget surplus to taxpayers and eliminating tax rules 
that can force a person to pay more married than single. Tierney emphasized 
his fight against Republican efforts in Congress to cut money for 
summer jobs, literacy, Head Start and other social programs, and pointed 
out that he had been awarded perfect ratings from groups that support 
the environment, Social Security, labor and education. Another difference: 
Tierney has fought for campaign finance reform in Congress, but his 
own campaign budget of about $1 million includes money from political 
action committees. Torkildsen was not known as a campaign-finance 
crusader, but emphasizes that his own budget of about $900,000 does 
not include PAC money. According to an independent poll and another 
by the Tierney campaign, the arbiters in all this appear to be preferring 
Tierney. A survey of 10 pivotal congressional districts, conducted 
for the Reuters news agency by John Zogby International, found Tierney 
leading by 21 percentage points. The poll, released Wednesday, was 
conducted among 300 likely voters in the district of about 600,000 
people. The marginally Democratic 6th District, which stretches from 
Boston's North Shore to the New Hampshire line and mixes fancy enclaves 
like Marblehead with working-class towns like Lynn, has been seen 
as one of Republicans' two best chances to break the Democratic domination 
of the Massachusetts congressional delegation, whose 10 representatives 
and two senators are all Democrats. But judging by the polls, that 
will not happen this time, despite Torkildsen's arguments that with 
a Republican majority in Congress, Massachusetts suffers on things 
like transportation-money allocations because it ``doesn't even have 
someone in the room when the decision is being made.'' For voters 
tired of the Tierney-Torkildsen match, there's also an independent 
candidate running: Randal Fritz, a conservative whom many consider 
the Boston-area answer to Ralph Reed, the former Christian Coalition 
leader _ though with the low level of support to be expected in liberal 
Massachusetts. Fritz, who wants to abolish the federal personal income 
tax and opposes abortion rights, has a different vantage point on 
the race. Republicans and Democrats, he said in the Danvers debate, 
all have the same approach: ``If there's something moving out there, 
tax it. Tax it to death. Tax it even after it passes away.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>