<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
UNITED NATIONS _ ``Divide and conquer'' is an ancient tactic that 
Saddam Hussein refined into an art form as a dictator in Iraq. Now, 
it seems, it has done him good service in aggravating the United States 
and its one-time allies as they struggle to keep him in the corner 
where they put him after the Persian Gulf war. These days, it seems, 
there are mostly divisions in the complicated apparatus designed to 
prevent him from acquiring new weapons of mass destruction or the 
economic power with which to develop them. Members of the transatlantic 
and Arab coalition that once fought him often seem at odds with each 
other _ so much so that they have not yet been able to force him down 
from his latest efforts to wriggle out of arms-control inspections. 
The Security Council, which enforces economic sanctions against Iraq, 
has been tied into knots as a result. And the bureaucrats charged 
with administering sanctions have begun to bicker among themselves. 
But none of this means that Saddam has freed himself either of the 
sanctions imposed on him after the war, or of limits on his ability 
to produce weapons. However clever he has been in exploiting divisions 
among the forces arrayed against him, he still has not converted his 
tactical maneuvers into a lasting turnabout in his fortunes. And the 
United States, his principal adversary, shows no sign of relenting 
in its refusal to re-admit him to the company of civilized rulers. 
In the United States, two schools of thought seem to have emerged 
from the West's tepid response to Saddam's latest challenge. One holds 
that Saddam stands on the brink of a major breakout into new power, 
with the sanctions regime moribund and the arms-limitation regime 
collapsing. The other holds that even without effective arms inspection, 
Saddam will be little threat because he is still under the West's 
stern watch and sanctions. In fact, the real prospect may be for something 
quite different: Continued slow and disconcerting Iraqi gains in the 
face of Western disunity, followed by tactical maneuvering by the 
United States aimed at frustrating Iraq all the same. And, in the 
process, a lot of confusion about who is really winning the game. 
Look at the situation now. Since August, Saddam has halted all new 
arms inspections by the United Nations Special Commission. U.S. officials, 
who have not responded with military threats, fear he may freeze monitoring, 
and he has hinted his next step may be to throw arms inspectors out 
of the country. The quiet response this time stands in contrast to 
what happened in February, when Saddam suspended inspections of his 
presidential palaces and was forced to back down by U.S. military 
threats. But that very experience that helps explain why the response 
is so muted now. The lesson drawn here seems to have been not so much 
what was gained by resisting Saddam so boldly, but what it cost, both 
in bargaining power (he got a doubling of the quota of oil he could 
export in exchange for food) and in unity. For one thing, Saddam extracted 
the direct involvement of U.N. Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan 
as a new layer of officialdom with whom to deal, between him and the 
arms-control officials. And the United States and Britain were deeply 
impressed by how little their arguments for using force had moved 
the other three permanent members of the Security Council, Russia, 
France and China, let alone the Arab countries and Iran. In other 
words, there were divisions within the coalition that fought Saddam 
in 1990, and Saddam had only to wait for a new chance to exploit them. 
And that is what he did. His next move was made when Washington was 
distracted by a sex scandal, Europeans were up in arms at American 
use of sanctions against Cuba and Iran, and Arabs were seething over 
the stalled progress toward an Israeli-Palestinian peace. This time, 
though, U.S. officials turned out to be more sensitive to keeping 
the Russians and French on board than to any effort to contain Saddam, 
even if that meant watering down the effort itself. So while this 
allowed Saddam to challenge the arms inspectors, there is also cause 
for some frustration among Saddam's representatives here; the West 
was not split as it was last time, and Iraq is no closer to an end 
of sanctions. On the other hand, new frictions have begun to show. 
At the arms-control agency, the forceful Australian diplomat who has 
been its leader, Richard Butler, now finds himself not so much an 
accuser as the accused. One of the agency's chief inspectors, a former 
U.S. marine named Scott Ritter, has quit, saying Butler and company 
have gone soft on Saddam. Russia, France and China, on the other hand, 
continue to say Butler's agency has been too hard on the Iraqis. In 
the absence of an ability to corner the Iraqis with intrusive surprise 
inspections, the agency has taken to telegraphing its punches for 
publicity effect. Recently, another U.N. agency charged with distributing 
food in Iraq also imploded in controversy. Denis Halliday, who managed 
the U.N. oil-for-food program in Iraq, resigned in anger, calling 
the sanctions regime a cruel farce that was destroying the Iraqi people 
while leaving the leadership intact. In effect, this pitted a U.N. 
humanitarian-aid official against the organization's arms-control 
officials, for whom maintaining sanctions is the key to keeping pressure 
on Iraq. At this point, some Middle East experts say the initiative 
clearly has passed to the Iraqis. ``They are setting the agenda,'' 
said Judith Kipper of the Center for Strategic and International Studies 
in Washington. ``They cause armies to move or withdraw, they sell 
oil, they have allies in the Security Council and in the region.'' 
What comes next? A senior Iraqi official gave this answer: Iraq will 
further erode the sanctions and create more confrontations. ``We can 
choose where,'' the official said. ``We know the United States wants 
to keep the sanctions forever, but how much is it willing to pay for 
that?'' Maybe more than the Iraqis think. ``I would say Iraq has changed 
the ground rules of the game,'' said an ambassador from an Arab country 
that was in the 1991 coalition. ``But is there light at the end of 
the tunnel? Not as long as Saddam is there, because the United States 
has built him into public enemy No. 1 and the Americans too cannot 
climb down.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>