<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0060 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A midterm election in search of a moral drove toward a close on Saturday 
in a final, frantic round of television advertisements, get-out-the-vote 
efforts and coast-to-coast partisan bickering over everything from 
President Clinton's character to health care and the safety of Social 
Security for his baby-boom generation. With 36 governorships, 34 Senate 
seats and all 435 seats in the House of Representatives at stake, 
neither national party entered the final 72 hours willing to predict 
major gains or losses in an electoral season that has seen repeated 
reversals of field and has often seemed overshadowed in Washington 
by the drama of an impending impeachment inquiry. ``My sense is that 
we're headed for a pretty low to modest turnout,'' said Mary Crawford, 
communications director for the National Republican Congressional 
Committee in Washington. ``There's not an overarching national event 
or situation that is propelling people, just real solid, good, hand-to-hand 
combat going on in these competitive individual districts. But there's 
not that national oomph, if you will.'' Still, there is no shortage 
of hotly contested races, including a half-dozen Senate seats, a dozen 
governorships and two dozen especially close House races that most 
experts now believe could wind up producing a net gain of a handful 
of seats for Republicans as that body begins a full-dress impeachment 
inquiry next month. ``What we're feeling is that there are 20 to 30 
races that are extremely close right now, a number of which will be 
decided by 1,000 to 2,000 votes,'' said Daniel Sallick, the spokesman 
for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. ``Right now, 
beyond that, we're not making any predictions.'' From California, 
where Sen. Barbara Boxer, the incumbent Democrat, has struggled to 
pull ahead of her Republican challenger, state Treasurer Matt Fong, 
to New York, where Sen. Alphonse D'Amato remains locked in a neck-and-neck 
race with his Democratic challenger, Rep. Charles Schumer, the airwaves 
were filled with the invective of last-minute advertising. At least 
one Democratic incumbent, Sen. Carol Moseley-Braun of Illinois, appears 
to trail badly behind her Republican challenger, state Sen. Peter 
Fitzgerald, but the prospect that Republicans might win a filibuster-proof 
majority of 60 seats in the Senate has receded in recent days as Democratic 
candidates like Boxer and Sen. Patty Murray of Washington have pulled 
ahead and Sen. Ernest Hollings of South Carolina appears to have rallied. 
With 18 incumbent Republican governors, compared with just six Democrats 
and one independent, the Republicans hold a pronounced advantage in 
races for governorships, but perhaps no single prize is more important 
than California, with control of redistricting its 52-member congressional 
delegation at stake in 2000. And here the Democratic nominee, Lt. 
Gov. Gray Davis, now holds a double-digit lead over his Republican 
opponent, state Attorney General Dan Lungren, in the polls. ``If you 
assume that the House is going to remain pretty closely divided, the 
Democrats can easily gain six House seats here in the next election, 
just by moving a few lines around after the next census,'' said Tony 
Quinn, a Republican redistricting expert in Sacramento. ``That can 
help them balance off what would be losses in other states. That's 
why the prize here is so important.'' Surrogate campaigners, like 
Hillary Rodham Clinton, who raced from fund-raisers here on Friday 
for Boxer to rallies in Chicago on Saturday, fanned out with one last 
round of election messages. Through all the vicissitudes of her husband's 
presidency, Mrs. Clinton has held a galvanic appeal for Democratic 
women and minority voters especially, and at a rally in Beverly Hills 
on Friday night she was ablaze. As a heckler interrupted the reception 
at the Beverly-Wilshire Hotel, Mrs. Clinton kept speaking calmly about 
the need to ``support public education'' and ``quality health care,'' 
but then, as the crowd cheered, she fairly shouted, ``We have to be 
sure that the people who do cheer for us get out and vote, so we protect 
our values.'' But Republicans were conceding nothing in the war over 
values. In the party's weekly response to the president's radio address 
on Saturday, Rep. John Ensign of Nevada, who is locked in a tight 
challenge to Sen. Harry Reid there, took credit for the Republicans 
for balancing the federal budget, overhauling the Internal Revenue 
Service, and cutting taxes and Medicare waste, and he promised his 
party would ``save Social Security.'' ``We are a party of compassion 
for those who cannot care for themselves,'' Ensign said, ``but a party 
of zero tolerance for those who commit violence, threaten our communities 
and prey on the small and weak.'' As the national Republican Party 
unleashed commercials in selected districts revisiting Clinton's deceptions 
about his involvement with Monica Lewinksy in hopes of adding 10 to 
15 seats to its 228-to-207 seat advantage in the House, the Democratic 
Party responded with advertisements of its own, mocking the Republicans. 
``We're not seeing a lot of evidence that their ads are having the 
desired effect,'' said Laura Nichols, press secretary to the House 
Democratic leader, Rep. Dick Gephardt of Missouri, ``in part because 
those ads have been very hard to find.'' But Ms. Crawford of the Republican 
Congressional Committee contended that the commercials aimed to draw 
a larger moral contrast between the parties' ideas. She added, ``If 
you didn't acknowledge that the scandal exists, your message seems 
phony, because in this political environment it hangs so heavy, which 
is why people are tired of it.'' Around the nation, polls showed that 
voters were apparently prepared to send mixed messages. The incumbent 
Republican governors of two of the biggest states, George Pataki of 
New York and George W. Bush of Texas, seemed poised for blowout victories. 
In Florida, Bush's brother Jeb leads his Democratic opponent, Lt. 
Gov. Buddy McKay, but by a smaller margin. Jeb Bush has said he is 
``running like I'm 10 points down,'' and last week he ran a series 
of television commercials warning elderly voters against possible 
intimidation by the McKay campaign _ attacks that McKay denounced 
as scare tactics. But in California, a new statewide poll by the Field 
Institute in San Francisco showed Davis holding a 14-point lead, 53 
percent to 39 percent, over Lungren, and Davis said he was ``so pleased 
to be on the threshold of what could be a great victory for every 
Democrat on the ticket.'' In Wisconsin, the incumbent Democratic senator, 
Russell Feingold, a vocal supporter of campaign-finance overhaul, 
has rejected help from his national party and as a result is in a 
fight for his life, facing perhaps $2 million in advertising and direct 
mail by the Republican National Senatorial Committee intended to help 
his challenger, Rep. Mark Neumann. On Sunday, both candidates are 
to take their campaigns to the parking lots of Lambeau Field in Green 
Bay, where Speaker Newt Gingrich is to appear at a pre-Packers' game 
rally for Neumann. By contrast, Republican hopes for winning a second 
Senate seat in Clinton's home state of Arkansas appeared to have fizzled. 
Former Rep. Blanche Lambert Lincoln held a 20-point lead over her 
opponent, State Sen. Fay Boozman, in a recent Mason-Dixon poll on 
the race to succeed the retiring Democratic incumbent, Dale Bumpers. 
``The seat is simply not in play anymore,'' said Dr. Cal Ledbetter, 
a retired professor of political science at the University of Arkansas 
at Little Rock. In sum, independent analysts said, neither party appears 
to have strong momentum at the season's end, though the consensus 
appeared to be that the Republicans diminished the gains they had 
made in the wake of Clinton's Aug. 17 confession of his relationship 
with Ms. Lewinsky by their handling of the material in Kenneth Starr's 
report on possible impeachable offenses. ``We do not see this as a 
`backlash' against Republicans per se,'' wrote the editors of The 
Cook Report, a non-partisan political newsletter in Washington. ``That 
seems far too strong a word. Instead it appears that House Republicans 
once again overplayed their hand, forfeiting a rather substantial 
advantage, and now have to settle for only a slight one.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>