<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981031.0187 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Labor unions in New York State are badly divided over their endorsements 
in this year's Senate race, depriving Alfonse D'Amato, the incumbent, 
and Rep. Charles Schumer of prized endorsements that could give them 
an edge in their neck-and-neck race. Several large unions have backed 
D'Amato, wanting to thank him for the repeated favors he has done 
for them during his 18 years in the Senate. But other unions, while 
appreciating D'Amato's help, have decided to endorse Schumer because 
they want to help the Democrats keep at least 40 seats and prevent 
Republicans from obtaining a filibuster-proof majority. Democrats 
now hold 45 seats to the Republicans' 55. By far the most important 
labor endorsement that D'Amato has received comes from the Building 
and Construction Trades Council of New York State, which the senator 
has wooed repeatedly over the years. The council, with 160,000 members, 
was so enthusiastic about D'Amato that it endorsed him in August, 
even before Democrats selected a candidate in the September primary. 
``Al D'Amato has an excellent record creating jobs for the building 
and construction trades in New York,'' said Edward Malloy, president 
of the building trades council. ``The senator does so much on a daily 
basis for labor that often goes unnoticed.'' As an example of D'Amato's 
help, Malloy cited his fighting to reconfigure federal aid formulas 
so that the state received hundreds of millions of dollars for highway 
and rapid transit construction. ``I can't see deserting a friend of 
the building and construction trades,'' Malloy said. But Jay Mazur, 
president of the nation's leading apparel union, the Union of Needletrades, 
Industrial and Textile Employees, insisted that Schumer had been a 
better friend to labor than D'Amato. While D'Amato has a much higher 
pro-labor voting record than do most Republicans, his lifetime pro-labor 
voting record is 47 percent, while Schumer's is 91 percent, according 
to the AFL-CIO. ``I think Schumer has an extraordinarily good labor 
record,'' Mazur said. ``But D'Amato has supported the basic principles 
of the Republican Party, although he has voted with us once in a while.'' 
Other unions supporting Schumer include the Communications Workers 
of America and the Service Employees International Union. Labor leaders 
who praise D'Amato note that he has voted labor's way on litmus-test 
issues like raising the minimum wage and keeping the Davis-Bacon Act, 
which guarantees that workers on government projects be paid the prevailing 
wage, normally close to the union wage. With unions so divided, neither 
candidate has been able to muster the two-thirds support needed for 
an endorsement from the New York State AFL-CIO, which has 2.1 million 
members. This means that the dozens of campaign workers mobilized 
by the AFL-CIO to make calls for labor-endorsed Democrats _ like Rep. 
Maurice Hinchey of Saugerties and Rep. Carolyn McCarthy of Long Island 
_ will not be urging union members to vote for Schumer. Similarly, 
it means that AFL-CIO callers who urge union members to vote for labor-endorsed 
Republican representatives _ like Michael Forbes of Long Island and 
Jack Quinn of Buffalo _ will not be urging people to vote for D'Amato. 
Two of the New York City's most prominent union leaders have been 
torn between D'Amato and Schumer, but, labor leaders say, their parent 
unions in Washington have pressured them to side with Schumer to help 
ensure that Democrats retain 40 seats in the Senate. That, labor leaders 
say, was the case with Dennis Rivera, president of 1199, the National 
Health and Human Service Employees Union, which has 150,000 members 
and recently merged into the Service Employees International Union. 
It was the same story, labor leaders say, with Stanley Hill, executive 
director of District Council 37, which represents 120,000 New York 
City municipal employees and is part of the American Federation of 
State, County and Municipal Employees. When a visibly agonized Rivera 
endorsed Schumer three weeks ago, he had kind words for D'Amato, thanking 
him for all the help he had given 1199, but he said it was nonetheless 
vital to back Schumer. He echoed many labor leaders in Washington 
who contend that if the Democrats fall to fewer than 40 seats in the 
Senate, the Republican majority will be able to push through anti-labor 
legislation, like bills to cut financing for the National Labor Relations 
Board and for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Labor 
leaders, fearing that incumbent Democratic senators may lose seats 
in Wisconsin, Illinois, California, South Carolina and Washington, 
are eager to pick up a seat in New York, a move they say will make 
it hard for the Democrats to fall to fewer than 40. Many labor experts 
see the political divisions as more evidence of the end of labor solidarity. 
``All this is kind of a wash for the candidates,'' said Norman Adler, 
a political consultant for both Democrats and Republicans. ``The unions 
don't seem to be able to draw together in the big races.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>