<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981018.1830.1193 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Television is under attack again. No surprise, you say qm this time 
the attack comes from a man who you could call one of television's 
pioneers. Steve Allen began his career when television was young. 
He was the first host of "the tonight show." He hit his stride in 
the 1950s. She's my baby. Allen is now 76, and television is not young 
anymore, either. Some say TV has grown more sophisticated. Allen says 
it's just more crass. He has teamed one a conservative group which 
launched an ad campaign in newspapers across the country. It asks 
readers to complain about sex and violence on TV. Has television lost 
its way or just grown up qm Jane Clayson sat dpoun for a conversation 
with Steve Allen. I think the majority of the American people feel 
as I do about this issue. Let me draw an analogy. Suppose there are 
two 57-year-old men out fishing and their boat starts to drift to 
shore. And they're telling Vulgar jokes. None of my business. Now 
suddenly, there are -- a picnic group, a bunch of children. At that 
point, I think any observer would say gentlemen, the kids are hearing 
this talk. Simple. I don't think anyone would say really lay it on 
them. You'd get arrested for talk like that. So that in a nutshell 
is what we are faced with. Do you think television was better in the 
'50s qm. We know what the great shows were in the '50s. They got big 
laughs. Jack Benny, Lucy, all got big laughs without vulgarity. Now 
when some of the same people worked in nightclubs with no children, 
it was different. But we're talking about television and radio, too. 
The television that was a big leap into a new order was "all in the 
family." But that was very objectionable to people at the time. Well, 
you can't issue blanket condemnations or you're a dummy. You have 
to examine shows and give a judgment. Today you have to listen to 
many lines to hear the clean lines. So you're asking the people to 
do what the heys commission did in the 1930s to picket movies or television 
programming or advertisers that promote sexually explicit or violent 
material. And my question now is, their actions let to sensorship. 
We should worry about how far it would go, as we would have to about 
how far our freedom gos. In are those who say this position is a remarkable 
evolution for a man who was once on the cutting edge of wlib ral politics 
and culture. Did you change qm did society change qm. Society changed. 
I still stake liberal positions on a long list of issues. I have always 
deplored filth, so I haven't changed my mind on that, but the sea 
around me has changed. Suddenly, I am awash in filth, as everyone 
else is. I don't want my grandchildren brainwashed with it. I conversation 
with Steve Allen. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>