<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981018.0447 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Serb official on Sunday accused ethnic Albanian rebels of increasing 
attacks on police in Kosovo to try to scuttle last week's peace agreement 
intended to avert NATO air strikes. ``These latest attacks show that 
the Albanian terrorsts are trying by all possible means to prevent 
the realization of the ... agreement,'' said Veljko Odalovic, the 
head of Kosovo's regional government. He spoke a day after NATO spy 
planes began flying over Kosovo and an advance team for a 2,000-strong 
monitoring force arrived to begin assessing whether Yugoslav President 
Slobodan Milosevic was complying with the peace agreement reached 
last Tuesday with U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke. Also Saturday, the 
Serb Media Center reported more than a dozen attacks by Albanian guerrillas 
throughout the province. Associated Press journalists witnessed the 
aftermath of the worst attack, which killed three Serbian policemen 
in Orlate, 30 kilometers (20 miles) southwest of Pristina late Saturday 
night. The conflicting events represented progress and setback for 
last week's agreement that was intended to peacefully resolve the 
conflict in the secessionist province in southern Serbia, the dominant 
republic of Yugoslavia. A NATO attack plan remains on standby if Milosevic 
fails to comply fully with the agreement, which calls for him to reduce 
military forces in Kosovo to the levels before his crackdown on Albanian 
separatists in February. He also must give full access to the 2,000 
``compliance verifiers'' and relief agencies trying to help scores 
of thousands of Albanian refugees return to their homes before winter 
sets in. U.S. and NATO officials have reported significant pullbacks 
by Yugoslav forces in recent days but say the number remaining exceeds 
the level required by the agreement reached by Milosevic and U.S. 
envoy Richard Holbrooke. But just a day after NATO gave Milosevic 
10 more days to fulfill his peace pledge, new attacks were reported 
throughout the province. In the Orlate attack, a grenade explosion 
in a house occupied by Serbian policemen killed three and wounded 
two. The AP journalists who drove by the house shortly afterward saw 
the bloodied bodies of the three slain policemen in the attic. The 
Serb Media Center in Pristina reported that other attacks involved 
machine-gun fire, mortars and grenades. ``This confirms what the international 
community has never wanted to admit, that these bands of terrorists 
are not in favor of a peaceful solution to the problem and are trying 
to take advantage of the withdrawal of the police and military forces 
from Kosovo,'' Odalovic said. The ethnic Albanians blamed the Serbs 
for at least two of the incidents, saying police in the Pristina suburb 
of Vranjevac had opened fire, hitting several Albanian houses and 
a car. The conflicting claims could not be independently confirmed. 
Hundreds of people on both sides have been killed during seven months 
of clashes between Serb forces and the KLA. More than 300,000 people, 
mostly ethnic Albanians, have been forced from their homes. Many refugees 
have been afraid to return to their homes because of the continuing 
presence of Serb police forces. But aid workers and U.S. officials 
have reported a steady return in the last few days. NATO began an 
aerial surveillance mission Saturday by sending U-2 planes high over 
Kosovo on a clear, sunny day in the southern Balkans. Yugoslavia formally 
consented to the flights Thursday as part the peace agreements. After 
the first planes had returned, a White House official said they found 
``clear indications'' Milosevic was pulling back at least two of seven 
force battalions as demanded by NATO commander Wesley Clark on Thursday. 
They also showed improved access for humanitarian and relief workers. 
The new deadline for compliance is Oct. 27. American diplomat William 
Graham Walker was appointed Saturday to head the new mission by the 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. A sizable number 
of monitors were expected to be in place in two weeks, and more than 
20 members of an advance team for the mission had arrived by Sunday 
afternoon. John Sandrock, an American who is chief of mission support 
for OSCE in Vienna, said upon arrival Sunday, ``We're glad we're here. 
We're ready to do the preparatory work for the Kosovo Verification 
mission. We're looking very much forward to consultations with the 
people who have been here already, the Kosovo Diplomatic Observer 
Mission. I hope to meet with them a little bit later, and we will 
go from there.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>