<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981018.0448 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
PRISTINA, Yugoslavia (AP) - The vanguard of what will be 2,000 unarmed 
international ``compliance verifiers'' arrived in Kosovo Sunday, rolling 
into Pristina on the heels of a new wave of violence in the strife-torn 
province. Three Serb policemen died and three others were badly wounded 
by a grenade at a police outpost in the town of Orlate, 30 kilometers 
(20 miles) southwest of Pristina, where police have long complained 
of frequent attacks by ethnic Albanians. An AP reporter verified the 
Orlate clash. The Serb-run Kosovo Media Center in Pristina reported 
a dozen other attacks around the province. Serb officials blamed the 
stepped up violence on the ethnic Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army, 
loosely organized bands of guerrillas still operating in wide areas 
of this poor southern province of Serbia, the dominant republic in 
the shrunken Yugoslav federation. ``These latest attacks show that 
the Albanian terrorists are trying by all possible means to prevent 
the realization of the ... agreement,'' said Veljko Odalovic, the 
head of Kosovo's regional government, referring to the deal struck 
by President Slobodan Milosevic and U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke. 
Hydajet Hyseni, spokesman for the United Democratic Movement, which 
is openly supportive of the KLA, accused the police of attacking the 
``innocent Albanian population,'' and said the KLA were shooting back 
in self-defense. ``There is no real withdrawal of Serb armed forces 
from Kosovo, let alone demilitarization of Kosovo,'' he said. Odalovic, 
however, said there was no doubt the Albanians were responsible. ``This 
confirms what the international community has never wanted to admit, 
that these bands of terrorists are not in favor of a peaceful solution 
to the problem and are trying to take advantage of the withdrawal 
of police and military forces from Kosovo.'' Hundreds of people on 
both sides have been killed during seven months of clashes between 
Serb forces and the KLA. An estimated 300,000 people, mostly ethnic 
Albanians, have been driven from their homes. Many of them have been 
afraid to return because of the continuing presence of Serb police, 
though there has been a trickle of returnees in a number of villages. 
The United States and NATO have reported significant pullbacks by 
Yugoslav forces in recent days but say numbers still exceed the level 
required by the Belgrade agreement. NATO plans for air attacks on 
Yugoslavia remained on hold as the North Atlantic Council, NATO's 
top policymaking body, extended the deadline for compliance from last 
Saturday to Oct. 27 and its spy planes continued to scan the region. 
As the violence escalated in this poor province of two million people, 
90 percent of whom are ethnic Albanian, an advance team from the Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe arrived in the provincial capital. 
The OSCE has been charged with the responsibility of verifying that 
Milosevic sticks to the promises he made in the agreement with Holbrooke. 
Principal among the demands is that he draw down troops and police 
to pre-February 1998 levels, the period when the current conflict 
began. So far, nobody has specified exactly what those levels are. 
``We will bring as many people in as quickly as possible, as the infrastructure 
permits,'' said John Sandrock, an American who heads the Vienna-based 
OSCE's mission support section. ``I don't want to give you any numbers, 
or any deadlines or any times, but we will respond to this issue as 
quickly as we can.'' Asked if he thought his current mission would 
have an effect on the rising number of attacks, he said: ``We hope 
that the overall presence of the OSCE can act in a stabilizing fashion 
and hopefully we'll resolve many of the issues. Ours is a technical 
mission. We are kind of an advance guard to try and assess where we 
will go from here.'' He said the OSCE mission had a one-year mandate, 
which could be extended. In Belgrade, the Serbian government prepared 
to exert full control over all media with a new law expected to restrict 
the work of the independent press. The law, government critics said, 
paves the way for shutting down media that don't toe the government 
line. The Serbian parliament is to meet Tuesday to pass the law, which 
follows a a government decree last week imposing censorship and shutting 
down three independent newspapers and a radio station. ``I think this 
law will be more restrictive than any previous one and probably the 
worst media law in Serbia ever,'' said Aleksandar Tijanic, a former 
information minister and a columnist in the banned Dnevni Telegraf. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>