<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981018.0438 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three weeks after voters dumped long-serving Chancellor Helmut Kohl, 
Germany's election victors have made clear the direction they want 
to take Europe's pivotal nation: left. The coalition deal completed 
by Social Democrats and Greens shifts Germany's course in important 
areas such as atomic power, the environment, integration of foreigners 
and taxes. Final details announced Sunday include a pledge to scrap 
cuts in retirement benefits pushed through by Kohl. More broadly, 
the new leadership will guide Germans through historic changes such 
as the government's return to the prewar capital, Berlin, and the 
introduction of a common European currency, the euro. But with unemployment 
stuck above 10 percent and the economy slowing, Chancellor-elect Gerhard 
Schroeder has firmly set his No. 1 priority: jobs. In a sign of high 
public expectations, his popularity soared to an all-time high in 
a poll published Saturday. Schroeder overtook Kohl protege Wolfgang 
Schaeuble at the top of the list, the Electoral Research Group survey 
said. While Germans seem ready to give Schroeder a chance, the defeated 
administration around Kohl and other critics have been quick to blast 
his emerging government's plans. The latest target was Sunday's confirmation 
that the Social Democrats and Greens intend to scrap cuts in retirement 
benefits and health care that were part of the modest welfare reforms 
passed by Kohl's government. Peter Hintze, general secretary of Kohl's 
Christian Democrats, called this approach ``a high risk for Germany 
as a business location.'' Also under fire from business is the coalition's 
tax plan, which would leave a bit more money in average earners' pockets 
but fill the gap by curbing writeoffs for companies and well-off individuals. 
Bild am Sonntag, Germany's most-read Sunday paper, called the reform 
``pitiful'' because it didn't go far enough. In a bigger policy shift, 
both parties agreed over the weekend to raise energy taxes, something 
Kohl's government had shunned. The first hike, to take effect Jan. 
1, includes 6 pfennigs (4 cents) a liter more on gasoline. The new 
government insists voters gave it a mandate to try new ways to put 
Germans back to work. Higher energy taxes, for instance, are intended 
to finance a cut in levies for social welfare programs that take a 
big bite out of paychecks and push up costs for business, making German 
products harder to sell abroad. As the junior partner, the ecology-minded 
Greens were forced to give up some of their more radical positions. 
Their demand for a speed limit on the autobahn, Germany's famously 
free superhighways, was shelved, along with calls for ending compulsory 
army service, disbanding NATO in the long term and a sharper hike 
in gas prices. Still, the two parties are breaking new ground. Talks 
with utilities on shutting down Germany's 19 nuclear power plants 
are to start soon. And in a historic project recognizing that Germany 
is more and more multicultural, children of foreigners are to be offered 
automatic German citizenship for the first time. On Monday, party 
leaders are to distribute Cabinet posts in Germany's first center-left 
government in 16 years. Schroeder has already announced his choice 
for finance minister: Oskar Lafontaine, a traditional leftist who 
favors a strong social welfare state and is the Social Democrats' 
national chairman. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>