<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981018.0644 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
PARIS (AP) - Minimal spare looks, or romantic, fussier styles? That's 
the low-key battle on runways as the 1999 spring ready-to-wear shows 
wind down. Freak shows shows are out in favor of attracting by plain 
or fancy styles. It seems to be a draw. Minimalism is starting to 
look boring, while romanticism hardly looks geared for the year 2000, 
either. On the romantic side, Franck Sorbier's Sunday show sparkled 
with sunny and charmingly naive southern French color and details. 
He dedicated it to the famous Colombe d'Or hotel-restaurant at St. 
Paul de Vence, a painting of the establishment behind the runway. 
The opulent romance of evening clothes dragged towards the end, but 
the result was appealing and fresh, with more than a touch of star 
quality - a reminder that Simone de Beauvoir, Yves Montand and others 
loved the Colombe d'Or, along with artists like Matisse and Picasso 
to Chagall, some of whom paid for their dinners with paintings that 
decorated the walls. Artistic references by Sorbier come up in some 
full skirts with abstract prints full bloom. More interesting are 
the pants or long skirt suits in oatmeal shades with triple eyelet 
ruffles at cuffs, and hems. Sorbier uses raffia beautifully in some 
gold-white or red fitted or full-skirted country-girl skirts, as the 
maidens waltzed in carrying flower baskets. A gold raffia bird-cage 
A-line number with sun motifs recalled the height of Paco Rabanne. 
Some new-look dresses with full skirts in layers of hot-colored nylon 
thrilled the audience full of little girls and Sorbier's friends. 
The innocence of it all was touching, and the Mediterranean sunny 
ideas quite nice. Jeans looks were dressy as if lacquered, though 
the almost neon multicolored layering of polyester-nylon is more cartoon 
than Riviera painter. But right now, it's somehow hipper and younger 
to go sparely minimalist. This is the story for Ines de la Fressange, 
a former top model with her own sporty ready-to-wear line for several 
years now. She's into all black and white, very high quality but unpretentious 
to the point of timidity. The various pullovers, canvas and cotton 
pants, leather here and there and several simple trouser suits, plus 
knee-length no-nonsense skirts could all drift nicely into a crowd. 
A strong point with Fressange is always the wonderful crisp white 
poplin shirts in many menswear or more exotic styles - just as the 
model-turned-businesswoman now wears them. More minimalism turned 
up at Daniel Hechter, whose German designer, Grit Seymour, trained 
at the famed St. Martin's school in London, the alma mater of Alexander 
McQueen, among others. The house is proud of its designer, bringing 
the ``new trends'' into what was just a practical manufacturing operation 
started in 1962. But all those unstructured suits, pearly-gray cropped 
pants, an even the cobalt blue jersey tops start to become a big bore. 
Silver jersey, metal-viscose blousons, pants and back-draped tops 
can be worn by many who appreciate reachable prices and want to look 
part of the fashion scene - however toned-down and hesitant. Yohji 
Yamamoto is in a different class. His witty statement was a kind of 
showbiz strip-tease, to solve the fancy-or-simple problem. But it 
was modest, and fashionable. He had a Victorian or 18th-century style 
full couture outfit step out to rip it off, glove, veil, hat and overskirt 
bit by bit - not into a g-string, but into a simpler but equally rich 
gown underneath, sometimes with bare shoulders, a lace-up bustier, 
or the popular dipped decollete backs. As the full crinolines disappeared 
for fluid skirts underneath, the message seemed to be ``have fun with 
your clothes, whether haute couture dies or not.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>