<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981018.1300.0586 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Adopting a child within the U.S. can be a difficult process, so many 
couples look overseas. Louise Schiavone reports such a move comes 
with its own risks. This is 9-year-old Nick, a spirited and well-loved 
third grader. He's come a long way since his early days in a Moscow 
orphanage, surrendered by an unmarried graduate student who couldn't 
afford to raise her son. His life changed forever at age 4, when he 
became part of an American family. We had a polaroid picture, and 
fell in love with the picture and with him. Nick has a lot in common 
with many of the 10,000 children adopted each year from other countries. 
This is very much a phenomenon of the fall of the iron curtain. Financially 
strapped former eastern Bloc nations are brimming with orphaned children 
in serious need of attention and resources that just aren't there. 
These institutions are both contaminated in the sense of health problems 
and sterile in the sense of emotional attachment. The problem's given 
rise to something called "adoption medicine." There are high risk 
factors that affect a developing brain, nutrition being one of the 
most important. Deprivation, social deprivation, isolation, and other 
types of hazards that can affect brain chemistry and development of 
proper brain cells and brain function. For youngsters like Nick, a 
new home in America can be lifesaving. But both parents and children 
face big adjustments. Nick's adoptive mom remembers playing with Nick 
at the orphanage before she took him home, and his clear craving for 
attention. They loved falling backward in the snow and having us pick 
them up. They would stiffen their bodies so we'd have to hold them. 
But once they got him home, Nick's new parents started to spot problems. 
He learned over many years of practice habits such as overactivity, 
impulsivity, poor learning abilities, had some risk factors that affected 
his learning. Therapy, special education, stability, patience and 
-- of course -- Love can undo much of the damage. He has certain learning 
disabilities. He goes to ld classes. But the most important thing 
about Nick is that he's really bright and he really works hard to 
overcome these things. Experts say would-be adoptive parents should 
research agencies and know as much about a prospective child as possible, 
including medical records and try to see the child, at least on videotape. 
When a child arrives in the United States, he or she should be examined 
thoroughly for health or developmental problems. Most stories, they 
say, have a happy ending. The resiliency of children represents the 
tenacity of mankind to hold on. Nick, say his parents, is the perfect 
example. Louise Schiavone, for CNN, falls church, Virginia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>