<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981018.1130.1489 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Charlton Heston is what some people might call a living Hollywood 
legend. He has authored, and been the subject of, at least half a 
dozen books. Now there's one more. Bill Tush reports. Stand with me. 
Charlton Heston's outspoken political views and the fact that he is 
the president of the national rifle association may overshadow the 
fact that he is an acting legend who burst on the screen as Moses 
in Cecil B. deMille's "the ten commandments." When the strong hand 
of the lord leads you out of bondage. And he owes it all to a chance 
meeting with the legendary deMille. He turned to his secretary and 
said, "who is that?" And he said, "that's Charlton Heston. He made 
a picture for Hal Wallace, 'Dodge city.' you ran it two weeks ago. 
You didn't like it." He said, "I like what I saw just now, let's have 
him in." Heston landed the role of the tough circus boss in DeMille's 
"the greatest show on earth." And three years later, he gave Charlton 
Heston the role of his life. How shall I find thy road through the 
wilderness lord? Heston was still a relatively young actor when he 
played Moses in "The ten commandments." If anything, I was a little 
green for that part. It was a huge role. You think so? I mean -- Well 
-- You're gonna go down in history as being Moses. I know, it's probably 
my signature role. But I could do it better now, what can I tell you? 
Actually, he has a lot to tell, and much of it is in his latest book, 
"Charlton Heston's Hollywood," covering his 50 years in over 70 films. 
And what other actor can boast that he played Moses and then went 
on to lead the cast of the epic, "Ben-Hur"? How does one learn to 
drive a chariot. With great difficulty. He did learn to drive one, 
although he expressed concern to the stunt director when the race 
day approached. I don't know if I can handle that. And he pushed his 
cap back and he said, "Chuck, you just make sure you stay in the chariot. 
I guarantee you're going to win the damn race." Not only won the race, 
but the academy award as well. Where do you go from there? Well, to 
"the planet of the apes," the "soylent green" future and survive an 
"earthquake." First time in my life I'm ashamed of my profession. 
Not really. We all got paid obscene amounts of money for doing about 
ten days' work. It was -- I still get checks on that. Oh, let's not 
leave out that trip to "Wayne's world." With a career like his, Charlton 
Heston can poke a little fun at himself. Bill Tush, "CNN Entertainment 
News," New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>