<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981018.1600.1485 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
New studies suggest babies understand language long before they can 
use it. So talking to your infant is crucial to his or her development. 
Rhonda Rowland reports. I'm gonna get your belly. How much does 8-month-old 
Ryan really understand? Row, row, row your boat gently down the stream 
Some would say this conversation is more for the parent's benefit. 
Life is but a dream But some researchers now believe baby Ryan is 
getting a lesson in language, even though it will be months before 
she'll utter her first "Mama" or "dada," and even longer before she'll 
put a simple sentence together. Just as babies are born hard-wired 
to walk, some scientists now believe they're also hard-wired to learn 
language. Infants don't start at an arbitrary point. They come into 
the world in the first six months of life with some ability to perceive 
differences between speech sounds that occur in the world's languages. 
Psychology professor Peter jusczyk says his studies show that by 7 
1/2 months of age, babies have the ability to pick specific words 
out of fluent speech. Jusczyk found infants listen longer to the passages 
with the familiar words. So once a child has recognized that some 
particular word is occurring, they can recognize then that other words 
seem to occur with that word. So let's take a word like "cat." Okay, 
you may hear "the" paired with "cat." At home, the children are getting 
ready for bed. Jusczyk used a similar experiment to show that by 18 
months, children can pick out grammatically correct sentences, even 
though a child of that age may only be able to say two words together. 
Before this and similar studies were done, researchers thought if 
a child wasn't producing complete sentences, they weren't hearing 
them. The new thinking is, children perceive the specifics of language 
long before they're capable of using it. Armed with the knowledge 
that children pick up the fundamentals of language during those early 
months, parents may feel they have an awesome and overwhelming responsibility. 
The experts say these findings do not mean parents should drill their 
children. What they should do comes naturally. It's not vocabulary 
lists that you're after, but children learning context. They also 
learn an emotional context. Those pretty Flowers? Expose your child 
to varied and rich experiences. Perhaps, most importantly, Dr. barnet 
says give your child plenty of this -- Smiles and hugs give the child 
a sense of accomplishment, making those lessons in language a pleasure 
to learn. Rhonda Rowland, CNN. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>