<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981018.1600.0120 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some Israeli settlers on the West Bank are concerned the outcome of 
the talks in Maryland could mean the loss of a protective shield. 
Jerrold Kessel reports. Proceeding apace, work on a new West Bank 
bypass road that'll allow Jewish settlers to avoid Palestinian territory 
should a new troop redeployment agreement become reality. Seen as 
a signal of intent that prime minister Netanyahu means to secure the 
agreement, work that's part of an elaborate army plan, according to 
israel television maps unveiled at the weekend. The land transfers 
would leave several Settlements as islands within palestinian-controlled 
areas, like the 70 families in this small settlement between Jerusalem 
and hebron. Some here believe implicitly in Divine protection, in 
the slogan over their synagogue -- "the rock of my salvation." But 
for most among the West Bank settler community, real concern if the 
army relocates. After they go, we will be all alone. Some of the prime 
minister's erstwhile backers on the right pull no punches about their 
long-term loyalty to Mr. Netanyahu. He changed his way, changed his 
philosophy, changed his words. He disappointed us. And I think that 
maybe the only thing now is to bring him down. There have been minor 
demonstrations by the extremists. But ultranationalist strategists 
are seen as holding their fire because they only want to swing into 
action when they believe those actions will have a chance of really 
influencing what the prime minister does. Day after day, night after 
night, provoking violent incidents between themselves and the Palestinians, 
sucking in the Israeli army and trying to create the kind of atmosphere 
that makes implementation virtually impossible. That's when Mr. Netanyahu's 
heart is pulled in the direction where, after all, his ideological 
origins are. After all, he's not the man who wanted to give away the 
historic heartland of Jewish history. Settler leaders try to make 
the point they're not in Netanyahu's pocket. They hosted, for example, 
the former army chief of staff amnon shahak who is known to oppose 
the Netanyahu approach and might emerge as a serious opponent in an 
election that could be precipitated by an agreement. Beyond the red 
roofs of the Jewish settlement, a Palestinian village. The lie of 
the land is part of Benjamin Netanyahu's political calculation. He 
believes that if he's able to secure an agreement now, whatever the 
immediate consequences, a majority of Israelis will eventually see 
him as the man who can ensure that the settlers are able to remain 
here. Jerrold Kessel, CNN, at the settlement of karmei tzur on the 
West Bank. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>