<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981018.1830.1570 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Finally this evening -- the return to space later this month of the 
first american ever to go there 36 years ago. The upcoming flight 
of the space shuttle "discovery" has reignited america's fascination 
with trekking to the stars. Here's NBC's Kerry Sanders. 11 days and 
counting. This mission has the most tightly packed scientific test 
schedule ever attempted, including the study of space habitation and 
the launch of two satellites. Senator John Glenn is but one of seven 
crew members standing next to him. The youngest crew member -- 35-year-old 
Pedro duque. He wasn't even born when astronaut Glenn first rocketed 
into space in 1962. Pad 39 B. 11 miles away from pad 14. Desolate, 
abandoned. It is here where astronaut Glenn lifted off to become the 
first American to orbit the earth. The pad was decommissioned in 1967. 
In 1984, it became a national historical landmark. But pad 14 still 
launches memories. And for those who played a role in John Glenn's 
mission 36 years ago, this return to space has reignited old feelings. 
Retired "Mercury" test conductor Tom O'Malley feels a stake in this 
mission. O'Malley pushed that very button and spoke the words that 
launched Glenn into space 36 years ago. All recorders to fast. T-minus 
18 and counting. Engines start. Godspeed, John Glenn. Three, two -- 
That liftoff woke up the sleepy cocoa beach area. Population then, 
3,750. Today brevard county's 1300 square miles is home to nearly 
500,000 people. In the early '60s this two-Lane road was the major 
thoroughfare. Today it's four-lanes wide. Kids no longer attend the 
tiny freedom 7 elementary school. It's a senior center. Today, most 
of the counties 59 elementary schools reflect what put this area on 
the map. What has not changed much -- Bernard's surf. The bar still 
offers a free drink during launches. On the walls, pictures of the 
astronauts who ate here and paraded here. Charles Curtis was an engineer 
at NASA in the 1960s. Everyone was excited. The space program was 
new. It was a very exciting activity that was going on. Now I think 
everyone is a little more blase about it. That is until now. Astronaut 
John Glenn, about to make history again, at 77 years old, the oldest 
man to go into space. Kerry Sanders, NBC news, the Kennedy space center. 
For more on John Glenn's new mission and a virtual tour of his original 
"Mercury" capsule, check our web site at MSNBC.com. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>