<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0243 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Monday, Oct. 19: It has 
always been clear that the Clinton administration's ambitious plan 
to save the Everglades would not succeed unless ways could be found 
to guarantee this wondrous ecosystem a reliable flow of fresh water. 
Last week, the Army Corps of Engineers unveiled a breathtaking plan 
to do exactly that. The plan has already won the support of environmentalists. 
It also needs support from less reliable but nevertheless indispensable 
stakeholders _ Congress, Florida's political establishment and the 
state's powerful and often obstructive sugar interests. The Corps' 
commitment is a good omen, since the Corps did much to damage the 
Everglades in the first place. Fifty years ago, under orders from 
Congress, the Corps drained a half-million acres south of Lake Okeechobee 
with a vast web of levees, canals and pumping stations. This marvelous 
if misguided feat helped the sugar cane industry and kept Florida's 
east coast free from floods and safe for development. But it robbed 
the Everglades and Florida Bay of fresh water and nearly ruined both. 
The plan's central purpose is to recapture 85 percent of the fresh 
water that is now channeled out to sea during the wet season, leaving 
the Everglades dry when the rains stop. Massive lagoons would be built 
to store the water, canals would be destroyed to let the water flow 
southward in a more natural way, and vast artificial marshes would 
be created to filter pollution from cane fields and the cities. The 
Everglades would not be the only beneficiary. The system would also 
supply drinking water for South Florida's exploding population. Even 
so, obstacles abound. Most of the restoration projects so far have 
been paid for on a 50-50 basis by the state and the federal government, 
as the new plan would be. One big question is whether the Florida 
Legislature and its patrons in agriculture and real-estate development 
will go along. Thousands of acres _ much of it coveted by developers 
and growers _ must be acquired for water storage and purification. 
With that in mind, the sugar industry persuaded its friends in the 
Florida Legislature earlier this year to pass a bill that would have 
given the Legislature line-by-line veto power over every detail of 
the Corps' restoration plan. Gov. Lawton Chiles courageously vetoed 
the bill, but the episode raised doubts about the reliability of the 
Legislature in the year ahead. There are also worries that Jeb Bush, 
the Republican who is favored to succeed Chiles, may not be as firmly 
wedded to Everglades restoration. Another potential obstacle is Congress. 
This year, various House appropriations committees denied the Interior 
Department some of the money it needed to acquire crucial buffer zones 
between the Everglades and Florida's populated east coast, and shortchanged 
the Corps as well. Republicans leaders said Florida's unreliability 
as a partner had discouraged their colleagues from approving more. 
That is a poor excuse. Time and again, Congress has committed itself 
to undo its disastrous mistakes of 50 years ago, when it robbed South 
Florida of its historic water flows. It is duty bound to honor that 
commitment now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>