<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0100 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On June 5, 1995, Roger Cohen was sitting in his room in the Holiday 
Inn, Sarajevo, when a sudden surge of electricity enabled him to switch 
on the television and watch Al Gore telling Larry King about Bosnian 
history. ``This is a tragedy that has been unfolding for some time,'' 
observed the vice president. ``Some would say for 500 years.'' Only 
500? If developments in the political and military history of the 
1990s can be traced so confidently all the way back to the 15th century, 
why stop there? President Clinton showed an obliging willingness to 
go the extra mile. ``It's tragic, it's terrible,'' he empathized. 
``But their enmities go back 500 years, some would say almost a thousand 
years.'' So there you have it: The origins of the Bosnian war can 
be found somewhere in the late 10th century, between, let us say, 
the death of Alfred the Great and the birth of Omar Khayyam. This 
theory, attributing the conflict to ancient ethnic hatreds, has become 
a matter of almost religious faith in the minds of many Western politicians 
and diplomats. Cohen, who reported from Bosnia for The New York Times 
throughout the war, is too good a journalist to be satisfied for one 
moment with this sort of pseudo-historical flimflam. Having interviewed 
the local politicians and having met innumerable ordinary Bosnians, 
he can see that the conflict was essentially a product of modern political 
history, and he knows that for most people lethal hatred was the consequence 
of the war, not its cause. This is perhaps the most important lesson 
that readers will learn from ``Hearts Grown Brutal,'' his powerfully 
written, ambitious and many-layered study of the Bosnian war. Like 
any journalist worth his salt, Cohen knows, too, that when Western 
politicians utter vague historical platitudes, they are not necessarily 
explaining the real reasons for their policies. The doctrine of ``ancient 
ethnic hatreds'' was convenient for Western leaders; it lent an air 
of justifiability to a policy approach _ of hesitancy, inaction and 
denial _ that had already been adopted for other reasons. Cohen is 
also too decent a human being to remain entirely dispassionate when 
considering the moral failure of the West's Bosnian policy. The last 
third of this book consists of a scathing catalog of Western cowardice 
and hypocrisy: from the early reluctance to accept (still less to 
look for) evidence of concentration camps and massacres, to the final 
tragedy of the so-called ``safe area'' of Srebrenica. Much of this 
has been said before, of course. But at several key points, Cohen 
has important information to add. He sheds new light, for example, 
on the role played during the hostage crisis of June 1995 by French 
President Jacques Chirac, who pushed hard (and successfully) for a 
policy of appeasement. And he quotes from the secret minutes of a 
crucial meeting between United Nations civilian and military authorities 
on the ninth of that month, at which fatal misjudgments about the 
Serbs' plans for Srebrenica became fixed in official U.N. policy. 
These sections of the book alone would suffice to make it required 
reading for all future historians of the Bosnian war. But what Cohen 
has set out to provide in this book is much more than just a catalog 
of Western blunders. He is also trying to explain the meaning of the 
war at two different levels: in terms of human experience and longer-term 
Yugoslav history. The first of these tasks is accomplished by weaving 
into the narrative the stories of several ordinary Bosnian families. 
What comes across most strongly from these personal histories is the 
sense of bewilderment most people felt. The outbreak of war took them 
by surprise, and the transformation of neighbors into enemies seemed 
to have no basis in their previous experience. Their favorite metaphor 
was that a whirlwind had come out of nowhere and blown their lives 
apart. Where and why had that whirlwind been generated? Because it 
is hard to imagine how hatreds can be created out of nothing at all, 
Cohen naturally hunts around for pre-existing tensions and animosities. 
These he finds not in ``ancient ethnic hatreds,'' but in unresolved, 
or unrecognized, conflicts of 20th-century Yugoslav history. He tells 
the story of the massacres of Serbs by extremist ``Ustasha'' Croats 
in World War II, of Muslim collaboration with the Nazis and of atrocities 
committed by Serb Chetniks. Because this murky history was never properly 
confronted or acknowledged during the Communist period, he suggests, 
such hatreds could only intensify and fester. Cohen's argument here 
is a little misleading on some points. It can hardly be claimed that 
the Communists swept the history of Jasenovac (the notorious Ustasha-run 
death camp) under the carpet, when they built a sky-high monument 
at the camp and bused in schoolchildren to visit it. And the way in 
which Cohen has presented his material, devoting the first 100 pages 
of the book to the family story of a Muslim who served with the Nazi 
SS in the war, may give a skewed impression. Only 18,000 Muslims joined 
the SS, out of a population of nearly one million; most Muslims took 
no part in the war, though many did join the anti-Nazi Partisans during 
its final phase. Sometimes Cohen comes close to suggesting that this 
20th-century history caused the Bosnian war, by creating psychological 
pressures that found their natural release in violence. This argument 
would seem not so very different from the ``ancient ethnic hatreds'' 
thesis, merely substituting modern political ones. More often, however, 
Cohen presents the causal mechanism the other way around: low-level 
prejudices were transformed into red-hot hatreds quite deliberately 
(and, I would add, wounds of war that had genuinely healed were violently 
reopened), for modern political purposes. If Cohen had known Bosnia 
long before the war, he would be even more certain of the truth of 
this explanation. As it is, the bewilderment of those ordinary Bosnians, 
caught up in Slobodan Milosevic's (and, later, Franjo Tudjman's) whirlwind, 
must stand as sufficient testimony to the tragic noninevitability 
of the Bosnian war. Readers of ``Hearts Grown Brutal'' may also be 
bewildered by the sheer intensity of the violence it describes; but 
at the same time they will be informed, challenged and moved by this 
powerful and richly human book. PUBLICATION NOTES: `HEARTS GROWN BRUTAL: 
Sagas of Sarajevo' By Roger Cohen 523 pages. Random House. $27.95. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>