<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0169 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Giants' season may have been saved more than a week before the 
team beat up on the Arizona Cardinals Sunday at the Meadowlands. That 
was when defensive end Michael Strahan and linebacker Jessie Armstead 
walked into an offensive-team meeting and basically told them, in 
the words of Armstead, ``to stop playing like a bunch of punks.'' 
Strahan and Armstead sent the players in the room into a state of 
disbelief. What were these defensive players doing in their meeting, 
criticizing them? Though both players say they were not attacking 
any one player or position, it is no secret that the defensive players 
have been disgusted by what they feel has been soft play by the offensive 
line. So, before the Giants played Atlanta last Sunday, Strahan and 
Armstead wanted players on the offense to check their pulse. Anyone 
without a heartbeat was to check themselves out of the lineup and 
onto the golf course. After the speech, the Giants were blown out 
by the Falcons, but that doesn't mean the chat didn't work. Offensive 
players said the message stuck with them for days afterward, like 
bad tuna, all the way up to the Cardinals game. They were furious. 
They practiced hard and mad. This week, Strahan kept up the pressure. 
Once, as a couple of offensive linemen walked by his locker, Strahan 
called them a word that would make Howard Stern blush. The word was 
another way to call someone soft. There is no way to accurately portray 
how different the Giants looked Sunday. For the first time they resembled 
the team that won the National Football Conference East last year 
and there is no question that what Strahan and Armstead did was a 
big part of that. The Cardinals aren't a good team, bunched up with 
two dozen other clubs that play mediocre football. But the Giants 
have been playing so poorly this year that beating Arizona was no 
certainty, and if they had lost, their playoff chances would nearly 
have been buried. Strahan and Armstead, the only two Pro Bowlers on 
the Giants, understood that if the Giants were going to make the playoffs, 
the offense had to play better. The three-and-out stuff on every series 
had to stop. They also realized that they were the only players on 
the team with the clout to send such a message. Strahan and Armstead 
couldn't care less about their popularity or hurting anyone's feelings. 
All they want to do is win. ``We were very upset with what they did,'' 
said running back Tiki Barber. ``We thought it was out of line. But 
I have to admit, it worked. There was a carryover, no question. We 
were mad for a long time.'' The Giants' offensive line pounded Arizona's 
solid defensive front of Andre Wadsworth, Eric Swann, Mark Smith and 
Simeon Rice. Giants running back Gary Brown had the team's first 100-yard 
game of the season with 108 yards on 24 carries. Quarterback Danny 
Kanell, for the first time this year, wasn't running scared. He had 
time to complete 22 of 36 passes for 259 yards and three touchdowns 
with no interceptions. ``A week later, the offense responded,'' Armstead 
said. ``Maybe they finally got mad. They were crying all this week 
about what Mike and I said, but they stopped crying and finally hit 
somebody.'' What had frustrated Strahan is that few people on the 
offensive side of the ball got irate when things were going bad during 
a game. Strahan doesn't want what happened last season in the playoffs 
against Minnesota, when defensive players almost got into a fistfight, 
to happen again. He simply wants offensive players to have the kind 
of emotion they do on the defensive side. ``We didn't point fingers 
at anyone,'' Strahan said. ``We just said things in general. I stood 
up and said, `We need to play with fire, like we give a darn.' Then 
Jessie stood up and said, `It's time to play with emotion. Hey, Danny, 
if you see a lineman mess up, tell him, yell at him. If you see a 
receiver mess up, yell at him. I know when I make a mistake, people 
point it out. When our defensive backs make mistakes, I yell at them.' 
That's how it went. ``Some players were offended. But that's too bad. 
We needed to turn things around. I was actually nice. I tell you what, 
if we would have lost to Arizona, then I would not have been nice.'' 
Strahan and Armstead aren't the kind of players who hammer teammates 
then fail to perform themselves. Against Arizona, the two did what 
they always do _ back up their attitude with action. Strahan had four 
tackles, one sack and hurried quarterback Jake Plummer about six times. 
Armstead had five tackles, one interception and knocked a pass to 
the ground. Then, to show there were no hard feelings, after the offense 
scored its third touchdown of the game, Strahan shook the hand of 
every offensive player as they walked to the sideline. To Strahan, 
like Armstead, it's all business. Get the job done, everything is 
fine. If not, be prepared to hear an earful. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>