<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0110 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After 20 years as an investigative reporter, Brian Ross of ABC News 
knows a good story when he hears one. He is also not stupid. He knew 
the story he heard last spring might raise difficulties because it 
involved ABC's parent, the Walt Disney Co., but he thought he had 
enough solid information to pursue it. The story involved accounts 
of pedophilia and lax security at theme-park resorts, including Walt 
Disney World, and once Ross and his longtime producer-partner, Rhonda 
Schwartz, had finished their reporting, they thought they had a solid 
investigative piece for ``20/20,'' ABC's news magazine program. But 
the report was killed last week, or at least shelved. ABC News executives 
refuse to discuss the reasons in detail and have urged those involved 
not to discuss the matter publicly. Disney issued a statement saying 
that its executives had nothing to do with the decision. The saga 
of the Ross-Schwartz report _ and how ABC dealt with it _ illustrates 
the thorny problems reporters have in examining their own companies, 
especially in this age of conglomerates, when many parent companies 
of media outlets are also involved in many other businesses. Can reporters 
investigate them the way they would any other subject? If not, where 
must a line be drawn? ABC News' public comments regarding the Ross-Schwartz 
report have come only from Eileen Murphy, the division's chief spokeswoman, 
and her efforts to explain the decision also highlight the sensitivity 
of dealing with one's own company. At first, Ms. Murphy would say 
only that ``the draft report submitted was not acceptable to ABC News,'' 
adding that this did not ``reflect badly on any reporter or producer 
involved.'' But when pressed for ABC News' thinking on whether there 
are limits to investigating its parent company, she said, ``We would 
generally not embark on an investigation that focused solely on Disney, 
and was not part of a broader story that involved other companies, 
for a whole variety of reasons, one of which is that whatever you 
come up with, positive or negative, will seem suspect.'' She emphasized 
that ABC News would not hesitate to cover any breaking news story 
about Disney, as it did when Disney's new Animal Kingdom theme park 
was accused of mistreating animals, or when Southern Baptists announced 
a boycott of Disney. And she said ABC would pursue investigative stories 
that included Disney among others, like one Ross did for ``20/20'' 
last spring about companies that took advantage of cheap laborers 
on the island of Saipan to make clothing that they could legally label 
``Made in America.'' Ross' investigative instincts were roused again 
last spring when Ms. Schwartz told him about a telephone call she 
received from Peter Schweizer, an author who had worked with the Ross-Schwartz 
team on two stories about five years ago, when the two were at NBC 
News. This time, Schweizer was offering an exclusive look at galleys 
of a book he and his wife, Rochelle Schweizer, were finishing on Disney, 
which had a chapter contending that several Disney theme parks had 
experienced problems with pedophiles and had resisted cooperating 
with law enforcement agencies. Schweizer offered his book as what 
he called ``a jumping-off point'' for an investigation by Ross, who 
had won many awards during his 18 years at NBC News, including a George 
Foster Peabody Award and two George Polk Awards. That record prompted 
ABC News to lure him away from NBC four years ago. Ross, because of 
his status and because he reports for several different programs, 
has a separate unit of his own within ABC News and is not supervised 
by any single executive producer. When he has a project that may raise 
legal or ethical questions, he is expected to discuss it with Richard 
Wald, the senior vice president for editorial quality. He did so last 
spring. While details of their talk remain private, both men clearly 
expected Ross to investigate problems with pedophilia and law enforcement 
at theme parks in general, not just at Disney World. In fact, Wald 
sent a letter on June 24 to Regnery Publishing, the Schweizers' publisher, 
saying that Ross wanted to interview Schweizer and have exclusive 
access to materials gathered for the Schweizers' book, titled ``Disney: 
The Mouse Betrayed,'' which was published in September. In the letter, 
Wald describes Ross' project as a report ``on the problems of employing 
undesirable persons at places like resorts and theme parks,'' adding 
that ``Disney World might be part of that.'' Ms. Schwartz and Ross 
spent much of the summer pursuing the story, and according to several 
people who worked with them, they re-interviewed people interviewed 
by the Schweizers, relocated police and court records and discovered 
additional cases of pedophilia and peeping-Tom incidents not found 
by the Schweizers. These people said the Ross-Schwartz team had examined 
more than a dozen theme-park resorts, mostly in Florida, but had found 
that Disney's resorts had more problems than others and that many 
Florida law-enforcement officials said the security staff at the Walt 
Disney World Resort complex in Orlando was more uncooperative than 
staffs elsewhere. At this point the tricky problem of how far reporters 
can go in investigating their employers arose for Ross and Ms. Schwartz. 
If they had set out only to examine Disney resorts, then by Ms. Murphy's 
definition of ABC guidelines, their project presumably would have 
been dead from the start. But they were given the go-ahead in part 
because they planned to examine other theme parks, too. Ross and Ms. 
Schwartz then had this problem: How could they not focus their report 
primarily on Disney if that is what their reporting found the facts 
to be? Wald and David Westin, president of ABC News, had a similar 
problem: How could they allow such a report to be broadcast if they 
believed it focused excessively on Disney and not others in the theme-park 
business? Ross and Ms. Schwartz finished a draft version of their 
report earlier this month and submitted it to Wald and Westin for 
review. On Tuesday, Ross and Westin had a shouting match over Westin's 
decision to shelve the report _ shouting that included Ross asking 
whether he should ``call his agent'' and Westin saying he would accept 
Ross' resignation on the spot _ but apologies were made afterward. 
People close to both men insist they respect each other and each other's 
position in this affair. Westin was then left with the problem of 
whether to explain the decision to kill the report. If ABC News believed 
the reporting was insufficient or inconclusive, to say so would mean 
publicly criticizing their own highly regarded investigative team. 
But to keep quiet would make outsiders suspect that ABC had killed 
the report out of fear of hurting Disney's theme-park business. A 
senior ABC News executive, speaking on the condition of anonymity, 
said that whatever the reasons, to discuss them publicly ``would have 
a chilling effect'' on future deliberations among producers, reporters 
and executives, who would be forced to worry that their private comments 
might become public. But an equally important issue is whether ABC 
journalists will feel chilled from pursuing stories about Disney. 
As a Ross admirer at ABC News said, Ross ``tested the outer boundaries 
of reporting on Disney and found them.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>