<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0126 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The anonymous caller to the police claimed there were many illegal 
immigrants working at the Galaxy clothing shop downtown. But among 
the cardboard boxes of cheap blue jeans and polyester shirts, the 
police found only one likely suspect _ a neatly dressed young salesman 
with the sharp features, dark skin and wavy hair of a northern African. 
When he could not produce identity papers, the immigration officers 
quietly escorted him to their prison bus. On the street, pedestrians 
quickly recognized the arrest for what it was and began to applaud. 
Then a taxi driver started chanting, pumping his fist out the window 
of his van: ``Go home!'' he shouted. ``Go home!'' Soon it was a full-fledged 
chorus, loud enough to drown out the screech of the rusting bus door 
closing behind the prisoner _ the ninth to be collected on a recent 
morning. Drawn to President Nelson Mandela's new democracy and an 
economy that dwarfs all others on this continent, illegal immigrants 
from all over Africa, many of them destitute, are pouring into this 
country in ever greater numbers, experts say. But they are hardly 
finding a welcome mat. The economy here is failing to grow as fast 
as predicted, and majority rule has failed to produce enough housing, 
health clinics and good schools. So South Africans are growing increasingly 
resentful of the new arrivals, seeing them as thieves of scarce resources. 
Many of the apartheid-era efforts to keep the country's borders secure 
have been relaxed. But current hardship and past isolation have left 
the country ill prepared to deal with this growing problem. Surveys 
suggest that anti-foreigner attitudes, particularly against blacks, 
are deep-seated and widespread among all races. And violence against 
immigrants is growing. Last month, an angry mob killed three foreigners 
on a commuter train outside Pretoria after accusing them of stealing 
jobs from South Africans. Two of the victims, both from Senegal, were 
electrocuted when they climbed onto the roof to escape being lashed 
with cattle whips. The third, a Mozambican, was thrown out the window 
and killed by an oncoming train. The incident was hardly the only 
recent brutality against foreigners. In Cape Town, at least 10 died 
in the last year in assaults that the police believe were related 
to anti-immigrant sentiments. In downtown Johannesburg, local hawkers 
have repeatedly demonstrated against foreign ones, and each time some 
foreigners have been beaten and robbed. In Alexandra township, inside 
the wealthy suburb of Sandton, armed gangs have assaulted immigrants 
and marched them to the police station to ``clean'' the area of foreigners. 
And in the eastern province of Mpumalanga last summer, a gang calling 
itself the Unemployed Group ambushed and burned at least six trucks 
as part of what it called a ``torch campaign'' to force companies 
to give jobs to locals. Concerned about the pattern, the Human Rights 
Commission has just sponsored a symposium to get business and community 
leaders thinking about the issue. ``Even with the Pretoria train attack, 
the reaction was very muted,'' said Jody Kollapen, a commission member 
who describes animosity toward immigrants as having risen sharply 
in the last five years. ``There was very little public outcry. That 
silence is of great concern to us.'' Recent surveys show that South 
Africans are among the world's most xenophobic people. Twenty-five 
percent want a ban on immigrants, according to one survey, taken last 
year by the Institute for Democracy in South Africa, a nonprofit research 
institute based in Cape Town. Just two years earlier that number was 
16 percent. The same survey found that about 80 percent of those polled 
said they had little or no contact with foreigners. Moreover, both 
black and white South Africans prefer white immigrants, viewing newcomers 
from Europe and North America more favorably than they do Africans. 
There is a debate about what may be behind such attitudes. One of 
the authors of the institute's survey, Dr. Robert Mattes, says he 
thinks the intolerance for other Africans may have grown out of a 
society that for decades carefully separated races and encouraged 
the denigration of blacks. ``There is a very paternalistic and antagonistic 
view of blacks north of the border,'' Mattes said. ``They are seen 
as wetbacks, yokels, rural folks. They are definitely not like us.'' 
But others argue that the xenophobia may simply be a passing mood 
in a country that is forging a new national identity and coping with 
difficult economic times. White-ruled South Africa strictly controlled 
the number of immigrants allowed in as cheap labor. Borders were patrolled 
and mined. An electric fence _ its voltage set to kill _ stood between 
South Africa and Mozambique. But such restrictions have eased under 
the government of the African National Congress, which in many ways 
owes its very existence to its neighbors. Many exiled ANC leaders 
sat out the apartheid era or plotted their guerrilla attacks in neighboring 
countries that risked the vengeance of an often-brutal apartheid government. 
Estimates of the illegal immigrant population in South Africa now 
vary widely, from 2 million to 8 million, and are regarded by most 
experts as hardly more than guesses. What is clear, however, is that 
South Africa _ which according to the latest census figures has a 
population of 37 million _ has been deporting more and more immigrants 
each year, nearly 200,000 in 1997. For much of the continent, South 
Africa is the pot of gold at its end, and each new war or famine triggers 
a wave of new arrivals desperate to work on farms or building sites 
for a pittance, or even for a daily bowl of porridge. Many end up 
at the lowest rungs of the economy and live clustered together, creating 
their own neighborhoods. The biggest influx comes from Mozambique, 
which has been ravaged by nearly 20 years of civil war. The Kruger 
Park forms most of the border between the two countries, and every 
year an unknown number of the thousands of Mozambicans trying to cross 
are eaten by lions _ which then must be hunted down and shot because 
they have developed a taste for human flesh. Last year, during an 
autopsy of one lion, a purse with $1.50 in Mozambican currency was 
found in its stomach. South of the park, about 40 miles of electric 
fence still stands. The voltage is now set to give only a strong shock. 
Soldiers monitor computers that sound alarms whenever it is breached, 
and they take up the chase. Many immigrants slip through by running 
into the sugar-cane fields, emerging on roads where they catch minivan 
taxis to carry them away quickly. Last year the Army Group 33, which 
patrols near Komatipoort, arrested about 22,000 border-jumpers. It 
keeps them overnight in a large holding cell on its base, gives them 
breakfast and takes them back to Mozambique. But officials say most 
simply try again the next day, which makes it difficult to keep up 
the soldiers' morale. ``I think when you catch the same guy three 
times in four days, it can get pretty frustrating,'' said Capt. Gustav 
Brink, who is in charge of one of the units that patrol the fence. 
One day earlier this year, Marcos Toal, 17, who had been caught within 
seconds of sliding under the fence on his stomach, was in the ``cage'' 
waiting to be taken back across the border. This, his first attempt, 
had ended badly. He had started with a change of clothes and $30 _ 
enough, he hoped, to reach ``Egoli,'' the city of gold, also known 
as Johannesburg. But he had been robbed on the Mozambican side by 
men demanding payment as guides through the fence. Though he was clearly 
frightened that he would be beaten, he was sure he would be trying 
again. South Africa is his only hope of making enough money to marry 
and get started in life. ``People speak of South Africa and they say 
it is a place where you can get work and make a living without having 
to turn to crime,'' he said. Since 1994 South Africa has been drafting 
a policy to admit immigrants who have sought-after skills. Officials 
also realize that the country's neighbors need investment, too, to 
keep their citizens at home. But none of this stops politicians from 
routinely using foreigners as scapegoats for everything from rising 
crime to unemployment to AIDS, and the government has taken no step 
to address the popular hostility. In a report released this year, 
Human Rights Watch condemned South Africa's xenophobia and documented 
abuses of immigrants, including beatings, extortion by the police 
and arbitrary arrests. Both legal immigrants and South Africans are 
the targets of these abuses, especially if they have very dark skins 
or inoculation marks on their forearms. Most local people have these 
marks on their upper arms. Foreigners, too, say they feel growing 
xenophobia, according to a new report by the Center for Policy Studies, 
a research group based in Johannesburg. Ade Ogunrinade, a Nigerian 
who is the deputy vice chancellor of the Witwatersrand University 
here, was quoted in a recent newspaper article as saying that his 
wife had had difficulty finding a job and that they had both felt 
hostility because they are foreigners. ``In West Africa we have a 
tradition of warmth to foreigners,'' Ogunrinade said. ``I find it 
disconcerting that the same warmth is not experienced here.'' Peter 
Takirambudde, executive director of the Africa Division of Human Rights 
Watch, took South Africans to task for a lack of compassion. ``During 
the apartheid era,'' he said, ``many African countries opened their 
doors to South African migrants, exiles and refugees and paid a heavy 
economic price for their opposition to apartheid. Now that the tables 
are turned, it is shameful to see how hostile South Africans have 
become.'' Authorities refused requests to visit Lindela, the holding 
installation for immigrants in the Johannesburg area. But when the 
young downtown salesman was taken there, a brief glimpse was possible. 
An official interviewing new arrivals could be seen repeatedly striking 
a young man, apparently unsatisfied with his answers. Police officers 
working for the Johannesburg police units tracking down illegal immigrants 
said arrests can be almost laughably easy. Sometimes the police simply 
send a van to a certain corner pretending that it is a taxi, and immigrants 
climb in. Some would-be immigrants have intricate schemes for getting 
false papers, including paying tribal chiefs in rural areas to make 
false certifications of who their parents are. But many cannot afford 
papers, and so barely eke out an existence, because they are taken 
advantage of by unscrupulous employers and landlords. ``Everybody 
looks at South Africa and sees it as the land of milk and honey,'' 
said Superintendent Montiers Stein, who runs one of the units. ``But 
it doesn't turn out that way for a lot of them.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>