<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0200 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Padres came to Yankee Stadium and paid their proper respects. 
Really, they did. Tony Gwynn said all the right things after his first 
visit to Monument Park. Greg Vaughn didn't thumb his nose at George 
Steinbrenner's baseball people and ask how many Yankees hit 50 home 
runs this season. Jim Leyritz stepped right back into place with his 
former teammates by scrawling Darryl Strawberry's No. 39 onto his 
cap. Bruce Bochy spoke of Joe Torre in a mentor/role model tone. These 
very nice men brought the low humidity from their weather paradise 
in Southern California, apparently figuring the best way to compete 
with the Yankees was to create a climate of mutual respect. Don't 
rock the team of destiny, just poke some holes and see if it starts 
losing air. Then the Yankees deflated the Padres' middle relief pitching 
Saturday night, and all of New York resumed making plans for a parade 
it knows will make Sammy Sosa's look like a pack of Waveland Avenue 
kids chasing one of his home runs. In the narrow stadium corridors 
early Sunday night, you could eavesdrop on the security guys, saying 
everything to one another but goodbye and have a nice winter. In the 
stands, the fans acted as if the next Yankee event in New York would 
be along Broadway. In Torre's pre-game news conference, he offered 
warm gratitude for the Yankee fans, nearly 3 million strong this season, 
using the past tense as he said, ``They have been wonderful.'' In 
Bochy's pre-game news conference, the Padres' manager was asked a 
question about the Yankees' Game 3 starter, David Cone, and essentially 
said, excuse me, I've got another problem right now and his name is 
Orlando Hernandez. He understood the implications of Game 2 in a World 
Series few believed his team would win. Win now, or else don't plan 
on coming back. What was it that Yogi Berra once said about the late-afternoon 
October outfield shadows in the south Bronx? ``It gets late early 
out here,'' is the quote, according to the Yogi legend, and that is 
what the Padres were facing Sunday night. It was time for them to 
slow down the Yankee steamroller early, or get rolled over. Too many 
Yankee story lines _ like El Duque's dramatic arrival _ seemed to 
be running parallel in the direction of the desired punctuation of 
this famous franchise's most decorated season. The obsession to not 
waste those 114 regular-season victories, the aching in their hearts 
to win it for the ailing Strawberry, the news that Joe DiMaggio was 
rooting from his own hospital sick bed, as was Andy Pettitte's father. 
In the year of major league baseball's re-emergence, the year that 
one man hit 70 home runs and another hit 66, who could imagine the 
San Diego Padres as the last team standing? Only Bochy, whose job 
Sunday night was to look at his players and tell them they did not 
have to accept what fate surely had in store for them, if Game 1 was 
the hint. ``I have seen this club rebound too many times and I think 
it is a very resilient club,'' he said. ``I just think they will be 
fine. Sure, it is a tough loss when you have a 5-2 lead in the first 
game of the World Series, but they will put that behind them.'' Sometimes, 
these things just seem to be preordained, and it is up to someone 
_ Kirk Gibson comes to mind _ to step up and dramatically alter history's 
course. Kevin Brown had a chance Saturday night, but he reportedly 
wasn't feeling well to start and was certainly feeling worse after 
watching his bullpen surrender home runs to Chuck Knoblauch and Tino 
Martinez as the Yankees rolled a seven in the seventh inning. The 
Game 1 story lines only pointed to this season's inevitable conclusion. 
Redemption for the slumping Martinez. Forgiveness for the playoff-scarred 
Knoblauch. Oh, what an explosion of fury Knoblauch might have faced 
had home-plate umpire Rich Garcia called Martinez out on that 2-2, 
knee-high fastball that cut the plate in half, right before Martinez 
struck the game-winning grand slam. In the very next inning, Knoblauch's 
error allowed the Padres' sixth run. As it turned out, it was just 
a footnote to another victorious Yankee box score, one which included 
more homegrown ingenuity by Torre. Of all players to demythologize 
Brown, who would have picked the rookie leftfielder Ricky Ledee? Well, 
Torre, in a manner of speaking. He started the kid who had less post-season 
experience than Shane Spencer, and was rewarded with Ledee's two-run 
double, another hard single and the walk that preceded Knoblauch's 
game-tying homer. No American League manager ever pushed as many right 
buttons as Joe Torre did in the summer of 1998. In the ball park that 
housed David Wells' perfect game, the Yankees this season created 
their own baseball paradise. Was it just coincidence that the weather 
was cool and breezy, a San Diego-like 68 degrees at game time Sunday 
night? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>