<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0136 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Around the packed back room of a suburban Boston bar one recent evening, 
dozens of rain-sodden campaigners summoned the energy for one last 
refrain. To the tune of the pop chestnut ``King of the Road,'' they 
chorused: ``Government for sale or rent; ``Billionaires for president.'' 
And then they cheered: ``Yes on Two!'' ``Two'' _ that is, Question 
Two, better known as the ``Clean Elections Initiative'' _ is the Massachusetts 
version of a proposal for sweeping campaign finance reform that is 
on next month's ballot. In Arizona, the shout would have been, ``Yes 
on Proposition 200!'' The two very disparate states, Massachusetts 
so liberal and Arizona so conservative, have become the principal 
battlegrounds this fall for the struggle over campaign finance reform. 
Stymied on the federal level by Senate opposition earlier this year, 
the push for cleaner campaigning has moved, for now, to the states. 
And it appears to be gaining ground, with showdowns expected next 
in Missouri, Washington and Oregon. In Massachusetts and Arizona, 
broad coalitions of groups ranging from the League of Women Voters 
to unions and the watchdog group Common Cause are using ballot initiatives 
to push a dramatic version of state-level reform known to campaign 
finance experts as ``full public financing,'' and to supporters as 
``clean money.'' The basic concept calls for replacing private campaign 
money with public money, thus freeing candidates from potentially 
corrupting obligations to lobbyists and special interests. It offers 
candidates for state office this incentive: If, after an initial spurt 
of small-donation gathering to qualify, they renounce all fund-raising, 
they will get enough public money for a moderate campaign budget. 
Opponents question whether taxpayers really want to spend millions 
of dollars to finance scores or hundreds of campaigns. But according 
to polls released in both states in the last week, the public financing 
initiatives have a strong chance of passing. Anthony Corrado, a professor 
of government at Colby College and a campaign finance specialist, 
calls the two initiatives the most progressive and comprehensive efforts 
at such reform under way in the country. They go far beyond the partial 
public financing and matching funds common in many states, he said, 
and try to take virtually all the private money out of state politics. 
``This approach to reform is a bold experiment,'' Corrado said, ``and 
it has enjoyed remarkable success for such a nascent effort.'' Corrado 
said the reform ``flies in the face of everything we hear out of Washington 
these days _ that the public doesn't want to pay for campaigns, that 
they don't want tax dollars used for elections.'' ``And instead,'' 
he said, ``what we are finding is that there is substantial support 
among the public for meaningful reform.'' Indeed, polls have found 
that voters nationwide think the campaign finance system needs major 
reform. But Stephen Roop, treasurer of the group now forming to oppose 
the Massachusetts initiative, said he expected to marshal many fellow 
opponents among ``people who find out what the proponents don't talk 
about very much, which is the cost: $56 million every four years out 
of one's taxes.'' ``This is no longer a voluntary system such as we 
have now,'' Roop said. ``This is a forced contribution to every candidate 
who makes the ballot.'' The public money to pay for the campaigns 
in Massachusetts would come in part from taxpayers who voluntarily 
checked off a special box on their income-tax returns and from appropriations 
by the Legislature. The measure's supporters respond that the initiative 
limits public campaign money to one-tenth of 1 percent of the state 
budget, or about $4 per year per taxpayer. In Arizona, ballot measure 
supporters said opponents cannot use the expenditure of taxpayer money 
as an argument because the initiative provided its own financing mechanism: 
It increases the fee for lobbyists from $25 to $100, includes a voluntary 
tax checkoff and imposes a 20 percent surcharge on civil and criminal 
fines. For an early idea of how things actually work under a full 
public financing system, the logical place to look is Maine. It was 
Maine, ever independent, that passed the first such reform back in 
1996, in a ballot initiative that gained 56 percent of the vote. Last 
year, the Vermont Legislature passed a similar measure. Neither of 
the new laws takes effect until the year 2000 elections. But initial 
indications of whether the plan can work can be seen in Maine, where 
taxpayers on this year's income-tax returns were given the option 
of checking a box that directs $3 to the campaign fund. So far, about 
16 percent of a half-million or so taxpayers _ about 80,000 people 
_ have checked the box, state officials say, a relatively high percentage 
for a checkoff. And the checkoff is only one of several sources for 
the election fund, they noted. The Maine Legislature has passed the 
first $2 million annual appropriation required to finance the new 
system. Maine and Vermont are also seen as testing grounds for legal 
challenges to the financing measures, which are under way in both 
states. Efforts to limit campaign spending risk running up against 
the U.S. Supreme Court's Buckley vs. Valeo decision of 1976, which 
decreed campaign donations a form of free expression protected by 
the First Amendment. The public financing measures try to work around 
that decision by keeping candidates' participation voluntary, said 
Ellen Miller, executive director of Public Campaign, a nonpartisan 
group based in Washington that advocates such laws and provided technical 
help to the initiatives in Massachusetts and Arizona. In a way, she 
said, the state initiatives are a way to work around the federal gridlock 
on the issue. ``It's a way of engaging citizens that could ultimately 
lead to federal reform,'' she said. ``It's a way of piloting and testing 
out a proposal that could ultimately make a difference.'' After Massachusetts 
and Arizona, Ms. Miller said, the states where the issue is likeliest 
to come to a vote next are Missouri, Washington and Oregon, and possibly 
Michigan and Idaho. If such public financing proposals ever came to 
fruition in more populous states where campaigns are much more expensive, 
the amounts of money that had to be approved by voters, taxpayers 
and lawmakers would presumably be far greater and the challenge to 
advocates greater as well. ``The goal is for state activists to demonstrate 
the viability of this proposal in the public's mind,'' she said. Meanwhile, 
this year's ``clean money'' campaigns are beginning to heat up. David 
Donnelly, who managed the victorious Maine campaign, is overseeing 
a Massachusetts effort that has already brought together several thousand 
volunteers, scores of endorsements and more than $900,000 in contributions. 
(He dismisses suggestions of irony that a campaign to cap campaign 
spending has raised so much; the difference, he says, is that the 
money buys no one any special access.) Last Monday, the entire Massachusetts 
congressional delegation endorsed the measure, issuing a statement 
that its passage would ``send a strong message to Washington that 
voters want an overhaul of the system.'' And a poll published this 
month in The Boston Globe found that 54 percent of respondents favored 
the initiative, and 28 percent opposed it. Along with providing public 
financing, the Massachusetts initiative would ban injections of national 
party money into the state parties, a form of the loosely regulated 
donations known as soft money, and would require that campaign finance 
disclosure forms be filed electronically, so access would be available 
on the Internet. If the measure is approved, Massachusetts would join 
Connecticut and Alaska in banning such ``soft money'' injections. 
In Arizona, Kaia Lenhart, the political director of Arizonans for 
Clean Elections, said the campaign had raised nearly half a million 
dollars, attracted a couple of hundred volunteers and gathered supporters 
ranging from the American Association of Retired Persons to Susan 
Goldwater, widow of the former presidential candidate, senator and 
conservative thinker, Barry Goldwater. The campaign, in fact, uses 
a classic quotation from Goldwater: ``Senators and representatives,'' 
he said, ``weigh every decision against the question `How will this 
affect my fund-raising prospects?' rather than `How will this affect 
the national interest?' '' A poll published last Sunday in The Arizona 
Republic showed 53 percent of respondents favored Proposition 200, 
while 14 percent opposed it and 33 percent were undecided. A formal 
opposition committee has yet to declare itself, Ms. Lenhart said, 
but is expected to do so soon. Interest in Arizona for campaign finance 
reform appears to arise in part from recent scandals in the state, 
notably ``Azscam'' in 1991, which featured police videotapes of legislators 
taking packets of money from purported casino operators. Reform advocates 
say that if Massachusetts passes its elections initiative, it will 
attract attention purely because of the state's political heft. But 
passage in Arizona, said Lila Schwartz, the state president of the 
League of Women Voters, would have special impact. ``We think if it 
passes in Arizona, it can pass anywhere,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>