<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0101 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Faced with the first federal budget surplus in a generation, the Clinton 
administration and the Republican-controlled Congress squabbled throughout 
this year's tax-and-spending negotiations. In the end, they spent 
more than they had agreed to a year earlier but deferred until next 
year any of the big decisions about how to take advantage of the nation's 
newfound fiscal health. The debate over the surplus is likely to become 
only more intense and more complex in 1999. In the next year, Congress 
and the White House intend to take up substantial overhauls of the 
two biggest and most politically sensitive entitlement programs, Social 
Security and Medicare, both of which might need to draw on the surplus 
to solve their long-term financial problems. Republicans, increasingly 
frustrated at their inability to enact a conservative agenda, have 
vowed not to let President Clinton block their tax-cutting plans again, 
even if it means defying his insistence that the surplus be left untouched 
until Social Security's solvency is assured. Meanwhile, the Pentagon 
is lobbying the administration and Congress for substantially more 
money after years of cutbacks. For their part, Democrats in Congress 
have a long list of pent-up spending demands, and with Clinton needing 
support from the party's liberal wing as he faces impeachment proceedings, 
they may get at least tacit support from the White House. Never mind 
that the economic outlook is suddenly murky, and that any downturn 
would create considerable pressure to stimulate growth through tax 
cuts and spending increases. Added to that is the fact that a severe 
recession could call into question the assumption that the government 
will enjoy surpluses for years to come. ``The first thing we learned 
this year is the difficulty politicians have keeping their hands off 
of surpluses,'' said Robert Bixby, the policy director for the Concord 
Coalition, a fiscal watchdog group. ``The temptation is certainly 
there to spend more money, and the temptation to go for more tax cuts 
is great,'' Bixby said. ``Fiscal discipline only held because there 
was so much disagreement over how to divide up the spoils that they 
gridlocked.'' In purely economic terms, that gridlock is not a bad 
thing, at least to many economists, including Alan Greenspan, the 
Federal Reserve chairman. In not passing a big tax cut for the fiscal 
year that started Oct. 1 or dramatically increasing spending, Congress 
and the administration agreed by default to let the federal government 
run a surplus for a second year in a row. This fiscal year's surplus 
is projected to be on the order of $70 billion, or roughly the same 
as the surplus in the year just completed. Running a surplus effectively 
means that the Treasury is able to pay down some of the $5.5 trillion 
national debt. Reducing the government's borrowing needs frees up 
more money in the economy for investment by the private sector, helping 
to create jobs and improve productivity. Reducing the national debt, 
however, is not seen by either party as an accomplishment with much 
political appeal. So Republicans are pressing ever-harder to use a 
big chunk of the surplus for tax cuts, arguing that putting the money 
back in the hands of the people is the best way to prevent Washington 
from spending it. ``We will be back in January with more Republicans,'' 
Speaker Newt Gingrich said on Thursday as the budget negotiations 
drew to a close and members of both parties prepared to head home 
to campaign. ``Then we can have a tax cut.'' Democrats say they have 
no intention of squandering their new claims to fiscal responsibility. 
But there will be considerable pressure from Democrats to use part 
of the surplus to help deal with the problems in Medicare and Social 
Security. And largely at Clinton's behest, the budget deal worked 
out last week called for about $20 billion more in spending than envisioned 
in the 1997 bipartisan balanced budget agreement. Although that money 
was labeled ``emergency'' spending and is supposed to be for one-time 
payments to help hard-hit farmers, improve security at U.S. embassies 
around the world and help prepare for the year 2000 computer problem, 
among other uses, it is still likely to create increased pressure 
to renegotiate the tight spending caps under which congressional appropriators 
are operating. Neither party likes to be seen as cutting funding for 
popular programs, emergency or not, and the caps for next year could 
leave both parties chafing. ``There will be tremendous pressure to 
reopen the budget agreement as far as how much money is permitted 
under the discretionary spending caps,'' said Richard May, a former 
Republican chief of staff for the House Budget Committee. Clinton's 
demand that the surplus be set aside until he agrees with Congress 
on a plan to shore up Social Security for the retirement of the baby 
boom generation proved to be perhaps the year's most successful political 
maneuver, uniting Democrats and leaving Republicans fuming at their 
inability to cut taxes. But there is no consensus about how to use 
the surplus to help Social Security; indeed, the administration has 
always been vague about what Clinton has in mind. And the surplus 
will be only one element in reshaping Social Security, with considerable 
attention being focused on whether the system should permit individuals 
to invest a portion of their payroll taxes in the financial markets, 
a debate that has sharpened since the global economic crisis has sent 
Wall Street reeling. Dealing with Medicare, long a flashpoint in partisan 
politics, could prove equally contentious. ''Anyone who thinks a Medicare 
or Social Security solution is going to be easy,'' said Rep. John 
Spratt Jr. of South Carolina, the senior Democrat on the Budget Committee, 
``is mistaken.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>