<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0244 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Opening arguments are to begin Monday in the trial of Corey Arthur, 
a 20-year-old accused of torturing and killing his former English 
teacher, Jonathan Levin, for his banking card. The slaying in May 
1997 unnerved the city in an era of declining crime, and turned a 
little-known schoolteacher into a symbol of public service. Levin, 
31, the son of Gerald M. Levin, chairman of Time Warner, had quit 
a corporate career in travel insurance to become a teacher at William 
Howard Taft High School in the Bronx. He was so popular with his students 
that some of them displayed a sign declaring ``We are his kids'' at 
his funeral. His death in his Upper West Side apartment, after he 
had let in the former student, led some teachers to question how accessible 
they should be to their students. Court papers and statements by investigators 
suggest that two pictures of the slaying, both troubling, are likely 
to emerge during the first-degree murder trial in state Supreme Court 
in Manhattan. Law enforcement officials have portrayed Levin's death 
as the result of a crudely bungled robbery carried out by Arthur and 
26-year-old Montoun Hart, who is being tried separately on a charge 
of second-degree murder. Hart has told the police that Arthur fired 
the fatal shot. In statements made to the police after his arrest, 
Arthur proclaimed his innocence and said he had gone to Levin's apartment 
to sell him crack cocaine. Arthur said two unidentified men killed 
Levin after entering the apartment and forcing him to tie up the teacher. 
Arthur managed to escape before the killing occurred, he told the 
police. Arthur's account appears to conflict with the portrait of 
Levin painted by friends, colleagues and former students _ that of 
a dedicated teacher who traded a life of privilege for a classroom 
in a Bronx high school with a four-year graduation rate of roughly 
30 percent. Former students praised Levin as a teacher with a rare 
ability to improve students' self-respect and self-esteem. He gave 
them his home phone number, invited students to his Upper West Side 
apartment, took calls from and visited students in jail, and rewarded 
academic performance with dinners and trips to Yankee games. He did 
not start telling students that he was the son of the chairman of 
one of the largest companies in the world until shortly before his 
death. He had been Arthur's English teacher as a part-time instructor 
during the 1993-94 school year, and the student's mother, Penny Bostick, 
told reporters last year that her son had liked Levin and often spoke 
about him at home. But in the spring and summer of 1994, Arthur was 
arrested three times on drug charges, including possession of heroin 
and selling crack. After he was paroled in 1995, he seemed to have 
new resolve, and earned a high school equivalency diploma. He started 
taking classes at Bronx Community College, but dropped out after one 
semester. Levin, meanwhile, had achieved his goal. He received his 
master's degree in education from New York University, and was hired 
as a full-time teacher at Taft in 1995. What brought Arthur to Levin's 
apartment on Friday, May 30, 1997, lies at the center of the trial. 
Arthur told the police that Levin paged him and asked him to bring 
crack cocaine. But law enforcement officials have said Arthur took 
advantage of his former teacher's openness to get in the apartment. 
Levin was tied up with electrical tape and repeatedly slashed in the 
chest and throat until he apparently revealed the user code for his 
computerized banking card. At 5:15 p.m. that Friday, an unidentified 
man was seen on a fuzzy surveillance tape using Levin's card to withdraw 
$800 from a nearby automated bank machine. When Levin failed to appear 
at school on Monday morning, the police entered his apartment and 
found him dead, killed by a .22-caliber bullet behind his right ear. 
A partial message from Arthur was on Levin's answering machine, and 
Arthur's fingerprint was found on the tape used to tie the teacher 
up. Eight days later, Arthur and Hart were arrested after one of the 
largest citywide police searches in recent years. Investigators said 
Arthur, who was apparently not aware of Levin's background, had bragged 
to friends about the killing and bought himself new $70 boots and 
$45 jeans afterward. Nearly 17 months later, the Jonathan Levin Foundation, 
a nonprofit organization established after the slaying, has created 
a new media center and athletic field at the school. A nearby block 
has been renamed Jonathan Levin Way. A faculty member at Taft said 
last week there were no plans to mention the trial at the school. 
Levin's mother, who has attended every pretrial hearing, and other 
family members are expected to attend Monday's opening statements. 
The trial, which is expected to last five weeks, may clarify what 
happened, but it is unlikely to explain it. Last year, letters written 
by Levin's students were read at his funeral, including one addressed 
to God: ``I write to ask why you took Jonathan away from us,'' it 
said. ``He was an angel. We needed him here.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>