<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0107 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There tend to be two sorts of regulatory disputes in the communications 
industry: the wildly Byzantine and the merely arcane. The Byzantine 
seemed on display at the Supreme Court last Tuesday as some of the 
United States' most prominent lawyers wrangled over the Federal Communications 
Commission's plan for bringing competition to local telephone markets. 
They relied not on broad constitutional principles but on subtle interpretations 
of dense subsections of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. But the 
complexity of the courtroom arguments tended to obscure something 
that became clear later in the week: Some factions within the local 
telephone industry might actually prefer to lose a big part of this 
case in the interest of expediting a more important victory later. 
At stake are the terms under which the local telephone incumbents 
_ the five Bells and GTE Corp. _ must open their networks to competitors, 
be they upstarts or long-distance carriers hoping to enter the local 
business. The local telephone market is worth about $100 billion. 
``The court realizes that the telecommunications industry is essentially 
the central industry,'' said William Barr, the former attorney general 
who is now chief counsel for GTE and who argued before the court on 
Tuesday. ``This case raised fundamental issues about how competition 
will unfold and the structure of that market in the future.'' Shortly 
after the Telecommunications Act of 1996 became law, the FCC issued 
an order that told the states how to set prices for the various elements 
of the local phone companies' networks that competitors might want 
to use. In that order, the commission did at least two things that 
the Bells and GTE despised. The first was to mandate what is known 
as a ``forward-looking'' pricing model. Under such a system, a local 
incumbent is allowed to recover only those costs that it would bear 
if its network were of the most modern and efficient type. An equivalent 
would be if a taxi driver charged customers based on the costs of 
operating his car but was told to pretend that his car got 50 miles 
to the gallon and was in tip-top shape. The long-distance companies 
think that is a great idea because it gives them cost-effective access 
to local networks without having to bear the cost of building such 
networks themselves. ``It is not economically possible to build loops 
to every house in America,'' Bruce Ennis Jr., who argued for the newly 
merged long-distance giant MCI Worldcom Inc. at the Supreme Court, 
said in an interview, referring to copper telephone lines. ``We need 
to be able to lease elements from the incumbents.'' But many taxis, 
and many equivalent phone networks, are decrepit gas-guzzlers. The 
local phone companies think they should be allowed to pass along the 
sometimes higher costs of maintaining and operating even the oldest 
parts of their networks to the new carriers that want access to those 
systems. Not long after the FCC order came out, the Bells and GTE 
sued the government, charging that the Telecommunications Act did 
not give the commission authority to tell the states to use a forward-looking 
pricing system. Last year the 8th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in 
St. Louis agreed. Significantly, the court did not rule on the merits 
of the commission's rules _ whether forward-looking price models were 
fair to begin with. The local phone carriers also challenged another 
provision of the FCC's order, which forced them to offer the different 
parts of their networks as complete packages for their competitors, 
largely alleviating the need for their rivals to do such assembly 
work themselves. The St. Louis court ruled against the commission 
on that score as well, and both issues were argued at the Supreme 
Court last week. The commission's uniform national pricing rules never 
went into effect, forcing the Bells and their competitors to take 
up the matter in proceedings before 50 different state utility commissions. 
The upshot, though, is that many, if not most, of the states have 
adopted forward-looking pricing schemes that are similar to what the 
commission proposed two years ago anyway _ and which the local phone 
companies had hoped to avoid. If the Bells and GTE want to appeal 
those state decisions, they must litigate state by state. So now comes 
the rub for the Bells and GTE. Remember, the 8th Circuit, which has 
already demonstrated sympathy for the local companies, never ruled 
on whether the forward-looking cost models were fair. If the local 
phone industry succeeds in convincing the Supreme Court that authority 
to set local-network pricing models does lie with the states and not 
with the commission, the fairness question has no chance of rebounding 
to the 8th Circuit. So now some lawyers for the local phone industry 
are thinking that it might actually be better for them to lose in 
the Supreme Court by having the justices declare that the commission 
does indeed have jurisdiction. That would send the case back to the 
8th Circuit. That way, the local companies could hope to have the 
lower court consider the merits of forward-looking pricing _ and perhaps 
declare it unfair across the country. ``I think there's a good chance 
that we lose on jurisdiction,'' said a lawyer who works for a local 
phone company. ``And to me, No. 1, it's not that bad.'' Whatever the 
outcome, an 8th Circuit ruling on the merits of forward-looking pricing 
might end up with the same parties back before the Supreme Court. 
But for the Bells and GTE, some of their proponents believe, a loss 
now might be the best chance at eventual victory. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>