<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0229 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A bankrupt franchise in a healthy sports league is like a neglected 
house on a pleasant and prosperous street. The decaying dwelling may 
be surrounded by neat homes with trim lawns, painted gutters and clean 
picture windows. But it is difficult to ignore the eyesore next door 
with the overgrown shrubs, the plywood over the broken glass and the 
police car in the driveway to break up the fight between the dysfunctional 
spouses. The franchise in this case is the Pittsburgh Penguins, who 
have replaced the Islanders as the embarrassment of the National Hockey 
League. Yes, the Islanders may have tried recently to evict themselves 
from their own arena during a bitter lease dispute and, yes, their 
television rights holder gives their games less respect than critics 
give Howard Stern's new show. But it is only a sour joke that Islanders 
fans chant the name of a recent owner sent to jail for financial fraud. 
At least the current owners who replaced him are legally clean and 
have not declared bankruptcy. Roger Marino's Penguins filed for Chapter 
11 last week, and the thought of jail crossed the mind of Pittsburgh's 
co-owner. Marino wasn't thinking about either John Spano of the Islanders 
or Bruce McNall, the recent chairman of the NHL Board of Governors, 
who also was jailed for financial fraud. Marino instead reacted to 
the news that the mayor of Pittsburgh was suing the team for unpaid 
taxes and that the district attorney for Allegheny County was investigating. 
``I have young children,'' Marino said. ``Debtors prison has gone 
away a long time ago.'' So have Spano, McNall and the shame attached 
to a business filing for bankruptcy. Marino, co-owner with Howard 
Baldwin, is not personally broke. Far from it. He has many high-tech 
millions. He left his luxury box after Saturday's 3-3 tie with the 
Rangers to fly by private jet to his home in Massachusetts. Marino 
is expected to show up in New York this week with Baldwin in the office 
of NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman. For the moment, these two have called 
a truce in their public feud, possibly because they have so many common 
enemies. Along with the angry public officials, the Penguins are in 
litigation with the landlord and the television rights holders. And 
Mario Lemieux, the retired Penguins hero, has demanded the $28.6 million 
they owe him. Perhaps the co-owners will discuss with Bettman their 
wish to renegotiate for a better lease from Spectacor Management Group, 
which runs their building as well as Nassau Coliseum. They might discuss 
how the Penguins, according to a team spokesman, have never financially 
recovered from the 15-week lockout that Bettman inflicted on the NHL 
in 1994-95. Or they could talk about their hopes for a new arena, 
despite the fact that the current building _ recently renovated with 
public funds _ is a big, bright edifice with excellent sight lines 
and usually filled with thousands of loyal fans. Unlike most NHL cities, 
Pittsburgh has a big-league feel but no competition from the National 
Basketball Association. The arena, nicknamed ``the Igloo,'' is a big 
dome on top of a hill surrounded by city streets in the downtown district. 
In the last decade, thanks in part to the two Stanley Cup championships 
of 1991 and 1992, Pittsburgh is one of the league's most upbeat hockey 
venues. More than most crowds, the Penguins fans wear team jerseys, 
with names of favorite players on the back. Step 10 yards into the 
lobby and you might meet an usher who will tell you he has worked 
there since before the Penguins started in 1967, that he hired on 
back when the Pittsburgh Hornets were a jewel of the American Hockey 
League. In most cities that have both the NHL and the NBA, hockey 
gets less local news media attention. Newspaper columnists and broadcasting 
celebrities amuse their friends by bragging about their hockey ignorance. 
Not so in Pittsburgh, where hockey information and opinion is widespread. 
Not all is positive. Columnist Brian O'Neill, writing in the Post-Gazette 
Sunday about more public money for the Penguins, said: ``Fat chance. 
Let the ice melt first.'' That's not about to happen, at least not 
yet. The players were paid last week, with the help of a personal 
loan from Marino, who will collect interest on the loan. ``I got my 
check,'' said defenseman Darius Kasparaitis. Did it clear the bank? 
he was asked. ``I'll let you know Monday,'' he said with a smile. 
The bankruptcy filing was done with the approval of the league, according 
to Frank Brown, an NHL spokesman. He stressed Sunday that Chapter 
11 is the lesser of two evils, not as worrisome as Chapter 7, which 
would allow the creditors to take over. Brown said other franchises 
in other sports have gone through the same procedures and emerged 
in good health. ``This is not a death knell,'' Brown said. Indeed, 
``The Burgh's'' downtown district seemed as alive as ever Saturday 
night as the fans filed out and down the hill into the warm autumn 
air. Had Marino stuck around, he could have walked down 6th Avenue 
to a busy hotel where business executives were assembled for the Fortune 
500 Forum. Around the hotel, the streets were thick with limousines 
and luxury sedans of chief executive officers. Marino could have strolled 
among the high-roller vehicles, just to chat or pass a hat. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>