<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0071 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Borders are as flimsy as bookmarks in the global realm where Thomas 
Middelhoff is preparing to take power as the new chief executive of 
the Bertelsmann media and publishing conglomerate. On a September 
morning, Middelhoff, 44, rises to field questions in German at a news 
briefing in Guetersloh, Germany. The following afternoon, he is in 
a dark, wood-paneled room of the 21 Club in Manhattan to go through 
the same business ritual in English. His son's electronic messages 
trail him from Germany, which he answers in both languages. Five years 
from now, Middelhoff declares, upper-level employees at Bertelsmann 
headquarters in Guetersloh will speak English as the official corporate 
language. And for those who blunder by referring to Bertelsmann as 
a German conglomerate, Middelhoff, a self-described global citizen, 
vigorously and frequently offers corrections. ``We are not a German 
company,'' he insisted, adding, ``We are a real global company.'' 
That sentiment is spreading in the world's $80 billion-a-year book 
market, which is not only becoming more concentrated among mega-publishers, 
but also is increasingly becoming a borderless territory with the 
expansion of electronic bookselling and global deals. Such deals cross 
nations and languages and range from Bertelsmann's purchase of Random 
House and its recent partnership in Barnes &AMP; Noble's electronic 
bookstore to moves by the largest French publisher, Hachette Livre, 
to acquire a majority stake in a British consumer book company, Orion 
Publishing Group. With these global shifts has come a new generation 
of issues for the publishing industry _ from the protection of intellectual-property 
rights and the balance of power between individual authors and behemoth 
publishers to concerns about whether consolidation will crowd out 
smaller houses and lead to homogenous literature. ``The whales are 
eating the whales,'' said Martin Levin, a former publishing executive 
and lawyer who specializes in mergers and acquisitions of publishing 
companies. ``It used to be that the whales were eating the minnows. 
Now the appetites are so much bigger. This is a watershed moment in 
publishing, where we have never seen this kind of concentration before 
with global ownership and the big getting bigger.'' The zest for global 
reach has also taken hold at chain booksellers like the Borders Group, 
which is preparing for eventual superstore saturation in the United 
States by opening branches in Singapore, Britain and Australia. The 
electronic bookseller, Amazon.com, this month is opening two European 
Web site versions of its operation with distribution points in Slough, 
England, and Regensburg, Germany. ``I do think that the world is becoming 
a smaller place every year that goes by,'' said Jeffrey Bezos, Amazon's 
founder and chief executive, who said that the growing expansion of 
electronic book sales could lead to more diversity and choice in literature. 
But he also said that the increasing consolidation of publishers bears 
watching. ``If you get too much concentration on the publishing side,'' 
he said, ``then you could start to get problems with ideas and the 
ability of authors to get multiple outlets for their work. If you 
took it to an extreme, it could be bad for the industry. It could 
be bad for society.'' To a certain extent, this global fever has spread 
to midsized and small American publishers, which in a variety of ways 
are casting about for partners, acquisitions or alliances to publish 
directly into foreign markets, a trend propelled by the slow growth 
of book sales. ``It's tough enough to make money in the U.S. market,'' 
said Steven Schragis, publisher of Carol Publishing Group, which last 
year foundered in an attempt to merge with Batsford Publishing in 
London. ``There's always been the avenue of selling your rights to 
foreign publishers, but you can make more money by exploiting your 
own copyrights directly _ i.e., release it directly yourself.'' Last 
month, Prima Publishing, an independent company in Rocklin, Calif., 
absorbed the employees of an inactive German publisher to establish 
Prima Deutschland, which will try to tap the German market for games 
with a division publishing game-strategy books. ``It's incredibly 
myopic for any company in the world that is truly becoming a global 
village not to use its core strength to expand overseas,'' said Ben 
Dominitz, Prima's founder and chief executive. ``We tend to look at 
technology companies for models and not publishing companies.'' The 
bigger shifts in global ownership and book selling are so new that 
no one is quite sure what impact, if any, such changes could have 
on literature and culture. But the trends are pronounced enough that 
the chairman of the Frankfurt Book Fair, Roland Ulmer, sought to draw 
attention to the changes earlier this month in an opening speech at 
the huge annual bazaar of books and publishers from all over the world. 
Ulmer noted that by as early as next year, more than 90 percent of 
the American book market will be controlled by the 20 largest competitors. 
On the technical, medical and scientific side of publishing, the concentration 
is even greater, he said, with three foreign companies dominating 
90 percent of the U.S. market. Within the sprawling halls of the Frankfurt 
Book Fair, the joke was that there was more gossip this year about 
buying companies than of buying books. At panel discussions, futurists 
with technology backgrounds floated the heretical view that copyright 
protection was a medieval concept, arguing that it had no place in 
a digital world, where information could be transferred with a few 
computer-keyboard clicks. The rights directors of publishing houses 
held their own forums to debate how globalization and electronic commerce 
had shifted the international flow of books and the frontiers of language 
markets. The rights to a book generally are not global; for example, 
selling a book that was published in the United States in a foreign 
country may violate a British publisher's rights to sell that same 
book in Britain. But those territorial boundaries are hard to enforce 
at an electronic bookstore, which may not always know which book is 
the British version or the American version. Sitting at his own cramped 
booth at the Frankfurt fair, Andre Schiffrin, director of the not-for-profit 
New Press in New York, said he was certain his public-interest publishing 
house would feel the effects of globalization. In some ways, it is 
to his advantage because he expects some authors to start coming to 
him for an alternative from the corporate publishing houses. But he 
said the new bonds between Bertelsmann and Barnes &AMP; Noble provided 
further impetus to seek new sales and marketing outlets, like public 
forums to promote his authors and their ideas. Such global shifts 
in ownership and book selling are also viewed warily by authors. For 
Stephen King, whose best-selling books are also successful in other 
countries, globalizaton is the ``literary equivalent of grazing the 
rain forest to make hamburgers.'' ``It lowers the IQ any time there 
is consolidation and there is more of a focus on bestsellers,'' he 
said. The National Writers Union, a New York-based group with a membership 
of more than 4,000 freelance writers and authors, has decided that 
it needs to become global by forming alliances with other international 
unions so it can follow the activities of large multinational publishers, 
according to Jonathan Tasini, the union's president. ``What writers 
are now starting to see is what we've seen in other industries,'' 
he said. ``Their industries are being run by companies with no national 
flag and when that happens you feel a loss of control,'' said Tasini, 
who added that he expected that as the companies grew, they would 
look for ways to economize, such as through tougher negotiations with 
authors. At least three of the top American publishing houses _ two 
of them newly merged companies _ are now reviewing their standard 
forms of contracts with authors. Contracts are the critical agreements 
that define the relationships between authors and publishers, establishing 
what a writer will be paid and who has the rights to sell a title 
in foreign countries. At Bertelsmann's Random House, contracts are 
under review, a routine step in the wake of the merger with Bantam 
Doubleday Dell, to edit out anachronistic language, a company spokesman 
said. Middelhoff of Bertelsmann, who will be formally promoted to 
chief executive in November, said that despite the criticism and concern 
of some authors, globalization of ownership and bookselling might 
in some ways increase the diversity of voices in literature. Through 
electronic bookstores, writers will have the ability to reach selected 
audiences through an efficient delivery system, he said. But he also 
thinks that an elite of internationally successful authors will develop, 
probably numbering no more than 25. And, he added, it will probably 
be impossible for authors to break into those ranks unless they write 
in English. He holds that view, in part, because he thinks that English 
will become an increasingly dominant force in commerce _ the common 
language of business by the next generation. And Bertelsmann is already 
shifting in that direction, according to Middelhoff, who noted that 
communications about major company issues were written first in English 
and then translated to German. With most of Bertelsmann's revenue 
coming from outside Germany, Middelhoff said it was important to stress 
the company's global reach and its corporate culture _ a decentralized 
structure with local, independent managers. ``We are Bertelsmann with 
a specific culture,'' Middelhoff said. ``And this specific culture 
is not influenced by one special country.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>