<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0257 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The San Diego Padres are the National League champions, conquerors 
of their domain. Facing the New York Yankees in the World Series, 
the Padres have looked an awful lot like doormats. But then, so does 
every team the Yankees play. The post-season was supposed to provide 
the ultimate test of greatness for the Yankees. Instead, they are 
treating the playoffs and World Series like extra credit. They crushed 
San Diego, 9-3, in Game 2 on Sunday night before 56,692 at Yankee 
Stadium, to take a 2-0 advantage in the four-of-seven-game series. 
Orlando Hernandez, the defector from Cuba, allowed a run in seven 
innings, the only run he has permitted in 14 innings in the post-season. 
The Yankees and Padres will resume the series on Tuesday night in 
San Diego, with no reason to believe that San Diego can mount a comeback 
other than the fact that the Padres have shown up for the first two 
games. The Padres are a mess. Sterling Hitchcock, who was scheduled 
to start Game 3 against the Yankees' David Cone, had flu-like symptoms 
and was losing his voice. Kevin Brown, the Game 1 starter, was suffering 
from a sinus infection and a bruised shin. Andy Ashby started on Sunday 
night without a voice and with a sore throat and head cold, and he 
would leave the field with this pitching line: two and two-thirds 
innings, 10 hits, 7 runs (4 earned), 1 walk and 1 strikeout. Everybody 
has looked bad against the Yankees this year. New York lost its first 
three games in April, then began careering down the mountain of the 
baseball season. The Yankees won 114 games in the regular season, 
compiling a .704 winning percentage; they now have an .818 winning 
percentage since the playoffs began, winning 9 of 11 _ a sweep of 
three games from Texas, four victories in six games against Cleveland 
in the American League Championship Series and two victories to open 
the World Series. The Yankees have nearly doubled their opponents' 
run production in the post-season, 54-30. Joe Torre, their manager, 
believes the Yankees have won 123 games this year in large part because 
they have respected all their opponents, taken all of them seriously. 
They beat up the expansion Tampa Bay Devil Rays; now they are beating 
up San Diego, and the Padres appear powerless against them. Padres 
Manager Bruce Bochy, knowing that left-handed batters hit 109 points 
higher than right-handed batters against Hernandez this season, inserted 
the left-handed-hitting Greg Myers into his lineup at catcher, Myers' 
first start since Sept. 17. But the move backfired in the first inning, 
as the Yankees blitzed Ashby. Myers failed to catch a foul pop hit 
by the leadoff batter, Chuck Knoblauch, who subsequently walked. Myers 
throws poorly, so Knoblauch swiped second and established that the 
Yankees would run aggressively. Knoblauch scored and Paul O'Neill 
reached first base on third baseman Ken Caminiti's throwing error, 
and then O'Neill broke for second on a ground ball back to the mound; 
if O'Neill had not been running, the play might have led to an inning-ending 
double play. But the rally continued, with successive hits by Chili 
Davis, Tino Martinez and Scott Brosius, and the Yankees led, 3-0. 
Ashby, nursing his cold and sore throat, needed quick innings. He 
needed a chance to retreat to the clubhouse, to relax, catch his breath, 
review the innings past and ahead. The Yankees treated him the same 
way they treated Brown in Game 1, however, taking pitches, making 
Ashby work, wearing him down. The Yankees sent 14 batters to the plate 
in the first two innings, and only O'Neill swung at the first pitch, 
in each of his two at-bats. Ashby had to throw 29 pitches to get through 
that first inning, and he would need almost as many in the second. 
The rookie Ricky Ledee, who reached base in his first seven plate 
appearances in this Series, led off the second inning with a single 
and Knoblauch walked. Myers threw out Ledee at third on an attempted 
double steal, but Derek Jeter hit a run-scoring single. Two batters 
later, Bernie Williams leaned on Ashby, fouling off three two-strike 
pitches; it was like watching a cat toy with a beleaguered mouse. 
Finally, Ashby threw a sinking fastball with his 50th pitch of the 
night and Williams drove it into the right-field stands, a two-run 
home run _ in what could be Williams' last game as a Yankee at the 
Stadium. (Williams is eligible for free agency after this season, 
and he will seriously entertain offers from other teams that are expected 
to be higher than what the Yankees most likely will bid.) The Yankees 
applied the coup de grace to Ashby in the third, quickly, as they 
often did against pitchers from Minnesota, Kansas City or Oakland. 
Martinez singled and Brosius ripped the second of his three hits, 
and after Jorge Posada hit into a double play, Ledee smacked a double 
down the left-field line. Bochy came out of the San Diego dugout to 
get his pitcher. As baseball lore would have it, the 1927 Yankees 
_ heretofore considered by many to be the greatest team of all time 
_ all but defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates in the World Series when 
they took pre-game batting practice. The burly sluggers Babe Ruth 
and Lou Gehrig smashed monstrous wall-clearing drives as the Pirates, 
diminutive in comparison, supposedly stood nearby and gawked, psychologically 
beaten. Their expressions could not have been much different from 
that smeared across Ashby's face after Bochy mercifully replaced him 
in the third inning. Sweat poured down his pale angular cheekbones, 
his mouth opened slightly, and Ashby shook his head, projecting disbelief. 
The Yankees led, 7-0, and Hernandez was in complete control, throwing 
fastballs when it appeared the Padres were anticipating his curveball, 
flipping changeups when San Diego batters were thinking fastball. 
Only three times in the first six innings did a Padres base runner 
reach scoring position. By the seventh inning, this felt nothing like 
a World Series games and every bit like a midseason blowout against 
Detroit. Fans departed early, those who stayed cheered the former 
Yankees catcher Jim Leyritz when he was announced as a pinch-hitter, 
and Torre was using the last innings to get work for his relievers, 
who gave up a pair of eighth-inning runs. Not exactly a Fall Classic. 
To be precise, a classic that began in spring and may well end in 
the next few days in San Diego. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>