<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jonathan Postel, who played a pivotal role in creating and administering 
the Internet, died of complications after undergoing heart surgery 
on Friday at St. John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif., his brother 
Thomas Postel said. He was 55 and lived in Los Angeles. Postel, a 
computer scientist at the Information Sciences Institute, a branch 
of the University of Southern California in Marina del Rey, was a 
creator of the Internet's address system. For 30 years he handled 
the administrative end of Internet addresses under the auspices of 
the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority, or IANA, a federally financed 
entity. ``Jon's greatest achievement was operating IANA,'' said Stephen 
Crocker, a colleague of Postel. ``It is a very central piece of the 
infrastructure. As mundane and as simple as it seemed, he set policies 
that made it very easy for the network to grow. He minimized bureaucratic 
delay and at the same time kept silly and nonsensical things to a 
minimum.'' Postel's interest in computers began while he attended 
a community college in Los Angeles in the 1960s. He once described 
himself as a ``mediocre student,'' a late academic bloomer whose intense 
interest in computer science in general, and networking in particular, 
did not begin until he transferred to the University of California 
at Los Angeles, where he received his undergraduate degree in engineering 
in 1966. He was one of a small group of computer scientists who created 
the Internet's precursor, the Arpanet. At UCLA in 1969, Postel assisted 
in the installation of the Arpanet's first communications switch, 
which routed network traffic. For nearly 30 years, Postel also served 
as editor of the Request for Comments series, or RFCs, technical notes 
that began with the earliest days of the Arpanet and continued into 
the Internet. Though intended to be informal, such notes often laid 
the foundation for technical standards governing the Internet's operation. 
Nearly 2,500 RFCs have been produced. As editor, Postel was technically 
rigorous, often refusing to distribute an RFC until he was satisfied 
that it made good engineering sense and showed tasteful design. ``His 
taste in design was by and large extraordinary,'' said Vinton Cerf, 
chairman of the Internet Society, a professional group to which Postel 
belonged. ``And yet he did it in a way that you were only barely conscious 
that was nudging you toward better design. As the rest of the Internet 
unfolds, we're going to discover that Jon isn't there to remind us 
what good taste means.'' As part of the effort to hand administration 
of the Internet over to a private international corporation, earlier 
this month Postel had delivered to the government a proposal to transform 
the IANA into a nonprofit corporation, with broad representation from 
the commercial and academic sectors. The proposed organization has 
been incorporated and has an interim board of directors. Pending final 
approval from the Department of Commerce, the new entity is prepared 
to take up its responsibility, Cerf said. As testament to Postel's 
control over the highest levels of the Internet, in conducting a test 
of its reliability this year he rerouted the network's directory service 
to alternate locations. Although there was no disruption of the Internet's 
operation, the incident attracted widespread attention. Postel said 
he was conducting an experiment to demonstrate the network's backup 
capability. Explaining the action, Crocker said, ``I think he was 
exercising his legitimate responsibility to make sure the network 
worked as advertised.'' Postel obtained a master's degree in engineering 
in 1968 and a doctorate in computer science in 1974, both from UCLA. 
In addition to the Internet Society, where he served as a trustee, 
Postel was a member of the Association for Computing Machinery. Besides 
his brother Thomas of Sherman Oaks, Calif., Postel is survived by 
his companion, Susan Gould of Los Angeles; his mother, Lois Postel 
of Sherman Oaks; another brother, Russell Postel of Sebastopol, Calif., 
and a sister, Margie Bradshaw of Paisley, Scotland. Postel assiduously 
avoided conflicts of interest. In 1995, as the Internet was growing 
into a commercial business, a reporter asked him why he had repeatedly 
turned down opportunities to pursue wealth. He replied that starting 
a company to profit from his activities would have amounted to what 
he called a ``violation of public trust.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>