<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0128 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A lot of beer, a little reefer, a whole lot of television: as a steady 
diet, these ingredients don't exactly sharpen the powers of concentration. 
And for the mush-minded Smiths, the homicidal, trashy Texas family 
in ``Killer Joe,'' Tracy Letts' terrifically tasty potboiler at the 
SoHo Playhouse, focus mostly means getting a better picture on the 
tube. Why, even consideration of the contract killing of a close personal 
relation and the contemplation of homemade pornographic photos take 
a back seat to whatever might be flitting across the small screen. 
Dad, poised to smash up some furniture after a nasty argument with 
Mom, finds that he just can't be bothered once he notices a rerun 
of ``Cannon,'' the series about the fat detective, is on. Tempers 
may run short in the family, but attention spans are even shorter. 
Audiences for ``Killer Joe,'' which opened Sunday night in a pulsing 
new incarnation starring Scott Glenn and Amanda Plummer, are unlikely 
to suffer from any similar affliction, even when the characters onstage 
are at their fuzziest. Surely directed by Wilson Milam, the show is 
compellingly watchable, a pungent reminder that characters in the 
theater don't have to be poetic or even passionate to hold your interest. 
Letts' play, his first, isn't brand new. Since 1993, Milam has staged 
it in Chicago, New York (for the 29th Street Rep, a co-producer here), 
Edinburgh and London. I didn't see any of the earlier versions, but 
this one has the seamlessness and authority that a long incubation 
can provide. Life may be sloppy and squalid in ``Killer Joe,'' but 
it is presented with surgical precision. The material could easily 
register as white-trash Gothic with a comic-book spin, a sort of ``Tobacco 
Road'' according to Wes Craven. Yet while ``Killer Joe'' is often 
deeply funny, it is cheap in neither its humor nor its shock effects, 
some of which run to the X-rated. This is partly because Letts' Texas 
trailer-park dialogue sounds so natural, only occasionally straining 
for effect, and partly because the production's five actors make such 
an unconditional commitment to their parts, refusing to signal that 
they are smarter than the people they're playing. And although the 
characters seldom invite your sympathy in any traditional way, you 
are utterly engaged by them. ``Killer Joe'' has the enjoyable hairpin 
turns of the standard mystery thriller, but it's the skewed, shifting 
relationships that keep you hooked. Mind you, Letts isn't serving 
two-ton moral themes. ``Killer Joe'' is no sign-waving study in the 
banality of evil or even the evil of banality. But it does present 
a portrait of a purely American world that is so numbed out that carnage 
fits comfortably into the everyday domestic landscape. It's a hazy 
environment in which violence on television and violence in life have 
bled into a single, continuing drone. When the 20-year-old Dottie 
Smith (Sarah Paulson) meets the play's title character (Glenn), a 
detective who moonlights as a contract killer, she makes the association 
with Mannix, a private eye on television, while observing, ``He's 
not real.'' ``No, I'm real,'' Joe responds. Among the characters of 
``Killer Joe,'' such distinctions are necessary. Set in the cheesy 
trailer shared by Ansel Smith (Marc A. Nelson) with his racy wife, 
Sharla (Ms. Plummer), and his daughter, Dottie, the plot spins on 
the planned murder of a character who is never seen. That's Adele, 
the ex-wife of Ansel and the mother of Dottie and Chris (Mike Shannon), 
an inefficient drug pusher who is seriously in debt to the wrong kind 
of people. Chris proposes to his father that Adele, who has a tempting 
life insurance policy, be exterminated by someone who knows exactly 
how to handle such things. Enter Killer Joe Cooper, who is everything 
the Smiths are not: polite, tidy and able to pursue a course of action 
from beginning to end. Joe's style clashes with that of his clients 
from their first meeting, a scene executed with the canny, deadpan 
casualness that is the production's dominant tone. (``We've never 
done anything like this before,'' Chris mumbles. ``We don't want to 
do it, but it's got to be done.'') The Smiths don't even have the 
money for a down payment. Joe, however, is willing to take a retainer 
in the form of the virginal Dottie, who wants to be a model like Christie 
Brinkley and has a habit of walking in her sleep. It says a lot about 
``Killer Joe'' that it is hard to distinguish innocence from anesthesia. 
That there's more to killing Adele than meets the bleary eye consumes 
nearly two and a half hours, with ancillary events ranging from a 
brutal revelation of a double-cross to a first-act conclusion that 
is one of the sickest (and, admit it, sexiest) seduction scenes ever. 
Joe finally blows his cool before the play ends. The production itself 
never does, yet it still manages to exert the addictive pull of a 
classic thriller. Achieving that feeling onstage has rarely been carried 
off in recent years. (Think of the unholy mess that was made of the 
revival of ``Wait Until Dark.'') In fact, despite surface similarities 
to Sam Shepard's family dramas, ``Killer Joe'' most directly invites 
comparison with movies: the droll, Southern-cracker variations on 
film noir, like the Coen brothers' ``Blood Simple.'' The show is nonetheless 
expressly theatrical. It makes tantalizing use of the sense of people 
existing in real time; it's not afraid to go slow in crucial moments. 
And it ruthlessly exploits the sensory immediacy the stage allows. 
You're always aware of the fleshy contingency of those people in the 
trailer (designed with dead-on detail, right down to the undersized 
antlers over the door, by George Xenos). Watch the girthful Nelson 
blotting sweat from his nearly naked body with paper towels, or the 
way Ms. Plummer's Sharla keeps spraying her legs with perfume, a process 
her husband likens to ``fumigating the gates of hell.'' This ripe 
physicality is carried out on every level: the wry use of classic 
Grand Guignol sound effects, like thunderclaps and barking dogs, supplied 
by Hired Gun/One Dream; Greg MacPherson's lurid lighting, which makes 
especially effective use of the glows cast by an open refrigerator 
door and a television screen; Jana Stauffer's tatty costumes, which 
range from Ansel's distended jockey shorts to the black sequined mini-dress 
that Sharla considers appropriate for a funeral. (Ms. Plummer wears 
both to stunning effect.) To the cast's credit, no single actor stands 
out. They're all first rate. As the mixed-up, verbally meandering 
Chris, Shannon takes Method mumbling to an exceptionally high level, 
while Nelson memorably finds the vague little coward inside his bulky 
frame. Even at her most robotic, Ms. Paulson's Dottie exudes a troubled 
sensuality that justifies Joe's attentions to her, and Ms. Plummer 
deliciously (and surprisingly) underplays a foxy character who isn't 
nearly as clever as she think she is. Glenn is the very model of the 
assassin next door, and he never succumbs to the temptation to go 
for the obviously sinister. There is, for the record, full frontal 
nudity and plenty of grisly violence. The latter is definitely disturbing, 
but mostly because it mixes so naturally into the ordinary flow of 
events. A lot of the activity in ``Killer Joe'' is of a sort usually 
associated with fiery passions; that the characters here run emotional 
temperatures below normal is exactly, if perversely, what keeps you 
enthralled. PRODUCTION NOTES: `KILLER JOE' By Tracy Letts; directed 
by Wilson Milam; sets by George Xenos; lighting by Greg MacPherson; 
costumes by Jana Stauffer; sound by Hired Gun/One Dream; production 
manager, Allan Kerr; production stage manager, Richard Hodge; fight 
staging by J. David Brimmer; general manager, Cole Theatrical Inc. 
Presented by Darren Lee Cole and Scott Morfee, in association with 
29th Street Rep. At SoHo Playhouse, 15 Vandam St. WITH: Scott Glenn 
(Killer Joe Cooper), Amanda Plummer (Sharla Smith), Mike Shannon (Chris 
Smith), Marc A. Nelson (Ansel Smith) and Sarah Paulson (Dottie Smith). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>