<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0161 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yugoslavia has begun to withdraw two army and police battalions from 
Kosovo in what NATO and Clinton administration officials described 
Sunday as a significant step by President Slobodan Milosevic toward 
complying with demands to end his campaign against Kosovo's ethnic 
Albanians. But the officials said they remained concerned about the 
pace with which Milosevic's government is abiding by the agreement, 
which was brokered last week under the threat of NATO strikes against 
Yugoslav military and police forces. The officials said NATO's supreme 
commander, Gen. Wesley Clark, would fly to Yugoslavia's capital, Belgrade, 
on Tuesday to deliver yet another stern message to Milosevic that 
he must comply with international demands. Last week NATO voted to 
authorize the use of force against Yugoslavia, but on Friday the alliance 
extended the initial deadline it had given Milosevic to comply. The 
deadline, which was to have expired early Saturday morning, was extended 
by 10 days until Oct. 27 because, the officials said, there were indications 
that Milosevic was complying with at least some of the demands to 
end the fighting. Richard Holbrooke, the U.S. envoy to the Balkans 
who brokered the agreement, said Sunday that NATO had not backed down 
but rather kept up the pressure. ``NATO didn't blink,'' he said. Holbrooke, 
appearing on the ABC News program ``This Week,'' said NATO was still 
ready to use force, if necessary. ``The Serbs fully know the consequences 
if they don't comply, and this is not a bluff,'' he said. In Kosovo, 
the first significant withdrawals of Yugoslav forces began after Friday's 
extension, according to NATO officials, who have closely monitored 
the troop levels through satellite imagery and other intelligence 
means, including reports from witnesses. A senior NATO official said 
Sunday that the Yugoslav Army's 211th Armored Brigade, with 300 to 
400 soldiers, had withdrawn from the Podujevo area and returned to 
Serbia, the republic that dominates Yugoslavia. The 3rd Military Police 
Battalion, part of the paramilitary forces Milosevic wielded in his 
campaign, also left its position near Urosevac, south of Kosovo's 
capital, Pristina. But the official said it was not yet clear that 
those forces, also 300 to 400 strong, had left Kosovo. Those two battalions 
were among seven that Clark demanded be withdrawn during a meeting 
with Milosevic in Belgrade on Thursday. There is no sign so far that 
Milosevic has made any effort to withdraw the other five battalions 
on Clark's list. ``He's got to step it up,'' the senior NATO official 
said of Milosevic. NATO has insisted that Yugoslavia withdraw 4,000 
to 5,000 army troops and 3,000 to 4,000 paramilitary troops involved 
in the crackdown, which ostensibly targeted rebels fighting for Kosovo's 
independence but spread to attacks on civilians and their villages. 
Under last week's agreement, Yugoslavia would still keep 12,500 soldiers 
and 6,000 police officers in the province. But administration and 
NATO officials said they hoped the increased international presence 
brought by the deal will prevent a renewal of the fighting. Under 
the agreement, Milosevic agreed to unarmed reconnaissance flights 
over Kosovo. On Saturday and again on Sunday, a U.S. U-2 spy plane 
flew over the province, collecting thousands of photographs of both 
troop concentrations and refugees who have fled to the mountains to 
avoid the fighting. Milosevic also agreed to allow international observers 
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe into 
Kosovo. The first of those observers arrived over the weekend, and 
Russia announced on Sunday that it would contribute 200 people to 
the mission. But it could take weeks before enough arrive to verify 
that Milosevic's forces have ended their campaign. ``I am worried 
that the international community will be too slow in getting them 
there and that they will take six months to get there, when we need 
them there in six days, or at least six weeks,'' Holbrooke said Sunday. 
Armed clashes continued over the weekend between Serb forces and ethnic 
Albanian rebels whose insurgency sparked Milosevic's crackdown. Three 
Serb police officers were reported killed and two wounded in a grenade 
attack near the town of Lapusnick on Saturday. Yugoslav officials 
have complained that the attacks prove the rebels are not interested 
in reaching a settlement to the conflict. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>