<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981018.0099 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On the third and final day of talks between Indian and Pakistani diplomats, 
the world's two newest nuclear powers announced Sunday that they had 
agreed only to keep talking to each other about ways to reduce the 
risk of nuclear conflict between them. The foreign secretaries of 
the rival nations presented proposals designed to help dispel the 
mistrust and enmity that have characterized their relationship since 
British India was divided into Pakistan and India 51 years ago. But 
no agreement was reached on even on the most modest of them. The two 
sides said they would meet again in New Delhi in February to continue 
the conversation and claimed a small victory from the simple fact 
that they have been sitting down in the same room to discuss their 
differences. Ever since India, and then Pakistan, exploded nuclear 
devices in May, the other nuclear powers have been putting pressure 
on them to restart talks that stalled a year ago. Pakistanis themselves 
have repeatedly said Kashmir, a predominantly Muslim territory in 
the Himalayas that both countries claim, could become a nuclear flash 
point. Pakistan controls a sliver of Kashmir and India most of the 
rest, and the countries regularly exchange fire across the line that 
divides the parts of Kashmir that each controls. India and Pakistan 
have fought three wars, two of them over Kashmir. The diplomats did 
discuss Kashmir in this round of talks, but apparently did little 
more than rehash old ground, or as the joint statement they issued 
Sunday said, ``The two sides reiterated their respective positions.'' 
``It would have been unrealistic on anybody's part to expect we would 
come along after this short session with progress on an issue that 
is one of the most complex this world faces today,'' Pakistani Foreign 
Secretary Shamshad Ahmed said after Saturday's session. While the 
sober-faced foreign secretaries couched their remarks in a kind of 
platitudinous code, they managed to describe very different ways of 
approaching the negotiations. Indian Foreign Secretary Krishnan Raghunath 
said the two countries should try to start small, with modest steps 
to which both could agree without major concessions. But Ahmed said 
it would be difficult to make progress until the Kashmir question 
is addressed. He said Kashmir ``is the core problem between our two 
countries and the root cause of tensions in the region.'' India, which 
has already committed itself to a policy of no first use of nuclear 
weapons, asked Pakistan to adopt the same doctrine, an Indian official 
said, speaking on the condition of anonymity. But Pakistan refused 
on grounds that it needs the nuclear threat to counter India's superior 
conventional military forces. Pakistan in turn proposed that the two 
nations sign a nonaggression pact, with a provision to set up a process 
for the resolution of disputes, with third-party mediation in cases 
Pakistan and India could not resolve on their own. But India, which 
has ruled out international mediation on Kashmir, rejected the Pakistani 
proposal. Both countries proposed a number of more modest measures 
to reduce their mutual hostility. The written proposals from each 
country were not made public, but were provided to The New York Times 
by an Indian official. India advocated that the two countries give 
each other prior notice of flight testing of ballistic missiles; that 
they agree not to aim weapons at each other's population or economic 
centers; that they exchange visits by senior military officers, and 
that they upgrade the hot lines between their prime ministers, military 
commanders and foreign secretaries. An Indian official said the two 
countries now have an out-of-date hot line that is neither fail-safe 
nor secure. ``If the telephone line is down, it is down,'' he said. 
The military operations directors should have not just a telephone 
link, but also special fax and computer lines, the Indians said. The 
Pakistani proposals were less specific than those of the Indians. 
Their page-and-a-half-long list of one-line suggestions included measures 
to prevent violations of air space, prior notification of military 
exercises, upgrading of the communication links between military commanders 
and restraints on hostile propaganda. But the big issues apparently 
got in the way of small agreements, despite the similarities between 
some of the Pakistani and Indian proposals. As Ahmed bade good-bye 
to the reporters assembled for the news conference in Punjab House 
here, he told them he hoped that they would return for additional 
rounds of talks in coming months and years _ a measure of the distance 
the two countries have yet to travel before they settle their intractable 
differences. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>