<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981021.1830.1225 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There are fascinating races in every part of the country. Tonight 
"A closer look" at one of the war horses in the democratic party. 
For many years now the democrats have been losing their grip on the 
south. They have half as many Senate seats now as they did 20 years 
ago. That is why the challenge to senator Ernest Fritz Hollings in 
South Carolina is important. Here's ABC's John Cochran. We're hanging 
in there. Fritz Hollings belongs to an endangered species -- a democrat 
in the south's most republican state. I got elected in '48, but I'm 
still a young politician working my way. He's 76, but that's not his 
problem, not in a state where the senior senator is 5-year-old Strom 
thur man. I learned something from Strom. You gotta get with the beauty 
Queens. His problem is that he represents the old politics. He brags 
that his seniority brings federal dollars home. But South Carolina 
is no longer a poor state dependent on Washington pork. His 39-year-old 
opponent, congressman Bob Inglis, argues that tax cuts would now be 
more effective than pork projects. We've got the most senior delegation 
in the history of the country, and it's not working for us. Inglis 
and Hollings could not be more different. Hey, how are you? The younger 
challenger is polite, almost too polite. Hollings can be arrogant 
-- I appreciate what you're doing. a proud native of that bastion 
of the old south, Charleston. He speaks with an accent that is obviously 
condescending. That is the old South Carolina. Inglis represents the 
booming, new industrial areas where efficiency and a zeal for global 
trade are valued more than social connections. But one thing has not 
changed in South Carolina. Blacks still vote democratic here. That's 
why Inglis showed up for homecoming at South Carolina state. If he 
can pick up more than 10% of the black vote, he should win. But it's 
not easy. We traditionally vote for Fritz Hollings. He our man, ain't 
that right? We democrats here, remember that. African-Americans still 
like President Clinton, and that is bad news for Inglis, a Judiciary 
committee member who has demanded that Clinton resign. That goes down 
better with whites than blacks. Is there more going to be coming from 
Ken Starr? I think there is. Inglis is campaigning as Mr. clean, refusing 
money from political action committees, vowing to make no personal 
attacks, promising to serve no more than two terms. Hollings mimics 
his rival with dripping sarcasm. I'm against taxes. I'm a nice little 
fella, getting rid of the government, term limits -- term limits? 
What in the hell -- that's why I'm running here next month. Even Hollings 
admits he went too far when he used profanity in attacking Inglis, 
who quickly turned it against him. Was it distinguished to call me 
a "gd skunk"? I wonder if it was courteous to say to "the Wall Street 
Journal," Kiss my -- Veteran journalist Lee Bandy says Hollings wouldn't 
be Hollings without his salty language. Some say it's refreshing that 
we have a politician that speaks his mind. In the old days, that's 
how they campaigned. Republicans insist Hollings is a dinosaur. What 
worries them is that he doesn't realize it. And the voters may not 
either. John Cochran, ABC News, Greenville, South Carolina. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>