<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981021.2130.0051 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Israeli ambassador to the U.N. says Israel has gone the extra 
mile to make the peace process work and it's now up to the Palestinians 
to take an equal risk for peace. Israel is threatening to leave the 
summit in Maryland unless Palestinians change their position on security 
issues. There is conflicting information on when the delegation might 
quit the talks. One source puts the deadline at 6:00 A.M. eastern 
time tomorrow. Another source says the delegation has scheduled a 
1:00 A.M. news conference at Andrews air force base in the event it 
chooses to depart in the early morning hours. Walter Rodgers has more. 
Even as President Clinton was leaving the summit in the early hours 
of Wednesday morning, there were signs the peace process was unraveling. 
Israeli sources complained Palestinians were retreating from earlier 
agreements. By daybreak, Israel accused the Palestinians of failing 
to provide sufficient security guarantees and reneging. Without a 
specific Palestinian guarantee on the amendment of the Palestinian 
charter at the Palestinian national council, without receiving an 
explanation or program which satisfies us regarding the extraction 
of terrorist, there won't be an agreement. At one point Israeli and 
Palestinian officials had a debate before cameras, live in Hebrew 
on Israeli television. Palestinians called the Israel threat to scuttle 
the summit over security and go home, political blackmail. We were 
astonished to hear today that there are a new Israeli security demands. 
I think the Americans were surprised also. Palestinian President Yasser 
Arafat has been banking on president clinton persuading Israel of 
the sincerity of Palestinian security guarantees for Israel -- Arafat 
believing, he and Clinton were on the same page. One official close 
to the talks said -- then, to save the wye river talks from failure, 
the United States told both sides it was presenting a Summit-saving 
document document. It's a text designed to put the current business 
and the old business of the interim agreement into effect so that 
we can move on to the permanent status talks. That's American pressure 
-- a U.S. document to save the talks, but it's still not clear if 
it will work. All participants have been playing high stake, make 
or break poker. Arafat believing he now has the Americans on his side. 
Netanyahu believing all the pressure for concessions is on Arafat, 
not him. The problem here is, both sides seem to lack the requirements 
to make peace. They don't like each other. They don't trust each other. 
And they don't believe each other. And that's part of what has caused 
the gigantic mood swings here. Walter Rodgers, CNN, wye mills, Maryland. 
We have this update. Israeli prime minister Netanyahu has withdrawn 
his threat to leave the peace talks Wednesday night or early the following 
morning. An Israeli source is saying now the talks are indeed scheduled 
to go into thursday. This source says progress is being made tonight. 
So that's the very latest. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>