<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981021.2100.0289 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Judiciary committee has been relatively quiet since the house 
voted to go forward with the process. Today's meeting was the first 
indication in some time of what's been going on. Eric schmitt is writing 
about this this tomorrow's paper. He's with us from Washington. Eric, 
what can we take away from what happened in there today? Well, I think 
you also have to remember it's in the whoice's interest to try and 
exploit this issue. The public opinion poll shows that the American 
public believes this is a biased investigation against Mr. Clinton. 
And with the investigation only two weeks away, this will also hope 
ener nies a democratic base before election day. Aside from public 
opinion, where's the White House leverage? And what's in it for the 
republicans to go along with any of the White House's requests? That's 
going to be the big issue that they'll be debating. Clearly there's 
an interest on all sides to get this wrapped up. Even democrats concede 
it could test voters' patience and the public's patience if this drags 
on. Is it conventional wisdom widely known on the hill that -- is 
it believed this election really is a referendum on how the house 
should proceed? I don't believe that so much is the case. But clearly 
this is an issue that many Americans have decided in H their own minds 
one way or the other on and many Americans are very upset about the 
way it's been going. Republicans are sensitive to that. They want 
to play it down until after the elections. A word we're going to be 
hearing a lot, and you can't explain this procedure enough, stipulations. 
Is it correct to describe them as -- let's agree upon a set of facts 
and so we don't have to go over territory that's already been plowed? 
That's right. That's one of the goals here. It will be very posht 
important in shaping the witnesses called as much as you can agree 
to a common set of facts, that will maybe reduce the number of witnesses 
that need to be called. Obviously, there's some key issues where the 
two sides disagree sharply on. And are the democrats contending that 
if they agree to anything of substance it will be tantamount to an 
admission of guilt? It depends on the kind of issue. If you look at 
perjury, that's hard for them to dispute. Once you get into the obstruction 
of justice charges, there's quite a bit of dispute there. If they 
don't agree, does that mean on the areas of disagreement they'll have 
to have hearings and at the risk of going back over the Starr investigation, 
we'll hear from Vernon Jordan, perhaps the president president, from 
Monica Lewinsky? Is that what decides it? That's very likely, and 
the testimony of those witnesses will really have to shape the decisions 
that the lawmakers face. Now, the decision to call people like Ken 
Starr and Monica Lewinsky that many democrats have been calling for 
that, but there are also some now that are concerned it could cut 
back on them. So, there are some that are voicing different opinions 
now. Eric schmitt's byline will be in the morning paper. Thank you, 
Eric. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>