<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981021.2100.2486 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We have been talking on this broadcast tonight and over the past several 
weeks about the wise men, who are today's wise people in light of 
the book of the same name written about the extraordinary group of 
Americans who helped shape cold war and post cold war policy in the 
United States. And one person on just about everyone's all-star list 
has been kind enough to join us this eeverening through a combination 
of modesty and love of country, former ambassador, party chairman, 
Bob Strauss has been staying off the airwaves recently. He has graciously 
decided to join us this evening and can't thank you enough, Mr. ambassador. 
I'd like to start with the big picture, and that is, how do you view 
things these days? It's been an awful period of several months. We've 
seen an awful story unfold regardless of party persuasion. This is, 
after all, every American's presidency involved. It's been a difficult 
story and a difficult time for the American people as well as for 
those trying to cover the story. I don't think it's been particularly 
well covered. I guess that's one of the reasons I've tried to stay 
out of the press and off television. I think that we've got a difficult 
time ahead of us, and I think the American people are sick of this 
whole mess. You are one of the pros, and that's an inescapable fact. 
If you receive add phone call from this president and this White House 
saying, Mr. ambassador, come on down and tell me how I should deal 
with this? You've seen a lot of presidents come and go and a lot of 
crises. What would your counsel be? Well, to tell you the truth, I'm 
pleased that a number of presidents from time to time have asked my 
advice about different things, and I think one of the reasons they 
ask is I don't give advice to presidents over the television or in 
the newspaper. So, I'm going to decline to do so now. I thought I'd 
try. Well, let me ask you more broadly, is there a purpose to be served 
by having the likes of Bob Strauss and whoever you view your modern-day 
contemporaries as to come down and have a chat? Should the president 
be bringing in a widening circle of folks? Well, I think there are 
people in this community and people in the country who could contribute 
to the thought process that goes on in the president'mind when he 
goes through things like this, as well as members of his staff, who 
-- there are senior people who've had experiences that some of these 
haven't had that could be helpful. And I'm not speaking of meist. 
I'm speaking of younger people than me. Now, remember President Carver 
bringing in Donovan, bringing in the noted Washington attorney, Lloyd 
coulter. Have you seen this president make those right moves? And 
part two of that question, do you think this situation he's in is 
irreparable? Well, I think it is irreparable in many respects. I think 
the president calls on people. The president calls me from time to 
time. And I'm delighted when he calls and delighted to give him the 
best judgment I have. Sometimes he listens to my advice, I would imagine, 
and sometimes he hasn't. But -- so, I think this president reaches 
out and talks to people across the country. I'm not in his inner circle, 
and there's no reason to be in his inner circle. There's a tremendous 
generational gap between the president and me. Well, you venerate 
the office he holds right now. I know that about you. Do you think 
there has been permanent damage to this office? I don't think permanent, 
but I think there's been damage right now at this time, and I hate 
that. I hate it for the president. I hate it for the presidency. And 
I hate it for the people of this country more than I do for any of 
the others. Of course it's rep rabble, and time cures things like 
this. You'd be surprised how quickly thinged fead. In the meantime, 
we've got to deal with a serious situation, and I think the president, 
having been a very foolish man, is doing if best he can right now 
under difficult circumstances and doing a good job. Remember the group 
of men that went down to have a chat with President Nixon, and it 
was at that day and age all men, and they came away having convinced 
the president to resign? And I don't mean -- Led by Barry Goldwater, 
as I remember. That's right. And I don't mean this at all flip or 
disrespectful. Do you think there's a purpose to be served in this 
president, just to stop the damage to his country and to the office 
he holds temporarily, leaving office? I think his resigning would 
be a major mistake. Forgetting about him, he's reasoning -- it would 
be bad for the country to have this president resign. No reason for 
him to resign right now, in my judgment. It would be detrimental. 
We don't need a parliamentary government in this country. We've seen 
that. It doesn't work as well as our own system does. The process 
needs to work, and it'll work. It is working. Are you confident that 
those in Congress handling this case are the right people at the right 
time handling this case? I don't think the Congress has handled itself 
well at all. We have a Judiciary committee with nice people on it, 
good people, I'm sure, but they represent rather far out left and 
far-out right points of view generally speaking. We don't have a center 
on that Judiciary committee. As a matter of fact, one of the problems 
the Congress has today in my judgment is that we have people who are 
beholding to stitches on our left and to the right, and we don't have 
muchf a center anymore in Congress. We need to elect more to the center. 
That center was good to you. One of your best friends I Bob Dole, 
and guys go way back. What has happened in your estimation to the 
level of public and political discourse? When you look at the Congress, 
what has changed? I think there is -- I think the word civility is 
almost never mentioned nism in our litil press, andt'sads, and it 
doesn't serve the country very well. I can remembern hnson, for example, 
would leave his home late in the afternoon and drive out or be driven 
out to senateor's home and sit and have a drink with that senator 
late in the afternoon or before dinner and they would gogs sip about 
what was going on in the Senate and solve political problems for the 
country when they were together. They did that once every week or 
two. They served the country well. There was little discourse between 
the ledership of the parties and that's sad. People found out Trent 
Lott was making a drive out to the president's house, they'd call 
that hidden back room politics these days. In those days, it was never 
mentioned in the press, and the press would have a field day if the 
president were seen driving out to see anyone. It's very sad. I suspect 
the media has its share of blame to accept in this. As a man who's 
worked for democrats and republicans, do you view the glass as half 
full or half empty having watched the country grow up? I've always 
been an optimist, and I'm an optimist now. I don't think we're going 
to hell in a hand basket at all. We're going through a difficult time, 
and we'll come through it. The process will work, and we'll have a 
brighter day. How will Bill Clinton be remembered? I think unhappily. 
Le eel be remembered in Negative terms with respect to his personal 
discipline and personal conduct. I think in terms of talent and the 
abilities that he has, he'll be -- he will be remembered quite favorably. 
He hasn't had a bad presidency in terms of some more than moddest 
accomplishments. It's all clouded and covered up by this personal 
conduct of his that showed obviously a total lack of discipline. And 
I'm sure he knows that better than anyone else. But I'm not here to 
criticize the president. I don't criticize sitting presidents. I didn't 
criticize -- I just don't criticize sitting presidents, and I don't 
criticize this president. Former ambassador, Robert Strauss, thank 
you very much for coming on the air with us tonight. We appreciate 
it. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>