<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981021.2100.0075 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to begin tonight with a reminder that the president is 
still facing deep legal trouble in this Congress. There was a meeting 
today on the hill that did not bode well for his side or for this 
taking anything less than a few weeks or months. Members of Congress 
are home right now running for re-election, so it's left to the attorneys 
to lay the groundwork for the formal impeachment inquiry. Things did 
not break the president's way. There are indications this evening 
this may be the long and drawnout process that everybody feared. We're 
going to begin at the White House where Claire Shipman is standing 
by. Claire, good evening. That's right. I think you could think about 
today's meeting as a preview of what we're going to be hearing and 
seeing in late November. This was the first face-to-face meeting between 
White House attorneys and the lawyers for the house Judiciary committee. 
It was really supposed to be a get-acquainted session, going over 
the rules, the regulations, the way the hearings will proceed. It 
was a two-hour session. Both sides really trying to feel each other 
out on the commitment to get this done quickly and not surprisingly, 
at the end, there were mutual accusations of foul play. You can't 
invest videotape charges without telling who is charged what it is 
they're being charged with. It's like attacking a man who is blindfolded 
and handcuffed. We have gone out of our way to be fair, but the strategy 
is clear. Attack the process, attack the process, and that way you 
never get to the facts. Let me tell you, sooner or later you got to 
get to the facts. That's what the committee will do. Now, what is 
interesting is really that if you talk to all the parties behind the 
scenes at this point, the democrats on the hill, the republicans and 
the lawyers in the White House, everybody does say it's in their interests 
at this point to get this over with quickly, but the fact is their 
different positions just may not allow it. Here's one example. This 
is an issue they didn't get into in detail today but would like to 
very soon. The republicans would like to get the White House to stipulate 
to as much as possible or essentially agree that what is in Ken Starr's 
report is true so that the committee doesn't have to go through all 
of that all over again. You might think that would be in the White 
House's interest as well. But what people say behind the scenes, we 
might be willing to admit the president did have some sort of sexual 
relationship with Monica Lewinsky, we are not going to stipulate that 
he did commit perjury. So, you can begin to see the difficulties in 
that. Another thing they only touched on today but still needs to 
be discussed is witnesses. The White House very much wants to cross-examine 
any number of witnesses, including Ken Starr. Henry Hyde has said 
he would like to begin the hearings in late November. There may be 
some closed sessions before that, and get it wrapped up by the end 
of the year. But it's not clear that's going to map. Claire, what 
do we look for next as the next sign about how this is going? I think 
what you're going to see now is continued contact. They say clearly 
there's going to be a lot of phone contact. There will probably be 
more of these meetings, again, trying to establish things like the 
witness list, some sort of ground rules. But what most people are 
really waiting for and what you hear people say at the White House 
is we're not going to know anything about how these hearings will 
be conducted until the elections are over because republicans will 
not know how they want to proceed until they see what the American 
people are thinking. Claire Shipman on the White House lawn tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>