<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rubbermaid Inc., despite its well-known brand name and product lines, 
is finally calling it quits as an independent company. On Wednesday 
it announced that it would merge with Newell Co. in a stock swap valued 
at about $5.8 billion. The merged company, which will be called Newell 
Rubbermaid, will probably have sales of about $6 billion this year. 
For Newell, the merger means instant access to the instant consumer 
cachet attached to the Rubbermaid name. And it also means entree for 
its products, which include brands such as Levolor blinds, Mirro and 
Wearever cookware and Anchor Hocking glassware, into some new sales 
channels, such as supermarkets or Amway distributors. ``Rubbermaid 
and Newell are a terrific strategic fit,'' said John McDonough, Newell's 
chief executive. For Rubbermaid, it will mean one final chance to 
translate some of its brand equity into profits. ``Rubbermaid has 
excellent product-development skills but has had trouble bringing 
that to the bottom line,'' said Eric Bosshard, an analyst with Midwest 
Research-Maxus Group. It is an inauspicious ending for a 78-year-old 
company that, until early this decade, was growing at 15 percent a 
year. It got a particularly strong boost in 1980 when it hired its 
first non-home-grown chief executive, Stanley Gault, a marketing whiz 
who had cut his teeth at General Electric. Gault sold extraneous businesses 
like auto accessories and turned the remaining businesses into veritable 
new-product machines that by 1991 were introducing new products or 
line extensions at the rate of one a day. But the company remained 
a high-cost producer. And when mass merchandisers like Wal-Mart began 
pressuring it to lower its wholesale prices, its margins eroded quickly. 
When resin prices soared in 1995, it simply could not absorb all the 
excess cost. It had to raise its own prices, leaving the field wide 
open for competitors like Sterilite and Tucker Housewares. Now in 
a tax-free exchange of shares, Newell will swap 0.7883 share for every 
Rubbermaid share, valuing each Rubbermaid share at $34.09, almost 
a 50 percent premium over Tuesday's price. Shareholders clearly believe 
Rubbermaid is getting the best of the deal. After the merger was announced, 
investors bid Rubbermaid's shares up by $6.125, to $32. But they registered 
a resounding note of disappointment in Newell, driving its shares 
down by $5.8125, to $43.25. Some analysts suggest that Newell's stockholders 
simply fear that Rubbermaid is too large a mouthful for Newell, which 
has grown primarily through buying up tiny companies, to swallow and 
digest. But others say they fear Newell is biting into poisoned fruit. 
In the last two years, Rubbermaid has taken charges for reorganization 
that have totaled hundreds of millions of dollars. The price of resin, 
its main raw material, has plummeted. And yet its earnings have been 
flat at best, and its stock price has come nowhere near its 1991 high 
of $38. ``This is one of the most grossly mismanaged companies in 
the industry,'' said Andrew Shore, an analyst with Paine Webber. ``Its 
service to retailers is horrendous; it does not know how to respond 
to competition, and the jury's still out on whether even Newell can 
turn it around.'' Wolfgang Schmitt, Rubbermaid's chief executive, 
readily concedes that the company's shareholders have had a right 
to be disappointed. But he notes that the company has tried mightily 
to get back a taste of its former glory. In the last couple of years, 
it modernized its plants, made friends with formerly antagonistic 
unions, courted disaffected retailers, cut prices and came out with 
a slew of new products. But very little of the reorganization filtered 
down to the product line or up into the stock price. One reason, Schmitt 
said, is that Rubbermaid's suppliers and main retail customers have 
been consolidating. This means that Rubbermaid is caught between the 
proverbial rock and hard place _ it is increasingly buying its materials 
and components from megacompanies that can keep their prices high, 
yet it is selling its products to megastores that can force it to 
keep its prices low. Still, even Schmitt concedes that Newell might 
be better primed to operate in that kind of environment. ``We're known 
for innovation, but Newell is known for execution,'' he said. ``They 
are good at servicing customers with on-time shipments and with keeping 
costs down.'' Clearly, Newell will be calling the management shots. 
The merged board will include nine people from the current Newell 
board and six from Rubbermaid's board. Newell's chairman, William 
Sovey, will be the chairman of the new company and McDonough will 
be chief executive. Although Schmitt will stay on as a vice chairman 
of the new company, his main job is to help integrate the two companies. 
Because Rubbermaid will undoubtedly be ``Newellized'' _ a term used 
by Newell and Wall Street for the company's habit of quickly bringing 
acquired companies up to speed on its customer service and production 
methods _ Schmitt's input may in fact be minimal. And what he will 
do a year or so down the road remains unclear. The merger is unlikely 
to result in many job cuts. Although both companies make consumer 
products, there is little overlap of product lines and thus little 
production redundancy. There will be some cuts at headquarters, but 
the numbers are already pretty low _ the combined headquarters staff 
amounts to only about 120 people. And some may not want to move. For 
now, Newell is based in Freeport, Ill., and Rubbermaid is in Wooster, 
Ohio; Schmitt said the merged company would be moved to a new site. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>