<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0015 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It takes eight men to capture a street-smart cow, so the municipal 
cow catchers of New Delhi must squeeze together tightly in the cab 
of their cattle truck. There are two parts to their important job 
and only one is easy: finding the cows. Getting the beasts into the 
truck is where these workers really earn their $119 a month. It is 
estimated that 40,000 cows wander the streets of this city, and most 
seem well informed of their sacred status. They are a study in nonchalance, 
slowly crossing a highway or, as many prefer, relaxing in the right-turn 
lane of a busy intersection. The 100 or so cow catchers employed by 
the city have always thought their occupation a merciful one, saving 
sanctified creatures from a run-in with a front bumper. ``It is necessary 
if misunderstood work,'' said Raman Kumar Sharma, a crew chief. ``Sometimes 
people do not realize we have the cow's best interests at heart. We've 
had violence with the crowds.'' But these days, their mission has 
taken on added urgency because the urban cow has encountered a vicious 
new enemy: the plastic garbage bag. With little grass to graze on 
in the paved cityscape, cows scavenge through trash that is increasingly 
packed into polyethylene. New Delhi's animal rights groups have recently 
begun campaigns against the lethal packaging. Table scraps may be 
fine fodder, they say, but the plastic wrapping is not digestible 
in any of the cows' four famous stomachs. They want use of the garbage 
bags banned, though as yet this appears unlikely. In modern India, 
the utility of the garbage bag may be a force beyond even the spirituality 
of the cow. ``Inside the cows we find glass, iron, wire, electrical 
cords, shoes, shirts and razor blades, but the real killer is the 
plastic,'' said Dr. Vijay Chaudry, a veterinarian who runs a refuge 
where the cow catchers deliver the caught cows. ``We lose two or three 
cows a day, and when we cut them open. It is terrible what we find. 
For an animal so sacred, they die a bad death.'' Cows are as common 
to big-city India as bright lights are to Broadway, and revered though 
they may be, most live the life of vagrants. They are either unwanted 
animals, turned out because they are old and dry, or milk producers 
belonging to city dwellers who do not feed them. ``Cows that are still 
productive belong to people who think, `Why should I feed this cow, 
when the cow can feed itself?''' said Sharma, 36, a bureaucrat whose 
official title is milk tax inspector. ``These owners sometimes chase 
us when we take their cows. ``I tell you, there are many difficulties 
to this work. Old cows are tired and sick, and these are easy to catch. 
Young, healthy cows, well, this is something else. The cow is quick. 
The cow is intelligent. The cow has learned to recognize our truck.'' 
Hindus venerate the cow as a symbol of motherhood and a giver of life. 
It is certainly the mainstay of rural India, providing milk and pulling 
carts. Dried cow dung is the slow-burning cooking fuel favored by 
most village households. It also makes a good hard floor. Cow slaughter 
_ sometimes a volatile, violence-provoking issue here _ is banned 
in most of India's 27 states, though there is no shortage of juicy 
steaks for those who can afford them. Beef is sold on the black market, 
and butchers casually deliver their prime cuts door to door. This 
not-so-surreptitious killing is rarely discussed in a nation where 
the hallowed cow seems quaintly familiar on boulevards that are otherwise 
overpopulated with smoke-belching rattletraps. For the cow catcher, 
the animal's high approval rating is a problem. As a crowd gathers, 
more people are always rooting for the cow than the catcher. There 
is little use in talking to spectators about plastic bags and clogged 
digestive tracts. ``Why don't you quit torturing the poor animal!'' 
a man called out as Sharma's crew took on its toughest challenge of 
the day, a horned, formidable-looking white brute. Stealth is the 
cow catcher's principal tactic. Once a rope has been slipped onto 
the animal's head, the techniques of the rodeo cowboy usually work 
_ the headlock, the twisting, the tugging. ``If you grab the ears 
and put your hand in its mouth, the cow won't run,'' said Aji Ram, 
at 60 the most veteran of the crew. ``Then someone's got to hold on 
to the tail.'' When the catchers sneaked up on her, the big white 
cow had been enjoying the garbage beside a vegetable stand along busy 
Okhala Road. Another, more alert animal had just bolted away, recognizing 
the green rust bucket that serves as the cow catcher's truck. She 
then agilely ran up a steep slope, eventually taking sanctuary in 
a taxi stand. The white cow, however, had carelessly allowed herself 
to be roped and there was little else for her do but use Gandhian 
tactics of civil disobedience. Whenever the catchers shoved her near 
the ramp of their truck, the beast went limp. If they wanted her so 
badly, they would have to carry her. For 45 minutes, the catchers 
used all their wiles. When these failed, they used their poles, slipping 
the wooden prods under the animal and hitting her belly. At the same 
time, Aji Ram pulled the tail. Suresh Chand pushed the flank. Radha 
Krishna slapped the butt. Sharma himself, dressed in a well-pressed 
blue shirt, never touched the cow, but he did survey the crowd, which 
was ready to declare the animal the winner. ``I don't think we catch 
this cow,'' Sharma said, calling off the struggle. Anyway, they already 
had eight cows in their truck, a good enough bounty for three hours' 
work. The animals were then driven to the city's outskirts and set 
free in a gosadan, a sort of a shelter for homeless cows. There, they 
could chew their cuds in relative tranquillity, and while their diet 
may neither be as varied or as tasty as human garbage, it would again 
be plastic-free. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>