<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0274 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The San Francisco Ballet, truly a world-class company, opened its 
weeklong season at City Center on Tuesday night with a gala program 
_ but not any old gala program. After William Forsythe's astonishing 
new ballet shot out with cannonball force at the start of the evening, 
one wondered how the company could go on to match the fabulous dancing 
in this ballet or even the Forsythian oddity of its title, ``The Vertiginous 
Thrill of Exactitude.'' The other titles grew less strange, but Helgi 
Tomasson, the San Francisco Ballet's artistic director, knew exactly 
what he was doing. He put virtually all his principals and some of 
his soloists on display in a showcase that was clearly devoted to 
excellent dancers. Some were new, including the striking young Spanish 
ballerina Lucia Lacarra, and some were familiar, better than ever 
and even stunning. It was a shrewd move. The San Francisco Ballet 
appears only occasionally in New York (the last time was in 1995) 
and audiences cannot acquaint themselves with its breadth of talent 
during a short run. If any further proof were needed to demonstrate 
how Tomasson has transformed a regional ballet troupe into a first-class 
classical company since he became director in 1985, it was on this 
program. Like all one-time galas, it had eclectic fare: excerpts from 
George Balanchine works and 19th-century ballets as well as short 
pieces by contemporary choreographers, including Tomasson. The range 
of the dancers was obvious. Tina LeBlanc could speed through the experimental 
complexity of Forsythe's most neoclassical ballet and also lend her 
perfection of traditional style to the pas de deux from ``Le Corsaire,'' 
where she danced an interpolated solo from ``La Bayadere.'' She was 
partnered by Roman Rykine, one of several high-jumping Russian-trained 
dancers that Tomasson brought to the fore. A company that has superb 
dancers attracts major choreographers. Forsythe, the American director 
of the Frankfurt Ballet, was one of the first to do a new work in 
1987 at Tomasson's invitation. ``Vertiginous Thrill,'' created in 
Frankfurt, Germany, in 1996 and staged for San Francisco this year, 
is an eye-opener (it will be repeated Thursday at City Center, 131 
West 55th St.). Here is William the Good, not William the Terrible: 
no more dark, alienated mood, no spoken text, no electronic music 
with a strong beat from a faithful collaborator, the Dutch composer 
Thom Willems. Forsythe goes back to his roots. He has used a Schubert 
score, the last movement from the composer's Ninth Symphony, to stress 
the purity of ballet's classical idiom while extending its dynamic 
potential. Taking his cue from Schubert's subtitle, this work is ``allegro 
vivace.'' It is sunny, bright and intricate. Ms. LeBlanc, Kristin 
Long, Katita Waldo, Parrish Maynard and Christopher Stowell are sensational 
in it. It is easy to see why. So much of the choreography depends 
on perfect body placement and clarity, a contemporary extension of 
the classical style. For all his experiments with spectacular production 
trappings in the past, Forsythe has always been a brilliant classical 
choreographer. ``Vertiginous Thrill'' lets us see it, yes, thrillingly. 
Maynard was once with American Ballet Theater, and Ms. LeBlanc was 
long ago identified as one of the best ballet dancers in the United 
States when she was with the Joffrey. It is how Tomasson has used 
them that makes the difference. Here, Stowell, always impressive in 
his precision and energy, and Maynard, both bare-legged in rust leotards 
(by Stephen Galloway), set the tone and pace of the piece. Their classroom 
positions would be echoed by the full cast at the end, becoming a 
metaphor for the basic exercises from which ballet choreography springs. 
When the three women entered in disc-shaped green tutus, the mood 
evoked a festive sideshow with Picasso's saltimbanques made happy. 
Forsythe's focus is on change and speed. The choreography's structure 
plays off the music, although the score's occasional canons are visualized 
onstage. Note the high-flying jumps (pas de chat) that set the entire 
cast springing toward an exciting finish. Less concerned than usual 
with a loose torso than fast footwork, Forsythe has the cast face 
different directions and move in and out of formations, often diagonals. 
The end of one phrase can contain the germ of the next. But as Maynard 
and Ms. Long show splendidly in an acrobatic duet, the steps are unpredictably 
joined. Charles Barker conducted. The rest of the program included 
three excerpts from ``Swan Lake.'' The Pas de Trois from Act I showed 
off Claudia Alfieri, as sparkling as she was in Ballet Theater; Vanessa 
Zahorian, and Guennadi Nedviguine, blessed with a light jump and clean 
style. The Black Swan pas de deux had another stylish Russian, Vadim 
Solomakha, partnering Yuan Yuan Tan, girlish and proficient. Ms. Lacarra, 
partnered by Cyril Pierre, carried off the difficult task of radiating 
emotional depth in Odette's adagio from Act II. Star presence comes 
naturally to Yuri Possokhov. ``Aria,'' which Val Caniparoli choreographed 
to an aria from Handel's ``Rinaldo,'' has plain movement. But Possokhov, 
searching for an identity behind a white mask that he momentarily 
sheds, has a Pagliacci poignancy. Similarly, he and Joanna Berman 
made something substantial of Tomasson's neo-Romantic duet ``Twilight,'' 
set to Mendelssohn. (Michael McGraw was the pianist and Emil de Cou 
the conductor.) Tomasson's ``Two Bits,'' set to music by Aaron Jay 
Kernis, served Evelyn Cisneros, who will retire this year, and David 
Palmer more than well. They were vibrant and hip in this flashy contemporary 
encounter. Muriel Maffre, with her ultra-stretched extensions, and 
Benjamin Pierce gave a smooth if acrobatic view of Balanchine's duet 
from ``Agon.'' The ballet will be repeated, as will ``Shogun,'' by 
a Brazilian choreographer, Ivonice Satie. Here Chidozie Nzerem was 
felled by Peter Brandenhoff in a bizarre and rarefied duel inspired 
by martial arts. Tomasson brought the corps onstage for a final parade, 
``Polonaise Defile,'' set to Dvorak, a fine close to a fine evening. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>