<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0403 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good help is hard to find these days, snobs say, as if it were news. 
The complaint has been circulating the globe since the race first 
cooked up the division of labor. Like parent and child or mate and 
mate, master and servant make up one of the handful of stock pairs 
in the theater of human destinies. In the drama of all places and 
periods, their dance of dominance and deference has been a constant. 
Two who observed its intricacies with the sharpest eyes were Mozart 
and da Ponte, the creators of ``Le Nozze di Figaro'' (1786), which 
will be given a new production on Thursday evening at the Metropolitan 
Opera; ``Don Giovanni'' (1787), and ``Cosi Fan Tutte'' (1790). For 
much of their lives, in their separate ways, Mozart and da Ponte had 
themselves seen no choice but to chase the mixed blessings of patronage. 
Class conflict was in any case a preoccupation among lively minds 
of their age. No wonder their masterpieces bristle with it. ``Viva 
la liberta!'' cries Don Giovanni, striking a freethinker pose: ``Hurrah 
for freedom!'' A stageful of characters chimes in, aristocrat and 
lackey alike, sentiments ranging from pure hypocrisy to a euphoria 
of self-delusion. The most conventional of Mozart and da Ponte's treatments 
of the master-servant paradigm is their last, ``Cosi Fan Tutte.'' 
When first discovered, Despina is stirring hot chocolate for Fiordiligi 
and Dorabella. Why should they get to drink it, she asks herself, 
while she gets only to smell it? ``Is not my mouth like yours?'' she 
rages, and in a tiny act of rebellion, she hazards a sip. ``When Despina 
runs a show, it never fails,'' she crows later, enlisted in a plot 
against the ladies. Sure enough, she manages her mistresses handily. 
But even as she pulls strings, an old cynic is leading her by the 
nose. By curtain-fall, her position is what it was at the start, if 
not worse, since her treacheries have come to light. Is not my mouth 
like yours? A question of all but mythic force. Leporello, the manservant 
in the second of the Mozart-da Ponte operas, might phrase it more 
brutally, working as he does for a sex fiend. ``Don Giovanni'' paints 
the ramifications of service in bleaker, fuller detail. In the common 
view, the libertine hero embodies Eros rampant, but he hungers for 
food and drink _ and for sheer manipulation _ as much as for (other 
men's) women. On the latter score, the opera catches him badly off 
form. At least four separate campaigns increase the pedantic count 
of his 2,065 amours not at all. Conversely, the second-act finale 
finds him tucking in with gusto at what will prove his last supper. 
But without applause, where is the fun? And here is where Leporello 
comes in. Don Giovanni's headiest pleasures range from rage to murder. 
To protect his social position (not to mention the freedom to keep 
up the chase), he must maintain a respectable facade. So he employs 
a secret sharer. The contract is simple. Don Giovanni gets sex; Leporello 
gets out his notebook. Don Giovanni gets dinner; Leporello gets to 
watch. But then Don Giovanni gets caught with his pants down, and 
Leporello gets thrashed, at which point Leporello gets fed up, and 
Don Giovanni gets out his wallet. Every so often, for kicks, man and 
master trade places, but always on the boss' terms, confirming his 
place on top. Is there a more wicked scene in all of opera than the 
second seduction of Donna Elvira? Under her window, wrapped in his 
master's cloak, Leporello quakes with smothered laughter while off 
in the shadows, unseen by the lady, Don Giovanni models romantic poses 
and croons sweet nothings. His game is to get rid of her. So as usual, 
Leporello feeds on Don Giovanni's leavings. Rank and privilege trump 
any common humanity, even between this pair of predators. Master and 
servant, almost master and slave: Don Giovanni and Leporello are their 
ghastly emblem. Strangely enough, this most resentful of Mozart and 
da Ponte's double portraits comes after, not before, ``Le Nozze di 
Figaro,'' which superimposes on its account of class conflict a highly 
sophisticated battle of the sexes. What results is their most delicate 
and conciliatory representation of socio-political realities. If in 
``Don Giovanni,'' status is destiny, ``Le Nozze di Figaro'' asserts 
that wiles, wit, determination, decency and love can (with luck) tip 
the scales against arrogance and power. In theory, Count Almaviva, 
the jealous philanderer, holds all the cards. In fact, he holds very 
few. Figaro's bride, Susanna, whom the count covets, cares not a pin 
for him or his money. The highly available gardener's daughter Barbarina 
actually prefers to dally with the fresh-faced page Cherubino. Almaviva's 
wife, who bores him, might at any time stain his honor by taking a 
lover, possibly that same page. ``Must I, while I sigh, see my servant 
happy?'' the count storms, venting his fury at the weakness of his 
position. ``And shall he possess a treasure that I desire in vain?'' 
Sabotage is the privilege of the underling; and Figaro _ as the count 
surely recalls from his courtship of the countess (the subject matter 
of ``Il Barbiere di Siviglia,'' which in its first operatic version, 
Giovanni Paisiello's, reached Vienna three years before ``Le Nozze 
di Figaro'') _ is a cleverer man than he. Soliloquizing on her state, 
the countess, too, must face a humiliating dependency: ``It has come 
to this,'' she cries in one of her most poignant lines. ``I must seek 
help of my maid.'' Before the follies of the day are sorted out in 
the moonlit garden, Almaviva has been led a dance by all and sundry. 
``If, dear Sir Count, you'd like to go dancing, I'll play the tune 
on my little guitar,'' Figaro vows in the opera's first aria. The 
prediction (or threat) comes true, and Susanna's chastity is preserved, 
with the connivance of the hardly disinterested countess. But beneath 
the pines, where indiscretions flourish, Figaro will do some dancing 
of his own to tunes played by the ladies, as Susanna will to his. 
In the end, only the countess emerges undeceived, entrancing and entrapping 
her husband, who is susceptible only because he believes her to be 
another woman. In the study, reading slowly, it is not impossible 
to follow the ins and outs of this elaborate fandango. With the help 
of the Met's splendid running titles, audiences at the new all-star 
``Nozze di Figaro,'' directed by Jonathan Miller, may succeed as well, 
though the odds are against it. (One of the exceptional productions 
that did sort out the entanglements for the viewer in real time was 
that of Peter Sellars, which famously, or notoriously, transposed 
the action to Trump Tower, Manhattan, circa 1990.) What will surely 
not be lost, however, is the humane, murmured message of forgiveness, 
uttered by the countess, in answer to the stammered eloquence of her 
husband's entreaty. So far, the focus has been on essentially literary 
matters, rooted in the libretto. But words alone, thought alone, cannot 
account for the transcendent reversal at the close of ``Figaro.'' 
For a moment of wondrous calm, all strife resolves in harmony. The 
composer as well as his poet has things to say about class relations 
as they are and as they might be. In fact, though, the implication 
that social hierarchies are accidents of fortune rather than reflections 
of native worth is woven into the musical fabric of ``Le Nozze di 
Figaro'' as well as ``Don Giovanni.'' Consider the matter of casting. 
By common agreement and with few exceptions, a singer endowed with 
the highest notes takes precedence over singers with notes less high, 
sopranos outranking mezzo-sopranos, as tenors do baritones and basses. 
It only makes sense; higher voices are in general easier to hear. 
Mozart and his contemporaries did not distinguish between vocal categories 
as neatly as subsequent periods did, or tried to. The designation 
for all the women's parts in the da Ponte operas is soprano. Yet the 
general principle applied, and in the main Mozart respected the musical 
prerogatives of the prima donna. In the ensembles of ``Cosi Fan Tutte,'' 
for instance, Fiordiligi's lines lie above Dorabella's, which lie 
above Despina's, position in the musical texture corresponding to 
status in the household. Among male voices, Mozart recognized the 
division between tenor and bass. So he could, if he liked, assign 
basses to servants' parts for contrast with masters played by tenors. 
Mozart followed this common practice early on, in ``La Finta Semplice'' 
and ``La Finta Giardiniera.'' In ``Die Entfuhrung aus dem Serail'' 
(1782), he abandoned it in favor of a mistress and her maid played 
by high sopranos and a man and his servant played by tenors. In a 
subliminal sense, the closeness of range erases distinctions of rank 
_ fittingly, since, as Christian captives in Araby, they are quite 
literally in the same boat. In the plots of ``Le Nozze di Figaro'' 
and ``Don Giovanni,'' the lines between master and servant are perfectly 
clear, yet Mozart blurs them just as in the earlier opera. With one 
adjustment: the male parts have been shifted to bass, gaining in lifelike 
macho what they sacrifice in storybook romance. At key moments of 
the action, the countess and Susanna, like Don Giovanni and Leporello, 
exchange clothes and mimic each other's voices; the singers taking 
the parts have been known to switch, too. The count and Figaro never 
switch roles. There is little vocal reason for the singers playing 
them not to, though temperamentally there might be a lot. Bryn Terfel, 
the pre-eminent Figaro of the moment and one of the stars of the new 
Met production, also has both Leporello and Don Giovanni under his 
belt, though not the count. As a matter of interest, where Figaro's 
and Leporello's music parallels that of the count and Don Giovanni, 
the servants take the lower line. From an analytical point of view, 
the bass forms the foundation for the entire musical structure. A 
fanatical Marxist might argue, therefore, that Mozart distributed 
the voices this way to reflect social inequities, an absurdity, of 
course. At a certain point, even in Mozart or Verdi, the voice in 
a large-scale ensemble ceases to function as the vehicle of personal 
expression and becomes, instead, an instrument within a symphonic 
interlude. So much so that since Mozart's day and with his approval, 
Susanna and the countess traded lines less according to who was the 
nominal prima donna than for musical expediency, notably in the second-act 
trio, which gives one of them the gratifying (or scary) opportunity 
of winging up to some very prettily placed high Cs. The original Susanna, 
the low soprano Nancy Storace, who was the toast of Vienna, was glad 
to take the lower part during the opera's first, disappointing run. 
Three years later, da Ponte's mistress, Adriana Ferrarese del Bene, 
assumed the role in a highly successful Vienna revival. A showoff 
who exulted in her high notes, she co-opted the lines once sung by 
the countess: this served the music and no doubt tickled her vanity, 
too. She also got Mozart to write her two new arias in place of the 
two he had written for Storace. (Cecilia Bartoli, the Susanna of the 
Met production, will stick to Storace's lines in the ensembles, leaving 
the higher ones to the countess of Renee Fleming. In selected performances, 
notably those before the video cameras, she is expected to replace 
Storace's arias with Ferrarese's less familiar alternatives.) It remains 
to say that with da Ponte's help Mozart served the servants in their 
operas at least as well as the masters. In the arias especially. By 
actual count, Don Giovanni and Leporello have three apiece. But with 
the Catalog Aria, Leporello has a juicy star turn that establishes 
him not just as a singer with a solo but as a character in the round, 
aglow with Rabelaisian zest. Don Giovanni's big solo moment comes 
(and goes) in ``Fin ch' han dal vino,'' a thunderclap of rapacious 
energy that fails to put him before us in three dimensions. Figaro 
has three arias, two hit tunes (one is quoted as such in ``Don Giovanni'') 
plus a racing monologue addressed straight to the audience. The count 
has just one, musically tremendous but emotionally flinty. The artist 
who can discover in it not only the tantrum of a justly foiled despot 
but also the pathos of a scorned lover is the exception. Mozart's 
generosity to Despina is admittedly less than to Fiordiligi and Dorabella, 
who are granted great flights of bravura. Still, Despina's tunes you 
can whistle and saucy street wisdom give a performer of genius all 
the chance she needs to clean up. (Ask Ms. Bartoli.) Between Susanna 
and the countess, the scales are in balance, not only thanks to the 
pair of shining arias awarded to each. Conspiring benevolently against 
the menfolk in their duettino ``Sull' aria,'' their voices intertwine 
in celestial amity. Perhaps such concord across the gulf of rank exists 
only in Mozart, and then only between these two women. Man and master, 
the operas tell us, will never be brothers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>