<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0280 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tile has always been long on service, but it's no longer short on 
style. Subway-white may still be their basic black, but after 50 years 
of an institutional lull, tile makers are rediscovering tile's fabled 
power to please and inspire. Thanks to a new market of colors, sizes 
and materials, the simple tile wall has become a world of options. 
The textures and palettes of North Africa, Latin America and the Middle 
East are being translated into some of today's most surprising interiors 
_ with tile. American artisans, too, are revisiting the idea of an 
arts and crafts movement, with reproductions from the turn-of-the-century 
and new designs. Today, there is tile for every taste _ for modernists 
who revel in intense color fields and preservationists who need historical 
replicas. One has only to survey the dozens of new stores in New York 
to appreciate the abundance of tiles. Heeding the call, the manufacturer 
Bisazza, based in Vicenza, Italy, and Ex Inc., with roots in Sardinia, 
opened sparkling new showrooms. ``People are tired of the old look 
of ostentatious, marble-slab surfaces,'' the New York designer Stephen 
Sills, said. ``The look of handmade ceramic tile is more personal 
and less slick. And for people who like color, Italian glass-mosaic 
tile corresponds to the modernist palette of the 1960s that is so 
popular now.'' Tile is also teaming up with other materials like metal 
and stone, taking some of the blank boredom from the traditional totally 
tiled look. David Mullman, a New York architect, used both glass-mosaic 
tile and broad, thin blocks of limestone in a recent loft bathroom 
construction, playing them for their gem-toned translucence, suede-like 
texture and subtle shades. ``A whole room of either would have been 
too much,'' Mullman said. ``One material is too hard to live with.'' 
Tile has been the face of civilization for 6,000 years, but at the 
end of this century, it still has a few tricks up its sleeve. Advances 
in technology have strikingly affected small producers working in 
ceramic workshops as much as giant factories. Shapes are breaking 
the grid, too, with brick-like oblongs and scallop-edged border panels. 
And innovations in glass are bringing a bright eyeful of color options. 
Even so, some of the most advanced tile production today looks still 
delightfully low tech, as it did in 1910. ``It might look that way, 
but the technology has allowed small kilns to use improved clays, 
glazes and firing techniques,'' said Marcello Napoleone, who owns 
Ex: Inc., with his wife Amy. ``Three thousand years ago _ even a few 
years ago _ small-tile production in America and in Europe depended 
on local clays and minerals for glazes. Now, materials can be brought 
in from any place to improve the process and the glazes.'' And 50 
years ago, only small tiles _ four or five inches square _ could be 
pressed. Now, it's not unusual to find 12-inch and even 16-inch squares. 
``Designers are using large tiles,'' said Christina Abbate, a consultant 
to the Italian tile industry, ``because they say large tiles make 
small rooms look bigger.'' Peter Sallick owns Waterworks, a group 
of 20 stores in the United States that specialize in handmade American 
ceramic tile from small workshops. He sells a collection of architectural 
tiles that are larger in scale and inspired by building materials. 
When installed, they look like white wainscoting or bead board. ``Ceramic 
tile is becoming almost like wallpaper or paneling,'' he said. ``People 
are more comfortable with tile and more sophisticated about the way 
they use it.'' Peter Stamberg of the architecture firm Stamberg &AMP; 
Aferiat uses tile to infuse Matisse-like colors into modernist architecture, 
like his addition to a '60s ocean-front home designed by Charles Gwathmey. 
The floors were originally tiled in earth tones; the firm is replacing 
them with vivid new ceramic tiles to make the house look less rustic. 
In an Upper East Side kitchen, the designers used one of the industry's 
newest innovations, terrazzo tiles made with chips of intensely colored 
glass in a polymer base, to an urbane effect. Unlike classic terrazzo, 
made of stone chips set in cement, this terrazzo comes in manageable 
12- or 16-inch-square tiles _ and many colors. Choosing tile is similar 
to choosing fabric for upholstery: some people prefer wool to cotton, 
and not everyone can afford silk. Both ceramic and glass are hard, 
durable surfaces, impervious to moisture. The choice, then, between 
glass and ceramic is either esthetic or budgetary. Some basic tile 
talk: Ceramic tile has been fired in a kiln. The more highly fired 
a tile, the stronger it is. Low-fired tiles are appropriate for walls, 
but should not be used on floors. A handmade tile is not as strong 
as an industrially made tile that's stamped out with presses of enormous 
strength. Glass tile is a combination of sand with minerals added 
for color. The tile is cooled very slowly by a process called annealing, 
which makes the glass less brittle than, say, tumbler glass. Glassmakers 
also add a very fine sand called silica to the basic sand mixture, 
which gives the tile a higher impact capability. Both glass and ceramic 
tiles are available with textured and embossed surfaces and in dozens 
of colors. Tiny glass-mosaic tiles now come on mesh sheets that are 
easy to install and have greater flexibility to cover curved surfaces. 
In a small room, glass reflects light and appears to give depth of 
field to a wall. ``Glass tile twinkles, it's vibrant,'' said Marcia 
Barkin, a designer who considers herself a modernist. She has just 
designed a curved, 28-foot glass-mosaic wall in khaki color for a 
client's living room. The floor is also tiled in the same glass in 
black, pewter and copper. But ceramic tile has qualities that no glass 
tile can offer. The architect Peter Marino is drawn to ceramic handmade 
American tiles inspired by turn-of-the-century Arts and Crafts designs. 
His favorites are custom-made by ceramists in small workshops. ``No 
two tiles come out the same when they are handmade, and today people 
like that craftsy quality,'' he said. He just used American handmade 
tiles for a swimming pool he designed _ in Athens, Greece. Handmade 
ceramic tile is still a cottage industry here. The number of artisans 
has grown; they are located mainly in California, with hundreds more 
throughout the Midwest and the East, near colleges that have large 
ceramics departments. ``The artisans are phenomenal,'' said Nancy 
Epstein, the owner of Artistic Tile in New York, which is starting 
to export American tiles to Europe. ``That's a switch,'' she said. 
``Handmade ceramic tiles are more expensive than machine-made tile, 
but you are buying artwork.'' Aside from esthetic considerations, 
there is one major reason to consider ceramic instead of glass tile: 
It's cheaper. There is a wide choice of inexpensive ceramic tiles. 
But there is no cheap glass. A press can turn out many more ceramic 
tiles in the same time that a machine can cut a square foot of glass 
mosaic. In addition, raw materials for glass must be pure for clarity 
and color. Basic ceramic will cost $1 to $3 a square foot for solid-color 
material; glass starts at $8 to $10 and more. Napoleone said that 
95 percent of the glass tile used in the United States is machine 
made and comes from Italy, and the best Italian glass is made by two 
manufacturers _ Bisazza and Sicis. Both companies offer dozens of 
colors, some with opalescent-look finishes and others of gold and 
platinum. Sicis' glass is made with enamel, which produces a color 
that is denser and less translucent than the glass from Bisazza. ``Tile 
is a fashion item,'' Napoleone said, addressing the trend. ``But that 
doesn't mean you can't do a nice bathroom that will last forever on 
a limited budget.'' Mario Paone, the president of Sicis North America, 
said that in the last five years, his company's glass-mosaic sales 
have increased 25 percent a year. Donato Glasser, a consultant to 
the Italian Ceramic Tile Association in New York, said the ceramic-tile 
market here has expanded 8 to 10 percent a year over a decade. Peter 
Marino's favorite tiles are not new; he is in love with antique tiles 
and uses them to great decorative effect, sparingly, as insets over 
stoves in kitchens or as fireplace surrounds. Antique tiles are as 
one-of-a-kind as old china or silver; dealers who specialize in antique 
tiles can be found at antique shows and fairs. Pedro Leitao, who opened 
Solar Tiles in 1989, has been collecting since childhood in his native 
Portugal. In 1947, his father, an antiques dealer in Lisbon, started 
buying tiles for their own 17th-century home. ``My father overbought,'' 
Leitao said, ``and a business was born.'' Most of his inventory is 
18th- and 19th-century tile, 85 percent from Portugal, the rest from 
Holland, China, Germany and Turkey. He also produces a collection 
of custom-made, readily available reproduction tiles. They cost $17 
to $30 a tile, compared with antique tiles that can cost hundreds 
and thousands for rare specimens. Leitao will advise customers on 
the proper way to install antique tiles so that they can be removed 
should a customer move. Just remember to shop carefully. Many tile 
stores have similar merchandise but at varying prices. And choose 
tiles you love. Art is long and life is short. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>