<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0397 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For all the American efforts to envelop Middle East talks in a rustic 
and secluded setting at the Wye Plantation, the smoke signals issuing 
from behind the police barricades have spelled a steady increase in 
tension, frustration and brinkmanship, building up to the pillar of 
flame that erupted on Wednesday when the Israelis angrily threatened 
to bail out. ``We are at a critical moment in terms of intensity and 
importance,'' conceded James Rubin, the State Department spokesman, 
in some of the strongest language to emerge from his studiously bland 
briefings _ officially the only sanctioned source of information here. 
Rubin's other morsel for the day was that the Americans intended to 
present their version of a potential settlement to both sides on Wednesday 
afternoon. But by the time Rubin made the two-mile voyage to the community 
college where reporters were keeping vigil, the Israelis had raised 
the alarm. Briefing Israeli reporters in time to make evening newscasts 
back home, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's spokesman, Aviv Bushinsky, 
declared that the Israeli delegation intended to pull out unless demands 
were met for the revision of the Palestinian Charter and the extradition 
of Palestinian terrorists. The threats built through the day. The 
Israelis set a 10 p.m. deadline for their departure from Wye Mills, 
and a midnight takeoff from the airport. They demonstratively moved 
bags into vans when Secretary of State Madeleine Albright came over 
to their lodgings for another hour of talk with Netanyahu. The Palestinians 
kept pace with the Israelis. Yasser Arafat's spokesman, Dr. Ahmed 
Tibi, was not far behind Bushinsky on the lawn outside the community 
college. He described in soothing tones how Arafat had sent over a 
bouquet for Netanyahu's 49th birthday on Wednesday, and how the Palestinians 
welcomed the American proposal, and how the Israeli threat was ``a 
political game.'' It is a fact of most negotiations, and certainly 
of all the bitter Israeli-Palestinian talks since Netanyahu came to 
power, that all is not as the participants would try to make it. What 
emerged from the day's threats, ultimatums and statements was a high-powered 
end-game in which feints, image and politics were at least as important 
as substance. According to participants at the conference, the ``document'' 
that the Americans were to present to the conference on Wednesday 
was in fact shown to both sides Tuesday evening, and the document 
prompted the Israeli tantrum _ which, in turn, was probably a play 
to pressure the Americans into twisting a few more concessions out 
of the Palestinians. By the time Rubin made his next briefing at 6:20 
p.m. _ over a speakerphone, this time _ no American document had actually 
materialized. The reality behind the drama was that after long resisting 
and dodging American persuasions, Netanyahu's back was against the 
wall. This time, the Americans had mounted some of the most formidable 
pressure the Clinton administration has ever unleashed on any front. 
President Clinton himself had spent 57 hours talking and eating with 
the Israeli and Palestinian delegations _ in the heat of a critical 
national campaign. Albright had spent the entire ``seven days and 
seven nights'' _ as Rubin intoned a few times _ at Wye, and even the 
ailing icon of the Middle East, King Hussein of Jordan, arose from 
his sickbed to plead for peace. This time, too, Netanyahu could not 
count on his supporters among congressmen and American Jews to push 
Clinton off. Americans were wrapped up in the campaign, and the Israelis 
and Palestinians had come willingly to Wye, all professing total commitment 
to making peace. But apart from the scope and intensity, the basic 
dance at Wye was the same it had been for so many months _ Americans 
talking alternatively to Palestinians and Israelis, back and forth, 
trying to find that elusive formula that would enable both to claim 
victory. By all accounts, the few direct encounters between Arafat 
and Netanyahu were formalities. In the end, the focus was on Netanyahu. 
Essentially, he was down to three choices: to accept the American 
plan, and face the inevitable rebellion from his constituents; to 
reject it, and face the inevitable denunciation of political opponents 
and much of the world, or to play for more time. The Americans and 
Palestinians seemed equally determined to cut off the last option, 
with the Americans demanding a response to their document, and the 
Palestinians rejecting any partial agreement. Back home, the Jewish 
settlers were preparing a nasty welcome if Netanyahu did agree to 
a deal. Leaders of the settlers' council, Aharon Domb and Pinhas Wallerstein, 
were on their way back from Wye, raising the alarm that ``almost all 
of the Israeli demands to the negotiations have collapsed and Israel 
is conceding on all fronts.'' Though the opposition Labor Party had 
pledged to support an agreement, there was no guarantee that it would 
not join with the right on the very next vote to force new elections. 
In all the drama, the least mystery was the outline of the plan. As 
Rubin acknowledged, it was essentially the same package the Americans 
have proposed for several months _ a staged Israeli pull-out from 
13 percent of the West Bank accompanied by a series of concrete Palestinian 
actions against terrorists, all monitored by the Americans. For the 
Israelis, the critical issue was also to ensure that Arafat would 
not proclaim a state next May, as he has threatened to do when the 
Oslo agreements run out. And for Netanyahu, a key requirement was 
to demonstrate, if he did strike a deal, that the 19-month delay had 
resulted in the ``peace with security'' that he had promised. Thus 
Netanyahu's lieutenants repeated again and again that Israel was giving 
something concrete, land, and thus expected equally concrete security 
assurances in return. To round out their position, the Israelis demanded 
further revisions of the Palestinian national charter and a reduction 
of the Palestinian police forces. As in all past negotiations, the 
Israelis also dangled before the Palestinians the prospect of letting 
them open their airport in Gaza and traveling freely between Gaza 
and the West Bank. Arafat likewise issued demands intended to demonstrate 
to his increasingly frustrated people that he was playing tough. He 
issued new demands for the release of prisoners and resisted demands 
for the reduction of his police force. The Palestinians also refused 
to release the Israelis from their obligation under the Oslo agreements 
to make yet a third withdrawal from the West Bank before a final settlement 
is reached. But Arafat's central strategy, as it has been for many 
months now, has been to agree with most anything the Americans proffer, 
essentially forcing the Israelis into the position of repeatedly locking 
horns with the Americans. The steps were familiar. Only in the quiet, 
pretty setting of the Chesapeake farmlands, it was finally evident 
that this dance, at least, had come to an end. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>