<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0277 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cultures get carnivals that reflect them, and Martinique's careful, 
deliberate carnival, with its strains of political satire and its 
eruptions of beautifully lyrical vulgarity, has the island's number. 
Martinique is worldly on its surface, but under that sheen lies all 
sorts of fun. Most of the public display takes place downtown in the 
island's capital city, Fort-de-France. The five-day festival lasts 
one day longer than most other Lenten carnivals, ending late in the 
evening on Ash Wednesday. The floats and drum groups march around 
the city's green square, La Savane, along the harbor front, along 
the town's main boulevard, down the canal that separates downtown 
from the working-class neighborhoods that produce most of the carnival 
drumming, and back along the harbor front. The walk takes 10 minutes, 
and in that 10 minutes one moves through centuries of Caribbean history, 
past gingerbread houses, women laden with ornate, gorgeous Creole 
gold jewelry, people of African, Chinese, Indian and European descent 
and combinations thereof. The festivities this year began at sunrise 
in the poor neighborhood of the Bo Kannal, with a traditional Creole 
breakfast (green bananas, codfish, avocado and smoked herring salad) 
and one of Martinique's great drum groups, Tambou Bo Kannal. They 
end five days later with the burning of Vaval, the carnival's king 
_ almost always portrayed in a large float as a crooked politician 
_ on a small beach on the harbor, the sun going down as cruise ships 
line up to enter the harbor. Carnival in Martinique is casual and 
refined, and onlookers can watch or join in and follow the small floats 
or the absolutely precise drum groups. You can wander into the stream 
of the parade, then stop for a croissant and coffee _ it's a French 
island, after all _ do some people watching, then head to the river 
again. This is an outwardly polite society, and there is no bumping, 
or thick crowds or obviously inebriated revelers. This carnival is 
great for children. The first two days demand nothing; they're mostly 
pageantry suitable for younger children. But the rest of the days 
are more ribald, with themes that most people embrace, dressing accordingly. 
Monday is a day for burlesque weddings (cross dressing is a must), 
Tuesday is red-devil day, Ash Wednesday is a day of mourning for carnival, 
so people wear black and white clothes. Out in the country another 
carnival rules. The smaller towns send their floats or drum groups 
to play in the largest nearby town. The floats have more character, 
and humor, and the feeling at Riviere Salee, for example, 35 minutes 
down the road from Fort-de-France, is more playful and more political; 
this year's floats celebrated the 150th anniversary of the emancipation 
of the slaves in Martinique. If you dig a little deeper, you'll find 
some of the best festival music in the Caribbean, and if you work 
at it a bit, access into one of the last places where an older Creole 
culture still exists. At La Fontane, an elegant restaurant in a planter's 
home, on the green hills that mark off the boundaries of Fort-de-France, 
a band of older musicians plays waltzes and beguines, using a clarinet 
as a lead instrument. The complicated dances are performed by elders 
_ the men in starched white suits, the women dressed in long white 
outfits with elaborate madras headdresses drenched in gold; the various 
knots in the headdresses indicate their marital status. The food is 
Creole and French, with conch and fish fritters and ragouts of squash. 
It's New Orleans during the last century. For a different type of 
formality, the best bands in a music-rich country all play during 
carnival, and they usually play in some sort of outdoor setting. Up 
the coast a bit from Fort-de-France, the Marouba hotel has large tents 
set up next to the beach. This year, the hit of carnival was ``En 
la Casa de tu Mama,'' part in Spanish and part in Creole _ imagine 
what happens in your mother's house _ and thousands of young Martinicans, 
many back from jobs or studying in France, all seemingly knowing each 
other, were there to hear the music. Taxi Kreol', a modern Caribbean 
dance band, with horns and guitars and choreography, had the place 
hopping until four in the morning, with people going from the bar 
and the food tables to the music and back; the food and liquor are 
free, after you've paid the $27 admission. Then, several sweaty hours 
and plenty of exuberantly rude carnival songs later, the crowd left. 
Suddenly, from a distance, the drums started, and the cascading sounds 
of a Martinican drum choir _ in this case Plastic System Band _ rolled 
through the place. The drum choir marched through the tent and hotel 
grounds, with the people following, dancing and singing to the music; 
it all ended after the sun came up. And there's more. Down south, 
in Ste.-Anne, a seaside town with perfect stone bungalows covered 
in flowers and an immaculate square, a large Guadeloupean drum orchestra, 
with chants sung over the roiling drums, played for free to a large 
audience relaxing in the sweet humidity. Out in the rural suburbs 
of Fort-de-France, Lamentin, a special carnival version of the Guadeloupean 
superstar Zouk group Kassav was playing in a huge shed. Sometime after 
3 in the morning, out came Matjilpa, a drum group with its own records 
and a dance group. It's surreal, after dancing all night, to see highly 
choreographed, wildly athletic young girls moving to the rolling extravagance 
of a drum group. Then, as the light of dawn makes its way through 
the early morning mist, as the people drift away, walking through 
the empty fields to their cars, all that is left is the sound of joy, 
as expressed through the drum. Here is a sampling of music festivals 
around the islands. Aruba's Carnival, which runs from Jan. 7 to Feb. 
16, includes a calypso contest (Jan. 26 to 28), along with traditional 
parades with marching bands and floats; the 45th Grand Carnival Parade 
takes place on Feb. 14. Information: (800) 862-7822. The Barbados 
Jazz Festival, on Jan. 13 to 17, will feature Kenny G and Earth, Wind 
and Fire, among others. (888) 227-2236. Curacao holds its Tumba Festival 
on Jan. 25 to 29, toward the end of carnival, with the best bands 
on the island competing. (Tumba, unique to Curacao, is based on African 
tambu rhythms.) (800) 270-3350. The Creole Music Festival, in Dominica, 
Oct. 30 to Nov. 1, features some of the best Creole groups from all 
over the world. This year bands include Tambo Combo from Haiti, Aurelus 
Malbele et Loketo from Congo and Buckwheat Zydeco from Louisiana. 
(767) 448-4833. Jamaica's Jazz Festival, Nov. 6 to 8, will include 
American pop acts like Kool and the Gang, Chaka Khan and Brian McKnight, 
along with light jazz stars like George Duke and Dianne Reeves. The 
island's Reggae Sunsplash Festival takes place Nov. 3 to 7. (800) 
233-4582. Martinique's 13th Biennial Guitar Festival takes place Dec. 
5 to 13, with performers from the Caribbean, Africa, Europe, the United 
States and Canada. (212) 838-6887. The St. Lucia Jazz Festival on 
May 10 to 16 mixes serious jazz musicians, including Elvin Jones, 
Ravi Coltrane and Loston Harris, with pop singers like Patti LaBelle 
and the world music star Ladysmith Black Mambazo. Outside of Cuba's 
jazz festival, it's the best Caribbean jazz and pop event. (800) 456-3984. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>