<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the Colorado River seeped over its banks early Wednesday, Irene 
Edwards began to unplug the appliances and stuff her clothes in boxes. 
When it crossed the road and swallowed her lawn, she called her uncle 
to get over in a hurry and bring his trailer. By noon, when it crested 
the door jam, she was bouncing up the street with everything she owned. 
``I'm getting out of here and I'm never coming back,'' said Ms. Edwards, 
21. ``I'm moving way out in the country where the river doesn't come 
into your living room.'' After record flooding that has left at least 
22 people dead, the water that began falling last weekend across central 
and southern Texas was still trying to find its way to the sea Wednesday. 
Several of the river towns along Texas' broad coastal plain, like 
Victoria, had significant sections under water. Some, like Cuero, 
were swamped and virtually cut off. And others, like Wharton, expected 
that the worst was yet to come. Though the rain had diminished to 
a drizzle and the sun was beginning to peek through the clouds here 
and there, the Guadalupe, the Brazos, the San Bernard, the Colorado 
and several other smaller creeks and rivers were all well beyond their 
banks Wednesday. Some were not due to crest until Thursday. Fingers 
of tea-colored water wrapped around bridges, spilled across fields 
and reached into low-lying neighborhoods. And residents up and down 
the swampy flatlands said it was the fiercest flooding they had seen 
in years, perhaps ever; state emergency officials agreed. Further 
upstream, in towns like Seguin and New Braunfels, at the edge of the 
Texas Hill Country, where the flooding had started on Sunday, people 
were just beginning to make their way back home, if they had a home 
left. Dozens of properties had been wiped away by the rushing waters, 
officials said. Early estimates, covering only two counties, put the 
cost of the damage at more than $400 million and officials predicted 
that the eventual figure would run in the billions of dollars as some 
flooding was reported in 60 Texas counties. President Clinton declared 
20 of those counties a federal disaster area Wednesday. ``We've got 
a saying around here that if you stand on a bucket you can see for 
two weeks,'' said Wharton County Judge Lawrence Naiser. ``It's just 
flat, flat, flat. But that makes it awful hard to get rid of the water 
once it's here.'' Wharton Mayor Joel Williams addressed an anxious 
gathering of about 300 of the town's 11,000 residents Wednesday morning 
at City Hall, which was rapidly being transformed into an emergency 
command post. By Thursday, he said, much of the city would be under 
water and some of the major highways out of town would be impassable. 
Officials in several communities have had trouble getting many residents 
to evacuate. Some, who had been through previous floods, suspected 
that officials were exaggerating the danger, others worried that their 
property would be looted. The result in several instances was that 
people who stayed behind had to be rescued by boat and helicopter. 
``The one thing that we do have in this instance is we have plenty 
of advance warning that the water is coming,'' Naiser said. ``So we 
have some time to try to convince people to get out.'' Two feet of 
rain fell over the weekend in parts of central and southern Texas, 
when a weather system caused by two hurricanes in Mexico met cold 
air pushing down from the north. The hardest of the rain _ sometimes 
dropping as much as five inches an hour _ hit portions of the counties 
northwest of Houston and north of San Antonio. Most of the deaths 
attributed to the storm system occurred on Sunday and Monday in San 
Antonio and the counties just to its north, where the downpour caused 
flash flooding that surprised and overwhelmed many residents. The 
later flooding, from Monday through Wednesday, has been more predictable, 
giving people ample warning and keeping deaths and injuries low, officials 
said. Officials expected the Colorado River to crest at 50 feet sometime 
Thursday afternoon in Wharton, at the center of the country's largest 
rice-growing region. The previous record of 46 feet was set in 1991. 
A map was distributed at City Hall showing the sections of the city 
that officials believed would be under water by the time the river 
crested late Thursday, about three-fourths of the town. If so, Wharton 
would end up as hard hit as Victoria and Cuero on the nearby Guadalupe 
River, which saw anywhere from a third to a half of their streets 
submerged on Monday. ``We expected the river to crest at 41 feet on 
Wednesday, but it crested at 49 feet on Monday, so a lot of people 
got caught in their homes,'' said DeWitt County Judge Ben Prause in 
a telephone interview from Cuero, a town of 6,800 that is the county 
seat. ``The water is just now beginning to go down and people are 
starting to try to get back to their homes.'' The previous flood record 
for Cuero was 46 feet, set in 1936. The Texas Department of Public 
Safety said Wednesday that five people were still missing in the floods, 
including a 7-year-old boy. About 7,000 people were evacuated during 
the early flooding between San Antonio and Austin on Saturday night 
and Sunday, with a further 8,000 people displaced in the subsequent 
flooding that began Monday night. By late Wednesday morning in Victoria, 
a city of 60,000 about 35 miles from the Gulf of Mexico, the Guadalupe 
River had receded to just over 31 feet, which was still 10 feet above 
flood stage. It had crested Tuesday night at nearly 36 feet, breaking 
a 1936 record by almost five feet. About 600 homes in the city had 
suffered water damage, officials said. ``I kind of lost everything,'' 
said Janna Schmidt, 61, who uses a wheelchair. ``I haven't been able 
to get to my apartment to find out, but I'm told it's underwater.'' 
Ms. Schmidt, who was at one of five emergency shelters set up in Victoria, 
said she was one of the people who ``were being stubborn and saying 
I was going to stay'' when emergency officials came to evacuate her 
on Monday. Ms. Schmidt said she resisted leaving because she is infirm 
and on a special diet. ``It's a hassle for everybody,'' she said. 
``I didn't want to be a problem, but when it got down to brass tacks, 
I decided to go ahead and be a problem.'' Police were going door-to-door 
in the western and northern sections of Wharton Wednesday asking people 
to evacuate and getting transportation for those who had none. An 
emergency shelter had been set up at the civic center in nearby El 
Campo, but by midday only a handful of Wharton's expected 2,000 evacuees 
had showed up. ``They're still in denial,'' said Renda King, the city 
manager's secretary who had volunteered to work at the shelter. ``We 
expect them all to show up at once later today.'' Troy Allen, a Wharton 
resident, sat on a plush chair in his upholstery shop on a bluff overlooking 
the river and said he thought he'd wait it out. ``See where that water 
is?'' Allen said. ``It's still three or four feet below where it was 
in the 1991 flood.'' And even though city officials warned that it 
would rise at least five more feet, he was doubtful. ``They told us 
all in `91 that we had to get out, that we'd be flooded, and the water 
didn't come up much higher than that.'' A line of mobile homes across 
the gravel road from his shop was already deserted, and two of them 
were already under water. But Allen and a few relatives sat around 
the dark workshop and listened to the bleating of the three cows that 
he kept fenced in an adjacent field. ``If it starts coming into the 
shop, then I'll get out,'' Allen said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>