<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0019 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NEW YORK _ KRFor the first time this season, the New York Rangers 
got effort, enthusiasm and scoring on the same night. And for the 
first time this season, the Rangers got a victory. On Tuesday night, 
everything came together for the Rangers, who beat the Edmonton Oilers, 
3-2, at Madison Square Garden after four losses and a tie. The winning 
goal was scored by the newest Ranger, defenseman Mathieu Schneider, 
midway through the final period. The power-play goal was Schneider's 
first of the season and first as a Ranger. It was made possible by 
Todd Harvey, who was the Rangers' best forward on Tuesday night. Harvey 
unleashed a blast that was stopped by Oilers goalie Bob Essensa's 
quick glove. Harvey followed his own shot and kicked the puck back 
to Schneider, who had been acquired in a trade with the Toronto Maple 
Leafs. Schneider's wrist shot beat the sprawling Essensa. The Rangers 
were dreadful early in the first period, falling behind, 1-0, in the 
first two minutes after a power-play goal as Bill Guerin, shooting 
from the slot, beat Mike Richter between the pads. But strangely enough, 
the early deficit seemed to energize the Rangers, who tied the game 
on a goal by Manny Malhotra, the team's 1998 first-round draft pick. 
Malhotra's first National Hockey League goal came on the 18-year-old's 
second scoring chance of the period. Malhotra, who nervously fired 
into Essensa's chest earlier in the period, scored by sliding the 
puck underneath Essensa, who misplayed a dump-in by defenseman Jeff 
Beukeboom. Essensa's blunder wound up on the stick of Malhotra, who 
was fighting off an Oilers' defender as he tapped the puck. Malhotra 
reacted like a player who scored an overtime goal in the Stanley Cup 
finals, pumping his fists and excitedly jumping up and down. ``It 
felt great,'' Malhotra told MSG Network after the first period. ``It 
will give me the more confidence on the ice. It wasn't the prettiest 
goal this league has ever seen, but I'll take it.'' The Rangers' inspired 
play continued into the second period as they came up with numerous 
chances although they failed to score against Essensa and the Oilers. 
The Oilers took a 2-1 lead when Josef Beranek knocked in a rebound 
midway through the second period while the teams were skating four 
men apiece. Late in the second period, the Rangers appeared to tie 
the game, 2-2. But Wayne Gretzky's rebound score was taken away when 
a replay that revealed Adam Graves' skate was in the crease, which 
was shortened this season for the purpose of cutting down on the frequency 
of such calls. A power-play goal by defenseman Brian Leetch, the Rangers 
captain, evened the score seconds after the puck was dropped to open 
the third period. Doug Weight, the Oilers' two-time All-Star center, 
was a surprise addition to Edmonton's lineup, playing only one day 
after ending his five-week holdout. Weight, who broke in with the 
Rangers in 1991-92 but was traded to Edmonton for Esa Tikkanen, signed 
a two-year deal worth $7.75 million. Weight, 27, is easily the Oilers' 
most-talented offensive player, leading the team in points in each 
of the last five seasons. He had 26 goals and 44 assists last season. 
On Tuesday night, he was used regularly skating on the Oilers' second 
line. Neil Smith, the Rangers' general manager, had expressed interest 
in re-acquiring the 5-foot-11-inch, 200-pound Weight, but it seems 
the Oilers do not want to trade him. Weight's signing on Monday leaves 
Smith with few options, those being the Penguins' Petr Nedved (who 
has held out for 18 months) and the Canucks' holdout Pavel Bure. But 
acquiring either Nedved or Bure would come at a high cost to the Rangers, 
who would be asked for youngsters like Niklas Sundstrom, Malhotra 
and the backup goalie Dan Cloutier in exchange. ``Obviously it was 
always a possibility,'' Weight said of being traded to the Rangers. 
``But I'm happy to be back with Edmonton.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>