<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0444 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The White House on Wednesday accused congressional Republicans of 
rigging an unfair impeachment proceeding, and Republicans fired back 
that Democrats were merely trying to exploit a campaign issue. The 
mutual recriminations came as Republican and Democratic lawyers squared 
off in an often contentious first meeting to begin defining the contours 
of impeachment hearings. Republicans also signaled their intentions 
to announce a witness list in two weeks. After the meeting on Capitol 
Hill, one of President Clinton's lawyers accused the Republican-led 
House Judiciary Committee of rebuffing Democratic efforts to wrap 
up the inquiry quickly by leaving its scope open-ended and refusing 
to define what an impeachable offense is. ``We're not yet convinced 
that this tribunal is operating by a fair, even-handed, impartial 
set of rules,'' Gregory Craig, a special White House counsel, told 
reporters. But a top Republican committee aide, Paul McNulty, marched 
to the microphones to rebut Craig's accusations, and to underscore 
that Republicans had adopted Watergate-style procedures. ``At some 
point the president's defenders have got to get away from this partisan 
attack on process and fairness,'' McNulty said. ``That's the strategy: 
attack the process and make it look like we're not working productively 
so the American people lose confidence.'' Indeed, Democrats acknowledge, 
that is their strategy, and so far it has worked. Public opinion polls 
show that most Americans believe that the Republican-led inquiry is 
sharply biased against Clinton. Craig's tone, more combative before 
the cameras than in the private meeting, lawyers for both sides said, 
aimed both to establish bargaining markers for the White House as 
well as to help the Democratic voter base get fired up two weeks before 
Election Day. House Democrats were willing Wednesday to let the White 
House play the bad cop role. One congressional Democratic aide put 
it this way: ``We're just laying back and letting the impression that 
this process is unfair set in. We're also being careful not to overplay 
our hand. We need to maintain good relations with Republicans in case 
there's an opportunity to make a deal after the election.'' In an 
interview with reporters Wednesday, Speaker Newt Gingrich accused 
Democrats of playing a ``deliberate calculated political game,'' adding, 
``I think they were going to scream partisanship no matter what we 
did.'' Many House members have said that the verbal attacks will soften 
after the elections when the need for both parties to rally their 
partisans is over. Democrats have voiced concern that their complaints 
could wear thin with the public if they are seen as trying to prolong 
the impeachment proceedings as a political spectacle. The 90-minute 
meeting Wednesday marked the first effort by committee staff members 
and White House lawyers to set the ground rules and procedures since 
the House approved the formal inquiry two weeks ago. Committee lawyers 
met with Charles Ruff, the White House counsel, David Kendall, Clinton's 
private lawyer, and Craig. No lawmakers attended. Much was discussed, 
but little was agreed to. The committee's witness list is sure to 
be contentious. Republican aides are examining who might be subpoenaed 
and who might be granted immunity from prosecution in exchange for 
testimony. Some Democrats want to call the independent counsel, Kenneth 
Starr, and Monica Lewinsky. Some Republicans want to summon Bruce 
Lindsey, deputy White House counsel and one of Clinton's closest aides. 
Committee staff say a list could be announced in the next two weeks 
or so. Republican aides defended the committee's procedures, saying 
Clinton's lawyers have the same rights and procedures that the Democrats 
afforded Richard M. Nixon's attorneys in the 1974 Watergate hearings. 
Clinton's lawyers will be able to question witnesses in hearings, 
but it is not clear whether they would be allowed to even sit in on 
depositions. That decision may be up to Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., the 
panel's chairman, whom White House lawyers will try to meet with in 
the next several days. Democrats complained Wednesday that the inquiry's 
scope was open-ended. David Schippers, the committee's chief investigative 
counsel has expanded Starr's original 11 possible impeachment counts 
to 15. But Hyde has now narrowed those to three basic categories: 
lying under oath, witness tampering and obstruction of justice. Moreover, 
while Hyde has said the inquiry will likely focus on the Lewinsky 
scandal, he is not ruling out other information that could lead to 
impeachable offenses. Democrats sought Wednesday to have impeachable 
offenses defined, but were rebuffed. A Judiciary Committee panel postponed 
a hearing this week on that topic, probably until early next month. 
But Democrats say the standards for impeachable offenses should be 
set before the inquiry proceeds. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>