<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0370 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There could hardly be a more English artist-craftsman than Grinling 
Gibbons. Master carver to the crown, he invented a decorative style 
that dominated interiors in England during the late 17th century. 
His name is imbedded in the consciousness of the nation. Windsor Castle, 
Hampton Court Palace, the grand country houses like Badminton, Burghley 
and Petworth and, of course, St. Paul's Cathedral all abound with 
his baroque cascades of fruit, flowers and foliage. ``There is no 
instance of a man before Gibbons who gave to wood the loose and airy 
lightness of flowers,'' wrote the collector and man of letters Horace 
Walpole in 1763. Today, David Esterly, an American limewood carver 
with an academic bent, is Gibbons' foremost evangelist. Having carved 
an exact reproduction of a floral garland destroyed in the Hampton 
Court fire of 1986 and advised on the restoration of the court, he 
is the sine qua non of knowledge on Gibbons. Over the last five years, 
with missionary zeal, he has devised the first and probably last exhibition 
of the virtuoso's masterpieces. The show, ``Grinling Gibbons and the 
Art of Carving,'' opened on Thursday at the Victoria and Albert Museum 
and runs through Jan. 24, in commemoration of the 350th anniversary 
of Gibbons' birth. A companion book will be published next month by 
Abrams. ``Gibbons' work is an integral part of the architecture in 
churches, universities or palatial settings, and therefore too difficult 
and fragile to move,'' Esterly says. ``However, I knew that many restoration 
projects were in train, presenting a one-off opportunity to borrow 
pieces for a display that would encompass his entire career.'' It 
is a fascinating exhibition, not least because it is visualized by 
a single discerning eye, Esterly's. Moreover, he traces Gibbons' trajectory 
from the point of view of a woodcarver, revealing how as the craftsman's 
self-assurance and proficiency blossomed, his artistry rose to unsurpassable 
heights. ``Certainly, his dramatic work for Charles II at Windsor 
in the 1670s is gargantuan in scale, opulent and deeply impressive,'' 
Esterly says, standing in the King's Dining Room at the castle. ``It 
brought him royal favor and fame. But it is eclipsed by the shadow 
and air and formal rhythm of his later designs, like the spectacular 
Carved Room at Petworth House and the Cosimo panel from the Pitti 
Palace in Florence. He lifted the genre of decorative carving above 
its station into the high art of sculpture.'' Lean and lanky with 
silvery grey moustache and hair, wearing owlish spectacles, Esterly, 
54, has a distinctly professorial mien. But he speaks with unbookish 
zest about his hero, animating the past, breathing life into wall 
carvings to thrill the listener. He has great affection for the myth 
that Gibbons left his signature pea pod open if he had been paid, 
closed if he had not. In the Wren Library at Cambridge, he adds, a 
blind man was said to be able to distinguish a Gibbons carving by 
touch alone. Brought up in Southern California, Esterly is a Harvard 
graduate and a Fulbright Scholar who earned a doctorate from Cambridge 
in English literature. He lives in upstate New York with his wife, 
Marietta von Bernuth. In the mid-'70s, because of her, he underwent 
what can only be described as a Pauline conversion to Gibbons after 
a chance encounter. Before their marriage, Ms. von Bernuth enticed 
him into the church of St. James' in Piccadilly to see the reredos, 
or altar screens. ``It was the master carver's first commission for 
Sir Christopher Wren, the architect,'' he says. ``I was seduced by 
the power of the carving, and its capacity to convey the beauty of 
nature. It seemed to me beyond belief that a human hand had fashioned 
those seashell swags, drooping bellflower chains, birds with laurel 
twigs in their beaks and dense whorls of acanthus. My fate was sealed.'' 
At first he considered writing a biography of the carver. However, 
only fragmentary documents about Gibbons' life and workshop exist, 
though records of his payments survive. Instead, to fathom the mind 
and technique of such a genius, Esterly taught himself to carve. For 
nearly eight years, in a cold, drafty cottage in Sussex, he took up 
his arsenal of chisels, slavishly copying 17th-century carvings. ``I 
felt like a pigmy on a giants shoulder,'' he recalls. It is a romantic 
tale, equal to the happenstance discovery of Gibbons himself by John 
Evelyn. Peering into a cottage window in Deptford, Evelyn, a courtier, 
connoisseur and diarist, glimpsed the 22-year-old carver toiling on 
a nearly complete limewood relief of ``The Crucifixion,'' after Tintoretto. 
On entering, he was bowled over by the prodigy's talent. He presented 
him to the King, Charles II. A diary passage on Jan. 18, 1671, records 
the date: ``I this day first acquainted his Majestie with that incomparable 
young man Gibson, whom I had lately found in an Obscure place, &AMP; 
that by meere accident, as I was walking neere a poore solitary thatched 
house in a field in our Parish.'' Not long after, Gibbons was busily 
employed at Windsor. The rest is history. Born in Rotterdam of English 
parents in 1648, Gibbons left Holland three years before this famous 
meeting. Posterity owes much to the accident of his birthplace, says 
Esterly. Trained as a sculptor, Gibbons has roots as a carver in continental 
soil. As shown by the Tintoretto relief, he possessed a set of tools 
infinitely superior to those of his English counterparts. Unlike them, 
he was also a fluent draftsman and familiar with European techniques 
of small-scale modeling in boxwood. On view are many exquisite pen-and-ink 
studies that have seldom been seen, some lent by the Sir John Soane 
Museum in London. So too is his earliest surviving box relief, King 
David playing the harp ringed by cherubs and incised with the Gibbons 
monogram, a back-to-back G.G. Owned by Alfred Taubman of Sotheby's, 
it is virtually the only Gibbons artifact to have been auctioned for 
generations. In all events, the master carver's glory rests on the 
fact that he introduced limewood to England, spurning the native craftsmen's 
preference for oak. ``Accepting fine detail, its close grain is unsurpassed 
in its response to the chisel,'' Esterly says reverently. No connoisseurship 
is needed to recognize how Gibbons achieved exquisite effects with 
thinness of cut and undercutting. It is plain to see in the delicate 
execution of a lace cravat worn by Walpole, in the looping ribbons 
and ropes in the Kirtlington panel and in the illusory quality of 
his trompe l'oeil tableaux of musical instruments, trumpeting putti 
and martial trophies. Known in America as linden wood, freshly carved 
limewood is pale and luminous. Sadly, many of the Gibbons treasures 
that Easterly has persuaded the British aristocracy (including the 
Duke of Devonshire of Chatsworth House) to lend have been darkened 
by age and even varnish. Beside them, a frothy white garland of flowers 
carved by Esterly underlines the difference. ``With sheer adornment, 
Gibbons gave lime a rich texture compensating for its lack of color; 
he defines form by playing with light and shade,'' Esterly explains, 
and advocates restoring at least some of Gibbons' work to its original 
lightness. Not so the Duke of Beaufort, accustomed to the mellow brown 
of Gibbons at Badminton, his home near Bath, a house rarely seen by 
the public. Certainly, the overmantel that normally hangs in the duke's 
private dining room, celebrating the estate's harvest and the trophies 
of countryside pursuits, is a revealing example in the development 
of Gibbons' career. Created in 1683 for 50 pounds, or about $6,000 
in today's money, the overmantel was widely imitated in other stately 
homes, making Gibbons style all the rage. Only a year before, drawing 
inspiration from sculpture and still-life painting, he created what 
is regarded as his supreme accomplishment _ the Cosimo panel belonging 
to the Pitti Palace. Ordered by Charles II as a gift for the Duke 
of Tuscany, the panel has not left Florence since 1682. Almost three-dimensional, 
it is a dazzling work of art, representing friendship between princes 
and the art of peace, when love conquers war. When the panel arrived 
at the Victoria and Albert, Esterly says, he felt like a small boy, 
opening his most coveted Christmas present. Understandably so. It 
represents not only the apex of the show, but the culmination of a 
true disciple's endeavor to honor his demigod. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>