<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0285 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Wolfgang Sawallisch, the music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra, 
announced that he had to remain in Germany recently because of the 
illness of his wife, finding a conductor to cover the all-Brahms program 
the orchestra presented in Philadelphia last week and at Carnegie 
Hall on Tuesday night was challenging. Not many conductors know the 
two works that constituted the first half of the program. In addition, 
Maurizio Pollini, the exacting and intellectually imposing Italian 
pianist who performed the Brahms Piano Concerto No. 1, had to be accommodated. 
And this came in the thick of the fall season, when most conductors 
are busy with concerts long booked. But the orchestra was able to 
hire Andreas Delfs, a 39-year-old German conductor best known for 
his work as music director of the Hannover State Opera and Orchestra 
and his new post with the Milwaukee Symphony. Delfs was free because 
his wife is expecting a baby and he was beginning a period of paternity 
leave. Such are the often circuitous ways that classical musicians 
reach career milestones. It was hard to estimate the depth of Delfs' 
capacity from this single save-the-day debut. He is a dynamic, technically 
gifted conductor, and he clearly knew the Brahms choral works, because 
he conducted them from memory. Brahms wrote a lot of music for amateur 
chorus, but ``Naenie,'' a setting of a Schiller poem about the ephemerality 
of beauty, and ``Schicksalslied,'' a Hoelderlin ode to immortality, 
are contemplative, compositionally sophisticated works. Delfs, his 
players, and the fine Philadelphia Singers Chorale gave beautiful, 
luminous accounts. Pollini's performance of the Brahms D Minor Concerto 
abounded with the musical insight and pianistic elegance that place 
him among the most admired of today's senior pianists. This is a rhapsodic, 
ruminative, youthful score, a work Brahms struggled with. Textural 
and structural clarity are not its strong points. But the music has 
seldom sounded so lucid as it did in Pollini's account, which revealed 
intertwining contrapuntal lines, startling asymmetries of phrase structure, 
and complex chromatic harmony where so many other performances are 
clouded over with thick pianistic mists. And of course he had the 
requisite pianistic power and stamina for the double octave outbursts 
and the thick, leaping chords. Those who respond to his restrained 
approach find Pollini's playing aristocratic. Those who don't find 
him cool, as I sometimes do. Once in a while he let go with what seemed, 
for him, real abandon, as in the finale of the first movement, which 
he played with demonic fervor, and the climax of the Adagio movement, 
in which he could be heard singing along with the surging melody. 
I wish he would let this side of himself out more often. Still, this 
was a distinguished performance, and the audience responded rapturously. 
Delfs did his best to keep Brahms' thickly scored orchestra part from 
swamping the soloist, but sometimes it did anyway. Yet, given the 
constraints of the occasion, Delfs did solid work. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>