<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0456 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After arguing for months that the United States has to pay its back 
dues at the United Nations to keep its credibility as a superpower, 
President Clinton vetoed a bill Wednesday that would have paid those 
dues, declaring that an unrelated anti-abortion measure left him no 
choice. But the president did sign separate legislation that will 
enable the United States to pay just enough for it to keep, for now, 
its right to vote in the General Assembly, even as the long-running 
debate over the back dues continues. Clinton's rejection of the bill 
to pay nearly $1 billion in arrears was a virtual certainty, because 
it included an amendment sponsored by Rep. Chris Smith, R-N.J., that 
would have barred federal spending for international family-planning 
organizations that lobby foreign governments to change their abortion 
policies. ``I've made it clear many times that I will veto such provisions,'' 
Clinton said Wednesday. ``Congress sent me the bill to fund our arrears 
to the United Nations knowing full well I would do so. So today I 
did. I regret that.'' The separate spending bill that Clinton signed 
to let the United States keep its vote in the 185-member General Assembly 
for the time being provides about a quarter-billion dollars for the 
United Nations. Previously, Congress appropriated, and the United 
Nations received, $100 million. But with the veto of the far larger 
payment the United States, a founding member of the United Nations, 
continues to owe the organization $1 billion in the face of harsh 
criticism from other nations. ``Great nations keep their word,'' Secretary-General 
Kofi Annan said last week in a speech here. Continued delinquency 
by the United States, Annan added, could only undermine the nation's 
prestige and its credibility in times of crisis. Still the back dues 
go unpaid, not because U.S. politicians and diplomats are insensitive 
to criticism but because payment of the arrears has been linked to 
a hot-button issue in domestic U.S. politics _ abortion. Probably 
no issue embodies such a blend of personal conviction (or ambivalence) 
and political calculation. Over the many months that the U.N. issue 
has dragged on, Democrats and Republicans have seen more political 
advantage in sticking to their respective positions than in resolving 
the dues problem. Moreover, Sen. Jesse Helms, R-N.C., who heads the 
Foreign Relations Committee, has been a longtime critic of the United 
Nations (and the State Department, despite an apparent rapport with 
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright) and has seemed in no hurry 
whatever to see that the United States pays up. The divisiveness of 
the U.N. issue, especially as it has been intertwined with abortion 
restrictions, was illustrated in April, when the Senate approved legislation 
to pay the arrears. The vote, 51-49, was largely along party lines, 
with most Republicans' backing the bill and most Democrats' opposing 
it. The House had earlier approved the bill in a voice vote. Wednesday 
a bipartisan group that is pushing for full payment of the dues was 
outraged. ``The failure of the Congress and the administration to 
agree on funding the United Nations is irresponsible and a national 
embarrassment,'' said David Birenbaum, chairman of the Emergency Coalition 
for U.S. Financial Support of the United Nations. The coalition includes 
former President Jimmy Carter and former secretaries of state James 
Baker III and George Shultz. In explaining his veto, Clinton said, 
``The Congress persisted in tying our United Nations dues to unrelated 
and controversial social provisions, which endanger the health of 
women and deny them even basic information about family planning, 
even though studies show that countries where women have access to 
strong family planning actually have fewer abortions.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>