<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0367 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Part of the political legend of Fob James Jr., the pugnacious Republican 
governor of Alabama, is that he likes to play from behind. ``Fob is 
a strong finisher,'' said Roger McConnell, the state Republican chairman. 
``He's just a fourth-quarter player,'' explained Tom Blackerby, chairman 
of Conservative Christians of Alabama. So as the clock ticks down 
in James' campaign for re-election, his allies are trying to convince 
voters _ and themselves _ that his current predicament simply reflects 
the natural order of things. But even as the James camp brushes off 
poll after poll showing him trailing Lt. Gov. Don Siegelman, other 
Republicans are getting nervous, and some sound downright defeatist. 
``I'd be real surprised if he can pull this one out,'' said one prominent 
Republican strategist in Alabama, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. 
Two weeks before the Nov. 3 election, James is not alone. In one of 
the real surprises of this very fluid election year, Republican gubernatorial 
candidates are locked in tight races in three conservative Southern 
states that have voted increasingly Republican in recent years. In 
South Carolina, polls have shown that the incumbent Republican, Gov. 
David Beasley, holds the thinnest of leads over his Democratic challenger, 
Jim Hodges, the former minority leader of the state House. And in 
Georgia, where Republican leaders have asserted that this will be 
the year they break the Democrats' 126-year lock on the governor's 
office, Guy W. Millner, a Republican businessman, is running just 
ahead of Roy E. Barnes, a longtime Democratic legislator. To some 
extent, the races hinge on local issues and dynamics, including the 
quality of the candidates. And it is certainly possible that the Republicans 
will win in all three states. But several authorities on Southern 
politics said Wednesday that the closeness of the races demonstrates 
that Southern Democrats are learning the lessons taught by their two 
most successful mentors, Georgia Gov. Zell Miller and North Carolina 
Gov. James B. Hunt Jr. The message, said Wayne Flynt, an historian 
at Auburn University, is that there may still be enough core Democrats 
and swing voters in the South, including blacks and working-class 
whites, to reward Democratic candidates who keep their campaigns focused 
on issues like education, jobs and the economy. ``If the issues are 
all about social concerns, like abortion and school prayer and vouchers, 
Republicans win,'' Flynt said. ``But Democrats can still succeed if 
they can make the case that they are the party of the common people, 
and that the Republicans are the party of big business and the wealthy.'' 
Nowhere is that theory being tested more than in the Alabama race. 
During the last two years, James has earned a national reputation 
for his fervent stands in support of school prayer and state autonomy 
from federal control. But even diehard Republicans acknowledge that 
he has allowed Siegelman to control the discourse of this year's campaign 
with a proposal for a lottery to finance education. Four different 
public polls taken during the first two weeks of October showed James 
behind by between 5 and 13 percentage points. He has raised significantly 
less money than Siegelman, and started his advertising campaign more 
than a month later. National Republican officials consider James the 
most vulnerable of the 18 Republican governors running for re-election. 
Within Alabama, Republican strategists are grumbling that James seems 
to not want his job all that much, and that his seeming dispassion 
could hurt fellow Republicans in important races for the legislature 
and state Supreme Court. ''There's a feeling that he's a drag on the 
ticket,'' one strategist said. ``It's just frustrating as all get 
out to everybody.'' There is enough of an impression of inertia in 
the James campaign that its chairman, Montgomery Mayor Emory Folmar, 
felt the need to energize the troops with a tough speech at a rally 
last Sunday. ``I haven't seen the fight in this campaign I'd like 
to see,'' Folmar said, according to news accounts. He urged James 
supporters to resort to ``some scratching, biting and clawing'' in 
exposing Siegelman as a liberal, adding, ``I love the smell of napalm 
early in the morning.'' But James does, in fact, have a history of 
making late dashes to victory, often with the help of Christian conservatives 
whose enthusiasm does not always register in polls. As a challenger 
in 1994, James trailed Gov. Jim Folsom by 10 percentage points in 
the polls with less than a week to go and came back to win by 1 percentage 
point. In this summer's Republican primary, he was forced into a runoff 
and was thought to be in peril but came back to win by a convincing 
12 percentage points. In his race against Siegelman, James' most significant 
problem is the Democrat's popular lottery proposal, which would provide 
an estimated $150 million a year to pay for merit-based college scholarships, 
pre-kindergarten programs and classroom computers. A disciplined, 
if scripted, campaigner with an experienced staff, Siegelman has promoted 
the lottery relentlessly on the trail, in his advertising and in debates 
like the one held here on Tuesday night. ``I have proposed an education 
plan that will change education in this state forever,'' Siegelman 
said in the televised forum. ``I say yes to a lottery. Fob James says 
no.'' With the lottery a big success in two of Alabama's neighboring 
states, the Siegelman plan has placed James utterly on the defensive. 
The governor has responded with a three-pronged rebuttal. He has proposed 
a far less ambitious plan for college scholarships that would be financed 
with existing state funds. He has argued that Siegelman will need 
to raise taxes to pay for his proposals, even with the lottery. And 
he has warned that the lottery would lead to other forms of legalized 
gambling in Alabama. In the last two weeks, for instance, James has 
run a series of television advertisements that question Siegelman's 
integrity by showing his nose growing like an animated Pinnochio. 
One of them depicts a cockfight as the narrator asks, ``Why should 
we believe Siegelman when he says that later he won't let his gambling 
friends sneak other games of chance into Alabama behind his lottery?'' 
James aides said that the campaign's polling suggests that the ads 
have closed the gap significantly in recent days. But it may be too 
late to reach swing voters like Brenda J. Crain, a 49-year-old Mobile 
woman who owns a used car lot with her husband. Although she voted 
for James four years ago, Ms. Crain said she would vote this year 
for Siegelman because she agrees that Alabama should have an education 
lottery and because she has been embarrassed by some of James' pronouncements, 
like his contention that the Bill of Rights does not apply to the 
states. ``I'm normally a Republican so this is a hard choice,'' she 
said while shopping Tuesday at Bel Air Mall. ``I don't think Fob James 
is a bad person but he's just a little more of a backwards type and 
Alabama could use a better image. And with the lottery, people are 
going to gamble whether it's here or in Florida or Mississippi. The 
tax money should stay here in Alabama.'' Natalie M. Davis, a political 
scientist at Birmingham Southern College, said that the lottery had 
become a wedge issue for Democrats just as social issues have for 
Republicans. ``We often think of wedge issues as abortion, prayer, 
that kind of thing,'' she said. ``But what has happened here is that 
Siegelman has used the lottery to pull apart a predictable Republican 
constituency.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>