<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0383 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr offered a broad defense Wednesday 
to the repeated criticism that he had overreached in his investigation 
of President Clinton's inner circle, using the forum of an appeals 
court where he sought to reinstate his criminal tax case against Webster 
Hubbell. Starr ridiculed as a ``Larry King, bumper sticker argument'' 
the accusation that he had gone far beyond his original assignment 
of investigating a decades-old land deal in Arkansas. ``It is a red 
herring,'' he said. ``It is a shibboleth to think that this had to 
do only with a real estate deal in Marion, Ark. The mandate we were 
granted in 1994 was much broader than that.'' The hearing Wednesday 
before the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia 
presented a spirited dialogue about the limits of the independent 
counsel's investigation, the perogatives of the attorney general and 
the role of the judiciary in overseeing the two. And while the precise 
legal issue before the court primarily involved the fate of Hubbell, 
Starr's presentation had clear resonance in the heated political debate 
over whether he had stepped beyond his charter when he began investigating 
the relationship between Clinton and Monica Lewinsky. Starr, a seasoned 
appellate advocate who once served on the bench that he was arguing 
before Wednesday, was uncharacteristically combative and defensive 
as he talked about the Hubbell case. ``I'm doing exactly now what 
I did in 1994 and not a peep was raised,'' Starr said, waving his 
arms in exasperation. ``I shouldn't say me. I'm getting personal. 
The independent counsel.'' Nearly four years ago Hubbell, an old friend 
of Clinton and former law partner of Hillary Rodham Clinton in the 
Rose firm in Little Rock, pleaded guilty to two felony counts for 
looting his former partners and clients. As part of his plea bargain, 
he agreed to cooperate with investigators. But after prosecutors said 
he was not forthcoming, they filed a second case against him last 
April, charging him with conspiracy, tax evasion and mail fraud in 
a 10-count indictment based on financial records Hubbell provided 
them under a grant of immunity. That indictment was dismissed last 
July by federal District Judge James Robertson. In agreeing with the 
legal arguments put forward by Hubbell's main lawyer, John Nields 
Jr., Robertson chastised the independent counsel's tactics, accusing 
Starr of both exceeding his authority and reneging on the immunity 
promise. Robertson also ruled that a special court that appoints and 
supervises independent counsels had overstepped its authority last 
January when it confirmed Starr's jurisdiction to proceed with the 
tax inquiry. The tax case arose out of Starr's investigation of Hubbell 
and others for possible obstruction of justice stemming from consulting 
payments he received in 1994. Prosecutors have said that Hubbell accepted 
more than $700,000 in contracts from friends and supporters of Clinton 
at a time when he was unhelpful to investigators. Hubbell has replied 
that he told investigators everything he knew and that he performed 
legitimate work for the money he received. Among those figures who 
helped Hubbell find jobs was Vernon Jordan, the president's close 
friend, who also helped Ms. Lewinsky find a job in New York earlier 
this year. Starr suggested that he had significant evidence of obstruction 
involving Hubbell and that that aspect of the inquiry was not over. 
``We are talking about literally hundreds of thousands of dollars 
in business in which virtually no service was performed,'' Starr told 
the appeals panel. ``And each of these came from entities with political 
ties to the administration. But a defense lawyer, K. Chris Todd, said 
that it was inappropriate for Starr to raise the specter of obstruction 
when the indictment did not raise any obstruction charges. ``This 
is a case where guidance can be given not to this independent counsel 
but every independent counsel about the excess of power,'' said Todd, 
who represents Michael Schaufele, one of Hubbell's tax advisers who 
was also named in the indictment. Through their aggressive questioning 
of both sides and close parsing of the independent counsel law, the 
judges did not telegraph the outcome of the appeal, although they 
appeared more sympathetic to Starr than the lower court on his claim 
that he had jurisdiction to bring the tax case. The appeals panel 
consisted of Patricia Wald, Stephen Williams and David Tatel. The 
Justice Department has intervened in the case, taking a middle-ground 
position about the ruling by Robertson. It has asked the appeals panel 
to uphold Robertson's ruling that Starr exceeded his authority because 
he did not initially seek the permission of Attorney General Janet 
Reno to get into the case. The department has maintained that Robertson 
erred on the immunity question and that Starr's limited grant of immunity 
to Hubbell for the production of business records did not prevent 
him from being prosecuted. In response to a suggestion in the Justice 
Department's brief, Starr sent a letter to the attorney general last 
week formally asking for her approval to move forward against Hubbell 
on the tax matter, according to lawyers who have seen the letter. 
Justice Department officials said Wednesday that Reno removed herself 
from considering the request because Hubbell, as associate attorney 
general, had been a close aide. The request is now being considered 
by Deputy Attorney General Eric Holder. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>