<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981021.2000.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. Despite days of negotiation, 
there is still no deal in sight at the Middle East peace talks in 
Maryland. Several points appear to be holding up the deal and most 
of them concern security. Israel wants a firmer commitment from the 
Palestinians to counter terrorism and to amend the anti-Israeli language 
in the PLO covenant. The Palestinians are more concerned with a scheduled 
withdrawal of Israeli troops from the West Bank. "New York Times" 
correspondent Steven Ehrlinger is following the negotiations. He's 
at the Y Mills Maryland Press Center right now. Steven, on the seventh 
day of what was supposed to be a weekend talk, where are we right 
now? Well, on the seventh day, the Israelis didn't rest but threatened 
to walk out of the talks. What the Americans are trying to do which 
they started to do last night is to pull together a text, a sort of 
compromise text. After having talked to both sides endlessly, as you 
know over the last 19 months, they've identified the areas that are 
the real sticking points, and they're trying to come up with mutual 
concessions both sides can agree upon to get this settled successfully. 
But no one is predicting that that's actually going to happen, though 
optimism is still around despite the Israeli threats to go home. So 
with regard to that threat of Israeli to walk out of the talks, here's 
what State Department spokesman James Rubin had to say about it earlier 
today. We've been here for seven days and seven nights. The president 
has spent tens of hours working the issues. We want to do all we reasonably 
can do to provide constructive solutions to real problems. But we 
can't hold people here against their will, and we can't make them 
make the tough choices. Steven Ehrlinger, how much of this is high 
rhetoric and brinkmanship on the part of the Israelis? I think a lot 
of it is. I mean, the Israelis came out and issued a statement in 
front of the cameras here this morning which was only in Hebrew. So 
it was clearly designed for domestic consumption back home. They need 
to show in the face of expected right-wing criticism about giving 
over anymore West Bank land that they're struggling for the best deal 
possible. They're trying to get as much specific commitment from the 
Palestinians as possible. So I think, you know, their tactic is to 
get as much as they can, and Netanyahu's new foreign minister, Ariel 
Sharone, is likely to be one of the prime decision makers to simply 
decide when they've gotten enough and can have a deal. If they decide 
they can't get enough, well, maybe they will go home. But I think 
the consequences of that would be so extraordinary for their relationship 
with the United States let alone the relationship with other countries 
in the region, that it would be very difficult to imagine the Israelis 
simply packing up and leaving. And what is emerging at this point 
today as the most difficult issue, one which the two sides need to 
reach an accord? The Israelis, for example, insist that the Palestinian 
National Council, this big, broad group which has Palestinians all 
over the world must meet publicly and formally and then, the Palestinian 
charter removing clauses calling for the destruction of Israeli, clauses 
that have already, you know, been removed by smaller groups. I mean, 
this is essentially a symbolic issue even though the Israelis are 
making a big deal of it. More important, I think, are, you know, what 
will the Palestinians do about a number of individuals that Israelis 
have identified as involved in attacks against Israelis even though 
some of those individuals are currently serving in the Palestinian 
Police as self-defense forces. Will they be extradited to Israel, 
which no one really expects? Or will the CIA in a sort of mediating 
role help vent those cases and decide whether they will be brought 
to trial in the Palestinian authority. Now these are very difficult 
kinds of questions that matter a lot, particularly with Israeli lobbying 
by families of, you know, people who have died in these terrorist 
attacks. There's another issue that is very important to the Palestinians. 
They want a third interim redeployment that's called for under Oslo 
to begin even if it doesn't take place right away. They want to know 
that it will take place and have a good idea of how expedient it's 
going to be. And the Americans, you know, I think tend to underestimate 
the problems of tribal politics. They think you just get everybody 
to take off their coats and ties and we can have peace. Well, it's 
not as easy as that. "New York Times" Steven Ehrlinger speaking to 
us from the Y plantation, site of the Middle East peace talks outside 
of Washington D.C. Thank you very much, Steven. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>