<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981021.2000.2997 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. Time now for the answer to our 
Geography Quiz today. We're visiting a country that's been called 
the Tibet of the Americas, the highest and most isolated country in 
all of Latin America. Its history is a volatile mix of Indian and 
Spanish encounters but one constant has been corn. In this place, 
it's used in all kinds of dishes, including a savory corn pudding. 
To describe this dish and to give the answer to our Geography Quiz, 
we rang up Steve Rykland, the author of "Healthy Latin American Cooking." 
Bolivia is the country and the dish is Bolivian corn pudding, known 
locally as Umitas Bolivianas. And I wonder if you can tell us before 
we get into that Bolivian corn pudding, is Latin American cuisine 
inherently healthy? Well, it depends really when you look at it. Before 
the arrival of Columbus, Latin America cuisine was very healthy. There 
was virtually no added fat to dishes. You think about it, lard comes 
from the pig. Those are Spanish imports. Deep fat frying, you need 
metal frying pans. That was a Spanish import. So it was really a diet 
that was based primarily on beans, grains, nuts, seeds, tubers, vegetables, 
with a little bit of meat as an accent. Namely exactly what the modern 
health pyramid proposes the healthy diet should be. Now in the century 
since the Spanish landed, of course, deep fat frying has become one 
of the favorite cooking techniques throughout Latin America, and a 
lot of Latin American food is very fatty. So I set out in "Healthy 
Latin Cooking" to try and help remove some of the fat from some of 
your favorite Latin American dishes. And one is using egg whites instead 
of whole eggs, and then I bolster the flavor by increasing the amount 
of spices. So we've got cinnamon and anise seeds and ground black 
pepper, which, you know, give you flavor. And this dish is really 
interesting because it reflects a couple of strains and tenets in 
Latino cooking, and one of is the juxtaposition of sweet and salty 
flavors. This is something that really defines the cooking of Latin 
America. Wow, so you're really big on sort of the convergence of different 
flavors, pretty pronounced flavors. I'm a flavor guy. I mean, on my 
tombstone, they're going to write, "He lived for flavor." I can sort 
of tell that much, Steve. And you also have a couple of tips on what 
you can do also in terms of corn kernels being a high source of full 
latent fiber in all and how you can toss them into other dishes as 
well. Well, there were four great pre-Columbian foods in the new world 
diet, and they were corn, chiles, squash, and beans. Corn is loaded 
with nutrition. And, of course, when you combine corn, which is grain, 
with beans, you wind up with a nutritionally complete form of protein. 
I like to puree corn and use it as a substitute for oil or lard or 
heavy cream in puddings and soups, so it's really versatile. Well, 
if our listeners would like the recipe for this Bolivian corn pudding, 
they can go to THE WORLD online at www.theworld.org and click on the 
recipe list. That's www.theworld.org. And they can also drop us a 
line at THE WORLD, 125 Western Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts, 02134. 
Steve Rykland, author of the newly published "Healthy Latin Cooking," 
thank you very much for joining us. Hey, it's a pleasure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>