<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981021.2000.0646 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The high level of distrust between Israel and the Palestinians may 
force the United States to play the role of arbitrator, not just at 
the peace talks but on the ground every day in Israel and the occupied 
territories. One of the topics being discussed by negotiators in Maryland 
is an expanded role for the CIA. The agency would supervise the arrest 
of suspected terrorists, decide whether they should be tried, and 
coordinate all communications between the two security forces. THE 
WORLD's Patrick Cox reports. As if anyone at the Maryland summit needed 
reminding, crowded public places in Israel are extremely vulnerable 
to attack. Two days ago, a Palestinian lobbed a grenade into a bus 
station sending dozens to the hospital. We had about 61 casualties, 
shrapnel wounds... It's this kind of scene that Israeli President 
Benjamin Netanyahu wants Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat to do more 
to prevent. If the Israeli government barely trusts the Palestinian 
authority to crack down on known terrorists, the Palestinians themselves 
have little belief in Israeli judicial fairness. In the past few years, 
the CIA, who's been advising both sides on security issues, Graham 
Fuller, a former vice chairman of the CIA's National Intelligence 
Council, says any agreement could see the CIA's role dramatically 
expand. It does appear that this is moving into a far broader role 
in which it is no simply any longer a bilateral relationship on the 
one hand between CIA and Israeli intelligence, and on the other hand, 
between the CIA and Palestinian intelligence and security but an effort 
to bridge the gap between them and to settle disputes. Even so, CIA 
officers are unlikely to start making house arrests but they are likely 
to encourage and oversee certain arrests and then arbitrate between 
the Israelis and Palestinians on jurisdiction charges and punishment. 
The CIA is not usually thought of as a force for justice and restraint 
seeking to reduce human rights abuses. That role often acted out by 
other U.S. government agencies may be a good fit in this case for 
the largely secretive CIA, says Fuller, because it isn't answerable 
to American public opinion. Historically, I would say American policy 
has been heavily bias towards the Israeli position due to domestic 
U.S. pressures. In this case, the CIA would be far freer from those 
kinds of domestic political pressures to act more objectively and 
with greater understanding between the two sides. But Anthony Cordesman, 
who held senior official positions for six presidents over 30 years 
warns that unless the CIA proceeds with extreme caution, greater understanding 
could quickly evaporate into animosity from both the Israelis and 
the Palestinians. Each side tends to resent every decision you take 
that favors the other. And what starts out as an honest broker and 
someone who is seen as saving the process can later be seen as an 
enemy. The other problem is that when you get this kind of visibility, 
you tend to become a target for terrorists yourself. Still, Cordesman 
says the U.S. should push for an expanded Middle East role for the 
CIA. It's going to be difficult. It will be dangerous. It will have 
all kinds of political complications. But the alternative to moving 
the peace forward is another Intifada that is even more violent. It 
is a serious risk to western security interests as well as to the 
future of the region, and I think you have to pay the cost to do the 
best you can. The CIA's role of grand security adjudicator in Israel 
and the Palestinian territories would not likely be permanent, but 
it is conceivable that with the prompting of the CIA, Israeli and 
Palestinian security forces could one day be cooperating so closely 
that they share intelligence on what is the most sensitive issue for 
both of them: terrorism. For THE WORLD, I'm Patrick Cox. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>