<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981021.2000.3200 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For years, Joe Zalano was known to jazz aficionados as being one step 
ahead of the pack. His experimental work on the keyboard in the 1960s 
served as a benchmark for cutting edge jazz artists. Now after more 
than three decades in the business, Joe Zalano doesn't see himself 
simply as a jazz musician. THE WORLD's Marco Worman has our story. 
It's little surprise that Austrian born Joe Zalano, who was raised 
to the sounds of Hungarian gypsy accordions, would have been playing 
so-called world music before it became a department in record stores. 
What they call today world music I played in the late '60s. Piano 
player Joe Zalano had already established himself in the early '60s 
as a lynchpin in Cannonball Atterly Soul and Fuse Quintent. In the 
late '60s, Zalano played a critical role in shaping the Seminole Miles 
Davis recording, "Bitch's Brew." That electric sound led Zalano to 
found the jazz rock band Weather Report. As Zalano says, Weather Report 
found a new generation of jazz fans not just in the West but around 
the world. Most of the West African musicians grew up with Weather 
Report and this album, the title song I had written, "Black Market," 
was in Daca Senegal for ten years, the theme song of a radio program. 
I produced Salav Cata, and I found out from all of these guys when 
I recorded, I found out that they grew with "Black Market" and this 
music by Weather Report. The album, Joe Zalano produced for Malian 
vocalist, Salav Cata, "Amen," was nominated for Best World Music Grammy 
in 1991. Island Records came to Zalano to do the job because of his 
global sensibility. But as he says at the time, he didn't even know 
who Salva Cata was. One of my sons called me and after asking me what 
I'm doing these days, I told him about this cassette I'm listening 
to, and he said, "Listen good to this. This is a great guy and he 
can really sing and you should produce his record." Then I listened 
to him and was really impressed. I think Salva Cata is one of the 
major talents. And we had a wonderful time producing this as I did 
and wrote the arrangements and orchestrated and went to Paris and 
recorded the best West African musicians and it became a wonderful 
album. Zalano's career as a global keyboard player has come full circle 
with the release of his latest CD, "World Tour," which he performs 
on with the most recent incarnation of his band, the Zalano Syndicate. 
On "World Tour," Joe Zalano features "Bamoria", a track he co-wrote 
with former collaborator, Salav Cata. I enjoy good things and sometimes 
when we travel, I hear some nice things and I enjoy that. I go to 
marketplaces and enjoy foreign countries and people with accents and 
all that. And out of this, I guess, something sticks and I come up 
with some good things. In other words, I don't like to play tomorrow 
what I played yesterday, and I want to make it interesting for myself 
and make it interesting for the musicians. Aside from ex-Weather Reporters, 
Victor Bailey and Manolo Badrena, Joe Zalano's "World Tour" also features 
a scorching international lineup of musicians from Senegal, Cameroon, 
and Ivory Coast. For THE WORLD, this is Marco Worman. The music from 
Joe Zalano puts the wraps on this edition of the program. In Boston, 
I'm Lisa Mullins. Hope you'll join us again tomorrow for another spin 
of THE WORLD. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>