<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981021.2000.0943 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's a story that's moved on and off the front pages for some three 
months now. The Democratic Republic of Congo, formerly Zaire, has 
been locked in a conflict that one senior U.S. official has ranked 
as one of the most dangerous wars on earth today. Rebel forces are 
trying to bring down the government of President Laurent Kabila, and 
now three southern African countries have announced that they are 
sending troops to the east of the country to back up the embattled 
Congolese Army. The president of Zimbabwe, Robert Mugabe, says that 
his forces and those of Namibia and Angola are ready for a prolonged 
war. The BBC's African correspondent is Jean Stanley. She's now in 
Johannesburg. It's not the first time that these and other countries 
have gotten involved in the Congolese civil war, is it? No, but when 
we saw the Congolese civil war start in '96 and through '97, the war 
that brought Laurent Kabila to power, everyone was on site. Now we've 
seen since August, these three southern African countries backing 
Laurent Kabila. But on the other side, on the rebel side, they deny 
it. We certainly have Uganda and Rwanda, intermittently Burundi, and 
that's the really dangerous thing about this conflict. It's a huge 
country with lots of resources, lots of potential, and we've seen 
a rift emerge in the last two or three months since August through 
this country which is actually splitting Africa, splitting old alliances 
side to side. And is that the primary significance of all of this, 
Jean, that up to ten African countries are now involved in this civil 
war and that there is a danger that this could be the seed of one 
enormous regional conflict? Certainly that's a very, very worrying 
prospect. It worries a lot of people in centers of power on this continent 
and around the world. And I must say it worries me. I covered intently 
the war that brought Laurent Kabila to power, and the explosive potential 
there when the allies were actually on one side backing Laurent Kabila 
against the former dictator, President Mobutu. That was frightening 
enough. But we now see this huge country being fought over by so many 
different people. Some people are not even declaring that they're 
fighting or contributing to the war effort other countries are. That's 
a really, really worrying picture in a continent that's already struggling 
to feed its people, to keep people actually in any form of employment. 
War should not be at the top of the agenda. And remind us, if you 
will, about the rebel forces primarily in the East right now. Why 
do they want to see Laurent Kabila overthrown? That's a very difficult 
question. When Laurent Kabila came to power less than 18 months ago, 
everyone was very optimistic that this was going to be different than 
30-odd years of dictatorship by President Mobutu. Those promises went 
sour very, very quickly. And so I think there's certainly an element 
of that. We've got disgruntled academics, intellectuals, some former 
soldiers who join this force, but certainly there's some prompting, 
particularly from the Rwandans who say, "This is the area where we 
need border security. That's where the rebellion started from. And 
we're not happy with Kabila. He didn't live up to any of our promises." 
And it's quite astonishing looking at it with the hope that Kabila 
brought in May 1997 to the Congo. It was then Zaire. He's really made 
enemies on all fronts with his neighbors, with the international community, 
and with a lot people invested money into the vast potential of the 
Congo in the mining resources. And there's a feeling really among 
people who know the Congo very well that he might survive this war 
but after that, really, he's a lame duck. Well, thank you for the 
update. The BBC's Jean Stanley speaking to us from Johannesburg. Thank 
you. Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>