<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981021.2000.2233 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
THE WORLD's Eddie Mayer has his own thoughts on the arrest of General 
Pinochet. Sitting in the BBC newsroom last Saturday afternoon, things 
were quiet. We had a news program on air at, and so far, very little 
had happened. Then a flash on the news wires. Augusto Pinochet had 
been arrested on our doorstep in London. Great story. Those first 
few hours were hectic, as you might imagine, but they were also hours 
of great clarity. Everyone we spoke to has agreed: bad guy arrested. 
Britain was the good guy. And at last, a blow had been struck against 
not just Pinochet, but despots and dictators around the world. A great 
day for justice and for the new labor government's much wanted ethical 
foreign policy. I spoke to one elderly woman by telephone in Chile 
late on Saturday night. Her husband was one of Chile's disappeared. 
She just heard the news and was celebrating. Even if Pinochet never 
stood trial, she told me, the fact he spent some time under arrest 
was a victory for her. Of course, we shouldn't have expected this 
to be one of those rare stories were right and wrong contrast each 
other so startling. By Sunday morning, questions were being asked 
about the arrest. The British government insisted this wasn't a political 
matter; the British government was impartial. It was the forces of 
law and order which had arrested Augusto Pinochet. And yet a senior 
member of the Cabinet went public with his view the former leader 
had been a brutal dictator. So much for impartiality. Then came questions 
about why the authorities allowed Pinochet into Britain at all, only 
to have him arrested after he'd been given VIP treatment at Hethrow 
Airport. Yesterday, came revelations that this so-called brutal dictator 
had had a cordial meeting with Margaret Thatcher in London 12 days 
ago. At the same time, there were claims that the extradition attempt 
by Spain is tied to an attempt by Britain to extradite an alleged 
murderer from Spain to here, a tangled web indeed. The Cabinet is 
reportedly split on what to do next. The final decision on whether 
Pinochet can be extradited to Spain rests with the Home Secretary 
Jack Straw, who also insists he will act impartially based on the 
evidence before him. One footnote to all this. The anti-Pinochet movement 
was a great call back in the 1970s for students. It was the apartheid 
of its day. One of our most respected broadcasters, Alister Stute 
told me Sunday of his time in the '70s on rallies, taking part in 
protests, and doing whatever he could to get rid of Pinochet and bring 
him to justice. He wasn't alone. Another senior figure in the National 
Union of Students at the time, bushy haired and radical, played his 
part in opposing the Pinochet regime. He's moved on since, married, 
kids, and a respectable haircut to go with a respectable job. He's 
Jack Straw, Home Secretary. What will the former anti-Pinochet campaigner 
decide to do? Eddie Mayer writes to us each week from London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>