<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.0600.2660 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A long-term nationwide cancer study reveals that American women who 
work outside the home are, on average, no worse off in terms of breast 
cancer death risk than those who remain at home. Brian Sislack reports. 
The information about working women, housewives and breast cancer 
comes from a large-scale nationwide epidemiological study of cancer 
risk that began 16 years ago. The study is sponsored by the American 
Cancer Society, an independent non-governmental group that collects 
data and supports research into the causes, prevention and treatment 
of cancer. Eugenia Call is the cancer society's director of analytic 
epidemiology. We have a large population of both men and women who 
were enrolled in 1982 in all 50 states of the United States and we 
have followed them for many years. And we track all the deaths that 
occur in this group. And so we were essentially analyzing data for 
over 560,000 women who gave us information about their occupational 
history in 1982. The group is a little bit more middle class than 
a representative sample of the U.S. population would be. And so, in 
that sense, they tend to be somewhat homogeneous. Dr. Call says that, 
according to the data, working in and of itself conveys no additional 
risk for breast cancer. Among women who worked outside the home, we 
found very little difference in breast cancer mortality compared to 
women who were housewives for most of their lives. And that's when 
we controlled for several other risk factors that may be expected 
to differ between housewives and working women, such as number of 
children, age at first pregnancy, things that have to do with reproduction 
that are somewhat different in working women and women who work in 
the home. In general, women who postpone their first pregnancy beyond 
age 30 or who decide not to give birth at all are more likely to develop 
breast cancer than are those who bear children earlier. Although many 
working women might defer pregnancy or forego it all together, thus 
increasing breast cancer risk, the designers of the study wanted to 
see if there were any risks to working women independent of reproductive 
matters. There were none. What's more, Dr. Call says that the more 
traditional occupational choices for women - teaching, nursing and 
secretarial work - were among those least likely to confer additional 
cancer risk. The elevation in risk is so small that I'm not sure that 
it's meaningful in the sense of being important. I'm not sure what 
it means. I'm not sure if it's real. Dr. Call stresses that, regardless 
of her occupational status, every woman should be vigilant about breast 
cancer and never take good health for granted. In my view, this finding 
is really entirely separate from the need to provide all women with 
opportunities for age-appropriate mammography screening. All women 
should be getting age-appropriate mammography screening and, if the 
workplace gives them a good opportunity to do that, then I would encourage, 
you know, any kind of intervention programs that would bring screening 
facilities into the workplace. Although there has been some controversy 
regarding how often or even whether women between the ages of 40 and 
50 should be screened, the American Cancer Society recommends that 
women should have mammograms at one to two-year intervals beginning 
at age 40, and should progress to an annual exam starting at age 50. 
I'm Brian Sislack. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>