<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.1700.3189 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ginger Rogers, Rosalind Carter, Queen Noor of Jordan - these are some 
of the famous women found in the new book, "Mariane Christie's Conversations 
- Famous Women Speak Out." For her book, journalist Mariane Christie 
chose some of the many interviews she did during her 26-year tenure 
at the Boston Globe newspaper. In the interviews, notable women from 
entertainment, the arts and politics, share their views on life and 
talk about difficulties that are experienced by women everywhere. 
Ms. Christie told VOA's Martin Secrest she compiled her new book from 
conversations with women who share a common quality. So I went through 
about 2,000 interviews and chose the 51 women who are in the book 
for various reasons, mostly because I thought that they had enormous 
courage, and I've always admired courage, especially courage under 
duress. And I don't mean courage like running into a building to save 
a cat if the building is on fire. I mean courage in the everyday sense 
- facing up, doing things, getting past obstacles. Do any of these 
interviews stand out for you in particular? Well, these all do. That's 
why they're there - for one reason or another. Rosalind Carter caught 
my eye. Tell me what you two talked about and how that interview went. 
Well, she resented very much the idea that she was the other half 
of the presidency. And she tried to explain that in any good marriage, 
it is a partnership all the way, 100 percent. It was always that way 
with them. And I think that a lot of women will have that in common 
with her. What sorts of techniques do you use to get celebrities to 
open up to you? Well, I am just myself. I'm the same with them as 
I am as I'm talking to you, Martin. I just tell them what I've always 
told famous people - that I'd like to get to know them beyond the 
mask of celebrity, and that's what celebritism basically is. People 
put on a front. These are all heroines of some type. They're all famous 
for one reason or another, and I asked to talk to them one-on-one 
in a humanist way. Why do you suppose it is that the public values, 
so to speak, the philosophies of celebrities? Celebrity is a phenomenon 
in America today, but I don't talk about celebrity. I talk about the 
human being behind the celebrity, and that's the unique voice that 
I tried to capture in the book so that, when people read this, they 
will see celebrity in terms of their own life. It's a mirror that 
they can look into and see reflections of themselves. I thought, for 
example, when I met Dyan Cannon - you know, she raised her arm and 
kissed herself. And it was a very revealing gesture, and we talked 
about what it means to love yourself. And it's not a sin. It's an 
actual requirement to survive and succeed. And the fact that she lifted 
her arm and kissed it I though was quite an interesting gesture. I 
think the theme of the book is tapping into the strength of your own 
powers and figuring out to do - what to do when things get tough. 
And if you read the prologue, you will see that I started out with 
no encouragement at all. This was just a dream that I had to be a 
journalist. I've always wanted to paint pictures with words and paint 
portraits of people with words, but simply. I wanted to boil everything 
down to its simplest components, including the people that I interviewed. 
That's what I'm proudest of. And I think I've achieved that. I think 
you've painted some interesting pictures here. I'm Martin Secrest. 
Veteran journalist Mariane Christie's new book is called "Mariane 
Christie's Conversations - Famous Women Speak Out." Mariane, thanks 
for joining us today. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>