<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.1700.2696 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Over the years, scientists combing the river beds of northern Alaska 
have found the bones of long-extinct dinosaurs. The bones have revealed 
clues to what the Arctic was like some 80 million years ago. But as 
Doug Snider reports, despite their constant searching, they've never 
found a good set of dinosaur footprints - that is, until now. rowan 
ganglaw, curator of earth sciences, university of alaska Once you 
find tracks and track ways, you find lots of them. And it is - it 
just seems to be the way it goes. That's Rowan Ganglaw. He's the curator 
of earth sciences at the University of Alaska Museum in Fairbanks. 
This past summer, while floating the Coleville River in northwestern 
Alaska, he and a team of researchers came across dinosaur tracks preserved 
in solidified mud and stone. The tracks were part of an extensive 
series of ancient trackways found at 13 sites along the river that 
were filled with dinosaur footprints. Some of the impressions were 
clear enough to show the rough, pebble-like texture of the dinosaur's 
foot. It is the first time we've ever found that. And so far, in the 
literature, it may be exceedingly rare that you actually have - and 
only certain dinosaurs may have these kind of surface - these skin 
tubricles in the pad of the foot. The tracks were mostly of three-toed 
dinosaurs, prehistoric creatures like the duckbill dinosaur, that 
measured up to 43 meters in length. And one track was especially large 
- some 45 centimeters long. That one was most likely made by a smaller, 
but still fearsome, relative of Tyrannosaurus Rex. And while most 
dinosaurs had three toes, Rowan Ganglaw found one print with four 
toes. Our first conclusions are that they were either intelisaurs 
or ceratopsins - either reform dinosaurs or armored dinosaurs because 
those both have four-toed feet and they tend to give you more distinct 
digit impressions than, say, some of the big sauropods. Scientists 
say the trackways were most likely made in the very early Cretaceous 
Period, some 90 to 110 million years ago. This finding is especially 
important because, if scientists are right, it means dinosaurs roamed 
Alaska some 25 million years earlier than they previously believed. 
And we predicted that we'll find the very last population of dinosaurs 
in the high arctic areas, and we should also find some of the earliest 
evidences of some of the major lineages of dinosaurs that originated 
in Eurasia. One hundred million years ago, Alaska's north slope was 
a whole lot different than it is today. Grasses, plants, even semi-tropical 
forests once flourished on land that is now frozen tundra. Philip 
Curie is a scientist at the Tyrell Museum of Paleontology in Alberta, 
Canada. A big difference is, though, is that there was no permanent 
ice cap and, because of that, plants could grow prolifically even 
well above the Arctic Circle. Exactly why dinosaurs would want to 
spend much of their time in the high arctic is a question researchers 
continue to puzzle over. One popular theory holds that arctic dinosaurs 
had strong herding instincts, much like caribou do today, and that 
they migrated between summer and winter ranges. Only dinosaurs migrated 
on a much grander scale. During the summer months, of course, with 
all the plant material available for them to eat, they had a good 
summer and smaller groups. But as the days started to shorten and 
started to get cooler, they started to get the onset of nights and 
so on, I think these animals would collect into herds again, push 
south, and end up overwintering in places like northern, central and 
southern Alberta. Ganglaw and his team of scientists from the University 
of Alaska campuses in Fairbanks and Anchorage collected casts and 
impressions of five different kinds of dinosaurs over the past summer. 
Those casts, as well as other artifacts and photos, are on display 
at the University of Alaska Museum I Fairbanks. For VOA, I'm Doug 
Snider with Arctic Science Journeys in Fairbanks, Alaska. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>