<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.0600.1943 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Law enforcement agencies in Hong Kong and adjoining mainland China 
have launched an aggressive campaign aimed at cracking down on cross-border 
crimes, especially the smuggling of stolen vehicles. VOA correspondent 
Chris Simpkins reports increased cooperation between Hong Kong and 
mainland Chinese authorities is making a difference in combating the 
smuggling of stolen goods. A six-kilometer long convoy of trucks streams 
through the border control post at Lat Ma Chow, linking the mainland 
Chinese city of Shingen and Hong Kong. Every day, thousands of tons 
of cargo flows through this customs checkpoint, which is the busiest 
of three highway crossing points between Hong Kong and the mainland. 
But on this day, along with the regular cargo from the mainland, there 
was also a batch of 11 stolen vehicles worth nearly $1 million. The 
vehicles, including both luxury cars and construction trucks, were 
being returned by the Guangdong Public Security Bureau. They were 
reported stolen from various locations in Hong Kong over the last 
two years. Police say in 1992, nearly 7,000 vehicles were stolen and 
smuggled into mainland China. Last year, the figure was reduced to 
just over 2,000. Nang Chur Quak, acting superintendent of the Hong 
Kong Police Department's Organized Crime Bureau, says the latest haul 
may be small in number, but it illustrates the point that greater 
cooperation with mainland police agencies has led to a sharp decline 
in cross-border crimes, especially the smuggling of stolen vehicles. 
The number is very low now because it's very difficult for them to 
do so because we have tightened up the control in the BCP is very 
- decreasing very much. Hong Kong Police Chief Inspector Chan Wing 
On says, since the return of Hong Kong to China and the beginning 
of a campaign against cross-border crimes, a total of 150 vehicles 
have been returned to Hong Kong. At the border crossing point, it's 
the - you know -- higher profile police presence and more frequent 
inspections of vehicles and the cooperation between the Chinese police 
and the Hong Kong police. Basically, it's more of an intelligence 
approach. You know, we investigate and cultivate intelligence in the 
individual syndicates, monitor the activities. When we think that 
it's the right time, then we hit it. Mr. Chan says, in the latest 
operation, three people were arrested. He says police are now concentrating 
in trying to put pressure on organized crime syndicates which, he 
says, are increasingly getting away with smuggling legitimately purchased 
vehicles into mainland China. Chris Simpkins, VOA NEWS, Hong Kong. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>