<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.1700.0707 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A similar problem exists in Malaysia, where the government summoned 
the editor of an opposition newsletter to justify the publication's 
content and to explain why it's being sold at newsstands. Southeast 
Asia correspondent Gary Thomas reports Malaysians have increasingly 
turned to alternative sources of information since the case of ousted 
Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim erupted last month. The editor 
of an opposition Islamic political party publication was called to 
the Home Ministry to explain why the party newsletter, Haraka, was 
being sold on public newsstands. The official Bernama news agency 
quotes the deputy home minister as saying the newsletter had been 
publishing "sensational and distorted news." Bernama did not say when 
the editor was summoned. The ministry, which issues annual publishing 
permits, had restricted distribution of the newsletter only to members 
of the Party Islam se Malaysia. Other political parties are also barred 
from distributing their publications outside party ranks. The government 
has the power to effectively ban a publication by revoking its permit. 
The government's attitude towards the media, both foreign and domestic, 
has been sharpened by the firing and subsequent arrest last month 
of Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim on corruption and sexual misconduct 
charges. Mr. Anwar, who is to go on trial next month, categorically 
denies the allegations, saying he was charged because of his calls 
for political reform and his sharp political differences with Prime 
Minister Mahatir Mohammed. The case has sparked sporadic but unprecedented 
anti-government demonstrations. With coverage of the case in major 
Malaysian newspapers and television very much pro-government, Malaysians 
looking for a different perspective are turning to alternative sources 
of news. Publications like Haraka report an increase in sales since 
the Anwar case broke last month. Malaysians also log on to the Internet 
and tune in to foreign news broadcasts. The government has been sharply 
critical of foreign news coverage of the case. Prime Minister Mahatir 
has repeatedly attacked foreign news media outlets as biased toward 
Malaysia with his most recent criticism coming Tuesday in Tokyo. Foreign 
television outlets in Malaysia report they have been cut off from 
buying transmission time from local television facilities to get their 
stories out forcing them to fly the videotaped news footage out of 
the country. Restrictions on foreign journalists have also been tightened, 
with entry to official functions, such as news conferences, blocked 
unless the reporter has obtained a government press card from the 
Ministry of Information. Gary Thomas, VOA NEWS, Bangkok. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>