<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.1700.0864 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Warring sides in Guinea Bissau exchanged gunfire again Wednesday for 
a fourth consecutive day. The violence started Sunday, ending an almost 
three-month-old cease-fire. West Africa correspondent John Pittman 
reports the fighting is said to have spread outside of the capital. 
News reports from Bissau, the capital, say artillery and automatic 
weapons fire resumed Wednesday morning, but died down after noon. 
Witnesses say the fighting was again concentrated on the outskirts 
of the city, along the front lines, which were frozen in place by 
a cease-fire agreement signed in late July. The Senegalese government, 
which has sent troops to support President Joal Bernardo Viera, says 
more than 50 rebels have been killed since Sunday. In a statement, 
the Dakar government said seven of its soldiers have also died. These 
casualty figures have not been independently confirmed, however. Fighting 
has also reportedly erupted around Bafita, Guinea Bissau's second 
largest city, and several other smaller town. The UN World Food Program 
has evacuated its staff from Bafita and has warned that the civilian 
population there will face another hunger crisis if the violence continues. 
The war has already disrupted the country's annual farming season, 
meaning most of the estimated 350,000 people who were forced out of 
their homes in Bissau are dependent on the UN food aid to survive. 
On Tuesday, the WFP said it would try to send food to calmer areas, 
where it might be distributed safely, but said civilians in the war 
zones had been effectively cut off from humanitarian aid. Meanwhile, 
diplomats from Portugal, France and Switzerland joined local political 
and religious leaders on Wednesday in trying to secure a new cease-fire. 
It remains unclear what progress the delegation has made. But by mid-afternoon, 
a diplomat at the Portuguese embassy in Bissau said the fighting had 
stopped and residents were expressing hope that the truce had been 
re-established. The July cease-fire had experienced several minor 
violations prior to this outbreak of fighting, but it was reaffirmed 
by both sides on August 25th. Still, efforts to find a permanent solution 
to the war have bogged down over disagreements over which countries 
would participate in an international peace-keeping mission to Guinea 
Bissau, and where the peace-keepers would patrol. Rebels have been 
fighting government loyalists since June 7th, the day after President 
Viera fired the army's chief of staff for allegedly smuggling weapons 
to Kazam separatists in southern Senegal. General Antimany Mani as 
denied the charge and has accused President Viera of corruption. Following 
his dismissal, General Mani rallied most of the army to his cause, 
calling for President Viera to step down and for new elections to 
be held. The rebels took an early advantage over the loyalists, but 
the two sides were eventually stalemated militarily after Senegal 
and Guinea Conacre sent troops to back President Viera. The presence 
of these troops has been one of the main stumbling blocks faced by 
negotiators at recent peace talks. The rebels have insisted that all 
foreign troops be withdrawn from the country as a pre-condition to 
any agreement. John Pittman, VOA NEWS, West Africa Bureau. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>