<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.1700.3029 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And while we're in Europe, the European Union has released its economic 
forecast saying growth remains strong for this year but will slow 
down next year. Ron Penstein reports from Brussels the union has had 
to revise its forecast because of economic troubles in Asia and in 
Russia. The European Union believes the economy of the 15 member countries 
is sound. But it is not immune from instability in Russia and Asia. 
While its forecast for the rest of 1998 is slightly better than the 
one at issue six months ago, the union's forecast for 1999 has been 
revised downward. Reduced demand for European exports to Asia and 
Russia, as well as the weakness in the American dollar, is expected 
to make it harder for Europe to sell its products abroad. While Europeans 
are not as exposed to the stock market as Americans are, the lack 
of investor confidence is another factor in the union predicting growth 
next year will be 2.4 percent - down from its previous estimate of 
3 percent. Still, the European Union believes it can ride the storm 
out. One reason is the budgetary discipline it took for 11 of the 
15 countries to agree to introduce the euro, the common currency they 
plan to start circulating in January. Economic growth is expected 
to be slightly higher in the 11 countries than it will be in all 15. 
Yves DeSilgi is the European commissioner responsible for economic 
and monetary affairs. He tells reporters through an interpreter Europe 
will still be better off than its prime competitors. yves desilgi, 
european commissioner for economic and monetary affairs Another reason 
for us to believe that the situation in Europe is still favorable 
is because the European economy has been doing better in the year 
- in 1999 and for the year 2000 - than we expect for Japan or the 
USA, according to our figures. So Europe is now contributing to an 
improvement of the situation, and we are contributing to the economic 
and financial situation in the world because if we have more growth, 
there will be more imports. The European Union's been criticized by 
the American Trade Representative for its refusal to step up imports 
of Russian steel and Japanese cars. The United States wants to see 
Europe do more to help Russia and Japan recover from economic instability. 
The United States is suffering from a growing trade deficit and wants 
to see the European Union take more of the burden of imports. Despite 
its prediction of slower economic growth next year, the European Union 
believes the year 2000 will bring more economic expansion with a 2.8 
percent growth rate accompanied by low inflation and a drop in unemployment. 
RON PENSTEIN, VOA NEWS, Brussels. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>