<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.1700.2155 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The new U.S. federal budget includes approval for $18 billion for 
the depleted reserves of the International Monetary Fund, the IMF. 
The budget does not, however, include money President Clinton sought 
to pay past-due that the United States owes the United Nations. America's 
funding obligations is the subject of today's "Dateline." Here's Pamela 
Taylor. The White House says the agreement to provide new contributions 
for the International Monetary Fund will allow the financial institution 
to proceed with strategies to fight off a global recession. President 
Clinton praised Congress for approving the additional money he'd been 
trying to get for the IMF for one year. We made a profound commitment 
to strengthening our own economy here by assuming our responsibility 
to stabilize the global economy on which so much of our prosperity 
depends. President Clinton praising the budget appropriation for the 
IMF. But the IMF fund package comes with a few strings attached, as 
we hear in this report from VOA economics correspondent Barry Wood. 
Liberal Democrats complain that the fund imposes unnecessary hardship 
on borrower countries, hurting the poor. Conservative Republicans 
say IMF loans are really insurance policies for big international 
banks, which essential get paid from IMF credits. Members of both 
parties believe the IMF is too secretive and that its Washington-based 
staff is paid too much money. These critics are unswayed by arguments 
that, because the United States has 18 percent of the votes in the 
IMF - far more than other member - the multilateral lender has served 
U.S. interests for over 50 years. During the IMF annual meeting, French 
Finance Minister Dominque Straus Kahn predicted that fear of continuing 
financial crisis would compel the Congress to approve the long-delayed 
U.S. contributions to the IMF. It's obvious for everybody that the 
crisis we're in and will have also influence on the rate of growth 
of the United States. So, the question is - Do you want to do your 
best efforts to fight this crisis or not? And obviously, it's not 
the only effort to be done, but one of those efforts is to give the 
IMF the money which has been promised. The legislation involves $14.5 
billion of direct U.S. contributions to the IMF and another $4 billion 
to be lent if needed. The money is part of an overall $88 billion 
membership contribution increase approved by the IMF's over 180 member 
countries a year ago. VOA economics correspondent Barry Wood. Another 
important international organization did not fare as well as the IMF 
in the new budget. Republican congressmen placed U.S. money for dues 
owed to the United Nations in a separate bill, the State Department 
authorization measure, which President Clinton is expected to either 
sign or veto this week. Although the United States has paid $228 million 
in UN dues this year, it still owes a huge amount for 1998 and it 
could lose its vote in the General Assembly next year. We have more 
in this report by correspondent Neil LeVaughn. The UN says Washington 
owes more than $1.5 billion in past-dues. The U.S. Congress has passed 
legislation authorizing pay a sum close to that amount. But the funds 
are being held up because of an impasse between Congress and the administration 
over whether U.S. funds can be used to lobby foreign governments about 
abortion policies. The Congress also wants to lower U.S. dues to 20 
percent of the UN budget from the current 25 percent. Ted Galen Carpenter 
of Washington's Cato Institute says the worsening relationship between 
Washington and the UN is not merely due to finances. He believes the 
downturn in relations can be traced to a series of developments going 
back two decades. In part, it was resentment on the part of Americans 
- particularly conservatives - about votes in the UN General Assembly 
back in the 1970s and 1980s, which were perceived - often correctly 
- as anti-Western, anti-American. There was also concern, again corruption 
and mismanagement of the United Nations. But Steven A. Dimoff, vice 
president of the Washington office of the United Nations Association 
of the United States, argues that the United States should not give 
up on the United Nations because Washington needs the world body. 
steven a. dimoff, vice president, washington office, united The fact 
is that the United Nations provides a forum for the United States 
to advance its interests, promote its values, to try to get countries 
to cooperate in setting norms and standards. The U.S. has interests 
all over the world. It can promote those interests through its work 
at the UN. UN officials are reportedly upset with Washington for demanding 
policy concessions on reform and budgetary matters while refusing 
to pay back dues. Meanwhile, the United States has no permanent representative 
to argue its case because the job of full-time ambassador has been 
vacant since June. But critics of the UN - both in and out of the 
U.S. Congress - say their concerns stem from an honest assessment 
of the shortcomings of the world body. VOA correspondent Neil LeVaughn. 
Although President Clinton is expected to veto the State Department 
authorization bill because of the abortion attachment, Republican 
lawmakers hope he will accept a watered-down anti-abortion language 
in order to get the dues paid. Conservatives in the U.S. Congress 
may regard Washington as too subservient to the United Nations, but 
many developing countries regard the United Nations as too subservient 
to the United States. We have more in this report from VOA correspondent 
at the United Nations Max Rustin. The United Nations penalizes countries 
when their debt exceeds the amount of contributions due for the preceding 
two years. Unless Washington pays an additional $200 million before 
January 1st, it will be among those penalized and lose its vote in 
the General Assembly. Fourteen countries now fall in that category, 
including Bosnia, Cambodia, Equatorial Guinea, Iraq, Liberia and Yugoslavia. 
The issue is considered of vital importance at UN headquarters in 
New York and was a central theme in Secretary-General Kofi Annan's 
speech at the opening session of the General Assembly. I appeal once 
again to those few member states who have fallen seriously behind 
in their contributions to follow the good examples set by others. 
There can be no such issue of full and timely payment of what is due. 
U.S. diplomats share the secretary-general's frustration and sometimes 
publicly criticize the circumstances that have led to the situation. 
U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright. This does not have to 
be - and we hope it will not be. We remain determined to persuade 
Congress to make the payments we owe. As many of you are aware, Congress 
and the administration worked together last year to develop a plan 
to encourage UN reform while paying many of our overdue bills. Unfortunately, 
a small group of House members blocked final passage of that plan 
by tying it to the unrelated issue of U.S. support for voluntary family 
planning programs overseas. But the United States does pay some of 
its bills at the United Nations, and some U.S. officials say this 
fact is often ignored. U.S. ambassador, Peter Burleigh. We are still 
the largest contributor to the United Nations, despite these arrears. 
No one compares with us. The U.S. still the major contributor to the 
United Nations - both to the regular budget and to the peace-keeping 
budget. So I'd like to be clear about that. These arrears are largely 
past arrears that have to do with peace-keeping operations and accumulated 
arrears in that category of the budget. Despite the problem of the 
U.S. debt to the United Nations, personal relations between the UN 
Secretary-General's Office and top U.S. officials are reported to 
be at their highest level in years. That report was from VOA correspondent 
Max Rustin at the United Nations in New York. America's funding obligations 
was the subject of today's edition of "Dateline". I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>