<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.0600.0355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A breakthrough could be in the making at the Middle East peace summit 
being held near Washington. As those meetings enter a seventh day 
today, a report has emerged that the Israeli and Palestinian negotiators 
may be near agreement on a critical security issue, which involves 
the treatment and the prosecution of suspects accused of terrorism. 
Sources who demanded anonymity have told wire services that Israel 
would no longer insist that suspected Palestinian terrorists be extradited 
to Israel. The sources also say the agreement under discussion would 
put the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency in a position to supervise 
the jailing of suspected terrorists by the Palestinian Authority. 
Jerusalem correspondent Al Pessin spoke with VOA's Charlene Porter 
and Paul Westfeeling about the treatment of terrorist suspects and 
why it's been a key issue in security discussions. Well, because the 
previous agreement provides two ways of dealing with these terrorism 
suspects that says either they have to be extradited to Israel or 
they have to be prosecuted and punished within the Palestinian Authority. 
That second option, of course, is the one that the Palestinian Authority 
has preferred and Israel has been forced to accept it. However, Israel 
complains that punishments that are given out to these people are 
very light or, if serious punishments are announced that, in the end, 
they're not implemented. So this has become, from Israel's point of 
view, an unsatisfactory arrangement. What happened is that they came 
into these talks with Israel demanding, essentially, a change in the 
previous agreement and the Palestinians refusing to make it, and extremely 
reluctant politically to face the prospect of actually extraditing 
Palestinians into the Israeli justice system. So this was really a 
very difficult issue to deal with. And it seems that the option that's 
been taken is to make a creative approach, a new approach, a third 
approach, involving the United States so that neither side gets everything 
it wants but neither side has to give up everything it wants either. 
So you're saying, then, that they - they were stalemated on this particular 
issue so it seems then - or are we to assume that the only way to 
break through that stalemate was for a third party to be called in 
to mediate, shall we say, these - these kinds of issues? Well, it 
looks that way. I mean the option was either for one side or the other 
to make a very major concession or to come up with a creative solution. 
And that seems to be what they've done - not that this was necessarily 
easy either because it means that both sides give up a measure of 
their own power to the United States or to a committee that includes 
the United States or whatever the final details turn out to be because 
it means that the Palestinian Authority will have somebody monitoring 
its treatment of these people through its justice system. It means 
that Israel will have to accept the judgment of - it seems, according 
to these reports - a U.S. official, who will say - Well, this individual 
or that individual has been treated correctly, has received a sentence, 
is in prison, and even if you, Israel, don't think the sentence was 
long enough or the prison is tough enough, you still have to accept 
it and you still have to go ahead and implement whatever other things 
you've promised to do, including most importantly troop withdrawal. 
All right, now, we're talking about sovereignty here, obviously. Won't 
this be a very difficult issue to sell? Both to the Israelis, the 
constituency of Prime Minister Netanyahu, and to the constituency 
of the Palestinians? Yes, it certainly will be, Paul. But perhaps 
not as difficult as a full concession by either side would have been. 
Already this morning, on Israeli radio, politicians and other folks 
are saying that - Oh, we're sure that Netanyahu won't come back without 
an extradition arrangement. But an extradition arrangement was completely 
what they call a non-starter on the Palestinian side. And so the Palestinian 
position, almost a non-starter on the Israeli side -- that the situation 
would just continue as it is. So there needed to be some kind of third 
road that was found. And this is not a surprise if these reports turn 
out to be true because it's the kind of thing that's been talked about. 
And by the way, it's the kind of thing that's being talked about on 
another very key issue in the talks, which is how to judge the Palestinian 
war on terrorism. The Palestinians say they're doing everything they 
can and Israel should go ahead and implement further withdrawals. 
Israel says the Palestinians aren't doing enough. Palestinians come 
back and say - Well, Israel will never be satisfied with whatever 
we do. So there is talk of creating a committee, bringing the United 
States in, and giving this authority to make these judgments to this 
third body so that, if a committee would say - Yes, the Palestinians 
have taken steps A, B and C and therefore, Israel you have to make 
this stage of the withdrawal. And a month later, say - Yes, the Palestinians 
have done D, E and F - or haven't done it - and would then have the 
power to turn to one side or the other and say - It's your turn to 
move. And this has not yet been decided on, but it's the kind of thing 
that's been talked about. And it would fit the pattern of the agreement 
that's being reported today. Jerusalem correspondent Al Pessin speaking 
with VOA's Charlene Porter and Paul Westfeeling. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>