<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981214.1830.1160 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to take "A close look" tonight at the boom in plastic 
surgery and the risks that go with that boom. There has been an enormous 
increase in almost every type of cosmetic surgery during the 1990s. 
Surgical procedures overall are up 69%. Liposuction and breast implants 
are up more than 200%. So many people wish to change the way they 
are and willing to pay for it. There are more doctors who want a piece 
of the action. And here's why we are taking "A closer look," they 
are not all trained as plastic surgeons. Here is ABC's Judy Muller. 
When tamara cotton went to a doctor's office for liposuction, she 
expected a routine operation. But when cotton failed to come around 
in the recovery room, her husband grew alarmed. Nobody took any vitals, 
blood pressure, checked pulse or monitored the heart rate or anything. 
Hours later, cotton was rushed to the hospital, where she died in 
the emergency room from an overload of fluid and anesthesia. I looked 
at Dr. chavis, who was sitting at the end of the bed, and I said, 
"It was just liposuction. What happened?" Cotton's doctor, Patrick 
chavis, was not a plastic surgeon but a Gynecologist who had taken 
weekend courses in the procedure. His medical license has since been 
revoked. But many plastic surgeons are worried about the growing numbers 
of nonspecialists doing cosmetic surgery. It's mostly liposuction, 
breast augmentation, face-lifts and eyelid surgery. What kind of doctors 
are doing that surgery? Every single kind of doctor is doing that 
kind of surgery. why? Because managed care is putting the squeeze 
on doctors' incomes, prompting them to branch out. And legally, there's 
nothing wrong with that. A medical license gives a doctor the right 
to practice any kind of medicine, including the lucrative practice 
of cosmetic surgery. It's the only area left in medicine that is truly 
fee-for-service, where the insurance industry has no regulation, where 
the patients themselves have to pay for it. But some patients are 
paying with their lives. At least 60 died last year from liposuction 
alone. The California medical board is looking into some troubling 
questions raised by this largely unregulated field. Such as -- are 
weekend courses an adequate substitute for a two-year residency? Can 
you just change from neurology to cosmetic surgery or from psychiatry 
to cosmetic surgery? I don't think you can. I think have you to go 
back and get formal training. But Del junco concedes that many nonspecialists 
have become quite skillful in this area. Dr. Phil young is a gynecologist 
who does liposuction. This is not, as they say, brain surgery. This 
is not the most complicated operation in the world. If you've got 
basic surgical skills and good training, you should be able to do 
it. Right now, the Burden is on the consumer to judge which doctors 
are qualified. What's the doctor's education? What's his training? 
What's his experience? How long has he been doing the operation? How 
many of them has he done? For Jimmy cotton, that advice comes too 
late. He says he'll never forget the words of his wife's doctor and 
nurse on the night she died. He told me he was sorry, he don't know 
what went wrong. And she told me, she said, "well, I'll tell you what. 
We'll give you your down payment back." I just couldn't believe she 
offered to give me $1,280 for 26 years of my life. At moments like 
that, the phrase "Buyer beware" hardly seems adequate. Judy Muller, 
ABC News, Los Angeles. A report that just begs a remark from Tim Johnson. 
I notice you skouling through some of this. You're surely not surprised 
it goes on. Not surprised. Cosmetic surgery is done largely in an 
office setting and unlike hospital procedures, office procedures are 
not regulated. Nobody is checking on the credentials or the training 
of the doctor. You really are taking a great risk when you go into 
an office setting for cosmetic surgery. I would say, the safest way 
to avoid problems is to insist your surgeon is really fully trained. 
Are you saying in order to do any of this you should have a reconstructive 
surgery, nobody else? I'm not saying nobody else. Certainly other 
kinds of specialists can be trained to do cosmetic surgery. I don't 
think nonsurgeons should be acceptable. Overall, the safest way is 
to insist on full training and credentialing. They're the ones that 
spend their full residency in surgical procedures. Thank you very 
much. Timothy Johnson, our medical editor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>