<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981214.1830.0052 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We are going to begin tonight with the enormous threat 
to Bill Clinton's presidency. There he was today, making a landmark 
trip to the Palestinians in a place of their own, while the shadow 
of impeachment grew somewhat darker. There he was helping the Palestinians 
to make history, fully aware that, come Thursday, he will make history 
in the House of Representatives. It is going to be a devastating week, 
one way or the other. In a minute, our impeachment watch in Washington. 
But first, to Sam Donaldson, who was with Mr. Clinton in Gaza. Sitting 
with Palestinian chairman Yasser Arafat, president clinton today seemed 
to draw the line on sharpening his admissions of wrongdoing as the 
house impeachment vote looms. Mr. president, you say you haven't committed 
perjury. Can you say, sir, that you lied, as some people believe would 
help? Sam, I've said what I have to say about that. But the president 
went on to argue that his impeachment is not in the national interest 
and almost pleaded with Congress to make a deal to avoid it. I don't 
believe it's in the interest of the United States or the American 
people to go through this impeachment process with a trial in the 
Senate. That's why I have offered to make effort to make any reasonable 
compromise with the Congress. In the meantime, Mr. Clinton fulfilled 
his reason for coming to the Middle East, becoming the first U.S. 
president to set foot in palestinian-controlled territory, where they 
used to burn U.S. flags but today displayed them proudly. He came 
to Gaza, where he cut the ribbon for the new Gaza international airport, 
and he went to the Palestinian assembly, as he had promised when the 
parties reached the interim withdrawal agreement last October, to 
watch the members ratify the removal of all the clauses in the Palestinian 
charter that called for the destruction of the state of Israel. In 
support of this, please raise your hands. Israeli prime minister Netanyahu 
accepted the vote as valid and a Positive step. The president put 
it another way. You did a good thing today in raising your hands. 
You know why? It has nothing to do with the government in Israel. 
You will touch the people of Israel. But after Arafat spoke of his 
hope for an independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital 
-- something the Israelis say they won't accept -- Mr. Clinton raised 
some Israeli hackles when he said -- It does not hurt Israelis to 
hear Palestinians peacefully and pridefully asserting their identity, 
as we saw today. The president may have nudge the peace process forward 
here, but he may have done it at his own expense. He'll have only 
one full day, after getting home late tomorrow night, to save himself 
from impeachment. There's a sense that Mr. Clinton is stealing for 
the worst, preparing for defeat that a few short weeks ago few people 
thought might occur. Sam Donaldson, ABC News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>