<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981214.1830.0225 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is a very high career game they're playing in Washington. There 
are careers at stake. An impeachment vote on Thursday is an agonizing 
exercise. Chris Shays of Connecticut who said he was against impeachment 
now says he is not so sure. Is he simply trying to attract attention? 
It happens. But he asked for and he got a meeting with the president 
when Mr. Clinton comes back from the Middle East. The day after tomorrow. 
Every single vote is important. Here's ABC's John dock ran. This is 
the time of year when going home to places like louisville should 
be fun for members of Congress. Representative northrup's office. 
May I help you? But it's not fun, not if you're an undeclared republican, 
like anne northrup, in a district where democrats outnumber republicans 
two to one. Even when she tried to talk to school kids, what they 
wanted to know was, how is she going to vote on impeachment? The one 
subject she didn't want to talk about. Something has happened, and 
the question is, is it grave enough to decide that he can no longer 
continue as president? Northrup has already lived through one political 
meat grinder over impeachment. In this fall's election, her democratic 
opponent hammered her for voting to go forward with the impeachment 
inquiry. She survived that, but now a lot of people in her district 
do not want to see the president on trial before the Senate. Let's 
go on, just like Clinton said. He wants to get on with his life, and 
I think the rest of the world does, too. So, voting against impeachment 
would be the smart political move for her, or would it? If she votes 
against impeachment, she could anger the republican base and draw 
opposition in the primary of 2000. In New Jersey, another republican, 
Frank LoBiondo, knows that dilemma well. A vote against impeachment 
could anger conservatives in his own party whose support is critical. 
A vote for impeachment could anger democrats who supported him in 
liberal areas like the casino town of Atlantic City. LoBiondo's district 
voted overwhelmingly for Bill Clinton. No matter what you do, you're 
going to make a lot of people mad in your district. That's right. 
And you just have to live with it. That's part of it. What I want 
to be able to do is to feel I put my best effort into this. Frankly, 
to impeach and continue the spectacle that's going on in washington, 
I think it's gotten to the point of being outrageous. The question 
of how LoBiondo will vote became an obsession on talk radio, especially 
after he hinted he might vote against impeachment. So what was the 
reaction? They went crazy. The lines lit up. And if LoBiondo doesn't 
vote for impeachment, even on one counsel the of perjury, I wouldn't 
vote for him for dog catcher because I am really upset with him. I 
will never vote for him again, even if he changes his mind now, because 
he's like -- he's like Clinton. Undeclared republicans know that politically 
there is no safe bet. Either way, they may lose. This afternoon, Frank 
LoBiondo announced he will vote for impeachment. John Cochran, ABC 
News, Atlantic City. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>