<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981214.2100.2338 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hillary Rod ham Clinton has been her husband's biggest supporter throughout 
their marriage, but the strains have become more evident of late. 
Some captured on camera. Here is Andrea Mitchell. She is drawing huge 
crowds. Today in the gazz ear strip. For the first time in 23 years 
of marriage, close friends say Hillary clinton is no longer the president's 
defender in chief. Whether in the Middle East, northern Ireland or 
the campaign trail back home, she is not lobbying to save her husband 
from the disgrace of impeachment. She is fighting for her issues, 
women and children and her role in history. I'm also pleased to be 
in golden gate park under any circumstances. In fact, she was in San 
Francisco last week talking about preserving historic gardens, unaware 
about his latest apology in the rose garden. Painful of the Con domination 
of the Congress would be, it would pale in comparison to the consequences 
of the pain I have caused my family. There is no greater agony. The 
agony is very apparent to close friends. In private, they describe 
an iciness between the Clintons. They perceive a distancing perhaps 
even notesable in public, very visible to cameras she brushes away 
his arm at the grave site of Yitzak Rabin yesterday. Flies in separate 
compa that of air force one last occasionally you get she manages 
to have some fun. Truly ext going to glamorous openings in New York, 
appearing with Rosie o'Donnell. He deals with Middle East one day, 
socks and buddy the next. And the first first lady to appear on the 
cover of "vogue," the December issue. She achieved so much under remarkably 
difficult circumstances and behave with such extraordinary dignity 
and courage, I think she was a symbol for american women everywhere. 
In fact, the latest poll shows Mrs. Clinton hat near record pop laret, 
54%. Why is she not using that to lobby Congress against impeachment? 
White House officials say because the target votes are not people 
she knows very well. Moderate republicans and consecutive democrats. 
More important friends say this is one defense team she ds not want 
to leave. She has seemed to emerged from the scandal stronger than 
ever. It is almost through the terrible things that happened to the 
Clintons this year that she has found her role. Now a leading contender 
for "time's" person cht year, a year she would surely rather forget. 
Andrea Mitchell, NBC news, Washington. The impeachment process is 
familiar to Hillary Clinton. 23 years ago she had a seat at the table 
when the py. Of Richard Nixon was under way. We have the report from 
"Dateline's" Chris Hansen. Everybody says how can you be so calm or 
look like you're not upset? In the darkest days she has been the pture 
of poise, the very definition of strength. I'm very proud of the person 
I'm privileged to introduce. I'm proud of his leadership, I'm proud 
of his commitment. But for Hillary Clinton, 1998 will be the year 
that Bill Clinton's presidency, the presidency she fought so hard 
to win -- The next president of the United States -- Came under fierce 
attack. The kind of attack another man and another presidency endured 
more 207b years ago. Tonight, let me explain to you what I did about 
Watergate after the break in occurred so that you can better understand 
the fact that I also had no knowledge of the so-called cover-up. In 
a curious way, Hillary Clinton had a front row seat on history then, 
too. That's her at a house Judiciary committee hearing, all of 26 
years old, a Young attorney hired on the impeachment committee's inquiry 
staff. It was 43 hand-picked lawyers, whose job was to determine whether 
there were grounds to impeachment President Richard Nixon. She was 
extremely bright, extremely able. Worked extremely hard. He worked 
on that staff with Hillary as did William well, the future republican 
governor of Massachusetts and Bernard nusbaum who followed her to 
the White House. You were among a team of lawyers that had to go back 
to the political history in this country to determine what constituted 
grounds for impeachment. Earlier. We had to go back to the British 
precedent. It goes back to parliamentary law and goes back to the 
12th century. Did you have a sense in 1974 that you and the young 
lawyers were making history? I think it' fes to say we were trying 
to help the committee members make history. We were trying to give 
them good advice. A daunting task, given the fact that last president 
to face impeachment was andrew Johnson, and that was back in 1868. 
In their research of history, he says he and Hillary and a handful 
of attorneys produced this report. They concluded that not all presidential 
misconduct is grounds for impeachment. It has to be conduct seriously 
incompatibleith the constitutional duties of the presidential office. 
And the 43 lawyers on the impeachment inquiry staff including Hillary 
helped prayer the finl report on President Nixon's impeachment. Obstruction 
of justice, abuse of presidential powers and contempt of congress. 
Some of the same charges now surrounding the man who become Hillary's 
husband. We need Shakespeare to write the play that could illuminate 
the irony for us. he He headed a task force that looked into Watergate 
and the cover-up. Who could have imagined that 24 years later she 
would be the wife of a President for whom an impeachment was going 
on in the same issues were coming up again? It is an ironi situation. 
I'm sure the irony is not lost at all on Hillary herself. It may not 
be lost on Bill Clinton as well. Listen to what he told a reporter 
back in 1974 when asked about president nixon's troubles? I think 
that definition should include any criminal acts, plus a willful failure 
of the topt fulfill his duty to uphold and execute the laws of the 
United States." He went on to say, "another factor that constitutes 
an ip peachable offense would be willful, reckless behavior in office." 
That's back when he was first making a thame for himself in politics. 
Running for Congress and commuting to Washington to visit Hillary. 
She brought him around at one point, and we were able to say hello 
to him. She was obviously quite proud of him. The rest is history. 
She went on to marry Bill Clinton. Soon enough, she was the first 
lady of Arkansas. I like being married to Bill Clinton, whether he 
was the governor or not. Being married to Bill Clinton curiously has 
brought Hillary Clinton full circle, confronting a thorny issue she 
thought she dealt with once and for all 24 years ago, never anticipating 
the possibility there would be a Second impeachment proceeding in 
this century, and that she would be in T middle of both of them. That 
report from "Dateline" NBC correspondent Chris Hansen. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>