<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981214.2100.0790 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the fate of this president, in effect, now resting in the hands 
of a Very few undecided members of the house, party leaders are lining 
up every last crucial vote they can. Some members bucking the party 
line. Republican congressman Peter king of New York who has been leading 
the party against impeachment is trying to pursuade a censure vote. 
And Gene Taylor from Mississippi, who was called for impeachment quarry 
back in September. From biloxi, Mississippi. Congressman king, were 
you surprised at Henry Hyde after presiding over the heeferings and 
taking great pains to say that we're thrige to do this in a Bipartisan 
way, went on the Sunday morning talk shows and called for the president 
to resign? I have a tremendous regard for Henry Hyde. There no one 
in the Congress I represent more than Henry. If he felt that's what 
he had to say, I will never second guess Henry Hyde. He did a fine 
job as chairman. He recommended what he thought was right, and so 
again, you're asking the wrong guy if you expect me to be critical 
of Henry Hyde. I won't. Are you worried that your party has so much 
riding on impeachment and only impeachment as we talk here tonight? 
Well, I don't think impeachment is a partisan issue. I'm against impeachment, 
not for the politics of it, but because I believe -- It has nothing 
to do with Bill inton. I believe we're setting a threshold which will 
damage the country in the future. I don't believe the crimes ich the 
president is accused rise to the level of impeachment. I don't think 
we disagree about E under lying molity of the president's action. 
I believe my position is stint with the republican party positions 
back during Watergate. As it's involved over the years, mine is strictly 
a constitutional issue. If we're perceived as trying to politicalize 
the impeachment process, it could hurt us. As long as we approach 
it with a legitimate and honorable way, let the chips fall where they 
may. Congressman Taylor, congressman king says it would be a bad thing 
to impeachment. Is it fair to sum up your position in sayingt would 
be a bad thing not to? We're a nation of laws. I believe the law has 
been broken by the nation's highest office Holder. This is one time 
I'm called upon to be a juror. I'm going to vote to say he committed 
perjury. That is a crime for you or I punishable by five years prison. 
I think contrary to what Pete said, that is a crime punishable, bad 
enough to warrant impeachment. Do you concur that this should be absent 
politics? And how can do you that? W can you remove? He's exactly 
right about this. This should not be about political parties this 
should be about right and wrong and whether or not the law was broken. 
Congressman Taylor, do you think you'll have more company among consecutive, 
moderate-leaning democrats as we get close to Thursday? I don't know. 
I think this will be a lot like the gulf war vote where everyone is 
getting an incredible amount of input wherever I go. Everyone has 
an opinion on it one way or the other. People have to look at the 
facts and hopefully we've done the right thing at the end of the day. 
Other people feel like they're getting the arm on them. Has the White 
House or any democratic-related organization called you? I've had 
a lobbyist hired by the White House call me. I have not had a direct 
call from the White House. I'm talking about the people I represent 
as I travel south of Mississippi, almost everyone I see has an opinion 
on this, whether to wrap it up, vote not to impeachment, vote to impeachment, 
everyone fells strongly about this one way or the other. What has 
been the volume of change of input? We were getting over 1,000 phone 
calls a day. There's been one change, last weeks the call were four 
to one against the president. Today they're 60-40 for them. The president's 
base was energized over the weekend when they realized that the whole 
prosct of impeachment may be very real. The phone calls generally 
go in concert with whoever is being heard at that moment. The president's 
people are rallying behind them. In the end, we have to make the decisions 
ourselves. People stop me in church, in the stores, this is on everyone's 
mind. In the end, we get paid to make the decision ourselves. As far 
as pressure, if we can't take the pressure, we shouldn't be in this 
business to begin with. We have to T in a short break. We'll be right 
back. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>