<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981214.2100.0052 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good Monday evening to you. There are signs tonight that Clinton house 
is losing the fight to survive an impeachment vote in the house. The 
news out of Washington is not good for Mr. Clinton. All indications 
are he faces a very tough time when he arrives back in the capital 
from the mideast. The president is too votes away from leaving the 
office. Looked at another way, there is more than enough time to strike 
the deal, for cooler heads to prevail to agree on some form of punishment. 
There is nothing in the short history of this long mess that would 
indicate the end of it will be any easier for the president or the 
United States. Mr. Clinton has had the chance to avoid punishment 
before. His final chance could be just days away now. We have a series 
of reports on this tonight. We'll be joined live by some who represent 
the crucial votes in the house. First the president under fire while 
overseas. Et's begin with David Bloom at the White House. Today even 
as President Clinton became the first U.S. leader to set foot in palestinian-held 
territory, he Con tronted the prospect he could become the second 
president to be impeached in the house and face trial in the Senate. 
He appears weary and attached, today I appealed to republicans saying 
he's open T to any CD-rom prigse. I don't believe it's in the interest 
of the United States of the American people to go through this impeachment 
process. The number of house republicans who say they'll definitely 
vote against impeachment, today dropped from five to only four. The 
republican congressman who today defected from the president's camp 
is connecticut's Christopher Shays. He maintains he wants to vote 
against impeachment, but is angered by President Clinton's sted fast 
refusal to admit he lied under oath. I'm having second thoughts because 
the president of the United States made an outrageous statement that 
makes me feel he still doesn't get it. The White House today intensified 
its media blitz. The esident's lawyers, political advisors, even the 
vice president, arguing it's unfair not to aloy the full house to 
vote on a democratic alternative censuring the president. What the 
leadership of the Congress has done is to prevent any kind of compromise 
along the lines that the American people want to see. So the president's 
democratic allies have launched a grassroots campaign. We're calling 
to tell people about a rally tonight in support of thement against 
impeachment. The Reverend Jesse Jackson is planning a prayer vigil 
on the steps of the capitol Thursday. These mean-spirited leaders 
do not want Mr. Clinton to have contrition or an apology, they want 
to ram a dagger through his heart. They hope a public backlash might 
spook republicans into allowing a censure vote. I don't think they're 
going to produce an outrage barricade in the street defense of the 
president. Tonight a democratic close to the White House said the 
president is in "Deep trouble." He adds every time Mr. Clinton opens 
his mouth and denies he committed perjury, the odds of cut be a censure 
deal gets smaller. David Bloom, the White House. Mr. are private predictions 
tonight the republicans have the votes for impeachment. It will come 
down to a few undecided medication of Congress. As Lisa Myers reports 
tonight, the vote counting is under way. They are getting enormous 
pressure from both sides. Republican Jay Dickey of Arkansas says the 
pressure is like 12 hours of surgery without ans these yafment at 
home today in his district which includes the president's hometown, 
he is having a miserable 59th birthday. It's a tough decision for 
you. After the speech he's worked over by local democratic mayors. 
No one promised me anything or threatened me anything like the White 
House did this is the most powerful offi in the world. The four who 
left the ranks of undecided today are relieved to have finally made 
a decision. Voters pressured Wamp at basketball games. Now Wamp says 
he'll vote two articles of impeachment. There is sufficient evidence 
to send those articles to the Senate for trial. Still undecided, as 
the facts sink in opinion in his district is shifting. The more the 
president denies, seems the worse it's getting for him. In San Diego, 
republican brn Bilbray is bombarded by calls. Plee hold. And by E-mail. 
He got 3,500 amails just yesterday, evenly split for and against the 
president. He believes he will be hurt politically no matter how he 
votes. Some of us are being attacked because we're trying to give 
the president the benefit of the doubt. That somehow is a high crime 
by some people. Most ofhese moderate republicans deny being directly 
reatened by croivein their party. Immediately after the last republican 
came out against impeachment, a Consecutive announced he would challenge 
him. As for Jay Dickey, he fares E worst no matter how he votes. He 
may well lose his seat in the next election and pay the price for 
the president's misconduct. Lisa Myers, NBC news, Washington. In addition 
to the president's answers to reporters questions during his Middle 
East trip this week, the White House is making surrogates available 
to speak to them. Amon them is Anne Lewis. What are the chances we'll 
hear something of substance prior to the vote? We'll see the president 
is off right now as you've said, ing what he ought to do, which isoing 
the job of being president. He's off in the Middle East working on 
some very important issues. I think it'ser who important he concentrate 
on efforts to bring Israelis and Palestinians to end that conflict 
in the Middle East. There is time to think about next steps when he 
returns. That is a possible next step? I'm not going to rule anything 
in or out. Just suggest we keep perspective here. What the 79 is doing 
right now is so important in the Middle East. Those of us here ought 
to be using the opportunity as I am to speak to the public. Is admitting 
to perjury a firm deal breaker? As I understand congressman chase 
wants to speak to the esiden that's something they'll be talking about 
I am not going to preclude what the outcome of that meeting would 
be. I want to be cautious. When put like that, I would say, what exactly 
is it he would be acknowledging? Let's see, I only read comments from 
congressman Shays. He wants to come in as I understand it and has 
a suggestion, certainly what we're talking about here is very series. 
We're really talking about right now a partisan effort by me duck 
Congress to remove a present who has been elected twice by the American 
people. A president people went to the polls just last month to show 
their support, highly unusual a midterm election. In the face of that 
overwemming and regularly demonstrated public support, to see a wholely 
poll process attempting to remove him, on a case which we have now 
seen bipartisan federal prosecutors say no prosecutor would bring 
this case to court. It's a very serious question bere us. A lot of 
people thought the matter was moot, then you're seeing a lot more 
in the media, members of Congress interviewed, expressing thr anger. 
We have one later on, at the president's last public statement. There 
will be some democrats, for example, voting for impeachment. Well, 
I would be even more troubled and perhaps I will hear it and so'll 
be listening, but the idea someone would vote for impeachment because 
you don't like a statement the president made last Friday, we're in 
danger of trivializing the constitution here. What wasn't in the statement, 
either impeachment is about act. It is not supposed to be about rhetoric. 
I would be very questioning people saying I wasn't going to vote for 
impeachment, but now that I listened to a four-minute stement, there 
weren't rds in it I want to ar. Impeachment is not a punishment for 
bad rhetoric or incomete speeches. Impeachment in the constitutn was 
bribery, high crimes. It was really a danger to our government. We 
now see it being used in a very partisan manner. It's as if people 
are saying, he didn't sayxactly way wanted him to say, i'll vote to 
impeachment. That debases the constitution and trivializes the process. 
This is bad for the country. In the condwe have remaining, are you 
aware of any personal calls the president made to unannounced or undecided 
members of Congress? I am not? ok. Ann Les, thank you fordoming on 
the air with us tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>