<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981214.2100.1560 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The serious turn in the impeachment process in Washington has not 
gone unnoticed overseas. Newspapers that prethlessly covered the details 
of the entire Lewinsky scandal are closely watching the latest developments 
in Congress. Charles Sabine joins us from London. Good evening to 
you. Good evening, Brian. Back in September those papers were fascinated 
with the extraordinary aspects of the Starr report. It seemed like 
a Hollywood movie. Day by day that interest is being replaced by the 
sober realization it is not fiction. The whole affair could have a 
serious and long-term effect on the citizens of the whole world. As 
if the tight rope of Middle Eastern politics wasn't tough enough, 
the president has to deal with the opinion of him outside the United 
States. Seemed at best distracted from world affairs and using the 
trip from the holly land to escape the heat in Washington. One Israeli 
puppet went to suggest he M need Divine intervex to save his presidency. 
It's all going sour again to President Clinton. The president is portrayed 
as a man once more with his back to the wall, with whom stress is 
the key emotion right now. The strain was written clearly on his face. 
European newspapers lost the lurid headlines of September's Starr 
revelations. Now some describe Washington as a madhouse. Their editorials 
challenge the president to admit to lying and acknowledge his private 
actions had profound consequences for the institution of the presidency. 
On the streets though, it seems that fascination with the presidential 
soap opera is running out of steam. I think they should leave him 
alone. Why should people worry what he does in private sth As for 
foreign governments, no official reaction from them to theecent developments. 
The president may well now be seriously distracted from hugely important 
wor affairs for several months to come. Brian? What's the level of 
interest compared to, I know the O.J. Simpson story was closely followed 
over there. Well, yes. It's very interesting. A lot of tabloids here 
in particular are making comparisons with the O.J. simpson trial, 
and saying that is going to be the level of distraction thought's 
going to be worldwide. Those tabloids if you remember, were concentrating 
with the lurid headlines not long ago. Now they're taking a moral 
high ground. For the sake of the world, the sooner this is over, the 
better. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>