<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981214.2100.1806 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Behind the scenes of the house Judiciary committee and out of range 
of its not-always high's minded debate, there were some members trying 
to find a Bipartisan solution quitely. -- Quietly one joins us since 
the Congress took up the evidence, democrat howard Bern is with us 
this evening from Los Angeles. I'm curious for your reaction about 
Henry Hyde going on one of the Sunday shows and calling for the president's 
resignation after he had just presided over so many weeks of hearings. 
Well, I know that that's been Henry's feeling for a long ti. The president 
is not going to resign. I think everyone should understand that this 
decision is going to have to be made by the House of Representatives. 
And perhaps by extension by the Senate, do you think it will get that 
far? It's 50-50, too close to call. I think it would be a very big 
mistake for the house to vote for impeachment, to thwart the will 
of the people as expressed in the 1996 election when you examine the 
tote yalt of the president's conduct and the context in which it was 
undertaken. It's really too close to call now. We had earer on this 
broadcast, congressman Taylor of Mississippi, he's going to vote for 
impeachment. For impeachment to fly, they'll need a lot of help. A 
lot of the moderates are breaking their way. What do you think is 
going on behind the scenes? I think people are really trying to examine 
this and do what's right, but the way I look at it, there are three 
reasons not to support impeachment. The first and in some ways the 
least important, is that while this is not just about sex it is colored 
by sex. The second reason is what's the standard by which you, we 
in the House of Representatives, decide to expunge the people's will 
as reflected in that election when the center of graft does not want 
this president impeached. They do not want him removed from office. 
That's a very major question, which many of my colleagues that are 
supporting impeachment really do not dwell on. They focus on his conduct, 
but don't focus on the consequences and the effects of nullifying 
the results of that election. The Devil's advocate response is what 
did you get elected for? If polls were to dictate public policy, there 
would be scant room for courage or Con vicks among elected representatives. 
I would argue a vote for impeachment may be the one vote where your 
own feelings should play a subordinate role to expressing the people's 
will. If you're going to abrow gate that vote, the consent for the 
government is very important and it is not there no chance for it 
at this point? The -- the leadership of the republicans seem to want 
to make it an impossible option, they don't want to give the members 
of the house a Chance to reflect on the different kinds of things 
they wanted to do, and unless they relent there will not be that option. 
Congressman, I thank you very much for joining us tonight from Los 
Angeles. We appreciate your time. Coming on to talk about this case 
that has taken up so many weeks and months of your time as member 
of the house Judiciary committee. Howard Berman, democrat of California. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>