<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981214.1830.0979 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight, a very different Hillary Clinton. It 
has happened so many times in her long marriage to Bill Clinton, a 
Public scandal that touches, even threatens, their private and political 
lives. In the past she has stood beside him, offering advice, strength 
and very public signs of support. What about this time? NBC's Andrea 
Mitchell tonight, "in depth." She is drawing huge crowds today in 
the Gaza strip. But for the first time in 23 years of marriage, close 
friends say Hillary rodham Clinton is no longer the president's defender 
in chief. Whether in the Middle East, northern Ireland or the campaign 
trail back home, she is not lobbying to save her husband from the 
disgrace of impeachment. She is fighting for her issues, women and 
children, and her role in history. I'm always pleased in be in golden 
gate park under any circumstances. In fact she was in San Francisco 
last week talking about preserving historic gardens, completely unaware, 
friends say, about his latest apology in the rose garden. Painful 
though the condemnation of the Congress would be, it would pale in 
comparison to the consequences of the pain I have caused my family. 
There is no greater agony. The agony is very apparent to close friends. 
In private, they describe an iciness between the Clintons unlike any 
previous family crisis. They perceive a distancing, perhaps even noticeable 
in public, barely visible to cameras. She brushes away his arm at 
the gravesite of yitzhak Rabin yesterday, flies in a separate compartment 
of air force one last week. But while he struggles for his political 
life, she manages to have some fun. Going to glamorous openings in 
New York, appearing with Rosie O'Donnell. My husband deals with the 
Middle East one day and sock and buddy the next day. And the very 
first first lady to appear on the cover of "vogue," the December issue. 
We felt that she achieved so much under remarkably difficult circumstances, 
and behaved with such extraordinary dignity and courage, that I think 
she was a symbol for American women everywhere. In fact, the latest 
NBC news/"Wall Street Journal" poll shows mrs. Clinton at near-record 
popularity -- 54%. Why isn't she using that to lobby Congress against 
impeachment? Because the target votes are not people she knows very 
well. Moderate republicans and conservative democrats. But more important 
friends say this is one defense team she does not want to lead, although 
she seems to have emerged from this scandal stronger than ever. It's 
almost through the terrible things that have happened to the Clintons 
this year that she's found her role in some way, in fact, now a leading 
contender for "time's" person of the year. Even though, friends say, 
she would surely rather forget. Andrea Mitchell, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>