<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981214.1830.1594 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight, "the fleecing of America." And in this case, a particularly 
cruel version. This is a time of the year when most people feel a 
little more generous. And so it is a prime time for charitable fund-raising. 
But knowing that, the Con artist can enter the picture. Especially 
with the reach and anonymity of telemarketing. NBC's Robert Hager. 
a terrible warehouse fire in chesapeake, Virginia. Two firemen, dead. 
Families grieve, and then are further shocked to find telemarketers 
calling around, claiming to be raising money for relatives. Families 
say, in the end, they got nothing. Victim John Hudgins, Jr., whose 
father says the calls were a scam. I was very hurt about that, knowing 
there was people in this world who would do something like that. Take 
somebody's tragedy and use it to make money for themselves. Another 
case -- a summer camp for burn victims in San Diego. The institute 
that runs it also hears unauthorized telemarketers are soliciting 
on its behalf. We actually had calls from little old ladies who were 
terrified, who had the representative from the telemarketing company 
on their front Porch there to pick up a check and calling us and asking 
us, "should we give them the check? Is this legitimate?" The summer 
camp says it was not legitimate. It got none of the money. The federal 
trade commission says fraudulent fund-raising using the names of police, 
fire, and veterans organizations, is a nationwide problem, a "Fleecing" 
that costs unwary givers millions every year. The FTC charges the 
calls, claiming to be for families of the Virginia firefighters, as 
well as calls for the San Diego burn camp were in reality, deceptive, 
arranged by a California firm called north American charitable services. 
The firm's lawyer claims no illegal activities, wouldn't talk about 
specifics of cases under litigation, but says it helps charities that 
provide much needed services and is countersuing, charging the FTC 
lacks jurisdiction. It's not the FTC's business who you or I give 
our charitable dollars to. But the FTC says there are many shady fund-rasing 
ventures, cases now brought in 41 states where money given has been 
misdirected. It goes into the solicitors' pockets, for the most part. 
Sometimes a small amount might go to an organization, the ones we're 
talking about, the solicitors are keeping the money. And the FTC says 
there's special reason to be careful now, during the holidays, when 
40% of giving takes place, and potential donors are vulnerable to 
a "fleecing" of American generosity. Robert Hager, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>