<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981214.1830.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The vote in the house will be decided by a handful of undecided representatives, 
most of them moderate republicans. They're getting enormous pressure 
from both sides. Tonight, NBC's Lisa Myers takes the measure of this 
group critical to Bill clinton's future. Republican Jay Dickey of 
Arkansas says the pressure is like 12 hours of surgery without anesthesia. 
At home today in his district, which includes the president's hometown, 
dickey is having a miserable 59th birthday. I know it's a tough decision 
for you. After a speech, he was taken behind closed doors and worked 
over by democratic mayors. No within promised me anything or threatened 
me anything like the White House did. This is the most powerful office 
in the world. The four who left the ranks of undecided today are relieved 
to have finally made a decision. Voters pressure Tennessee's Wamp 
even at basketball games. His calls ran four to one against the president. 
Now, Wamp says he'll vote for two articles of impeachment, There is 
sufficient evidence to send those articles to the Senate for trial. 
Still undecided, Bob Ney of Ohio says, as the facts sink in, opinion 
in his district is shifting. The more the president denies, it seems, 
the worse it gets for him, based on the calls we're getting. In San 
Diego, Brian Bilbray is bombarded by calls. Bilbray, can you hold? 
Bilbray can you hold. And by E-mail. He got 3,500 E-mails just yesterday, 
evenly split for and against the president. He believes he'll be hurt 
politically no matter how he votes and is feeling intense heat from 
longtime supporters. Some of us are being attacked because we are 
trying to give the president the benefit of the doubt. And that somehow 
is a "high crime" by some people. Most of these moderate republicans 
deny being directly threatened by conservatives in their party. Immediately 
after the last republican came out against impeachment, a Conservative 
announced he would challenge him in the next election. As for Jay 
Dickey, he fears the worst no matter how he votes, even if the president 
survives, he says he may very well lose his seat in the next election. 
And end up paig the prize fors president's misconduct. Lisa Myers, 
NBC news, Washington. How does this work on Thursday? How does this 
play out on the floor? Gren Ifill covers this. What can we expect? 
We can expect the house committee to give its final report early wednesday 
morning. Then it goes to the house floor on Thursday for probably 
as little as six hours of debate but more likely more in which democrat 
will try to find an effort to get a censure Bill on the floor. And 
it could last into Friday. What's going on in the house offices right 
now? They are swamped by phone calls. You can't get through. E-mails, 
phone calls, everything to change people's minds. No one knows which 
way they are going. The one people who aren't calling, the White House. 
Thanks very much. We won't know until the vote has been cast. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>