<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981214.1830.0072 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. Now we're down to just two days, Tuesday and Wednesday, 
before the full House of Representatives takes up the question of 
whether to impeach the president, that is, charge him with high crimes 
and misdemeanors as the constitution states, and then send the case 
on to the Senate for trial. And if two-thirds of the Senate believes 
he is guilty, President Bill clinton is gone from the office that 
he won in two elections. Those are the rules and the consequences 
of what has been a long, sordid and painful ordeal. Tonight the president 
continues on his peace-keeping trip to Israel, but impeachment is 
a persistent presence. NBC's Claire Shipman is traveling with the 
president. Claire? Tom, a president found the two high stakes crisis 
in which he is the central player colliding. The president made history 
in Gaza today as the first U.S. leader to visit palestinian-held territory, 
but all the while, he was dogged by the looming impeachment vote at 
home. He was treated to a hero's welcome and praise by a grateful 
yaser Arafat. In support of the peace process. Would you please race 
your hands. As he witnessed the centerpiece of the trip, Palestinian 
delegates voting symbolically to remove language from their charter 
about the destruction of Israel. President Clinton savored the victory 
which was also acceptable to Israel, though diplomats caution that 
move alone isn't enough to revive the floundering peace process. You 
and they must determine what kind of peace you will have. Will it 
be grudging and mean spirited and confining, or will it be generous 
and open? But at the same time, the president was sharply focused 
on washington and the vote on his impeachment. The questions at an 
early morning session with reporters were inevitable. Sources say 
aides told him not to Dodge for fear of seeming cavalier about his 
own fate. I don't believe it's in the interest of the United States 
and the American people to go through this impeachment process and 
have a trial in the senate. And in surreal scenes around Gaza, as 
the president played peacemaker, advisers grabbed available phones 
to call Washington to check on the vote count. Manied avirers are 
grim about the president's chances to avoid impeachment. The president 
himself? Friends say he's worried but hopeful he can win. The president's 
personal history is full of near disasters. tom? Claire Shipman traveling 
with the president in the Middle East tonight. So, where does the 
president go from here? What does he do? Aides close to the president 
say they have no secret, dramatic plans at the moment, but anything 
is possible. But what's probable and what will help the president? 
NBC's David Bloom is at the White House. Tom, tonight, instead of 
picking up votes, the White House appears to be losing them. When 
the day began, five republicans were thought to be firmly in the anti-impeachment 
camp. Now there are only four. Even those supporters, we are told, 
are wavering. The republican congressman who Gee fekted from the president's 
camp is christopher Shays. He maintains he wants to vote against impeachment 
but is angered by the president's refusal to admit he lied under oath. 
I'm having second thoughts. The president of the United States on 
Friday made an outrageous statement that makes me feel he doesn't 
get T As republican support eroded, the White House intensified its 
media blitz. The president's lawyers, political advisers, even the 
vice president, arguing it's unfair not to allow the full house to 
vote on a democratic alternative, censuring the president. What the 
leadership of Congress has done is to prevent any kind of compromise 
along the lines that the American people want to see. So the president's 
democratic allies have launched a campaign. We are calling to tell 
people about a rally tonight. In support of the president against 
the impeachment. Rainbow coalition. The Reverend Jessie Jackson is 
planning a prayer vigil Thursday. These mean-spirited leaders, they 
don't want contrition or an apology. They want the ram, a dagger through 
his heart. The White House hopes a public backlash might spook republicans 
into allowing a censure vote. Polling experts are sceptical. Don't 
think they will produce an outrage barricade in the street defense 
of the president. Tonight a democrat close to the president says he's 
in deep trouble and says that every time Mr. Clinton opens his mouth 
and denies he committed perjury, the odds of cutting a deal with republicans 
grows smaller. tom? Thanks, David Bloom, at the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>