<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981214.2000.0371 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullens. In some ways, it was a bizarre 
scene. Nearly 6,000 miles from Washington where he's being threatened 
with impeachment, President Clinton was given a hero's welcome in 
a place not generally hospitable to American leaders. On the first 
presidential visit ever to Palestinian territory, Mr. Clinton applauded 
today's vote by the Palestine National Council to renounce the anti-Israeli 
passages in its charter. He predicted the move would bring Palestinians 
and Israelis closer together. Tomorrow, Mr. Clinton will bring the 
leaders of the two sides closer together in a high-stakes summit meeting. 
We'll have more on that in a moment. But first, we turn to The World's 
Richard Myron for this report on the president's day in Gaza. President 
Clinton's Marine 1 helicopter with the stars and stripes on its tailfin 
touched down at the newly-opened Gaza International Airport, one of 
the fruits of the troubled Wye Memorandum. Mr. Clinton arrived from 
Jerusalem on this, the second stop of his 3-day trip to the Middle 
East. Accompanied by the first lady, the president was welcomed to 
Palestine-controlled territory by Palestine leader Yasir Arafat. We 
asked President Clinton and his wife to do us the honor of cutting 
the ribbon to inaugurate the airport, he said, and then with smiles, 
warmth and laughter, both leaders cut off sections of the ribbon to 
take away as souvenirs. In Gaza, there was an Arab celebration. On 
a street corner in Gaza City, a children's pipe band entertained people 
as they wandered, chanted and enjoyed the day. Banners have been strung 
across the street with messages to the American leader saying we have 
a dream, the same as you, and most welcome, Mr. President, in Palestine. 
Uzafel Ferani, the deputy head master of a girl's high school, led 
his pupils onto the street to wave American flags and to celebrate 
the visit of Bill Clinton. speaking, this is a feast day, and we welcome 
the leader of peace, Mr. Clinton, in the land of peace, Palestine. 
We hope our living circumstances will improve slowly by slowly. Clinton, 
like the other European leaders and presidents, realize without any 
doubt that we want peace and love peace. Gaza was awash with the stars 
and stripes. Flags hung from trees, lampposts and department buildings. 
On other occasions, Palestinian demonstrators have burned the flag 
to protest what they consider America's pro-Israeli policies. But 
Palestinian legislator, Hanana Shrowey, said today she hopes President 
Clinton's visit marks a new U.S. approach. I believe that there is 
a beginning of addressing some of the injustice under this equilibrium 
because American relations have always been dominated by the strategic 
alliance with Israel, and of course, their whole policy towards the 
Middle East and the Arab world in particular, has been dominated by 
the tail wagging the dog, so to speak. So I believe it is time that 
American policy declares its independence and shows some political 
will in order to be less biased or to start forging relationships 
that are more even-handed. From the airport, the president went to 
Yasir Arafat's office where he met some tearful children whose fathers 
are in Israeli jails. The continued imprisonment of Palestinians is 
one of the major issues separating the two sides and a reason for 
the president's visit. Another reason was to attend a meeting of the 
Palestinian National Council as it voted to revoke sections of its 
charter calling for the destruction of Israel. At a conference in 
the center of Gaza, the delegates responded to Yasir Arafat's call 
for them to do their duty. Would you please raise your hands in support 
of this? Please raise your hands. The first person to congratulate 
the gathered dignitaries was their guest President Clinton. He spoke 
to them of his hope that despite bad relations between the Israeli 
and Palestinian leaders, the peoples could find a way to peace. You 
did a good thing today in raising your hands. You know why? It has 
nothing to do with the government in Israel. You will touch the people 
of Israel. The obvious warmth today between Yasir Arafat and Mr. Clinton 
stood in contrast to the sometimes awkward atmosphere between the 
president and the Israel prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu. But after 
a day of uplift and ceremony, Mr. Clinton must now get on with the 
hardest part of his trip: to bring Arafat and Netanyahu together for 
head-to-head negotiations. For The World, this is Richard Myron in 
Gaza. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>