<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981214.2000.2996 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullens. Now showing at a theater near 
you, if you have to live near New York's Museum of Modern Art, is 
a series of cinema novo of Brazil; literally new cinema. This new 
wave of films was born in the early 1960s out of a desire to create 
a Brazilian film culture free of foreign influence. As The World's 
Beth Ackamondo reports, that influence came primarily from Hollywood 
and from one Hollywood star in particular. With her broken English 
and wildly improbable tutti-fruity hats, Carmen Miranda came to represent 
Latin American women for U.S. film-goers in the 1940s. But many Americans 
won't remember that Carmen Miranda came from Brazil or that she was 
one of the biggest stars to come off the back lots of 20th Century 
Fox. The exotic Hollywood image of Carmen Miranda affected not only 
the world's perception of Brazil, but also Brazil's perception of 
itself. Brazilian film maker Helena Salburg became so fascinated with 
Miranda's image that she made the documentary, Carmen Miranda: Bananas 
Is My Business, in 1995. The way the image of Carmen was in a sense 
taken by the Americans and transformed in something else was something 
that absolutely fascinated me. The dilemma she had about translating 
herself, I think you always lose something in that translation. But 
once the translation entered the Hollywood lexicon, it became the 
standard for Latin American actresses. In Salburg's documentary, actress 
Rita Moreno describes the impact Carmen Miranda had on the next generation 
of Latinas. I came here as a young Latin girl. I was very young when 
I came to this country, and I quickly found out that the only way 
to have people pay attention to you is to be vivacious and fiery. 
So you had to be a very exaggerated caricaturized person for the American 
movie people to pay attention to you. Brazilian film maker Jose Arollo 
sees this Hollywood influence extending to his own country's cinema. 
In trying to conquer our public, we have a lot of film makers, they 
try to sort of imitate Hollywood films. And so the roles are a lot 
based on that, and Brazil somehow tries to portray this image to the 
world that is this sort of sexy country, and that women are sexy, 
that people should love Brazil because women wear bikinis and all 
that. But it is sort of them representing themselves the way that 
the people of the outside see them, so they're looking at a Brazil 
that is interpreted by the outside. But cinema novo, the Brazilian 
film movement of the 1960s, spawned a new breed of film makers who 
wanted to interpret Brazil from the inside, not the outside. Brazilian 
film maker Helena Salburg says cinema novo directors reacted harshly 
to the Hollywood portrait of Brazil. I think for my generation, the 
effort to try to actually show the country in a way that wasn't just 
a copy of a cinema that came from outside, you know, but to find our 
own images and our own language in cinematography was very, very important, 
I think, for my generation. In films such as Porta de Casas, They 
Don't Wear Black Ties in the deceased. Cinema novo film makers turned 
Hollywood stereotypes of Brazilian women on their heads. Uti Yensen, 
curator of the film series Cinema Novo And Beyond at the Museum of 
Modern Art in New York, says these days, images of women in Brazil 
continue the trend of realism set forth in the 1960s. I think that 
a lot of the films made in the '90s, but actually also films of the 
'70s and '80s, depict the very hot times and the very big social difficulties 
for women. For instance, film by Leon Hirschman, They Don't Wear Black 
Ties. The women are very, very strong characters, but it's also shown 
that their influence in society is very questionable; however, they 
end up being the ones that you remember very often. The strength of 
Brazilian women is evident in the 1996 film, Landscapes of Memory 
by Jose Arollo. The film depicts age, powerfully dignified women who 
offer a stark contrast to the flashy legacy of Carmen Miranda. Arollo 
sets the film in Brazil's harsh Zutal Desert where women are in a 
daily struggle against the environment. The women are very -- under 
these circumstances, usually the women, they hold on much more strongly 
than men. Men, they tend to weaken more if they lose their ground. 
Also, the fact that we're talking about land and the connection of 
the feminine side and the land and the earth, and all these elements 
that have to do with life. So the image of women are crucial in that 
sense of redemption through faith and through believing in life even 
if you are living under difficult circumstances. The need to use film 
as part of an ongoing social and political dialogue has fueled Brazilian 
cinema since the beginning of the cinema novo movement. For Arollo, 
film is also a vital part of enriching Brazilian culture. And there 
is an understanding from the part of the government and from the part 
of society that we do have to have a cinema because that's our mirror, 
that's how we see ourselves; otherwise, we totally forget who we are. 
For The World, this is Beth Ackamondo reporting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>