<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981214.2000.0670 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
That summit is scheduled to begin tomorrow on the border between Israel 
and Gaza. Heme Scheleve, diplomatic editor of the Israeli newspaper 
Maharib, says hopes that the summit could revive the Wye peace accord 
are unlikely to be fulfilled. I don't think there's been a breakthrough, 
at least from the Israeli point of view, despite the fact that prime 
minister Netanyahu has recognized the Palestinian nullification of 
the anti-Israeli clauses in the charter. Nonetheless, he does not 
sound as if he's prepared for a breakthrough. I think the summit is 
being held in order to see, in order for President Clinton to see 
whether he cannot extract some last-minute concessions from the Israeli 
side so that Yasir Arafat, as it were, would be rewarded for the deeds 
that he did today with the Palestinian National Council. I expect 
that the summit will probably last for quite a while, for several 
hours. And I think that what the president is looking for and what 
Yasir Arafat is looking for is at least some concession concerning 
the burning issue of the prisoners. I don't think President Clinton 
is under any illusion that he can get the peace process back on track 
altogether in anticipation of this Friday's expected withdrawal. Well, 
let's talk about that prisoner issue that you mentioned which seems 
to be one of the main sticking points. Palestinians are saying that 
Israel is not living up to its commitment under the Wye accord to 
release Palestinians who are involved in fighting for Palestinian 
interests; in other words, political prisoners. But instead, they 
say, that Israel is releasing primarily common criminals. In fact, 
apparently, some of the young daughters, about 11 years old, of some 
of these prisoners who are still in Israeli prisons, spoke to President 
Clinton today in kind of a tearful plea that he try and get their 
fathers released. How pivotal an issue is this, and how moveable does 
it seem to be? It's very pivotal. I think even the Palestinian leadership 
was surprised by the vehemence of the Palestinian emotion concerning 
this issue, the emotion of people on the street. On the other hand, 
I must say that I think most Israelis were taken aback by the fact 
that President Clinton seemed to put both the victims of terror and 
the terrorists themselves on the same plane and made a comparison 
between them. If we look at prime minister Netanyahu's statements 
up until now, they've been very tough and it doesn't seem as if there's 
any leeway there. On the other hand, we do know that other Israeli 
ministers have been a bit more flexible. We also know that the Israeli 
defense establishment has been a bit more flexible. I wouldn't rule 
out the possibility that there will be way for Netanyahu to find some 
way of releasing at least, let's say, 20, 30, 40 more prisoners, and 
then our side will be able to say that at least he's had some small 
achievement. I wonder if you can make a comment about President Clinton's 
ability to deal and intervene in the peace process at this point, 
and whether or not it's been affected by the moves back here in the 
United States toward his possible impeachment. Well, I'm sure that 
his political predicament has been playing a role in the attitudes 
of both Arafat and Netanyahu, perhaps more so Netanyahu, who seemed 
to be quite tough with the president, perhaps thinking that this is 
not a time that the president would like to enter into a confrontation 
with him when he needs every vote in the House of Representatives. 
On the other hand, one must remember that President Clinton is the 
most popular person in the world, both in Israel and now, it seems, 
in the Palestinian territories. He has great personal prestige here. 
From that point of view, he does -- he is effective in intervening 
perhaps now more by virtue of his own personal standing than by the 
powers of the presidency which seem to be in some trouble. Heme Scheleve 
is diplomatic editor of the Israeli newspaper Maharib speaking to 
us from Jerusalem. Thank you. Good night. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>