<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981214.2000.2448 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Delegates to an international conference on Bosnia are putting the 
final touches on a draft plan to strengthen the peace process in the 
former Yugoslavia. Among the goals of the Peace Implementation Council, 
which opens its meeting tomorrow in Madrid, is the return of Bosnian 
refugees to the homes they fled during the 4-year war. But an estimated 
20,000 Bosnians disappeared during the war, and their families have 
been left to wonder whether they'll ever see their loved ones again. 
The World's Jackie Roland sent us this report from Sareyevo . It's 
a.m., the start of another day for Esma Pallech. First, Esma takes 
her two daughters to the local kindergarten, then she goes to Sareyevo 
University where she's finishing a degree program that was interrupted 
by the war. Esma's daily routine keeps her going. For more than 3 
years, she's been waiting for news of her husband, Afto, a commander 
in the Bosnian Muslim army. One night toward the end of the war, as 
Esma remembers it, her husband went to negotiate with the Bosnian 
Serbs. He was so calm. He held my hand and told me life was just beginning, 
that the war would soon be over. Then it was time for me to leave. 
He took me in his arms and hugged me and kissed me. And that was the 
last time I saw him. When the war ended, Esma desperately wanted to 
learn what had happened to Afto, but her local politicians told her 
to keep quiet. If Afto was alive and being held prisoner, they said, 
it was best to avoid publicity. But after a year of silence, Esma 
had had enough. It was time to put Afto and the thousands of other 
missing people onto the political agenda. No one cares about the missing, 
not the international community nor the local authorities. The only 
ones who care, the only ones who are suffering are the families, and 
we are powerless to do anything. Esma started her search for Afto 
through the International Red Cross. The organization has received 
requests for help in tracing 20,000 people who disappeared during 
the Bosnian war. In the 3 years since the war ended, just 1/10 of 
these cases have been resolved. The exhumation of mass graves around 
Bosnia is a crucial part of the investigative process. Red Cross workers 
admit there's little chance that many of the missing will be found 
alive, but it's still important to clarify their fate. Esma's case 
worker, Natasha Miskin, says all the families she deals with have 
the same need. They have to know is the person dead or is the person 
alive? Before they find the information about the fate of the missing 
relative, they cannot start to live a normal life again. Most of the 
missing in Bosnia are Muslims. More than 7,000 disappeared during 
the fall of Shrebenizyr alone. But there are also hundreds of Croatian 
Serb families who live in uncertainty about missing relatives. Christopher 
Bennett, a political analyst based in Sareyevo, says the fate of the 
missing is an issue that cuts across the ethnic divide. The families 
of the missing, whether Serb, Croatian, Muslim, have actually been 
brought together on a regular basis and are lobbying within their 
own ethnic communities for the opening of mass graves, for example; 
lobbying with their own ethnic leaders to open mass graves on behalf 
of families of the missing of other ethnic groups. It's actually one 
of the best examples of multi-ethnic cooperation here. For Esma Pallech 
and her daughters, the wait continues. Esma has gotten scraps of news 
over the years, but there's been no concrete information. One man 
says he heard Afto's voice through a prison wall, another claims he 
glimpsed Afto through a keyhole. Through it all, Esma hasn't given 
up hope. Realistically, I know he might not be alive. No matter how 
hard it is, I must accept the truth and I can't rest until I know 
the truth. But 'til I find out for certain what happened to him, I 
must believe my husband is still alive. International officials in 
Bosnia acknowledge that resolving the issue of the missing is a crucial 
part of the peace process. There can be no real reconciliation in 
Bosnia until thousands of families can close the chapter on their 
missing loved ones. For The World, this is Jackie Roland in Sareyevo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>