<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981214.2000.1255 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullens. The complex rules governing international 
trade tend to be so indecipherable, not to mention dull, that we admit 
that it can be hard to understand the stories, let alone explain them. 
But the story The World's Steven Beard is about to tell about tariffs, 
global economic trends, and perhaps even a trade war between the United 
States and the European union, revolves around a simple tropical fruit. 
Yes, indeed, the latest furious row between Washington and Brussels 
is about bananas. The U.S. wants the European Union to open up its 
markets to the Latin American variety. If the EU continues to refuse, 
the U.S. will slap huge tariffs on $1 billion worth of European imports. 
This could be the opening shot in a trade war at a time when the world 
economy looks increasingly fragile. EU trade commissioner Sir Leon 
Britain is appalled at the American action. It's very bad for relations 
between Europe and the United States, and it's unnecessary and it's 
damaging. Just at the moment when we both have to try and handle a 
whole question of the consequences of the Asia crisis and work together 
and not engage in squabbles of this kind. Most of the bananas on sale 
in this British supermarket and in stalls throughout the European 
Union, come from former British and French colonies, primarily in 
the Caribbean. That's unfair, says the U.S.; it discriminates against 
Latin American bananas, which are mainly distributed by U.S. multinationals. 
Peter Scherr is the U.S. special trade negotiator. We have urged the 
European Union now for over a year to sit down with us, to sit down 
with the other Latin American countries, to work with us, to come 
up with a solution that recognize the European's interests, that recognize 
the U.S.' interests, and to come to an amicable solution. Frankly, 
the European commission and the European Union have refused to do 
that. The Europeans claim that the U.S. is only pushing Latin American 
bananas because the biggest distributor, Chiquita, is American, and 
a generous donor to Democrat and Republican party funds. The U.S. 
says right is on its side. The World Trade Organization, or WTO, has 
ruled in favor of the American case, and unless the Europeans comply, 
trade sanctions will go ahead. At a recent news conference in Brussels, 
Sir Leon Britain once again condemned the American move. No WTO member 
has the right to judge the compliance of another, nor to be judge 
and jury in its own cause. In resorting to unilateral action, the 
United States is setting itself above the law and resorting to the 
principle of might is right. This clothing factory in the English 
midlands could be one of many small firms to suffer if the U.S. tariff 
increases go ahead. The boss, Daniel Hanson, says he exports most 
of the luxury dressing gowns and pajamas he makes to the U.S. A big 
increase in American duty would price his products out of the U.S. 
market and hit his business hard. Well, it would be catastrophic. 
I can't say any more than that. It would be catastrophic. It would 
mean that, I would say, 80 percent of our current work force would 
be laid off. Twenty jobs would be lost and irreparable damage done 
to a business that Hanson has spent more than a decade developing. 
It does, honestly, seem an unreal situation that a row about bananas 
could affect the very small business that I've built up and the dependents 
that I and my staff have on this business for our livelihoods. Hundreds 
of European business people making everything from silk scarves to 
wine and novelty items are equally incredulous. The fact that whoopie 
cushions and laughing bags, among many other things, have been caught 
up in a row about bananas has rendered this dispute open to even more 
ridicule. But this could be serious. A trade war between the world's 
two biggest trading partners is bad news at the best of times; with 
the global economy teetering on the brink of recession, it could be 
a disaster. For The World, this is Steven Beard in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>