<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981214.2000.2018 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, a coproduction of the BBC World Service, PRI and 
WGBH in Boston. I'm Lisa Mullens. The news from Russia isn't bad; 
it's terrible. Unpaid nuclear scientists tempted to defect to rogue 
nations, rampant corruption, anti-Semitism, opposition politicians 
gunned down in the streets and one of the worst depressions ever suffered 
by an industrialized nation. But Gregori Yuvlenskei, the founder and 
leader of Russia's Yablicka party, sounds almost optimistic about 
his country's future. Yuvlenskei is a former middle-weight boxer. 
He's now a liberal candidate for president, and he says he's not about 
to get on board the doom and gloom bandwagon, in part because he can't. 
I'm sorry to say that as a politician, I'm not allowed to say such 
things. But this is the case when the press have a very special approach. 
In '91, '92, '93, the press was in a flurry about Russian reform. 
Everything was great. Any... Are you talking about the Western press 
or the Russian Press? Yes. I mean, the Russian press. Everything is 
great. Everything happened. Now, as we have a failure in the reform, 
the press is saying everything is bad. They're looking for very nasty 
things, which a lot in the country, and presenting them to public. 
So what I want to say both approaches are wrong, not true; both. But 
the truth is... It was not very good. It is not very bad. It's a very 
complicated, difficult transition. What you did in 200 years, we are 
doing in 2 or 3 years. But those are very frightening prospects. I 
mean, it doesn't sound, from this end, as if we 200. Yes, but we were 
trying many times to explain that to public, to American government 
that be more serious with us. Don't be so euphoric. Why are you talking 
only about money? When you would hear something about help to Russia 
from politicians here, they're talking only about financial aid, only 
about money. They're not talking about moral, about civil society, 
about values, about democratic structures, about democratic political 
parties. They're talking only about some money. Can you imagine, for 
example, if you have a children and the kid is coming to you asking 
you what to do in this or that case, and you say here is $100 for 
you and get away from here; I have no time for that. And you say the 
best help then could come from where? What kind of help would be most 
useful? It's not -- it's not the help itself; it's the cooperation, 
you know. This is a problem in the world, and it's necessary to solve 
it For example, why would I ask your leaders whom I am going to see 
Thursdays, how do you see Russia in 20 years from now? What is the 
concept? What do you want from us? What do you want to see there? 
No answer. And how do you see it then in 25 years? I think that Russia 
have two choices at the moment. One choice is strongly supported by 
the Communist Party. It is the choice of isolation and creating a 
special living which is built on the law of the most strong. Who's 
the strongest? He's the boss. There is another choice: for Russia 
in 25 years to be European country. And we would live not under the 
law of the strongest, but we would live under the civil law where 
the president and every citizen are under the same law. And I wonder 
then if you can tie that to the recent death of Galina Sterovotyva, 
the Duma member and leading Democratic reformer. How has that death 
impacted Russians? That certainly affects all Russian future and the 
people are afraid of that, and that's why the vote for the Democratic 
party which was saying that we would build a wall of protection against 
the open criminality in the country was so strong. But if that level 
is criminality is high, how do you turn something like that around, 
particularly when corruption, which is one of the things you have 
been focusing on, has been so entrenched in politics even since the 
Soviet days? Sure, this is not easy. But, for example, we can use 
your experience. You have the same criminality, the same corruption 
at the beginning of the century, in '20s and '30s in Chicago, everywhere, 
and nevertheless, the nation managed to overcome that. Well, in terms 
of how you and Yablicka would go about doing that on a national level, 
I mean, you're using American experiences that are more local than 
federal or national. How would you go about turning that around specifically? 
Now for that, the first segment would be clean people in the government. 
At least you have -- you need five people who are clean. The question 
is very simple: to find in Russia five people who are not taking bribes 
being in the government, or you have no chance. This is the experiment 
and this is the challenge. So if you're talking about fresh blood, 
where is that fresh blood coming from? Just now, we are coming to 
the end of the end. It was very naive to think that under Mr. Yeltzin, 
who was a member of the Politburo, under Mr. Cherninmoryn, who was 
a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party, we can create 
a democracy. Maybe we can create something like an environment where 
the people are simply killing and eating each other for the money. 
That's what was really constructed, but not the civil society, not 
the real freedoms, not the real property rights, not a civilized way 
of making business and making markets. So we are saying we are all 
Russian democratic party. We have four values like freedom, private 
property, competition and human rights. We want Russia in 25 years 
to be a member of NATO, by the way. This is our agenda. Everybody 
who shares this agenda, come on, we would go together. Gregori Yuvlenskei, 
the Yablicka Party, in Russia. Thank you very much for coming in. 
Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>