<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981214.2000.0894 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mr. Clinton is not the first president to travel to the Middle East 
with a cloud of impeachment hanging over him back home. Richard Nixon 
made a similar trip in June of 1974 at the height of the Watergate 
crisis. Two months later, President Nixon resigned. Richard Hauss 
is the director of foreign policy studies at the Brookings Institution. 
Mr. Hauss, what did the stakes look like for President Nixon when 
he made his trip back in 1974? Well, it was probably, what, 8 or 9 
months or so after there had been a major conflict in the Middle East, 
and U.S. diplomacy at that point was essentially trying to stabilize 
the relations between Israel and Syria as well as Israel and Egypt. 
And the United States was as much involved in those as it -- as it, 
say, is now between Israel and the Palestinians. So could we look 
at it as a simply straightforward foreign policy trip, or was that 
Middle Eastern trip a more cynical move to try and divert attention 
from Watergate? I don't think it was cynical, and I don't think it's 
a question of either/or. Most things done in the Oval Office tend 
to be done on both policy and political grounds, and going to the 
Middle East is no exception. I think, though, the lesson is that whatever 
it is you can accomplish abroad rarely has much, if any, impact here. 
The wheels of the impeachment process essentially turn at their own 
rate, and Mr. Nixon was slowly disappointed to the extent that he 
hoped his Middle Eastern diplomacy or his Soviet diplomacy was going 
to save him, and I think Mr. Clinton might essentially encounter the 
same experience. Just as President Clinton is now, President Nixon 
back then was under extreme pressure. How well did he function under 
that pressure? Was he visibly distracted? I think most of these politicians, 
and Nixon and Clinton and both good examples, are pretty good at separating 
things, or to use the word of the day, compartmentalizing. I think 
also to some extent, foreign policy almost becomes a welcome distraction. 
You're out of the country. You're able to act without Congress looking 
over your shoulder. You have quite a degree of freedom. I think also 
it clearly increases your incentive to succeed. It's impossible to 
prove, but clearly, there's the hope that if you do come up with something 
of a foreign policy success, it will redound to your advantage here 
back in Washington. Were there, looking back, telltale signs at the 
time that Richard Nixon would ultimately resign? Well, I think by 
then the head count was becoming pretty clear. And I think some of 
the foreign policy diplomacy, not simply in the Middle East, but with 
Mr. Breshnev with the Soviet Union at the time, had something of a 
desperate quality, that if he could show himself to be indispensable 
on the world stage, maybe, just maybe, it would have a positive impact 
here at home. And what was the pulse of the planet at that time? Did 
the rest of the world seem to share the American people's anger at 
what President Nixon had done? I think it was different. I think American 
politics are something of a mystery for the rest of the world. Most 
of the rest of the world either has an authoritarian system or has 
a parliamentary system, but either way, you tend to have the concentration 
of political authority in the hands of one individual or government. 
The divided authority that is in the United States really sets up 
apart, so I don't think there was so much anger as just a degree of 
confusion and an inability, really, to understand what makes American 
politics tick. So then how close is the historical parallel here? 
What are the similarities, and what are the differences? I think that 
the big difference is that Mr. Nixon's predicament was considerably 
more serious than Mr. Clinton's. Mr. Clinton right now is essentially 
still supported by his own party, and that, unless things change, 
will protect him should this ever reach the Senate. Mr. Nixon, on 
the other hand, was essentially being deserted by his own party, so 
as a result, he was far more vulnerable. So whatever Mr. Clinton's 
problems are this week in the Middle East, whatever his problems are 
more generally, he is not nearly as wounded as Richard Nixon was a 
quarter of a century ago. Richard Hauss is the director of foreign 
policy studies at the Brookings Institution. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>