<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981214.0500.1832 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton is in Gaza City, the first ever visit by a U.S. 
president to the Palestinian-controlled Gaza Strip. Mr. Clinton and 
Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat officially inaugurated the Gaza City 
airport and then left in separate helicopters to begin talks in Mr. 
Arafat's office in Gaza City. As VOA's Debra Tate reports, Mr. Clinton 
will address the Palestine National Council in its effort to give 
impetus to the faltering Israeli-Palestinian peace process. The president 
agreed to make the Gaza trip as part of his commitment to Wye River 
peace accord, which he brokered two months ago. The focus of his day 
will be his address to the Palestinian National Council which will 
formally reaffirm deletions of language from its charter that call 
for the destruction of Israel. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
has long sought the changes, but he has also demanded the council 
vote on the matter, something Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, has 
rejected saying the Palestinian authority is under no obligation to 
do so under peace accords he has signed with Israel. It appears that 
behind-the-scenes diplomacy may resolve the issue. Secretary of State 
Madeleine Albright says the action that will take placer in the council 
will satisfy Mr. Netanyahu. Anti-Israel language in the Palestinian 
charter is just one of a number of Israeli concerns Mr. Clinton will 
raise during his Gaza visit. Another is Mr. Arafat's vow to unilaterally 
declare a Palestinian state in May, a matter the president says should 
be resolved at the negotiating table. Mr. Clinton is also expected 
to make a strong appeal to the Palestinians to do more to curb violence. 
He offered a preview during his speech to young Israelis in Jerusalem 
Sunday. I will ask the Palestinian leaders to join me in reaffirming 
what the vast majority of Muslims the world over believe, that tolerance 
is an article of faith, and terrorism, a travesty of faith. And I 
will emphasize that this conviction should echo from every Palestinian 
schoolhouse and mosque and television tower. At the same time, Mr. 
Clinton will listen to the concerns of the Palestinians, including 
their desire for Israel to move forward with a troop withdrawal from 
another five percent of the West Bank, a move Israel has suspended 
until Palestinians do more to fulfill their commitments under the 
Wye accord. The presidential visit will be a day of immense pride 
for most Palestinians who view it as a key step toward realizing their 
desire for independence. Still, some Palestinian extremists who oppose 
the peace process have denounced Mr. Clinton's trip. In his speech 
in Jerusalem, the president indicated he would challenge those opponents 
when he appears before the PNC. I will point out, of course, all the 
ways in which this Wye agreement benefits Palestinians. It provides 
for the transfer of more territory, the redeployment of more Israeli 
troops, safe passage between Gaza and the West Bank, the opening of 
the airport and Gaza, other initiatives to lift their economic condition, 
and new commitments of international assistance to improve the lives 
of the Palestinian people. Before returning to Jerusalem, there is 
a possibility that Mr. Clinton will hold a joint meeting with Mr. 
Arafat and Mr. Netanyahu on the Gaza border. Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright says a trilateral meeting will take place if it is useful, 
although she says no such session is yet scheduled. Debra Tate, VOA 
News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>