<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981214.1600.2438 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Along with philanthropy, volunteer work, or civic service is also 
very much a part of life in the United States. But performing civic 
service for one's own community is unknown in many other countries. 
For instance, in France, the issue of civic duty came to light recently 
when the government tried to get city residents to clean up after 
their dogs by using a device known as a pooper scooper. It was an 
idea greeted with cries of " That's why we pay taxes." Gay Tishbereck, 
director of the Paris-based firm, Cross-Cultural Consulting, says 
one of the things which separates the French from Americans in this 
regard is the issue of taxes. The French, when they are looking towards 
their civic duty, one of the first things they do is they think about 
the taxes that they're paying. The French attitude is more that the 
monies that they pay into the government is money that should be distributed 
to other people for the philanthropic issues. They don't feel that 
they should have to donate themselves to these things. And so they 
have a tendency to get down on the government because the government 
has not been doing its job. Is this because there's more of a tradition 
in Europe to have the government do more and the tradition in America, 
of course, is for the government to do less? Less, right, exactly. 
That's exactly what it is. Now that's not to say that the French don't 
donate to a variety of things. But if you combine French individual 
donations with help that goes through the government, the French actually 
give more than an American would. In the terms of the taxes they pay? 
Right. Let's separate the issue of philanthropy a minute then from 
the issue of civic duty. How are the French with regard to, let's 
say, doing voluntary neighborhood work and cleaning up? I understand 
there's this new law that the French are supposed to clean up after 
their dogs on the streets of Paris. Yeah, well, they are not at all 
civic minded from that point of view. Again, they go back to the business 
of this should be done through the taxes that we are paying, and we 
shouldn't have to be called upon to do this. Now this said, they do 
have very strong traditions through the different parishes. The Catholic 
Church has its parishes and in fact that number is very, very limited 
compared to what might happen in the United States. What the French 
would say is, "Well, listen, in terms of the pooper scooper issue, 
we pay taxes for this. We shouldn't have to do it." Now it's not only 
a question of civic duty, this particular issue of a pooper scooper, 
we might compare that to actually just smoking in a way. I know that 
sounds a bit farfetched but French people smoke much more than the 
Americans do, and they're much less pleased when someone is pointing 
out to them that you're polluting their air. So they think that their 
dogs should have the right to use the public... Yes, yes. It's not 
that they're not that disassociated, if you will, in terms of you 
know, reasoning. What about the kind of Frenchman that invented doctors 
without borders and all of those who volunteer? Anybody who's traveled 
has run into these underpaid Frenchmen and women who are doing this 
thankless work in other countries. Do they do that kind of thing in 
their own country? Yes, you do find people doing that, but it's again, 
they're not that prevalent. You know, it's a question also of image. 
The French express themselves physically, outwardly in what they wear 
and their attitudes and the way they talk. And this is in direct contradiction 
to bending over in the street and scooping up what your dog has left 
behind. It's a question that's image that's involved there. However, 
doctors without frontiers, now mind you, that's very noble. Gay Tishbereck, 
director of Cross-Cultural Consulting speaking to us from her ofice 
in Paris. Philanthropy and civic service was the subject of today's 
Dateline. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>