<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981214.1600.2158 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Around the world, part of the celebration of the Christmas holiday 
is giving gifts to friends and family. In the United States, critics 
say this tradition has become a commercial and consumer frenzy that 
perverts the true meaning of Christmas. But for many Americans, the 
holiday is a time to give not just to family and friends but in the 
Christmas spirit, to the poor and needy as well. Philanthropic and 
civic service is the subject of today's Dateline. Here's Pamela Taylor. 
Americans have a reputation for being generous and helping people 
around the world in times of disaster or hardship. They are also generous 
in giving both time and money to help the poor and under-privileged 
here in the United States. It's a tradition some sociologists say 
which comes from a pioneer heritage of communities getting together 
to collectively build each other's barns and homes. That tradition 
is still observed today as we hear from VOA's Sladitza Hoke. Keep 
it going. Nice and easy, guys. It took 250 volunteers just one week 
to build this house in Yonkers, New York. They've been flown in from 
all over the country. I'm from Colorado, there's guys from Washington, 
Nebraska, all over come here to help with it. The nonprofit group 
called Habitat for Humanity has already built more than 70,000 homes 
for low income families across America. The houses are built mostly 
by volunteers from donated material and with donated money. Habitat 
for Humanity is just one of many volunteering organizations in America. 
Brian O'Connell, professor of public service at Taft University, Massachusetts 
says volunteerism is part of the American character. He says nearly 
100 million Americans, that's every other one over the age of 13, 
volunteer regularly several hours a week. That's just staggering amount 
of participation that does so much good for people in need or for 
community and causes, but also does a great deal for those who are 
volunteers in terms of how they feel about themselves, including young 
people who find that the participation gives them a sense of purpose, 
a sense of importance, a sense of personal growth, and a fulfillment. 
Americans start volunteering at an early age. Brian O'Connell says 
60 percent of American teenagers aged 14 to 18 volunteer an average 
of 3-1/2 hours per week. Some children start volunteering even earlier 
with their parents and continue throughout their lifetime. Jim Humphrey, 
a retired building inspector from Battle Creek, Michigan is one of 
them. He currently works four to eight hours a week for an organization 
called Safe Place that offers shelter and counseling to victims of 
domestic violence. Help is needed all over, and a lot of organizations 
like us, they have to get funding from other areas. When volunteers 
go to a place, then they're getting that service for nothing. So I 
think volunteerism is very necessary to help out and to give something 
back to the community. In addition to volunteer work, Americans donate 
money, food, clothing, and other items to charitable institutions 
such as homeless shelters. Brian O'Connell says more than two-thirds 
of all households make financial contributions to philanthropic organizations, 
and the average annual amount of these donations is over a thousand 
dollars. Almost half of all that is given comes from people with lower 
incomes. Indeed, the person of lower income is likely to give more 
proportionately of what she or he has than the person of higher income 
because they see more need around them, and they very much share what 
they have even if it is not significant. According to Giving USA 1998, 
trusts for philanthropy, Americans contributed a total of almost $144 
billion to nonprofit organizations in 1997. The lion's share of these 
donations, almost $110 billion, comes from individuals. Most of the 
money, 47 percent, went to religious organizations who channeled most 
of it to various charities. Other contributions went largely to education, 
health, and human services. Brian O'Connell says no other country 
in the world has so many volunteers and so many donors as the United 
States, but he says philanthropy is on the rise in other parts of 
the world as well. For example, in South Africa, Japan, parts of Latin 
America, and post Communist countries of Central Europe. VOA's Sladitza 
Hoke. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>