<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981214.1600.3228 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Classical music from the age of Mozart and Vivaldi is finding a new 
audience through a series of recordings aimed at youngsters. VOA's 
Michael O'O'SULLIVAN spoke with the founder of the company, Classical 
Kids, who says classical music, when well presented, can captivate 
young listeners. Susan Hammond began her firm ten years ago with a 
$450 investment working out the living room of her home in Toronto, 
Canada. She was always a classical music lover who believes the musical 
classics are exciting, even to pre-school children. I was teaching 
piano at home and I realized it wasn't the music that was a problem, 
it was the way it was presented. The kids could come very fired away 
from their lessons, and especially in an early age before they've 
made their real musical choices; they're opened to any kind of music. 
Then I became a mother, and when I became a mother, I became aware 
of the power of story. So I thought if I put together story, real 
drama with the music, we might be able to build a more child-friendly 
approach to classical music. In each of the recordings that she has 
produced, Sue Hammond mixes classical compositions with stories of 
the composers. Young listeners take a musical journey along with fictional 
children, and they discover new worlds together. Ms. Hammond explains 
that each fictional child is plausibly connected to the real-life 
composer on the recording. For instance, Vivaldi taught at a girls 
orphanage. Simple, it's an orphan story. Handel used boys choirs a 
great deal, so we can capitalize on this. "Mozart's Magnificent Voyage," 
which is the latest one, is a story of his child life of genius and 
his early death. Well, there was one very credible tie in that he 
had a son. When Mozart died, he was - the son was seven years old. 
The CD, "Mozart's Magnificent Voyage," features a composition that 
Mozart wrote as a child and the voice of a child portraying the composer's 
son as he discovers his father's music. He wrote this symphony when 
he was eight years old? All those notes. Classical music is complex 
and recent studies suggest it can help children in their cognitive 
development. More important, says Susan Hammond, classical music can 
be fun when it is presented along with a narrative story line. Children 
are very dreamy. They're very imaginative. If you look at a child 
on its mother's or father's lap when a story's being read to it - 
and this child, you can talk until you're hoarse, they want to hear 
the story. They want to spin those pictures in their mind. The theater 
of the imagination is so compelling. So, yes, these recordings - and 
there are eight of them out - ask that a child listen to a drama for 
45 minutes, but kids do it. Susan Hammond's classical kids recordings 
are distributed by Atlantic Records. So far, more than $2 million 
have been sold, a fact which Ms. Hammond says demonstrates the enduring 
appeal of classical music for children. I don't know what the future 
holds, but for now, let the music guide our way. Mike O'Sullivan, 
VOA News, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>