<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981214.0500.1322 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here's a great story. A great love inspires a great playwright to 
create one of the greatest romances in the history of literature. 
Is this a good story or what? No, it's a great story. oh. That's the 
premise in a hilarious new comedy from Miramax Films now at North 
American theaters. Alan Silverman takes a look at the unlikely titled 
movie, "Shakespeare in Love." Are you the author of the plays of William 
Shakespeare? i am. Then kiss me again. Joseph Fiennes stars as William 
Shakespeare, whom we meet in the 1590s, a working actor and a playwright 
struggling with writer's block on his latest comedy. What's called? 
"Romeo Nettled the Pirate's Daughter." What is the story? Well, there's 
this pirate. "Romeo and Juliet." Just a suggestion. Good title. What 
Will lacks is a muse, someone to inspire his work until she appears 
in the lovely form of Gwyneth Paltrow as Viola, a noble woman with 
her own dreams of the stage. I will have poetry in my life and adventure 
and love. This was an era when women could not become actors. They 
were forbidden. All of the female roles in Shakespeare's plays in 
Shakespeare's time were played by young boys. So Lady Viola masquerades 
as a boy to become part of the action. Gwyneth Paltrow gets to play 
both Romeo and Juliet during the course of "Shakespeare in Love." 
It's just rare that you come across a role like that, you know, getting 
to play a boy and getting to, you know, do "Romeo and Juliet" and 
both parts, and you know, with the accent. And it was just - There 
was a lot going on. It really kept me busy. I mean, I never worked 
so hard in my entire life. But she's so strong and pro-active, and 
you know, she's really in touch with not only what she's feeling and 
who she is but what she becomes and what she ends up feeling. You 
know, she's very in touch with her growth, and I just really admired 
her, and it was really fun to play. It is still dark. It's still day. 
The rooster tells us so. It was the owl, believe me, love. It was 
the owl. English stage star, Joseph Fiennes, the younger brother of 
Ray Fiennes, admits the idea of playing Shakespeare is a bit daunting, 
but he says the film is more about a guy named Will than it is about 
the icon of world literature. He's less of an icon and more of a young 
man, you know, that's all of the flaws and contradictions that we 
have in our daily life. If anything, it's vibrant and sassy. And I 
hope excite people to go and actually look at Shakespeare again and 
go, "Wow, it's not so stuffy and academic." I can turn a phrase and 
reinvent it. And hopefully as well in the same breath, the academics 
kind of respect it as well. Mind you, I think 'cause I think that's 
what they need. Well, are you finished. yes. Oscar winner Geoffrey 
Rush co-stars as Henslo, Shakespeare's sleazy theater manager. I need 
actors. Those of you who are unknown will have a chance to be known. 
What about the money, Mr. Henslo? It might cost you a penny. Despite 
the historical liberties taken, Rush believes "Shakespeare in Love" 
is true to the spirit of its title character. Even though we don't 
know a lot about Shakespeare, 'cause he didn't leave a diary or whatever, 
the testimony's there in the plays. I mean, you know what he thought 
about love, you know what he thought about politics. You know what 
he thought about power structures, people, people getting drunk, people 
being in love, whatever. And I think the scholars over history have 
kind of removed him from the public eye and put him on some kind of 
pedestal or shoved him away in a glass case in a museum. So in the 
broad population, there's this feeling that he's inaccessible and 
he's not understandable, he's not comprehensible as a dramatic thing. 
He wrote great jokes, you know. He wrote great sitcoms. He wrote great 
dramatic miniseries, you know. I mean, he was a very populist kind 
of writer. Playwrights teach us nothing about love. They make it pretty. 
They make it comical, or they make it lust. They can't make it true. 
Oh, but they can. I mean, Your Majesty, they do not, they have not, 
but I believe there is one who can. "Shakespeare in Love" also features 
Judy Densche as a quick-witted Queen Elizabeth. Tom Wilkinson plays 
a money lender smitten with the theater bug, and Ben Affleck shows 
up as a pompous, vain actor. What is the play and what is my part? 
One moment, sir. Who are you? I'm the money. Then you may remain, 
so long as you remain silent. "Shakespeare in Love" is directed by 
John Madden. The script is by playwright's Mark Norman and Tom Stoppard. 
Alan Silverman for the Voice of America in Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>