<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981214.1600.1342 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Americans spend around $40 billion a year on toys, and a lot of the 
toy shopping occurs at Christmastime, and it's for some pretty expensive 
items. They are, for example, talking dolls named Arthur and Barney, 
loaded with computer gadgetry and a 4,000-word vocabulary, and a price 
tag of $110 per doll. The toy companies say they are interactive and 
educational, but some experts on early childhood development aren't 
so sure. Claire Lerner is a specialist on children's issues with a 
nonprofit group called Zero to Three. A lot of these toys are marketed 
sort of playing into parents' anxiety about raising the "smart child." 
Ms. Lerner believes that a ball, a simple, little, inexpensive ball 
may actually be the best educational toy for small children. A child 
rolling a ball back and forth with parent is teaching them about reciprocity, 
about, you know, sharing, about the joy of a relationship of moving 
things back and forth. They're learning about the properties of a 
ball, you know, how it rolls, how they can make their body move it 
forward. So a simple thing like playing, you know, rolling a ball 
back and forth I think is a very rich experience. And my concern is 
that these other toys are so stimulating and so captivating that it's 
very easy for parents to sort of hook on to them, because of course 
the children are going to show joy and excitement around them. But 
this Christmas, many American parents are buying the so-called interactive 
and other high priced toys, as VOA's Andrew Barrett found out at a 
shopping mall near Washington D.C. Excuse me, sir, what do you think 
of the way Americans spend a lot of money on Christmas toys? Oh, we 
spend probably too much money on Christmas. We forget the true meaning 
of Christmas 'cause we've, I guess we've kind of materialized everything. 
But I'm guilty, too. I spend a lot of money, too. How old is this 
young man here? Fifteen months, 15 months. Can I ask you a question? 
Sure. How much have you spent or will you spend on Christmas for this 
young man? Four or $500. Well, there's a Lego set that's $130, and 
then there's more Legos for $40, so that's $200. Probably around $300. 
How much money did you spend on toy buying this year? I really haven't 
started, but it will probably go up maybe $100 or more. Hundred-dollars-plus 
toys. Would you ever spend money on that? Yes. Last year, we got Barney. 
We try to keep it around maybe between $100 and $150 per child what 
we spend, and then maybe some bigger thing that the whole family can 
use, like some computer items or something like that. But it gets 
hard as they get older, you know. A pair of roller blades is $100, 
and that's one of the things that they want. Why do you think Americans 
spend a lot of money on Christmas toys? 'Cause we don't want them 
to miss out. We want them to have what their friends have. We want 
to get everything on their list. We have the wealth. We want to share 
it with our children, pass that on to generations. If we're not going 
to spend our money on toys and gifts, what would we do with it? Wow, 
what do you do? Just shake your head and say, "Well, I got to buy 
it 'cause my child wants it" or what? Yeah, well, see, I'm a grandparent, 
so therefore I get what mom doesn't get. Ah. What do you think of 
the prices of the toys. Some of them are ridiculous, such as that 
Sabrina telephone, 30 bucks. I mean, Christmas is getting out of control. 
It's sort of skewed, don't you think, that we're willing to spend 
this kind of money on children's toys? I look at what we have in our 
basement, you know, mostly unused, and I start adding it up. It just 
kind of makes me sick. But yet you still go and do it. You know, I 
think it's sort of that sort of buying that happiness on Christmas 
morning without really maybe thinking ahead. Sometimes it's easier 
to just shop and buy it than to, you know, explain why you can't have 
it. It's hard when your children are still small and they believe 
in Santa: "Why didn't he bring this when he brought it to somebody 
else?" And I think, you know, I think we just get caught up in all 
the advertising and the Christmas shopping. I know I do and I try 
not to. I talk the talk but I can't walk the walk. Oh, I think we 
definitely spend too much on toys for children. They have more than 
they could possibly play with. I was just in here looking for a card 
game for my almost five-year-old granddaughter because she plays with 
so many computer games and high tech toys, and she really enjoys card 
games. Card game as in what? Card games like Uno, Go Fish, this type 
of thing, 'cause I think they need some more simple games to play 
with. Good luck in finding a card game. Thank you. Sounds very civilized. 
But it's very difficult to find. "You want like a card game? What 
do you mean?" Well, you just heard a few Christmas shoppers in a shopping 
mall outside of Washington D.C. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>