<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981214.0500.2077 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Back in Washington, several undecided Republican lawmakers have expressed 
their disappointment with President Clinton's refusal to admit that 
he lied under oath in the Monica Lewinsky matter. On the NBC program, 
"Meet the Press," Sunday, reporter Tim Russert spoke with three Republican 
lawmakers who have not yet publicly announced where they stand on 
impeachment. First is Louisiana Congressman Billy Tauzin. He says 
he believes all House members should remain undecided until they have 
reviewed the material coming from the Judiciary Committee, which last 
week urged along party lines, impeachment. We're going to literally 
be like grand jurors. I can't imagine a fair grand jury process where 
the jurors would come on your show and tell you how they're going 
to vote before they read the report. We ought to at least do that. 
Two weeks ago, one of your top aides says you don't have the votes 
or the stomach to vote for impeachment, that you're torn between the 
right thing and the smart thing to do. No, that's not it at all. I 
think what's happening to this country and what's happening to many 
of us in the House is that we're as conflicted as America is. We all 
agree the president did some pretty terrible things and that lying 
under oath and getting others to lie and obstructing justice is serious 
charges that most Americans consider impeachable offenses. At the 
same time, most Americans don't want to see this brought to the conclusion 
where we'd be removing a president over it, so we're conflicted over 
that. What's best for the country here? Do we vote to condone this 
behavior, or do we send it to the Senate and let it take its natural 
course? Is a vote to impeach a vote to remove? Well, if a vote to 
impeach were a vote to remove, then the president wouldn't be president 
next week. I ask you to check after the House votes this week if we 
do vote to send articles of impeachment to the Senate, will the president 
still be president? Yes. Will he still be going about his business? 
Yes. Will he have been removed? No. It will be up to the Senate then 
to make that decision, not the House. Scott Klug of Wisconsin, on 
October 9th, you said if you had to vote then, you'd probably vote 
against impeachment. Where are you today? Undecided. And I agree with 
Billy that I don't think you can make a decision until the committee 
completely wraps up it work and you listen to the debate this week. 
And I think the president's answers to Congress I think have caused 
me the most concern, and I think there's still a sense that, you know, 
the White House is trying to run the strategy with the contrite run 
and then an attack dog the next, and you got to be one or the other. 
And I think that's why the president has very little credibility left 
with the 59,000th confession this week. Brian Bilbray in California, 
how will you vote on Thursday? Well, I agree with Billy, both my colleagues. 
I think it's absolutely irresponsible to take positions on it on something 
that's this important of this magnitude before the entire process 
is worked out. You got all the evidence before you. I'm still studying 
not only the documents that were just approved by the committee, but 
also the history of the whole impeachment process and past impeachment 
activities. Brian, now a few weeks ago, you said, "All this talk of 
impeachment, all this right-wing jargon puts off people in mainstream 
America." Do you think that the focus on impeachment is hurting the 
Republican Party politically? Well, let me clarify. I said the right-wing 
jargon and the left-wing jargon is getting people frustrated. I think 
the frustration is what they've seen a lot coming out of the committee 
is those members who you and I would agree are at the extreme fringes 
of both elements. I don't think this is just a conservative problem. 
I think this it's a problem in the consistency of the partisan bickering 
back and forth, both liberal and conservative. The lawmakers are part 
of about two dozen officially undecided Republicans who can make or 
break Thursday's impeachment vote in the full House of Representatives. 
Last week, as you remember, the House Judiciary Committee approved 
four articles of impeachment accusing President Clinton of perjury, 
obstruction of justice, and abuse of power. Approval of those articles 
of impeachment would require at least 218 votes. Republicans, including 
those who are undecided, control 228 seats in the House. On Sunday, 
Judiciary Committee chairman Henry Hyde urged Mr. Clinton to resign, 
but the president said he's not going to do that. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>