<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981214.1600.0766 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton is pressing Congress for a compromise over the Monica 
Lewinsky scandal, but the Republican leadership in the House has said 
it would not allow a floor vote on censure as an alternative to impeachment. 
However, some moderate Republicans favor such a vote. One of them, 
Peter King of New York, talked to NBC's Katie Couric today about his 
feelings. And the issue is this is not really about Bill Clinton. 
It's about the future of the presidency, and that's why I think that 
if there is going to be an impeachment vote, it's absolutely essential 
as a matter of conscience that the Republican leadership allow us 
to vote on a censure alternative. But right now, Bob Livingston is 
saying that he will not permit that to happen. I know he's saying 
that, but I think it's important. Again, he keeps saying this is a 
conscience vote, and if it is, then I think it should be a true conscience 
vote, and we should be allowed to decide on what we want to vote on. 
And I think it's important, really, as the American people start to 
focus on this, that they let their congressman or congresswoman know 
whether or not they feel it should be a free choice on Thursday or 
Friday, whenever the vote happens, and whether or not we should be 
allowed to vote on censure, 'cause as I see the polls, at least 65 
percent of the American people believe that censure is the proper 
way to go. And I can't see why we wouldn't be allowed to vote on that. 
Congressman, how many moderate Republicans, as far as you know, agree 
with you on your position on censure? Well, I've been saying all along 
is at least 15 to 20, and certainly, based on the phone calls that 
I've gotten over the last week, I would stand by that number. He's 
a solid Republican. It's not just moderate, but also some conservatives 
who believe that the proper way to go is essentially believe the president's 
conduct is disgraceful, it's immoral, it's indefensible, but it does 
not rise to the level of an impeachable offense, and we don't want 
to be setting this standard for the future. And that's what this is 
all about. But I would say if there is any censure vote allowed, clearly 
impeachment would not pass, and perhaps that's the reason why the 
Republican leadership doesn't want to allow it. Well, this should 
not be a party vote. This should be strictly a vote of conscience 
and the American vote. Tom DeLay, the Majority Whip, says the Constitution 
does not provide for censure. What's your reaction to his position? 
Well, you know, Tom DeLay makes a very good argument, but I think 
we can make a counter-argument. Let's have that debate on the House 
floor, don't he it on the "Today Show" or "Meet the Press." Let's 
have debate that on the House floor and vote on it. If the majority 
of the House agrees with Tom DeLay, so be it. But I'm saying if he 
has enough faith and confidence in his idea and his conclusion, then, 
you know, put it to the test in the House of Representatives. That's 
what a representative democracy is all about, not to have one or two 
people decide what's right but have all 435 members of Congress in 
both parties decide. Congressman, any plans for moderate Republicans 
to unite and approach the Republican leadership in one large block 
and say that if they are not permitted to vote on censure, they will 
vote against impeachment? Well, a number of us have been considering 
that. I certainly think it's what should be done. I feel that we should 
come together as - Not just moderates. I put myself more in the conservative 
camp. I think we should - All of us who believe that the traditional 
position of the Republican Party were not being to impeach under facts 
such as these, as illegal as they are, we should go to the Republican 
leadership, let them know how strongly we feel, and just the actual 
conscience vote up and down on censure, a conscience vote up and down 
on impeachment. New York Congressman Peter King. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>