<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981214.1600.0358 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As President Clinton watched and listened, Palestinian leader Yasir 
Arafat called on the leaders of the Palestine National Council to 
reaffirm that the destruction of Israel is no longer one of their 
objectives. Heard here through a translator, Mr. Arafat said the promise 
been made and now must be ratified. In the presence of his excellency, 
the president of the United States,, honored guests, and pursuant 
to the Wye River memorandum, I call on you members of the PNC, members 
of the legislative council, members of the Palestinian Center of Council, 
members of the executive committee, the Palestinian Cabinets, and 
all representatives of national, social, and popular institutions, 
and on the basis of the grievancy in April 1996, I call on all of 
you to reaffirm this letter and to reaffirm on the aforementioned 
decisions of the PLO executive committee and this entire council in 
support of the peace process. Would you please raise your hands in 
support of this? Please raise your hands. While there was no reported 
vote or even an exact tally of how many council members raised their 
hands in support of Mr. Arafat's call for reaffirmation of the end 
to the Israeli destruction clause in the PLO charter, Israeli Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said he was satisfied. President Clinton 
in his remarks to the Palestinian assembly again urged both sides 
to resolve differences by peaceful negotiations and urged Israelis 
to be aware that the - of the great economic hardships faced by the 
Palestinian people. I want the people of Israel to know that for many 
Palestinians, five years after Oslo, the benefits of this process 
remain remote. That for too many Palestinians, lives are hard, jobs 
are scarce, prospects are uncertain, and personal grief is great. 
I know the tremendous pain remains as a result of losses suffered 
from violence, the separation of families, the restrictions on the 
movement of people and goods. I understand your concerns about settlement 
activity, land confiscation, and home demolitions. I understand your 
concerns and theirs about unilateral statements that could pre-judge 
the outcome of final status negotiations. I understand, in short, 
that there is still a good deal of misunderstanding five years after 
the beginning of this remarkable process. It takes time to change 
things and still more time for change to benefit everyone. It takes 
determination and courage to make peace, and sometimes even more, 
to persevere for peace. Mr. Clinton will be meeting shortly with both 
Palestinian leader Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu where 
he's expected to reemphasize that message. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>