<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981214.1600.2699 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Seahorses are some of the world's most unusual sea creatures. They 
have no scales, as most other types of fish, and no teeth, stomach, 
or ribs. During pregnancy, male seahorses carry their mates eggs until 
the baby seahorses are ready to swim on their own. Like many marine 
creatures, seahorses are declining in number both from over fishing 
and loss of habitat. Aquarium professionals and marine researchers 
from 13 countries met recently to discuss ways of protecting seahorses 
without hurting people who depend on the creatures to earn a living. 
We have more from VOA's Michael Leland. The seahorse exhibit at the 
Shed Aquarium in Chicago attracts more than 4,000 children and adults 
a day strolling past tanks displaying 25 of the roughly 35 species 
of seahorses that exist in the world. One floor below the exhibit, 
a few dozen scientists listen to Heather Hall of the Zoological Society 
of London talk about the need to protect these fish. We all want seahorses 
here for the future, whether you're a trader, whether you're an aquarium 
curator, whether you're an agriculturist, or a biologist. We're all 
working towards the same goal. An estimated 20 million seahorses are 
taken from the seas each year, though officials think the real number 
is higher than that. About 95 percent of those are dried, ground up, 
and used in traditional Chinese medicine or TCM, to treat everything 
from heart disease to asthma, to impotence. The rest end up in public 
aquariums or are purchased for home aquariums. The demand for seahorses 
for TCM is growing eight to ten percent a year. The Shed Aquarium's 
vice president for research and veterinary services, Jeff Bohm, says 
the demand is hurting the supply. Fishermen are reporting that it's 
much more difficult to catch the numbers of animals that they used 
to. They're finding that the grounds that they used to go to are devoid 
of seahorses now. And officials say it's not just because of over 
fishing. The head of a global conservation effort called Project Seahorse, 
Amanda Vincent, says seahorses are also suffering from destruction 
of habitat. She says the seahorse actually represents several of the 
marine world's most pressing conservation issues. They are attractive 
flagship species, icon species for their endangered habitats and can 
encourage people to care about them. They also represent the plight 
of subsistence fishers who are faced with declining resources and 
growing populations. They draw attention to the need for marine protected 
areas, no-take zones, where we can have some insurance against or 
mismanagement. The international conference are representatives from 
aquariums throughout the world as well as marine life researchers 
eventually hope to learn more about seahorse management and care and 
share that information with people who work in conservation. What 
they're not trying to do is ban seahorse fishing. Ms. Vincent says 
many people in coastal Southeast Asian communities depend on seahorse 
fishing for their livelihoods and she says they are also interested 
in conservation efforts. We've been extremely encouraged by the recognition 
from seahorse fishing areas that they have to be part of the solution. 
We never promise or impose in our community-based projects but we 
find that the villagers have thought about opportunities for conservation 
long before we have. Officials at the Shed Aquarium and Project Seahorse 
are hopeful that a combination of public education, conservation, 
and development of alternate sources of income for some fishermen 
can preserve seahorses for the future. Michael Leland, VOA News, Chicago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>