<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981214.0500.0718 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There are growing fears that the tiny Yugoslav Republican of Montenegro 
could become the next flash point in the seemingly endless crisis 
in the Balkans. Tensions are escalating between Montenegro and Serbia, 
the dominant of the two remaining partners in the Yugoslav republic. 
VOA's Douglas Roberts reports. When Yugoslavia began to break apart 
at the beginning of this decade, Montenegro was the only one of Serbia's 
erstwhile allies that opted to remain in the federation. But tensions 
soon developed between Belgrade and the Montenegrin capital, Povgoritsa, 
and Serbian involvement in the wars on Slovenia, Croatia, and Bosnia, 
sparked international condemnation and stiff economic sanctions against 
both federal partners. The simmering tensions burst into the open 
late last year following the election of 36-year-old Milo Jukanovich, 
a political and economic reformer as Montenegro's new president. Yugoslav 
leader, Slobodan Milosevic, has refused to recognize the Jukanovich 
victory, and he appointed the Montenegrin leader's main political 
rival as federal prime minister. There is talk of succession in Povgoritsa. 
The new Montenegrin government has already taken steps to loosen ties 
with Serbia. Montenegro is also hosting and supporting some of the 
independent newspapers and broadcasters recently banned in Belgrade. 
In testimony before a U.S. congressional committee this week, Montenegrin 
human rights activist, Serjon Delmanovic, said Belgrade is now preparing 
for a confrontation with Montenegro. It is only by provoking crises, 
he said, that President Milosevic can maintain his grip on power. 
The only territory left for exercising this method of creating crisis 
is to stay in power is Montenegro at the moment. James Hooper, who 
heads the private Balkan Action Council here in Washington says that 
scenario is plausible. In fact, I believe it is likely that the only 
thing that will stop him is a credible red line drawn by Washington 
and NATO warning him against interfering in Montenegro's internal 
affairs. Mr. Delmanovic notes that the Montenegrin government has 
already requested the deployment of observers from the European Security 
Organization in a bid to dissuade Belgrade from intervening. Mr. Hooper 
is among many Balkan experts here who say the threat of a crisis over 
Montenegro demonstrates the need for more western support for Democratic 
opposition groups in Serbia itself. Mr. Hooper says the emergence 
of a Democratic government in Belgrade would remove the threat to 
Montenegro and bolster the prospects for lasting peace in Bosnia and 
Kosovo. Douglas Roberts, VOA News, Washington. You are listening to 
VOA News Now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>