<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981115.0199 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pacific Rim nations failed Sunday to overcome Japanese objections 
to slash tariffs in two key industries, but claimed a partial success 
by keeping the negotiations alive for at least another year. While 
Japan did not relent in its refusal to agree to a schedule for cutting 
tariffs on forestry and fish products, it did accept language in the 
final communique that would allow negotiations to continue in all 
nine sectors of the proposed accord covering dlrs 1.5 trillion in 
global trade. Even though Japan, the world's second largest economy, 
could still refuse to make any actual tariff cuts, other nations portrayed 
the vague wording of the final communique of the 21-member Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation forum as the achievement of at least a partial 
success. U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky called the 
accord a ``very significant outcome,'' even though she has repeatedly 
said Japan's objections represent a significant failure of the group's 
goal to promote free trade in the face of the worst economic crisis 
to hit Asia in 50 years. Under the outline of the agreement, APEC 
nations, which represent half of total global trade, will take their 
tariff cutting proposals to the World Trade Organization in Geneva. 
There, they hope to attract countries outside the Asia-Pacific region 
to make similar offers to lower barriers in sectors ranging from chemicals 
to medical equipment. They also agreed to set a new deadline for next 
year's APEC summit in New Zealand to see if they can finally overcome 
Japan's objections to lifting tariffs in fish and forestry products. 
On Tuesday and Wednesday, leaders of the 21 APEC members will meet 
in Kuala Lumpur to approve the ministers' communique on the tariff 
proposal and a wide range of other issues regarding the Asia financial 
crisis and its effects on the rest of the world. U.S. President Bill 
Clinton canceled his visit to the APEC summit to remain in Washington 
and deal with the Iraqi crisis. He will be represented by Vice President 
Al Gore. The APEC meetings were nearly sidelined Sunday by America's 
efforts to gain widespread support for a possible military attack 
on Iraq for expelling U.N. weapons inspectors. In another development, 
demonstrators hit the streets for the second day running, demanding 
the resignation of Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad and siding 
with Anwar Ibrahim. Mahathir fired Anwar, his deputy and finance minister, 
then had him jailed after Anwar led a reform movement. Mahathir said 
he regretted Clinton would not attend the APEC summit, saying he would 
have liked the American president to see for himself that the streets 
of the capital were calm. But soon after Mahathir's speech, riot police 
sprayed water cannons to break up a noisy protest by 200 people demanding 
Mahathir's resignation. On Saturday night, 3,000 people demonstrated 
and marched toward the hotel where the U.S. delegation is staying, 
screaming ``Clinton, save us from Mahathir!'' Several undercover policemen 
fired shots in the air, but no serious injuries were reported. Protesters 
have been calling for Mahathir's ouster since he fired Anwar, his 
one-time protege who is standing trial on charges of corruption and 
sexual misconduct. In a speech to international business leaders attending 
a meeting on the sidelines of the APEC forum, Mahathir took aim at 
Clinton over the standoff with Iraq's Saddam Hussein. ``I'd always 
hoped we could settle such problems with negotiations,'' Mahathir 
said. ``Iraq is not an easy country, but lobbing bombs and grenades 
will not do anything to solve this problem.'' China and Russia also 
refused to condone air strikes against Iraq as the only acceptable 
response to Saddam's refusal to cooperate with U.N. weapons inspectors. 
Mahathir has had to face many setbacks surrounding the economic summit 
that was supposed to showcase his leadership and the enormous economic 
progress in the Southeast Asian nation. Clinton and Canadian Prime 
Minister Jean Chretien have said they would refuse the customary courtesy 
calls on the host of the APEC summit, angered by the treatment given 
Anwar Foreign officials, including U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright, have said they plan to meet with Anwar's wife to discuss 
the case, particularly his apparent beating while in jail. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>