<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981115.0908 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Steffi Graf took a dramatic step in her tennis comeback on Sunday 
by stunning top-ranked Lindsay Davenport to win the Advanta Championships. 
The unseeded Graf defeated Davenport 4-6, 6-3, 6-3 in a grueling two-hour 
match, to win her second tournament in as many tries since returning 
from a two-month layoff because of wrist surgery. The loss spoiled 
Davenport's debut on American soil as the top-ranked player in the 
WTA Tour's computer rankings. She had won her last seven matches, 
including a victory over Monica Seles in the semifinals Saturday and 
the European Championships finals against Venus Williams last month. 
Davenport is still assured of finishing the season at No. 1 regardless 
of what she does at the Chase Championships next week. Second-ranked 
Martina Hingis cannot garner enough points to overcome Davenport, 
even if Hingis wins the Chase event. But it was Graf who celebrated 
this time in the first meeting between the two in a championship final. 
Minutes after Davenport's return hit the net on match point, Graf 
smiled widely and shook her fist in the air. ``It's been a tough road 
back, but I seem to be doing really well,'' Graf said after receiving 
her dlrs 79,000 winner's check. After splitting the first two sets 
and exchanging service breaks as Davenport took a 4-3 lead in the 
third set, Graf went to work, allowing Davenport just four points 
in the last three games. Graf went up 40-15 in the last game and was 
cheered by the crowd after Davenport's return sailed into the net. 
It was Graf's 10th straight match victory, including a win in the 
finals of the Leipzig Open, since returning from wrist surgery last 
month. It was the second time Graf has won the tournament, and the 
second straight year that Davenport has lost an Advanta final. The 
two were tied at 2-2 in the third set before exchanging service breaks 
on consecutive serves, with Graf needing five break points, and Davenport 
four. Graf came out blazing in the first set, nailing three aces and 
pushing Davenport back on most of her service returns to take a 4-1 
lead. Davenport turned it around winning the last five games. She 
rallied back from three points down to take one game, then rocketed 
a forehand winner past a charging Graf to break service on the way 
to taking the set. Graf took the first game of the second set, then 
had to retreat to the locker room for trainers to re-tape her left 
leg, which cramped in the quarterfinals against the second-seeded 
Martina Hingis. The delay showed little effect on Graf, who jumped 
out to a 5-3 lead. On the last game, Graf held off two break points, 
hit a forehand winner, then took the set after a Davenport return 
went long. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>