<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981115.0948 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A governor opposed to the U.S. military presence on his southern Japanese 
island lost a re-election bid Sunday to a more flexible opponent, 
the semi-government television broadcaster reported. With 100 percent 
of the ballots counted, Keiichi Inamine, 65, an adviser to a group 
of local business leaders, had 374,833 votes, while incumbent Okinawa 
Gov. Masahide Ota, backed by the largest opposition party, had 337,369, 
NHK television reported. It showed Inamine celebrating victory as 
his supporters chanted ``Banzai!'' in unison. ``There was a feeling 
that Okinawa was stuck with the military base issues and the economy 
both not moving forward at all,'' said Inamine, who was backed by 
the ruling Liberal Democratic Party of Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi. 
``I wanted to break this gloomy feeling and improve the situation 
so that people can start seeing some light and make Okinawa a place 
for young people to have future dreams and hopes,'' he said. Voters 
in the economically depressed prefecture, or state, apparently chose 
Inamine's aggressive economic policy over Ota's steadfast opposition 
to the presence of U.S. bases, the Yomiuri newspaper, Japan's largest 
daily, reported Monday morning. Voter turnout was 76.54 percent, far 
higher than the previous poll's 62.54 percent four years ago, media 
reports said. Two-thirds of the 47,000 U.S. troops in Japan are concentrated 
on Okinawa, which accounts for less than 1 percent of Japan's total 
land area. The island was the site of some of the bloodiest fighting 
in World War II. Longstanding opposition to the military presence 
in Japan exploded in 1995 when three U.S. servicemen raped a 12-year-old 
Okinawan girl. The central military-related issue of the campaign 
involved how to carry out a 1996 U.S.-Japan agreement to move a U.S. 
Marine Corps facility from a crowded Okinawan city to a more remote 
location. Aimed at easing the American military burden on Okinawa, 
the centerpiece of the accord calls for the closure of Futenma Air 
Station in five to seven years as long as a suitable replacement is 
built elsewhere. The national government has proposed building a floating 
heliport off the coast of Nago, a central Okinawan city north of the 
capital of Naha. But Ota, 73, wanted the facility moved to another 
part of Japan or outside the country entirely. The 65-year-old Inamine 
backs a plan calling for the military heliport to be incorporated 
into a new airport in northern Okinawa that would also be open to 
civilian air traffic. In February, a supporter of plans to build the 
floating heliport narrowly won a mayoral election in Nago. ``I'm sorry,'' 
Ota was quoted by Kyodo News as telling his supporters. He had been 
seeking his third four-year term. Expressing concerns over the likely 
change of policy, he added: ``I'm worried about a loss of consistency 
in the future.'' Yoshiro Mori, secretary-general of the LDP, said 
voters supported Inamine's realistic ideas about economic measures 
and military base issues, Kyodo reported. Inamine has pledged to improve 
Okinawa's relations with the central government, which have soured 
over the bases issue, to help promote economic stimulus measures. 
The LDP supported a setback in another election, however. On the main 
southern island of Kyushu, incumbent Fukuoka Mayor Keiichi Kuwahara, 
who was backed by the ruling party, was defeated by challenger Hirotaro 
Yamasaki, a former member of Parliament supported by the nation's 
main opposition Democratic Party of Japan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>