<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981115.0207 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a first public indication of what they plan to do with 650,000 
war-displaced people, officials in northwestern Rwanda said they will 
build new villages to provide security for those fleeing attacks by 
Hutu rebels. The policy of resettling mainly Hutus from scattered 
hillside plots into concentrated villages where they would be easier 
to protect _ and control _ has long been favored by the government. 
The plan gained momentum this year when tens of thousands of them 
grew tired of giving portions of their own scarce food, shelter and 
money to the rebels. They knew they would be killed if they refused, 
so the Hutu villagers left their homes and sought protection from 
the army. But similar government-drafted schemes to resettlieng the 
Hutus in villages have failed before, leaving thousands of donor-constructed 
rectangular houses standing empty in rows along roads. Foreign donors, 
who are expected to finance most of this project, have been reluctant 
to respond for fears the resettlement may not be voluntary. Crowding 
people into villages also raises questions about changing cultural 
and social habits of Rwandans who have been living a different life 
for centuries. ``The plan is to take these people to their sectors 
once we are assured about their security. Following discussions with 
the communities, they will be put into groups of houses where it is 
safer for them to be,'' said Alphonse Sharamanzi, a local official. 
Sharamanzi, who on Saturday briefed aid workers and U.S. diplomats 
on the project, said officials from the Ministry of Transport and 
Communications had already begun to train some of the farmers on how 
to carve up the land and allocate properties for housing and farmland. 
He said those Rwandans living in army-protected camps will eventually 
move to the new villages. Their original houses most of them built 
with mud bricks, will be dismantled and moved to the new locations. 
It is not clear, however, how long the project will last or when the 
first villages will be erected. But even traditional farmers acknowledge 
they have little alternative. ``For many of us it is a choice of being 
killed by the rebels in your field, or look for safety elsewhere,'' 
said 38-year-old Appolinaire Abukuli. Along with 45,000 others who 
left their family plots for this squalid, makeshift camp overlooking 
the dark green Lake Ruhondo on the volcanic slopes, Abukuli, a Hutu, 
said attacks and harassment by Hutu rebels had driven most people 
away from their homes and food. The rebels are former Hutu soldiers 
and militiamen responsible for a 1994 genocide of more than 500,000 
minority Tutsis and politically moderate Hutus. The killing ended 
when the Tutsi-led fighters won power in July 1994 and promised a 
national reconciliation. ``The rebels lied to people. They promised 
they would come back to power, but they couldn't do it,'' Abukuli 
said. For the moment, the donors and the U.N. Development Program 
in Rwanda have agreed to finance with dlrs 50 million only the distribution 
of food and water for an estimated 650,000 displaced people sheltered 
in dozens of camps throughout the mountainous region. Apart from security, 
Rwandan authorities say the grouping of people would ease the pressure 
of a rapidly growing population on increasingly scarce land. In northwestern 
Rwanda, the population density of 800 people per square kilometer 
(mile) is double the national average, which is already the highest 
in Africa. An average size of a family plot dropped from 1.8 hectares 
(0.7 acres) in 1950s to 0.6 hectares (0.2 acres) thirty years later. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>