<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981115.1830.0074 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening, tonight the U.S. says it won the battle that almost 
was. Through the threat of American military might. Iraq says it won 
too. By standing up to American aggression. And though tensions have 
ratcheted down a few notches, no one knows if the agreement will hold. 
We get the latest tonight from NBC's Claire Shipman at the White House. 
Claire? Jodi, advisers tonight say that President Clinton called off 
not one, but two, scheduled air strikes against Iraq in the last two 
days. And though the White House is claiming victory and weapons inspectors 
will soon return, one senior official said the gun is still cocked. 
An active effort to oust the government of Saddam Hussein. The president 
said he's finally convinced after a number of communications from 
Baghdad that Iraq is backing down unconditionally. Still, he said 
capitulation was not enough. Until we see complete compliance, we 
will remain vigilant. We will keep up the pressure. We will be ready 
to act. To that end, more B-1 bombers are set to leave langley air 
force base. And officials said those forces in the gulf will act next 
time without warning. Iraq, meanwhile, pledged full cooperation. We 
have decided to give it a chance because peace, stability, preventing 
war, I think, is a Noble goal. For the U.N. weapons inspectors, it's 
wait and see. Iraq has caused this crisis, and that's where it starts. 
It starts with them. If they will come back into cooperation, fine. 
The U.N. team and the U.S. promise rigorous tests of that cooperation. 
Some of the things they will look for -- but those visits might take 
weeks to prepare. More immediately, a hand over of documents detailing 
the Iraqi weapons program, specifically verifiable descriptions of 
their biological and VX chemical weapons programs. Still, the White 
House is aware many will think it was outmaneuvered by saddam again, 
that today sounded an awful lot like nine months ago. Last night, 
Iraq agreed to meet the demands of the international community to 
cooperate fully. The government of Iraq has made a written commitment 
to provide immediate unrestricted, unconditional access. That's why, 
say aides, the president was also eager to demonstrate the U.S. has 
a broader vision for Iraq. Over the long term, the best way to address 
that threat is through a Government in Baghdad. That statement signals 
a distinct shift, a recognition of the need for an alternate and admittedly 
long-term strategy. It doesn't mean the United States will be arming 
the opposition, at least not yet. The opposition is still too weak 
but that's what the United States would like to change. Jody? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>