<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981115.1830.0968 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In "focus" this evening, a legal challenge to the routine practice 
of cutting deals with cooperative witnesses. NBC's Pete Williams on 
a case which will be argued this week in federal court. The case that 
has alarmed the nation's prosecutors began when police in Wichita, 
Kansas, wondered how drug dealers managed to send their profits out 
of town back to suppliers. Detectives soon discovered a drug ring 
that hired Wichita women who took the cash and wired it out of state. 
One of the woman arrested was sonya singleton. She was found guilty, 
based in part on the testimony of a known drug dealer, a man she says 
did not tell the truth. Everything he said was a lie. He laughed the 
whole time he testified against me. It was like it was a joke to him. 
That man, Napoleon Douglas, was a government informant, testifying 
under a deal with prosecutors. They would urge the judge to reduce 
his sentence if he would explain how the money-laundering worked. 
But sonya singleton's lawyer challenged the deal using a novel argument. 
He asked the court to throw it out as an illegal bribe, reasoning 
that the federal bribery law applies to anyone who promises anything 
of value to a Witness for court testimony. We determined that surely 
freedom is a thing of value, or a reduced sentence is a thing of value. 
And there was no exception in the statute for the United States of 
America. a panel of three federal judges agreed that the deal was, 
indeed, a bribe, ruling that the judicial process is Tainted and justice 
cheapened when factual testimony is purchased, whether with leniency 
or money. But just ten days after that decision, the full federal 
appeals court on its own took the ruling off the books and ordered 
the lawyers to reargue the case this week. The government calls the 
original decision an absurdity, noting that informants, like Sammy 
"the bull" gravano, can be key in prosecuting the mob, or in complicated 
conspiracies like the world trade center bombing, and that several 
federal laws explicitly allow plea-bargaining. Legal experts say informant 
deals are most often used in crimes committed by groups. It's a practice 
that exists in almost all criminal prosecutions where you have more 
than one person involved. It's particularly prevalent in organized 
crime or gang cases. And former prosecutors say, if the court ends 
up equating plea deals with illegal bribes, it would be much harder 
to convict the leaders of criminal enterprises. You wouldn't have 
the benefits of a cooperating witness to help you against the bigger 
fish that you were going after. Or you would have to chose to let 
someone go unpunished. And I think either option is inherently unfair. 
But the president of a defense lawyers group says it's time prosecutors 
stop making deals with some criminals to get at other criminals. They 
take people who have been untrustworthy the rest of their lives and 
suddenly build entire cases on them and put people in prison based 
on these unreliable people. The stakes are so high that no matter 
how sonya singleton's case is decided, it's bound to wind up in the 
Supreme Court. Pete Williams, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>