<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0264 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Japanese government has racheted up to a monumental $195 billion 
the size of a new economic stimulus package that it announced on Monday 
morning, making this the largest package Japan has drawn up in eight 
years of economic malaise. Just last week, the government was suggesting 
that it would spend $148 billion. So, in barely four days, the government 
has increased the amount of the plan by about $47 billion _ more than 
the entire amount of the bailout fund for Brazil that was arranged 
last week by the International Monetary Fund. The increase in the 
plan's size, while boosting the impact that it will have on the world's 
second-largest economy, underscores the anxieties in Tokyo and around 
the world about Japan's recession and the risk that it will drag down 
the rest of the world's economic growth as well. Prime Minister Keizo 
Obuchi said on Monday only that the package would be ``substantially 
bigger'' than 20 trillion yen, or $164 billion, but details released 
by government officials showed it at about $195 billion. ``This is 
the first step to put the Japanese economy on a recovery orbit within 
a couple of years,'' said Obuchi, announcing the measures on Monday 
morning. ``I will make every effort to achieve these targets.'' A 
catch-all of tax cuts, spending and lending measures, Monday's stimulus 
package is in many ways a last-ditch attempt by Prime Minister Keizo 
Obuchi to demonstrate his resolve to pull Japan out of its worst recession 
since the end of World War II. Earlier this year, Japan's government 
adopted a stimulus and spending plan worth $137 billion, and the money 
from that package is slowly beginning to roll into the economy. Still, 
the government has suffered repeated criticism that it is not doing 
enough to boost consumer spending, which accounts for the majority 
of the national economy. Over the last year, Japan has been shackled 
by a fiscal austerity law that called for stiff reduction in government 
deficits over the next few years and essentially a balanced budget 
by fiscal year 2005. This package, however, includes a freeze on that 
law, a move that will allow Obuchi to make good on a promise he made 
soon after he took office this summer. Because of confusion surrounding 
the actual spending amounts of the package, some critics fear that 
the package may be less than what is being presented. At about five 
percent of total economic output, the new package is the largest Japan 
has ever recorded, and in some ways, the most ambitious. Government 
estimates suggest that the package could boost real gross domestic 
product by 2.3 percentage points over the next year, which would pull 
Japan out of a recession. It is not clear, however, exactly how much 
of the money the government pours in will lead directly to economic 
growth. The package contains special financing measures that are not 
direct government investment in bricks and mortar, but instead are 
meant to stimulate growth. Still, the government has earmarked about 
$66 billion for developing infrastructure in areas such as information 
technology, telecommunications and the environment, and it aims to 
create one million jobs through training assistance and other programs. 
Addressing one of the major appeals of American officials, it is trying 
to lift spending by individual consumers and corporate spenders over 
the next year and a half through long-term tax cuts that will slash 
individual and corporate income tax rates. In a measure that will 
cost the government a total of $50 billion in tax revenue, Obuchi 
plans to lower the maximum individual income tax rate to 50 percent, 
from 65 percent, where it is now. The government will also lower the 
corporate tax rate to about 40 percent, from 46 percent at the moment. 
The package also includes measures that arose from political bargaining. 
Since the Liberal Democratic Party is short of a majority in the Upper 
House of Parliament, it has had to curry favor with other opposition 
groups. Thus, in response to a demand from the New Komei Party, the 
latest plan will distribute about $5.7 billion in shopping coupons, 
each worth nearly $165, to the elderly and to families with young 
children, to encourage people to spend. Many economists are skeptical 
about whether this measure will lead to a surge in consumption, for 
while consumers may spend the shopping vouchers, they may then save 
that much more from their salaries, leaving the money in the banks. 
While banks usually would take their customer deposits and lend it 
out to corporate and individual customers, the biggest challenge the 
government is facing now is that the nation's banks _ wracked by bad 
loans and weak capital bases _ simply are not lending their money. 
So another pillar of this package is the government's desperate attempt 
to assume a greater role as the nation's banker. Indeed, it is revising 
the law to allow the Japan Development Bank to lend directly to corporations 
that need money to redeem bonds or pay off their debt, or that of 
their affiliates. It will also expand the scope of guarantees the 
government issues to enable medium-size companies to get loans from 
banks. As a complement to this package, the Bank of Japan, the nation's 
central bank, on Friday adopted three measures to help bring money 
to cash-strapped corporations. Under the measures, the Bank of Japan 
will ease the rules under which it buys commercial paper issued by 
companies and conducts open-market operations. The central bank will 
also set up an emergency loan program in which banks can borrow a 
certain amount of money from the central bank if they increase their 
lending to corporations from September levels. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>