<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0102 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Haven't we seen this screen before? The latest Internet initiative 
from Microsoft Corp. is an all-in-one service that combines news, 
information, shopping, bulletin boards and electronic mail. Even its 
name sounds familiar: MSN. Of course, MSN was originally the banner 
for one of Microsoft's most embarrassing missteps, a subscription-based 
online service meant to crush America Online. But that service, introduced 
three years ago, was slow, full of bugs and hard to use, and it fell 
far behind the competition _ on one side from America Online and on 
the other from the emerging World Wide Web. Shifting its focus to 
the Internet, Microsoft then poured money into elaborate entertainment 
offerings, but few people looked at them. After canceling those, the 
company built a series of Internet services meant to be useful, like 
the Sidewalk local-entertainment guide and the Expedia travel agency. 
Now, it seems, there's no page like home. The company has realized 
that on the Web, the power and the money are going to search engines 
like Yahoo, which have added so many features that they are beginning 
to look like just the sort of online service MSN was three years ago. 
So Microsoft has reversed itself again and is stitching its disparate 
Internet services back into a unified network, which it reintroduced 
in September under the name MSN. The service has hardly taken the 
world by storm, and it may face additional questions. Last week, Pete 
Higgins, the top Microsoft executive who looked after the company's 
online efforts, announced that he would take a six-month leave of 
absence beginning in January and would return in an unspecified capacity. 
For now, the online business will report to Steve Ballmer, Microsoft's 
president, who is widely seen as more hard charging and confrontational 
than Higgins. Higgins says that his departure reflects no more than 
a desire to take a break to spend time with his family and tend his 
salmon farm. But in a sign that Microsoft may see the need for a more 
significant change, Ballmer said the company was searching for an 
outsider to replace Higgins. ``Pete has us on a nice trajectory,'' 
Ballmer said. ``All we're trying to do is pump up the volume as we 
move forward.'' Microsoft's trouble in gaining traction for its Web 
effort stands in sharp contrast to the speed with which its Internet 
Explorer Web-browsing software has been able to surge past its main 
competitor, the browsers offered by Netscape Communications Corp. 
The Justice Department, of course, has been arguing that Microsoft 
improperly used the market power of its Windows operating system to 
extend its domination into the browser market. But while the new MSN 
has the seeming advantage of being reachable by a single mouse click 
from the Internet Explorer browser that comes loaded on every new 
Windows PC, it remains uncertain how many Web surfers will choose 
to make that click. After all, the initial MSN online service also 
had the enviable asset of a start button on the main screen of Windows 
95. Microsoft's biggest advantage in its Web effort, however, may 
be the popularity of some of its individual Web sites. Most notably, 
the Hotmail e-mail service that Microsoft bought last year signs up 
150,000 new users a day. Taken together, the Microsoft sites constitute 
the third-most-popular network on the Internet after America Online 
and Yahoo, according to Media Metrix, the rating service based in 
New York. Not that all this was planned. Microsoft is the master of 
the so-called ready-fire-aim business model. The company introduces 
a hastily conceived product and then, through a war of attrition affordable 
perhaps only to a company with a stock-market value of $274 billion, 
methodically hunts down the bugs until a version of the product finally 
wins the minds, if not the hearts, of the computing masses. This trial-and-error 
approach has convinced Microsoft that Web sites are in fact mainly 
another form of software. That is a sharp contrast to the approach 
taken by Yahoo, Disney and most other purveyors of what are called 
``portals'' _ a media-network approach to the business that is based 
on gathering and retaining as large an audience as possible to sell 
to advertisers. Microsoft says it hired many media types but learned, 
for example, that what brings people back to Sidewalk is not witty 
reviews or flashy graphics but sophisticated programs that help people 
find the events they are looking for and then display a map of nearby 
restaurants. The other sites that have worked well for the company 
allow customers to use software to search for airplane tickets, cars, 
home mortgages and the like. Microsoft sees MSN as closer to an extension 
of its Office suite of programs than as a magazine or an online television 
channel. This plays into its current thinking about how it will turn 
MSN's losses _ which it declines to quantify _ into profits. First, 
all those programs that help people find things to buy, like Expedia 
and so on, put Microsoft in a position to earn fees from each transaction. 
And second, it sees a host of new computerized services that can be 
delivered over the Internet as part of what the chairman, Bill Gates, 
calls the company's megaserver strategy. For example, customers could 
connect to MSN to automatically back up the information stored on 
their hard drives. They may pay a fee for this _ or, more likely, 
Ballmer says, they will have to watch advertising as the service is 
performed. The biggest mistake Microsoft made as its strategy evolved 
was to miss the power of portals. But it has now focused its prodigious 
product development organization on building a better portal. Microsoft's 
research department regularly surveys hundreds of Internet users. 
It has discovered that so far only one-third of the users of the so-called 
``portal'' sites exhibit what it defines as ``portal behavior'' _ 
using at least three services within the same name-brand portal site. 
But that proportion is growing rapidly, meaning that while the market 
remains open, it may not stay so as consumers develop Web brand loyalty. 
As the center of its portal strategy, Microsoft created a new home 
page, called MSN.com, meant to be a jumping-off point for its other 
services. This page is the first thing that many users of Microsoft's 
Internet Explorer now see. So do users of the old MSN online service, 
which has been transformed into what amounts to a basic Internet-access 
service provider. As at other portals like Yahoo and Excite, the MSN.com 
home page lets users select certain information _ like local weather, 
sports, and news on certain topics _ that they want to see first thing 
every day. During the initial planning earlier this year, this portal 
page was going to be called ``Start,'' a name that echoes the button 
on the Windows desktop. But upon further review, the name struck Microsoft 
executives as too transient and too oriented toward beginners. Instead, 
it chose MSN to emphasize this network theme and redesigned its other 
services to appear more consistent and to feature the MSN logo. Thus 
Hotmail became MSN Hotmail, Expedia is MSN Expedia, and so on. Each 
of these has a series of links that direct users to other sites in 
the network. The result, since the September rollout, has been an 
immediate jump in traffic. Before the new design, for example, only 
13 percent of the visitors to Expedia came from other Microsoft sites, 
the company says. Now it is 54 percent. Even Hotmail, which has demonstrable 
momentum on its own, now gets about one-third of its new-member referrals 
from other MSN sites. It has been difficult for Microsoft's evolving 
online strategy to maintain credibility with advertisers. ``The strategic 
direction changed so often that every time you worked with them it 
didn't go anywhere,'' said Michael Golden, the head of media at Organic 
Online, an interactive advertising agency. Organic, he said, spent 
a lot of time with Avis Rent A Car on a sponsorship of the Microsoft 
travel site, now defunct, called Mungo Park. Recently, he allows, 
several of his clients have been finding vigorous sales on the MSN 
Shopping site. Over the last few months, Microsoft has more than doubled 
its ad-sales force to 40 people from 20. And it has discovered what 
America Online realized about a year ago _ that there is a lot of 
money available to offer online ``distribution'' to other Web services 
as well as traditional marketers. The company, for example, took in 
a total of $60 million from four search engines _ Alta Vista, Infoseek, 
Lycos and Snap _ to be featured on the MSN home page. It signed a 
$90 million advertising deal with First USA, the credit-card unit 
of Bank One. And it has sold $26 million worth of local advertisements 
on its redesigned Sidewalk service, which is moving to be more of 
a national yellow pages than an entertainment guide. As much as the 
strategic direction may have shifted, people who deal with MSN say 
that its executives move with a hard nose in whatever direction they 
are pointed. One marketing official of an online store that has a 
multimillion-dollar contract for Microsoft to send shoppers to its 
site was flabbergasted when MSN officials asked the advertiser to 
put links on its site to send surfers back to MSN after shopping. 
``They are much more hard driving and bottom-line oriented than other 
Internet companies,'' said the marketer, who rebuffed the demand. 
For all that, MSN's new consistent-brand approach glosses over the 
many incompatibilities between the sites that resulted from the various 
product groups that did not coordinate design of their sites. Because 
each of the originally separate services posted a slightly different 
privacy policy, they cannot share data about users with other parts 
of the network. Such exchanges, however, would be difficult anyway, 
because each site has a separate user-registration database. One person 
can sign up for the user code name Bsmith on Hotmail. A second Bsmith 
could use that name on Expedia and a third person could sign up separately 
on Investor. Or all three accounts could be the same person, and Microsoft 
would have no way of knowing. Microsoft says it is working on a way 
to have a single unified registration account, of the sort that Yahoo 
and Excite have. But it will be complicated to retroactively change 
customers' account information. And even over the last year, as the 
strategy was changed to merge the separate sites into the unified 
portal, it was up to the separate teams to work out the details of 
the integration among themselves. The process, especially to newcomers, 
was excruciating. ``In a start-up, I spent less than 1 percent of 
my time communicating what we were doing,'' said Sabeer Bhatia, the 
chief executive of Hotmail, who was with the company when Microsoft 
bought it. ``At Microsoft, the overhead of having meetings and building 
a consensus among a group of people is so high, I had to hire people 
just to manage the communication,'' he said. All that is now in the 
past, Microsoft executives assert. Their strategy is set and they 
are all working to flesh out this new vision of a utilitarian portal. 
Similarly, Microsoft is working to improve MSN by expanding the Internet 
search capability and adding instant messaging and other features 
that let users communicate with one another and form virtual communities. 
There will also be much more emphasis on shopping services, to complement 
the new design of Sidewalk, and offerings for small businesses and 
Web publishers provided by the Link Exchange advertising network of 
400,000 Web sites that Microsoft recently acquired. Of course with 
all the changes, many wonder how long Microsoft will be willing to 
continue to lose money on its online efforts. But Ballmer insists 
the company will not pull out. ``We are a company that makes long-term 
investments,'' he said last week. ``MSN can be a great business. The 
largest unanswered question is how quickly will this happen.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>