<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0205 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As soon as Bret Favre's dart stuck in Tyrone Davis' hands for a 2-yard 
touchdown pass in the first quarter on Sunday, a voice in the press 
box intoned: ``That is Favre's 200th touchdown pass; he's the second-fastest 
to 200 in NFL history. He did it in his 107th game; Dan Marino did 
it in his 89th game.'' On another Favre completion in the second quarter, 
the Green Bay Packers' quarterback soared over 25,000 career passing 
yards. When he collaborated with Davis, his tight end, for a 60-yard 
score and his 201st touchdown pass, he tied Roman Gabriel for 21st 
place on the career list. And he's only 29 years old. Now that's a 
quarterback. Throughout the Packers' 37-3 rout, the changes in the 
out-of-town results on the scoreboard were more compelling than anything 
the Giants did. As the remnants of 76,272 spectators watched the final 
minutes, Favre displayed what the Packers possess and what the Giants 
so desperately need: a quarterback. In another dreary performance, 
Danny Kanell completed only eight of 20 passes for only 88 yards with 
two interceptions and three sacks. For the first time, Coach Jim Fassel 
would not confirm that Kanell would be the quarterback in the Giants' 
next game _ even against the 2-8 Eagles, who lost on Sunday to the 
now 2-8 Redskins. All that Fassel would say about the identity of 
next Sunday's quarterback was, ``I don't know yet,'' meaning Kent 
Graham, the backup who completed 2 of 5 passes for 12 yards, might 
start. With the Giants now having lost five of six games for a 3-7 
record, Kanell keeps getting worse. He talked about ``this being part 
of the struggle you have to go through'' as a young quarterback, but 
the Giants' hierarchy has to be wondering if the struggle is just 
too much for him. Unless Kanell suddenly shows much more potential 
over the rest of the season, Fassel and General Manager Ernie Accorsi 
must be hoping that there's a quality quarterback who will still be 
available in the National Football League's annual stock show of prime 
beef in April. The touted names are Kentucky's Tim Couch (if he doesn't 
decide to remain in college for another season), Central Florida's 
Daunte Culpepper, UCLA's Cade McNown, Kansas State's Michael Bishop 
and Washington's Brock Huard. The expansion Cleveland Browns II have 
the first choice in April. And three other teams with a worse record 
than the Giants are expected to covet a young quarterback _ the Carolina 
Panthers, now at 1-9, along with the Eagles and the Redskins. Even 
if the Giants were to grab one of the touted rookie quarterbacks, 
they also would be wise to hire an older quarterback to get through 
the next season or two, as the Jets did in signing Vinny Testeverde 
and as the Buffalo Bills did in importing Doug Flutie from the Canadian 
Football League. Whatever the Giants do, they can't go into next season 
with only Kanell, Graham and their current third-stringer, Mike Cherry, 
as the only quarterbacks on their roster. With the Giants' offense 
unable to generate a touchdown now for nearly 10 quarters, Kanell 
has shown himself to be no better than the departed Dave Brown, if 
not worse. And with Favre on display Sunday, the Giants' loyalists 
saw the quality of quarterback the Giants need if they are to be a 
Super Bowl contender again. No other quarterback slings the ball off 
balance or off his back foot the way Favre does. And no other quarterback 
seems to exhult in the fun of the game the way Favre does. Against 
the Giants, Favre hit 21 of 33 for 267 yards and two touchdowns with 
no interceptions. And if Mike Holmgren, the Packers' coach, had let 
him throw more than two passes, which he completed, in the final quarter, 
Favre would have had a 300-yard game, maybe a 400-yard game. ``I told 
him, `You're a little bored now, aren't you?''' Holmgren would say 
later, alluding to the fourth-quarter leash. ``He gave me that little 
smile and said, `You're not letting me throw.''' Told later of Holmgren's 
remark, Favre smiled that mischievous smile and denied he was bored, 
saying, ``I wouldn't call it bored. I was happy we were up, I was 
pleased with the way we were playing, but I don't think I was bored.'' 
Maybe not, but he would have rather been throwing passes. As for his 
201 touchdown passes and 25,000-plus passing yards, Favre didn't seem 
impressed. ``I didn't even know that until you just told me,'' he 
said. ``I couldn't tell you who I passed, because no one cares. What's 
important is how many Super Bowl rings you put on your fingers.'' 
Brett Favre already has one of those rings. But the Giants can't even 
dream of Super Bowl rings until they find a much better quarterback. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>