<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0101 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright met the wife of a jailed Malaysian 
political leader here Sunday in a gesture of solidarity that angered 
her hosts and suggested that politics could swamp economics at a meeting 
of Asian and Pacific Rim countries. Albright talked briefly with Wan 
Azizah Ismail, whose husband, former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim, 
was imprisoned in September and is on trial for corruption and sex-related 
charges. Shortly after the meeting, Albright had a caustic public 
exchange with Malaysia's Minister of Trade, Rafidah Aziz, about Anwar's 
treatment. ``The reporting on the trial of Anwar Ibrahim has given 
us great concern,'' Albright said at a news conference with other 
ministers. Ms. Rafidah responded that Anwar would get a fair trial, 
adding, ``Maybe when I go to the states, I would like to meet Ken 
Starr,'' referring to the independent prosecutor who is investigating 
President Clinton. ``He's not in jail,'' Albright replied brusquely, 
to the surprise of hundreds of reporters who had turned up to hear 
an announcement of a new trade agreement involving the 21 countries 
at the meeting. The ministers did announce a trade deal, though it 
fell far short of the sweeping agreement to lower tariffs that many 
countries were seeking. Stymied by opposition from Japan, the countries 
agreed to reconsider the proposals, which would lower tariffs in nine 
major industries, at the World Trade Organization. That basically 
puts off the drive for free trade in Asia until 1999. Sunday's compromise 
was a fitting conclusion to a chaotic opening weekend at the Asia 
Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, which ends Wednesday. With restive 
crowds outside, rancorous exchanges inside and a conspicuously absent 
guest from the United States, the gathering seemed anything but cooperative. 
President Clinton said on Saturday that he would skip the meeting 
to monitor the Iraq crisis from Washington. While Albright participated 
in the talks Sunday, she cut short her visit to return to Washington. 
Malaysia's political turmoil flared up on the streets, too, as 200 
demonstrators marched at the base of the Petronas Towers, the twin 
skyscrapers that are the world's tallest buildings. The crowd chanted 
slogans against Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad until riot police 
dispersed them with tear gas and a water cannon. On Saturday, Mahathir 
criticized foreign visitors for using the APEC meeting as an excuse 
to meddle in Malaysia's internal affairs. His comments came after 
Canada's foreign minister, Lloyd Axworthy, met with Anwar's wife. 
Officials were more diplomatic in their assessment of the trade agreement. 
But it was clear that many were deflated by the outcome. ``I wouldn't 
say the talks collapsed, but we're disappointed,'' said Sergio Marchi, 
Canada's Minister for International Trade. Marchi said the agreement 
failed to build on a pact reached at last year's APEC meeting in Vancouver 
to reduce trade barriers in Asian markets by Jan. 1, 1999. By shifting 
the negotiations to the WTO, the countries have delayed that process 
by as much as a year. Japan steadfastly refused to lower tariffs in 
its fishing and forestry industries. Although Japan agreed to move 
the negotiations to the WTO, it gave no indication that it would retreat 
from its position. Officials with knowledge of the talks also said 
that Mexico and Chile resisted the package because they did not want 
to weaken their bargaining position in upcoming trade negotiations 
with Europe. Charlene Barshefsky, the U.S. Trade Representative, said 
that the agreement to move the entire package to the WTO constituted 
a victory, since Japan had wanted to strip out the fishing and forestry 
industries altogether. ``Two days ago, we thought the whole initiative 
would collapse,'' Ms. Barshefsky said. ``From our point of view, moving 
forward is the key.'' Japan's trade and industry minister, Kaoru Yosano, 
said Japan had not been able to mobilize domestic support for the 
cuts in fishing and forestry tariffs. But he held open the chance 
of doing so. ``Don't confuse what is happening at APEC with what will 
happen at the WTO,'' Yosano told reporters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>