<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0083 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's easy enough to preserve art that has been designated classic 
in the old high sense: the kind meant to reside in museums, concert 
halls and august theatrical spaces. Age cannot wither nor custom stale 
its infinite variety, we feel (or are told to feel). This art has 
history and eternity on its side. The question of preserving art that 
began as entertainment and made its way from the bottom or the middle 
up rather than from the top down is trickier. Without this kind of 
stuff, from movies to all that popular music and dance, the United 
States would be a shriveled little cultural husk. But here's the rub 
when it comes to the popular performing arts. The best preservations 
shouldn't just reveal their aesthetic timelessness or new-found historical 
value. They need to recreate the excitement _ that's too vague a word 
_ the delight, titillation and pure adrenalin these works sent coursing 
through the culture's bloodstream. And here's the danger, too. For 
whether it was ragtime, blues, jazz, the tunes of Tin Pan Alley, swing, 
or hillbilly music, it was denounced once upon a time as a mindless 
fad, a vulgar craze, the sign of a nation's basic triviality or a 
near-obscene eruption of its once well-regulated musical id. Now, 
as the century that birthed all this music ends, we are reviving or 
renovating it, even trying with great fervor to make it new. And it's 
very interesting to try to separate the bogus from the genuine as 
we look backward, hoping to learn something about how to move into 
a new century when everything we are was shaped by the old one. It's 
been almost exactly 100 years since the first piano rags were published, 
loosing a music that would be heard round the world from the 1890s 
through World War I. Ragtime had it all: minstrel and vaudeville songs, 
dances from the cakewalk to the fox trot; sheet music, piano rolls, 
banjos, marching bands, bordellos, ballrooms and clubs; urban chic 
(``Harlem Rag''), pastoral longings (``Heliotrope Bouquet'') and Orientalist 
cravings (``The Cleopatra Rag''). Ragtime is the musical and dramatic 
frame for the Broadway show of the same name. It is treated as a body 
of classic piano music and a genre that can still inspire vigorous 
new pieces in Reginald R. Robinson's current CD, ``Euphonic Sounds'' 
(Delmark). And it is claimed for the jazz repertory in Marcus Roberts' 
CD ``The Joy of Joplin'' (Sony Classical), at last joining a body 
of work that, like the songs of Cole Porter or Harold Arlen, can be 
improvised on or made the raw material of new compositions. There's 
no denying that it's hard to believe this music, with its firm marching 
bass and its fluid asymmetrical melodies, was so shocking that playful 
syncopation could shatter a nation's peace of mind. ``Like a criminal 
novel, it is full of bangs and explosions,'' one critic complained. 
But a writer for Opera Magazine in 1916 chose to both exalt and pontificate: 
``If any musician does not feel in his heart the rhythmic complexities 
of the `Robert E. Lee,' I should not trust him to feel in his heart 
((those)) of Brahms.'' Indeed. And when the ragtime revival began 
in 1970 with the Nonesuch recordings of Scott Joplin rags, the pianist, 
Joshua Rifkin, went out of his way to stress Joplin's links to such 
composers as Chopin and Schubert. The Nonesuch label and the Rifkin 
approach did what a Chanel or a Ralph Lauren logo would have done: 
They created a certain aura for the music and guaranteed a certain 
quality. But the interpretations came to sound wan (pretty, but wan) 
and monorhythmic, as though drawing-room hyper-refinement had met 
up with the rhythmic stolidness of a player piano. The balance was 
better as the decade went on. There was Joplin's ``Entertainer,'' 
a 1902 rag that became the hit theme song for ``Butch Cassidy and 
the Sundance Kid.'' More important, the irrepressible Eubie Blake, 
who had been writing and performing ragtime for more than 50 years, 
reappeared, while young musicians like William Bolcolm started playing 
with more imaginative energy. (And writing. Bolcolm's ``Ghost Rags'' 
are lovely pieces.) But basically the revival of the 1970s was about 
expanding and revising the canon of American music. The 1990s revival 
wants to explore ragtime's role in our past, and make it part of a 
musical canon that has a future. The Broadway show, with a book by 
Terrence McNally, a score by Stephen Flaherty and lyrics by Lynn Ahrens, 
is the biggest, costliest artifact, an effective but diluted version 
of E.L. Doctorow's novel, which used language to ``score'' social, 
racial and political changes in the United States as they burst through 
the unyielding beat of late Victorian life. Flaherty's score has a 
number of rag and rag-inflected songs, all competent, but with melodies 
that tend to be anthemlike, or pretty but unsurprising. The musical 
approaches of Robinson and Roberts are more exciting. They combine 
the historical with the contemporary in quite different ways and succeed 
equally well. Robinson (seen on the cover of ``Euphonic Sounds'' with 
bowler hat and cane in true ragtime gent-style) plays rags by Joplin 
and his contemporaries, who included James Scott, Louis Chauvin and 
Joseph Lamb. (There is also a very good CD of Lamb's opulent rags, 
by the Dutch pianist Guido Nielson on the Basta label). He plays with 
force and ease. You savor the grace and languor of the Joplin-Chauvin 
``Heliotrope Bouquet'' and the mood swings _ stately to brilliant 
to feverish _ of Joplin's ``Euphonic Sounds.'' You feel the tension 
and the collaboration between the right and the left hands. And seven 
of the 19 pieces are his own, written in all kinds of moods: eccentric 
and romantic rags, a charmer of a tango, even a rambunctious little 
gallop. In ``The Joy of Joplin'' Roberts is out to harness the forces 
of ragtime for the jazz tradition. (It was the 1920s craze for blues 
and jazz that dethroned ragtime.) Best known for his work with Wynton 
Marsalis, Roberts is a beautifully trained jazz modernist whose favorite 
period extends from the early 1920s (Jelly Roll Morton and James P. 
Johnson) into the 1940s and 1950s (Thelonious Monk and Erroll Garner). 
He fractures ragtime's meters, complicates its melodies, expands its 
harmonies and composes new themes over its chords. And it's bracing 
and jolting _ the closest we've yet come to the shock of the new, 
our new, which takes in rhythms and sounds unheard by the old masters. 
His own eight compositions show his musical passions and his formidable 
technique. Here's Bach; here's Debussy; here are Beethoven and Gottschalk. 
They bristle and take unexpected turns, then linger (too long at times) 
in fields of lavish chords. In the end, Robinson and Roberts show 
us that hearing ragtime should be like holding two contradictory ideas 
in your head at the same time and continuing to function, which was 
F. Scott Fitzgerald's prescription for a first-rate intelligence. 
He didn't add ``with pleasure and excitement,'' but we can. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>