<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0142 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Jets produced a spectacular play Sunday _ Aaron Glenn's 
104-yard score on the longest return of a field-goal attempt in National 
Football League history _ but they couldn't overcome dropped balls 
and missed tackles. Perhaps the Jets are not at the stage where they 
win games they're supposed to win. But in recent weeks, they certainly 
had overcome blown plays and poor execution. There were too many Sunday, 
though, as the Colts produced a 24-23 victory. It didn't matter that 
the Colts came in as a 1-8 team, led by a rookie quarterback, or that 
the Jets had brought in a four-game winning streak, had flexed their 
muscles repeatedly week after week, had been making big plays when 
it mattered. At the end, it was the lowly Colts who launched an 80-yard 
drive, who kept it alive on a fourth-and-15 pass from Peyton Manning 
to Marshall Faulk, and who got the winning score as Marcus Pollard 
hauled down a Manning pass and dragged Otis Smith into the end zone 
for the winning score with 24 seconds remaining. The loss dropped 
the Jets out of their first-place tie with Miami in the American Conference 
East, lowering their record to 6-4 and giving them a share of second 
place with Buffalo. ``This makes me sick,'' moaned coach Bill Parcells. 
Repeatedly in his postgame news conference, Parcells used the words 
``terrible'' and ``horrible'' and said he was ``the most disappointed 
since I've been here.'' And who could blame him? Glenn's cinematic 
runback, which consumed 17 seconds and looked like one of those old 
college-hero movies as he dashed to and fro and ultimately down the 
left sideline, had started with 1 second left on the clock at halftime. 
Mike Vanjerjagt was attempting a record-equaling 63-yard field goal. 
The football went wide right to Glenn, whose run put the Jets ahead 
by 23-10. But Parcells, and the Jets, sensed this wasn't going to 
be a rout. In fact, the coach even warned his players that when they 
went out for the second half they could blow this thing. The offense 
had been seriously flawed at times despite the reemergence of Curtis 
Martin's running game and quarterback Vinny Testaverde making some 
big plays. With the score tied at 10 in the second quarter, Testaverde 
found tight end Fred Baxter alone near the back line of the end zone. 
The pass spiraled to Baxter who caught it, looked down, realized his 
feet were touching the line, and tried to get them inbounds. It was 
too late. The play was negated and the Jets merely wound up with a 
field goal from John Hall, one of three he kicked. He missed a 47-yarder 
in the third period that could have put the Jets ahead by 9. Jets' 
drives were erratic. Their first barely had time to start moving. 
For the second straight week, Testaverde tossed an interception on 
his first pass of the game. It was converted into a field goal by 
Vanderjagt. ``I'm having a tough time the first play of the game,'' 
Testaverde conceded later. But he also said, ``A couple of dropped 
balls would have been big plays for us.'' Instead, Testaverde was 
the losing quarterback for the first time as a Jet after leading the 
team to six victories. His second-half problems were compounded by 
missed opportunities as he wound up completing 12 of 28 passes for 
249 yards. He was intercepted once, threw one touchdown, but was sacked 
four times and lost one of his three fumbles. Manning, meanwhile, 
generated 276 yards in completing 26 of 44 passes. He tossed three 
touchdowns while being intercepted twice. Martin won the battle of 
the running backs, at least in rushing yardage _ 134 yards to Faulk's 
69. The Jets did produce a 63-yard touchdown from Testaverde to Wayne 
Chrebet, and Hall's three field goals _ all in the first half. Chrebet 
and Keyshawn Johnson also had missed catches, though. Then there was 
also a key drop by Baxter on a third-and-8 in the final period, with 
the Jets hanging on to a 23-17 lead. That stalled the drive, and though 
the Colts failed to do anything on their next possession, they got 
the ball back with 3:04 remaining. Now it was the Jets' defenders 
turn to miss. Manning is a much more poised performer since facing 
the Jets in the third game of the season, when the Jets routed the 
Colts, 44-6. He had good protection and he also moved well out of 
the pocket. On this winning drive he recovered from a third-and-20, 
and then a fourth-and-15. The Colts were backed up on their 33 on 
that fourth down when he sought out Faulk. The slithery running back 
snared the pass short of a first down, but put on a move past a flailing 
Corwin Brown and got 18 yards on the play. Manning methodically moved 
toward the Jets' goal line, converting twice on third-and-1 by running 
himself, passing every other time. Finally, the Colts got to the Jets' 
14. Manning drilled the ball to Pollard on the 3. That was where Smith 
wrapped him up. Or tried to. Smith is 5 inches shorter and 65 pounds 
lighter than Pollard, a 6-4, 257-pound tight end. Smith bear-hugged 
him and Pollard began to inch his way to the goal line while Smith's 
feet were churning. As Pollard was falling he extended one hand, holding 
the ball, over the goalline. ``It was hard getting around him,'' said 
Smith. ``He's not one of those little receivers, and I couldn't get 
my arms around him to bring him down. I've got to get back in the 
weight room.'' The Jets' last gasp was drowned out by the crowd noise 
in the RCA Dome, a rare occurrence in recent years. The Jets' final 
drive began on their 29, but a Testaverde-to-Johnson 19-yard pass 
got the Jets to the 48 with 11 seconds remaining. From there, anything 
was possible, especially in this season of the Jets' excellent passing 
game. The crowd wouldn't let up, though. Testaverde couldn't hear 
very well and neither could his center, Kevin Mawae. ``I was pulling 
away as Kevin was snapping,'' explained Testaverde. ``My bottom hand 
hit the ball.'' It bounced to the Colts with only six seconds remaining. 
There are, as Testaverde knows, many a slip in a game and in the season. 
For Parcells, it was ``a big step back.'' ``All we had to do was make 
that one tackle,'' he said. As Testaverde put it, ``This hurts us 
quite a bit.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>