<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0215 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Maybe it was the time the Green Bay Packers split a receiver wide 
at the goal line and the New York Giants did not bother to send a 
defender out there to cover him. Or maybe it was when Giants quarterback 
Danny Kanell did a reprise of his version of the Statue-of-Liberty 
play, the football taken out of his hand for a fumble as he brought 
it up to throw _ a replay of a misplay from a Giants defeat of last 
month. Kanell's fumble was sandwiched between two interceptions. Or 
maybe it was when Giants Coach Jim Fassel finally caved in, turning 
his sideline into a fire drill as he made wholesale changes in the 
offensive lineup. It mattered little. The Giants' offense, in any 
grouping of players, has now gone nearly 10 quarters without a touchdown. 
Choose your moment, but somewhere along the way in the Giants' numbing 
37-3 loss to the Green Bay Packers on Sunday, the 1998 Giants bottomed 
out, and with that came the acknowledgment that their season is not 
only lost, not only beyond rescue, but has become material for next 
year's planned rebirth. The defending National Football Conference 
East champions are in a rebuilding mode. For weeks, Fassel has insisted 
he was not going to make lineup changes that would suggest he was 
playing with the 1999 season in mind. After Sunday's collapse, with 
his team in a deep decline, Fassel has revised his thinking. ``If 
this is the way we are going to play, then I am going to give some 
other guys a chance to play,'' Fassel said. Asked if that included 
Kanell, whose record as a Giants starter is now 10-9-1 after a dreadful 
8-for-20 passing day, Fassel said he had not made that decision. But 
even that response is a change of heart for Fassel, who after every 
previous Giants loss has said that Kanell was still his starter. Kanell, 
who was replaced late in the third quarter by Kent Graham, seemed 
to understand how badly the Giants have stumbled. ``I don't think 
you can get any lower than this,'' Kanell said. ``It was that ugly.'' 
It was a rare day in the Giants' locker room, when the poor play was 
so universal that offensive and defensive players shared the sting 
of the blame. ``It's ridiculous that we have the record we have after 
the season we had last year,'' said the Giants' Pro Bowl defensive 
end Michael Strahan. ``Things are going to have to change around here. 
I don't know if it's changing this year, maybe next year. But things 
have to change.'' With a 3-7 record, the Giants have their worst record 
after 10 games since the 1995 season, when the team finished 5-11. 
``I'm going to look at everything,'' Fassel said. ``I think a lot 
of guys were giving a full effort, but when I examine the tape of 
the game, I expect to see some guys who aren't. And I won't tolerate 
anything less than full effort.'' The Giants' troubles were so numerous 
that almost no portion of their performance deserved praise. They 
rushed for only 65 yards, with starting running back Gary Brown carrying 
eight times for 21 yards. Tyrone Wheatley, who finally got some rushing 
carries in the second half, gained 20 yards on five attempts. Kanell 
threw for 88 yards, most of it in the Giants' lone scoring drive in 
the second quarter. The offense he led converted only two of 11 third-down 
opportunities. The Giants averaged 2.6 yards a rushing carry and 2.1 
yards a passing attempt. On defense, the Giants' front four, the team's 
strength, registered just one sack and seldom pressured Green Bay 
quarterback Brett Favre, who had a steady game with two touchdown 
passes and 267 yards on 21-for-33 passing. Together with the Giants' 
linebackers, the defensive line did little to stop the Packers' running 
game, which, plagued by injuries, was almost nonexistent before today. 
The Packers' Darick Holmes rushed for 111 yards, the first Green Bay 
running back to run for more than 100 yards this season. The Giants' 
secondary had many lapses, too, with loosely covered Green Bay receivers 
piercing the middle of the field and with poor judgments by other 
Giants defenders hurting the team at pivotal junctures. ``Everybody 
on this team had their moment out there when he didn't make a play,'' 
Kanell said. Among the first of those breakdowns came in the first 
quarter of a scoreless game. A Green Bay penalty near the Giants' 
goal line had backed the Packers up to a second-and-12 at the 12-yard 
line. But on the next play, Giants linebacker Marcus Buckley, who 
has struggled to replace the injured Corey Miller, was blocked completely 
out of the play on the right side of the Giants' defense as Green 
Bay's Raymont Harris dashed unimpeded through the opening Buckley's 
absence presented. Harris was knocked out at the 2. On the next play, 
Favre lofted a pass to tight end Tyrone Davis, who had lined up on 
the right side of the Packers' line and been left completely uncovered. 
After Kanell suffered his first interception _ an underthrown pass 
that was picked off by Leroy Butler _ the Packers extended their lead 
to 10-0 with a 39-yard Ryan Longwell field goal. The Giants' lone 
score of the game followed, Brad Daluiso kicking a 24-yard field goal 
at the conclusion of a 9-play drive. Half of the eight passes that 
Kanell completed came during that drive. The Giants quarterback connected 
with Ike Hilliard twice for 40 yards and found tight end Howard Cross 
for a 12-yard gain. It didn't take Green Bay long to answer the Giants' 
score. Favre was sacked on first down of the Packers' next possession, 
but on second down he completed a 10-yard pass to Robert Brooks. On 
a third-and-3, Favre connected with Davis again for a 60-yard touchdown 
pass play. On the play, Giants free safety Tito Wooten went for the 
deflection as he ran alongside Davis. When Wooten missed the ball, 
Davis caught it and turned upfield. He outran strongside safety Percy 
Ellsworth for the touchdown. The Packers added a field goal for a 
20-3 halftime lead. If the Giants made any adjustments at halftime, 
they did not show them in third quarter. Green Bay expanded its lead 
with another Longwell field goal _from 31 yards _ on its first possession 
of the second half, and the next time the Packers got the football 
they drove 73 yards for a touchdown and a 30-3 lead. Favre riddled 
the Giants' defense in this 11-play drive, which concluded with a 
7-yard touchdown run by fullback William Henderson. Holmes concluded 
the scoring with a 2-yard touchdown run. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>