<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0109 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This pristine Caribbean beach is one of the world's most important 
nesting areas for sea turtles, and Mexican environmentalists view 
its ivory sands and emerald waters as sacred terrain, on a smaller 
scale but a bit the way people in the United States see Yosemite or 
the Grand Canyon. For years the environmentalists have been pleading 
with the authorities to protect the beach, 67 miles south of Cancun, 
from the bulldozers and chain saws that are devouring vast stretches 
of palm-covered dunes and mangrove marshes as the government sells 
off the coast of the state of Quintana Roo to commercial developers. 
But in February, after months of secret negotiations, the state government 
announced that Xcacel (pronounced shkah-SELL) had been sold for $2.2 
million to a Spanish conglomerate that plans to build a 450-room hotel. 
The sale has set off one of Mexico's most bitter environmental battles. 
Greenpeace, the Sierra Club and other international and Mexican conservation 
groups are campaigning to reverse the deal. Government officials and 
the developers are shrugging off the protests. ``Everywhere there 
are extremists who say development can't move in concert with nature, 
but we disagree,'' said Jorge Polanco Zapata, who represents Quintana 
Roo as a senator from Mexico's governing party and supports the Xcacel 
hotel project. ``We think the turtles will be a tourist attraction.'' 
The sale has become a symbol of what ecologists describe as predatory 
development desecrating a wonderland of squawking parrots and pre-Columbian 
ruins along 80 miles of coast stretching from Cancun to the Mayan 
site of Tulum. Environmentalists complain that land use plans and 
environmental impact statements have been ignored in the construction 
of a new corridor of luxury hotels and ``eco-tourism'' resorts. Aracely 
Dominguez, the founder of the region's most important conservation 
group and the owner of a small Cancun hotel, said highways had been 
gouged through coastal rain forests, mangrove swamps paved into parking 
lots and delicate coastal bays dredged with hydraulic draglines. ``We 
can't permit them to plunder Xcacel as they have all these other beaches,'' 
she said. Xcacel has become the focus for scientists because of research 
showing that thousands of Atlantic green and loggerhead turtles nest 
there, apparently attracted to the gentle slope of its sands, so many 
that those species' genetic diversity is dependent on the beach. As 
a result, scientists and conservationists have based turtle protection 
and environmental education programs for the entire Yucatan Peninsula 
here. For a decade, thousands of children and their families have 
made pilgrimages to Xcacel each year to experience the wonder of the 
summer nesting season, when on any evening scores of 400-pound loggerheads 
glide through the surf, lumber up the sloping beach and burrow into 
the dune to lay eggs. Turtle rangers protect the nests from the poachers 
who sack beaches elsewhere in Mexico. Xcacel was a federal reserve 
until 1992, when control passed to Quintana Roo. Aides to Gov. Mario 
Villanueva secretly negotiated the sale, and federal environmental 
officials have ignored entreaties to intervene. ``This sale has fed 
cynicism about the government's environmental policies, because an 
entire generation of children has learned that Xcacel is a protected 
area,'' said Julio Zurita, a Quintana Roo biologist who helped identify 
its importance. ``Then overnight they were told it's been sold.'' 
The announcement of the sale in February touched off an outcry from 
scores of international environmental groups. ``We don't think the 
builder of a hotel should come in and destroy the habitat of a creature 
that's been around for millions of years,'' said Edgar Wayburn, honorary 
president of the Sierra Club. Villanueva reacted by declaring a swath 
of dune 100 yards wide the length of the beach to be a ``protected 
natural area'' and prohibiting construction there. Conservationists 
said the move had little practical consequence, since few hotels build 
on the dune anyway. The Spanish corporation that bought Xcacel, Sol 
Melia, which operates hotels in 23 countries, has said it plans to 
build ``a 450-room Paradisus Tulum All-Inclusive Beach Resort.'' Evagrio 
Sanchez, a senior executive of Sol Melia's real estate division, said 
his company was awaiting an environmental study before elaborating 
final designs. But the hotel will be built away from the beach, with 
subdued illumination that will not confuse the nesting turtles, he 
said. ``We want sustainable development, with scrupulous protection, 
not just for the turtles but for all the fauna and flora,'' Sanchez 
said. But environmentalists were alarmed when, during a meeting in 
May, Sol Melia executives outlined plans for a golf course at Xcacel. 
A seaside hotel in Costa Rica that Sol Melia has touted as an example 
of its commitment to build ``in concert with nature'' features an 
18-hole golf course and a discotheque. Construction at Xcacel has 
not yet begun, but Sol Melia employees who put up a barbed-wire fence 
around their newly purchased property chopped down 1,200 rare palm 
trees, said Juan Carlos Cantu, Greenpeace's Mexico director. Sanchez 
denied that. ``We're not going to do anything that will go against 
nature,'' he said. If most of the debate has been about ecology, Alfredo 
Cesar Dachary, director of Quintana Roo's Caribbean Center for Sustainable 
Development, has questioned the economics of the deal. Why, he asks, 
did the government sell a coastal treasure like Xcacel for a price 
fetched by some private homes in Cancun or the nearby island of Cozumel. 
``That $2.25 million price is completely laughable,'' Cesar said. 
The government sold several beaches in the same area last year. Atop 
a mangrove marsh on the beach adjoining Xcacel, a developer is building 
tracts of concrete bungalows. Builders describe the sprawling resort 
as ``low-density'' development, but from the air it looks like Levittown. 
All the construction has attracted thousands of workers to Quintana 
Roo, and many live in coastal slums. One squatters' settlement near 
Playa del Carmen, 42 miles south of Cancun, has 30,000 inhabitants. 
When Hurricane Mitch was threatening Quintana Roo recently, there 
was an incident that was emblematic of developers' attitudes. The 
owners at several seacoast hotel projects summarily fired 7,000 construction 
workers, shorting them a week's pay, and fled. The panicked laborers, 
many of whom live in other states, blocked the coastal highway for 
hours until authorities sent buses to take them to Cancun. After sleeping 
in streets there for two nights, mobs of hungry workers rioted, shattering 
windows and overturning vending machines. Artemio Santos Santos, president 
of the Coparmex, the state's most important business group, said environmental 
and social disputes were beginning to disrupt Quintana Roo's coastal 
development because the government had failed to enforce clear environmental 
policies. ``There need to be clear rules for investors about respecting 
our fauna and flora, and that's where we've fallen short,'' Santos 
said. ``And that could be what's happening with this Xcacel project. 
They're developing an area that should be dedicated to the turtles.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>