<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0099 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
JAKARTA, Indonesia _ ``Please don't break through the barriers,'' 
an army captain pleaded to a huge throng of student demonstrators. 
``We are soldiers. We are not the enemy of society.'' He turned to 
his troops, massed shield-to-shield across a roadway, stern-faced 
behind their plastic visors. ``No shooting at all,'' he ordered. ``Hooray 
for the students! Hooray for the military!'' That was the early evening 
of the day now being called Black Friday, before troops fired volley 
after volley of rounds in the direction of the demonstrators, killing 
a half dozen and wounding scores more. Two days later, Indonesians, 
diplomats and other analysts remain perplexed Sunday as to why the 
military acted as harshly as it did against demonstrators who had 
made no real effort to break through its lines. At a moment when the 
military is desperate to show that it is indeed ``not the enemy of 
society,'' it was one of the worst tactical decisions it could have 
taken. The killings, which were reported vividly in the newly open 
Indonesian press, have caused outrage here at the very moment when 
the dominant role of the military in Indonesian society is hotly debated. 
Some experts even see the success or failure of the military's attempt 
to reform as the linchpin of Indonesia's efforts to move peacefully 
toward greater democracy after more than three decades of authoritarian 
rule by President Suharto. Friday's deaths spurred huge demonstrations 
of tens of thousands of students and poor people and an opportunistic 
wave of rioting on Saturday. The unrest subsided Sunday in the rain 
and the exhaustion, but not before some military officers on duty 
to keep order Saturday said they felt uncomfortable exerting their 
authority, given the new level of public anger against them. The armed 
forces are now at one of the most delicate moments in their history, 
their public image at a low ebb because of their close association 
with Suharto and because of past abuses now being made public. Last 
week, the armed forces chief, Gen. Wiranto, took the humbling step 
of visiting a hospital to apologize to students who had been beaten 
by soldiers. Unimpressed, one of the students, a young woman named 
Zulhamdi, told him, ``If you can't resolve this incident, you'd better 
resign.'' Since Friday's killings, calls for his resignation have 
multiplied, despite the general's reputation as a moderate and reform-minded 
leader. Things have not always been this way for Indonesia's proud 
and powerful armed forces. Since the founding of the nation in 1945, 
the military, known by its Indonesian acronym as ABRI, has played 
a dominant political, administrative and social role. Under Suharto, 
this role was skewed to make the military the instrument of the repression 
with which he consolidated his power. The military permeates society 
under a home-grown philosophy known as ``dwifungsi,'' or dual function. 
Serving officers hold administrative posts from the highest to almost 
the lowest levels of society. They are ambassadors, corporate directors, 
provincial governors and Cabinet ministers. Fully two-thirds of the 
300,000 members of the military are assigned to civilian duties. The 
current debate, and one of the issues that had brought the demonstrators 
to the streets on Friday, is over a reduction in the 75 seats that 
are allocated to the military in the 500-seat Parliament. The attempts 
to reduce the military's civilian functions have become a major focus 
of the reforms of the post-Suharto era. ``The direction and pace of 
change in ABRI will be one of the most important _ if not the most 
important _ determinants of political change in Indonesia,'' said 
David Timberman, the Indonesia representative of the National Democratic 
Institute. Both Wiranto and some of his senior officers have voiced 
their support for a retrenchment. ``ABRI must reduce its role in politics 
to a minimum and step back to give civil society more leeway,'' said 
Lt. Gen. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, the military's chief theoretician 
of reform, who headed its office of social-political affairs until 
the post was abolished in a gesture of reform last week. ``ABRI will 
be part of the process of empowering civil society.'' But reformers 
like Yudhoyono face resistance from middle-level officers who stand 
to lose opportunities for prestige and wealth, and the fears of some 
officers who worry about the stability of a society long dependent 
on the armed forces for much of its cohesion. Some independent experts 
agree that this time of transition could be a dangerous moment to 
remove the traditional bulwarks of stability, especially since civilian 
political and administrative institutions withered under Suharto. 
In Indonesia's new, more open society, various blocs are attempting 
to exercise authority, from separatist movements to labor unions to 
Islamic groups, and the military has voiced its concern about the 
effects of these unchecked forces. In addition, a contracting economy, 
increased unemployment and possible food shortages are creating an 
unstable situation. Rioting and attacks on ethnic Chinese, along with 
a wave of apparently unchecked killings of Indonesians deemed ``sorcerers,'' 
have increased. ``I think some in ABRI quite genuinely want to reduce 
their role, but they face a dilemma,'' said Harold Crouch, an expert 
on the Indonesian military at the Australian National University in 
Canberra. ``They fear that at this moment if they withdraw further, 
there could be a danger of anarchy. On the other hand, if they stay 
on, that may even provoke the anarchy.'' Efforts at reform have begun 
painfully, and many Indonesian and foreign experts remain skeptical 
that the powerful military can _ or truly will _ beat a unilateral 
retreat from civilian power. Wiranto's first step was to purge the 
leadership of hard-liners, particularly Lt. Gen. Prabowo Subianto, 
a son-in-law of Suharto who was believed to have been behind many 
of the military's abuses. Next was an investigation of past military 
abuses, beginning with the shootings of four students in May that 
helped spark the riots that led to Suharto's downfall. Other investigations 
involved abuses over the years in battles against separatists in the 
provinces of Aceh and East Timor. Those investigations, which threatened 
to spread in embarrassing directions, have made limited progress. 
But in an extraordinary step for a dominant military, it admitted 
in July that one of its elite units was involved in the abduction 
and torture of as many as two dozen dissidents this year. In another 
significant step, the military has withdrawn combat forces from disputed 
territories in East Timor and Aceh. Both withdrawals have been surrounded 
by controversy, and there are reports that fighting troops have been 
reintroduced into East Timor. It is a perilous military operation: 
a withdrawal from the heights of political influence at a time of 
national transition and instability. ``Many countries were able to 
start reform but unable to end the process properly, as happened with 
the Soviet Union with its glasnost and perestroika movement,'' Wiranto 
said not long ago. ``The armed forces will use the authority with 
which it is vested to take part in safeguarding and controlling the 
reform movement.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>