<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraq had found few Arab friends in its latest showdown with the United 
Nations, but its shift away from confrontation was greeted in the 
Arab world on Sunday with swift statements of relief that could complicate 
American efforts to maintain military pressure. The lack of Arab support 
had shown just how isolated the Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein, had 
become among his neighbors. Just three days earlier, Egypt, Syria 
and six Arab Persian Gulf countries declared that he alone would bear 
the blame for whatever his defiance provoked. But by Sunday morning, 
despite the Clinton administration's initial rejection of Iraq's promise 
to resume cooperation with the United Nations, some of those same 
countries had proclaimed the standoff essentially over. ``The Iraqi 
decision is good news for the Arab nation and all the gulf states, 
the United Arab Emirates foreign minister, Rashed Abdullah al-Nuaimi, 
said at a meeting of Persian Gulf leaders in Abu Dhabi, the capital. 
``Now the region can once again live in peace.'' The Egyptian foreign 
minister, Amr Moussa, said: ``Now we are not talking about military 
strikes. We are talking about an exchange of views and letters and 
commitments. So we must give this process a chance.'' And the Saudi 
defense minister, Prince Sultan, was quoted as saying that his country 
would not permit American warplanes based in the kingdom to be used 
to attack Iraq _ a resurrection of a stance that has limited American 
military options in the past. One dominant view was typified by an 
editorial on Sunday morning in Asharq, a Qatari newspaper. It said 
the Iraqi initiative would ``spare the children of Iraq more disasters, 
and at the same time preserve the stability and security of the region 
and eliminate the pretext for the foreign military presence.'' In 
contrast to previous crises, it has been notable in the last week 
that Iraq's defiance of U.N. resolutions did not draw mediation by 
any Arab leader. That angered Iraq, which had appealed for Arab solidarity. 
In the letter on Saturday that spelled out the Iraqi initiative, Deputy 
Prime Minister Tariq Aziz thanked Russia, China and France for their 
support, but he pointedly did not mention a single Arab country. Still, 
Sunday's statements hint that the United States could be back in the 
situation it faced last November, and again in February, when it could 
muster little Arab support for threats of force. ``Three days ago, 
I think it was safe to say that if the Arab states were not fully 
on board with an attack against Iraq, they were not going to stand 
in the way,'' a Western diplomat in the region, who spoke on the condition 
of anonymity, said on Sunday. ``Now it would take a lot of new convincing 
to get them back where they were.'' At the same time, the diplomats 
said, the danger of an Arab popular backlash against American military 
moves would almost certainly increase if the United States was seen 
as using force against a country that had promised to cooperate. Egypt's 
top cleric, Sheik Mohammed Seyyed Tantawi, provided a hint of that 
mood in a sermon Friday in Al Azhar Mosque in Cairo, He called on 
Muslims around the world to ``support our Iraqi brothers against American 
aggression with all our ability _ by arms if necessary.'' Since Iraq 
invaded Kuwait in 1990, few Arab political leaders have issued that 
kind of call. The invasion prompted Egypt, Syria and other Arab countries 
to take the extraordinary step of joining in the American-led coalition 
against a fellow Arab country. In the years since, though, there has 
been mounting popular resentment toward what has been widely seen 
as American callousness about Iraqi lives. In the current crisis, 
the opposition to using force appeared to have been diminished by 
two factors. Saddam was widely seen as having overreached, angering 
Arab leaders who had put their credibility on the line only nine months 
earlier by endorsing his pledge of cooperation with U.N. weapons inspectors. 
And Iraq's latest defiance came as Arab leaders had begun to look 
more favorably on American policy as a whole because of President 
Clinton's success in hammering out last month's agreement between 
Israel and the Palestinians. Against that backdrop, some Arab commentators 
resorted to undisguised sarcasm last week in mocking Iraq's pleas 
for Arab support. But by Sunday morning, most newspapers in region 
were adopting a more familiar tone. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>