<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0110 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kansas State Coach Bill Snyder is uncomfortable enjoying a warm moment. 
Distant, precise and calculatingly contrary, Snyder found something 
to be troubled about in the afterglow of his program's greatest victory 
in the last decade _ if not ever. In a low voice, he wondered aloud 
what would have happened if Nebraska had beaten his team on Saturday. 
``Would that have diminished what these young people have done _ what 
this program has accomplished over the last 10 years?'' Snyder asked. 
He then shook his head gravely and murmured something about the unfairness 
of it all. His Wildcats' 40-30 victory against the Cornhuskers kept 
that musing in the rhetorical realm. In Knoxville, Tenn., however, 
Arkansas Coach Houston Nutt was finding out what a momentary stumble 
could mean to a team and its bid for respect. His Razorbacks were 
predicted to finish at the bottom of the Southeastern Conference and 
were considered an undefeated fluke when they met the Tennessee Volunteers, 
who were top ranked in the Bowl Championship Series rating. But the 
Razorbacks had a 24-20 lead with just under three minutes left in 
the game when the unfairness of it all struck on a rain-soaked field. 
First, deep snapper Benji Mahan sent the ball sailing over punter 
Steadman Campbell's head. When he recovered the ball at his 15-yard 
line, Campbell wisely kicked it out of the end zone for a safety and 
the Vols closed to 24-22. Still, Arkansas held the Tennessee offense 
and all it had to do was run out the clock. With 1 minute 43 seconds 
remaining, quarterback Clint Stoerner pulled from behind center and, 
without being touched, stumbled on the wet sod. He tried to right 
himself with the hand that held the ball. It was a mistake _ the ball 
squirted lose and Tennessee recovered and drove 43 yards for the winning 
score. It was a devastating moment for a young man who had thrown 
for three touchdowns and 274 yards. ``We couldn't run out a minute 
and forty-three seconds,'' said Nutt. ``I hate to lose one like that.'' 
In an instant, Snyder's dreaded diminishing moment had visited the 
Razorbacks. Despite the stumble, though, the shape of the new Bowl 
Championship Series ranking may have shifted slightly, with even less 
ground separating the contenders for the top two slots that guarantee 
a date in the national championship game in the Fiesta Bowl. In the 
media poll, Tennessee (9-0) retained the No. 1 ranking and Kansas 
State (10-0) the second spot. In the coaches' poll, however, the Volunteers 
fell out of the tie for No. 1 that they had been in last week with 
Kansas State. The Wildcats were granted sole possession of No. 1 and 
the Vols dropped to No. 2. But UCLA won convincingly against Washington, 
36-24, and is usually rewarded by the three computer rankings, as 
well as the Bowl Championship formula, because its schedule is considered 
among the nation's strongest. So the Bruins (9-0) may reclaim the 
top spot _ they were a close No. 2 last week _ when the latest bowl 
ranking is released on Monday, despite being ranked No. 3 by both 
the news media and the coaches. Or it may be Kansas State. Or Tennessee. 
Until the numbers are crunched, it's fruitless to guess. But what 
the Bowl Championship Series ranking has done, besides inject a little 
mystified fun into bar-room arguments, is remind college fans that 
there is no need for a college football playoff. There already is 
one: It takes place every Saturday from late August to early December. 
The best teams usually survive. Just ask Ohio State, which was eliminated 
from the title tournament last week by Michigan State. Or the Wisconsin 
Badgers, who suffered their first loss of the season Saturday at Michigan, 
27-10. Tulane, the fourth remaining unbeaten team, learned how treacherous 
a season-long campaign can be. Tulane struggled against Army (2-7) 
before notching its ninth victory, 49-35. Buy into this way of thinking 
and it's easy to see the final two weeks of the season as a sort of 
Final Four, plus maybe one, in the competition for a place in the 
title game. In addition to Tennessee, Kansas State and UCLA there 
are Florida State, which is No. 1 in The New York Times computer ranking, 
and Florida, which is No. 4 in both the news media and coaches' polls 
and which plays the Seminoles on Saturday. The Aggies of Texas A&AMP;M 
have their nose pressed to the glass looking for breaks. They leaped 
to No. 4 in the Times ranking after beating Missouri, 17-14, on Saturday. 
The Aggies have won 10 consecutive games since an opening loss to 
Florida State, and can win the Big 12 title if they beat rival Texas 
on Nov. 27 and then defeat Kansas State in the league championship 
game on Dec. 5. They are long-shot contenders because they need UCLA 
and Tennessee to lose, too. Then, the Aggies could convincingly argue 
that as one of the top two one-loss teams in the nation, they have 
earned the title game. None of these scenarios are detrimental to 
college football. The fact that the other bowl games exist insures 
that the kids on teams that either have overachieved or recovered 
from early-season setbacks are not sentenced to Snyder's ``diminished'' 
status. Tulane Coach Tommy Bowden has not argued that his Green Wave 
deserves a shot at the national title by dominating Conference USA. 
But Tulane deserves the recognition it will get either at the Liberty 
Bowl or the Sugar Bowl, which had representatives at West Point and 
might be able to choose the New Orleans school to play in its hometown. 
Nutt's Razorbacks not only have a shot at redemption _ his team will 
likely get a rematch with Tennessee in the Southeastern Conference 
championship game on Dec. 5 _ but they should receive a holiday bowl 
trip as a reward for a surprising season. The same should be said 
for Air Force (9-1) and Notre Dame (8-1), both of which have been 
barely noticed though each has exceeded expectations. There also will 
be justice for Michigan and Ohio State. Michigan, which shared the 
national championship with Nebraska last season, opened this season 
with two losses, but has won eight straight, including all of its 
Big 10 games. Like years past, the Wolverines meet Ohio State on Saturday 
with the conference title and a trip to the Rose Bowl at stake. Both 
have proved that they are not national-title caliber teams, but they 
are fine ones and the winner will have earned the Rose. That is fair. 
Snyder is correct to worry about the media and fans keeping college 
football in perspective no matter how taciturn and dour his warning. 
Over 10 years, what was once considered the worst program in the nation 
has been built into a consistent winner. Kansas State is now at the 
precipice of playing for a national title. Wildcat players say their 
coach has never congratulated them on a nice victory. Instead, post-game 
remarks are confined to what they did wrong. After Saturday's game, 
Snyder fretted about his team's five turnovers and sloppy play. Finally, 
though, Snyder followed his own advice. ``I told them I was going 
to let them enjoy this,'' he said, almost embarrassed. ``We'll talk 
about what we did wrong on Monday.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>