<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0192 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Monday, Nov. 16: When you 
request a book in the Main Reading Room of the New York Public Library, 
the call slip disappears down a pneumatic tube into regions unimaginable 
and you are given a number. You take a seat at one of the long desks 
in the north or south hall and wait for your number to appear on a 
board at the front of the room. Nearly everyone spends the time gazing 
at the room itself, listening to the audible rumble of intellection, 
and wondering how to collect one's prize without stumbling or making 
too much noise or betraying a fit of self-consciousness during that 
long, deliberate walk. This was before the Main Reading Room was restored, 
when the atmospheric scenes in the ceiling panels were still blighted, 
by what appeared to be dense smog, when the ornamental woodwork seemed 
almost gouty with wax buildup. Even then, it was a room that redefined 
the act of reading. The act of opening a book within the dome of light 
thrown off by the desk lamps had something ceremonial about it every 
time. To look around at a roomful of readers, each bent over a book, 
was to realize that this posture is among the most beautiful of human 
transfigurations. Now every inch of this remarkable room has been 
restored to immaculate condition, thanks to a $15 million gift from 
Frederick Phineas Rose and Sandra Priest Rose, a library trustee. 
It reopens to the public on Monday. A reader who comes in haste will 
find himself stilled by the beauty of what he sees. The ceiling seems 
to open overhead onto a heaven that Rubens might have imagined. The 
woodwork and brass have been burnished, the original chairs restored 
or replaced, and the windows modernized. With great restraint, the 
room has been made ready for laptop computers, and space has been 
reserved for those who find the clatter of keyboards distracting. 
The only drawback is that readers who were intimidated before the 
restoration by the walk to the book-delivery window may find themselves 
unable to move at all amid this new splendor. It has become a conceit 
to call what this building houses ``information.'' Perhaps when the 
library is closed at night that is the right word for its contents. 
But when it is open and the room is filled with readers transfigured 
by light pouring in from the great arched windows, it is no longer 
information. It is knowledge. One test of a democracy is whether it 
grants equal access to the tools that make knowledge possible. No 
credentials are required to use the Rose Main Reading Room, no tests 
of income or IQ. There were always a few readers who seemed destitute 
or worn. With luck, they will be among the first to return. Their 
presence is a reminder of the ideal of intellectual equity embodied 
in that place. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>