<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0175 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Washington political circles, Rep. J.C. Watts Jr., R-Okla., is 
considered one of the Republican Party's brightest stars, a leading 
voice for conservative principles and, more recently, a candidate 
for congressional leadership. But a broader picture emerges from a 
look at Watts' career back home, where despite his popularity, the 
former star college quarterback has had to defend himself over the 
years against accusations arising from bad debts, unpaid state and 
federal taxes, and his actions during a federal bribery investigation 
in 1991. In particular, Watts was heard on a federal wiretap arranging 
to pick up $1,500 from a lobbyist for telephone companies that stood 
to lose $16 million a year in a case before a state regulatory agency 
of which Watts was a member. Watts was never charged with a crime, 
but portions of the transcript of this conversation have been used 
by his political opponents in an effort to discredit him. While the 
details of Watts' troubles have not become widely known nationally, 
they have been explored by newspapers, and radio and television stations 
in Oklahoma. This year, Watts' Democratic opponent, Bruce Ober, put 
the transcript of the FBI tapes on his Internet campaign site. Watts, 
who is challenging Rep. John Boehner, R-Ohio, for his post as Republican 
Conference Chairman, says that he has made no secret of his financial 
problems, which arose when the oil and gas business in Oklahoma went 
bust in the mid-1980s. And while he has acknowledged that his name 
came up in the FBI investigation, he has often noted that he was fully 
exonerated. The voters in the 4th Congressional District have continued 
to support him. Watts was easily re-elected earlier this month, winning 
a majority of votes in each of the 11 counties in the conservative 
and traditionally Democratic district. ``He is extraordinarily gifted,'' 
Tom Cole, the Oklahoma secretary of state and the state's leading 
Republican strategist, said of Watts, who became a hero to football 
fans when, as a quarterback, he led the Sooners of the University 
of Oklahoma to an Orange Bowl victory in 1981. ``He is the best pure 
communicator I've ever seen,'' said Cole, who helped Watts get started 
in politics. ``He not only gives a great speech, he's got charisma. 
He lights up a room. He has a star quality that transcends having 
been a football player.'' Watts, 40, was first elected to Congress, 
where he is the only black Republican, in 1994 and quickly became 
a darling of conservative members of the party. ``In my wildest imagination,'' 
he said in a keynote speech to the Republican National Convention 
in 1996 that cemented his reputation as a rising star, ``I never thought 
that the fifth of six children born to Helen and Buddy Watts _ in 
a poor black neighborhood, in the rural community of Eufaula, Okla. 
_ would someday be called congressman.'' The details of Watts' finances 
emerged from an examination of public records, interviews with public 
officials and a lengthy interview on Friday with Watts. In the 1980s, 
two properties owned by Watts were foreclosed on and sold at sheriff's 
sales, and he was pursued for debts ranging from a doctor's bill to 
a $25,000 loan for oil and gas investments. Asked about these debts, 
all of which have been paid, Watts said: ``Guilty as charged.'' ``In 
the early to mid-'80s the oil business went bust,'' he said. ``I don't 
think that there was anybody in the oil and gas business that didn't 
get bloodied up. When I ran for office in 1990, I never claimed to 
have no financial problems. I thought I was doing the honorable thing, 
working through things, not declaring bankruptcy. Now, 10 years later, 
it's an issue.'' In November 1990, Watts was elected to the Corporation 
Commission, which regulates Oklahoma's utilities and oil and gas industries, 
unaware that a federal bribery investigation was under way at the 
agency. Three months after he took office, Watts was named as one 
of 10 possible defendants in the Justice Department's request for 
a wiretap in connection with the investigation, federal court records 
show. Others named in the request included William Anderson, a lobbyist 
and lawyer for utility companies who was later sent to prison for 
bribery, and Robert Hopkins, a commissioner later convicted of accepting 
a $10,000 bribe from Anderson in a $30 million telephone rate case 
involving Southwestern Bell. It is legal in Oklahoma for commissioners 
to seek campaign contributions from lawyers or officials of utilities 
they regulate in a period from 120 days before the election to 120 
days after. All contributions over $200 must be reported, and they 
cannot be linked to cases the commissioners are deciding. Watts told 
federal investigators that he asked Anderson to help him raise money 
for his campaign and that Anderson gave him contributions of $200 
or less from some of the small, independent telephone companies Anderson 
represented. Watts told the investigators that Anderson never tried 
to influence him on behalf of his clients in return for campaign contributions. 
But two FBI wiretaps appear to tell a different story. On Feb. 24, 
1991, Watts, who was in Washington, called Anderson at home. Watts 
reminded the lobbyist several times that the deadline for campaign 
contributions was March 6. At the time, the independent telephone 
companies represented by Anderson stood to lose $16 million a year 
in a case before the commission. Southwestern Bell was challenging 
a requirement that income from in-state toll calls be pooled and divided 
among all the telephone companies operating in the state. The small 
companies received far more from the pool than they contributed. The 
transcript of the conversation shows Watts pushed for a contribution, 
and Anderson asked for his help. Anderson asked Watts if he could 
delay action on the pooled tolls, while the small companies tried 
to work things out, ``'cause if you don't, it's gonna hurt ever' damn 
one of us. J.C.?'' Watts replied: ``Yeah. That's true.'' Anderson 
said: ``Yeah.'' Watts said: ``Well ... hey, I've worked, I'm, I've 
had some, uh, a couple of folks that said they were gonna try to, 
try to help us, uh, for that March 6th date, so, uh, whatever you 
could do for me before then I sure appreciate it.'' Anderson: ``OK 
I'll get, I'll get back on it there, yeah.'' Watts: ``Yeah, 'cause 
after March 6th I'm gonna close the door and ...'' Later in the conversation, 
Anderson said: ``And if you could think about not forcing them out 
of that toll pool. It'd break ever' damned inde, every little, every 
little telephone company and little towns in the state right now.'' 
Watts: ``Yeah.'' Later, Watts said: ``I'm not promising one way or 
the other ... I'll be fair and open.'' The FBI also recorded a conversation 
on March 1, a day after Watts returned from Washington. Watts called 
Anderson, who told him he had $500 from each of three independent 
telephone companies, explaining, ``I got ahold of Chickasaw and Alltel 
over at, uh, Poteau and old boy at Oklahoma Communications out here 
at Choctaw service I know, and they got the five piece for.'' Watts: 
``Yeah, OK. All right.'' Anderson: ``And it's just in cash.'' Watts 
suggested they meet that day and Anderson started to give Watts directions 
to his house. When Watts hesitated, explaining that state Rep. Kevin 
Cox was with him and he planned to drive Cox home, Anderson said: 
``And hell, I'll just, uh, if he's with you, you just come to the 
door and I'll just hand you the thing and Kevin needn't know what 
you came for.'' Anderson continued: ``I'll be the third house on the 
left, and I'll have the front door open and, and uh, I'll just hand 
you the cash. Kevin needn't know. You, just tell him you need to come 
by and get a message from me or something.'' Federal agents later 
told Watts they saw him come to Anderson's house that day. Watts told 
the FBI he could not remember either the conversation or picking up 
$1,500. He said Cox had reminded him they once stopped at Anderson's 
house so Watts could pick up a regulatory manual. ``For the umpteenth 
time,'' Watts said on Friday: ``Every dime I received, thousands of 
dollars in contributions, went into the campaign. I cannot identify 
any single contribution. The FBI looked at everything and found nothing 
illegal.'' After Anderson and Hopkins were indicted, Watts said, he 
complained to the prosecutors because his name kept appearing in news 
reports. ``I said, `I feel like I'm being hung out to dry here,''' 
he recalled. ``I felt I needed something to clear my name.'' On Jan. 
7, 1994, Gary Richardson, a former federal prosecutor in Tulsa and 
a friend of Watts, asked the federal prosecutors to issue a news release 
on Watts' status. A reply came in a letter written by John Green, 
the first assistant U.S. attorney, on official stationery from the 
U.S. attorney, Vicki Miles-LaGrange. Green wrote: ``Commissioner Watts 
has been a friend of both Vicki Miles-LaGrange and myself for a number 
of years, my friendship going back to his days as a freshman quarterback 
at the University of Oklahoma.'' The letter continued: ``We consider 
him our friend and would do anything within possible bounds (we have 
told him how to handle the situation), to relieve whatever cast of 
doubt, suspicion and morale problems that might exist at the Oklahoma 
Corporation Commission over any alleged investigation.'' Green wrote 
that his office could not assure anyone that no federal agency was 
investigating Watts, but ``at this point we do not know of any type 
of investigation concerning any present or former Corporation Commissioners.'' 
Watts read the letter to reporters at a February 1994 news conference, 
saying the cloud of controversy was gone. ``I was not involved in 
any wrongdoing, nor had I ever been a target of their investigation,'' 
he said at the time. ``The fact they had me under observation in early 
March 1991 was a result of the institution, the Corporation Commission, 
being investigated, not me.'' Four months later, at the request of 
Ms. Miles-LaGrange, the entire U.S. attorney's office in Oklahoma 
City was removed from the case by the Justice Department. Carl Stern, 
the Justice Department spokesman, said: ``There was a concern that 
the public would not have confidence in the U.S. attorney's office's 
impartiality.'' The bribery investigation was not the only time Watts 
had to deal with unfavorable publicity. Earlier financial problems, 
which dated back to his days as a player in the Canadian Football 
League, also made their way into the news. In 1992, a newspaper, the 
Tulsa World, reported that Watts had a history of bad debts and said 
the state had filed three tax liens against him, for income taxes 
in 1983, 1984 and 1986. Watts said at the time that he was working 
to pay those taxes and attributed them his delay to misunderstandings 
and a downturn in the oil business in Oklahoma. Watts was also late 
in paying his 1992, 1993 and 1994 real estate taxes, records show. 
In 1994 he did not declare the $14,320 his wife earned as an in-home 
nurse and $2,511 from an annuity on his federal income tax return, 
tax records shows. ``It is simply an oversight,'' Rick Buchanan, Watts' 
press secretary, said when the Watts campaign released his tax returns 
in 1996. ``The voters had seen everything they could possibly see,'' 
Watts said on Friday. His opponents, he said, have ``tried to put 
oxygen on a dead issue.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>