<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0158 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kwame Ture, the flamboyant civil rights leader known to most Americans 
as Stokely Carmichael, died Sunday in Conakry, Guinea. He was 57 and 
is best remembered for his use of the phrase ``black power,'' which 
in 1967 ignited a white backlash and alarmed an older generation of 
civil rights leaders, including the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. 
The cause of death was prostate cancer, for which Ture had been treated 
at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York in the last two 
years. He once said his cancer ``was given to me by forces of American 
imperialism and others who conspired with them.'' Ture, who changed 
his name in 1978 to honor Kwame Nkrumah and Ahmed Sekou Toure, two 
African socialist leaders who had befriended him, spent most of the 
last 30 years in Guinea, calling himself a revolutionary and advocating 
a Pan-African ideology that evoked little resonance in the United 
States, or, for that matter, Africa. Though his active participation 
in the struggle for civil rights in the United States lasted barely 
a decade, he was a charismatic figure in a turbulent time, when real 
violence and rhetoric escalated on both sides of the color line. Stokely 
Carmichael was inspired to participate in the civil rights movement 
by the bravery of those blacks and whites who protested segregated 
service with sit-ins at lunch counters in the South. ``When I first 
heard about the Negroes sitting in at lunch counters down South,'' 
he told Gordon Parks in Life magazine, ``I thought they were just 
a bunch of publicity hounds. But one night when I saw those young 
kids on TV, getting back up on the lunch-counter stools after being 
knocked off them, sugar in their eyes, ketchup in their hair _ well, 
something happened to me. Suddenly I was burning.'' Rejecting scholarships 
from several white universities, he entered Howard University in Washington 
in 1960. By the end of his freshman year, he had joined the Freedom 
Rides of the Congress of Racial Equality, hazardous bus trips of blacks 
and whites that challenged segregated interstate travel in the South. 
The Freedom Riders often met with violence, and at their destinations 
Carmichael and the others were arrested and jailed. Graduating with 
a bachelor's degree in philosophy from Howard in 1964, he joined the 
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. It was the ``Freedom Summer,'' 
the year that SNCC (popularly pronounced ``snick'') was sending hundreds 
of black and white volunteers to the South to teach, set up clinics 
and register disenfranchised black Southerners. As a SNCC field organizer 
in Lowndes County in Alabama, where blacks were in the majority but 
were politically powerless, he helped raise the number of registered 
black voters to 2,600 from a mere 70 _ 300 more than the number of 
whites registered to vote. Displeased by the response of the established 
parties to the success of the registration drive, he organized the 
all-black Lowndes County Freedom Organization, which, to fulfill a 
state requirement that all parties have a logo, took a black panther 
as its symbol. The panther was later adopted by the Black Panther 
Party. The young Carmichael was radicalized by his experiences working 
in the segregated South, where peaceful protesters were beaten, brutalized 
and sometimes killed for seeking the ordinary rights of citizens. 
He once recalled watching from his hotel room in a little Alabama 
town while nonviolent black demonstrators were beaten and shocked 
with cattle prods by the police. Horrified, he said that he screamed 
and could not stop. Carmichael was arrested so many times as a nonviolent 
volunteer that he lost count after 32. His growing impatience with 
the tactics of passive resistance was gaining support, and in 1966 
he was chosen as chairman of SNCC, replacing John Lewis, a hardworking 
integrationist who is now a congressman from Georgia. Barely a month 
after his selection, Carmichael, then just 25, raised the call for 
black power, thereby signaling a crossroads in the civil rights struggle. 
Increasingly uncomfortable with King's resolute nonviolence, he sensed 
a shift among some younger blacks in the direction of black separatism. 
In the book ``Black Power,'' which Carmichael wrote in 1967 with Charles 
Hamilton, now a professor of political science at Columbia University, 
the authors tried to explain the term. ``It is a call for black people 
in this country to unite,'' they wrote, ``to recognize their heritage, 
to build a sense of community. It is a call for black people to define 
their own goals, to lead their own organizations.'' In 1966 and 1967 
Carmichael lectured at campuses around the United States and traveled 
to countries including North Vietnam, China and Cuba. He made perhaps 
his most provocative statement in Havana. ``We are preparing groups 
of urban guerrillas for our defense in the cities,'' he said. ``It 
is going to be a fight to the death.'' In 1967 a declining SNCC severed 
all ties with him. Soon afterward he became honorary prime minister 
of the Black Panthers, the ultramilitant urban organization begun 
by Huey Newton and Bobby Seale. But he soon found himself embroiled 
with the other Panther leaders for opposing their decision to seek 
support among whites. He moved to Guinea, in West Africa, in 1969, 
saying, ``America does not belong to the blacks,'' and calling on 
all black Americans to follow his example. He became a globe-trotting 
exponent of the All African Peoples Revolutionary Party, returning 
to American campuses to recruit. He maintained that continued progress 
for black Americans could be made only through ``mass political organization 
on a Pan-African scale.'' ``Black power,'' he said, ``can only be 
realized when there exists a unified socialist Africa.'' He sounded 
the idea that blacks must work with blacks for their cultural, economic 
and political liberation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>