<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0092 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Texas woman on a Caribbean cruise with her husband accused a waiter 
of drugging their dinner drinks and later raping her in their cabin. 
An Oregon family on a cruise said their daughter was raped by a ship's 
bartender after she celebrated her 16th birthday in a bar. A California 
woman said that a crewman forced his way into her cabin and beat and 
raped her. As with many rape cases, none of these was clear-cut. Some 
involved alcohol and counterclaims of consensual sex. One wasn't reported 
until after the cruise. Yet in every case, the accusers say, the cruise 
line's main concern was to protect its reputation by buying or coercing 
their silence and shielding the accused. Once the exclusive playground 
of the very wealthy, the cruise business has expanded over the last 
decade by appealing to the vast middle class, especially families 
and young adults. The polished mahogany decks and formal dinners of 
a bygone era have been replaced by glittering floating cities dedicated 
to carefree partying, gambling and drinking. But as the industry has 
boomed to more than 5 million passengers a year, it has presented 
new concerns for its ports of call, its passengers and the environment, 
in part because of the size of its giant liners, in part because the 
cruise lines operate largely outside the laws of any one country. 
A particular problem is the allegations of sexual assaults committed 
by crew members. There is no evidence that crime is rampant aboard 
cruise ships. And the FBI does not break out statistics on the number 
of rapes on the high seas. But FBI agents in Miami, the United States' 
busiest cruise port, said they are called out to investigate a shipboard 
sexual assault about every other week. An examination of sexual assault 
cases on ships operated by the largest cruise lines, based on court 
records and interviews with current and former employees, law-enforcement 
officials, passengers who reported assaults, and those passengers' 
lawyers, found a pattern of cover-ups that often began as soon as 
the crime was reported at sea, in international waters where the only 
police are the ship's security officers. Accused crew members are 
sometimes put ashore at the next port, with air fare to their home 
country. Industry lawyers are flown to the ship to question the accusers; 
and aboard ships flowing with liquor, counterclaims of consensual 
sex are common. The cruise lines aggressively contest lawsuits and 
insist on secrecy as a condition of settling. When the Texas couple 
sued, the cruise line settled with a confidential agreement. Cruise-line 
lawyers subpoenaed the Oregon girl's school records to question her 
character, but eventually settled a suit. Officers aboard the California 
woman's ship did notify the FBI, at her insistence, but she said the 
arrival of the agents was delayed until her room had been cleaned. 
In another case, a federal grand jury is investigating whether Carnival 
Cruise Lines, the world's largest, helped a ship's officer accused 
of rape get out of the country. And in 1995, a Florida appeals court 
found that Carnival dismissed a crew member for refusing to lie to 
protect the company in a civil suit brought by another seaman. ``You 
don't notify the FBI,'' said Charles Harris, a former chief of security 
for Carnival. ``You don't notify anybody. You start giving the victims 
bribes, upgrading their cabins, giving them champagne and trying to 
ease them off the ship until the legal department can take over. ``Even 
when I knew there was a crime,'' he said, ``I was supposed to go in 
there and do everything in the world to get Carnival to look innocent.'' 
The cruise lines say that crimes are uncommon and that they do a good 
job of investigating when one does occur. But three years ago their 
lobbyists tried in Congress to win protection from most damages in 
sexual-assault suits and from all suits by foreign crew members. In 
many ways these ships, as long as three football fields, are not so 
much floating cities as sovereign islands, operating beyond the police 
and regulatory jurisdiction of the nations they cruise among. Every 
major cruise ship sailing out of U.S. ports is registered with a foreign 
country, usually Panama or Liberia. The corporations that own them 
are foreign, too. The foreign registry means the ships and their owners 
avoid U.S. corporate income taxes and many U.S. laws, though more 
than 80 percent of their passengers are American. Carnival Corp., 
the parent of Carnival Cruise Lines, has its headquarters in Miami 
but is a publicly held corporation registered in Panama. Controlling 
interest is held by the family of its founder, Ted Arison, a billionaire 
who renounced his U.S. citizenship in 1993, in part to avoid estate 
taxes. His son, Micky, an American citizen, is chairman. Most of Carnival's 
executives are American. The other leading line, Royal Caribbean Cruises 
Ltd., also has its headquarters in Miami, but the corporation is registered 
in Liberia. Controlling interests are owned by a Bahamian partnership 
associated with the wealthy Pritzker family of Chicago and by a shipping 
company owned by a Norwegian family, the Wilhelmsens. Lynn Martenstein, 
vice president for communications at Royal Caribbean, said the company 
would not comment on cruise-ship crime or respond to any specific 
questions, because of legal considerations. A vice president of Carnival, 
Tim Gallagher, said his company reacts promptly and thoroughly any 
time there is an allegation of sexual misconduct involving passengers 
or crew members. He said only a handful of assaults occur each year, 
though he would not provide numbers. ``We have more than 1.5 million 
guests a year, and it is impossible that there would not be a huge 
public outcry if there were any kind of serious crime problem,'' Gallagher 
said. The FBI has jurisdiction to investigate crimes in international 
waters on foreign ships if the vessel departed from or is headed to 
a U.S. port and the crime involves an American citizen. But investigating 
a crime scene at sea is difficult, agents routinely wait until a ship 
returns to port, and jurisdictional questions often arise, according 
to law-enforcement authorities. And not all crimes are reported. Cruise 
ships are required to report only crimes and other incidents that 
result in serious physical injury, which does not necessarily include 
rape. ``Unless otherwise required to do so, Carnival leaves it to 
the individual to decide whether to report to authorities,'' said 
Curtis Mase, a lawyer for Carnival. Complaints are frequent enough, 
however, that Lloyd Lipkey, the agent in charge of the FBI's Miami 
squad that deals with crimes on the high seas, offered a warning to 
passengers: ``Go on a cruise just like you go anywhere else, with 
your eyes open.'' The Culture Aboard Ship Rules Bar Fraternizing Today's 
huge cruise ships carry 1,800 to 2,200 passengers and 700 to 800 crew 
members drawn from 50 or more countries, many of them poor nations. 
While some crew members are highly trained, particularly the officers, 
many are unskilled young men who work long hours seven days a week. 
Pay can be as little as $500 a month; many send their wages home to 
support families. Ships have rules barring fraternizing with passengers. 
Carnival, Gallagher said, prohibits crew members from fraternizing 
but encourages officers to be friendly. ``The guests like it,'' he 
said. And romance, of course, has long been one of the attractions 
of cruises. ``Sex between crew and passengers happens all the time,'' 
said Dennis Hypolite, a musician who worked for Carnival and Royal 
Caribbean for three years until he quit on Nov. 1. ``Every cruise, 
every day. Crew go into guest cabins and guests go to crew cabins. 
Both seek it out, passengers and crew.'' Harris, the former Carnival 
security chief, who now investigates shipboard crimes for lawyers 
of victims and insurance companies, said crew members and officers 
often pursue sex with female passengers. ``That's the game,'' he said. 
Carnival's lawyers said Harris was a disgruntled former employee who 
now earns his living testifying against cruise lines. Michael Eriksen, 
a lawyer in Lake Worth, Fla., has handled more than a dozen cases 
of sexual assault on ships in recent years. ``Typically it starts 
out with an opportunity for a crew member to observe and sometimes 
interact with a passenger,'' he said. ``A lot of times it will be 
a waiter or someone who works in room service or behind a bar.'' The 
Oregon girl struck up a conversation with a bartender in the Ain't 
Misbehavin' Lounge on the Monarch of the Seas, a Royal Caribbean ship. 
It was her 16th birthday, and after some drinks she went with the 
bartender to his cabin. The girl's parents said she was raped, and 
they sued the cruise line last year. Royal Caribbean contended that 
the bartender did not threaten the girl and that the sex was consensual. 
Even so, because of the girl's age, the incident would have been a 
felony had it occurred in Florida. But state law was not applicable. 
The line also accused the girl's parents of failing to exercise reasonable 
care in protecting their daughter, and subpoenaed the girl's school 
records in an attempt to discover previous problems. When the case 
was settled this summer, the company insisted on a confidentiality 
agreement that prohibited the family or their lawyer from discussing 
the case, according to the lawyer, David Bianchi. ``People just want 
to get on with their lives, and when the cruise lines wave money under 
their noses if they promise not to talk, they always accept it,'' 
Bianchi said. In a deposition in the case, the bartender, Cleve Ellis, 
testified that crew members make a sport of having sex with passengers, 
Bianchi said. Because of the confidentiality order, the deposition 
was not available to The Times. Attempts to find Ellis were unsuccessful. 
People who deal with assault victims say teen-age girls are often 
targets on cruise ships. In 1996, Bianchi represented the family of 
a 14-year-old who said she had been raped by a crew member aboard 
the Fascination, a Carnival ship. After an article about the case 
appeared in a legal publication, Bianchi said, he was contacted by 
the father of a 16-year-old girl who said she had been raped by the 
same crew member a few weeks after the first incident. Both cases 
were settled and the crewman was dismissed after the second report, 
he said. Last year, the Texas couple were on a seven-day Carnival 
cruise in the Caribbean to celebrate their 10th anniversary. The woman 
claimed the waiter drugged their drinks at dinner and later went to 
their cabin and raped her while her husband was unconscious. The couple 
complained to cruise officials, who responded in part by moving them 
to a better cabin for the remainder of the voyage. When the ship docked 
in San Juan, Puerto Rico, they tried to report the incident to the 
police but were told they would have to contact the FBI. They never 
did. Theodore Shinkle, a Carnival lawyer, said the ship's officers 
assisted the couple in contacting the San Juan police and provided 
them with the phone number for the FBI. The couple did file a civil 
suit against Carnival. At the trial the waiter, Ashton Sylvester, 
a 12-year employee of Carnival, denied having sex with the woman, 
and witnesses said she and her husband had been drinking heavily that 
day. But the company settled the case just before it went to the jury. 
Shinkle declined to disclose the terms of the settlement, citing a 
confidentiality agreement. He said Carnival's decision to settle was 
``just a matter of good business sense'' after the couple reduced 
their financial demand. Rape experts say delays often occur in reporting 
rapes, particularly in a situation like a cruise, where the passenger 
could fear reprisal and there is no independent investigator or rape-treatment 
center. But the time lag makes criminal prosecutions difficult. ``Cases 
reported within 72 hours offer the best forensic evidence,'' said 
Dr. Karen Simmons, director of the rape-treatment center at Jackson 
Memorial Hospital in Miami. ``But we see a lot of people after that 
because they may be afraid of reporting it or ashamed.'' Dr. Simmons 
said the center does not keep statistics on victims from cruise ships, 
but she said passengers are treated with some frequency. Court files 
in Miami, where most suits must be filed against the big cruise lines, 
indicate that rapes often are not reported until it is too late for 
criminal investigation. Maneuvers Trying to Deflect Victims' Lawsuits 
Not everyone delays reporting. On June 19, 1997, a 35-year-old California 
woman aboard a Royal Caribbean ship with her parents sought help immediately. 
The woman had spent some time in the ship's nightclub before returning 
to her cabin about 4 a.m. In contrast to many cases aboard ships, 
where alcohol is plentiful, records show that she consumed only a 
non-alcoholic drink in the nightclub. ``I put my key into the slot 
to open the door,'' she later testified in court. ``I put one foot 
in and was pushed from behind.'' She said she fell onto her hands 
and knees but ``fought to save my life, wrestling, kicking, biting, 
yelling.'' People in the cabin next door heard the commotion, but 
did not summon help. Her injuries were so severe that she was on crutches 
for two weeks, according to court records and her lawyer. When her 
attacker left, she called her father and he alerted the ship's security. 
Within hours, the woman had identified her attacker in a line-up conducted 
by the ship's security officers as Jorge Virtucio, a member of the 
cleaning crew. Questioned that day by a ship's security officer and 
a company lawyer who had been flown in, Virtucio denied being anywhere 
near a passenger, saying he had been washing decks at 4 in the morning. 
When asked about scratches on his body, he said they were from minor 
work accidents. Virtucio was indicted and, as his trial approached 
last May, DNA evidence linked him to the assault. He switched his 
story and his lawyers argued that the woman had consented to sex. 
A jury found him innocent. ``Our defense was that the case was a false 
claim and that the motive was ultimately to sue Royal Caribbean,'' 
said Fletcher Peacock, the public defender appointed to represent 
Virtucio at trial in U.S. District Court in Miami. The woman did sue 
Royal Caribbean. Her lawyer, Johnna Hansen, said the cruise line had 
appeared to cooperate with her client and had notified the FBI at 
the woman's request. But she said the cruise line tried to make sure 
that no one else on the ship heard about the incident and that FBI 
agents were delayed for several hours before boarding the ship. During 
that time, she said, her client's room had been cleaned, making it 
harder to gather evidence. She also said lawyers for the cruise line 
conferred with Virtucio's lawyers in the courtroom during the criminal 
trial. Peacock said Royal Caribbean maintained a neutral stance, but 
its lawyers were pleased by the verdict. In court papers, Royal Caribbean 
said it was not responsible for a crew member's actions outside his 
official duties. To counter what it regards as frivolous lawsuits, 
the cruise industry had its lawyers draft a measure in 1995 to restrict 
the ability of sexual-assault victims to collect damages in court, 
and to prohibit foreign crew members from suing in U.S. courts. Rep. 
Don Young, R-Alaska, introduced the measure as an amendment on the 
House floor and it passed without a hearing. Between 1993 and 1998, 
Young received at least $29,000 from political action committees and 
individuals affiliated with the cruise industry, according to Federal 
Election Commission records. The bill was stopped by Sen. Ernest Hollings, 
D-S.C., only after lobbyists for the trial lawyers noticed the language 
and started a campaign against it. One of the strongest allegations 
of a cover-up involved an alleged sexual attack on a crew member. 
A 26-year-old Carnival employee was in her cabin last Aug. 13, nearing 
the end of a weeklong Caribbean cruise on the Imagination, when one 
of the ship's engineers, Yurij Senes, attacked and sodomized her, 
according to court records. Her lawyer, Bianchi, said the woman reported 
the rape to ship's security and identified her attacker. But Carnival's 
lawyers said the woman initially did not want to report the episode 
to the authorities. Two days later, when the ship docked in Miami, 
Senes was dismissed from his job and arrangements were made for him 
to be taken to Miami International Airport for a flight to his native 
Italy, because his visa automatically expired when he was fired. By 
then, the female crew member had filed a complaint with the FBI and 
agents told Carnival security personnel that they wanted to interview 
Senes. Mase, Carnival's lawyer, said a mix-up occurred and the suspect 
was taken to his flight without being questioned. Bianchi disclosed 
at a court hearing last month that his client had testified before 
a federal grand jury investigating whether Carnival helped the officer 
escape. John Schlesinger, special counsel in the U.S. attorney's office, 
would not confirm or deny an inquiry. But he expressed amazement at 
the suspect's escape. ``Carnival raised some eyebrows when they whisked 
him to the airport moments ahead of the posse,'' he said. In September, 
Senes was indicted on federal charges of aggravated sexual assault. 
He was arrested at his home in Italy and faces extradition to the 
United States. Lawyers who sue cruise lines said it is common for 
crew members suspected of crimes to be sent home. Tracking them down 
for depositions and subpoenas can be expensive and difficult, particularly 
in undeveloped countries. ``My general experience is that the cruise 
lines would rather be horse-whipped than bring these perpetrators 
back to U.S. law enforcement,'' said Eriksen, the Lake Worth lawyer, 
who has located crew members as far away as Bombay, India. There also 
is evidence that employees are encouraged to lie or remain silent. 
Charles Lipcon, a Miami lawyer who often represents crew members, 
said they often keep quiet about crimes because those who speak out 
are fired and sent home. In 1995, a Florida appeals court found that 
Carnival had fired a crew member, Luis Baiton, for refusing to lie 
to protect the company in a civil suit brought by another seaman. 
``In our view, allowing retaliation against an employee for truthful 
testimony, or refusing to give false testimony, strikes at the heart 
of the adjudicatory process,'' said the court. The case did not involve 
sexual assault, but rather a claim filed by a crew member who was 
injured on a ship. Baiton said Carnival tried to persuade him to lie 
in his testimony on behalf of the other crewman and fired him in retaliation 
when he refused. In September, Royal Caribbean paid a $9 million fine 
after pleading guilty to a fleet-wide conspiracy to dump oil into 
the ocean. As part of the plea, Royal Caribbean acknowledged ordering 
an engineer to lie to a federal grand jury and destroying evidence 
to conceal its illegal dumping. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>