<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0140 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Buffalo Bills quarterback Doug Flutie is doing everything he can to 
make sure the magic does not run dry. Not a game goes by without one 
of those improvisational Flutie plays that causes jaws to drop. Against 
the New England Patriots Sunday, there were two Flutie beauties. In 
the first quarter, on third down, Flutie scrambled for 10 yards and, 
just as he was about to get smacked by a Patriots linebacker, he jumped 
and threw a lateral to a trailing Thurman Thomas, who ran for 10 more 
yards. It was something that both Bills and Patriots players said 
they have never seen before. On another crucial third down, Flutie 
ran for 22 yards, zigging when defensive backs were zagging. Actually, 
Flutie did have several bad throws, two of which were intercepted 
in the New England end zone. But over all his improvisation, as well 
as a solid Bills defense that limited New England to only one touchdown, 
were keys to the Bills beating the Patriots, 13-10, before a crowd 
of 72,020 at Rich Stadium. With the New York Jets losing to last-place 
Indianapolis Colts, the American Football Conference East, the most 
topsy-turvy division in the National Football League, has a new leader 
in the Miami Dolphins, winners over the Carolina Panthers. The Jets 
and Bills are tied for second place with 6-4 records, and the Patriots 
fell to fourth at 5-5. In the Patriots' locker room before the game, 
there was a sense of dread. The players know their team, which during 
the preseason some in the NFL thought was a Super Bowl contender, 
is in danger of not making the playoffs. ``This team isn't going into 
the tank,'' New England Coach Pete Carroll said. ``We'll keep battling.'' 
They did throughout the game, although the Bills almost gave it away 
on several occasions. Flutie's first interception came when the Bills 
were at the Patriots' 13 in the third quarter and Flutie threw behind 
his intended wide receiver Andre Reed, and the pass was picked off 
by Willie Clay. ``I made some bad throws today,'' Flutie said. ``There 
are no excuses.'' Flutie would atone for that mistake later with a 
10-yard touchdown pass to tight end Jay Riemersma for a 13-3 lead. 
It was only the Bills' first touchdown in their last seven quarters. 
At that point, it looked like the Patriots were dead. The day had 
mirrored their season, with New England losing four of its last five 
games. The team has also suffered a rash of injuries. Key receivers 
Vincent Brisby (fractured finger), Terry Glenn (hamstring) and Troy 
Brown (ankle sprain) are all hurt with only Brisby playing against 
Buffalo. The team's lead blocker, fullback Tony Carter, had knee surgery. 
Defensive players have also paid a few visits to the doctor's office. 
Willie McGinest (groin) and Brandon Mitchell (broken foot), the team's 
best pass rushing linemen, were hurt with McGinest missing the three 
weeks before this game and Mitchell out for the season. Linebacker 
Chris Slade, another key pass rusher, did not play because of an ankle 
injury. But Bledsoe (12 of 31 for 180 yards) gave the Patriots some 
hope early in the fourth quarter. The rookie wide receiver Tony Simmons, 
pressed to play because of the injuries, ran a near-perfect deep crossing 
pattern that caught the defense off-guard. By the time the Bills realized 
that blur shooting across their line of sight was Simmons, he caught 
the ball at the Buffalo 17 and ran into the end zone, to help narrow 
the deficit to 13-10. The Bills dominated the time of possession, 
holding the ball for 37 minutes 17 seconds, as well the ground game, 
rushing for 213 yards to New England's 48. But Flutie blew two scoring 
opportunities with bad throws. The second came with under 5 minutes 
left with the Bills at the New England 4 when Flutie badly underthrew 
wide receiver Kevin Williams. But the Patriots could not capitalize 
on the mistakes. After the interception, two sacks by Bills defensive 
end Bruce Smith on the ensuing series ended a chance at tying the 
game. Then the Bills, because of swirling winds of nearly 25 miles 
anhour, decided to try a fourth-and-4 at the New England 27 instead 
of attempting a field goal. Flutie's pass to wide receiver Andre Reed 
was incomplete, and the Patriots had the ball back with 2:57 left. 
But that drive ended with three consecutive Bledsoe incompletions, 
the last coming when wide receiver Shawn Jefferson was flipped like 
a pancake by defensive back Donovan Greer. ``I should have made the 
play,'' Jefferson said. Flutie would not admit it publicly, but this 
victory was special for him, because the Patriots, after the 1989 
season, sent him packing for Canada. Now, Flutie's victory Sunday 
might ultimately knock the Patriots out of the playoffs. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>