<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0143 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Who blinked? Both of them, Bill Clinton every bit as much as Saddam 
Hussein, in the weekend showdown over Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. 
Although many in his administration had decided that United Nations 
weapons inspections were highly unlikely to work, that they would 
always be hamstrung in one way or another by the Iraqis, Clinton has 
given them yet another chance. Having ordered air attacks, he has 
called them off. The president acted a bit as his hero, John F. Kennedy, 
did during the Cuban missile crisis: Confronted with mixed signals, 
he chose the more favorable interpretation, acted upon it and will 
now wait to see if that works. As for Saddam, he felt obliged by the 
threat of American and British military action to reverse his decision 
last month to suspend all cooperation with the United Nations. But 
few doubt that it was a ploy, like so many of his past moves, to buy 
time. His goal remains what it has always been: the development of 
weapons to help him dominate his region. So not a great deal has been 
resolved in the last 48 hours, and the administration provided no 
clear blueprint of its future strategy. Clinton said he had changed 
his mind overnight. After reading the first Iraqi letter on Saturday, 
the president's national security adviser, Sandy Berger, termed it 
``unacceptable'' and said it had ``more holes than a Swiss cheese.'' 
Clinton said subsequent letters _ the president mentioned three, but 
Berger said there had been only two _ had closed the most gaping holes. 
Perhaps. But the texts of the supplementary letters offered only very 
modest assurances that the inspectors could ``resume all their activities.'' 
A reasonable person could conclude that they made matters clearer, 
or that the first letter was the definitive text and the others merely 
tactical wiggles. Something else changed overnight. It became clear 
that only the United States and Britain were dissatisfied with the 
original Iraqi letter; a number of other countries that 24 hours earlier 
had backed American threats of air attacks suddenly started calling 
for further diplomacy. Eager to resume full-scale purchases of oil 
from Iraq, several European and other countries had backed military 
action only reluctantly, and the letter gave them an out. That changed 
the political if not the military reality facing Clinton. With much 
of the world now willing to give Saddam the benefit of the doubt, 
and Secretary-General Kofi Annan describing the initial letter as 
a positive development, the president was backed into a corner. He 
had no real choice but to test the Iraqi leader's intentions once 
more. To have sent the bombers and missiles in under those circumstances 
would have been to invite widespread criticism abroad and perhaps 
even at home. In that sense at least, he had waited 24 hours too long 
to order the attack. So Clinton put the best face on the matter. He 
attributed his change of course to the clarifications, accepting for 
the moment the Iraqi assurances that they attached no conditions to 
the inspectors' freedom to operate in an unfettered way. The best 
long-term solution, Clinton said, was to keep inspectors ``in there 
working'' to block weapons production. In October 1962, with an American 
invasion of Cuba imminent, Kennedy received two letters from Soviet 
leader Nikita Khrushchev about the missile crisis. One was bellicose, 
one conciliatory. It was, of course, a moment of far greater national 
peril than this one, because enemy missiles were being installed less 
than 100 miles from Florida. Acting on the suggestion of his brother 
Robert, Kennedy replied to the conciliatory letter, and nothing more 
was heard about the other. An agreement was quickly reached on the 
removal of the missiles from Cuba. The two cases are not, of course, 
directly parallel. Clinton faced one ambiguous letter and two clarifications, 
Kennedy two separate letters whose relationship was not clear. But 
each president decided to put the best face on an unclear situation 
and wait to see whether his adversary would go along. ``We have to 
be able to take yes for an answer,'' Berger said. Now, the president 
said, ``Iraq must live up to its obligations.'' Otherwise it would 
have to pay the price. But that, as Clinton well knows, is what the 
United States said nine months ago, to no effect. Then as now, it 
is up to Saddam to decide when and how the next crisis comes. And 
when it does, what will the United States do? Presumably, launch the 
attack that was aborted Saturday. But neither Berger nor Defense Secretary 
William Cohen was willing, at a briefing Sunday, to discuss whether 
that would happen immediately after the next infraction by Saddam, 
without warning or pause for diplomacy, or whether another long buildup 
would be needed. Nor is there any indication that the administration 
is ready to set a firm timetable, with deadlines for specific actions 
by Iraq. The cycle can repeat itself _ violation, buildup, threats 
of attack, retreat from the brink _ as long as the United States chooses 
to let Saddam play that game. There is no easy remedy to a very complex 
situation, as administration officials constantly emphasize. But eventually 
there will be a loss of credibility unless Saddam is restrained or 
eliminated. Clinton addressed that point, calling for change in Baghdad, 
``a new government that is committed to represent and respect its 
people, not repress them.'' That seemed to suggest a policy departure. 
But Cohen cautioned that the president ``was not calling for the overthrow 
of Saddam Hussein,'' but rather promising to work with opposition 
groups to try to bring a more democratic government to power in Baghdad 
``in some future time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>