<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0250 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The sushi platter was not allowed to remain a marine still life for 
long. After doing a double-take at the size of her portion, Martina 
Hingis activated her chopsticks and went spear-fishing from a restaurant 
banquette in New York City last week. Lately, the second-ranked Hingis 
has had better luck catching fish than titles. Though she ended 1997 
ranked No. 1 in the world by a landslide, this year she will settle 
for second place, unless Lindsay Davenport loses in the first round 
of the Chase Championships and Hingis wins the tournament. So there 
she was, just 18 but already on the rebound, chowing down and shoring 
up her stamina for the most important hunt on her agenda _ the year-ending 
Chase Championships at Madison Square Garden that begins Monday. Hingis, 
mired in a slump she deems a personal insult, hoped to reclaim the 
No. 1 ranking that Davenport took from her a month ago. Davenport 
also took away Hingis' bragging rights as the United States Open champion 
by beating her in the Open final. Now, Hingis is simply trying to 
win a title, not the ranking sweepstakes. ``It's the end of the year 
for me,'' Hingis said. ``I didn't win a tournament since May, and 
believe me it would be nice to walk away from 1998 with a win. When 
you're used to being a champion, it's like a drug, you want to be 
there again and again.'' ``Right now she's been better than me, and 
I want to beat her. I don't have this feeling about anyone else,'' 
Hingis added, in what amounted to a candid and unapologetic declaration 
of war against the towering Californian, the winner of all three finals 
the duo contested this year. It rankles the average-sized teen-ager 
that, in recent history, bigger is proving to be better. According 
to Hingis, the so-called ``big girls'' are apparently ganging up on 
her. The latest addition to a group of bullies that includes Davenport, 
Venus Williams and Mary Pierce, is 29-year-old Steffi Graf, who humbled 
Hingis by 6-0 last Friday night in the third set of their quarterfinal 
in Advanta, and spoiled Davenport's bid to clinch as the year-end 
No. 1 by beating her in the final Sunday. ``It's not like they've 
figured out my game,'' said Hingis, who often toyed with that cartel 
of heavy-hitters during her 1997 heyday and still senses she has the 
strategy to outwit them. ``But the big girls, their bodies are bigger 
than mine, and they've worked on themselves. I have to be more clever 
and faster than them.'' Last year Hingis was just that, but then an 
inevitable case of ennui set in. ``Sometimes when you're over-confident, 
you kind of lose your focus,'' Hingis said. While Hingis' predecessor 
at the top, the regally remote Graf, always scoffed at the notion 
that the computer ranking was anything more than a manufactured statistic, 
Hingis was unashamed to admit that she reveled in it. ``It does bug 
me to be No. 2. I don't like the 2,'' she said last week as, with 
her sushi leftovers stowed in a doggie bag with a piece of chocolate 
cake, she ambled along Madison Avenue to an autograph session. ``I 
mean, last year I was almost unbeatable. There is nothing for me to 
lose anymore.'' Hingis is as blunt in reviewing her shortcomings as 
she was last year when she matter-of-factly declared herself the best 
player on earth. In 1997 and not so far from braces and pigtails, 
a 16-year-old Hingis not only became the youngest No. 1-ranked woman 
in tennis history, she monopolized three of the four slam championships 
with her canny mixture of clockwork counter-punching and opportunistic 
show-stoppers that sliced up the court. Though her serve did not sting, 
the rest of her arsenal did. More subtly than sensationally, Hingis 
turned the competition to little more than accessories to her ambition. 
They praised her work ethic and versatility, they (publicly) declared 
her the undisputed No. 1 in 1997, and they (secretly) devoted themselves 
to disputing her stranglehold in 1998. Hence this mixed bag of a year 
where she successfully defended the first slam title of her career 
in Melbourne, acquired and discarded her first serious beau (the bleached-blond 
106th-ranked Spaniard, Julian Alonso), became the first female athlete 
to grace a GQ cover, and ceased to be the first lady of tennis when 
Davenport displaced her on Oct. 12. Though Hingis appeared to be on 
track early in 1998, Monica Seles reduced her to rubble in their French 
Open semifinal, and Jana Novotna snuffed out her Wimbledon defense 
in the semifinal round. Discouraged, Hingis went into a summer funk 
from which she was not quite able to bestir herself at the United 
States Open, where her slam campaign concluded on the meek note of 
a 6-3, 7-5 loss to Davenport. ``I don't think she's lost her touch 
for the game, although she has seemed a little tired this year,'' 
Davenport said. ``It's more that the rest of us realized the one way 
to beat her is overpower her. Sometimes it works, sometimes it doesn't.'' 
Lately it has. From invincible to vulnerable? Hingis refuses to view 
her evolution that gloomily. Aware that Davenport improved her game, 
Hingis vowed to do the same. Her lackluster autumn schedule included 
a loss to Patty Schnyder, also from Switzerland, who happens to be 
her first-round Chase opponent. At their Grand Slam Cup match, Hingis 
retired with heat cramps. After visiting her horses in the Czech Republic, 
Hingis repaired to the Bollettieri Sports Academy to recharge. ``I 
worked on myself there,'' said Hingis, who also got treatment for 
a chronic ankle sprain. Hingis noted that her court coverage suffered 
this season as Davenport's improved. ``I thought I had improved myself 
in 1998, but I also got worse in some areas. You want to make her 
move around, but it's easy to say and hard to do. I've had to concentrate 
on motivating myself. You feel more tired when you're losing.'' Last 
week at the Advanta Championships in Philadelphia, Graf saw to it 
that yet another successful title defense eluded the upstart who had 
dared to pronounce her over-the-hill last year. Now Hingis' last chance 
for restitution is the Chase Championships, one of the rare main events 
that she has never won. The French Open is the other. ``It would be 
like a dream final to play Lindsay: No. 1 against No. 2 with everything 
on the line,'' Hingis said. Everything except the No. 1 ranking. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>