<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0160 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Stock markets are up, currencies are stable and bankers no longer 
live in dread of panicky runs on their branches. Even CNBC Asia, the 
cable news channel that offers minute-by-minute coverage of the region's 
malaise, has stopped using its pulse-quickening logo, ``Asia in Crisis.'' 
The Asian crisis has not passed. But 16 months after the devaluation 
of the Thai baht sent currencies tumbling, capital fleeing, and governments 
toppling throughout the region, a semblance of calm has returned. 
From Thailand to Korea, the crisis feels more like a chronic condition. 
As representatives of the United States and 20 other countries gather 
here this week for the annual meeting of the Asia Pacific Economic 
Cooperation forum, economists and analysts warn, though, that Asia's 
surface stability presents its own set of problems. The United States 
is pressing Asian countries to undertake wholesale and painful economic 
reforms. But without the threat of a collapsing currency or dwindling 
foreign reserves, their governments may lose their resolve. Already, 
experts say, efforts to overhaul banks and corporations are flagging 
in Korea, Malaysia and Indonesia. ``It would be very dangerous to 
assume that the crisis is over,'' said Brian Lippey, the managing 
director of Tokai Asia Ltd., an investment firm in Hong Kong. ``There 
is a big risk of complacency and a return to protectionism. We have 
seen how quickly things can unravel in Asia.'' Indeed, over the weekend, 
Indonesia was struck by a fresh spasm of violence between protesting 
students and soldiers. And in the streets of this normally staid city, 
protesters howled against the ouster and imprisonment of Anwar Ibrahim, 
Malaysia's former deputy prime minister. Moreover, the rebound in 
Asian sentiment masks a continuing deterioration in the underlying 
economies. Analysts estimate that Indonesia's economy will contract 
by more than 15 percent this year and another 5 percent next year. 
Malaysia's is expected to shrink about 5 percent, both this year and 
next. And Singapore, one of Asia's most resilient performers, announced 
last week that its economy had slipped into negative territory for 
the first time since 1986. ``It's vastly premature to expect a turnaround 
in the real economies,'' said C. Fred Bergsten, director of the Institute 
for International Economics, a research organization in Washington. 
``The countries in Southeast Asia are in what I would call a depression. 
It looks to me like they're continuing to go downhill.'' Then why 
have stock markets in Jakarta, Hong Kong, and Tokyo risen anywhere 
from 10 percent to 60 percent since early October? Two outside factors 
are responsible: the Federal Reserve Bank's decision to lower interest 
rates and the strengthening of the Japanese yen relative to the dollar. 
The Fed's rate cuts have emboldened Asian banks to cut their rates 
as well, which has rekindled confidence in places where commercial 
activity had virtually ground to a halt. The stronger yen has taken 
the pressure off other Asian currencies, notably China's yuan. ``We 
returned to a point where, instead of raw panic, people are doing 
calculations again,'' said William Overholt, director of Asia strategy 
at the Japanese financial services firm Nomura International in Hong 
Kong. But while lower interest rates and stable currencies can make 
for a more tranquil atmosphere, ``cuts in interest rates don't make 
a difference in an economy where the banks are insolvent,'' said Simon 
Ogus, head of Asian economics at the investment bank Warburg Dillon 
Read in Hong Kong. There are big variations between countries, of 
course. Experts said Thailand and South Korea were on the road to 
recovery, having already borne much of the pain of the currency collapse. 
But healthier economies like Hong Kong and Singapore, which did not 
suffer steep currency devaluations, could take longer to adjust. Indonesia 
remains in a treacherous downward spiral. Although its currency, the 
rupiah, has risen from 12,000 rupiah to the dollar to just under 8,000 
since last summer, inflation is running at an annual rate of 80 percent 
and one-fifth of its 92 million workers are unemployed. ``We're in 
a very dire situation on the political front,'' said Mari Pangetsu, 
executive director of the Center for Strategic and International Studies, 
a research group in Jakarta. ``For almost every single economic reform 
we've tried to do, the process gets politicized.'' Even in the more 
stable countries, the restructuring of banks and debt-burdened companies 
has been stop and go. In Thailand, for example, the government has 
moved aggressively to auction off bad loans. But experts there said 
the government had been slow to introduce a promised new bankruptcy 
code. ``There are intense vested interests fighting against it,'' 
said James Stent, a senior executive vice president of Bank of Asia, 
Thailand's 11th-largest bank. Malaysia has devised its own solution 
to the crisis by imposing strict controls on its currency and stock 
markets. Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad says he is shielding his 
economy from the vagaries of international capital flows. But critics 
say Malaysia is following a potentially ruinous policy that could 
cut it off from the global economy and snuff out its much-needed economic 
reforms. An even bigger concern among the leaders who will gather 
at the regional summit meeting is that other countries may follow 
the example. Although officials in Thailand and Indonesia have said 
they would not impose capital controls, experts said the specter of 
several more years of recession could test their resolve. That is 
why most experts here were relieved that the Federal Reserve cut interest 
rates, even if they doubt the long-term effect. The Fed's action, 
they said, signaled that the United States finally recognized the 
depth of Asia's problems. Still, it is not clear they can offer much 
of a remedy. The Treasury Department is drafting a proposal to be 
presented at the meeting to restructure the huge debts hobbling Asian 
corporations. But the United States wants Japan, whose banks are the 
biggest lenders in Asia, to bear much of the cost. Bergsten, an economist 
who heads an informal group of advisers to APEC, the regional economic 
group, said Asian countries should adopt a policy of aggressive fiscal 
stimulation. If the governments acted in concert, he said, they could 
revive domestic demand, which would reduce their export dependence 
on the United States and Europe. Other observers said, though, that 
it is futile to divorce the future of Asia from the economic vitality 
of the West. Many analysts say the recovery of Asia hinges on whether 
foreign investors pour money back into the region. ``If conditions 
in the United States and Europe remain normal, Asia will probably 
be OK,'' said Marc Faber, an investment adviser in Hong Kong. ``But 
if the U.S. economy weakens, all bets are off.'' To some extent, then, 
Asia's recovery depends as much on averting a new crisis abroad as 
confronting the one at home. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>