<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0257 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A sculptor who has lived in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, for 20 years says 
he is thinking of moving to get away from the garbage. A retired salesman 
in Hunts Point in the Bronx crinkles his nose as he describes the 
acrid smell of the endless garbage trucks. On the Brooklyn waterfront 
in Red Hook, a man rails against a plan to bring immense garbage barges 
to a newly created shipping hub for trash. ``What they're trying to 
bring in here is death, the barges of death,'' said the man, Jay McKnight, 
who lives in public housing and is a member of the Red Hook Lions 
Club. These scarred old waterfront areas are ground zero in the scramble 
to find a solution to the flow of residential trash that, by law, 
must stop going to the Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island by Dec. 
31, 2001. They are home to what are called transfer stations, buildings 
where local commercial garbage has for a decade been unloaded from 
standard-sized garbage trucks, compacted and transferred to 18-wheelers 
for shipment out of state. Now, residential waste is starting to go 
to these commercial stations, and soon new, much larger stations will 
be added to transfer residential waste to railroad cars or oceangoing 
barges. The upshot is that as Fresh Kills prepares to close, large 
swaths of the city will experience a much closer connection with garbage, 
both through the transfer stations and the fleets of trucks traveling 
to them. In essence, the city is changing its entire system for handling 
the 3.5 million tons of waste it produces yearly, a tonnage equal 
to 76 Titanics. Exporting to other states, at a cost the city estimates 
may exceed $6 billion over the next 30 years, is the linchpin of the 
strategy. But critics say that the rules on placing transfer stations 
are illegal, that city laws for fairly sharing odious activities are 
ignored and that minority residents suffer unfairly. Last week, these 
issues were addressed at a Brooklyn hearing by an Environmental Protection 
Agency advisory panel. It may recommend an increased Federal role 
in insuring that waste disposal policies here and in other cities 
are not discriminatory. On Thursday, the State Department of Environmental 
Conservation withdrew permits for two transfer stations in Williamsburg 
after opponents raised objections. Opponents hope delay will stall 
the city's drive to close Fresh Kills, and force a policy re-evaluation. 
They demand a more open process, adherence to city rules against ``clustering'' 
unpleasant public services. Even as they say they favor closing Fresh 
Kills, they seethe that poorer, minority areas dominated by Democrats 
appear to be sacrificial lambs for satisfying white Republican Staten 
Islanders. City Hall has so far sketched a rigid approach. The city 
would assign huge contracts to large garbage companies to ship trash 
by rail or barge to Pennsylvania, Virginia and other states, and it 
would truck trash out until then, reducing the flow to Fresh Kills 
to nothing in three years. As tension builds between the boroughs, 
there are hints that City Hall's approach may be changing. Joseph 
J. Lhota, Deputy Mayor for Operations, said the city hoped to make 
far more use of its existing city-owned waterfront stations for transferring 
garbage to barges _ something critics have strongly urged. Ocean dumping 
was the primary means of disposal until 1935, when a coalition of 
New Jersey coastal cities forced New York to end the practice. (Ocean 
dumping of sewage sludge was banned in 1992.) Then landfills and incinerators 
were used for garbage. Apartment incinerators were outlawed in the 
1980's. Gradually, landfills in Brooklyn, the Bronx and Queens closed. 
Fresh Kills, which opened in 1948 as a temporary dump, became the 
only disposal site after incinerators ended. In 1957, the city stopped 
collecting commercial waste. A new industry emerged to handle this 
waste, shipping some of it out of the city. In 1988, even more commercial 
waste was pushed to out-of-state landfills when the city raised the 
price it charged commercial haulers to dump at Fresh Kills. In the 
1990's the city started to make plans to close Fresh Kills, prompted 
by two Federal lawsuits. Engineers developed plans for a vast enclosed 
transfer station there for shipment to out-of-state landfills. But 
planners assumed the landfill would be open for another 20 years. 
Suddenly, in 1996, it appeared the City Council would pass a law to 
begin closing Fresh Kills. Gov. George Pataki and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, 
both of whom rode strong Staten Island majorities to victory, jointly 
announced the dump would close. The State Legislature passed a law 
to do this. At that point only the closing date was known. A task 
force was set up with limited options: no incinerators or landfills. 
Moreover, the task force decided that recycling could not come close 
to filling the need. Export seemed the only route. The city took its 
plans for a huge transfer station at Fresh Kills _ behind the scenes, 
those plans had come to appear politically impossible because of Staten 
Island opposition _ then asked the major waste companies to propose 
a similar center somewhere else on New York Harbor. The companies 
came back with 13 proposals, including building huge stations in Red 
Hook, Bay Ridge, the South Bronx and Williamsburg. One proposal to 
put garbage in huge containers on barges at the marine transfer stations 
was rejected as impractical. But the idea has come to dominate discussions 
of garbage strategy. Opponents favor the eight existing marine transfer 
stations, where white sanitation trucks already go, because they are 
evenly distributed around the city and are not concentrated in poor 
neighborhoods. The bottom line: For the first time since the 1930s, 
when ocean dumping ended, none of New York City's garbage will be 
disposed of in the city. But more areas of the city will play host 
to garbage, perhaps permanently. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>