<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0128 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After years of debate, hundreds of studies, thousands of pages of 
blueprints and billions of dollars, the United States and 15 other 
nations are ready to start building the largest, most complex structure 
ever assembled in space, the international space station. Almost 15 
years after the United States first made a commitment to building 
a space station _ a period marked by shifting goals, numerous revisions 
and false starts, and, most recently, serious concerns about Russia's 
involvement _ the United States and its partners are embarking on 
an ambitious five-year construction project 220 miles above Earth. 
Planners say it will culminate in a sprawling research complex that 
answers major questions about the future of humans in space, while 
producing data and products with more immediate applications down 
on the planet. Despite severe money problems at its space agency, 
Russia is to place the first piece of a giant puzzle on the board 
this week by launching a 20-ton pressurized module that will serve 
as the core of the orbital outpost by providing initial propulsion 
and power. This unit, named Zarya after the Russian word for sunrise, 
is to lift off Friday atop a Proton rocket launched from the Baikonur 
Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The United States is to follow on Dec. 3 
when the space shuttle Endeavour takes off with a large hub unit, 
named Unity. This node attaches to the Russian part and serves as 
a main connector for future pieces of the station, designed to eventually 
house up to seven astronauts at a time from countries around the world. 
Three astronauts are expected to occupy the station beginning early 
in 2000, well before it is fully completed. The space station is one 
of the largest peacetime international engineering projects in history, 
and one of the costliest too, with a construction price of at least 
$40 billion, more than half of which will be paid by the United States. 
Various estimates suggest that participating nations together will 
spend a similar amount to operate it during its lifetime, a minimum 
of 10 years. It will be a risky and difficult project as well, experts 
said, noting that the odds of a major accident during the station's 
construction or operation are high. Construction will require at least 
43 space flights, including 34 by space shuttles and the rest by Russian 
rockets, to haul almost 900,000 pounds of building materials and supplies. 
These materials, including pressurized modules, connecting nodes, 
expandable metal trusses for holding solar panels and heat radiators, 
and miles of electrical cables, are to be assembled by American and 
Russian astronauts making 144 spacewalks. The spacewalks, in which 
two-man teams will have to connect hundreds of station components 
and cables, are expected to total at least 1,800 hours, double the 
time that American astronauts have spent outside their ships since 
the beginning of piloted space flight almost four decades ago. When 
all of the pieces finally come together in 2004, as scheduled, they 
are to form a complex that covers an area equal to two football fields 
when the massive solar power arrays are unfurled. Almost a dozen interlocking 
modules, housing research laboratories, living quarters and support 
equipment, are planned to provide 46,000 cubic feet of pressurized 
space, equal to the interior volume of two 747 jet planes. ``The space 
station is being built to see how people can live and work safely 
and productively in space for long periods,'' said Daniel Goldin, 
administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 
``It will be a world-class laboratory for science that could lead 
to discoveries and technical advances that affect all our lives.'' 
Construction is to begin, however, while several uncertainties remain 
about costs and schedules. Assembly already has been delayed more 
than a year because the third major component, a Russian-built unit 
called the service module, has not been completed because the Russian 
Space Agency is out of money. This critical unit is to provide living 
quarters and laboratory space in the early stages of station construction. 
Noting that the collapse of the Russian economy is a threat to the 
space station, NASA last month announced a bailout plan to funnel 
money to the Russians to complete the service module and have it ready 
for launching in July 1999. The American agency said it would initially 
pay Russia $60 million for equipment and services related to the station 
project. And NASA told Congress that the United States would have 
to channel $600 million more to Russia over the next four years to 
help that nation meet its space station obligations. Even with this 
aid, questions remain whether Russia will eventually find the money 
to complete what it has promised for the station, including two science 
laboratories, a power station and cargo spacecraft to take up supplies. 
President Clinton, at the Kennedy Space Center on Oct. 29 for the 
space shuttle flight of Sen. John Glenn, said he favored covering 
Russia's financial shortfalls for the station because of the importance 
of the international project. ``I think we're doing the right thing 
with this space station, and we need to stay with it,'' Clinton said 
during a CNN interview. The Clinton administration has had a vested 
interest in the space station since 1993, when it restructured the 
program, on the verge of cancellation by Congress, and brought in 
the Russians as full partners in a foreign policy initiative after 
the breakup of the Soviet Union. John Logsdon, director of George 
Washington University's Space Policy Institute, said including Russia 
in the program saved the space station, both by giving the project 
an added political purpose and by offering the hope that Russian participation 
would move the program along. ``There was a dramatic shift in the 
debate when Russia was brought in,'' Logsdon said. ``Political support 
for a space station is now very solid.'' Much of the flight hardware 
for the station has either been built or is nearing completion since 
the new start five years ago, he said, and the project has a good 
chance of being completed once construction in space begins, even 
if Russia ends up with a lesser role. ``I don't think there is much 
of a possibility of canceling the program now,'' Logsdon said. The 
new outpost will not be the first space station in history, but it 
will be the biggest and most versatile and well-equipped. In the early 
days of the space race, President Kennedy considered having the United 
States try to build the first space station to assert American dominance. 
But when advised that the Soviets' more powerful rockets would allow 
them to win that race, Kennedy set the more difficult goal of landing 
men on the Moon. After the Moon landings, NASA officials believed 
that the next step should include a large space station supplied by 
a reusable shuttle. Public support for the space program declined 
markedly after the Moon landing, however, and the Nixon administration 
cut the agency's budget, making it clear it would not support two 
major new programs. NASA chose to pursue the space shuttle. Only after 
the shuttle began flying successfully did NASA resurrect the idea 
of a space station. The Soviets launched the first space station, 
Salyut 1, in 1971. They followed it with a series of larger and more 
sophisticated Salyuts, culminating in the launching of Mir in 1986. 
Mir, the first permanent station, grew to a complex of seven modules 
weighing more than 100 tons. The first U.S. space station was Skylab, 
made from the third stage of a Saturn rocket and flown into orbit 
in 1973. The 84-ton station was in use for only nine months, during 
which crews visited for 28, 56 and 84 days. President Reagan first 
proposed building an international station, led by the United States, 
in 1984 and within two years got the European Space Agency and other 
partners to agree to contribute hardware to the project. NASA first 
estimated that the United States could build its part of the station 
for $8.5 billion, but the project almost immediately bogged down. 
``No one agreed on what kind of a space station to build, and it was 
constantly being redesigned,'' said Howard McCurdy, a professor of 
public affairs at American University who studied the program. ``All 
we could agree on was that we wanted one.'' As work on the station 
dragged on, with several NASA centers proposing different designs, 
estimated costs rose, prompting Congress to get involved in managing 
the program to hold down expenses, McCurdy said. ``By 1993, we had 
spent $11 billion on the space station and all we had to show for 
it was piles of blueprints and no major flight hardware,'' he said. 
The Clinton administration then asked NASA to redesign and streamline 
the station again, this time including Russian components, and capped 
U.S. spending at $17.4 billion through assembly. Goldin, the NASA 
chief, said early this year. however, that American costs would likely 
be about $21.3 billion, requiring additional funding. And an independent 
study commissioned by the agency suggested in April that U.S. costs 
could climb as high as $24.7 billion. Joining the United States in 
the project are Russia, Japan, Canada, Brazil and 11 nations of the 
European Space Agency: Italy, Germany, France, the United Kingdom, 
Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. 
The original Russian contribution to the program was expected to be 
worth $8 billion to $10 billion before the current economic crisis. 
The other partners' shares amount to about $3.1 billion from Japan, 
$850 million from Canada, and $3.8 billion from the European group, 
with a separate $550 million from Italy. Experts warn that the cost 
of the space station is likely to be borne in more than mere dollars. 
``Like any construction project, this is going to be risky business,'' 
said John Pike, director of space policy for the Federation of American 
Scientists. ``You have to assume that you are going to lose at least 
one major component of the station, either because of a rocket blowing 
up or an accident in orbit,'' Pike said. ``And it is likely that someone 
will be killed, which is not uncommon on construction sites even when 
they are not doing spacewalks, which are dangerous all by themselves.'' 
With so many rocket launches required for the station, the odds of 
a major accident involving a shuttle or Russian rocket are high, according 
to Pike and others. A statistical analysis done last year by the British 
journal New Scientist concluded that there was a 73.6 percent chance 
of at least one major failure during the assembly sequence. ``It would 
be a miracle if there wasn't a major failure,'' Pike said. ``And depending 
on any loss of life, or what part of the station is lost during an 
accident, it could severely cripple the project or cause major construction 
delays.'' The new space station, which will be five times larger than 
Mir if completed as planned, is to be occupied and producing research 
data long before its scheduled completion date. Plans call for Russia 
to launch a Soyuz spacecraft in January 2000, carrying Capt. Bill 
Shephard of the U.S. Navy, the station's first commander, and Russian 
astronauts Yuri Gidzenko and Sergei Krikalev. Their arrival will mark 
the beginning of research and a permanent human presence on the space 
station. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>