<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Monday, Nov. 16: The latest 
confrontation with Iraq has ended with another promise from Saddam 
Hussein to allow unfettered access to U.N. weapons inspectors. The 
apparent peaceful resolution is welcome, and can be credited to President 
Clinton's renewed willingness to back diplomacy with the threat of 
force. But this must be the last time that Iraq tries to manipulate 
the Security Council. Too many times before, Iraq has tried to slip 
free of its commitments to cooperate in the elimination of its stocks 
of biological and chemical weapons and the missiles that can deliver 
them. Iraq's interference with the inspectors has repeatedly forced 
the United States to build up military forces in the Persian Gulf 
region at great expense. Faced with a credible threat of force, Iraq 
has backed down, only to resume its defiance at a later date. Despite 
its latest promise, Iraq is still far from fulfilling its responsibilities. 
Thousands of chemical weapons and tons of deadly germ-warfare agents 
remain unaccounted for. The only way to bring the inspections process 
to a timely conclusion and prepare for an eventual end of the international 
economic sanctions is to give the inspectors the access they require 
to laboratories, factories, desert hiding places and computer records. 
The process will go considerably faster if Iraq not only refrains 
from interfering, but freely provides information about what has been 
done with the deadly ingredients it purchased before the Persian Gulf 
war. That kind of full cooperation and compliance must now become 
the principal goal of the Security Council with regard to Iraq. Saddam 
must be made to understand that no further toying with the inspections 
process will be tolerated. If Baghdad again attempts to restrict inspections, 
Washington, with support from Britain and other allies, need not wait 
for weeks or even days to respond. The Clinton administration, which 
reacted too passively last August, when Iraq first began barring surprise 
inspections, did an effective job of coordinating diplomacy and military 
force this time around. If there is a next time, Washington has rightly 
made it clear that the American reaction will be prompt and certain, 
with no further warnings necessary. If Iraq is truly prepared to cooperate, 
the day may come when the chief U.N. inspector, Richard Butler, can 
report that all prohibited weapons have been located and destroyed 
and a reliable long-term monitoring system, including continued surprise 
inspections, is in place. At such a time, the United States must be 
prepared for an easing of sanctions, as spelled out under the relevant 
Security Council resolutions. But for as long as Saddam remains in 
power, an airtight and intrusive verification system to monitor his 
weapons activities will have to be maintained, under threat of force 
if necessary. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>