<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0248 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For all the surprises in the recent elections, one widely shared prediction 
turned out to be correct. Despite increases in those eligible and 
registered to vote, only 72.5 million Americans turned up at the polls, 
2.5 million fewer than four years ago. It was the lowest voting participation 
rate since 1942 and the lowest outside the South since 1818. But underneath 
this dismal trend lies an encouraging phenomenon that bears examination. 
About a dozen states increased turnout, in many cases because of get-out-the-vote 
drives by the Democrats. ``We won the election on the ground,'' asserts 
Gov. Roy Romer of Colorado, chairman of the Democratic National Committee, 
referring to the thousands of foot soldiers thrown into the breach 
in a way the party had not done in decades. Romer and other political 
operatives have come to realize that attack ads on television and 
radio may persuade some voters at the cost of turning off others. 
Thanks especially to the Christian Coalition and other religious conservatives, 
Republicans marshaled sufficient ground forces to influence the results 
in the last several elections. Two years ago, however, the AFL-CIO 
spent millions on attack ads to try to elect Democrats in a few dozen 
congressional races. They lost almost all of them, but infuriated 
the Republicans so much that they counterattacked in Congress by introducing 
anti-union bills. This election, the AFL-CIO shifted strategy and 
spent more money on mailings, telephone calls and other low-key but 
intense efforts to motivate union members and their communities. The 
Democrats selected a handful of races where they knew turnout could 
make a difference, organized Democratic allies and enlisted thousands 
of volunteers to make calls, go door to door, pass out leaflets and 
otherwise contact individual voters, usually on behalf of a cause 
like Social Security or women's issues. The allied groups included 
unions, women's organizations, black community groups, gay activists, 
youth groups, seniors, ethnic groups, disability groups and many others. 
The Democrats' surveys showed that personal contact with a party worker 
was more effective than television ads in motivating voters to go 
to the polls. There are a lot of theories about why voter turnout 
has declined. Some say voters have grown cynical, doubtful of government's 
role in their lives and alienated by negative campaigning. Curtis 
Gans, director of the Committee for the Study of the American Electorate, 
argues that all Americans should be alarmed by what he calls the ``long-term 
demobilization'' of voters. The committee found this year that the 
overall drop in turnout among Republicans from 1994 was 19 percent, 
compared with only 2.1 percent for Democrats. My own feeling is that 
an additional factor reducing turnout rates is that political organizations 
no longer invest in producing the turnout. Getting out the vote was 
forgotten as campaigns turned more and more to costly television advertising, 
raising more and more money from special interests to do it. This 
year the Democrats invested in the ``ground war'' in Kentucky, North 
Carolina, South Carolina, Alabama, Georgia, Hawaii and Maryland, all 
states that experienced an increase in turnout. It may be wishful 
thinking, but if this election forces the rediscovery of old-style 
politics closer to the voter, and the possibly diminishing returns 
of negative advertising on the airwaves, it will have benefits more 
far-reaching than anything else the winners may achieve. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>