<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0195 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If Anthony Mazzocchi's vision becomes reality, the United States will 
someday have a Labor Party that rivals Britain's. Mazzocchi said he 
hoped the new Labor Party would fill the void that he and the 1,200 
delegates gathered here for the party's constitutional convention 
see in American politics. Mazzocchi, the driving force behind the 
fledgling party, said Jesse Ventura's election as governor of Minnesota 
showed that Americans were turned off by the two big political parties. 
And the delegates _ miners, farm workers, nurses, social workers _ 
had a explanation for why some have soured on the Democrats and the 
Republicans: Those parties heed the interests of corporations far 
more than those of workers. ``Neither the Democrats or Republicans 
have passed any pro-worker legislation in 25 years,'' said Mazzocchi, 
a longtime official of the Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers Union. 
``On issues that working Americans care about, on trade, health care, 
welfare reform, the two major parties have sided with corporations.'' 
His hope, he said, is that millions of Americans will embrace a party 
with a platform that supports a 32-hour work week, four-week vacations 
and a minimum pension for all workers, and a Canadian-style health 
care system in which the government pays the bills. Many labor leaders 
warn that third parties generally fail. Republicans deride the party 
as fringe leftist. Democrats worry that it could siphon votes from 
their candidates. But, gesturing toward the crowded convention hall, 
festooned with banners showing legendary labor leaders, Mazzocchi 
said: ``This is another example of people being turned off by the 
two political parties. We're convinced there's going to be an alternative 
political party _ it's either going to come from us or from the right.'' 
The convention was afire with speeches about how, in the richest nation 
on earth, one in five children are in poverty and one in six Americans 
lack health insurance. At the gathering, the most popular T-shirt 
read: ``The Bosses Have Two Parties. Now We Have One of Our Own.'' 
With an eye toward building public support, the party's faithful plan 
to hold Tupperware parties and kaffeeklatsches across the nation to 
rally support for universal health coverage. Members are also working 
to collect 1 million signatures for a constitutional amendment that 
would guarantee every American a job that pays a living wage. ``The 
ultimate goal is to amass enough people so we will be able to contest 
for real political power,'' said Gloria Mattera, secretary of the 
party's New York City chapter. While Mazzocchi talks big, the membership 
and public awareness of his fledgling party remain small, and it is 
unclear how fast the party is growing. The Labor Party's current convention 
has attracted fewer people than the founding convention two years 
ago. As it did in 1996, the party says it has been endorsed by unions 
whose membership totals more than 1 million workers, including the 
United Mine Workers, the California Nurses Association and the American 
Federation of Government Employees. And the party is struggling over 
whether it has reached critical mass big enough to field candidates, 
although it claims more than 10,000 members who pay $20 a year in 
dues. Not only that, the party hopes to take off at a difficult time. 
In the last two decades, American politics has moved to the right, 
unions have taken it on the chin and traditional liberals like Sen. 
Edward Kennedy, D-Mass., have been ridiculed as pariahs. Mazzocchi 
said his union's members _ workers in oilfields and chemical plants 
_ are in many ways conservative, but they still overwhelmingly support 
the party's worker-friendly platform. That demonstrates, he said, 
that the party is not out on some leftist fringe. No one in the labor 
movement writes off the 72-year-old Mazzocchi. Now an assistant to 
the president of the chemical workers union, he is widely considered 
the father of the Occupational Safety and Health Act because of his 
pioneering work a quarter-century ago as the union's safety director. 
Nonetheless, many labor leaders, noting that third parties generally 
have a short life span, warn that the Labor Party is doomed. ``It's 
true unions have to get more involved in a political process,'' said 
Jay Mazur, president of the Union of Needletrades, Industrial and 
Textile Employees, ``but not in a vehicle that can't ride very far.'' 
Republicans deride the Labor Party as socialists and big-government 
enthusiasts, though Mazzocchi insists that the party resembles social 
democrats in Western Europe. Democrats often denounce it as an unwitting 
fifth column that will hurt the cause of workers by siphoning off 
votes, helping ensure the election of Republicans. But many delegates 
here seemed unconcerned that the party might propel some Republicans 
to victory. ``In many areas of the country, you can't tell the difference 
between Republicans and Democrats,'' said Chris Townsend, a Labor 
Party member and legislative director of the United Electrical, Radio 
and Machine Workers. ``We're not going to be spoiling anything.'' 
At its 1996 convention, the party voted against entering electoral 
politics, concluding that it was too small. But at this year's convention, 
the delegates gave an ambivalent go-ahead to fielding candidates. 
On Friday, the convention hall boomed with ferocious debate. Some 
delegates shouted that the party should field candidates immediately, 
to keep members from drifting away. ``If we don't fill in the political 
gap, someone else is going to,'' said Jan Campbell, director of the 
Rhode Island Labor Party. ``Our health care campaign is great, but 
our members want us to run candidates.'' Other delegates warned that 
the party would need several more years to build its base. Their fear 
was that the party would embarrass itself if it ran candidates now 
and that it would be the party's death knell if candidates flopped 
miserably before it had a solid base. AFL-CIO President John Sweeney 
questioned the timing of the effort, saying labor's limited resources 
could best be used to rebuild the union movement and elect pro-worker 
candidates. This fall, the labor federation worked hard to pull the 
Democratic Party leftward by campaigning for hundreds of Democrats. 
But Mazzocchi insists that strategy has failed for 50 years, adding 
that the current Democratic president pushed through a free trade 
agreement that hurt workers and welfare reform that shredded the New 
Deal's safety net. ``We'd like to see the Labor Party, 10 years down 
the road, as a formidable entity on the national political scene,'' 
he said. ``There's no guarantee that this will happen. We're not naive. 
We don't expect lightning to strike overnight.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>