<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0214 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Connecticut officials and two major banks will face off in court on 
Monday in a ferocious battle over a state rule _ one of just two in 
the country _ that forbids banks to charge noncustomers who use their 
automated teller machines. In other states, customers who use another 
bank's ATM frequently are charged twice for the privilege, by the 
other bank and by their own. The fee is typically $1 to $1.50 by each 
bank. Consumer advocates and banking industry officials say that if 
Connecticut's ban is upheld, other states might seize the opening 
to impose similar bans. ``If Connecticut's interpretation stands, 
you could be opening the floodgates for other states to follow,'' 
said James Febeo Jr., staff lawyer for the Consumer Bankers Association, 
a trade group for banks. The precedent is so important that the banks, 
Fleet Bank and First Union Corp., are trying to overturn the restriction 
in both state and federal courts. In an indication of the banks' aggressive 
strategy, both banks have asserted in federal lawsuits filed last 
week that Connecticut's restriction on ATM charges _ which the banks 
call ``convenience fees'' _ is a violation of the banks' civil rights. 
Legal authorities said that although civil rights laws are typically 
used by people with grievances against police or schools, federal 
law does recognize that a corporation is entitled to some of the same 
protections afforded a person. The dispute does not involve the fees 
that banks charge their own customers. So although Fleet Bank is free 
to penalize one of its depositors in Connecticut for using a First 
Union ATM, for instance, First Union cannot impose its own charge 
for that transaction. Although limits on ATM fees can be expected 
to play well with voters, state legislatures have consistently refused 
to act on such proposals, partly because of effective banking lobbies 
and the nation's climate of deregulation, industry experts say. But 
Connecticut and Iowa, the only other state with such a ban, have relied 
on their regulators' interpretations of state law. In both cases, 
banking regulators have issued opinions declaring that because state 
law does not explicitly provide for such fees, they are illegal. Fleet 
said in court papers that Connecticut's ban was causing it to lose 
$15,000 a day. First Union put the figure at $10,000 daily. The American 
Bankers Association, the largest industry group, contends the proliferation 
of ATM's has been possible only because people are paying fees to 
use them. ``No fees means no choice,'' said John Hall, a public relations 
manager for the association, who pointed to the cost of renting the 
space for the machines, filling them with cash and maintaining their 
computer links. James Schepker, a Fleet spokesman, said noncustomers 
should pay when they receive a service from the bank. ``This is an 
issue that comes down to free-market competition,'' he said. First 
Union said it would not discuss the matter during litigation. Richard 
Blumenthal, who as Connecticut attorney general will argue the state's 
case, said its significance went beyond ATM charges to whether states 
would have any say in fees banks try to impose in the future. ``This 
is trench warfare for both sides,'' he said. ``We're going to fight 
this till the last dog dies or the last banker barks.'' ATM fees are 
a small but escalating expense that has sneaked up on consumers, especially 
since April 1996, when the largest networks of ATM's lifted their 
ban on such charges. The General Accounting Office, which conducts 
investigations for Congress, released a study in February that concluded 
that 79 percent of ATM's operated by banks charge a fee for users 
who do not have accounts at those banks. The study found that the 
typical charge had leaped to $1.50, from $1 the year before. Consumer 
groups are cheering on Connecticut officials. ``More banks are charging 
fees, and the fees are climbing,'' said Bill Anderson, the publisher 
of Bank Rate Monitor, a consumer information service. ``If your service 
station increased a gallon of gas by a dime and nobody protested, 
they would keep increasing it. That's what's happened here.'' In one 
of several signs of a backlash against the banks, a member of the 
San Francisco Board of Supervisors proposed an ordinance last month 
to protect consumers from being charged twice for one transaction. 
In Philadelphia, though, the City Council in September abandoned a 
plan to punish banks for charging ATM fees after banks threatened 
to drop the city as a client. In several states, alliances of smaller 
banks have agreed not to charge one another's customers for ATM use, 
to give them a selling point against their huge competitors. In western 
Pennsylvania, such a group calls itself the Freedom ATM Alliance. 
At an ATM kiosk in lower Manhattan on Saturday night, conversations 
about the fees tapped a geyser of irritation. Merryl Winter, 26, a 
special education teacher, said she paid $15 a week in fees because 
she does not like to carry a lot of cash and her bank does not have 
machines near her school. Hilary Brown, 21, a social-work major, called 
the fees ``a tip for banks.'' Connecticut and the banks already have 
gone several rounds. Last week, the 2nd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals 
referred the matter to the state courts, overturning an earlier decision 
by U.S. District Court in New Haven that had permitted the fees. Last 
month, Fleet Bank, First Union and BankBoston began imposing a $1 
fee on nondepositors who used the banks' ATM's in Connecticut. But 
when Connecticut Banking Commissioner John Burke issued an order for 
them to cease charging the fee until a state court could consider 
the matter, they agreed to stop temporarily. On Monday, in Superior 
Court in Hartford, Fleet and First Union will challenge his order. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>