<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton said Sunday that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq 
had unconditionally retreated and once again had vowed complete cooperation 
with U.N. weapons inspectors. That vow will be tested quickly, Clinton 
said, and U.S. and British forces that nearly struck Iraq on Saturday 
will remain poised to act. ``Iraq has backed down, but that is not 
enough,'' Clinton said in a brief White House appearance before reporters 
on Sunday. ``Now Iraq must live up to its obligations.'' Clinton also 
called more directly than ever before for the overthrow of Saddam, 
calling him ``an impediment to the well-being of his people and a 
threat to the peace of his region and the security of the world.'' 
In the latest round of seven years of confrontation with Iraq over 
weapons inspections, senior U.S. officials struggled to explain why 
Clinton found acceptable on Sunday what his national security adviser, 
Sandy Berger, said was unacceptable on Saturday. They said the Iraqis 
had clarified their position overnight in two letters that eliminated 
all unacceptable conditions. The administration regards those letters 
as binding on Baghdad, officials said, despite comments on Sunday 
by the Iraqi deputy prime minister, Tariq Aziz, that seemed to cast 
doubt on their authority. Most important, the officials said, Iraq 
had now agreed to hand over to the weapons inspectors two sensitive 
documents on its chemical and biological weapons programs and promised 
the inspectors full and unfettered access to all sites _ including 
those the Americans deemed too controversial to risk last summer. 
The U.N. weapons inspection team called UNSCOM, has been stymied for 
the last year, the officials said. But they insisted that Saddam's 
retreat now had ``opened a window of effectiveness for UNSCOM that 
we want to use as quickly as possible.'' They said they expected U.N. 
inspectors to return to Iraq in about two days with a specific list 
of documents they want to see and sensitive sites they want to inspect, 
together with the personnel and the equipment to do it. At least some 
of those sites were at the center of a dispute with Saddam this summer. 
One of the those documents, dealing with Iraq's chemical-weapons program, 
was found at the Iraqi air force headquarters but was seized from 
UNSCOM by Iraqi authorities; the other document, dealing with Iraq's 
biological weapons program, the U.N. inspectors know about but have 
never seen. If the Iraqis resist inspection efforts now, the officials 
said, the U.S. and British military are prepared to attack. But the 
officials acknowledged that military action would be impossible so 
long as officials of the inspection team and the other nations on 
the Security Council believe they are getting adequate cooperation 
from the Iraqis. In the effort to contain Iraq, economic sanctions 
are only helped by a functioning inspection program, one senior official 
of a NATO country said. ``For nearly two years, UNSCOM has been pushed 
backward and for the last year, its performance has been next to useless,'' 
the official said. ``But we now have an opportunity to get UNSCOM 
back to a satisfactory level of performance, and UNSCOM has the greatest 
possible leverage just now to inspect.'' A senior U.S. official said: 
``UNSCOM should feel pretty good, because they're now in a stronger 
position than they've been in a long time. It's much harder for Saddam 
to wriggle around now about what compliance means. The spotlight is 
on Saddam, where it belongs, and not on UNSCOM. And Iraqi obstruction 
will be clear and unacceptable.'' That may be true for only a limited 
time, another official conceded. ``Sure, there's a window for UNSCOM 
to be effective now,'' the official said. ``But Saddam will shut that 
window as soon as he thinks he can, and then we're back just about 
where we started.'' Still, the official said, ``Saddam can be in no 
doubt that we intended to use force, because it was on its way. That 
makes the threat of force pretty credible again.'' Last February, 
Washington also vowed that force would be used against Iraq if Saddam 
broke his promises to U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan that he would 
guarantee complete access for UNSCOM. But that threat proved hollow, 
paving the way for this latest chapter in the ongoing effort to get 
Iraq to disarm against its will. On Sunday, Clinton called the return 
of the weapons inspectors ``the best outcome, because they have been 
and they remain the most effective tool to uncover, destroy and prevent 
Iraq from rebuilding its weapons of mass destruction and the missiles 
to deliver them.'' Clinton listed five benchmarks to judge Saddam's 
compliance: Iraq must allow inspectors ``unfettered access'' to all 
sites they choose to see, ``with no restrictions or qualifications''; 
it must turn over all relevant documents on the production of nuclear, 
chemical and biological weapons and the missiles to deliver them; 
it must not interfere with the inspectors themselves or question their 
independence or professional expertise _ for example, by dictating 
the composition of UNSCOM teams; it must ``resolve all outstanding 
issues raised'' by the weapons inspectors; and it must accept all 
the relevant U.N. resolutions regarding weapons of mass destruction. 
The Americans and the British had authorized the use of force against 
Iraq to break out of the cycle of Iraqi defiance and retreat, the 
officials acknowledged. But they also said Clinton and Prime Minister 
Tony Blair of Britain decided it would be immoral to continue with 
an attack once there were serious signs of an Iraqi retreat. Saddam's 
diplomatic initiative came as B-52 bombers loaded with cruise missiles 
were airborne. There was no indication that the specific decision 
to use force on Saturday _ made by Clinton on Friday night and by 
Blair on Saturday morning _ was leaked to Iraq, officials said. Clinton's 
decision at about 8 a.m. on Saturday to call off the air strikes actually 
postponed them for 24 hours, officials said Sunday. At 3:30 a.m. Sunday, 
after clarifications from Iraq, Clinton decided that Washington ``would 
take `yes' for an answer'' and called off the bombing again. Clinton 
and Blair spoke eight times on Saturday, officials said; British pilots 
were to be responsible for 20 percent of the targets to be hit by 
manned airplanes, as opposed to cruise missiles, the officials said. 
``This is not over until absolute and unconditional compliance is 
guaranteed and delivered,'' Blair said Sunday morning in London. If 
Iraq violates its new pledges, he said, there will be air strikes, 
and ``there will be no warning whatsoever.'' Kenneth Bacon, the Pentagon 
spokesman, said in an interview that if Saddam interferes again with 
UNSCOM, ``our forces are there and we've shown we're ready to use 
them.'' What has been gained now, Bacon said, ``is the chance to have 
a more effective inspections regime'' and a clear ``capitulation'' 
from Saddam. Saddam's two goals are to end the sanctions and the inspections, 
in order to keep his weapons of mass destruction, Bacon said. ``What 
he's left with this time is an international community more united 
behind his need to meet U.N. resolutions before sanctions are lifted, 
and a commitment to hand over documents he's been refusing to provide.'' 
The Pentagon also said Sunday that it would suspend the deployment 
of dozens of additional aircraft and ground forces to the region, 
where the United States already maintains some 23,000 troops as well 
as a dozen warships and 170 aircraft. Those aircraft that had already 
arrived in the Persian Gulf _ six B-52s, four B-1s, and several support 
aircraft _ will remain there. Several squadrons of fighter planes 
got as far as U.S. bases in Europe and will remain there. The rest 
of the 139 aircraft that President Clinton ordered to the region last 
week will remain at bases in the United States, as will roughly 4,000 
ground troops who had been readied to go. The U.S. effort to keep 
the spotlight on Saddam's defiance and not on the inspection team's 
methods led to decisions last summer that proved extremely controversial 
and led to the resignation of a highly regarded U.S. inspector, Scott 
Ritter. Ritter charged that Washington had discouraged the commission's 
chairman, Richard Butler, from confrontational surprise inspections, 
because it did not want a new crisis with Baghdad. U.S. and British 
officials say the charge is unfair, because the policy was designed 
to avoid the expulsion of UNSCOM and a military confrontation on Saddam's 
timing and terms, when there was no unity in the Security Council. 
But now that the Security Council is firmly behind the inspectors' 
right to complete access to all sites, the officials argue, those 
very inspections should be carried out as soon as possible, to test 
Saddam's compliance while military force remains on standby. ``If 
the law of the land was to avoid unnecessary confrontation last summer, 
it's to press ahead right now,'' one official said. ``The point is 
to put Saddam on the spot, not UNSCOM, and I'm sorry Ritter didn't 
understand that, because we could use him now. We always preferred 
to have sanctions plus UNSCOM, so long as UNSCOM is useful, and UNSCOM 
has a chance to be more useful than before.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>