<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even before the Security Council resolved Sunday night to give Iraq 
a chance to prove that it really intends to resume cooperation with 
arms inspectors, some familiar code words for trouble were in the 
air. When pressed to promise that no sites, including presidential 
properties belonging to Saddam Hussein and his security services, 
would be barred to inspectors as in the past, Iraq's representative 
Nizar Hamdoon reminded reporters that certain ``modalities'' governed 
searches of such places, according to the agreement signed with U.N. 
Secretary-General Kofi Annan in February. That agreement effectively 
ended serious inspections of those palaces and other properties and 
allowed only one round of pro forma visits by monitors chaperoned 
by teams of diplomats. In a similar vein, when the Security Council 
meeting ended Sunday night, Sergei Lavrov, Russia's representative 
and Iraq's most outspoken advocate in deliberations, quickly noted 
that Iraqi points about a comprehensive review of sanctions against 
Baghdad would have to be taken into consideration. U.N. weapons inspectors 
may be back in Iraq as early as Tuesday. But the level of skittishness 
about taking Iraq at its word this time was manifest in the delay 
in beginning Sunday's Security Council session. The postponement arose 
from fears that an Iraqi official was already rolling back the added 
clarifications that allowed President Clinton to give Iraq a chance 
to prove itself and avoid a military attack. The last-minute hitch 
arose when Tariq Aziz, Iraq's deputy prime minister and spokesman 
on the arms issue, said in a CNN interview from Baghdad that Iraq 
was committed only to what he had written to Annan on Saturday. ``Nothing 
beyond that,'' he added for emphasis. That letter was rejected as 
inadequate by the Clinton administration, which refused to join a 
Security Council consensus this weekend until two further, brief letters 
were received from Hamdoon. Those letters removed some ambiguities 
in Iraq's pledges. Was Aziz now disavowing them? Peter Burleigh, the 
American representative and this month's Council president, asked 
Annan to straighten this out with Aziz, who told the secretary-general 
on the telephone late Sunday afternoon that he regarded Hamdoon's 
letters as part of his own. Against this backdrop, it was not surprising 
that the Council prefaced the most critical paragraph in its statement 
with, ``Taking note of past experience with Iraq ...'' ``We remain 
vigilant and alert,'' said the British envoy, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, 
after the meeting. The Council demanded that the Iraqis show their 
intentions with ``unconditional and sustained cooperation.'' Those 
intentions will be tested as early as Tuesday, when more than 100 
arms inspectors are expected to return to Baghdad, said Richard Butler, 
the executive chairman of the U.N. Special Commission, known as UNSCOM. 
His inspectors, who monitor biological, chemical and missile systems, 
and those of the International Atomic Energy Agency, who watch Iraq's 
nuclear activities, have been in Bahrain since Wednesday, when they 
were withdrawn in the face of a possible American military strike. 
About 150 relief workers will also be returning to Iraq from Amman, 
Jordan, most as early as Monday, said Benon Sevan, director of the 
Iraq humanitarian program. Iraq has long sought a review of sanctions 
on its terms, with the lifting of sanctions foreordained. By referring 
to Iraq's talking points for such a review, contained in an annex 
to the letter to Annan Saturday, Lavrov raised a matter that is a 
virtual anathema to Washington. Lavrov also returned to the dormant 
theme of the behavior of UNSCOM inspectors, a theme Iraq plays on 
when explaining why it will not tolerate spot inspections at certain 
sites. ``UNSCOM also has to be guided by general principles, including 
the respect for sovereignty of Iraq and respect for dignity of Iraq 
and, of course, its territorial integrity,'' Lavrov said. ``I believe 
that those are very clear provisions, and there were instances in 
the past that some UNSCOM members were not entirely within those parameters.'' 
With the Clinton administration no longer blocking agreement on how 
to respond to Saddam's overture on Saturday, the Security Council 
met Sunday only to acknowledge formally Iraq's decision to resume 
cooperation. Despite predictions among diplomats that some Council 
members would take the opportunity to criticize Clinton, albeit diplomatically, 
for his comments about helping dissidents overthrow Saddam, which 
many did not consider conducive to fostering cooperation from Baghdad, 
the administration was applauded. Most Council members and U.N. officials 
did not support the use of force to end this crisis. Their sense of 
relief was summed up by Annan after the meeting. ``In common with 
many members of the Security Council, I am grateful to President Clinton 
for the courageous and the difficult decision he took earlier today,'' 
Annan said. ``This is a victory for all those who express their firm 
determination that United Nations Security Council resolutions must 
be respected. It is a victory for diplomacy and resolve.'' But he 
added that ``for the crisis to be put permanently behind us, Iraq 
must move swiftly to insure complete and unconditional compliance.'' 
Annan, who has now been through two major crises with Iraq in less 
than a year, said he could give no guarantees that this new agreement 
would work. But alluding to the threat of American and British military 
strikes hanging over Iraq, he added: ``I'm not sure that if there 
is a next time, we would even have time for further diplomatic initiatives 
and appeals.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>