<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0220 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Laurence Owen Vine Gandar, the South African newspaper editor credited 
with bringing investigative journalism to a country that desperately 
needed it, died Saturday in Pietermaritzburg. He was 82, and had been 
suffering from Parkinson's disease. As editor and editor-in-chief 
of The Rand Daily Mail from 1957 to 1969, Gandar was the first to 
turn a major South African newspaper into an instrument for crusading 
for human rights rather than a tool for selling advertising. Doing 
so eventually cost him his job at the Johannesburg paper, after he 
oversaw a powerful series of articles, beginning in 1965, about appalling 
conditions for blacks in South African prisons. When he defied police 
demands that he not publish his articles, his paper suffered repeated 
raids, telephone taps and prosecution under the Prisons Act, one of 
several laws that essentially made it illegal to criticize the police, 
the army or prison administrators without their permission. During 
the trial, witnesses disappeared, and he and his reporter, Benjamin 
Pogrund, were convicted and fined. As a result, wrote Rex Gibson, 
The Mail's night editor at the time and eventually one of Gandar's 
successors in the top job, ``the press as a whole had been deterred 
from publishing prison revelations and Gandar had signed his own professional 
death warrant. As soon as it was decently possible, Gandar was fired.'' 
A host of journalists who eventually became famous for reporting on 
apartheid said, though, that they drew their first inspiration and 
tutelage from Gandar. He was also the first editor to make a subtle 
change in his pages that infuriated thousands of white readers. He 
stopped referring to blacks as ``natives'' and instead called them 
``Africans.'' Known as Laurie, Gandar was described by other editors 
as reserved and laconic, going into battle with a shrug rather than 
a flourish. ``There was an aura of cool remoteness which appeared 
to defy attempts by his staff to get to know him better and which, 
on occasion, infuriated the authorities, who were trying to intimidate 
the English-language press in general _ and The Rand Daily Mail in 
particular,'' Raymond Louw wrote in a memoir published Sunday in the 
national Sunday Times. Louw, who edited the Mail from 1966 to 1977, 
also said that Gandar's writing helped condition reluctant whites 
to the inevitability and justice of majority rule. ``His liberal philosophy 
of nondiscrimination, of freedom, tolerance and justice for all helped 
prevent this country from sliding into civil war,'' added Louw, now 
publisher of a respected newsletter, Southern Africa Report. Gandar 
was considered ahead of his time, but his editing was in keeping with 
the mores of his day. After the 1960 Sharpeville massacre, in which 
panicky police officers opened fire on a crowd of 5,000 protesters 
surrounding their station, killing 69 and wounding 178, Gandar obtained 
a dramatic photograph showing bodies stretched out as far as the camera 
could capture. In those days, pictures of corpses seldom appeared, 
and Gandar also worried the sight would provoke another riot, wrote 
Harvey Tyson in his history of the South African press, ``Editors 
Under Fire.'' Gandar did not use the picture. The Rand Daily Mail, 
which was indirectly controlled by Harry Oppenheimer, then head of 
the DeBeers Consolidated Mines Ltd. and Anglo-American Corp., was 
closed in 1985, at the height of the government's efforts to throttle 
dissent. Oppenheimer had practiced a hands-off attitude toward the 
paper editorially, but also sat by as it suffered deep financial losses, 
and ultimately he just let it fold, Louw said in a recent, rather 
uncomplimentary contribution to a page of 90th birthday tributes to 
Oppenheimer. Gandar was born in Durban, South Africa, in 1915, studied 
at Natal University and reported for small newspapers. During World 
War II, he fought as an infantryman in North Africa and Italy. In 
1953, he joined the Anglo-American Corp.'s public relations department, 
from which he was recruited for the editorship of The Mail. He is 
survived by a grandson, Owen. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>