<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981115.0125 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Few dream cruises have turned into the nightmare experienced by Iva 
and Ron Bradley of Richmond, Va., on a cruise last March through the 
southern Caribbean with their son, Brad, and daughter, Amy. Midway 
through the cruise, 23-year-old Amy, a recent college graduate about 
to start her first full-time job, disappeared. While what happened 
to Amy is not known, her case illustrates the difficulties that can 
arise when a possible crime occurs outside the immediate reach of 
law-enforcement authorities, and how cruise lines struggle to balance 
investigations with protection of their reputations. The Bradleys 
were on Royal Caribbean's Rhapsody of the Seas, a year-old luxury 
ship. In the early hours of March 24, the parents retired to the family's 
suite, leaving Brad and Amy dancing in a disco. The ship's computerized 
door-lock system recorded Brad's return to the suite at 3:35 a.m. 
and Amy's arrival five minutes later. Brad said he and his sister 
sat on the suite's balcony and chatted. He then went to sleep inside 
while Amy stretched out on a lounge chair on the balcony because she 
felt slightly seasick. Her parents said her cigarettes and lighter 
were gone from the room. Ron Bradley said he awoke about 6 a.m. and 
saw that Amy was not in the room or on the balcony. He went to search 
for her, and at about 7 a.m., he said, he ran into the ship's security 
chief, Lou Costello, and alerted him. He then returned to the cabin 
and woke his wife. By that time, the ship was docking in Curacao. 
The Bradleys said they pleaded with ship's officers not to lower the 
gangway for disembarkation until their daughter was found, but the 
gangway was lowered. At about lunchtime, Mrs. Bradley said, she asked 
the ship's captain, Kjetil Gjerstad, to distribute a picture of Amy 
to all passengers. ``I cannot do that,'' she said he replied. ``I 
will not alarm the passengers.'' Royal Caribbean's spokeswoman, Lynn 
Martenstein, would say only that the company had cooperated with investigators 
and did not believe foul play was involved. But an internal Royal 
Caribbean report provided to The New York Times by the Bradleys said 
that Bradley did not notify Costello of the disappearance until 7:35 
a.m., by which time the ship had docked and passengers were going 
off for a day of shore excursions. It also said a cabin-by-cabin search 
was conducted almost immediately. Shortly before the Rhapsody departed 
that evening, the Bradleys left the ship in hopes of finding Amy in 
Curacao. They said they had also grown frustrated and angry dealing 
with the ship's officers and with a company lawyer flown in that afternoon 
from Miami. It took two days before FBI agents boarded the ship to 
investigate. A search of the harbor at Curacao and the surrounding 
water that first day and the next did not turn up a body, leaving 
the Bradleys convinced that Amy had been abducted by a crew member 
and was either held aboard the ship or had been smuggled off in Curacao. 
Weeks later, the Bradleys hired private detectives to board the ship 
undercover to search for evidence of their daughter. None was found. 
They also consulted psychics, posted a $260,000 reward and created 
a World Wide Web site (www.tggweb.com/amybradley/), all to no avail. 
The FBI has not had any success, either. ``We've pursued every angle, 
from whether there was foul play, a suicide or an accident, and we 
have basically not gotten anywhere,'' said James Weber, special agent 
in charge of the FBI office in San Juan, Puerto Rico. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>