<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981105.1830.1116 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to take "A closer look" tonight at "fast money," by which 
we mean money on the move. The federal reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, 
was citing factors today that have helped spread the financial upheaval 
of the last year from one country to another. The crisis, he said, 
"reflects the inability of people to come to grips with the vastly 
accelerated pace of financial activity." Mr. Greenspan means the incredible 
speed at which money travels all over the globe. In the twinkling 
of an eye, the international currency traders can have a Devastating 
effect on a nation's economy. Here to explain is ABC's Robert Krulwich. 
Yes, they are wild, a little raucous. But free markets mean investors 
anywhere in the world can put their money anywhere they please and 
take their money out any time they choose. That's a free market. It 
makes some people rich. And some -- well, for millions of Asians, 
says the prime minister of malaysia, free markets have proved painful, 
too painful. People can no longer stay with the free market system. 
The problem is, free markets have changed in the last 30 years. They've 
gotten freer. Years ago, most people, even the rich, kept their savings 
in their home countries. They invested their money locally. But then 
several things happened. In the 1970s when Arabs made a forever tune 
in oil, they ran out of things to invest in at home. So, bit by bit, 
they created a pool of money and said, let's look around and see if 
there's some place else we can invest. Then, in the 1980s, many countries 
deregulated and ended all the paperwork and rules that made it hard 
to invest money abroad. So now, rich people everywhere could takeome 
ofheir savings and send it abroad to join the other money, looking 
for places to invest. I'll take a quarter there at 40. Meanwhile, 
computers arrived, so it was much easier to move money from place 
to place and more speedly, which attracted even more money into this 
international pool of capital. And then came the success of mutual 
funds. So now, perfectly ordinary people, investment clubs, abody 
C aatiofund. And all that money was added to the pool of cash wandering 
the globe. And then, in the 1990s, a hunk of this money discovered 
Asia. Your profit center. Indonesia. Korea. And almost in unison, 
investors said, this is the place. For example, international investors 
but $27 billion in south Korea in 1994, another $33 billion in '95 
and another $37 billion in '96. And then, just as suddenly, the money 
left. $29 billion gone in one ar imagine what it would be like to 
be living in asia. Somewhere when all of a sudden, a Tidal wave of 
money pours in from all over the world, and for one moment, you're 
rich. And thenst add goesy. D there you are thinking, what happened? 
In Asia what happened is investors got nervous. A bank panic here, 
a surprise failure there, and everybody who wanted into asia now wanted 
out. South Korea's economy, which was up 20% in 1995 will sink 35% 
this year. Investors, of course, are free to pull their money out, 
that's what freedom means, but after Korea, Indonesia, Russia and 
now Brazil watching investments yanked from their countries -- wouldn't 
it be nicer if markets could operate, says President Clinton? While 
avoiding the cycle of boom and bust that diminishes hope and destroys 
wealth. Yeah, that would be nice, but you see, the problem, president 
clinton wants this big pile of money to move freely around the world. 
So the president says, yes, money should be free, but even he is wondering 
how much freedom can we afford? Robert Krulwich, ABC News. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>