<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981105.1830.0517 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is remarkable scientific news to report this evening. And some 
people will find it frightening. Scientists have succeeded in growing 
stem cells in the laboratory. ABC's James Walker will explain it. 
Many people have said that it's like finding the holy grail of biology. 
There are tremendous implications. What you are looking at are the 
most basic kind of human cells, the stem cells of a embryo. They have 
the extraordinary capability to become any kind of cell -- brain, 
blood, or bone, anything. Now for the first time, researchers are 
successfully growing these cells in the lab. We can now do in a dish 
what normally occurs in an embryo. Beyond that, scientists in Wisconsin 
and Maryland are beginning to learn how to turn the cells on, to make 
just the kind of human tissue they want. Such as heart muscle cells, 
which could then be grafted into a heart that has a zee infected heart 
muscle either through disease or injury. That graft would be successful 
and the heart would recover. That's only the beginning. The ultimate 
potential for this breakthrough would be to grow any kind of human 
organ. What it does is allow us to be able to guarantee people when 
they need a Transplant to be able to do that because the supply could 
be limitless in terms of the organs available. Closer to reality, 
within the next five years, researchers expect to supply limitless 
amounts of laboratory grown human tissue for testing new drugs. But 
there is a controversy. The cells come from human embryos, either 
from fertilized eggs from fertility clinics or abortions. Congress 
has barred federal funding for research involving human embryos on 
the grounds that embryos are already human beings. That puts the dream 
of creating things like new spinal cords for paraplegics, even farther 
away. It's just unacceptable to say because we have moral reservations 
about taking cells from embryos, you have to remain paralyzed. You 
have to remain immobile. Scientists say the potential benefits from 
reproducing embryo stem cells are stunning. The question is how far 
will society allow them to go? James Walker, ABC News, New York. Our 
medical editor Tim Johnson joins us tonight. Tim, astonishing, we 
agreed earlier, how big a challenge to take the next step? It's a 
huge challenge. I think the next step, controlling the differentiation 
of the cells into specific types of cells will be much more difficult. 
The ultimate goal of growing entire organs that can be transplanted 
I would guess must be decades away. Will doctors automatically come 
down on the side of proceeding? Not automatically. The vast majority 
of them, I think, will support it. These tissues otherwise could not 
be utilized. Okay. Thanks very much. Tim Johnson who is in Boston 
tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>