<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981105.1830.0176 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The other priority tonight is central America. It is much clearer 
to individual Americans today and the Clinton administration what 
a blow tropical storm Mitch has been to Honduras and nicaragua and, 
to a Lesser extent, El Salvador and Guatemala. Today, the U.S. government 
pledged almost $70 million in assistance. But it is going to take 
vastly more. First, from the region, ABC's Ron Claiborne. The storm 
has been an economic catastrophe that will be felt for years. In Honduras, 
the destruction extends across the entire country. Every major crop 
in this agricultural nation has been devastated. Fields of melons, 
submerged. Sugar cane crops, washed away. Bananas, wiped out. In hundreds 
of towns, including morilica, there is now no way to make a Living. 
The main source of income for this town of just over 2,000 people 
used to be raising cattle and growing corn. All of the cattle were 
swept away in flood waters, and this is what is left of the corn field. 
In all of Honduras, hundreds of thousands may be out of work for months, 
maybe years. This farmer says, everybody worked in the corn fields. 
It's where we all made a living. Now everything is lost. There is 
another long-term problem. There is virtually no way to distribute 
food, medicine, or anything. Bridges are down all over the country, 
almost every road has been severed by mudslides or flooding. The region's 
commerce has been shut down. We're not talking just highways. We're 
talking getting trucks from one point to another. Even in tegucigalpa, 
the capital, where there is a functioning airport, the deprivation 
is being felt. Gasoline and drinking water are running out, despite 
rationing. Food is scarce. The international relief will help, but 
Honduran officials say their country has been setback 50 years by 
what happened. And it will take billions of dollars to bring it back. 
Ron Claiborne, ABC News, tegucigalpa. In Washington., the head of 
the agency for international development called this the worst disaster 
ever seen in the Hemisphere. As we said, Americans already sense that 
and have begun to help on their own. Here's ABC's Brian Rooney. Ordinary 
Americans responded to the disaster in central America even as troops 
began assessing the damage. In Los Angeles, volunteers are busily 
collecting food, water and medicine to ship to central America. They 
have already gathered truckloads of goods. There's a lot of people 
dead already. The help is not there at this time. The same is happening 
all over the country, this is suburban washington. And from Houston, 
a planeload of supplies has already been delivered to honduras. Our 
needs are enormous. We have a population of a little over 6 million 
people. At this moment, over 1 million people are homeless. Piecemeal 
volunteer aid is not enough to prevent the disaster from getting worse. 
Much of the focus on President Clinton's order is intended to overcome 
transportation problems and begin rebuilding. We will be making enough 
movements of two 747s into the region to provide 2,800 metric tons 
of food. Over the longer term, the U.S. military will be involved 
in rebuilding roads, bridges, schools, and helping to get the countries 
running on their own. The U.S. has both a humanitarian and political 
motivation to do so. The most immediate results will be more pressure 
for migration into the United States. That's the only hope people 
have if they can't make a living in their own countries. But for now, 
the damage is too severe for anyone to leave. America is now involved 
in a relief effort that may need to continue for years. Brian Rooney, 
ABC News, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>