<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981105.0295 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
India and Pakistan discussed a water sharing dispute Thursday, part 
of an attempt to improve relations between the nuclear rivals, even 
as they continued skirmishes along the Kashmir border. Thursday was 
the first day of talks over the next week in New Delhi on a range 
of issues that have been overshadowed by the main dispute between 
the two neighbors: their competing claims to the Himalayan border 
region of Kashmir. India had hoped progress on other issues could 
improve the atmosphere to the point where Kashmir could be tackled. 
But Pakistan maintains that no progress can be made until Kashmir 
is resolved. Since their twin independence from Britain in 1947, India 
and Pakistan have fought two wars over Kashmir, a border region divided 
between them that both claim in its entirety. The two sides regularly 
skirmish along the Kashmir border. Indian police reported Thursday 
that three civilians were killed by a Pakistani shell that landed 
in a northwestern region of the Indian-held portion of Kashmir Wednesday 
night. Their enmity and Kashmir's central role in the rivalry became 
an international concern in May, when India and Pakistan conducted 
underground nuclear tests, declared themselves nuclear powers and 
generated global fears of a nuclear confrontation. Hopes were raised 
when Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee and his Pakistani 
counterpart Nawaz Sharif met in July and agreed to resume peace negotiations 
that had been suspended in 1997. But when Pakistan's top foreign office 
bureaucrat and his Indian counterpart met last month in the Pakistani 
capital to discuss Kashmir, their consultations yielded little more 
than pledges to meet again in February. Like those talks, Thursday's 
meeting between water ministry officials from India and Pakistan ended 
inconclusively, with a promise to meet again on an as yet undetermined 
date. In a joint statement, the two sides said they merely ``exchanged 
views'' and reviewed negotiations last held in 1992 on the use of 
the Jhelum River, which flows through Kashmir. Under a 1960 agreement, 
Pakistan was to have unrestricted use of the waters of the Jhelum. 
India wants to construct a dam to control the Jhelum's flow to make 
the river navigable in the dry season. India says the dam would not 
affect the water flow to Pakistan, but Pakistan has questioned whether 
the plan conflicts with the 1960 agreement. The dispute is all the 
more difficult to resolve because it involves a river in Kashmir. 
Six days of talks are scheduled through Nov. 13 in New Delhi. On Friday, 
defense ministry officials take up the tangled issue of Siachen, a 
glacier battlefield in Kashmir. An Indian foreign ministry official 
had indicated the best that could be hoped for was an agreement to 
stop the almost daily skirmishing across the border in Siachen. The 
two countries cannot even agree on whether they agreed to withdraw 
troops from the glacier when they last met on the issue, in 1992. 
Other issues on the New Delhi agenda include a proposal to start bus 
service between the Indian capital and the Pakistani border city of 
Lahore, and a possible deal for Pakistan to sell electricity to India. 
Officials from both sides have said they expect few breakthroughs 
in New Delhi. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>