<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981105.0299 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After several delays, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Thursday 
presented the land-for-peace agreement with the Palestinians to his 
Cabinet for approval, taking a necessary step toward implementation 
of the accord. The Cabinet was expected to narrowly ratify the agreement 
despite vocal opposition by several ministers. However, the vote might 
not be taken until Friday or even Sunday, after many hours of debate, 
said Netanyahu adviser David Bar-Illan. Netanyahu had postponed the 
Cabinet meeting twice in two days, charging that the Palestinians 
had failed to present a time table for the arrests of 30 suspects 
in the killings of nearly 100 Israelis. Bar-Illan said the Cabinet 
was convened after Israel received assurances from the United States 
on Wednesday evening that the 30 would be arrested in three stages, 
with the roundup to be completed by the end of January. However, Palestinian 
negotiator Saeb Erekat said the Palestinians had not provided any 
new assurances in the past two days. Erekat said the latest delays 
and disputes did not bode well for the implementation of the accord. 
``I urge Mr. Netanyahu to stop such painful tactics, to stop exporting 
blame to us ... and maybe to start thinking in the mentality of a 
partner,'' Erekat said. Under the accord reached during last month's 
Mideast summit at the secluded Wye Plantation in Maryland, Israel 
is to withdraw from 13 percent of the West Bank over a period of 12 
weeks, with the Palestinians taking steps against Islamic militants 
during each phase of the pullback. Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat 
said Wednesday that 12 of the wanted men were already in detention, 
and that he would make an effort to round up the others. A Palestinian 
police official said Thursday that in all, 14 were in jail. Several 
of the suspects have been in Palestinian jails for months or years, 
but Palestinian security officials in the past refused to provide 
exact figures. U.S. Mideast envoy Dennis Ross, meanwhile, delayed 
his trip to the region. Ross was to arrive on Thursday to oversee 
implementation of the agreement, but is now expected over the weekend, 
Palestinian officials said. While the dispute over the wanted men 
appeared to have been settled, the next crisis already loomed on the 
horizon. Israeli and Palestinian officials have widely divergent interpretations 
of the procedure that will lead to the annulment of clauses in the 
Palestine Liberation Organization founding charter calling for Israel's 
destruction. The paragraph in the peace agreement addressing the issue 
is vaguely worded. Israeli officials insist that the clauses by annulled 
with a vote by the Palestine National Council, a body with hundreds 
of members. However, the agreement only says that PNC members, along 
with members of other Palestinian organizations, will be invited to 
a meeting in mid-December during which an Arafat letter to U.S. President 
Bill Clinton concerning the revoking of the offending clauses will 
be reaffirmed. Israel radio said several Cabinet ministers planned 
to approve the peace accord only on condition that a sentence is added 
declaring that the charter clauses by annulled by a PNC vote. Such 
an addition could create new confusion, though Bar-Illan said the 
Cabinet members were not trying to change the accord. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>