<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981105.1187 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With his Cabinet debating the latest Mideast peace accord, Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu assured skeptical hard-liners Thursday he would 
walk away from the deal if he feels the Palestinians are not keeping 
their commitments. After several delays, Netanyahu's Cabinet began 
a marathon session expected to last through the weekend, before a 
vote is taken to approve the new land-for-peace agreement with the 
Palestinians. Netanyahu said he was confident the 17 ministers would 
ratify the accord, despite the vocal opposition of at least four and 
the indecision of several others. Leaks from Thursday's meeting indicated 
the session was stormy, with hard-liners accusing the government of 
selling out and signing a vague agreement lacking tough security clauses. 
In an attempt to blunt the criticism, Netanyahu told the Cabinet that 
Jewish settlers would be given a say in deciding from what West Bank 
areas Israel would withdraw. Settler leaders said they were looking 
for an alternative candidate to challenge Netanayahu in the next elections. 
Asked whether he would begin the troop pullback on Nov. 16, as stipulated 
in the accord, Netanyahu said it was up to the Palestinians. ``If 
they implement, we will implement. If they don't implement it, we 
won't carry it out,'' Netanyahu told Israel TV's Channel Two during 
a brief Cabinet recess after seven hours of debate. ``That includes, 
of course, arresting prisoners. That includes, of course, annulling 
the charter by vote,'' Netanyahu said, referring to clauses in the 
PLO founding charter calling for Israel's destruction. ``We won't 
accept any diversion.'' But Ahmed Qureai, the speaker of the Palestinian 
legislature, told Israel TV, ``There will be no such thing as a vote'' 
over the charter. Ahmed Tibi, an adviser to Palestinian leader Yasser 
Arafat, accused Netanyahu of trying to please hard-liners at the expense 
of the Palestinians and the majority of Israelis who back the deal. 
``Netanyahu is looking much more toward the settlers, expressing understanding 
for their demands rather than for the interests of the majority of 
the Israeli public,'' Tibi said. As part of the new accord signed 
last month in Washington, Israel pledged to hand over 13 percent more 
of the West Bank over the next 12 weeks, in exchange for Palestinian 
steps to improve Israeli security. U.S. Mideast envoy Dennis Ross 
was to arrive in the region Thursday to supervise implementation of 
the agreement, but his trip was moved back to the weekend, most likely 
because of the delayed Cabinet vote. Netanyahu delayed convening his 
Cabinet for two days over the issue of Palestinian fugitives, but 
the matter seemed cleared up Thursday. Netanyahu said he had received 
American assurances that the Palestinians would arrest 30 men wanted 
by Israel. But other disputes between the sides remained, chiefly 
over the procedure that will lead to the annulment of clauses in the 
PLO founding charter calling for Israel's destruction. The paragraph 
in the peace agreement addressing the issue is vaguely worded, allowing 
for somewhat different interpretations. The agreement says members 
of the Palestine National Council, along with those of other Palestinian 
organizations, will be invited to a meeting in mid-December during 
which an Arafat letter to President Clinton concerning the revocation 
of the offending clauses will be reaffirmed. The PLO charter itself 
says it can only be amended by a vote of two-thirds of the PNC members, 
but the agreement does not specifically refer to holding a vote or 
a required majority. Israel says the clauses in the charter must be 
annulled with a vote by the PNC, not by affirmation. Netanyahu said. 
``There will be a vote.'' ``And if not, we simply won't give them 
the territory,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>