<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981105.0895 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ending months of speculation, Russia's highest court ruled Thursday 
that Boris Yeltsin cannot use a legal loophole to seek a third presidential 
term in 2000. The ruling _ combined with Yeltsin's fragile health 
_ should encourage several top political leaders to rev up their presidential 
campaign preparations. Russia's constitution puts a two-term limit 
on presidential tenure. Yeltsin himself has hinted he would not seek 
re-election when his current, second, term expires, and said he was 
satisfied with Thursday's ruling. Yet he had allowed aides to promote 
the idea of a third term until recent months, when speculation resumed 
about his health and his fitness to govern. Yeltsin's first term began 
in 1991, when Russia was just a republic within the Soviet Union. 
Also, the first term began before the current constitution was adopted 
in 1993, and Kremlin aides have argued that it should not count toward 
the constitutional two-term limit. Yeltsin was re-elected in 1996. 
The Communist-led opposition in parliament apparently wanted a formal 
ban on Yeltsin running again, and had filed a petition for a court 
ruling. The Constitutional Court firmly ruled out the bid. ``The constitution 
is clear, there is nothing to interpret, the president is in office 
for the second term running,'' the court said in a statement Thursday. 
Yeltsin praised the decision as a ``victory of law over emotions and 
passions,'' said his spokesman Dmitry Yakushkin. With Yeltsin apparently 
out of the picture for 2000, fierce jockeying is expected to ensue 
among presidential hopefuls. ``The main thing is to thank the president 
for giving us freedom, and ask him to go so that his place can be 
taken by somebody who knows how to use this freedom,'' said liberal 
lawmaker Alexei Zakharov, according to the ITAR-Tass news agency. 
The potential front-runners include: _ Communist leader Gennady Zyuganov. 
Runnerup in the 1996 election, he is short on charisma and long on 
disdain for Yeltsin's government. Zyuganov recently accused Yeltsin 
of being a ``full-blown alcoholic'' unable to perform his duties. 
Zyuganov's Communist Party is the largest in parliament, but there 
is discord among his followers and the numbers of his elderly supporters 
seem to be dwindling. _ Moscow Mayor Yuri Luzhkov. A tremendously 
powerful and popular man in Moscow, which he has turned into the country's 
only boomtown, Luzhkov likes to exploit nationalist sentiments. But 
it is unclear how much support he can muster in Russia's impoverished 
hinterlands, which often resent Moscow's wealth. _ Krasnoyarsk Governor 
Alexander Lebed. A gravel-voiced retired general, Lebed has never 
claimed much understanding of the economy, but stresses his plans 
to bring law and order. He came in third in the 1996 election. _ Grigory 
Yavlinsky. A liberal economist and lawmaker liked in the West, he 
finished fourth in 1996 and has a loyal following among liberal intellectuals. 
But his reformist ideas have little appeal to the poor, desperate 
for a stable salary after months of unpaid wages. _ Prime Minister 
Yevgeny Primakov could emerge as a contender, but has so far denied 
presidential ambitions. A former spymaster and diplomat, he has been 
carrying out most of the country's top leadership duties since Yeltsin's 
latest ailments struck. Primakov is widely admired in Russia as a 
conscientious worker and a defender of the country's interests. But 
his unusually high popularity ratings may dissipate fast if the economy 
shows no signs of improving. The Constitutional Court announcement 
Thursday came on the second anniversary of Yeltsin's quintuple heart 
bypass surgery, which sidelined him for months in 1996. The president 
has been ill several times since then, and has been working only sporadically 
in recent months. Yeltsin is now recuperating from his latest illness 
at the Black Sea resort of Sochi. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>