<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981105.0247 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Government troops drove rebel forces out of key buildings and began 
reclaiming control of a city in northern Tajikistan in a second day 
of heavy fighting, officials said Thursday. The fierce battle for 
Khodzhand, about 200 kilometers (125 miles) north of the capital, 
Dushanbe, was one of the most serious outbursts of violence since 
a peace accord was signed last year, ending five years of civil war 
in the small, impoverished Central Asian nation. The government press 
service said up to 100 government troops have been killed, but presidential 
spokesman Zafar Saidov put the death count at 39. He said 50 rebels 
had been killed, the Interfax news agency reported. The government 
claimed it had retaken two buildings belonging to the Interior Ministry, 
which the rebels seized when they stormed the city Wednesday morning. 
By midday Thursday, there was still fighting in and around the old 
fortress in the city center, but the government troops were gaining 
the upper hand, according to Interior Minister Khumdin Sharipov. The 
government was also pouring reinforcements into the region. Tajikistan's 
Vice Premier Abdurakhmon Azimov said in a radio broadcast that ``there 
will be no negotiations or consideration of the rebels' demands. The 
matter in question is to block and liquidate them.'' The rebels still 
controlled the northern town of Aini, about 140 kilometers (87 miles) 
northeast of Dushanbe. They have taken all government buildings, appointed 
a new police chief, and confiscated large amounts of industrial explosives 
from a local factory, the Interfax news agency reported. But a strategically 
important mountain pass, just below the town, was still controlled 
by government troops, and small groups of refugees were moving along 
toward Dushanbe, Interfax said. The attackers were led by Makhmud 
Khudoberdyev, a former army colonel who turned against hardline President 
Emomali Rakhmonov last year, authorities said. The rebel forces were 
estimated to number several hundred, possibly as many as 1,000. Khudoberdyev 
issued a statement Thursday, and said he would not negotiate with 
the government until it broadcast his demands on national television 
and radio. ``We have decided to enter the political arena ... to force 
the Rakhmonov government to listen to the voice of its own people 
and to end the terror against its political opponents,'' the statement 
said. Representatives of seven nations, along with the United Nations 
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, met in 
the Tajik capital, Dushanbe, to discuss potential solutions to the 
crisis. The civil war was waged between Rakhmonov's secular government 
and the mostly Muslim opposition. Since the peace deal was signed, 
the main opposition groups have been participating in a National Reconciliation 
Commission. However, a number of warlords have refused to recognize 
the deal and continue to attack government forces. Russia has about 
25,000 troops in Tajikistan to support the government, with most deployed 
along the country's southern border with Afghanistan to prevent an 
influx of drugs and weapons. The Russian forces were not involved 
in the latest fighting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>