<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981105.2100.1805 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In central America, a disaster of epic proportions now. Rescue workers 
keep finding bodies buried in the muds. Thousands are missing in the 
flooding and mudslides caused by hurricane mitch's recent onslaught. 
The official death told in Honduras, 6,420. Another 11,000 people 
are missing and feared dead. More than 400 deaths are reported in 
El Salvador and Guatemala. And in Nicaragua, at least 3800 are dead. 
NBC news correspondent George Lewis has been in the area for some 
time now. Tonight he reports from managua, Nicaragua for us on what 
he has seen of the destruction and the effort to help those who survived. 
Brian, when a U.S. aide official calls this the worst disaster in 
recent times in this Hemisphere he isn't exaggerating. There are at 
least a million people home leps and without food and water. The actual 
death count, the deaths are estimated between 13 and 20,000. The actual 
count may never be known. They're still counting the thousands of 
dead in central America. In Honduras the authorities place the corpses 
in body bags which are buried in mass Graves. Throughout the region, 
a massive creenup effort is under way. The governments estimate 70% 
of their roads, bridges, and telephone lines are wiped out. Refugees 
at camps in Honduras are getting only one glass of milk for breakfast 
and two tortillas at dinner time. In tegucigalpa, Julia peralta an 
her family huddle by a fire cooking beans. She says it took 8 hours 
to find the beans and the price was five times normal. Next to Honduras 
in Nicaragua this disaster is hardest on the children who can't comprehend 
what's happened to them. In chinandega, the hospital is full of kids 
who have been forefanned by the hurricane. This boy named Kelvin says 
his father didn't make it. I was thrown in the air, he says, then 
I fell down and had mud up to my waist. Some of the young mudslide 
victims have wound up here in this pediatric hospital in managua. 
They're just now beginning to deal with the tough part, the psychological 
scars. Josephina murrilo is a psychologist putting together a volunteer 
group of mental health workers to treat the survivors. Many now without 
families. What do the children need now? To feel loved and protected. 
To feel loved and protected? yes. Moises salgado is 11. He lost his 
mother and four brothers. He suffered skeefer skin scrapes and is 
still in shock. Dr. Maria Teresa Blackwell has volunteered to help 
some of the victims. How long do these emotional scars last? Forever. 
You need a lot of therapy. A daunting task considering the overwhelming 
toll on the people here. I've been coming down here to Latin America 
for NBC news since 1972, and i've covered a lot of disasters in that 
time, both natural and man made, including hurricanes, floods, fires, 
wars, earthquakes, and this ranks up there among the top disasters 
for me, anyway. The damage is widespread over a huge swath of land 
in both Honduras and nicaragua. There is suffering everywhere. People 
are homeless and hungry wondering what to do. Little children wondering 
around with just a few crumbs of bread to eat. What's needed here, 
basically, is a 1990's equivalent of the Berlin air lift, planes coming 
in day and night with relief supplies. This isn't going to be the 
worst disaster in recent history, it is going to be the most long 
running disasters. Personal observations of a veteran NBC news correspondent 
tonight, George lewis in managua, Nicaragua. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>