<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981105.2100.0807 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With us to talk about the fate of house speaker Newt Gingrich and 
the future of the republican party, republican strategist Mary matalin. 
She served as deputy campaign manager to president bush in 1992 and 
former talk show host with us in Washington. And in Pensacola, Florida 
we're joined by Joe Scarborough, frequent critic of the house G.O.P. 
leadership. He was involved in one failed coup attempt against the 
speaker in 1997. Congressman, let's begin with you. Americans went 
into the polls and we were told it wasn't a referendum on the president, 
they were deciding about individual elections. So why should that 
reflect poorly on the speaker of the house? I don't think the republicans 
are being really honest with themselves. If they try to blame the 
speaker exclusively, I think you need to look at the entire leadership. 
I think you need to look at the entire republican party. This is a 
party that in 1998 did next to nothing but pass a monstrosity of a 
transportation Bill. And I think the responsibility needs to be shared 
by every republican member. Unfortunately, though, you do look at 
the leadership at a time of crisis, and I don't think it needs to 
be focused exclusively on the speaker. I think we need to look at 
people that work with the speaker and just decide what's best for 
the party. We need to be more conserved about what message we're going 
to have the next year than our messeningers. What's the upside of 
sticking with Newt Gingrich? The upside is we were the party of Moses 
before Newt, wondering around for 40 years in the desert. Another 
upside is Newt Gingrich more than anybody else visited so many districts 
and raised more money than any leader in the history of this party. 
The real down side is missing the opportunity to focus on what Joe 
just said. What is our real problem? Is new leadership the solution 
to our problem or is a reaffirmation of our old principalles the real 
solution? Joe is a great example of why people are frustrated. He 
was elected in Florida who never elected a republican and re-elected 
with 73% of the vote on our principalles and policies. We did not 
run on our principles or policies. We ran against Clinton. We had 
been suckered into it so many times. You would think we'd learn that 
lesson and reassert what got us to the majority in the first place. 
Does the 73% congressman wush to respond? I don't know. I think, actually, 
we went across the country, Steve Largent and myself three weeks ago. 
There was a tremendous frustration across the country not just at 
Newt gingrich but at our leadership and entire caucus. We've been 
afraid of our own shadow since 1995 since the government shutdown. 
I think we learned all the wrong lessons since that and been afraid 
to do anything, afraid the democrats are going to attack a us. That's 
not what got us to the majority and going to save us in 2000. We need 
to reassert ourselves. And I'm not talking about being liberal but 
having a message and having and agenda. In the definitely Devil you 
know department who do you turn to if not Newt gingrich. The American 
voters didn't show a great love for conservatives Tuesday night. Who 
do you go to, the moderates -- ok. Just a minute. A political disaster 
is the democrats in 1994, 50 seats gone. Are the republicans in 1974, 
50 seats. A disaster is not five seats. You can't say they didn't 
like conservatives. In fact, they loved conservatives. Democrats were 
running and winning on conservative themes and conservative issues. 
How about Schumer and Davis? Let me say right now, for the third election 
in a row, more Americans voted for republican congressional candidates 
than democratic congressional candidates. It didn't break our way. 
We should have picked up more seats, but we still are out getting 
more votes than democratic congressional candidates. We still have 
15 more senators than we had when President Clinton became president. 
We still have 15 more governors. We're at a high water Mark for the 
gubernatorial candidates. We're not doing that poorly. We should have 
done better, though. We need to get ready for 2000. You understand, 
the conversation is framed against the predictions, even the conservative 
ones were a pick up of 8 to 12 in the house, B, the widely held notion 
was the G.O.P.'s race to lose, in that they had a second term president 
deeply mired in what might be the scandal to end all scandals. We 
and we had two mistakes. We gave him the home team advantage. We played 
on his issues. We ought to have played on our issues which we gave 
up in the budget deal. We didn't have a consistent message. You know, 
the key element to a strategy is to have one. We didn't have one. 
If you don't have a strategy, you don't have a message, you're playing 
on the other guy's Turf and he has the biggest meeting a phone and 
you've got screeching liars like somebody who lives in my house. You're 
kind of disadvantaged. If this were a company, wouldn't you fire the 
management? I just want us not to repeat the mistake we've been making. 
As the congressman said for a couple of years now, which is reflexive 
reaction. Is our problem the leadership or is our problem that we 
have not affirmed our policies and our principles. We have another 
problem which is to unify the faction, each factions thinking they're 
the reason -- their presence is the reason we're in the majority. 
The reason we're in the majority is because all of the factions, the 
sum of the factions -- the whole of the sum of the factions is greater 
than each of the factions. Each one who is running for the leadership 
--ive noff dog in this fight. I want each to say how are we going 
to unify the factions and what are the themes. If they have the answer, 
why don't they tell us before the election. The next question goes 
to the congressman. We have to take a break and we'll continue. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>