<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981105.2100.2170 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From "dateline NBC" tonight, the story of a middle-class American 
teenager with a big secret. It led him into an explosion of violence 
and ended in a violent way and left his family and friends asking, 
how could this happen? Here is "dateline NBC" correspondent Mike tiabbi. 
Our entire society has a mistress, and that mistress is gambling. 
Whether it's betting at the racetrack at casinos or on college and 
pro sports, many being seduced or teenagers like these men who succumbed 
to temptation and were done in by gambling. I've done heavy-duty drugs 
and the biggest highs I've gotten did not compare to the gambling. 
For me that was my crack. If you're a parent or a grandparent, pay 
close attention, because unlike drugs and alcohol, gambling in it's 
dictative form can't be detected by blood tests, breath liesers or 
bad balance. That's why it's called the hidden illness, creeping into 
our high schools and colleges. These kids are the normal kids, the 
average kids you see on the street. The average kid who would get 
into debt from gambling? That's correct. Gambling counselor who has 
worked with dozens of young betters. Teen gambling is growing at three 
times the rate of adult gambling. When you go into a classroom and 
0% of the kids raise their hand when you ask them who was gambling, 
and it's a middle school, what does that say? Sounds like the definition 
of an epidemic. yes. This young man, Jeff, shadowed to broket his 
identity knows that too well. He began gambling at 10 years old. It 
starts with a couple of dollars in a pool with your friends ands came 
lates. N as the stakes got higher, the stakes grew higher and higher. 
I was in my shower and I was crying at 20 years old and I didn't want 
to live anymore. I still oontee think about stopping gambling. My 
choices became either committing suicide or continue gambling and 
be miserable. But a life without gambling wasn't an option. Until 
it turned out mission parents discovered he was in hawk for a bookie 
an force $HIM into gamblers anonymous. It saved his life. There is 
hope. Not everybody gets lucky that way. 19-year-old Moe pergament 
his friends say blammabled for a short time but long enough for the 
dangers to deaf as state him. Try as he did to hide it. Did you see 
him in a down mood that lasted for any length of time? No, definitely 
not. Because more often than not, Moe was the life of the party. He 
had a different of making people smile. In fact, that was his job. 
He was hired by parents to organize and run parties for kids. No one 
was better at it. He had them captivated all the time, like the Pied 
Piper. They would follow him around. John was Moe's boss and friend. 
We would have three parties going on at the same time and the loudest 
party would be mow's. But the happy go lucky kid with the gift of 
laugher stopped smiling himself after last year's world series. The 
college sophomore from New York did something so shocking and completely 
out of character that months later his best friends are still shaking 
their heads in disbelief. I don't know. This is just so unexpected. 
I couldn't see Moe doing that. Last November 14, a cold, dreary night, 
several drivers on this busy long island highway spotted a car driving 
crazy ill and called 911. This is 911, what is your emergency. There 
was a weapon, possibly a weapon involved. A police spokesman said 
the car driving so dangerously floored it past a Police Vic. You don't 
see a car speeding past you? The police cruiser got on the tail of 
the swerving car. The car pulled over. No hesitation? no. The driver, 
that 19-year-old party kid, Moe pergament got out of his car. He was 
ordered to get back in, but he ignored that command and kept moving 
and kept coming closer, and then Moe, who had no police record, did 
something completely unexpected. Mr. pergament reached into his waist 
band of his pants and removed what appeared to be a silver hand gun. 
Moe began waving the gun in the air. By this time the second police 
officer had arrived and he, too, was yelling for Moe to get on the 
ground. Mr. pergament had had the gun in his right hand, he lowered 
it from above his head and brought his left hand up, class'ing the 
gun with two hands and pointing it in what is described as a point 
shoulder position. Firing position? yes. In self-defense, the two 
cops fired off a total of 10 shots and the 19-year-old who loved magic 
tricks and balloon animals fell face first, his wounds fatal. But 
as it turns out Moe never squeesed off a shot of his own because that 
would have been impossible, because his gun was like this one. It 
sure looked real, but it was a cheap toy, made of plastic. Only after 
he was pronounced dead at this hospital did people discover that in 
the last days of his life, Moe had become desperate and disstrut over 
mounting debts. It was a terrible secret he shared only to a point 
with a few friends. He mentioned to me he took a hit on the world 
series. And to me, you know, what do you mean? He said, I lost a few 
dollars. I said what could you have lost? More than a few hundred 
dollars. In fact, according to the police and several friends, he 
owed a hefty, $6,000 to a bookie. Still, Moe didn't behave like it 
was a big deal. He told John of his plans to keep working several 
different jobs to get even. He was going along business as usual. 
It didn't affect his work. He didn't seem scared? no. As they parted, 
John said he was counting on Moe to work a party that saturday, just 
four days away. He said to me, the way he would, like, dude, don't 
worry, I'll be there there. But more had other plans. He bought this 
gun for $1.79. his mind was made up. He would die by gun fire, but 
he was going to have the police pull the trigger. How do we know? 
This letter was found in Moe's car at the shooting scene. Officer, 
it was a plan. I'm sorry to get you involved. I just needed to die. 
Please remember this was all my doing. You had no way of knowing. 
Moe pergament. Last time I saw him was Tuesday night. Best friend 
had seen him three days before, but he, along with another friend 
never saw how much trouble Moe was really in. He never showed depression 
at all. He was just Moe? That's like him, though, he wouldn't want 
to bring his problems out to his friends. He would want to keep it 
inside. How and why would a playful teenager decide his life wasn't 
worth living? Was it all about a gambling debt? His friends say no, 
there had to be more. They say Moe was a gambling novice with only 
a passing interest in sports. He was not a chronic gambler? no. He 
wasn't a gambler. He was not -- He wasn't one of these guys who opened 
the pair every day and checked the lines? He didn't even know the 
football teams. Whatever his gambling and sports knowledge, the $6,000 
marker he was holding from the worlingd series must have been an unbearable 
Burden, and as a result it left more than one victim on that long 
island roadway. The two cops, unwitting pawns in Moe's suicide scheme 
have undergone counseling. They'll live the rest of their live with 
this some where in their minds. Moe's best friends who several months 
later seem no closer to understanding why. He's the last friend that 
I would think would do something like this. And Moe's parents and 
older brother left behind with memories of the Moe they loved, but 
also with a haunting suicide note addressed to Moe's father that other 
families might heed as well. That report from "dateline NBC" correspondent 
Mike tiabbi. Date line wanted to give the pergament family an opportunity 
to respond to some of the issues raised in the suicide note and the 
story in general, including how much he told his family about his 
gambling losses, apparently. But the pergament family decided "Dateline's" 
repeat request for an interview were not something they wanted to 
do and they had declined. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>