<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981105.2100.3007 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today the nation heard from the new governor-elect of Minnesota, former 
navy seal, former professional wrestler, Jesse Ventura aagreed to 
a series of interviews, during which he acknowledged the shock surrounding 
his election. Here he is on the air with mbsmbs with agors Chris jansing 
and John siegelman who asked Ventura if politics would change him. 
I certainly hope not. I'm a strong willed person. And on the night 
I won, I turned to the people and I said, certainly I'm going to make 
his takes, but I will do the job to the best of my ability, and I 
think that's what people respect from me. And I'm certainly not going 
to change Jesse Ventura. I got elected being myself. I had all these 
experts telling me, Jesse, you've got to do this and that. The experts 
were wrong. And I was myself throughout the entire race. I will continue 
to be myself, and that's all I can be. I can only be Jesse Ventura. 
You are a party of one. You ran on the reformed party line, and you 
have one house of the legislature that's democratic, another that's 
republican. How are you going to work with these people and get things 
accomplished? I think because if they're truly elected to what they 
say they want to do, it's the good of Minnesota that comes first. 
I think it's a very unique position, because before both houses have 
always been democrat, now we've got one of each. We've got an executive 
who belongs to neither. We have a republican house and a democrat 
Senate. I think it will work very well that we can hopefully move 
forward and find, you know, government is compromising. Nobody gets 
everything that they want. And I think in the situation, it might 
work out best for all. I'm a strong believer in fate, and I'm a strong 
believer that things happen for a reason. And these elections happen 
for a reason, I believe. Everybody feels like they know you and call 
you Jesse, but governor-elect, are you going to continue to coach 
the football team you've been coaching? Absolutely. I wouldn't foresake 
them through the campaign. I had my campaign people on my case, we've 
got to do this and that. I said no, between 4:00 and 6:00, Monday, 
Tuesday, and Wednesday, I coach my football team. I will not leave 
my kids. We are the conference champions, we're number one in the 
sections and playing a great team this Friday. It's actually therapeutic 
for me because it allows me to yell and jeem and be crazy. When you 
get stressed out in the governor's office you leave and go to the 
football feelt. There you go. He is the new gnch major elect. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>