<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981105.1830.0603 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton is not the only leader locked in a political struggle 
tonight. The results of election has thrown republicans into turmoil 
and put the job of speaker Newt Gingrich on the line tonight. More 
from Gwen Ifill. Secluded from public view at his suburban Atlanta 
home, sources say house speaker Newt Gingrich worked the phones today, 
desperately trying to save his job. As frustrated republicans prepare 
to clean house in the wake of Tuesday's election losses, several said 
Gingrich has become his party's number one target. Things were happening 
out there that none of us understood. Look, I am the speaker. I take 
responsibility. Many republicans are blaming Gingrich, using words 
like "chaos" and "bloodbath" to describe what lies ahead. I think 
we've got a problem from top to bottom. Leadership takes the credit 
when things go right. They ought to take the blame when things go 
wrong. And artfully sidestepping all opportunities to endorse their 
leader outright. Do you think he should? Good morning. Also vulnerable 
in Capitol Hill's current backbiting mood, sources say -- Gingrich 
deputies Dick Armey of Texas and John boehner of ohio. Competing to 
replace them, some of Gingrich's closest political allies. Appropriations 
committee chairman Bob Livingston of Louisiana, who, sources say, 
has told Gingrich he should consider stepping down. Former football 
star and Oklahoma congressman Steve Largent. Conservative caucus leader 
David McIntosh of Indiana. And Gingrich lieutenant Jennifer Dunn of 
Washington state. One republican who has tried to oust Gingrich in 
the past said more than one head should roll. That's like putting 
duct tape on the "Titanic." We're going to see some dramatic changes, 
and if we don't see dramatic changes, then I'm afraid the speaker 
and everybody else is in danger of losing their job. But other republicans 
predict Gingrich will survive. I think you're gonna see a lot of pulling 
and tugging, and not very much sugar-coating in the next ten days, 
but they're gonna come together after november 16th. That's ten days 
from now, when republicans meet to pick their new leaders. But one 
lawmaker said Livingston and Largent may decide to mount a Challenge 
as soon as tomorrow. This time, the speaker's fight for survival will 
be hand-to-hand combat, as newt Gingrich fends off attacks not only 
from his liberal enemies, but also his conservative friends. Gwen 
Ifill, NBC news, the capitol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>