<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981105.1830.0106 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In central America the news gets no better. In fact, we may never 
know how many people were killed beyond thousands. Tonight, we take 
you to central America which is a national disaster zone. NBC's George 
Lewis is there. They're still counting the thousands of dead in central 
America. In Honduras, the authorities place the corpses in body bags 
which are then buried in mass Graves. Throughout the region, a massive 
cleanup effort is under way. The governments of Honduras and Nicaragua 
estimate that 70% of their roads, bridges, electrical and telephone 
lines are wiped out. Refugees at camps in Honduras are getting only 
one glass of milk for breakfast and two tortillas at dinner time. 
In the Honduran capital of tegucigalpa, Julia peralta and her family 
huddle by a fire, cooking a Pot of beans. She says it took eight hours 
to find these beans, and the price was five times normal. Next to 
Honduras, in Nicaragua, this disaster is hardest on the children, 
who can't comprehend what's happened to them. In chinandega, the hospital 
is full of kids who have been orphaned by the hurricane. This little 
boy named Kelvin says his father didn't make it. "I was thrown in 
the air," he says, "and then I fell down and I had mud up to my waist." 
Some of the young mudslide victims have wound up here at this pediatric 
hospital in managua. Doctors have been treating their wounds and just 
now, beginning to deal with the tough part, the psychological scars. 
Josephina murrilo is a psychologist who is putting together a volunteer 
group of mental health workers to treat the survivors -- so many now 
without families. What do these children need the most? To feel loved 
and protected. Loved and protected? yes. Moises salgado is 11. He 
lost his mother and four brothers. He suffered severe scrapes to his 
skin and is still in shock. Dr. Maria Teresa Blackwell has volunteered 
to help some of the victims. How long will these emotional scars last? 
Forever. Forever? Forever. They'll need a lot of therapy. a daunting 
task considering the overwhelming toll on the people here. George 
Lewis, NBC news, managua. And that is a disaster that reaches far 
beyond the countries of central america. Think about it. If you live 
in any city in this country, you encounter someone from nicaragua, 
Honduras, El Salvador almost every day -- the immigrants who have 
poured in here in recent years, often to take the hardest, low-paying 
jobs. Now, thousands of miles from home, no word of their families. 
Desperation. Here's NBC's Dan Lothian. To try to get funds and food 
and try to send it out there. We have to act really, really quickly 
because these people are in dire need. Unfortunately, we're experiencing 
audio difficults there. The people in Los Angeles and Miami and other 
cities organizing relief efforts, but they have no form of communications, 
many not knowing what happened to their families or villages. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>