<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981105.1830.0916 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight -- a medical milestone and a potential 
revolution in the treatment of deadly diseases that strike so many 
of us. We all know the human body is incredibly complex. It contains 
nine major organ systems and more than 110 organ and tissue types. 
The foundation for it all -- human cells. Now, a new study in the 
journal "science," says scientists have figured out how to reproduce 
cells that may help cure major illnesses. Here's NBC's chief science 
correspondent Robert Bazell tonight, "in depth." For the first time, 
scientists have learned how to grow the most basic building blocks 
of the human body in a laboratory. They are called "embryonic stem 
cells," and their potential for treating disease is mind-boggling. 
It is a big deal to us, absolutely. The human body is made of specialized 
cells -- hair cells, skin cells and those that make up muscle, blood, 
nerves -- every organ in the body. But the embryonic stem cells have 
the amazing capacity to become any kind of cell. This could be a resource 
for growing cells and transplanting them into the body in cases where 
there are diseased organs or where there are injuries, and you need 
tissue replacement. In other words, one day, some of the 4 million 
Americans suffering from Alzheimer's might be treated with stem cells 
to replace the brain cells they have lost. Or the cells might repair 
the damage to spinal cords, now considered permanent in 250,000 Americans. 
Stem cells could repair the damaged heart muscle in some of the 20 
million americans with heart disease and could treat others illnesses 
ranging from diabetes to cancer. Isn't it true that there's almost 
no area of medicine that couldn't potentially benefit from these cells? 
I guess I agree with that statement since you could form virtually 
any cell type, then, obviously, that pretty much covers the human 
body. Until now, the stem cells existed only in embryos at the very 
beginning of life, a few days after fertilization. But Dr. John gearhart 
and his team at Johns Hopkins, along with a second group at the University 
of Wisconsin, managed to harvest the stem cells and make them grow 
continually in the laboratory, creating, in effect, an endless resource. 
When will clinical trials with these cells begin? No one knows. Scientists 
have many technical obstacles to overcome. But even these experts 
are amazed at how fast the work is progressing. And with the progress, 
inevitably, come ethical concerns. Some critics argue that the embryonic 
cells are a form of human life. Others disagree. I think if we regard 
these cells as prepregnancy cells, which are nothing more than cells, 
we're in a far better position to explore these potentials in research 
and in human medicine The ethical debates will continue. But most 
scientists believe that growing the stem cells marks yet another major 
milestone in a scientific revolution that will ultimately save many 
lives. Robert Bazell, NBC news, Baltimore. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>