<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0489 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a slew of European interest-rate reductions, the Bank of England 
ordered a larger-than-expected cut in a key rate Thursday, half a 
percentage point, to 6.75 percent. It was the second reduction in 
a month, reflecting heightened anxiety over slower economic growth 
both in Britain and abroad. Less than two months before the introduction 
of a single European currency, though, Germany's central bank resisted 
strong political pressure from the new finance minister, Oskar Lafontaine, 
to cut rates and said they would remain unchanged. Financial markets 
here showed little enthusiasm for the Bank of England's decision, 
with the London Stock Exchange declining 2.5 percent. Investors were 
apparently worried that the unexpectedly large cut showed that the 
central bank was more worried about the economy than it had let on. 
Traders also thought that the half-percentage-point cut in the repurchase 
rate, an important short-term lending gauge, contrasting with the 
bank's more usual quarter-point increments, meant there was little 
likelihood of further cuts soon. But British business, which has blamed 
high interest rates and a strong pound for a deep slump in manufacturing 
and exports, generally pressed for further cuts. ``With further reductions 
in interest rates and in sterling, businesses can get back to the 
job of competing and investing for growth,'' said Ian Peters, deputy 
director general of the British Chambers of Commerce. Britain is not 
among the 11 countries adopting the new currency, the euro, in electronic 
trading on Jan. 1, and is in the throes of debate over its chances 
of avoiding recession next year. Two days ago, Gordon Brown, the chancellor 
of the exchequer, cut his estimates of growth next year to a range 
of 1 percent to 1.5 percent. And government figures on Thursday showed 
a bigger-than-forecast four-tenths of a percent drop in manufacturing 
output in September. Other European nations face a more complex array 
of interest-rate pressures. Those that will adopt the euro are supposed 
to harmonize key interest rates at 3.3 percent, in line with France 
and Germany. Spain and Portugal lowered key rates by a quarter of 
a percentage point this week to move closer to that target. The German 
central bank, by contrast, argues that its rates are already low and 
that any further reduction would make it harder for other nations 
to bring their rates down before the euro is introduced and the European 
Central Bank assumes responsibility for monetary policy. In addition, 
the Bundesbank is locked in a battle of wills with Lafontaine, the 
left-leaning finance minister, who has been exerting political pressure 
for lower rates to spur growth and combat Germany's stubbornly high 
joblessness. Figures announced Thursday showed German unemployment 
slightly lower _ down 43,000, to 4.106 million, on a seasonally adjusted 
basis in October. There was, though, a widespread perception that 
this could be attributed to job-creation measures before last month's 
national elections rather than any upturn in the economy. Lafontaine 
attended Thursday's meeting of the Bundesbank council in Frankfurt, 
and his ministry said later that European interest rates had been 
``a particular emphasis of the discussion'' _ suggesting strong resistance 
by the central bank to his demands for lower rates. A Finance Ministry 
statement insisted, however, that ``no member of the government is 
questioning the independence of the Bundesbank or the European Central 
Bank.'' Sweden and Denmark, both outside the euro zone, also cut rates 
earlier this week, and Denmark cut its benchmark rate another quarter-point 
Thursday, to 4.40 percent from 4.65 percent. The Danes were retreating 
from a rate increase in September intended to protect their currency 
from world financial upheaval, said Jose Luis Alzola, an economist 
with Salomon Smith Barney. The cut in Sweden, he said, was inspired 
by ``a gloomier assessment of growth.'' ``This is a common theme across 
Europe,'' Alzola added. ``Expectations for growth are being revised 
downward.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>