<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0407 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When it came to getting the black vote out for Tuesday's election, 
Roy Barnes did not leave much to chance. In the final days of the 
race, Georgia's Democratic candidate for governor used every opportunity, 
in both his speeches and his advertising, to accuse his Republican 
opponent of trying to divide the state by race. The state Democratic 
Party targeted three telephone calls and two mailings at each of 300,000 
black households, many of them in majority black Atlanta, with one 
flier reminding voters that the Republican candidate for lieutenant 
governor had threatened to ``kick Atlanta's ass.'' And last Sunday 
morning, Barnes did not simply attend services at one black church. 
He went to four, escorted by Atlanta's first black mayor and a black 
Cabinet secretary. Those efforts were rewarded on Tuesday. Black voters 
went to Georgia's polls in force, and 9 out of 10 cast ballots for 
Barnes, according to surveys of voters leaving the polls. He almost 
certainly would not have won without their extraordinary support. 
As it was, he cruised to a nine-point victory over his Republican 
opponent, Guy Millner, despite falling short of the 40 percent of 
the white vote usually considered necessary for a Democrat to win 
in this increasingly two-party state. Across much of the South, where 
Democrats on Tuesday won some of their most significant victories 
in years, including the governorships of South Carolina and Alabama, 
the same pattern emerged. Although blacks comprised about the same 
share of the national electorate as they did four years ago, according 
to surveys of voters leaving the polls, their numbers increased significantly 
in crucial Southern states. The fallout from that political debt will 
be substantial, analysts said. ``In terms of governing, Tuesday's 
black turnout is going to mean a heightened sensitivity to the concerns 
of blacks within the party, perhaps in the way of particular policies, 
appointments and benefits,'' said Merle Black, an Emory University 
political scientist and an authority on Southern politics. ``And that 
will be something that will persist for the indefinite future.'' In 
Alabama, it took less than 24 hours for the state's legislative black 
caucus to send its payback demands in a telegram to Governor-elect 
Don Siegelman, a Democrat who defeated Gov. Fob James Jr. The demands 
included the appointment of two blacks to Siegelman's transition team 
and the selection of blacks for at least one third of his cabinet 
positions. A spokeswoman for Siegelman said he would make his appointments 
based on merit. In South Carolina, Rep. James Clyburn, a black Democrat 
who worked diligently to turn out the vote for Governor-elect Jim 
Hodges, said he found the use of the word ``demands'' to be distasteful. 
``Let's not be too pointed in our language,'' Clyburn said. ``We can 
do this without using those inflammatory terms.'' But he added that 
Hodges clearly must pay attention to his black constituents. ``He's 
a smart guy,'' Clyburn said. ``He knows where his margin of victory 
was, and I don't think there's going to be any problem getting our 
concerns addressed.'' Indeed, the Democrats' strength on Tuesday may 
also expose their most enduring vulnerability as they challenge the 
Republicans for majority status in the South. If the Democrats ever 
hope to lure white moderates and suburban residents back into the 
fold, they must shed the perception that the party is beholden to 
special interests, including minorities, political scientists said. 
For the moment, Democrats can rejoice that they finally managed to 
stall the seemingly inexorable advance of Republican troops through 
the South. In the 11 states of the old Confederacy, they claimed a 
net gain of one governorship, moving from three to four, compared 
to eight in 1980. They picked up one Senate seat, and now have eight 
in the region, compared to 16 in 1980. There was no numerical change 
in the South's congressional representation, with Democrats continuing 
to hold 54 of the 125 seats, down from 77 of 108 seats in 1980. The 
Democrats won back the North Carolina House of Representatives, which 
had been considered a prime target for a Republican takeover. Now 
they will hold 58 percent of all Southern legislative seats. But the 
importance of the black turnout to this year's Democratic victories 
underscores the thesis that the party's successes do not necessarily 
suggest any broad partisan realignment in the South. Rather, many 
political analysts argue that the Democrats benefited from unique 
circumstances that will be difficult to replicate. This year's elections 
were influenced by a broad array of unusual factors. The Democrats 
fielded moderate candidates who were uncommonly well-financed. In 
South Carolina, for example, video poker interests poured millions 
of dollars into defeating Gov. David easley, a Republican who had 
crusaded to ban the industry. Much of that money was spent on turning 
out the black vote, Democratic officials said. In both South Carolina 
and Alabama, where Democrats won governorships for the first time 
in 16 years, voters responded to highly disciplined campaigns that 
focused on proposals for state lotteries that would finance educational 
improvements. In the governors' races in Georgia and Alabama, the 
Republicans fielded flawed candidates _ a two-time loser in Georgia 
who went on to fail a third time, and an incumbent in Alabama who 
had alienated many in his own party by focusing relentlessly on social 
issues. The heightened black vote was stimulated at least in part 
by anger over the Republicans' pursuit of impeachment proceedings 
against President Clinton, who remains popular among blacks. Democratic 
strategists happily exploited that anger. One mailing sent to black 
voters last week by the Georgia Democratic Party featured photographs 
of Speaker Newt Gingrich and Kenneth Starr, the Whitewater independent 
counsel. ``They couldn't win at the ballot box, so now they want to 
overturn our choice,'' the advertisement read. ``Send them a message.'' 
Clinton did his part by speaking at a black church in Baltimore last 
Sunday and by granting an interview that was broadcast on Monday night 
on the BET cable network. In Georgia, black voters may also have been 
motivated by the presence of three black candidates on the statewide 
ticket, two of whom won. And they seem to have been incited by the 
perception that Millner and his running mate, Mitch Skandalakis, had 
engaged in race-baiting. Both men railed against the management of 
the city of Atlanta, which has a black mayor that Skandalakis described 
in a television advertisement as ``an incompetent boob.'' Millner 
closed his campaign with an advertisement charging that Barnes favored 
racial quotas in college admissions and state contracts, an accusation 
that Barnes denied. Robert Kahn, Barnes' campaign consultant, said 
the black vote was ``essential, indispensable'' to his candidate's 
victory. In a state where 27 percent of all registered voters are 
black and where blacks almost always vote less reliably than whites, 
29 percent of Tuesday's voters were black, according to polls of voters 
leaving the polling place conducted by Voter News Service. That compared 
to 16 percent in 1994 and 25 percent in the 1996 presidential election. 
Exit poll data was less clear in other states, with changes within 
the statistical margin of error, but was consistent with reports of 
heavier black voting. Compared to 1994, the black share of the total 
vote was up two percentage points in South Carolina, where Sen. Ernest 
Hollings, a Democrat, held on to his seat and where Hodges, the former 
minority leader of the state House of Representatives, ousted Gov. 
David Beasley. It was up two percentage points over 1996 in North 
Carolina, where John Edwards, a Democratic trial lawyer, defeated 
Sen. Lauch Faircloth, a conservative Republican. In Alabama, where 
Siegelman unseated the incumbent Republican governor, Fob James Jr., 
the black share of the vote declined by one percentage point. But 
Siegelman won 95 percent of the black votes cast, a bit more than 
the percentage won by other Southern Democrats. Perhaps the most meaningful 
tribute to the Democrats' organizational skills came from an unlikely 
source. ``All of us want to pay the greatest respect to the ability 
of the Democrats in this election to turn out their base,'' House 
Speaker Newt Gingrich said on Wednesday. Gingrich, who represents 
a congressional district outside of Atlanta, said the Democrats ``have 
found a pretty effective formula for competing with us head to head'' 
in the South. ``I think that drive toward being a majority is now 
a little more in doubt, frankly,'' he said. In South Carolina, an 
estimated 260,000 blacks turned out on Tuesday, about 50,000 more 
than in 1994, and Hodges defeated Beasley by about 82,000 votes. In 
Georgia, an estimated 520,000 blacks voted, more than twice the 1994 
number, and Barnes won by about 150,000 votes. An analysis of selected 
precincts in the Atlanta area suggests that this year's higher black 
turnout may have been a windfall from increased voter registration 
under the motor voter law, which enables people to register to vote 
in a variety of government agencies, including motor vehicle offices. 
There were a number of precincts here in which the percentage of black 
registered voters who showed up at the polls was actually less than 
in previous elections. But the raw number of black voters in those 
precincts was still higher because there is now a larger group of 
blacks who are registered. Since 1994, the black share of the electorate 
increased by three percentage points in Georgia and nearly two points 
in South Carolina and North Carolina, and remained about the same 
in Alabama. Republicans won the governorships in the two largest Southern 
states, with George W. Bush being re-elected in Texas and his brother 
Jeb winning in Florida. But in the states where Democrats won, they 
won handily, with Siegelman defeating James by 16 percentage points, 
Barnes winning by 9 and Hodges by 8 percentage points. Still, many 
Republicans said those victories were poor tests of the South's partisan 
loyalties. Beasley argued that his loss in South Carolina, like those 
of other Southern Republicans, was ``an aberration'' generated by 
unique circumstances. ``It had nothing to do with the Republican Party,'' 
he said. ``South Carolina is a Republican state, and will continue 
to be a Republican state.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>