<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0240 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Attention, class: Would it be a good thing to see U.S. Army troops 
marching over the Brooklyn Bridge? Should we imprison those of foreign 
descent if they have putative links to terrorism? In the event of 
martial law, would anyone want Bruce Willis to be in charge? And if 
there were, quite literally, a bomb in a Broadway theater, wouldn't 
it be sporting to let us see what was on the marquee? ``The Siege'' 
provides the easiest of answers to all but the last question (the 
name of the play is tactfully shrouded in post-explosion haze) as 
it turns into a speechifying consideration of civil liberties and 
constitutional rights. Too bad, because Edward Zwick's ultimately 
sedate thriller starts out with crisply efficient style and the potential 
for a much more involving story. Incorporating a sense of real news 
and real peril, it begins with the surreptitious capture of a suspected 
Arab terrorist, Sheik Ahmed Bin Talal, and envisions the activities 
of US-based disciples who seek his release. Among the film's most 
ominous shots is one panning from a New York mosque to the Manhattan 
skyline, which looks like one big tempting target in the context of 
this story. Presiding over the film's first few terrorist attacks, 
which are menacingly staged, is Denzel Washington as the take-charge 
FBI man Anthony (Hub) Hubbard. Lines like ``Put him in play!'' and 
``Pin a tail on her!'' and ``All right, let's roll!'' establish Hub 
as the authoritative type, as does his way of sipping coffee from 
an FBI mug while striding down the hall. Washington excels at bringing 
teasing charm to such officious types, but Hub isn't given much chance 
to develop into an interesting character. Once the film gets a few 
shocking explosions under its belt (like that Broadway attack, where 
``the list of victims is a veritable Who's Who of the city's cultural 
leaders''), it simmers down into an internecine cat fight involving 
the military, the FBI and (with Annette Bening as one brusque Mata 
Hari) the CIA. Caught up in the crossfire is New York's Arab-American 
community, which has raised understandable objections to images seen 
in ``The Siege.'' Though the screenplay (by Lawrence Wright, Menno 
Meyjes and Zwick) is strenuously even-handed and even incorporates 
a nice-guy, Beirut-born sidekick for Hub (played ably by Tony Shalhoub), 
the film's stark images of scheming Arab villains often speak louder 
than its diplomatic words. Bending over especially far backward, the 
film gives Ms. Bening's tough cookie a complex relationship to the 
Arabs in her past, with lines like: ``My first boyfriend was Palestinian. 
You know, my father used to say they seduce you with their suffering.'' 
When, late in the film, Arab-Americans are put in internment camps, 
there is the obligatory cry: ``What if it was black people? Huh? What 
if it was Italians? Puerto Ricans?'' Well-intentioned words don't 
change either the film's visual demonizing of Arab characters or its 
way of titillating the audience with terrorist stunts. As Ms. Bening's 
worldly character points out, it's often the television cameras that 
matter most in hostage takings. And here it's the movie cameras, lending 
a deadly frisson of excitement to bombs in a schoolroom, on a city 
bus, at a federal office building and in Times Square. Washington 
and Ms. Bening play smart, interesting characters who never quite 
connect, while Willis turns himself into the loosest military cannon 
this side of ``Dr. Strangelove.'' His arrogance is nothing if not 
persuasive, but it should be remembered that Willis hit his stride 
as an actor playing salt-of-the-earth Everyman types, without the 
sneer. PRODUCTION NOTES: `THE SIEGE' Directed by Edward Zwick; written 
by Lawrence Wright, Menno Meyjes and Zwick; director of photography, 
Roger Deakins; edited by Steven Rosenblum; music by Graeme Revell; 
production designer, Lilly Kilvert; costumes by Ann Roth; produced 
by Lynda Obst and Zwick; released by 20th Century Fox. Running time: 
109 minutes. This film is rated R (under 17 requires accompanying 
parent or adult guardian). It includes violence, profanity and a brief 
sexual situation. With: Denzel Washington (Anthony Hubbard), Annette 
Bening (Elise Kraft), Bruce Willis (General William Devereaux), Tony 
Shalhoub (Frank Haddad), Sami Bouajila (Samir Nazhde) and David Proval 
(Danny Sussman). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>