<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0362 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu convened his Cabinet on Thursday 
to ratify the Israeli-Palestinian peace accord after a weeklong delay 
that established what is likely to be a pattern of Israeli ultimatums, 
Palestinian protests and American mediation. But as soon as he opened 
the meeting, Netanyahu issued a new demand that went way beyond the 
terms of the written accord and was immediately rejected by the Palestinians. 
He pronounced that the whole deal would crumble if the Palestinians 
did not formally revoke the covenant calling for Israel's destruction. 
``They vote to annul the provisions, we will say they did their part,'' 
Netanyahu said, during a break seven hours after the Cabinet meeting 
began. ``If not, we simply won't give them the territory.'' At the 
beginning of the day the Cabinet had been expected to approve the 
land-for-security plan, signed at the White House two weeks ago, either 
on Friday or, after the Jewish Sabbath, on Sunday. By midnight, however, 
it was no longer so certain. Netanyahu's declaration was another sign 
that, facing threats from the right wing to topple his government, 
he has chosen to adopt an aggressive public posture toward the Palestinians 
even as he moves closer to giving them more West Bank land. And after 
the Palestinians' rejection, the signposts to the next Israeli-Palestinian 
showdown were clear. Netanyahu's demand reopened a sensitive issue 
that was solved by a compromise during the peace talks at the Wye 
Plantation in Maryland. There the Palestinians agreed to ``invite'' 
legislators to a meeting that would be attended by President Clinton, 
where they would ``reaffirm'' what they consider to have been the 
cancellation of the offending clauses in their covenant two years 
ago. ``There will not be anything that is called a vote,'' Ahmed Qurei, 
known as Abu Ala, the senior Palestinian negotiator, said Thursday. 
Later Netanyahu responded, ``If they do not vote, there will be no 
continuation of the process.'' When the Cabinet recessed around midnight, 
the ministers issued a statement demanding ``clarification'' from 
Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian leader, about whether there would be 
a vote, what kind of vote it would be and by whom. Some ministers 
went further, insisting that the Cabinet vote should be delayed until 
the clarification was received. During the one-week delay before Thursday's 
meeting, in which Netanyahu awaited a Palestinian commitment to jail 
30 fugitive terrorists, Israel had already rankled both the Palestinians 
and the Americans. It unleashed a volley of vitriol between the two 
sides, which worsened Thursday, fraying the fragile spirit of cooperation 
at the start of what was originally expected to be a 12-week period 
of putting the accord into effect. ``They're off to quite a rough 
start, and they haven't even begun to transfer territory,'' said Joseph 
Alpher, Israeli director of the American Jewish Committee. ``It bodes 
ill for the implementation.'' Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon, who has 
been house-bound with an ear infection since his return from peace 
talks in Washington, emerged from his ranch in southern Israel to 
attend the meeting. And, for the first time, he acknowledged Thursday 
that he would vote for the agreement he helped to broker in Maryland, 
contrary to his earlier insistence that he never would. Despite his 
illness, Sharon looked as robust as ever as he helped Netanyahu face 
down his right-wing ministers, who squirmed as Sharon, a longtime 
hawk, played the role of defending a territorial giveaway. After seeing 
for the first time maps that showed how the West Bank would be chopped 
up, the ministers gave Sharon, the longtime defender of the Jewish 
settlements there, a particularly hard time. ``You disappointed us,'' 
Rabbi Yitzhak Levy, the education minister, told him, according to 
Israeli television's Channel Two. The Israeli Defense Forces radio 
reported that nine new settlements would become isolated islands in 
Palestinian-ruled territory after troops withdrew from an additional 
27 percent of the West Bank under the agreement. About half of that 
land was already under Palestinian civil control. By whatever margin 
it approves the agreement, however, the Cabinet is likely to shackle 
its approval to a series of demands that go beyond the accord _ that 
in the third redeployment, for instance, Israel would turn over no 
more than an additional 1 percent of the West Bank. This underscores 
the holes in the accord signed in Washington. Several divisive issues 
were left out or left vague, like the arrests of the 30 fugitives, 
but they are still alive and contentious, threatening the fragile 
cooperation between the Israelis and the Palestinians. The Israelis 
went into the negotiations demanding that the Palestinians reduce 
their police force, for instance, but they came out with a written 
guarantee only that the Palestinians would submit a list of who was 
on the force. The time line for carrying out the agreement is tight. 
The interim peace agreement established in Oslo in 1993, which is 
the framework for the most recent, more modest accord, expires in 
May. Arafat has threatened to declare a Palestinian state then if 
the promises in the Oslo agreement have not been met. ``Final status'' 
negotiations remain, dealing with the thorniest issues, like borders, 
the fate of Jerusalem and the return of Palestinian refugees. In what 
was to have been a triumphant moment, Arafat was supposed to have 
inaugurated the new Palestinian airport in Gaza Thursday by arriving 
home there from Madrid. But the Israelis prohibited his landing because 
the government has not yet ratified the accord, which would allow 
the long-completed airport to open. As usual, Arafat landed in Egypt, 
and crossed into Gaza by helicopter. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>