<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0384 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The note was scrawled on a scrap of paper and thrust at a truck driver 
for a United States oil company stopped on a rebel-held highway to 
the eastern plains of Colombia recently. ``Please do us the favor 
of coming to talk to us, so we can reach agreements allowing you to 
work without problems,'' the note said. ``If you do not come, we will 
not be responsible for the consequences.'' The company passed the 
extortion demand, penned in oddly formal, misspelled Spanish, to Colombian 
military intelligence. Executives at the multinational concern, who 
asked that the company not be identified, did not give in to insurgents, 
but ordered their drivers to skirt the area by taking other roads. 
The company could alter its routes and still conduct business, said 
Enrique Urrea, head of a committee of security chiefs for U.S. multinationals 
operating in Colombia. ``Not everybody can,'' he added. A Colombian 
soft drink manufacturer, defying similar demands from the insurgents, 
saw 54 of its trucks burned. In September, the rebels kidnapped three 
of the company's drivers and executed one to pressure the company. 
``If they give up a road, they lose a market,'' Urrea said. He asked 
that the company not be named, saying publicity could endanger the 
lives of the remaining hostages. Though the new government of Andres 
Pastrana seeks peace talks with the country's three rebel movements 
in an effort to end three decades of civil war, Colombia remains one 
of the riskiest places in the world to do business. Threats to foreigners 
come from random street crimes, kidnappers, extortion, vandalism and 
sudden roadblocks thrown up by rebel factions vying for power. Half 
of all the reported kidnappings in the world happen in Colombia; 806 
occurred in the first six months of this year and 1,693 last year, 
according to the Presidential Anti-Kidnapping Office. More people 
are murdered in this nation of 36 million than in the entire United 
States, which has nearly eight times the population. In 1996, the 
last year for which figures are available, the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
reported 19,645 homicides; in Colombia, there were 26,627. While the 
central government holds Bogota and the larger cities, the countryside 
is fragmenting into a collection of fiefs controlled by rebels or 
by right-wing paramilitaries that terrorize peasants, often in collusion 
with army officers and the police. Foreign businesses are particularly 
vulnerable to kidnappings and extortion and kickback demands from 
the rebels. Security costs, which average 4 percent of a company's 
operating costs in the rest of the developing world, can run up to 
10 percent here, security experts and company executives say. Despite 
the limitations and risks, a variety of U.S. companies have opened 
offices and factories in Colombia, particularly since the country 
acted in the early 1990s to lower trade barriers and otherwise open 
the economy to foreign investment. They include Occidental Petroleum, 
Procter &AMP; Gamble, Colgate-Palmolive, Kellogg, DuPont and Citigroup. 
Some businesses have left, but those that stay in Colombia have learned 
to protect their interests. To discourage kidnappings, they employ 
Colombian executives and use local contractors. They hire such multinational 
security services as Control Risks Group and Defense Systems Ltd., 
both based in London; Ackerman Security, and the Kroll-O'Gara Co., 
in New York, to tailor security packages for their executives, installations 
and trade secrets. Insurance companies, sometimes working directly 
with protection services, often demand strict security precautions 
from U.S. executives in Colombia, said Joseph Finnin, head of the 
American Chamber of Commerce here. One insisted that not only an oil 
company president but also his wife use bodyguards and armored cars. 
The security services also analyze the risks of doing business with 
a given Colombian company, perusing court records for potential legal 
or tax problems. Earlier this fall, Kroll-O'Gara bought a factory 
for making armored cars in Colombia, said Bruce Goslin, a managing 
director of the company's office in Miami. Because of security worries, 
foreigners largely confine themselves to a small, safe piece of this 
grimy, bustling city. They take apartments on the upper floors instead 
of houses, and only in the priciest neighborhoods. They vary routes, 
switching vehicles and vetting maids, nannies and gardeners with a 
thoroughness J. Edgar Hoover might have envied. And they fly, rather 
than drive, if they must leave Bogota. Oil companies pay a special 
war tax to the government, and they contract with the Defense Ministry 
for special army platoons to protect oil exploration and production 
sites or dangerous highways. As threats to their business escalate, 
foreign companies are sharing security information and tightening 
their lines of communication with Colombia's military intelligence 
service. Through the committee that Urrea heads, the chiefs of security 
for 65 of the largest companies in Colombia, most of them from the 
United States, are in constant contact through beepers that flash 
bulletins. Urrea heads security operations for Esso, the Colombian 
subsidiary of Exxon. On one recent day, his beeper warned of a strike 
by 700,000 civil servants that was paralyzing roads, telecommunications, 
hospitals and airports. The Colombian military sends the committee 
daily intelligence reports and other information, while the police 
provide financial profiles of potential or actual employees. ``If 
there's no information, there's no power,'' Urrea said. For Armando 
Lara, a former FBI officer who heads Latin American operations for 
Control Risks, that maxim was vividly illustrated a few years ago. 
Running late to a meeting with a military commander in charge of eastern 
Colombia, Lara flipped on the radio to hear that the commander had 
been killed when his car exploded a few minutes earlier. If Lara had 
known security was so volatile in the area, he would have avoided 
going there, he said. But more information means maintaining close 
ties to military and police forces that have a record of chronic human 
rights abuses. According to government investigators and human rights 
groups, army and police officers have colluded with the right-wing 
paramilitaries, which roam the countryside, terrorizing and massacring 
peasants. Last summer, the 20th Intelligence Brigade, which supplied 
information to every branch of the military, was disbanded, with numerous 
officers facing criminal charges of running death squads and carrying 
out political assassinations. For more than a year, the State Department 
has been combing through the human rights records of the Colombian 
army, seeking units with clean records to receive aid to combat narcotics. 
But the human rights problems are so pervasive that only one unit 
has been cleared, and another had to be created fresh, culling officers 
and soldiers with unblemished records from scattered units. Urrea 
said that most security chiefs working in the private sector are retired 
military officers like him who have access to the most senior officers 
in the Colombian military command. ``As far as I know, they are honest, 
but there are exceptional cases where a person, in his impotence before 
the situation we're living through, commits excesses and violates 
human rights,'' he said. `` But that's the exception, not the rule.'' 
Security chiefs and security firms have also been involved in negotiating 
ransoms, which are technically illegal in Colombia. In a famous case, 
Control Risks negotiated for the wife of a BASF chemical company executive. 
The hostage, Brigitte Schone, was eventually released when a German 
spy couple, Werner and Isabel Mauss, elbowed Control Risks aside and 
paid rebels a ransom of $1.5 million _ 10 times the amount the company 
had bargained the ransom down to. The case set off an international 
incident when the Mausses were briefly arrested trying to leave the 
country with the freed hostage, using false passports provided by 
the German government. (In the latest illustration of how shadowy 
are the ties that run Colombia, the Mausses emerged last summer as 
behind-the-scenes figures arranging peace talks in Mainz, Germany, 
between rebels of the National Liberation Army, or ELN, and Colombian 
business and church representatives.) It is also illegal to pay extortion 
in Colombia. Most large U.S. companies do not surrender to extortion, 
Lara of Control Risks said, but added, ``So many have a policy of 
subcontracting to Colombian firms, and Colombians feel, especially 
operating in rural areas, that they've got to pay to keep themselves 
safe.'' The most costly threat to foreign businesses has been attacks 
on oil pipelines. The attacks have not ceased even as the government 
prepares to open talks with the largest insurgent group, the Revolutionary 
Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, in an effort to end the civil war, 
which last year claimed 2,183 lives, according to human rights groups. 
Nestor Martinez, Interior Minister in the new government, acknowledged 
that lack of security is a serious hindrance to doing business in 
Colombia. ``Of course, we have problems, like all other developing 
countries,'' he said, ``but we're dealing with them, and we're beginning 
peace talks with the guerrillas.'' Of the four major American oil 
companies working here_ Exxon, Amoco, Chevron and Occidental Petroleum 
_ perhaps no company has been more battered by the instability than 
Occidental. Oxy Colombia, as the company's local office is known, 
pumps 160,000 barrels a day of crude from its complex at Cano Limon, 
near the Venezuelan border. So far this year, ELN rebels have blown 
up the pipeline 61 times. Last year, rebels bombed the pipeline 64 
times and started striking closer to home, at the wellheads. The rebels 
collect a 10 percent commission from contractors hired to repair the 
pipeline and wellheads, said Robert Stewart, a spokesman for Occidental. 
``We're getting clobbered,'' he acknowledged. ``It used to be the 
guerrillas would do their attacks and run. They're not even scrambling 
anymore. Now, they sit around after, have a cup of coffee and wait 
for the army to show up.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>