<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0519 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Friday, Nov. 6: Washington 
is doing far too little to help Nicaragua and Honduras deal with one 
of the worst natural disasters in recent history. The Clinton administration 
pledged $70 million Thursday in food aid and Pentagon help, and U.S. 
soldiers have rescued 600 people. But Honduras and Nicaragua urgently 
need helicopters to get food, safe water and medicine to those stricken 
by the torrential rains from Hurricane Mitch. Flooding and mudslides 
have killed at least 7,000 people, perhaps double that, in a region 
just a few hundred miles from the United States. To prevent more death, 
President Clinton needs to galvanize his administration, coordinating 
a much larger effort that overcomes bureaucratic obstacles and gives 
the desperate people of Central America a level of assistance that 
matches their travail. The need is staggering. The emergency will 
not subside when the waters do, as Mitch has destroyed the shelter 
and sources of food of millions of people. Once the emergency is over, 
of course, billions in international aid will be needed to rebuild 
and help farmers plant. Mitch wiped out two-thirds of Honduras' crops 
and 60 percent of its roads, bridges and buildings. The most urgent 
needs are for portable bridges and air transport. Even towns a short 
distance from major cities are cut off by flooding and mud. As of 
Thursday, the United States had lent Nicaragua four helicopters, and 
Mexico has lent two. Four more are coming, but Nicaragua's ambassador 
to Washington says that a total of 20 are desperately needed. There 
are seven helicopters at U.S. bases in Panama, and more can be flown 
by cargo plane from the United States in a matter of hours. There 
is no reason to wait. Disaster relief is often a political event in 
Latin America. Nicaragua's dictator Anastasio Somoza was widely accused 
of stealing most of the relief money after an earthquake leveled Managua 
in 1972. This was a key element in his fall seven years later. Mexico's 
difficulties in building houses for those left homeless by the 1985 
Mexico City earthquake left millions disillusioned with the ruling 
party. The governments in the region will lose all popular support 
if they do not distribute aid fairly or if much of it disappears. 
Mitch will set Central America's development back years, if not decades. 
The United States, which spent billions of dollars in the 1980s to 
finance wars in Central America, now has a responsibility to help 
save lives and protect the region's democracies. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>