<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0386 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Where just a week ago there were fertile fields of corn, beans and 
peanuts almost ready for harvest, there are now only discolored corpses, 
swelling grotesquely in the tropical sun. Where the simple thatched 
houses of peasants have always stood, all that remains are clusters 
of ripped and shredded clothing and a few scattered kitchen utensils. 
For Central America, Hurricane Mitch and the floods and landslides 
that followed the storm have been a catastrophe, killing at least 
7,000 people and inflicting billions of dollars of damage. No single 
place, however, has been harder hit than this collection of humble 
agricultural settlements near the Nicaragua-Honduras border where 
at least 1,500 people, and perhaps many more, perished after a series 
of landslides swept down upon them over a four-day period ending Monday. 
``This has been a tragedy beyond measure, beyond our comprehension,'' 
said Juan Alberto Munoz Gomez, a 36-year-old-farmer from one of the 
half-dozen villages that was obliterated by the stream of mud. ``I 
thought we were all going to die, and perhaps it would have been better 
if we had, for now we have nothing, not our loved ones, not our houses, 
not our crops, nothing.'' Because of the hurricane, it had been raining 
incessantly for nearly a week here, forcing residents of the villages 
on the flanks of the Casita Volcano to remain in their houses instead 
of going out to investigate conditions. So when the first of the murderous 
mudslides announced itself as a loud rumble just before noon Oct. 
30, nearly everyone was taken by surprise. ``At first, it sounded 
like a brigade of helicopters was landing,'' said Fausto Moreira Ruiz, 
63. ``But then the noise got impossibly louder, the ground began to 
shake, and then, before we knew it, the mud was on top of us.'' When 
it was over, he and his daughter Ofelia, 31, were the only survivors 
of a family of nine. When Ana Francisca Sandoval Hernandez and her 
family heard the sounds, they ran out to the local baseball field 
to get a better view. It was there that they saw a wall of dirt mixed 
with trees, rocks and roofs of houses, more than 20 feet high, heading 
towards them, with a herd of frantic oxen running in front of the 
advancing avalanche. ``I thought it was the end of the world,'' Miss 
Sandoval, 22, said from the hospital bed in nearby Chinandega where 
she is being treated for injuries caused by the stones, sand and branches 
that raked and scraped her body as she was dragged along by the mud 
flow for nearly two hours. ``The worst part now, especially at night 
or when there's a lot of fog, is the fear that it is going to happen 
again,'' said Ernesto Juarez, a farm worker in the settlement of Calle 
Real del Bosque. ``All it takes is just a bit of rumbling, and people 
rush out of their houses and begin running around every which way.'' 
From the air, it looks as if a giant hand had descended from the top 
of the volcano, its coffee-colored fingers clawing and gouging their 
way indiscriminately across fields, streams, settlements and highways. 
Many of those caught in the avalanche were buried alive as they tried 
to outrun the mudflow, and will remain interred in unmarked graves, 
but others were merely immobilized, trapped up to their waists or 
shoulders and left to worry that the next wave would bury them too. 
Kelvin Madariaga Gonzalez, 11, survived the onslaught only by taking 
refuge on an oxcart that had wound up lodged on top of a tree. The 
boy, severely bruised, was eventually evacuated to a hospital where 
he was reunited with an older brother, Humberto, 20, but Kelvin still 
does not know what happened to his parents and 8-year-old twin brothers. 
``I think they are all in the other hospital,'' he said hesitantly. 
``That is what my brother told me.'' In some cases, the magnitude 
of personal loss the survivors have suffered is so overwhelming as 
to stagger the imagination. Francisco Javier Sandoval, for instance, 
counts 47 relatives who were swept away and still have not been accounted 
for: ``uncles and aunts, brothers, cousins, nephews and nieces, family 
members of all sizes and ages,'' he said with anguish in his voice. 
Others are still struggling to accept what has happened. ``I went 
up there again today looking for my wife, my children, my brothers, 
my mother-in-law, and my brothers-in-law,'' said Felix Pedro Caballero, 
a 26-year-old farmer. ``But I didn't find them. All I found was a 
pair of pants belonging to my brother. But I'm going to keep going 
back until I find them, dead or alive.'' Relief workers say the odds 
are that Caballero's search, like that of thousands of others whose 
relatives are still missing, will never be satisfied. With so many 
decaying corpses strewn about the landscape, health workers have abandoned 
hope of identifying and burying the dead, and are now merely collecting 
bodies and burning them en masse. For their part, peasants in remote 
areas are simply gathering bodies and burying them in common graves 
without bothering to report their actions to the authorities. ``My 
sons alone have buried 40 or 50,'' said Maria Lourdes Rodriguez. Another 
round of heavy rains Wednesday night only made the situation worse. 
The downpour swept dozens of corpses down the mountainside and into 
gullies, adding to the threat of epidemics by contaminating drinking 
water, and making it easier for ravenous pigs and dogs to feast on 
the flesh. On Thursday morning, the decomposing, grayish-yellow bodies 
of a half-dozen victims still lay in a sugarcane field just north 
of Calle Real del Bosque. Some were adults, others were children; 
all had been stripped of their clothing and any possible identifying 
documents by the tremendous force of the mudslides, and most lay on 
their backs, their mouths open and their arms stiffly extended as 
if they had been swimming ``It is painful to say this, because we 
are Nicaraguans, and these are our countrymen,'' said Jose Perez Aviles, 
a Ministry of Health inspector who was leading a team equipped with 
cans of diesel gasoline and rubber tires to dispose of the corpses. 
``The dead who are already buried are going to have to be left in 
place, and the others are going to have to be incinerated because 
they are a risk to the health of survivors.'' By those macabre standards, 
Isaias Vasquez Santeliz has to be counted as one of the lucky ones. 
The 12-year-old boy survived the mudslide and was hospitalized over 
the weekend, but could not stave off infections in the wounds he suffered 
when he was carried by and trapped in the mud. So on Wednesday afternoon, 
his grandparents, uncles and aunts wrapped his body in a blue tarpaulin 
and a white lace tablecloth and placed him in a simple gray coffin 
that was hoisted onto a flatbed truck. As a tractor led a procession 
to the cemetery here, relatives and townspeople walked behind or rode 
on bicycles, thankful that at least one child could be properly buried. 
``There were six in that family, and now only one remains, Isaac, 
the youngest son of my only daughter,'' the boy's grandmother, Candida 
Morales Delgado, said tearfully as the casket was lowered into the 
ground. ``We will care for him as best we can because he is all that 
we have left.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>