<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0221 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Spurred by fierce competition for students, colleges and universities 
from Florida State to New York University are plunging headlong into 
the rapidly evolving world of online education, a world that barely 
existed five years ago. In recent years, technologically adventurous 
professors worked the Internet into their courses, posting the syllabus 
or readings, sometimes responding to student queries. Some of the 
more proficient put courses online. But only recently have universities 
begun to offer whole programs and degrees on line, where a student 
can sign up for a bachelor's, a master's or even a law degree _ the 
1990s version of a correspondence course. No college can be certain 
whether the programs will attract enough students to justify the considerable 
expense _ $50,000 or more to create and support each class. But school 
officials say that if they do not stake out territory in cyberspace 
now, someone else will. ``This is the hottest and most sweeping development 
I've ever seen,'' said James H. Ryan, a vice president at Pennsylvania 
State University, who has been in higher education for 35 years. ``It's 
like being in a roller coaster; it's a thrill a minute.'' But even 
as universities stampede onto the Internet, significant questions 
have yet to be answered. How good is the education? Who owns the courses 
_ the university or the professors who create them? How should faculty 
members be paid? What works best in online teaching? And will a degree 
from a virtual university be worth the actual paper it is printed 
on? Frank Mayadas, a program officer at the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation 
in New York, which has financed programs to improve online teaching, 
said the picture was mixed. Some online degrees, like Stanford University's 
master's degree in electrical engineering or Drexel University's masters 
in information systems, are sound, Mayadas said. But he is skeptical 
that other offerings will endure. ``The predictability we associate 
with higher education institutions isn't there yet,'' he said, ``and 
it needs to be there for this to become a credible source of education.'' 
Still, online classes are a considerable step up from correspondence 
schools. Internet bulletin boards function as virtual classrooms for 
students and teachers who can participate at any time, from anywhere, 
using a computer and a modem. Instructors post lectures and assignments; 
students turn in papers and tests and discuss their studies with classmates 
and professors in online conferences. Michele Acuna of Saugus, Calif., 
a 34-year-old mother with two teen-agers who is working on a bachelor's 
degree from the University of Phoenix, signs on almost every day to 
the Hewlett Packard computer in her bedroom for a communications course. 
Her professor is in Utah. ``I do a lot at night when my children are 
in bed,'' she said. ``That's the beauty of this stuff _ you can do 
it at 3 a.m.'' No one knows exactly how many colleges operate on the 
Internet. But what is clear is that the trend is picking up speed 
nationwide: _ New York University announced this month an audacious 
plan to create a profit-seeking subsidiary to market Internet courses. 
The venture would allow NYU to raise millions of dollars through a 
stock offering or private partnerships. _ The University of Phoenix, 
a for-profit behemoth that has officials at many traditional universities 
scared because of its rapid spread online, has nearly 5,000 students 
in its online program, more than double the number two years ago. 
_ Western Governors University, an online college sponsored by 17 
states and Guam, was started this fall to improve access to college 
education for adults and to help accommodate an expected crush of 
students without building classrooms. The university offers associate's 
degrees in liberal arts and applied science. _ The California Virtual 
University, a consortium of nearly 100 California universities and 
colleges, opened this fall with more than 1,600 online courses. _ 
The Open University _ Britain's 29-year-old pioneer in distance education 
for college students _ has applied for American accreditation and 
is striking cooperative agreements with universities like Florida 
State University. _ Penn State established its online ``World Campus'' 
in February with just four courses and expects to have 30 courses 
by next February. _ Florida State will begin offering courses next 
fall for a bachelor's degree, but will concentrate on course work 
for juniors and seniors. The proliferation of online programs has 
many traditional educators scratching their heads. A committee of 
the American Association of University Professors concluded last year 
that online learning could be ``a valuable pedagogical tool to increase 
access to higher education.'' But it warned that developments could 
compromise traditional notions of academic quality, academic freedom, 
intellectual property rights and instructors' workloads and compensation. 
In some cases, long-standing safeguards of faculty members' rights 
may suffice, it said, but in others, those protections may need reworking. 
Unlike a traditional classroom course, for which a professor creates 
and delivers each course, the professor becomes more dispensable online 
after putting the course together in a form that can be sent out again 
and again. Another instructor can be assigned to answer questions 
and grade papers. Universities are creating different arrangements 
to determine who owns what. Penn State, for example, is splitting 
revenues with the faculty members who develop the courses and their 
departments, while New York University says its new subsidiary will 
hold ownership rights for the online courses. The student body for 
most online courses is part-time adults in continuing education programs 
or full-time degree-seekers who take most of their work in traditional 
classrooms. But the trend is to make it possible to earn a degree 
online rather than just take a few individual classes. Jeremy Carlo, 
a sophomore majoring in applied math and physics at the New Jersey 
Institute of Technology, took a computer science course online in 
the spring when he could not fit the regular course into his schedule. 
He found the flexibility a mixed blessing. ``It was nice that you 
didn't have to be somewhere from 4 to 5:30 twice a week,'' Carlo said. 
``The negative is that you really have to keep on top of the work.'' 
Ms. Acuna is using her computer for all of her courses. She said she 
had always wanted a college degree. But as a single mother with a 
full-time job as an operations manager for a retail chain with night 
and weekend shifts, she could not commit to regular-class attendance. 
She looked into several online programs before enrolling as a business 
major at the University of Phoenix. At $370 a credit ($465 for graduate 
work), Phoenix charges more than the local community college. Phoenix 
students typically take one course at a time for five weeks, and then 
have a week off before starting the next. The only requirement Ms. 
Acuna was not able to fulfill at home was the university's entrance 
examination, which she took at a local school. In her current communications 
course she and her five classmates write essays, read them and discuss 
them in teams _ but talk about little else. There is no sense of a 
campus community, but she does not mind. Now that Internet education 
is taking clearer shape, some university officials are taking a closer 
look at the business aspects. Active marketing is a major component 
of the NYU plan. Rather than aiming to put all the courses it can 
on the Web, the university is hoping to start with a dozen or so niche 
courses _ like computer and management courses that will be attractive 
to people in industry. As these courses bring in revenues, others 
will be added. ``Online is a big, important field in higher education, 
but it does not have a business model that works,'' said Gerald A. 
Heeger, dean of Continuing and Professional Studies at NYU, who is 
directing the university's new online enterprise. ``The dirty, little 
secret is that nobody's making any money,'' Heeger said. But someday 
they will, he added. NYT-11-01-98 1917EST 
</TEXT>
</DOC>