<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0536 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If all free-agent situations were as easy to resolve as Scott Brosius' 
status with the New York Yankees, Friday would be an insignificant 
day in the 23rd year of Major League Baseball free agency. But the 
Yankees' new agreement with Brosius is an exception, which is why 
it is time to let the offers begin. Bernie Williams, Mo Vaughn, Randy 
Johnson and Kevin Brown, the elite of this year's market, and 130 
other free agents can sign with any team beginning Friday. Their 1998 
teams no longer have exclusive negotiating rights. Albert Belle, free 
until Dec. 2 through a clause in his contract, is another elite hitter 
available, but he did not have to wait until Friday to sign a new 
contract. Brosius is not among the free-agent group because he and 
the Yankees have agreed to a three-year contract for $15.75 million. 
The most difficult aspect of the negotiations, whose conclusion the 
Yankees have not announced, was for Brosius' agent, Tony Attanasio, 
to get his client what he felt was a fair deal. Attanasio was somewhat 
hamstrung because even before he filed for free agency on Oct. 27, 
Brosius told the world he wanted to remain with the Yankees. After 
a season in which he batted .300 with 19 home runs and 98 runs batted 
in, then became the World Series' most valuable player, why wouldn't 
he want to stay? The Yankees began the negotiations offering less 
than $5 million a year. On the open market, Brosius would command 
well in excess of $5 million. After more talking, the Yankees raised 
their offer, and earlier this week Brosius said done. The Yankees 
should have it so easy with Williams. The premier hitter in the market, 
Williams has not seen an offer from the Yankees, who very likely want 
to wait to see what offers the market will produce from other teams. 
Scott Boras, the center fielder's agent, seeks a seven-year contract 
for more than the $91 million the New York Mets bestowed on catcher 
Mike Piazza. On the final day of the 15-day filing period Thursday, 
two other members of the Yankees added their names to the list, though 
provisionally. David Cone and Darryl Strawberry still have 1999 options 
to resolve, but they protected their rights by filing. They cannot 
sign with another team before the options are acted on. Cone has until 
midnight next Wednesday to decide if he wants to exercise the $5.5 
million option in his contract. The Yankees have the same deadline 
to decide if they want to pick up the $2.5 million option in Strawberry's 
contract. Cone and the club have been negotiating for weeks, Cone 
trying to get two or three years on a new contract for about $8 million 
a year, the Yankees offering $7 million for next season but nothing 
beyond except an option year. The Yankees have a dilemma with the 
Strawberry option. If he were healthy, they most likely would already 
have exercised the option. But because he has colon cancer and his 
recovery is uncertain, at least to the extent that he would be able 
to play again, the Yankees are reluctant to guarantee $2.5 million. 
Of the four elite free agents, Vaughn is the only one who has said 
he would like to stay with his team, the Boston Red Sox. The chances 
of that happening are strictly up to the Red Sox, whose previous negotiating 
stance alienated the burly first baseman. The relationship has not 
been good, but the Red Sox could make it right by offering a five-year 
contract for the kind of money other players of his stature have received. 
The Yankees have said they want to re-sign Williams, but he has not 
said he wants to re-sign with them. He continues to hold a grudge 
about previous contract negotiations. The Houston Astros have made 
Johnson an offer, but he is also considering Arizona, Los Angeles, 
Texas, Anaheim and the Yankees. The San Diego Padres want to retain 
Brown, but Boras, his agent, will listen to all interested parties. 
St. Louis, Colorado, Los Angeles and Cleveland are expected to talk 
with Brown. Brown is considered less willing than Johnson to play 
in New York. The Mets took Al Leiter off the market by signing him 
to a four-year, $32 million contract, leaving Todd Stottlemyre as 
the most attractive pitcher below the Johnson-Brown top tier. Cone 
will jump in there if he becomes available next week. Attanasio, Stottlemyre's 
agent, said he has heard from 11 teams that said they wanted to talk 
about the pitcher. ``Most are looking for the guy just below Brown 
and Johnson, or at him if they don't get Brown or Johnson,'' Attanasio 
said. Belle is in a different position from the other free agents. 
If he does not like the offers he receives, he can return to the Chicago 
White Sox and pick up his original contract with them. It guarantees 
him $35 million for the next three years. Among the seven players 
who were the last to file Thursday were Will Clark of Texas and Jim 
Abbott of the White Sox. Terry Mulholland, who had previously filed, 
agreed to a two-year, $5.9 million contract with the Chicago Cubs. 
Midnight Thursday also was the deadline for eligible players to demand 
a trade. Chuck Knoblauch did not, lending more credence to the belief 
that he and the Yankees sometime ago agreed to a two-year, $18 million 
extension. Moises Alou, who hit 38 home runs and drove home 124 runs 
for the Astros, was another player who was traded in the middle of 
a multiyear contract. With three years left on a five-year, $25 million 
deal, he reached an agreement with Houston Thursday and did not have 
to demand a trade as leverage. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>