<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0520 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Friday, Nov. 6: Suddenly 
Rep. Henry Hyde looked as if he really meant it when he said he was 
not enjoying himself. Guiding the impeachment process is a constitutional 
duty, Hyde said, but ``I'd like to have it behind me.'' With that 
the chairman of the House Judiciary Committee committed himself to 
an accelerated timetable for a committee vote and perhaps even a full 
House vote on impeachment by the end of the year. In addition he set 
plans for calling Kenneth Starr as the first and perhaps only witness, 
on Nov. 19. No less important, he sent the White House a list of 81 
questions to be answered yes or no, giving President Clinton a chance 
to speed up the fact-finding process. Though Hyde understandably denied 
it, he seemed to realize that the political landscape had changed 
as a result of Democratic gains in the election on Tuesday. The public 
clearly wants the impeachment deliberations to be wrapped up in an 
efficient fashion. Moreover, with a majority of only 12 seats in the 
next Congress, the Republicans may not be able to muster the votes 
to pass an impeachment resolution in 1999. As for the current Congress, 
some Republican moderates do not want the first order of business 
after the election to be a vote on removal of the president. But the 
constitutional process has to be reckoned with, as does the need, 
as a matter of the rule of law, for Clinton to receive a formal rebuke 
for his recklessness and lying. For that reason, Hyde's course is 
a sound way to achieve these goals through a process that meets Clinton's 
standard of being ``constitutional, fair and expeditious.'' It will 
move things along to hear first from Starr and to let Democrats critical 
of his prosecutorial methods and the interpretation he has applied 
to the evidence have a chance to question him. One of the most important 
things that both Democrats and Republicans need to ask the independent 
counsel, of course, is whether he has any additional evidence of possibly 
impeachable offenses by the president. These questions need to range 
not simply through the Monica Lewinsky matter but through other abuses 
investigated by Starr, including Whitewater, the alleged misuse of 
FBI files and the dismissal of the White House travel office. Hyde 
cannot allow Starr to be coy about these questions. If Starr has anything, 
he must deliver on Nov. 19. We are not prepared to accept the idea 
at this point that Starr must be the only witness called before the 
Judiciary Committee. But once he testifies, the committee can make 
an informed decision, in public view, as to whether more witnesses 
are needed. As for the questions sent by Hyde to the White House, 
it may be in Clinton's interest to answer some of them to expedite 
the process. Some he will dodge for obvious legal reasons, including 
the one asking him to ``admit or deny that you gave false testimony 
under oath'' in the Paula Jones case. Sooner or later the president 
will have to own up to that as part of any negotiated settlement. 
For now, however, there are less momentous questions that can be answered 
without jeopardizing the president's ability to defend himself or 
to enter into settlement negotiations. Hyde continues to insist that 
the Constitution leaves no room for a censure or other action short 
of impeachment. He ignores the fact that the impeachment process is 
a legislative and political step rather than a judicial and legal 
one. The House can set the rules. It can censure Clinton if it wants 
and offer the president demanding terms for such a censure. In the 
election, the public signaled that it is ready for such an approach. 
We believe that barring new evidence of other wrongdoing by Clinton, 
Hyde will come around to guiding the Judiciary Committee in that direction. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>