<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0516 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite strong objections from Detroit's Big Three auto makers, environmental 
regulators in California voted Thursday night to require cars, minivans 
and nearly all sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks to meet identical 
and much more stringent emissions rules. Thursday night's vote makes 
California the first state to impose car emissions standards on so-called 
light trucks, a category that includes sport utility vehicles, minivans 
and pickup trucks. Regulated as work vehicles, light trucks have been 
allowed until now to emit up to three times as much pollution per 
mile as cars. The Environmental Protection Agency is working on new 
emissions rules that, like the new California regulations, would start 
with the 2004 model year. Auto makers and environmentalists lobbied 
California regulators with particular zeal because the EPA is widely 
expected to follow the outlines of California's models, although possibly 
with slightly higher limits on some emissions because the rest of 
the country tends to have cleaner air. The California Air Resources 
Board, which regulates the state's air quality, not only approved 
a staff proposal for stricter standards but actually made it even 
tougher by eliminating a clause that would have allowed diesel-powered 
cars and light trucks to meet less strict rules. All of Detroit's 
Big Three and several foreign auto makers are working on fuel-efficient 
diesel engines for their sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks 
so they can meet federal fuel-economy regulations while continuing 
to make these vehicles bigger and bigger. Requiring diesel vehicles 
to meet the same rules as gasoline-powered vehicles ``makes it extremely 
difficult to market a diesel vehicle in California,'' said Richard 
Varenchik, a spokesman for the air resources board. Detroit's Big 
Three auto makers _ the General Motors Corp., the Ford Motor Co. and 
the Chrysler Corp. _ had agreed with state regulators that minivans, 
midsized sport utility vehicles like the Jeep Cherokee and midsized 
pickups like the Ford Ranger should start to meet car pollution standards. 
They objected strongly but unsuccessfully to the California regulators' 
decision to apply car pollution standards as well to full-sized pickup 
trucks like the Dodge Ram and full-sized sport utility vehicles like 
the Cadillac Escalade and Chevrolet Tahoe. These big vehicles have 
much larger engines that are designed to haul heavy loads and pull 
trailers, and tend to pollute more than cars. Auto makers here were 
dismayed by Thursday night's unanimous decision by the air board's 
11 members. ``Make no mistake, this is going to be really difficult,'' 
said Sara Tatchio, a spokeswoman for Ford. Full-sized sport utility 
vehicles and pickup trucks sold in California may become less powerful, 
with less capacity to haul freight or trailers, as a result of Thursday's 
decision, she said. Regulators calculated that the cost of complying 
with the new rules would be $96 to $304 for each vehicle, but the 
auto makers warned that the cost could be far higher for full-sized 
sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks. The very largest pickup 
trucks, as well as four-wheel-drive Chevrolet Suburbans and even bigger 
sport utility vehicles that Ford will introduce next year, will qualify 
for less stringent rules. The new rules do not require any further 
regulatory or legislative action before taking effect, but could be 
challenged in court, although auto makers have historically avoided 
doing so. It takes two to five years to make significant alterations 
in automobile designs, so auto makers can seldom afford to wait for 
the result of a lengthy court battle before beginning to make the 
changes. Thursay's vote will force drastic reductions in pollution 
from full-sized sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks. The new 
rules will require, for example, that cars only emit a quarter of 
their current output of nitrogen oxides, which are thought to be an 
important contributor to smog. By requiring full-sized sport utility 
vehicles and pickup trucks to meet the new car standards, instead 
of continuing to be allowed to emit three times as much, California 
is asking that nitrogen oxide emissions from these vehicles be cut 
to one-twelfth of their current levels. Cars and light trucks already 
produce far less pollution per mile now than they did in the 1950s. 
But this improvement has been partly undone because there are more 
vehicles and they are driven farther. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>