<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0492 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For decades, consumers have paid a little more with each passing minute 
they spent on the phone making a long-distance call. This weekend 
that will begin to change. Breaking with longstanding practice in 
the $80 billion long-distance market, Sprint Corp. introduced an all-you-can-eat 
pricing plan Thursrday that allows consumers to make unlimited long-distance 
calls on the weekend for $25 a month. The marketing wars in the long-distance 
business are among the fiercest in any industry, with Sprint, AT&AMP;T 
and MCI Worldcom each spending millions each year to win the ears 
and mouths of consumers everywhere. The new Sprint Unlimited plan 
seems sure to give Sprint, the No. 3 long-distance carrier, a big 
boost in that battle. If the plan proves both popular with consumers 
and profitable for Sprint, it could usher in a time when people could 
elect to pay a flat charge for unlimited long-distance calls all week, 
eliminating the cringe factor when the phone bill arrives. Internet 
users have enjoyed unlimited-use plans for years. Most people _ except 
those in much of New York City, of course _ can make unlimited local 
phone calls without incurring additional charges. Most cable television 
channels offer unlimited viewing for a flat monthly fee. But pricing 
plans in the long-distance business have remained resolutely a la 
carte. Even as the long-distance giants have started offering special 
calling plans that eliminate different rates based on geographic distance, 
those charges have remained resolutely per-minute. ``The whole notion 
that a caller can get on the phone and not worry about how long they 
are on the call is pretty revolutionary,'' said Rebecca Sachs, a spokeswoman 
for the Telecommunications Research and Action Center, a nonprofit 
research group in Washington. ``It is consistent with attitudes people 
have about the Internet. You don't think about sending e-mail to people 
in Asia or how long your message is.'' But do not try to send e-mail 
with Sprint's new plan. The catch in the program is that Sprint intends 
the service to be used only for voice calls and will try to ferret 
out those who use the plan for modems, fax machines or other data 
services. ``It's not available for data usage, Internet connections, 
because of the usage profile that would be associated with ongoing 
data connections,'' said Tim Kelly, a Sprint vice president for marketing. 
In other words: people spend so much time on line that if they used 
the Sprint Unlimited plan to make long-distance calls into the Internet, 
Sprint could end up having a hard time making money on the program. 
The problem for Sprint is that the new program could end up being 
highly attractive to cyberspace denizens and fax users. The America 
Online phone lines in your area are jammed or cranky? Try California. 
Want to send faxes to a few hundred friends? Wait until Saturday. 
``We'll monitor the network to identify that,'' Kelly said. ``We have 
ways of tracking it.'' He added that Sprint would not monitor calls 
but would instead analyze use patterns to figure out whether consumers 
are making unauthorized use of the program. Customers who use a modem 
could be kicked off the plan. MCI Worldcom already offers a 5- cent-a-minute 
rate on Sundays and AT&AMP;T offers a 5-cent-a-minute rate all weekend. 
That means that users would have to make about two hours of calls 
every weekend to make the Sprint plan economical. The Sprint plan 
is available nationwide and allows users to make unlimited calls to 
anywhere in the country on the weekend. During the week, calls cost 
10 cents a minute. Kelly said that the plan would have a positive 
effect on Sprint's financial results. But Eric Strumingher, an analyst 
for Paine Webber, estimated that Sprint must pay about 5.5 cents a 
minute to local phone companies for beginning and ending long-distance 
calls. That means that the program could potentially hurt Sprint's 
financial performance if many of its customers signed up for the program 
and then switched a lot of their calling from the week to the weekend. 
An MCI Worldcom spokesman said his company had no plans to offer an 
unlimited-use plan. AT&AMP;T said that it would consider such a plan 
if its customers asked for it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>