<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0437 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For a small biotechnology company, Geron Corp. sure knows how to make 
headlines. For the second time this year, it has electrified the scientific 
world. Geron financed the university researchers who announced Thursday 
that they had succeeded in growing in the laboratory human stem cells, 
the embryonic progenitors of all other types of cells. In January, 
the company announced that it had found a way to keep human cells 
alive well past the time they normally die. The two discoveries have 
vast implications for medicine and for Geron's business, which is 
aimed at treating cancer and diseases associated with aging. The stem 
cells, for instance, conceivably could be grown into nerve cells, 
heart cells and other types of cells for use in transplants. For instance, 
new heart muscle cells could replace tissue destroyed by a heart attack. 
``The integration of these two technologies positions us ultimately 
to be able to repair degenerating tissues of our mortal bodies with 
immortalized cells,'' Dr. Thomas Okarma, vice president for research 
and development told securities analysts Thursday. ``It's an outstanding 
opportunity.'' However, big profits from the discoveries are probably 
years away. The company, which is based in Menlo Park, Calif., has 
no drugs in clinical trials yet, or even one that it is getting ready 
for such trials. ``It's about as early stage as they can get,'' said 
Richard van den Broek, biotechnology analyst at Hambrecht &AMP; Quist. 
He said Geron also could face competition from other companies pursuing 
stem cells, such as Novartis, a large Swiss pharmaceutical company. 
Geron's stock, traded on Nasdaq, soared 2], or 31 percent, to 9 15/16 
in trading that was 40 times heavier than average. The company did 
not announce its findings until after trading closed, but it had told 
securities analysts earlier in the day that some announcement was 
coming. Such a spike in stock price is typical for young biotechnology 
companies making big announcements but it can be short-lived. In January, 
after Geron's last big announcement, the stock rose to about $17 from 
about $10 but then dropped back. Ronald Eastman, president and chief 
executive of Geron, said in an interview that although developing 
tissues for transplants could take years, the company could very quickly 
begin selling stem cells to other pharmaceutical companies for use 
in research. The cells could be used in finding genes or grown into 
different types of human tissues on which to test drugs. ``There is 
a business opportunity almost immediately here,'' Eastman said. He 
also said that Geron is hoping to collaborate with one or more big 
companies that would help finance and accelerate the development of 
the stem cells. ``No one company would have the ability to fully exploit 
this discovery,'' he said. Geron was started in 1990 by Michael West, 
who has a doctorate in cell biology. He dropped out of medical school 
to develop products based on a theory of aging that he had been researching. 
The company's name, pronounced ``JEH-ron,'' comes from gerontology, 
the study of old age. From the start, Geron has been aggressive in 
financing academic scientists in exchange for the exclusive commercial 
rights to their work. It financed three groups working on stem cells, 
two of which _ the University of Wisconsin and Johns Hopkins _ announced 
results Thursday. The theory that intrigued West was that of telomeres, 
which cap the ends of chromosomes like the tips of shoelaces. Each 
time a cell divides, the theory goes, telomeres get shorter until 
they eventually run out and the cell dies. In January, in what seemed 
to confirm the theory, the company showed than an enzyme known as 
telomerase can keep the telomeres from shrinking, thereby allowing 
cells to live, perhaps indefinitely. West, who had been a vice president, 
quit the next month to start a company to apply telomere theory to 
animals, an effort that Geron executives had declined to pursue. It 
might seem a big leap from cell death to stem cells, which are found 
in embryos at the start of life. But the company was drawn to the 
study of stem cells because telomerase is active in embryos, in which 
cells rapidly divide. But once the basic stem cells differentiate 
into nerve cells, heart cells and so on, the telomerase disappears 
and the clock leading to cell death starts ticking. Telomerase, however, 
is found in cancer cells, allowing them to divide and multiply indefinitely. 
Geron is working with Pharmacia &AMP; Upjohn, a big drug company, 
to try to find a drug that will block telomerase and could be used 
to treat cancer. Geron also hopes that telomerase itself can be used 
as a drug or turned on inside cells to fight the diseases and deterioration 
of the skin, eyes, brain and other organs associated with aging. Besides 
formidable scientific challenges, the company faces ethical issues 
about working with stem cells. There is a ban on federal financing 
of work using tissues derived from human embryos. The company has 
formed an ethics committee of outsiders to advise it on such matters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>