<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0461 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fewer eligible Americans _ 36 percent _ voted on Tuesday than in any 
election since 1942 when the nation was at war, according to a study 
made public Thursday based on unofficial voting figures. The examination, 
by the Committee for the Study of the American Electorate, raises 
serious doubts about the longheld notion that core Republican voters 
can be counted on to be more energized about voting _ and that therefore 
low turnout benefits Republican candidates. This year, Democrats capitalized 
on the expected low turnout and were particularly successful at persuading 
blacks, union members and women to go to the polls. ``This election 
perhaps nailed the coffin on the belief that low turnout benefits 
the GOP,'' said Curtis Gans, director of the committee, a nonpartisan 
group. Turnout was down substantially in New York and California, 
for instance, and the Democrats wrested the California governor's 
seat and a New York Senate seat from Republicans in two hotly contested 
races. This dwindling participation capped an election season overshadowed 
by President Clinton's affair with Monica Lewinsky. On the television 
networks this year, there were roughly six news stories about the 
scandal for every one story about electoral politics, according to 
an analysis by S. Robert Lichter, president of the Center for Media 
and Public Affairs in Washington. He said there were 73 percent fewer 
stories on the networks about the elections than during the midterm 
campaign four years ago. Lichter found that ABC, NBC and CBS collectively 
devoted 11 hours and 49 minutes to the Lewinsky case from Sept. 7 
through Nov. 2. In that same period, the networks allotted two hours 
and 26 minutes to the conflict in Kosovo; two hours and 18 minutes 
to the elections, and two hours and six minutes to Sen. John Glenn's 
return to space. The dip in turnout came in the face of a nearly 8 
million increase in the number of Americans eligible to vote _ and 
a 4 million increase in those registered, according to Gans. In all, 
an estimated 72.5 million (72,500,000) Americans voted on Tuesday, 
down more than 2.5 million from 1994. And the largest number of eligible 
Americans in history opted not to vote, estimated at 119.45 million 
(119,450,000). The highest turnout of any state _ 59.5 percent of 
eligible voters _ was recorded in Minnesota, where Jesse Ventura, 
the former pro wrestler and Reform Party candidate, was elected governor. 
The decline in turnout affected Republicans the most. Republicans 
accounted for an 18 percent share of the eligible vote, compared with 
22 percent in 1994. Democrats suffered more modest loses; the party's 
turnout was 16.8 percent, compared with 18.9 percent in 1994. Twelve 
states saw higher turnout, and in eight of those states the most competitive 
races were won by Democrats: Maryland, Georgia, South Carolina, Hawaii, 
Louisiana, Wisconsin and North Carolina. But at least 36 states and 
the District of Columbia reported lower turnout. Turnout declined 
in every region of the nation except the Midwest. And Gans said ``one 
of the sad findings'' is that turnout is diminishing appreciably in 
the South. Until recently, he said, the South ``helped keep turnout 
from falling to truly historic levels by virtue of the enfranchisement 
of blacks and the development of a two-party system.'' Gans said the 
slashing attack commercials in the New York Senate race, where Rep. 
Charles Schumer, a Democrat, ousted Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, contributed 
to a historic low in the state's turnout. ``Voters were so turned 
off,'' he said, ``that Gov. George Pataki's one-sided victory had 
a higher turnout than the senatorial battle.'' The biggest increases 
in turnout occurred in four states with particularly tight contests: 
Kentucky (an increase of 10.7 percentage points), Minnesota (up 6.8 
percentage points), North Carolina (up 5.1 points) and Wisconsin (up 
4.2 points.) Among the lowest turnouts in states with statewide contests 
were Oregon (18.2 percent), Tennessee (23.6 percent), Arizona (25.8 
percent), Texas (26.2 percent) and Louisiana (30.8 percent). Another 
estimate of turnout put the overall percentage at slightly higher 
than Gans', at 37 percent. That figure was from Voter News Service, 
a consortium of the television networks and The Associated Press, 
and was based on surveys of 50,000 voters leaving the polls. The VNS 
study estimated that turnout was slightly higher among men than women; 
it also found that 37.6 percent of white voters and 29.6 percent of 
black voters went to the polls. Among age groups, the survey found 
that turnout was highest _ 51.7 percent _ for people ages 45 to 64. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>