<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0333 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The proper old lady sitting on the bus is clearly riding in from the 
past, with her Sunday hat, neat white gloves and perfect posture. 
Arriving in Baltimore in 1970, Flora (Cicely Tyson) hauls her drunken 
granddaughter, Diana (Queen Latifah) and Diana's toddler son back 
to the wholesome air of Stockton, Tenn., where she will restore their 
bodies and spirits and tell the multi-generational tale that is ``Mama 
Flora's Family.'' To appreciate this swift, engaging mini-series (shown 
Sunday and Tuesday on CBS), it helps to cast off its heavy excess 
baggage. As it follows Flora from the turn of the century and her 
girlhood in a Mississippi shack to the 1970s, it evokes the family-epic 
genre of Alex Haley's ``Roots.'' The fictional Flora is descended 
from the people in ``Roots'' in a more substantial way, too. The new 
mini-series is based on an unfinished novel, inspired by his maternal 
relatives, that Haley left behind when he died in 1992. (Completed 
by David Stevens, the book was published last month.) And as the brave 
black woman who strolls through some of the highlights of the century, 
Ms. Tyson can't help but call to mind her more groundbreaking role 
in ``The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman.'' These burdens don't 
help ``Mama Flora's Family,'' which is not especially original or 
ambitious. On its own modest terms, though, it is far more satisfying 
than most mini-series. Terrifically cast and acted, it is best at 
charting the family dynamics that swirl around Flora: the misunderstandings, 
the rivalries, the way characters take shape. The most gripping and 
fleshed-out character, and the most remarkable performance, comes 
from Blair Underwood as Flora's son Willie, who goes from a zoot-suited 
gambler to a World War II hero to a put-upon janitor trying mightily 
to provide for his family and getting angrier every minute. The mini-series 
is weaker when it tries to chart the panorama of history. Mama Flora 
gets up one morning in the 60s and decides to integrate the local 
coffee shop, which she does with relatively little trouble. As Flora 
tells her story, the film flashes back and forth in time, too often 
and abruptly. The device allows Ms. Tyson to return to the screen 
frequently even in the early sections when Flora is a young woman, 
played strongly by Erika Alexander, who helps take the character past 
the predictable writing. Her parents are tenant farmers on a plantation 
owned by a wealthy black family, the Flemings. After the naive Flora 
is seduced by the plantation owner's handsome son, Lincoln (Shemar 
F. Moore), she gives birth to a boy who is immediately taken from 
her to be raised by the Flemings. (In true mini-series style, the 
son will eventually return.) The distance between rich and impoverished 
blacks is a striking though underdeveloped theme in this section. 
Flora's own father calls her seducer ``Massa Lincoln.'' And Lincoln 
coldly says of the baby, ``With so much high yellow blood in some 
pickaninny, the child could become an embarrassment if it grows up 
in the wrong hands.'' As Flora ages and Ms. Tyson takes over, the 
character becomes even more sentimental and predictable. She marries 
a black man who is killed by whites after he steals to feed his family. 
Alone, she raises their son, Willie, and a niece, and is heartbroken 
when Willie drops out of school to get a job. At the start of Tuesday's 
installment, Flora rediscovers the son she was forced to give up. 
Luke, a successful lawyer, is played by Mario Van Peebles, and the 
casting of him and Underwood as brothers is one of the series' inspired 
choices. Though Luke's role as the rich, educated brother is too skimpily 
written, these two actors create a trenchant sense of the resentment 
and jealousy between Flora's sons. Where Luke turns his anger outward 
on racist society, Willie tears himself apart over his failure to 
provide a better life for his family. In this often schematic tale, 
Underwood brings unexpected complexity to his portrait of a man who 
sometimes blames himself and sometimes turns his fury on those he 
loves. Most difficult for Willie to take, he finds himself helplessly 
caught in situations (wrongly accused of a liquor store robbery) that 
his educated, distant brother must help him out of. Ms. Tyson is dignified 
if unsurprising. Queen Latifah offers fresh energy and an amazingly 
accomplished performance, making Diana tough and believable even when 
the script lets her down with trite scenes about her romance with 
a Black Panther. Flawed though it is, this mini-series offers so much 
to savor that it is a happy exception in a season of duds. PROGRAM 
NOTES: `MAMA FLORA'S FAMILY' CBS, Sunday at 9 p.m. First of a two-part 
mini-series to be continued Tuesday at 9 p.m. Written by David Stevens 
and Carol Schreder, based on a novel by Alex Haley and Stevens; directed 
by Peter Werner; Terence A. Donnelly and Lisa Lindstrom, producers; 
Neil Roach, director of photography, music by J.A.C. Redford; Jon 
Avnet, Jordan Kerner and Ms. Schreder, executive producers. With: 
Cicely Tyson (Mama Flora), Blair Underwood (Willie), Queen Latifah 
(Diana), Mario Van Peebles (Luke), Erika Alexander (Young Mama Flora), 
Hill Harper (adult Don), Tanya Wright (adult Ernestine), David Ramsey 
(Booker), Novella Nelson (older adult Pearl), Lou Myers (Albie), Shemar 
F. Moore (Lincoln) and Della Reese (Nana Fleming). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>