<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0350 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cornel West is well known as an expert on social issues and as a professor 
of the philosophy of religion and of African-American studies at Harvard 
University. But for a few hours on Sunday evening, West became confessor, 
revivalist preacher and coach to black filmmakers and entertainment 
executives at a gathering here at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel. What was 
most striking about his appearance was the difficulty he faced in 
offering hope to those frustrated by the Hollywood industry. The gathering 
at this resort south of Los Angeles was the second annual ``summit'' 
of the Black Filmmakers Foundation, an organization formed to help 
independent black filmmakers. The aim of the meeting was to create 
a forum for networking and deal-making for members of ethnic minorities; 
Latinos, American Indians and Asian-Americans were also invited. Organizers 
said they wanted to create an atmosphere like that of an annual media 
and entertainment conference run by Allen &AMP; Co. in Sun Valley, 
Idaho, which attracts people like the investor Warren Buffet; Bill 
Gates, chairman of Microsoft, and Michael Eisner, chairman of the 
Walt Disney Co. Precisely 100 people were invited to attend the meeting, 
which was underwritten by HBO. Among them were the directors Carl 
Franklin, Robert Townsend and Kassi Lemmons; the actors and producers 
Vondie Curtis Hall and Mario Van Peebles, and Robert Johnson, founder 
and chairman of the Black Entertainment Television cable channel. 
Many of the seminars and panels focused on specific subjects like 
financing and marketing movies, and opportunities in children's programming. 
``The whole point of this is to figure out strategies we can use to 
be successful in this business,'' said Warrington Hudlin, the foundation's 
president, and a producer of ``Boomerang'' and ``House Party.'' Though 
Hudlin and many others attending the meeting have found some success 
in Hollywood, the air was frequently filled with disappointment, particularly 
over the fact that while black music like hip-hop attracts a broad 
audience in the United States and abroad, black movies generally do 
not. Several people noted that ``Beloved,'' the movie based on Toni 
Morrison's novel of how a black woman deals with the legacy of slavery, 
had not done well with either white or black audiences. The movie 
is the latest in a string of films on black themes have not broken 
out, including ``Why Do Fools Fall in Love,'' ``Rosewood'' and ``How 
Stella Got Her Groove Back.'' Filmmakers here expressed concern that 
the studios would be less willing to finance such projects in the 
future. One person after another complained of inadequate marketing 
of black movies by the major studios, a reluctance to market them 
overseas and even of attracting black audiences to black movies, particularly 
young blacks. West sought to transform the worries and complaints 
into plans for practical action, and offered encouragement. ``I personally 
believe that, in terms of entertainment, if there was a really fair 
playing field, the entertainment industry would look like the NBA,'' 
he said, adding: ``I think we're at an historic turning point. There 
are tremendous expectations of all of you.'' Rusty Cundieff, a comic 
and a director, said young black audiences shied away from entertainment 
that lacked a hard edge or that appeared to be uplifting rather than 
gritty. He noted that many of the young avoided seeing rap stars who 
have become role models take on dramatic parts in which they were 
perceived to be ``going soft.'' Taking such roles, he added, can rob 
the stars of their legitimacy in the eyes of their audience. And if 
rap performers are discouraged from taking those roles, one result 
is less diversity of black entertainment. But the business of the 
meeting was business, and West sought to refocus the discussion by 
noting that, though the white business community is frequently divided, 
chief executives of major companies tend to put differences aside 
and close ranks when their economic interests are threatened. ``We 
have to close ranks,'' he said. And the talk was all business when 
the panel discussions began. Appearing on a panel, Johnson of Black 
Entertainment Television made clear that capitalism, not altruism, 
led him to focus on winning over black audiences. Asked by one participant 
whether there was room for two black cable channels, Johnson said 
flatly, ``No.'' Johnson also said that finding a white partner in 
the entertainment industry was a necessity for most ventures; his 
own company is partly owned by, and has received help from, John Malone's 
Liberty Media. He added that complaining about hurdles was not enough. 
``You wake up black in America, and that alone is a challenge,'' he 
said. ``But what are you going to do, go back to bed? For an entrepreneur, 
those challenges are part of the standard operating procedure.'' Johnson 
said that if blacks want to make films that are true to their experience, 
they have to control the financing. ``No one will let you tell your 
story on film unless you own the company,'' said Johnson, who has 
started a venture to produce four to five movies a year at a cost 
of no more than $3 million each. ``You have to control the financial 
end.'' Some participants said that creating movies that have crossover 
appeal to a white audience should not be a concern, that black producers 
should focus on winning black audiences because they are potentially 
so large and because white-run film companies were competing for their 
attention. ``We still have something we can control, or should _ our 
own markets,'' said Byron Lewis, founder of UniWorld Group Inc., an 
advertising agency. ``Don't worry about crossover. If you dilute your 
thing, you'll be doing yourselves a disservice.'' He added that blacks 
would have to work hard to maintain a grip on black audiences. ``Urban 
doesn't mean urban,'' Lewis said. ``It means black. It is a word white 
people use so they can play in that area.'' To which Johnson responded, 
``They'll be using our best talent and using it as an entree to our 
market, unless we can.'' An Adman's Dream What person in, say, the 
advertising business hasn't kicked back his feet at some point, stared 
out the window and thought about bailing out of the rat race, traveling 
and maybe even writing a movie script. And then getting some of Hollywood's 
top talents to produce and act in the film and a former poet laureate 
to direct it. Welcome to the dream of Myron Goble, advertising strategic 
planner one day, well-traveled author of a script directed by Maya 
Angelou, if not the next day, not too much later. Goble is the author 
of ``Down in the Delta,'' scheduled to open on Christmas Day. The 
film is both a drama and an allegory about a black family's path to 
redemption and dignity after undergoing the brutal indignities of 
slavery and the diaspora from the rural South to the industrial North. 
``Beloved'' tackles the difficult subject of slavery with a mix of 
brutal realism and dreamlike sequences. ``Down in the Delta,'' made 
for $3.5 million, approaches the issue largely through metaphor. By 
his own account, Goble, 43, was an advertising man in Manhattan when 
dissatisfaction with his career led him to take a sabbatical in 1990 
and, as he put it, just think about things and clear his head. His 
six-month leave turned into a year as he backpacked around South America. 
``I had no real agenda,'' Goble said. ``Well, the only agenda was 
living on 50 cents a day.'' Back in New York in 1991, two fortuitous 
events gave him some focus. He read ``The Promised Land,'' Nicholas 
Lemann's book on the movement of blacks from the South to industrial 
centers in the North, and he went to a bad movie. Goble said he walked 
out of the movie feeling he could do better and, untainted by any 
advice on how to do it, sat down to write a script. Inspired by the 
book, he tackled the story of a black family in inner-city Chicago 
that reclaims its roots in the Mississippi delta in the era of slavery. 
The reconnection to the past is made through a silver candelabra the 
family has passed down for generations and dubbed Nathan. Understanding 
Nathan delivers the family from the ghetto and destruction. Alfre 
Woodward plays the mother, who flirts with alcohol and drugs; Mary 
Alice plays her earnest and sad mother; Mpho Koaho is her struggling 
son, and Al Freeman Jr. plays an uncle back in Mississippi who clings 
to the family history. Ms. Angelou, well known for her poetry and 
autobiographical writings, directs her first feature film. As pleased 
as he was with the finished product, Goble said, the effort involved 
a difficult introduction to the ways of Hollywood and required great 
reserves of patience. ``I just said: `Burn all your bridges and close 
all the exits. If you don't get this movie made, you die,' '' Goble 
recalled, adding that once ``Down in the Delta'' is released, he will 
begin trying to sell his second script, about several generations 
of a Southern family. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>