<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0354 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The big election issue in Burgville was the meals tax. Would the people 
approve a tax on restaurant meals to help pay for building schools? 
Burgville's cry of ``No!'' was resounding. I knew it would be, so 
I voted for it. Voting to be taxed so Burgville youth could get an 
education and amount to something made me feel not only like a good 
citizen, but also like a wonderful human being. Knowing the tax hadn't 
a chance of passage doubled the satisfaction with which I cast the 
vote. Burgville elections are always rife with certainties. Everybody 
always knows for certain that congressman Frank Buckner will be re-elected, 
as he was on Tuesday. He's Republican. Nothing but Republicans have 
been elected in Burgville, or within a radius of 200 miles, since 
the Weather Bureau began keeping records. I figured Buckner a good 
bet to get 75 percent of the vote, and, being a student of history, 
I know that when a politician gets 75 percent of the vote it often 
goes to his head and, sooner or later, he starts behaving like Lyndon 
Johnson or Caligula. So, though Buckner has actually been perfectly 
acceptable, as Congressmen go, I voted against him as a matter of 
abstract principle. Some show of opposition was important, I thought, 
possibly to save Burgville from the caprices of tyranny. I remember 
reading that Caligula made his horse a consul of Rome. Or was it associate 
emperor? It's not important what the office was. It's the horse of 
the matter that interests me. That's because Burgville is surrounded 
by horses and all the paraphernalia that goes with them: hounds, foxes, 
saddles, bourbon, chukkas of polo, people so devoted to their horses 
that they hitch horse carriers to their pickups and take them out 
for Sunday drives in the country. Is it inconceivable that in this 
venue a tyrant hardened by incessantly winning 75 percent of the vote 
might make his horse mayor of Burgville? Yes, I guess it is if we 
are talking of sedate Frank Buckner in his neatly pressed, but not 
ostentatiously custom-tailored, middle-of-the road-Republican, not 
right-wing-nut, suits. Still, all this Burgville certainty _ there's 
something unhealthy about it. So I voted for the Democrat, even though 
his campaign literature disclosed an alarming amount of time spent 
in divinity schools. Republicans are bad enough about confusing Gospel 
and politics. Why encourage the habit in Democrats? If he had had 
a chance of winning, I might have reconsidered the wisdom of voting 
against Buckner, and never mind the threat of tyranny. Since, however, 
nobody could recall a Democrat ever winning anything in Burgville, 
I felt safe in acting on my intellectual grasp of history, and voted 
Democratic. Such is the comfort of political life in Burgville. Here 
a person can always vote the way a good citizen ought to vote and 
be certain that the majority of the electorate will never let him 
suffer the consequences. Televised experts in faraway cities droned 
on far past 10:30, when Jock's Exxon down the block closes for the 
night. I nodded by the tube as the silence of downtown Burgville's 
empty streets deepened outside and televised experts filled the house 
with expert talk about significance. Several experts, not the least 
grateful to have the 1998 ordeal behind them, launched into the politics 
of the year 2000. Several were certain who the Republican candidates 
would be. No expert suggested the arresting possibility that their 
year 2000 nominees might forgo a crack at the White House rather than 
have their sex lives fully investigated, an ordeal that all Presidential 
candidates will have to face for a while to come. I thought certain 
that Burgville's unbeatable Frank Buckner would have nothing to fear 
on the scandal front, but none of the experts seemed to think he was 
Presidential timber. Newt Gingrich and Trent Lott began appearing 
on various channels looking stunned and pretending to calmness about 
their unhappy day. In Burgville, all had been certainty for hours, 
for days, for years. There would be no new tax on dinner at Johnson's 
Charcoal Beef House. At midnight I pushed the button that closed the 
turbulent story of democracy with its poisonous commercials and slimy 
millions. Squalor, squalor everywhere. But in Burgville, certainty. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>