<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0457 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A top U.S. diplomat ended a weeklong trip to Africa Thursday by again 
urging a political solution to the war in Congo, which has drawn in 
neighboring countries and threatens to become a larger regional conflict. 
``There is a strong desire on the part of literally everyone we talked 
to for peace,'' the diplomat, Susan Rice, assistant secretary of state 
for african affairs, said Thursday evening in a telephone interview 
from Zambia. ``The frustrating aspect, and the irony, is that as much 
as everyone wants peace, everybody is prepared to keep fighting unless 
peace can be found on the basis of a formula that all find broadly 
acceptable.'' The open question after her at-times stormy visit to 
seven African countries, five of which are fighting in Congo or are 
widely suspected to be involved, is what exactly might create that 
peace. Ms. Rice emphasized that devising such a plan was not the goal 
of the trip, which she said was purely ``consultative.'' In fact the 
delegation pointedly avoided any public discussion of concrete solutions, 
saying it broadly supported efforts by other African nations like 
South Africa and Zambia for a cease-fire and the removal of foreign 
troops. ``I know it's hard to envision, but we really did not come 
here with a fantasy that we're going to shake our finger at these 
actors and tie this thing up in a bow,'' said Gayle Smith, senior 
director for african affairs at the National Security Council, who 
traveled with Ms. Rice. The rebellion in Congo, formerly known as 
Zaire, began on Aug. 2. From the start it was not confined to the 
forces that were trying to overthrow President Laurent Kabila, who 
took power in a similar rebellion last year. It is almost universally 
assumed that neighboring Rwanda and Uganda are involved, in part to 
secure their borders from rebel groups based in Congo. Uganda concedes 
it has troops in Congo to protect its borders, but denies a role in 
the rebellion. Rwanda has completely denied involvement. Kabila has 
cast the rebellion as an ``invasion'' by those two nations and found 
military support from Angola, Namibia, Chad and, particularly, Zimbabwe, 
which has sent several thousand combat troops. President Robert Mugabe 
has seemed ever more militant about the role of Zimbabwe in Congo, 
even though he faced huge protests at home against that effort. Several 
rounds of peace talks have failed, and Kabila refuses to speak with 
the rebels, who call themselves the Congolese Rally for Democracy. 
On Thursday the foreign minister of South Africa, which has been promoting 
a peace plan, warned that the situation was becoming graver. ``If 
this conflict is not stopped the danger of a massive African war is 
a reality,'' Foreign Minister Aziz Pahad said in Cape Town. On Friday, 
South African President Nelson Mandela is to hold another meeting 
with the most powerful politician in Rwanda, Vice President Paul Kagame, 
and will reportedly push for a plan that calls for Rwanda to admit 
its role. That admission, according to published reports, would be 
aimed at a cease-fire, followed by the withdrawal of foreign troops 
and the arrival of a peacekeeping force that would help protect the 
Uganda and Rwanda borders. The U.S. delegation has not endorsed any 
particular plan. Ms. Rice said her role was to listen to each nation 
and repeat what the United States has said from the start are its 
base-line goals: a cease-fire and the withdrawal of foreign troops. 
Starting last Wednesday she visited Kabila in Kinshasa, the capital, 
and stopped in South Africa, Angola, Zimbabwe, Rwanda, Uganda and 
Zambia, whose president, Frederick Chiluba, has been sponsoring peace 
talks. She visited Chiluba Thursday for a second time before returning 
home. Ms. Rice did not receive a warm welcome from Mugabe, who kept 
her waiting for several hours, or President Jose Eduardo dos Santos 
of Angola, who said he could not see her because of a scheduling conflict. 
On Wednesday night she met four members of the rebellion movement 
in Kigali, the capital of Rwanda. In an interview Thursday the president 
of the rebels, Ernest Wamba dia Wamba, described the talks as useful 
but declined to give details. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>