<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0442 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Talk about an on-and-off affair. The French drug maker Rhone-Poulenc 
SA and Hoechst AG of Germany are again pondering a merger that would 
create one of the largest sellers of pharmaceutical and agricultural 
products. Rumors of the courtship between Rhone-Poulenc and Hoechst 
have circulated in Europe for weeks. Yet news reports last week that 
the deal had ended apparently upset several executives involved. According 
to an executive with knowledge of the negotiations, they are progressing. 
If a deal emerges, it will rival in scope the industry's three failed 
mergers earlier this year. Just as many top drug makers are out to 
become life sciences companies, with holdings in biotechnology, agriculture 
and pharmaceuticals, Rhone-Poulenc and Hoechst would be a world leader. 
The merged company would have a 14 percent share of the world's $50 
billion agribusiness market, according to analysts, making it a co-leader 
with Novartis AG. Rhone-Poulenc and Hoechst would also have $13 billion 
in worldwide pharmaceutical sales, easily outpacing the American giants 
Johnson &AMP; Johnson and Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. ``What has happened 
here is that Novartis has been a good business model, with agribusiness 
and pharmaceuticals,'' said Mark Becker, an analyst who follows European 
pharmaceuticals for J.P. Morgan Securities in London. ``But it is 
very important that the next deal that is announced be completed. 
After the mergers that failed this year, nobody is going to believe 
any deal until it actually gets done.'' Both companies declined to 
comment Thursday. But even investors were having an odd reaction to 
the merger speculation, bidding up one and dropping the other. Shares 
of Hoechst closed Thursday in Frankfurt at 73.74 marks, up 1.9 percent. 
During the past two weeks, Hoechst's shares have soared 16.5 percent. 
Shareholders of Rhone-Poulenc have not been so fortunate. After rising 
sharply last week, the company's shares closed in Paris Thursday at 
256.5 francs, down 2.5 percent. American investor reaction to a possible 
merger has shown the same pattern. Within the past two weeks, the 
American depository receipts of Hoechst and Rhone-Poulenc have risen 
sharply. Hoechst's closed Thursday at $44.75, up $1.6875. Rhone-Poulenc's 
dipped 31.25 cents, to close at $46.75. Investors may have cause to 
be skeptical. Even though Rhone-Poulenc and Hoechst can transform 
themselves from two second-tier pharmaceutical players into a global 
monolith with the merger, analysts are not applauding the deal. Their 
complaint: Rhone-Poulenc and Hoechst could find more strategic merger 
partners. Both companies get roughly 25 percent of their pharmaceutical 
sales in the United States, according to Dresdner Kleinwort Benson, 
a brokerage firm in Britain. That is sharply less than most of their 
competitors. The companies' failure to pursue the U.S. market has 
been costly. The pharmaceutical market in the United States is growing 
at 10 percent annually, compared with a growth rate of just 4 percent 
in Europe, according to Dresdner Kleinwort Benson. If Rhone-Poulenc 
and Hoechst merge, they will be going in the wrong geographic direction. 
``If this merger occurs, it won't meet the strategic need of either 
company,'' said Anthony Cox, a pharmaceuticals analyst with Dresdner 
Kleinwort Benson. ``The core pharmaceuticals at both companies are 
poor and they lack marketing power in the United States.'' Several 
roadblocks could easily sidetrack the merger discussions. Analysts 
note that Rhone-Poulenc and Hoechst will be hard pressed to dismiss 
any employees if a merger succeeds. Hoechst has already angered many 
of its workers in Germany through an extensive restructuring. Not 
only is Jurgen Dormann, the company's chairman, unloading many of 
the company's chemical operations, he is winnowing the work force 
by 80,000 jobs through next year, according to analysts. Yet, like 
any merger discussion, this one has its share of drama. European stock 
analysts believe the deal is being pushed from the French side. Several 
large European investors in Rhone-Poulenc, analysts said, are convinced 
that the merger may be a way to rid themselves of Jean-Rene Fourtou, 
the company's chief executive officer. ``Fourtou never appears to 
be on top of things,'' said Jonas Morner, a pharmaceuticals analyst 
with Deutche Bank Securities in London. ``He has a reputation in analysts' 
meetings of getting his facts wrong, of not knowing the company's 
income or debt levels.'' Analysts recall incidents in which colleagues 
nudged Fourtou beneath the table for making misstatements. But investors 
might have overlooked these problems had it not been for Rhone-Poulenc's 
problems with Centeon, the company's blood plasma joint venture with 
Hoechst. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration temporarily shut down 
Centeon's Illinois manufacturing plant in August so the company could 
make quality control improvements at the plant. The shutdown came 
after repeated warnings from the FDA, and contributed to a net loss 
at the joint venture that could total $150 million this year. A Rhone-Poulenc 
spokesman said Fourtou was a highly intelligent man who was responsible 
for the company's successful expansion. The spokesman said the fact 
that English was Fourtou's second language may have caused some language 
misunderstandings at analyst meetings. Still, despite the steep hurdles 
it faces, the merger may indeed happen. Analysts note that Hoechst 
has mysteriously switched an analysts meeting on Nov. 17 to Frankfurt 
from New York. Hoechst officials told one analyst in Europe that the 
switch was made because three of the company's directors could not 
travel to New York on that day. They could, however, come to Germany. 
The switch has ignited speculation among investors and analysts that 
Hoechst will announce that it is selling off Celanese, a Dallas petrochemical 
company that had sales of $4.77 billion last year. ``What's happening 
is that Hoechst is getting rid of its chemical baggage,'' said one 
analyst who asked not to be identified. ``What the company is doing 
really is getting rid of its poison pills. After the chemical companies 
are gone, Hoechst is going to look like a cheap life sciences company.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>