<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0381 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Beginning its 25th anniversary season, the Jewish Repertory Theater 
is looking not only to its future but also celebrating its past. Its 
opening attraction is a revival of ``Kuni-Leml,'' which won the 1984 
Outer Critics Circle Award for outstanding off-Broadway musical. Derived 
from a play by Avrom Goldfadn, widely regarded as the father of Yiddish 
theater, ``Kuni-Leml'' not only evokes Jewish life in Odessa in 1880, 
it also sounds a modern note in its conflict between a father's concern 
for tradition and a nubile daughter's attraction to education and 
self-determination. As directed once again by Ran Avni, founder and 
artistic director of the Jewish Repertory Theater, ``Kuni-Leml,'' 
with book by Nahma Sandrow, music by Raphael Crystal and lyrics by 
Richard Engquist, is a lighthearted, old-fashioned diversion that 
moves swiftly and smoothly to its happy ending. If it never attains 
exhilarating heights, and if its seems to leave some of its potential 
for humor unexploited (although plenty is evident), this musical farce 
is nonetheless buoyed by an engaging cast and some sweet and sprightly 
tunes, and glows with enough decency and good-heartedness to warm 
a crisp autumn evening. ``Kuni-Leml'' tells the story of the turbulent 
romance of the willful daughter (Jennifer Rosin) of the widowed Reb 
Pinkhos (David Brummel). Disdaining her real name, she calls herself 
Carolina, pronounced ka-roh-LEEN-a, uses words like retinue and parasite, 
drops an occasional French phrase and is not at all disposed to lend 
herself to her father's intention to marry her off to some nice Hasidic 
scholar. Carolina has her heart set on Max (Jonathan Hadley), the 
enlightened tutor who taught her the fancy words and French and is 
no longer welcome in Reb Pinkhos' home. But Kalmen (Paul Harman) is. 
This dapper fellow, with his checked brown suit and color-coordinated 
yarmulke, is the local matchmaker. And the match he has in mind for 
Carolina is Kuni-Leml (Danny Gurwin). As Kalmen sings, ``The Boy Is 
Perfect,'' even if he has a limp, a stutter, a squint and various 
other defects. Reb Pinkhos accepts. Carolina still has other plans, 
and before long, there are two Kuni-Lemls on stage. Drawing on the 
masquerade element of Purim, the period of the action, one is Max, 
disguised so well as the limping, stuttering Kuni-Leml that even the 
innocent Kuni-Leml is convinced that he must be the wrong Kuni-Leml. 
By the time the wedding day arrives, there are not only two Kuni-Lemls 
running on and offstage, there are also two veiled brides, the other 
being Libe (Farah Alvin), the matchmaker's neglected daughter, who 
finds the real Kuni-Leml to be her ideal match. Adding to the fun 
are Jay Brian Winnick and Joel Newsome, who play dual roles, respectively, 
as Simkhe and Yankl, who are Reb Pinkhos' parasitic friends, and Sasha 
and Yasha, Max's mischief-making pals. With an orchestra led by David 
Wolfson adding to the spirited proceedings, ``Kuni-Leml'' is easygoing 
entertainment. PRODUCTION NOTES: `KUNI-LEML' Book by Nahma Sandrow; 
based on a play by Avrom Goldfadn; music by Raphael Crystal; lyrics 
by Richard Engquist; directed by Ran Avni; musical staging by Haila 
Strauss; sets by Elizabeth Chaney, based on the design of Joel Fontaine 
and Michal Barzilay-Gissin; costumes by Tzili Charney; lighting by 
Deborah Constantine; orchestration by Crystal; sound by Joshua Bender-Dubiel; 
musical director, David Wolfson; production stage manager, D C Rosenberg; 
production supervisor, Jonathan Bradley. Presented by the Jewish Repertory 
Theater, Avni, artistic director; Michael Lichtenstein, managing director, 
in association with the 92nd Street Y. At Playhouse 91, 316 E. 91st 
St. With: Danny Gurwin (Kuni-Leml), Jay Brian Winnick (Simkhe and 
Sasha), Joel Newsome (Yankl and Yasha), David Brummel (Reb Pinkhos), 
Jennifer Rosin (Carolina), Paul Harman (Kalmen), Jonathan Hadley (Max) 
and Farah Alvin (Libe). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>