<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0462 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Justice Department filed suit Thursday accusing the state of Louisiana, 
widely believed to have the worst juvenile prisons in the nation, 
with failing to protect youthful inmates from brutality by guards 
and providing inadequate education, medical and mental health care. 
The lawsuit, to force the state to improve conditions, is an unusually 
forceful action by the Justice Department. It follows two years of 
investigation by department experts and unsuccessful negotiations 
with the Louisiana Department of Public Safety and Corrections. ``It 
is incredibly unusual,'' said David Utter, director of the Juvenile 
Justice Project of Louisiana, which has also filed suit against Louisiana 
over conditions at one of its four juvenile prisons, the privately 
owned Tallulah Correctional Center for Youth. ``I don't even know 
when the Justice Department ever filed suit against a state in a case 
like this.'' ``Over the past two years, the Justice Department has 
repeatedly advised state officials of the specific deficiencies and 
the corrective action needed,'' the department said. ``The state has 
failed or refused to address the Justice Department's findings in 
many critical ways.'' Richard Stalder, the secretary of Louisiana's 
Department of Public Safety and Corrections was traveling Thursday 
and could not be reached for comment. A spokesman for his office said 
he would have no comment, because the department had yet to receive 
a copy of the lawsuit. Louisiana has repeatedly insisted that it has 
tried to make changes in the four juvenile prisons and that the federal 
investigators have exaggerated the troubles. The owners of Tallulah 
have also complained that the improvements demanded by the Justice 
Department would be so expensive it would put them out of business. 
With Thursday's action, the Justice Department will join the suit 
by Utter's group, as well as another suit dating to the early 1980s, 
in a case scheduled to be tried in federal district court in Baton 
Rouge in February. Utter's group is an offshoot of the Southern Poverty 
Law Center. Another lawyer, Scott Wolleson of Monroe, La., is also 
planning to file a suit on behalf of up to 50 young inmates at Tallulah 
seeking damages for injuries they sustained in beatings by guards, 
including broken cheek bones and punctured ear drums. Tallulah is 
operated by Trans-American Development Associates, which is owned 
by several close friends of former Gov. Edwin Edwards. Trans-American 
was named as a defendant in the suit filed by the Justice Department 
Thursday. Louisiana officials took over temporary management of Tallulah 
in July after Justice Department investigators reported high levels 
of brutality and an almost total lack of education or care for the 
large number of inmates suffering from severe mental illness. At the 
time, the state sent in a new team of guards from its adult prisons. 
Utter said some of the brutality had decreased, but there were also 
new reports that the state guards were occasionally more violent than 
the private guards they replaced. In addition, said Shannon Robshaw, 
executive director of the Mental Health Association of Louisiana, 
there had been no improvement in education or medical or mental health 
care at Tallulah since the state took over. In fact, Ms. Robshaw said, 
she had received a report that one mentally ill boy, who was hearing 
voices, had stuck broken glass in his ears but had not been given 
treatment. As an indication of how unusual the Justice Department 
suit is, department officials noted that in recent years they had 
also investigated conditions at juvenile prisons in Kentucky, Puerto 
Rico and Georgia, and had subsequently reached agreement with each 
on improving the problems that had been found. ``As in all cases,'' 
said Bill Lann Lee, the acting assistant Attorney General for Civil 
Rights, ``we had hoped to resolve this matter short of contested litigation. 
At the moment, however, it is clear that federal court action is the 
only way to protect juveniles in Louisiana's secure correctional facilities 
from unlawful conditions.'' Ms. Robshaw said the action of the Justice 
Department in joining the lawsuit ``is extremely significant,'' providing 
further momentum and legal resources for the team of public interest 
and private lawyers already pursuing the case. ``I think it is a profound 
statement of the magnitude of the problem and the state's refusal 
to address its deficiencies,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>