<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0528 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Forging ahead with an impeachment inquiry that most Americans say 
Congress should drop, Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., asked President Clinton 
Thursday to say flatly whether he lied under oath, tampered with witnesses 
or obstructed justice. In an 11-page letter, Hyde, chairman of the 
House Judiciary Committee, asked Clinton to admit or deny 81 selected 
findings gleaned from the independent counsel's 445-page report on 
the president's affair with Monica Lewinsky. Hyde had indicated to 
the White House a few weeks ago that he would ask Clinton to acknowledge 
certain assertions in the report. Hyde said the president could speed 
the process by not disputing the findings. But many questions are 
pointed and ask Clinton to admit to accusations that he and his advisers 
have strenuously denied since the independent counsel Kenneth Starr 
sent his scathing report to Congress. For example, question No. 20: 
``Do you admit or deny that you gave false and misleading testimony 
under oath when you stated during your deposition in the case of Jones 
v. Clinton on Jan. 17, 1998, that you did not know if Monica Lewinsky 
had been subpoenaed to testify in that case?'' Answering such questions, 
Hyde said, would help wrap up the inquiry by the end of the year. 
``No one should take these requests as establishing our final conclusions,'' 
he said. ``Rather, they will simply help us to establish what facts 
are in dispute and what facts are not.'' Gregory Craig, the White 
House coordinator of impeachment strategy, Thursday night called Hyde's 
questions predictable and said: ``I don't think our answers are going 
to change the dynamics of the inquiry. We're going to work our way 
through it and make a good-faith effort to respond to it in a timely 
manner, sooner rather than later.'' Craig said the White House reply 
would probably come before Nov. 13, when the president leaves on a 
10-day visit to Asia. ``At the appropriate time, in the appropriate 
way, we will say whatever we intend to say,'' Clinton told reporters 
at a meeting with Democratic congressional leaders at the White House. 
``The important thing is that we've got to get back to doing the people's 
business.'' At a news conference in Chicago, Hyde described the letter 
to Clinton as he outlined the schedule for the inquiry against the 
president. On Thursday, Hyde underscored his goal to wrap up the inquiry 
this year, announcing that the committee would very likely summon 
only one witness, Starr, on Nov. 19. Hyde also said that assertions 
from some committee aides on Wednesday that the panel would vote on 
articles of impeachment by Thanksgiving were incorrect. But the shock 
waves from Democratic gains in the midterm election on Tuesday have 
injected new doubts and uncertainty into the impeachment process, 
lawmakers said Thursday. And any alternative to impeachment, like 
censure, has been complicated by the leadership fight that has broken 
out among House Republicans in recriminations over the election debacle. 
Hyde said Thursday that the election would have ``no significant impact'' 
on the proceedings. But whether voters intended to or not, the outcome 
of the election has been widely viewed by many Democrats and Republicans 
as a referendum on the scope and scale of the impeachment process. 
``It certainly doesn't make our job any easier,'' said Rep. Bob Barr, 
R-Ga., who is one of Clinton's fiercest critics on the committee. 
``There'll be no impact on what we do on the Judiciary Committee. 
But other Republicans' view of impeachment will be colored in by political 
considerations.'' In light of public resistance to removing Clinton 
from office, the slim Republican majority in the House seems to stand 
little chance of mustering the 218 votes required for impeachment. 
``Some people are really depressed,'' said a Republican aide. ``It's 
taken the wind out of our sails.'' Democrats seized on their gain 
of five seats in the House of Representatives and polls of voters 
that showed Americans' strong desire to end the inquiry now. Rep. 
John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, the ranking Democrat on the Judiciary 
Committee, said, ``If the election has made clear one thing it is 
this: The American people do not want President Clinton impeached.'' 
The truncated schedule Hyde described today would abandon plans to 
call such central figures as Bruce Lindsey, the presidential aide, 
and Vernon Jordan, Clinton's longtime friend and confidant, although 
Hyde said more witnesses could be added. Other committee Republicans 
praised Hyde's approach. ``Bringing in witnesses to rehash testimony 
that's already concretely in the record would be a waste of time and 
serve no purpose at all,'' said Rep. George Gekas, R-Pa. Instead, 
only Starr will testify, probably for two days. Starr has expressed 
eagerness to defend his four-year, $40 million inquiry that critics 
say has turned into a personal vendetta against the president. ``He 
is the center of this inquiry,'' Hyde said at his news conference 
in Chicago. ``He's someone everybody wants to hear from, and we're 
going to give him that opportunity.'' Some Democrats want Starr to 
testify, to put him on the defensive. But other Democrats fear Starr 
could make a compelling case against Clinton. Perhaps a greater risk 
for the White House are the 81 questions Hyde posed on Thursday. Some 
simply restate the president's job title: ``Do you admit or deny that 
you are the chief law-enforcement officer of the United States of 
America?'' Other questions ask Clinton to affirm that he met or spoke 
with Jordan or Ms. Lewinsky at a particular time on a particular date. 
Most go to the heart of the accusations Starr has made. For example, 
question No. 27: ``Do you admit or deny that on or about Dec. 28, 
1998, you requested, instructed, suggested to or otherwise discussed 
with Betty Currie that she take possession of gifts previously given 
to Monica Lewinsky by you?'' Hyde denied the questions constituted 
a witch hunt. ``It would be a witch hunt if we served him with a subpoena 
to come in, get under oath and testify to a cross-examination from 
all members,'' Hyde said. ``That would be pushing the envelope. We're 
doing it in the most genteel way.'' With the possibility of impeachment 
growing dimmer, attention is shifting to a group of 10 committee moderates 
who have been exploring alternative punishment, including censure. 
But that exit strategy faces several hurdles. Hyde and many Republicans 
say it is premature to talk about a deal now. The likely candidate 
with enough stature to broker an alternative, if the moment was right, 
is Speaker Newt Gingrich. But Gingrich has his hands full trying to 
quell a rebellion of party members unhappy over the election results. 
Rep. Asa Hutchinson, R-Ark., who is one of the committee moderates, 
said the election results would ``keep discussion alive'' on some 
alternate punishment. ``But the difficulty is finding an alternative 
that's constitutional and politically acceptable,'' Hutchinson said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>