<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0403 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Each of us was going to build a kayak so attuned to its environment, 
so highly evolved, so sturdily elegant, that it could withstand 30-foot 
seas, hurricane winds and bashings from the claw of a hammer. In doing 
so, we would be joining an ancient tradition from a cold chain of 
islands where nothing grew beyond knee height, where no one had ever 
seen a living tree and where the boat makers thought the driftwood 
they used was a gift from the sea gods. We would be building an Aleutian 
skin-covered baidarka, ``a very, very sea-kind boat,'' our instructor 
said. It is at once flexible, safe and svelte. ``If you do them right, 
they will be like your personality,'' he said. ``One may be playful; 
one may be conservative.'' I had come to Corey Freedman's boat-building 
workshop in Seattle because all wanted a vessel that I could hoist 
onto the roof rack of my Honda Civic. By the second hour of the workshop, 
however, I was a changed woman. I was ready to reserve baidarka books 
from the library and dip into the fanatically detailed baidarka bulletin 
board on the Internet, with its discussion of the proper placement 
of spirit lines, the meaningful decorations hidden on the boat's frame. 
Freedman is one of just a handful of specialists who teach the nearly 
forgotten craft of building sea kayaks, as baidarkas are commonly 
known. Our small class last month at the Center for Wooden Boats, 
a nonprofit educational organization in Seattle, included a reggae 
music promoter, a retired neurosurgeon, an artist and mother enamored 
of anything Arctic and a journalist who hadn't touched a router or 
countersink since seventh grade. But Freedman was ready for us: In 
overseeing the construction of more than 350 boats over the last five 
years, he has developed a low-key manner that put us at ease immediately. 
All sorts of people have taken his course, he said, including many 
slight women like me who seem to be drawn to lightweight boats. (The 
baidarka weighs about 30 pounds.) Nobody, though, has ever given him 
a hard time. ``Jerks don't build these boats,'' he said. Freedman, 
37, the son of a raw-materials distributor and a homemaker, might 
seem an unlikely baidarka guru. He grew up in West Orange, N.J., 20 
miles from Manhattan and about 4,600 miles from the Bering Sea, where 
baidarkas originated. At the age of 17, after seeing baidarkas in 
books and at the Smithsonian, Freedman knew that he wanted to live 
in the Northwest and run a boat-building school. Eight years ago, 
he bought a barn to house the operation. He holed up there for a year 
and a half to figure out how to build the best baidarka _ and lost 
35 pounds in the process. He now runs Spirit Line Kayaks, which operates 
the school and makes custom-built boats. On the first day of class, 
we took several baidarkas out for a wobbly, rudderless spin on Lake 
Union in the middle of Seattle, dodging sailboats and marveling at 
our spindly, six-inch-wide paddles and the kayaks' translucent skins. 
The memory of that brief cruise stayed with us as we worked nine consecutive 
10-hour days to cobble together our own crafts, bending cedar ribs 
fresh out of the boiler, tying 572 rib lashings with what feels like 
heavy, sticky dental floss and sewing on skin to be tight as a drum. 
We worked without blueprints, glue or metal, just yellow and red cedar, 
bamboo pegs made from whittled chopsticks (they're strong, rot-resistant 
and affordable) and nylon for the lashings and skin. The coating is 
the same kind of urethane used on parking garage floors; none of the 
350 boats has ever had a puncture. As we worked, we came to understand 
the reasoning behind some of the baidarka's quirkier features, including 
its bifurcated bow. The lower part it extends the keel, improving 
the boat's ability to hold a course; the upper part acts as a hydrofoil, 
lifting the boat above heavy seas. The U-shaped bottom helps the paddler 
stay upright in swells, and the truncated stern helps the boat maneuver 
in following seas. ``With these boats, you don't paddle them, you 
wear them,'' Freedman said, recalling how the native Alaskans would 
tie themselves into their baidarkas to avoid falling into the frigid 
sea. Freedman gets his wood from an 80-year-old miller in Concrete, 
Wash., who salvages logs that were cut 30 or 40 years ago and cast 
off because of flaws. The red cedar for the deck beams was fished 
out of Baker Lake, in the Mount Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest, 
while the yellow cedar ribs came from the Cascade Mountains east of 
Seattle. Our seminar cost $850 including materials _ a bargain, considering 
that professional builders charge several thousand dollars for a new 
baidarka, and even fiberglass kayaks have retail prices around $2,500. 
Once we had finished lashing and sewing our boats together, we decorated, 
stained and coated them. My baidarka smelled of linseed oil and cedar, 
wood taken from places where I had hiked just this summer. As I lifted 
her easily and prepared to slip her into the water, it was easy to 
think that such materials, and the old knowledge of what to do with 
them, were of sacred provenance. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>