<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0515 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following are excerpts from remarks by Henry Hyde, the Illinois Republican 
who is chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, at a news conference 
about the impeachment hearings: The election is over, and we must 
now turn to the unpleasant duty that the Constitution requires of 
us. The search for the truth now must begin without distraction. Many 
Americans want to know where we're going, how we will proceed. And 
so I've called you here to give you some idea of what we plan to do. 
Before I make any specific announcements, let me just say a word about 
some general matters. No one knows more than I do that the public 
wants us to end this matter as soon as possible. I want to end this 
matter as soon as possible. Let me assure you, no one on the committee 
enjoys this task. Conducting an inquiry of this nature is solemn, 
sober, serious business. There's nothing enjoyable about it. There 
are always appealing voices of convenience and comfort to call on 
us to look away. It would be easy. We could just look away from this 
awful mess and let it disappear. But our duty demands that we look 
further. It requires that we search out the truth, face it squarely. 
It insists that we uphold the rule of law. It demands that we assure 
that both the president and the average citizen stand before the bar 
of justice equally. ... We believe the most relevant witnesses have 
already testified at length about the matters in issue. And in the 
interest of finishing our expeditious inquiry, we will not require 
most of them to come before us to repeat their testimony. The committee 
will invite Judge Starr to appear in public session on Nov. 19. Judge 
Starr led the investigation, and we believe his testimony will be 
helpful to the committee. Today I'm sending a letter to the president 
asking him to admit or deny certain facts that appear to be established 
by the record now before us. No one should take these requests as 
establishing our final conclusions. Rather, they will simply help 
us to establish what facts are in dispute and what facts are not. 
The president is free to dispute, of course, whatever he wants. But 
by agreeing to those facts that he does not dispute, he will allow 
us to narrow the issues and bring this matter to a close more quickly. 
This is our agenda for the next few weeks. The committee's activities 
beyond that time have not been finalized. But I remain committed to 
trying to complete this inquiry as expeditiously as possible and by 
the end of the year if possible. Article I, Section 2 of the Constitution 
provides the House of Representatives shall have the sole power of 
impeachment. The House has directed our committee to begin an inquiry 
of impeachment of President Clinton. Implicit in that mandate is the 
responsibility to independently investigate and establish all of the 
relevant facts. This took the committee nearly six months in the impeachment 
inquiry of President Nixon, 16 months in the impeachment inquiry of 
Judge Hastings, and 13 months in the impeachment inquiry of Judge 
Walter Nixon. Clearly, to complete the task before us in less than 
three months will require the cooperation of the White House. More 
important in this process than any schedule is the preservation of 
our constitutional system. Our system of government demands the full 
cooperation of the executive branch in an impeachment inquiry. Indeed, 
the judiciary committee reaffirmed that principle in its impeachment 
inquiry of President Nixon in 1974. When the Nixon White House failed 
to cooperate fully, the committee approved an article of impeachment 
against the president for usurping the authority of Congress. Our 
firm intention is to resolve this matter with fairness, honor and 
expedition. With the president's cooperation, we will meet our goal 
of finishing by the end of the year. This, of course, is up to the 
president and his advisers. But we intend to continue as long as it 
takes to vindicate the rule of law and follow the truth wherever it 
leads us. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>