<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0402 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Spanish Civil War pitted the well-equipped and well-trained nationalist 
armed forces, led by Franco, against the poorly armed and trained 
troops of the elected Republican government. It was an unequal contest: 
Franco's forces were backed by Hitler and Mussolini, and the leftist-liberal 
Republicans, or Loyalists, were supported by the Soviet Union and 
the International Brigades, some 40,000 volunteers with little or 
no fighting experience from 52 countries who wanted to stop Fascism. 
Long on idealism but short on military know-how, the Republican cause 
was doomed, even as it drew such champions as Andre Malraux, Ernest 
Hemingway, George Orwell, Henri Cartier-Bresson, Tina Modotti, Hans 
Namuth, David Seymour and Robert Capa. Then as now, some of the most 
compelling images of that war are Capa's 1936 photograph of a Loyalist 
falling in battle; Picasso's 1937 painting ``Guernica,'' a wrenching 
tribute to the victims of German aerial bombing of a Basque village, 
and Hemingway's 1940 novel, ``For Whom the Bell Tolls.'' But if one 
could see the Spanish Civil War freed from these familiar images, 
what would it be? ``The Spirit Lives: Photos From the Spanish Civil 
War, 1936-39,'' at the Puffin Room in SoHo, comes close to giving 
a freshly personal perspective to this conflict. Drawn from the archives 
of the International Institute of Social History in Amsterdam, most 
of the photographs in this exhibition have not been shown before in 
the United States. They survived the war because they were sent to 
the Paris branch of the Confederacion Nacional del Trabajo, a major 
labor union and player in the war, then to England and eventually 
to Amsterdam. Many of the photographers in ``The Spirit Lives'' bring 
a so-called snapshot esthetic to their pictures of Republicans and 
leftists preparing for war or at war. The photographers are all anonymous 
except for Sam Walters, a veteran of the American contingent of volunteers, 
the Lincoln Brigade. And the pictures are mostly quiet, taken by people 
who share a casual familiarity with their subjects. It is that very 
ordinariness that gives these images their surreal power. In an overhead 
shot of a roadside scene, a crowd has gathered around a truck, which 
has the union's initials on the hood and windshield. Another crowd 
stands and watches from the pavement, both groups oblivious to a cannon 
parked nearby. What is going on? ``Distributing arms to the people 
from a C.N.T. truck, Madrid, 1936,'' the caption says. A picture of 
boys marching down the street on a sun-splattered day appear to be 
playing at war, rifles over one shoulder. But the rifles look suspiciously 
lethal, and emblazoned on the chest of each boy's sweater is a star, 
at the center of which is the hammer and sickle insignia. These are 
``Young Communists exercising on the streets of Madrid, 1936,'' the 
caption says. Two young couples pose for the camera as if out walking 
in the park, the men in uniform, the women fresh-faced and smiling. 
They are part of the Garcia Oliver Column setting out in 1936 from 
their barracks in Barcelona. In 1931, a year before women first voted 
in Spain, the Republican constitution introduced political equality 
for men and women. Early in the war, a few women were leading figures 
of the Republic, including the fiery Dolores Ibarruri, the Communist 
leader known as La Pasionaria, who famously told the Republicans on 
the radio in July 1936: ``It is better to die on your feet than to 
live on your knees! They shall not pass!'' But this liberating time 
for women was short-lived. They were soon ordered back home to tend 
to housework or to work in factories, replacing men who had gone to 
war. But while it lasted, photographers made many striking images 
of fighting women. ``Anarchist militiawoman, undated,'' in the exhibition, 
is a close-up of a determined young woman, her hair tucked into a 
helmet bearing a skull-and-bones sketch, the shiny barrel of a rifle 
against one shoulder, her pale eyes steady. ``Militiawoman, Barcelona, 
July 1936'' shows a different kind of fighter. Here, a young woman, 
in blouse, skirt and sandals, a purse hanging from a belt, walks cheerfully 
down the street, toting a rifle. In an arresting image, three Loyalists 
lie in wait on the edge of a cliff overlooking a bucolic valley. Two 
are uniformed soldiers; between them is a woman in a dress and sandals. 
And in ``Three generations of resistance, undated,'' a grim white-haired 
woman raises a clenched fist, her daughter and granddaughter following 
suit. In the photographs by Sam Walters, his camera is turned on the 
international contingent and Loyalists waiting to go to war. These 
pictures have a certain Yankee humor and directness, particularly 
one of Jack Corrigan. According to the caption, this young man is 
convalescing, but with his chest bare, a straw hat on his head, a 
bunch of grapes in one hand, he looks in the pink of health. The caption, 
however, says he was killed soon after the picture was taken. Walters 
shows a volunteer painting while he waits to be called to battle. 
A Loyalist peruses an English-language newspaper. And in a poignant 
photograph, three young women look out a high window protected by 
a metal grill. They are smiling, care free, seemingly untouched by 
war. The counterpoint of this image, taken by an anonymous photographer, 
is ``Militiaman and girlfriend saying goodbye, Barcelona, August 1936.'' 
Photographed from above, this is a spare picture of a couple surrounded 
by people yet intensely alone, he looking wordlessly at her, she with 
her eyes cast down. ``The Spirit Lives'' ends with photographs of 
death and destruction. In a devastating picture that brings to mind 
the image of the stricken young woman kneeling by the slain student 
at Kent State, a weeping Spanish woman, her arms outstretched in grief, 
kneels by a body. Today, when photography has become, for many artists, 
a tool for purely esthetic ends, the exhibition at the Puffin Room 
is a welcome reminder that the camera can be both pitiless and powerful 
when it records events that forever change people's lives. ``The Spirit 
Lives: Photos From the Spanish Civil War, 1936-39'' remains at the 
Puffin Room, 435 Broome Street, near Broadway, through Nov. 29. ``The 
Spanish Civil War,'' by Abel Paz, published last year by Hazan of 
Paris and available at $12.95 from D.A.P./Distributed Art Publishers 
(800-338-2665), includes many of the pictures in the exhibition as 
well as Paz's vivid recollections of what he saw and did during one 
tumultuous and heady week in July 1936, when he was a 15-year-old 
revolutionary in Barcelona. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>