<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0225 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Microsoft Corp. does not go softly into hardware. When it decides 
to enter a hardware niche, it typically has a good reason. The rise 
of graphical user interfaces like the Windows shell demanded a mouse, 
and Microsoft is now the big cheese in computer mice. Microsoft's 
game-software division is a powerhouse, so the company is trying to 
conquer the market for game paraphernalia like joysticks, steering 
wheels and stereo speakers. William H. Gates became a daddy, and now 
there is the Microsoft Actimates Interactive Barney doll. And now 
Microsoft is going after the cordless phone business, which says a 
lot about the company's vision for the future. It is a future that 
blends telecommunications, consumer electronics and computing, and 
it envisions increasing reliance on voice commands to control common 
household devices _ that, not coincidentally, use Microsoft operating 
systems. Microsoft's latest hardware product is a $199 cordless telephone 
that connects to a personal computer and uses Windows-based call management 
software. In theory, the Microsoft Cordless Phone System, officially 
known as the PC Phone System MP-900, is supposed to harness the power 
of the PC to improve the way we use the telephone. After a couple 
of weeks of testing the MP-900, I find it hard to give it a ringing 
endorsement. Even so, the ideas behind the PC Phone System MP-900 
are so compelling that I eagerly await version 2.0. The MP-900 is 
a black, 900-megahertz cordless phone that comes with a desktop cradle, 
a base station that connects to a PC and a CD-ROM disk with call management 
software. In general, 900-megahertz phones are significantly superior 
to the first-generation cordless phones, which operated at 46 to 49 
MHz. The software enables the user to set up a voice mail system, 
with separate voice-mail boxes for each member of a family or small 
business. A voice command system lets the user make calls by simply 
speaking the name of the recipient, once that name and phone number 
are entered in a speed-dial directory. Up to 40 names can be entered. 
For example, to call one's bookmaker, one simply presses the voice 
command button on the handset and says, ``Call Weasel.'' (Your bookie's 
name may vary.) The phone looks up Weasel's number in the PC database, 
dials it and logs the call. It is one of the first successful examples 
of speech recognition in my house, certainly more impressive than 
when I try to summon my teen-ager by voice. If the user subscribes 
to a Caller ID service through the phone company, the software can 
recognize calls from certain individuals and play a custom greeting 
whenever that person calls. The phone handset also uses voice synthesis 
to announce incoming calls. ``Gates, Bill, calling.'' Thus, the user 
can screen calls even when away from the PC. Voice messages are stored 
on the computer's hard disk and can be played back, even from a remote 
location. It sounds great in theory. But to be broadly successful, 
consumer electronics devices have to be relatively inexpensive, simple 
to learn, easy to use, reliable and so compelling that people eventually 
wonder how they ever survived without one. The telephone is one example, 
and the radio, the television, the VCR, the stereo and the microwave 
oven are others. By those standards, the Microsoft Cordless Phone 
has not quite made the connection. First, $199 is a lot to spend on 
a single-line, 900-megahertz analog cordless phone. For just a few 
dollars more, you can get 2.4-gigahertz digital spread-spectrum cordless 
phone with greater range, two-line capability and protection against 
electronic eavesdroppers. (The problem with many analog cordless phones 
is that your conversations can sometimes be picked up on the neighbor's 
baby monitor.) Or you can buy a 900-MHz digital cordless phone with 
many useful features for much less than $199. Sony just introduced 
several new 900-MHz digital phones, for slightly more money, that 
match some of the more appealing features of the Microsoft phone, 
without the need for a PC. While more than 70 percent of American 
households have a cordless phone already, fewer than 45 percent have 
a PC, and of those, not all have the features needed to operate the 
Microsoft phone. These include a Pentium 90 processor (or faster) 
running Windows 95 or 98, a vacant serial port, 32 megabytes of RAM, 
up to 100 megabytes of hard disk space and a Windows-compatible 16-bit 
sound card with a microphone and speakers. Many of the more appealing 
features require Caller ID, a subscription service offered by local 
phone companies. The phone will not work with Windows NT, and there 
are no plans to create a Macintosh version, Microsoft said. Connecting 
the MP-900 to my Windows PC was harder than I thought it would be 
and required much fussing over serial ports. The software installed 
easily, but it refused to work until other phone extensions on the 
line were disconnected. The phone's battery must be charged for 10 
hours before use, which might frustrate users who require instant 
gratification. The special call management software is relatively 
easy to configure. But it was unnecessarily difficult to import the 
hundreds of names and telephone numbers I have collected in Microsoft 
Outlook into the new phone's directory. The idea of re-entering all 
those numbers manually was too much to bear. The thought of attempting 
a link with Sidekick or some other non-Microsoft contact-management 
software was truly odious. No matter how I tweaked the software, the 
phone refused to play the custom announcements I lovingly recorded 
for special callers _ the Wicked Witch theme song for one, the submarine 
``battle stations'' sound effects for another, and so on. Perhaps 
the largest drawback is that to take advantage of all the advanced 
features, you must leave the PC turned on. If the PC is switched off 
or crashes, the MP-900 becomes a very expensive cordless phone. Nor 
is there a headset option for the MP-900, which disqualifies it for 
use as my primary office phone. The sound quality of messages played 
back through my computer's speakers was erratic, fading in and out. 
On the flip side, my digital cellular phone is much less reliable, 
and I still put up with it. On balance, the MP-900 is a clever device, 
and its call management software deserves to be incorporated into 
future generations of desktop and cordless phones. But the price is 
still a bit steep, the inconveniences still outweigh the advantages, 
and non-PC cordless phone technologies offer some of the same features. 
In last week's column about Macintosh OS 8.5, a brief reference was 
made to the ``Revision B'' iMac computer. Apple would neither confirm 
nor deny what it said were ``rumors'' about the existence of the new 
model. Here are the details: Since introducing the iMac in July, Apple 
has made several improvements to the original model, including adding 
a faster graphics chip and more video RAM (6 MB versus 2 MB). These 
Revision B iMacs come from the factory with Mac OS 8.5 installed instead 
of 8.1. NYT-11-04-98 1622EST 
</TEXT>
</DOC>