<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0447 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Republican National Committee on Thursday chose Philadelphia over 
New York and three other cities for the party's national convention 
in 2000, a decision that disappointed New York's mayor, Rudolph Giuliani. 
With an announcement that turned attention from the Republicans' dispiriting 
election results, party leaders picked a city that was also a finalist 
for the Democratic national convention in 2000. But after Philadelphia 
officials were told they had won, they informed the Democrats that 
they were withdrawing their bid, leaving Los Angeles as the probable 
front-runner for that convention. Denver and Boston are among five 
other cities competing for the Democrats, who are expected to narrow 
their finalist list next week. The final selection is expected by 
January, but many senior Democrats say party leaders favor Los Angeles 
as part of an effort to win California's 54 electoral votes, the most 
of any state. At a City Hall news conference in New York, Giuliani 
attributed the rejection of New York City, in part, to Sen. Alfonse 
D'Amato's loss to Rep. Charles Schumer in New York's Senate race, 
combined with a record victory by Pennsylvania's Republican senior 
senator, Arlen Specter, who won with his widest margin of victory, 
26 percentage points, in four general elections to the Senate. ``I 
think it's very hard to overcome the election results,'' Giuliani 
said. ``I was afraid that something like this would happen, and I 
think it had an impact on it.'' He added: ``It had come down to three 
cities, and I think something like this can tip the balance in terms 
of atmospherics and feeling.'' Giuliani said he understood that Indianapolis 
was the other finalist, but San Antonio and New Orleans were also 
under consideration. It was not especially surprising that Philadelphia 
won a national convention, after intense sales pitches to both major 
parties by a bipartisan committee, known as Philadelphia 2000, made 
up of business and political leaders from Pennsylvania, New Jersey 
and Delaware. But it was somewhat unexpected that it was the Republicans 
who grabbed it first. Philadelphia, the nation's fifth-largest city, 
with a population of 1.3 million, is a heavily Democratic, highly 
unionized city that frequently wins federal dollars through efforts 
of Mayor Edward Rendell, a Democrat who is close to President Clinton. 
Rendell, who wore an elephant-adorned tie to an afternoon news conference, 
is a rising star in the Democratic Party, a strong leader who has 
steered his city out of financial chaos into a vibrant metropolis 
with new restaurants, museums, hotels, a convention center and, perhaps 
most strikingly, a sense of pride. At the same time, however, Rendell 
has proved to be a political pragmatist, maintaining a solid working 
relationship with state leaders, most of whom are Republicans. He 
enjoys a particularly strong alliance with Gov. Tom Ridge, a popular 
Republican whose vice-presidential aspirations could be considerably 
enhanced by the staging of a party convention in his home state. On 
Tuesday, Ridge won election to a second term with 57 percent of the 
vote in a four-way race. Together, Ridge and Rendell served as honorary 
chairmen of the Philadelphia 2000 efforts and appeared together to 
announce their prize. ``It is a great day for us,'' Rendell said. 
``If I had told Philadelphia five years ago that we had beat out New 
York and Chicago for the most important convention, nobody, but nobody 
would have believed us.'' Chicago was eliminated earlier. As a further 
justification for the selection, Republicans control both chambers 
of the State Legislature and have both United States Senators, Specter 
and Rick Santorum. Beyond that, however, Pennsylvania is a presidential-year 
plum, with 23 electoral votes that, in the past two elections have 
swung for the Democrats. Clinton carried the state twice after George 
Bush won in it in 1988. Philadelphia, which promotes itself as the 
cradle of American democracy as home to the Liberty Bell and the site 
of the signing of the Declaration of Independence, is no stranger 
to political conventions. The Republicans have held their nominating 
convention there five times, the last in 1948. But to win any convention, 
the city had to overcome the problem of an insufficient supply of 
hotel rooms downtown. The bid committee made a major thrust of its 
work pushing for construction of 2,000 new hotel rooms by the year 
2000. David Cohen, a co-chairman of the bid committee and a former 
chief of staff to Rendell, said in an interview that 13 hotels were 
under construction in the metropolitan area. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>