<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0512 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two hundred horses, artists all, and from all points of the globe, 
transformed midtown Manhattan into an international equine wonderland 
Thursday night as the 115th National Horse Show got under way at Madison 
Square Garden. There were German, French, Dutch, and even Argentine-bred 
grand prix jumpers, the horse show world's version of aerialists, 
and there were five-gaited saddlebreds, homegrown in the United States. 
The exhibitions featured the trick horses of the charro champion Jerry 
Diaz, who surrounds himself and his palomino with a spinning lariat, 
as well as a balletic dressage demonstration by the four-time United 
States Olympian Robert Dover and Anky van Grunsven of the Netherlands, 
whose bay horse, Bonfire, is the Michael Jordan of this sport. Summoned 
to the show ring by the traditional call of the coaching horn, the 
horses, if not the spectators, arrived on time and immediately got 
down to business in a speed stake, the $10,000 Etienne Aigner Horseshoe 
Classic. The course required a dozen jumping efforts by its 18 competitors, 
including the teams from the United States, France and Canada, which 
sent its first all-female riding squad to the National and which will 
compete Friday night in the Nations Cup. For a time, three riders 
from the American team, led by the veteran Leslie Burr Howard, occupied 
the first three spots on the leader board Thursday night. But when 
Patrice Delaveau and Aurnella, representing the French team, flashed 
through the course in 45.65 seconds without nicking a jump, the male 
rider on the 10-year-old French-bred mare moved into the first position 
and held it. Howard, riding Jane Clark's French-bred mare, Ulane de 
Plessix, took second place with a brisk and unflawed 46.83-second 
trip round the course. Howard was a member of the United States equestrian 
squad that won a team gold medal at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics 
and a team silver in 1996 in Atlanta; this year she already has nine 
grand prix victories, and she is in such demand that she is commuting 
this week between the National and the Royal Agricultural Winter Fair 
in Toronto. Third place went to the American squad's Eric Hasbrouck 
on Miss Flo, the only Argentina-bred equine in the class; their clean 
ride was timed in 48.62 seconds. The Garden and Canadian team debut 
of 17-year-old Frankie Chesler, the youngest rider ever to represent 
Canada, did not go as smoothly as the teen-ager had hoped. She came 
in last in the field on Virtual Village Elton III, with five knockdowns 
and a time of 118.09 seconds. Gail Greenough, the Canadian chef d'equipe, 
attributed Chesler's opening night woes to an overdose of adrenaline 
and an unruly horse. ``She'd never ridden the horse in competition 
before, and though I told her to slow things down in her mind when 
she visualized the course, once she got out there, she put it in fast 
forward,'' said Greenough. ``But that can happen here on your first 
time out. It's New York, it's the Garden, it's impressive, and you 
want to go for broke.'' Chesler, who was born in Miami but lives in 
Orangeville, Ontario, with her string of seven jumpers, earned her 
place on the Canadian team with a stellar 1998 campaign that has put 
her in third place in the World Cup standing among Canadian riders. 
Last year she won the individual and team silver at the North American 
Young Riders Championship with Braveheart, a black quarterhorse that 
survived a bout with cancer in 1996. Two weeks ago at the Washington 
International, Chesler finished second in the $25,000 International 
Open Jumper class aboard Ravenna Z, her favorite horse. ``I want to 
have my own horse business, do the Olympics and win a gold medal, 
and next year I want to ride in the Pan American games, that's my 
biggest goal for now,'' said Chesler, who elected to represent Canada 
rather than the United States because she suspected, accurately as 
it turned out, that she had a better chance of making the Canadian 
team in a hurry. ``In the U.S., there are too many older riders just 
as good as or better than me who've been waiting for a spot on the 
team, so it wouldn't have been fair for them to pick me. And here 
I am already on the Canadian team. It's a big honor.'' The dressage 
specialist van Grunsven, a three-time World Cup Final champion who 
won double silver at the Atlanta Olympics, waltzed through her musical 
ride on 15-year-old Bonfire. ``The truth is that Anky is the state 
of the art of our sport,'' said Dover, the United States dressage 
champion. ``And Bonfire is the same way: he's so far advanced beyond 
most of the other animals. He just has this incredible desire to get 
it right.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>