<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0409 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Honda _ more to the point, Acura, Honda's luxury-sport division _ 
has a problem. While the company's smaller cars, everything from the 
Honda Civic and Accord to the Acura Integra and NSX, are class beaters, 
its offerings in the hot ``entry level'' luxury market have been greeted 
with yawns. The now-forgotten Vigor struck few customers as superior 
to the less expensive Accord. And the 2.5TL, the Vigor's replacement, 
proved to be an overpriced, underpowered bore. What to do? Acura stuck 
by the TL name, but has transformed the car into a slick performer 
_ a worthy rival to the $30,000-plus sport sedans from Mercedes-Benz, 
Saab, Volvo, Infiniti, Lexus and many others. Moreover, on the assumption 
that half-measures would not be adequate to redeem the brand, Acura 
priced the new American-made 3.2TL several thousand dollars below 
comparably equipped competitors from Europe and Japan. Indeed, with 
a sticker of $28,405 and a long list of standard equipment, the sales 
strategists for the 3.2TL seem determined to make the car the price-performance 
leader in this crowded corner of the market. Get past the bad news: 
the styling. While the new TL was designed at Honda's studio in California 
with an eye on the American market, the finished product is still 
hard to spot in a crowd of Japanese sedans. But that is the only criticism 
that sticks. Inside, the 3.2TL is a model of comfort, functionality 
and cool good looks. The firm, nicely padded seats are covered in 
lush leather; the driver's eight-way power seat, with lumbar support, 
is infinitely adjustable. Controls, with oversize buttons and uncluttered 
dials, are easy to read and use. And thanks to the roomy cabin, the 
3.2TL's back seat is a pleasure for two passengers and is perfectly 
adequate for three. Virtually every luxury convenience is standard 
equipment on the 3.2TL. The front seats are heated. The rear-view 
mirror automatically darkens at night. The Bose-designed five-speaker 
stereo, complete with cassette and CD players along with an exceptionally 
sensitive radio, is superb. The automatic climate control system has 
a dust filter as well as separate vents for the rear passengers. A 
power sliding and tilting moonroof, keyless locking, anti-theft protection, 
side-window defoggers, an outside temperature gauge, steering-mounted 
audio controls, high-intensity-discharge headlights _ even a second 
12-volt outlet _ are included for the base price. Indeed, the only 
options are floor mats at $109 and a navigation system linked to global 
positioning satellites, at $2,000. But don't misunderstand what Acura 
has done. While the 3.2TL offers luxury at a bargain price, the engineers 
were very much in charge of the redesign. They abandoned the oddball 
five-cylinder engine of the Vigor and the 2.5TL in favor of a zippy, 
all-new 3.2-liter aluminum V6 with variable valve timing. This very 
modern power plant delivers 225 horsepower and rockets to 60 mph in 
less than 8 seconds, yet manages to go 27 highway miles on a gallon 
of gasoline. To complement the new engine, which is exclusive to the 
TL as of now, Acura added a new four-speed automatic transmission 
that offers both ``grade logic'' that alters the shift patterns on 
hills and a Sportshift function that allows manual gear changes like 
Porsche's Tiptronic. Less obvious, but equally important, the engineers 
toughened the front suspension and installed a new rear suspension 
worthy of a real sport sedan. Anti-skid brakes, 16-inch wheels with 
low-profile tires and an advanced traction control system round out 
the package. The proof is in the driving, of course, and here the 
TL does not disappoint. The sedan feels big because it is, measuring 
four inches longer and weighing 200 pounds more than an Accord. But 
size does not translate into awkwardness. The TL's road manners are 
crisp, nicely straddling the line between Teutonic firmness and Detroit 
sponginess. Cornering is a pleasure, with little evidence of the understeer 
that sends many front-wheel-drive cars forward when the driver wants 
to turn, or the dreaded torque steer, a wobbly feel in the wheel so 
common on takeoff in high-powered front-drive cars. Most drivers, 
I would guess, won't use the Sportshift much because the automatic 
transmission does such a good job of adjusting to hills. But this 
semi-manual mode does offer an adrenaline rush on quiet, twisty roads, 
where it is practical to keep the engine revving near the 6,300 rpm 
redline. Still, the new 3.2TL is not a sports car in sedan disguise. 
It won't tempt drivers addicted to the more precise handling of a 
3-Series BMW or the Audi A4. But the Audi and BMW are smaller vehicles 
that trade a measure of comfort for performance, and they are less 
indulgent for long-distance highway cruising. The more relevant comparisons 
are with the Lexus ES300, the Infiniti I30, the C-Class Mercedes, 
perhaps the Cadillac Catera. And here, the TL is second to none, offering 
more bang for the buck along with the promise of superior fuel economy 
and low maintenance costs. Someday, of course, someone will come up 
with a better midsize luxury sedan at a better price. But for the 
moment, Acura is top dog in the pack. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>