<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0009 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Daunte Culpepper squeezed his 6-foot-4-inch, 240-pound frame into 
an office chair and talked about the evolution of quarterbacking. 
He has played the position since 10th grade, when he innocently threw 
a ball 50 yards in practice after being overthrown on a pass pattern. 
Now at age 21, Culpepper is the quarterback at the University of Central 
Florida. He is a tank, like Steve McNair, only bigger. He is Houdini, 
like Doug Flutie, only capable of making the defender disappear with 
the drop of a shoulder. He is elusive, like Kordell Stewart, only 
preferring to stay put in the pocket. Culpepper can take a pounding 
and give it out. The last quality is his greatest virtue. For all 
the talk about evolution, mixing size and speed and mobility, Culpepper 
subscribes to one unshakable truth: ``You have to be able to stand 
in the pocket. You have to get hit in your teeth.'' That, football 
fans, is Daunte Culpepper, one of the great college quarterbacks you 
may never see in action. He has stood in the pocket virtually from 
the time he was born, and life's blitzes have never rattled him. Those 
are the qualities he brings to the football field. But because he 
plays at a relatively obscure, independent Division I school, much 
of the nation doesn't get to see him. Pro scouts do, however, and 
they are projecting him as a high draft pick next spring, perhaps 
the first quarterback selected. Culpepper leads the nation in completion 
percentage, connecting on 73.7 percent of his passes, which is ahead 
of the current National Collegiate Athletic Association record of 
71.3, set by Steve Young at Brigham Young in 1983. Culpepper's pass 
efficiency rating of 178.7 is ahead of Danny Wuerffel's NCAA record 
of 178.4, set at the University of Florida in 1995. Now, with 10,640 
yards passing and 876 yards rushing in his career, Culpepper needs 
124 yards rushing in his final three games to become only the third 
player in the history of college football to pass for 10,000 yards 
and rush for 1,000 in a career. The only others to do so are Alcorn 
State's McNair (1991-94) and Idaho's Doug Nussmeier (1990-93). Last 
week against Youngstown State, Culpepper completed 31 of 41 attempts 
for 347 yards and 4 touchdowns, leading Central Florida to a 44-32 
victory in Orlando. He carried the ball 14 times for 63 yards and 
one touchdown. With 410 yards of total offense, Culpepper moved into 
eighth place on the career NCAA total offense list for all divisions 
with 11,543 yards. His performance has helped Central Florida to a 
7-1 record, the best start in school history, heading into a pivotal 
game at Auburn on Saturday. ``I see myself as a drop-back quarterback 
who can run and improvise if I have to,'' Culpepper said. But statistics 
hardly represent just who Daunte Culpepper is and what he represents. 
The inner story is a story of love, of family, and of a real-life 
example of a village's raising a child. In Daunte's case, the village 
is Emma Culpepper. Daunte was born Jan. 28, 1977, and the drama of 
his life began immediately. His biological mother, in a home for unwed 
mothers in Ocala, Fla., realized she couldn't raise a son. In desperation 
she asked Emma Culpepper, a house mother there, to take her son and 
raise him. By that time Emma was 62, and had already raised 14 children, 
none of them hers. She raised her brother's children after he died, 
then her brother's widow's children after that. It had been her life's 
mission. She agreed to do it one last time. ``What she did was awesome,'' 
said Daunte. ``A lot of people wouldn't have even taken that chance 
or wouldn't have taken the time to do what she did. She could have 
said `I'm too old,' or `I don't have time.' She could have made a 
lot of excuses, but she didn't. If it wasn't for her, I don't know 
where I'd be.'' Emma Culpepper is the pivotal person in Daunte's life. 
She is the staff and the rod, and never spared either. Even now, in 
the safety of an office, the solidly built Culpepper cringes when 
he thinks of Emma's motherly discipline. Sports didn't provide discipline, 
she did. ``I couldn't have been disciplined any stiffer than what 
my mom did,'' he said. ``She used to put it on me if I messed up. 
She's from the old school: she didn't have all that timeout and any 
of that. She put it on me: belt, shoes, anything, man. Anything. Switches. 
It didn't matter. And I really needed it. Without the fear of that; 
when I had a decision to make, I might have made the wrong decision 
and it could have been a real bad decision that put me behind bars. 
``You know the saying, `Give 'em an inch they take a mile?' I was 
one of those kids who would have taken a mile.'' Culpepper always 
knew his biological mother, knew where she was, and was kept abreast 
of her situation. When she got herself back on her feet, family officials 
tried to reunite mother and son, and arranged for Daunte to live with 
her. ``I wasn't having it,'' Culpepper recalled. ``Nothing against 
my biological mother because I love her, but I'd grown so close to 
Emma Culpepper I felt that she was my biological mom. I couldn't be 
without her. Every day I wasn't with her I cried and cried. I couldn't 
help it.'' Finally, his biological mother returned Daunte to Emma 
Culpepper. ``I know it nearly broke her heart,'' Daunte said. ``But 
I was a kid.'' His biological mother is a social worker, has recovered 
from childhood troubles and now stays on the periphery of her son's 
life. Culpepper holds no grudges. Probably the greatest indication 
that Culpepper has become a leader is that he learned not to sit in 
judgment of people _ not of his mother, not of the father he never 
knew. ``I don't blame my biological mom for anything,'' he said. ``She 
did what was best for me. I call her `mom.' I love her like she's 
my mom. I'm a lot more mature now and I understand a lot more things. 
Whatever happened, I was with somebody who loved me good enough to 
be my mom and dad.'' If, as scouts project, Culpepper may be the first 
quarterback selected in the June draft, it will mean an imminent change 
in financial status. Will it mean a different, less grounded Culpepper? 
Daunte said he wouldn't think of changing. With Emma Culpepper watching? 
You must be kidding. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>