<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0023 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three months after agreeing to redevelop the last unclaimed historic 
theater on 42d Street, the financially troubled Canadian production 
giant Livent Inc. announced on Wednesday that it was dropping the 
project. Livent officials said that the plan for the Times Square 
Theater, which was to include a 500-seat theater, a restaurant and 
shops, no longer seemed like a prudent investment. ``The option we 
signed in August provided us the opportunity to analyze in detail 
the ambitious and creative, multi-use plan that we had developed,'' 
Livent's chief executive, Roy Furman, said in a statement, ``and we 
determined that our proposal did not deliver sufficient returns for 
the company.'' Reached at his home on Wednesday night, Furman declined 
to elaborate. A spokesman for the Toronto-based company, whose projects 
include rebuilding the Ford Theater next door to the Times Square 
and staging ``Ragtime'' there, declined to say whether Wednesday's 
decision stemmed from Livent's recent financial problems. Shortly 
after agreeing to redevelop the theater in August, Livent's board 
ousted the company's founder, Garth Drabinsky, after executives said 
they had discovered inflated revenues and other financial irregularities 
in the company's books. Trading of the company's stock, which was 
listed on the Nasdaq and Toronto exchanges, has been halted since 
then. New York state officials had said they expected the project 
would require Livent to invest at least $36 million. Officials at 
the New 42d Street, the nonprofit redevelopment agency that controls 
the Times Square Theater and that signed the agreement with Livent, 
said other groups were interested in the 88-year-old landmark, but 
declined to name them. In August, New 42d Street chose Livent's proposal 
over a more lucrative one from the World Wrestling Federation, which 
had proposed building a restaurant and store with a professional wrestling 
theme, saying it preferred to have another live theater on 42d Street. 
Other proposals, real estate executives said at the time, included 
a comedy club called the Laugh Factory and a restaurant called Empire! 
with a Roman gladiator theme. The Times Square, on the north side 
of 42d Street just west of Seventh Avenue, is the only one of the 
seven historic 42d Street theaters between Seventh and Eighth avenues 
that is still available. In 1994, the Walt Disney Co. reopened the 
New Amsterdam Theater near Seventh Avenue. Across the street, the 
New 42d Street installed a nonprofit children's theater at the New 
Victory Theater and is building a small theater and rehearsal studio. 
The nonprofit Roundabout Theater Co. plans to move into the nearby 
Selwyn Theater. And last year Livent, whose productions have collectively 
won 18 Tony Awards, combined the old Lyric and Academy theaters to 
create the Ford Theater. Livent's financial future remains up in the 
air. The company has promised to issue revised financial statements 
by no later than the end of next week, a process that company executives 
said has been slowed by a suit filed in September by Drabinsky that 
is aimed at stopping an investigation by the accounting firm KPMG 
Canada. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>