<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0335 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.N. arms inspection system in Iraq is near death. Even if Saddam 
Hussein lifts his new bans on inspection imposed three months ago, 
Iraq and its friends at the United Nations have so eviscerated the 
system that there is no realistic hope it can be revived, with or 
without bombing, except as a thin facade. These realities are held 
secret at the United Nations because so many bureaucrats and member 
nations share responsibility for what is happening. Some countries, 
like Russia and France, eviscerate quite openly; others, like the 
United States, use the hidden knife of apathy. During election campaigns, 
we don't bother to talk about it. But in the past days a few intimately 
informed U.N. people have been willing to reveal these truths about 
the fate of the hunt for Saddam's stockpiles of chemical, nuclear 
and biological weapons and his plans to build ever more. They are 
not ready yet to go public, as have Scott Ritter and David Kay of 
the U.S. and David Kelly of Britain. By daily harassment and trickery, 
Saddam tried to prevent arms inspection for the first six years after 
it was put in place by the victors in the gulf war, to contain his 
power and dreams. But inspection worked anyway. Without it, his weapons 
would be in use by selected terrorists around the world. The inspectorate 
found 21 nuclear facilities that Iraq denied existed. Warheads loaded 
with anthrax and botulinum, evidence of VX, 400,000 liters of chemical 
agents, missiles, two million liters of precursors used in making 
chemical weapons, lists of foreign suppliers of death, a whole inventory 
from hell. Two years ago inspectors drew close to more weapons, and 
weapons programs, more foreign supply lines. So Saddam started his 
endgame. First he limited inspectors to four to a site. Then he put 
a choke collar on inspectors _ where they could go with how much advance 
notice, where they could never go. Then in October 1997 he banned 
inspection altogether, as if the United Nations did not exist; a reasonable 
attitude for a dictator with good friends abroad. Secretary-General 
Kofi Annan flew off to Baghdad in February 1998 to make a Saddam-appeasing 
deal, including allusions of lifting sanctions. The United States 
approved, and warned Saddam _ do it again, we clobber you. Sanctions 
hurt Iraqi civilians. But everybody knew Saddam could end sanctions 
whenever he wished. All he had to do was reveal his weapons of mass 
destruction; the agreement in 1991 was that he do it within 15 days. 
Annan and the Security Council pretended that lifting the sanctions 
was Iraq's major goal. That was world-class cynicism. Anthrax, VX, 
missiles _ those goals Saddam cherishes over all of Iraq's children. 
``I can do business with him,'' said Annan. He did _ until Aug. 5, 
five months later, when Saddam ordered U.N. inspectors out, again. 
The Clinton administration did nothing for three months. Now there 
is serious talk of ``using'' Annan again! This would be one more evisceration 
_ of the major-power responsibility on which the United Nations was 
founded. Meanwhile Defense Secretary William Cohen tries to get support 
for possible bombing of Iraq. Six years ago, even two years ago, bombing 
might have made Saddam permit real inspection again. Now, if bombing 
comes, he will let the inspectors back for awhile, in confidence of 
his controlling knowledge. International arms inspection is not just 
snooping around a suspected site. It is a continuous complex of gathering 
information from intelligence and commercial sources everywhere, scientific 
analyses, laboratories, amassing data banks on Iraq's foreign suppliers 
and pipelines. The information about U.N. inspection methods that 
Iraqi specialists have collected by harassing, disrupting and banning 
cannot be bombed out of their heads, or the new hiding places Saddam 
now has created at home these past few years and in very friendly 
nations abroad. Journalists write as if what we report is the whole 
universe of the story. Generally we do not mention the existence of 
what we do not know, often the most important information. I do not 
know how, when or if arms inspection can be repaired without obliteration 
of Saddam and his regime. And I do not know when Americans will realize 
that the next terrorist explosion in their country might suffocate 
a million people, and therefore is worth talking about, even during 
a political campaign. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>