<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0440 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Dismissing doubts about France's support for NATO in Kosovo after 
a French officer was charged with passing bombing plans to Serbia, 
the French government offered Thursday to lead the allied force that 
will protect international observers in the Serbian province. France 
backed NATO's threat to carry out air strikes against Serbia last 
month if it had refused to pull back forces that were attacking ethnic 
Albanian civilians in Kosovo, Defense Minister Alain Richard said 
Thursday. He said France would provide between one-third and one-half 
of the 1,200 to 1,800 troops in the ``extraction force'' that would 
be ready to rush to the aid of the unarmed observers who are to monitor 
the Serbian pullback in Kosovo. NATO diplomats said that demonstrative 
support for the new mission by Richard and Foreign Minister Hubert 
Vedrine at a joint appearance in Paris Thursday showed French determination 
to limit the damage from the espionage scandal and underline France's 
commitment to a more effective European security policy in the Balkans. 
NATO officials in Brussels said that the French openness in revealing 
the spy case this week and their willingness to deal with its consequences 
had been reassuring to other allies. ``It was a hard blow,'' Richard 
said of Monday's disclosure that French authorities had arrested Maj. 
Pierre-Henri Bunel, an army officer assigned to the alliance's top-level 
military committee in Brussels, on suspicion of passing secrets to 
a Serbian agent in Brussels. ``But we made the decision not to try 
to settle the matter in private,'' he said. It was clear from what 
Richard and Vedrine said Thursday that they hoped that the frankness 
would nip in the bud any suspicions that Bunel's action stemmed from 
secret French sympathies with Serbia that date to their alliance in 
World War I. Doubts had been raised last winter, especially in Washington, 
by disclosures that another French officer, Maj. Herve Gourmelon, 
had been withdrawn from the NATO peacekeeping force in Bosnia after 
being accused of tipping off the Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, 
about plans the allies had to arrest him on war crimes charges. The 
plans were put off and the initial disclosure in Washington was followed 
by near-total silence in Paris. French officials said then that the 
officer had only been following orders in pursuing contacts with the 
Bosnian Serb leadership. They conceded that perhaps he had been a 
little too zealous in trying to persuade Karadzic to surrender, rather 
than wait for U.S. or other allied troops to come and get him. They 
took no further action against Gourmelon. Bunel has reportedly confessed 
that he passed military secrets to Serbia because he took a liking 
to the Serbs during service in Bosnia in 1996. As the French daily 
Le Monde noted, some allies wondered whether the major's sympathies 
might be shared more widely within the French military establishment. 
During the Bosnian war, Francois Mitterrand, then France's president, 
said, ``As long as I live, France will never make war against Serbia.'' 
But France nearly did make war against the Bosnian Serbs in 1995, 
after Mitterrand was succeeded by President Jacques Chirac, who was 
outraged when Serbian forces in Bosnia took French U.N. peacekeepers 
hostage to try to ward off NATO bombing that summer. An intense NATO 
bombing campaign, and new backbone by reinforced French and British 
troops serving with the peacekeepers, led Slobodan Milosevic, who 
was president of Serbia at the time, to negotiate an end to the fighting 
in Bosnia. Now, as president of Yugoslavia, Milosevic agreed under 
the threat of bombing last month to stop Serbian attacks against civilians 
and separatist Albanian forces in Kosovo and to negotiate an agreement 
that would give Albanians autonomy in the province, but not independence. 
According to Le Monde, it was U.S. Army intelligence that first became 
suspicious of Bunel's contacts with a Serbian intelligence operative 
in Brussels, Col. Jovan Milanovic, and tipped off French investigators. 
Richard refused to confirm that account Thursday, and officials in 
Brussels had no comment. But French investigators lost no time in 
summoning Bunel to Paris, obtaining a confession and turning him over 
to civilian prosecutors. They could charge him with supplying intelligence 
to a foreign power, punishable by a 15-year prison term. Richard said 
Thursday that what the major had turned over was not a detailed target 
list, as reported in Le Monde, but ``preparatory documents'' that 
gave a general idea of what the allies planned to do if Milosevic 
refused to back down in Kosovo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>