<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0243 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a nice piece of timing, three substantial gallery exhibitions of 
drawings by Willem de Kooning _ at the Drawing Center in Soho, Matthew 
Marks in Chelsea and Mitchell-Innes &AMP; Nash on Madison Avenue _ 
have coincided with the enthralling Jackson Pollock retrospective 
at the Museum of Modern Art. The two men were friends and peers, but 
are very different artists. Pollock, deeply and irrevocably mythologized, 
has taken on the aura of an E.T. who briefly streaked in from another 
universe and out again. The tirelessly productive de Kooning (1904-97) 
had both feet on earth, and that's where the clamorous, humming energy 
of his painting seems to come from. The same energy is evident in 
his drawings. The three shows (two of which also include sculptures) 
don't pretend to add up to a survey; they include nothing at all from 
the pivotal 1940s or early 50s. But the later work that they do have 
is protean stuff. It includes high-spirited warm-ups for paintings, 
ultra-refined finished pieces and all manner of glorified doodles, 
which together illuminate a career. In shaping that career, de Kooning 
found ways to reign in his natural facility as a draftsman in order 
to sharpen his pictorial game. Some of those strategies can be seen 
in the four series in the Drawing Center exhibition, organized by 
Klaus Kertess. The earliest pieces, dated 1958, are studio exercises 
of the ``write a sonnet about that chair'' variety, self-assigned 
tasks set to keep the mind and eye alert. Titled ``Folded Shirt on 
Laundry Paper,'' they are what they say they are: quick ink-and-brush 
sketches of shirts. In de Kooning's hands, the results are almost 
absurdly virtuosic, a witty, effortless dance between abstraction 
and depiction. On the one hand, the shirts are distilled to pictographs; 
on the other, they assume anatomical life as stout upright phalluses 
or rectangular torsos topped by with plump breasts. The human body, 
particularly the female body, was at the center of almost everything 
he did. And it is the subject of a group of charcoal drawings from 
1966, all of which he executed with his eyes closed, a Surrealist 
technique designed to tickle the subconscious into action. (He also 
cooked up his own variation on this device, which involved drawing 
with his left hand while watching television.) In this period he was 
painting hot-pink nudes: Rubensian good-time girls whose robust bodies 
ripple and blur as if reflected in water. But the figures in the drawings 
are their opposites: stooped hags with long arms, spindly legs and 
haunted eyes. Any attempts to figure out de Kooning's ``real'' attitude 
toward women through his art (a vain endeavor, surely) must take both 
sets of images into account. Also in the mid-60s, he returned to the 
male figure in a series of Crucifixion drawings; some two dozen are 
in the show. Barnett Newman was painting his ``Stations of the Cross'' 
then, and Mark Rothko his murals for the de Menil chapel in Houston, 
so something was in the air. But exactly what prompted de Kooning's 
drawings is uncertain. Most of the crucified figures are nudes, with 
prominent genitals and outstretched arms, though they rarely assume 
the spread-eagle pose of sexual availability routinely found in his 
images of women. The bodies are often framed by the lines of the cross 
itself. The faces are tangles of lines, and some have cartoonish features, 
with a sharp nose and bulging, forlorn eyes. De Kooning riffed on 
this motif for years. A scratchy 1969 pencil drawing of the Crucifixion 
carries the hand-lettered title ``Charleston Pose'' and includes a 
demure woman with long eyelashes and a kneeling or splayed figure 
with what appear to be Philip Guston-eque hairy legs. And an oil and 
ink-wash series from 1972, ``For Santa Emilia: Six Tears for Six Saints,'' 
turns the crucified figure into spare, androgynous icons. Kertess 
proposes that the crucified men are self-portraits. In any case, their 
emotional ambiguity is of interest. Are they intended to be tragically 
expressive or merely klutzy? Parodies of suffering, emblems of the 
real thing, or both? Here, as usual, de Kooning took pains to complicate 
his work enough to put it beyond easy grasp. His complications were 
also formal, as suggested by the large-scale charcoal and oil on vellum 
pieces that close the Drawing Center show. They were created not as 
stand-alone works but as means of tracing and transferring images 
from paintings he had finished to others still in progress. This process 
was clearly intended to interrupt the smooth flow of the act of painting, 
to keep art itself impure; de Kooning used other methods to do the 
same thing, like collage and techniques that combined newsprint and 
paint. Examples of work using newsprint are at Matthew Marks and Mitchell-Innes 
&AMP; Nash. In one oil sketch done on a page from a 1977 copy of The 
New York Times, a snarling, bug-eyed painted face can be read as a 
response to a grisly headline and as a hilarious counterpart to two 
suave models in an advertisement, who themselves look pretty freakish 
in the context. Neither of the gallery shows has the thematic coherence 
of the Drawing Center presentation, but they are full of good things 
and make some astute points. An ink drawing of a head at Marks really 
could be a candidate for a self-portrait. And an oil-and-gouache figure 
of a woman at Mitchell-Innes &AMP; Nash, just a twist of flesh pink 
and lipstick red, distills the tradition of Baroque mythological painting 
that was in de Kooning's blood. Both shows make useful links between 
drawings and sculptures. At Mitchell-Innes &AMP; Nash, a jittery ``Clamdigger'' 
sketch, circa 1972, appears in the company of a plaster version of 
the sculpture of that title, on loan from the Nasher Collection in 
Dallas. (Two big de Kooning bronze sculptures, incidentally, are on 
temporary outdoor view in the Manhattan, under the auspices of the 
Public Art Fund, one at Doris C. Freedman Plaza, the other in Bryant 
Park.) The Pollock retrospective at the Modern includes drawings along 
with the paintings, a good idea. The major de Kooning exhibition at 
the National Gallery in Washington in 1994 did not, and we're still 
waiting for the show that will integrate such materials _ the inner 
mechanics of a career, what makes it tick _ into a comprehensive survey 
of his work. But then, de Kooning is an odd case in postwar art. He's 
so huge _ in the senses of being both ambitious and prolix _ that 
he's elusive; so monumental that he can almost be ignored. Contemporary 
art history hasn't really begun to tackle him. Theory-minded scholars, 
who find much to say about Pollock, so far seem little attracted to 
de Kooning. And a lot of critical writing on him is gushy, still in 
the adoring, star-struck stage. This will probably change as de Kooning, 
who was still hard at work just over a decade ago, gradually moves 
out of the present and into history. He has certainly left future 
historians plenty to work with, and the drawings in these three shows 
add a provocative dollop to that dauntingly generous mix. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>