<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0398 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.S. economy is still expanding, but much more slowly than in 
the first half of the year. The Labor Department _ reporting on October 
a day ahead of schedule after some data were accidentally posted on 
the department's Internet site _ said that employers added just 116,000 
workers to their payrolls last month, the unemployment rate held steady 
at 4.6 percent and the hourly pay of most workers inched up slightly. 
Though the department also said that it had badly underestimated job 
growth in September _ revising its initial estimate to 157,000 jobs 
from 59,000 _ the labor market looked weaker in October than forecasters 
had expected. Solid gains in the services and construction sectors 
were offset by deep cuts by manufacturers who are bearing the brunt 
of global economic turmoil. ``The markets for at least two weeks have 
been sending a very clear message that the economy is slowing but 
will not lapse into recession,'' said Hugh Johnson, chief investment 
officer at First Albany. ``The jobs data are very consistent with 
that message.'' After digesting the details of the report, which was 
officially released in full at 1:30 p.m., stock investors focused 
on the positive implications; the Dow Jones industrial average ended 
the day up 132.33 points. The good news is that the labor market, 
still very tight by any historical measure, is not getting any tighter, 
leaving the door open, at least in principle, to further interest 
rate cuts by the Fed. At the same time, the job market has not unraveled 
either. Job security and income growth are crucial to consumer spending, 
the economy's sole source of strength at the moment. ``The pattern 
is the same as for the past few months,'' said Tom Nardone, an economist 
at the Bureau of Labor Statistics. ``Payroll growth is tailing off, 
but not as dramatically as we feared.'' Adjusting for the effect of 
the strike against General Motors Corp. during the summer, which cut 
employment in July and bolstered it in August, payrolls have risen 
an average of 148,000 a month in the last three months compared with 
an average of 247,000 a month in the first seven months of the year. 
That is the slowest pace in the last three years. The dichotomy between 
the industrial sector and the rest of the economy, evident since the 
Asian crisis first hit last winter, widened further in October. While 
the sprawling services sector added 154,000 jobs and construction 
payrolls expanded by 19,000, manufacturers cut employment by 52,000 
jobs. The biggest losses were in clothing and textiles, which lost 
18,000 jobs, and in electronics, which lost 12,000. But there were 
many smaller declines scattered across industries from machinery to 
metals. Within manufacturing, Detroit was the only bright spot: Automakers, 
which are still scrambling to keep up with strong demand and to rebuild 
inventories depleted by the GM strike, added 7,000 workers. Nearly 
200,000 manufacturing jobs have disappeared since March, an important 
reason that consumers have begun to get nervous about the global economic 
outlook. John Challenger, whose outplacement firm, Challenger, Gray 
&AMP; Christmas, tracks layoff announcements, said that the cuts could 
be attributed largely to mergers, cost pressures and low oil prices. 
Companies announced _ though they did not yet carry them out _ 73,000 
job cuts in September and 91,000 in October, many in the oil, metals, 
electronics and telecommunications sectors. Last month, the three 
biggest cutbacks were announced by Halliburton Co. and Schlumberger 
Ltd., two oil-services companies, and Bell Atlantic. ``These were 
kinds of numbers we were seeing in 1993 at the peak of the downsizing 
wave,'' Challenger said. His layoff figures had been running as low 
as 20,000 a month as recently as last fall. Though the pace did not 
match that of earlier this year, hiring in the services sector picked 
up last month. Computer and other business services, which had been 
down in September, added 58,000 jobs. Work at temporary-help companies 
rose by 21,000 positions, though the levels were still below their 
peak in June. As businesses turned to outsiders for advice, computer, 
engineering and management services continued to hire; employment 
grew by 13,000. And so, surprisingly, did financial-services companies, 
which added 18,000 jobs, a large part in mortgage banking, after no 
growth in September. ``We'd create more jobs if we could find the 
workers,'' said Bill Dunkelberg, chief economist of the Federation 
of Independent Business. That organization's monthly survey of small 
businesses, which was also released Thursday, shows that 32 percent 
of its members still had openings that they could not fill. Total 
hours worked, a rough indicator of the growth of the nation's gross 
domestic product, edged up two-tenths of 1 percent, suggesting that 
output as well as employment expanded in October. In an anomaly _ 
given the sharp drop in employment _ total hours worked rose in manufacturing 
as well. Hourly earnings, meanwhile, barely edged up, rising by a 
penny to $12.89. If the numbers are to be believed, wage inflation 
is slowing. The 12-month increases peaked at 4.4 percent in June and 
were down to 3.6 percent. Most economists, however, consider this 
series less reliable than the Labor Department's broader employment 
cost index, which indicates that wage inflation rose during the summer. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>