<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981105.0424 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pushing the frontiers of biology closer to the central mystery of 
life, scientists have for the first time picked out and cultivated 
the primordial human cells from which an entire individual is created. 
The cells, derived from fertilized human eggs just before they would 
have implanted in the uterus, have the power to develop into many 
of the 210 different types of cell in the body _ and probably all 
of them. Because they can divide indefinitely in culture without the 
signs of age that afflict other cells, biologists refer to them as 
immortal. Eventually, researchers hope to use the cells to grow tissue 
for human transplants or to introduce new or improved genes into people. 
But there is a thicket of ethical and legal issues, as well as technical 
problems, to be overcome. The cells are obtained from embryos created 
at in vitro fertilization clinics and so far do not seem definably 
different from the primordial cells from which an entire individual 
is created. Though some of the scientists involved in the work see 
nothing unusual about working with these cells, other researchers 
say they must be treated differently, given their human potential. 
Once the work becomes widely known, it may draw criticism from those 
who say it is wrong to interfere with nature by doing any kind of 
research on cells like these. Known as human embryonic stem cells, 
they have eluded capture until now because they exist in this state 
only fleetingly before turning into more specialized cells, and need 
special ingredients to be kept alive outside the body. The new cells 
have many possible uses of which the most promising is to grow new 
tissue, of any kind, for transplant into a patient's body. The cells 
may also offer effective routes to human cloning, although both the 
researchers and their sponsor deny any interest in this application. 
Another likely use is in gene therapy, the insertion of new or modified 
genes into body tissue. Two forms of human embryonic cells have been 
developed, one by a team under Dr. James A. Thomson of the University 
of Wisconsin in Madison, the other by Dr. John Gearhart and colleagues 
at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore, Md. 
Thomson's work is reported in this week's issue of Science, and Gearhart's 
in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Congress in 
1995 banned federal financing of research on fetal cells, including 
those derived from embryos, and the university researchers whose work 
was announced today were funded by the Geron Corporation of Menlo 
Park, Calif., a biotechnology company that specializes in anti-aging 
research. ``It has potential health benefits which I think are extremely 
promising, and I am sorry that the law prevented us from supporting 
it,'' said Dr. Harold Varmus, director of the National Institutes 
of Health. After an egg is fertilized it divides several times and 
forms a blastocyst, a hollow sphere with a blob of 15 to 20 cells, 
known as the inner cell mass, piled up against one wall. It is from 
these cells that the embryo develops. Thomson grew his embryonic stem 
cells from the inner cell mass of blastocysts left over from a fertility 
treatment and due to be discarded. Patients who had undergone fertility 
treatment donated the blastocysts to be used in research. As an embryo 
grows and develops its cells become irreversibly committed to their 
fates as specialized components of the body's organs. A pocket of 
cells, known as embryonic germ cells, is protected from the commitment 
process so as to create the next generation of eggs and sperm. Gearhart's 
group has developed embryonic stem cells from the germ cells of aborted 
fetuses. The cells developed by the two groups may well be equivalent 
but this has yet to be proved. If researchers are able to use the 
cells to grow new tissues, the work could alleviate the shortage of 
livers and other organs for transplant. Cultures of the cells in the 
laboratory could be nudged down different developmental pathways to 
become heart or bone marrow or pancreatic cells. Before reaching their 
final stages, the about-to-become heart cells, for example, could 
be injected into a patient's ailing heart. Guided then by the body's 
own internal regulatory signals, the cells would develop into new, 
young heart tissue, supplementing or replacing the heart cells already 
there. The same approach should in principle work with any tissue 
of the body. Human embryonic stem cells would thus serve as a universal 
spare parts system. Because the cells grow and divide indefinitely 
in culture, very few blastocysts would be needed. Many technical problems 
remain to be resolved. The art of directing embryonic stem cells down 
specific pathways is in its infancy. But heart muscle cells have been 
grown from mouse embryonic stem cells and successfully integrated 
with the heart tissue of a living mouse. Thomson in 1995 isolated 
the embryonic stem cells of a monkey, and Geron intends to do pilot 
experiments in these cells. Another problem lies in making grafted 
cells compatible with the patient's immune system. Dr. Thomas B. Okarma, 
Geron's vice president for research, said Geron would explore several 
ways of doing this. One, the least preferred, would be to set up a 
bank with enough different human embryonic cells that most patients 
could be matched. Another would be to suppress the self-recognition 
genes that make the stem cells appear foreign to the patient's immune 
system or, more elegantly, to replace them with copies of the patient's 
own self-recognition genes. A third approach would be to convert one 
of the patient's own body cells back to embryonic form by fusing it 
with a human embryonic stem cell whose own nucleus had been removed. 
Embryonic cells may have the power, not yet understood, to rescue 
an adult cell's nucleus from its specialized state by flicking all 
the switches on its DNA back to default mode. This reprogramming of 
DNA is presumably what happened when mice were cloned this July from 
adult cells. The ethical status of the cells is also likely to be 
a matter of discussion. They cannot become a fetus, as their blastocyst 
no longer exists, yet are very similar, if not identical, to the 20 
or so primordial cells from which the embryo develops. Both research 
groups refer to their cells as ``pluripotent'' because, when injected 
into a mouse with no immune system the cells develop into many of 
the major tissues of the body. The tissues are disorganized and do 
not develop into a normal embryo. The cells may also be ``totipotent,'' 
meaning they can form every one of the body's cell types, but the 
experiment to prove this point would be unethical. The test for totipotency, 
developed with mouse embryonic stem cells, would involve injecting 
stem cells into another blastocyst. A normal mouse will usually develop 
but is composed of a patchwork of cells, some from the blastocyst, 
some from the injected embryonic stem cells, proving the stem cells 
retain all their powers. It would be unethical to perform such an 
experiment on people but if it could be done, it seems likely that 
the human embryonic cells cultured by the researchers would also prove 
to be totipotent. If so, they might be capable in principle of contributing 
to the generation of a new individual. But ethicists say great care 
must be taken in work involving human embryonic cells. ``Any time 
you take a cell off a blastocyst, that cell could be used itself to 
create a human being, so some groups in our society believe that in 
making it transplantable you have derailed it into becoming a kidney 
or some other tissue,'' said Dr. Lori Andrews of the Chicago-Kent 
College of Law, an expert on the laws governing reproductive technology. 
``Some researchers say `It's just a bunch of cells, why should people 
care?' But that totally avoids the fact that some people do care, 
and I'm concerned that if the researchers don't take into consideration 
the variety of viewpoints about embryos they might ultimately end 
up with more restrictive regulations,'' she said. Geron, which obtained 
the exclusive rights to make use of the cells from the researchers' 
universities, which hold patents on the processes, says it regards 
them as qualitatively different from other cells used in research. 
``Because these cells are derived from human blastocysts there is 
a moral authority here, so we take these cells seriously,'' said Okarma 
of Geron. He believes that use of the cells is justified because they 
are something less than a living embryo and life-saving treatments 
may be derived from them. ``We are not saying the ends justify the 
means, but that given that the moral authority of these cells is subordinate 
to that of the embryo, the work we contemplate with them is appropriate,'' 
he said. But Gearhart said he did not consider the cells that he and 
Thomson have isolated to have a special moral status because ``they 
cannot form a fetus _ you cannot take one of these cells and form 
a being out of it.'' Still, he said he would not argue with Okarma's 
view that the cells had a different standing to ordinary cells. Johnson, 
too, said that they were ``special cells.'' Dr. Kevin T. Fitzgerald, 
a geneticist and Jesuit priest at Loyola University Medical School, 
said that if the human stem cells are totipotent, ``then you are disputing 
the viability of life, and we are back to the question of how to justify 
destroying life for the purposes of scientific advancement.'' The 
new cells may well reawaken fears of human cloning, although many 
ethicists have now come around to believing that the public's fears, 
despite science fiction writers' portrayal of clonal armies of frenzied 
despots, are largely beside the point. Many experts now predict human 
cloning is more likely to end up as a rare treatment offered in fertility 
clinics, no different from the others like in vitro fertilization 
and egg donation in that they were first bitterly denounced and are 
now regarded as routine. ``Human cloning will likely also be accepted 
once it becomes a reality. Most of today's ethical arguments against 
it were previously used against in vitro fertilization and turned 
out to be false,'' writes Dorothy C. Wertz, a bioethicist at the Shriver 
Center, in the current issue of Gene Letter. The availability of human 
embryonic stem cells suggests a quite different possibility to biologists, 
who are well aware of how mouse embryonic stem cells have long been 
used to generate genetically altered mice. The belief that humans 
can now be modified like mice ``will be the knee-jerk reaction of 
the academic community,'' Thomson said. He said human embryonic stem 
cells were unlikely to be used in this way because there were more 
promising approaches for gene therapy in people. For one thing, the 
mouse method requires the creation of many embryos in order to obtain 
the few in which new genes integrate in exactly the correct position, 
as well as the breeding of a male and female mouse that have been 
genetically altered. In its present form the technique is evidently 
inapplicable to humans. The National Institutes of Health and the 
university scientists it funds often play a leading role in reviewing 
new biomedical technologies. But because of the Federal funding ban, 
university scientists cannot get government support to study human 
embryonic stem cells. But industry can do whatever research it pleases, 
without necessarily obtaining government approval. Academic biologists 
believe this asymmetry is unfortunate and that the new technique would 
receive better and more detached review if the N.I.H and its scientists 
could take part in the discussion. Varmus said that an expert panel 
on human embryo research had recommended to the NIH that attempts 
to derive stem cells from human embryos should be permitted, but Federal 
efforts along this line were thwarted in 1995, with the Congressional 
funding ban. Varmus said he believed the public ``will see how important 
the benefits of this research might be.'' A Senate bill to ban human 
cloning was defeated in February, the principal argument of its opponents 
being that its overly broad language would prohibit promising research 
on human embryonic stem cells. In any event, any ultimate use of human 
embryonic stem cells may face legal hurdles in the nine states that 
have outright bans on research on human fetal tissues, Andrews said. 
Some laws also prohibit payment for embryos, a restriction that might 
extend to cell lines and tissues derived from embryos. The technique 
reaches to the central mysteries of life and death. As biologists 
have recently begun to understand, the body's cells are not inherently 
mortal. They become mortal only when committed to developing into 
one or another of the body's mature cell types. These specialized 
cells have mostly lost the ability to grow and divide but a few, typically 
those of the skin and intestinal lining, can divide in culture about 
50 times and then die. In January, biologists at Geron learned how 
to manipulate the section of DNA that marks off the 50 or so permissible 
divisions. By reversing the changes in this section of DNA, called 
the telomere, they created lines of cells that divided well beyond 
the usual limit and are still going strong, while retaining their 
youthful vigor and appearance. Biologists refer to these cultured 
cells as immortal because they are expected to grow and divide indefinitely. 
Embyronic stem cells are also immortal because, until they become 
committed to specialized fates, their telomeres are renewed each time 
they divide. Unlike ordinary cells, they grow indefinitely in culture. 
In the lineage of living organisms, they cycle indefinitely from the 
embryo to the germ line to a new embryo. Geron biologists believe 
they can manipulate the telomeres of the human embryonic stem cells 
so that the cells stay immortal even as they turn into specialized 
tissues. Can the mortal body therefore be repaired with new, tissues 
that remain youthful indefinitely? ``Exactly,'' Okarma said. Critics 
have said it would be folly to tamper with the telomere division-counting 
system because it probably arose in evolution as the body's last-ditch 
defense against any run-away cell likely to become a cancer. Okarma 
said that new experiments had largely laid this concern to rest by 
showing that telomerised cells are no more likely to become malignant 
than are normal cells. These grand schemes may or may not come to 
pass, but the techniques now at hand for manipulating human embryonic 
stem cells will at least allow them to be seriously attempted. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>