<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981105.2000.0655 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The administration is indeed banking on the bounty to bring in bin 
Laden. And Neil Livingston, the head of Global Options, an international 
crisis management company, thinks that it's a pretty good idea. Dr. 
Livingston, do you really think that a reward, even one as substantial 
as this one, $5 million, will move this investigation forward with 
such an elusive figure as bin Laden? We can't say with certainty, 
but rewards have been very effective in bringing other terrorists 
to justice, including the master-mind of the World Trade Center bombing, 
Ramzi Yousef. We found that rewards provide the kind of incentive 
in this very dark world of terrorism, its world of treachery, and 
people are willing to sell out other people for money. And because 
the United States finds it so difficult to infiltrate these groups, 
we really don't have a lot of options. And rewards have worked better 
than anything else. And so who is it who usually picks up the bait 
in those previous cases and who's likely to do it this time around? 
Well, Afghanistan itself is a country that is something like a floating 
crap game. It's a nation of shifting alliances based on clan, based 
on tribal allegiances and so on. I'm convinced, as is the government 
that there's probably some fellow out there that claims to be a Taliban 
supporter or Islamic extremist that would really rather live in 90210 
and get a green card and a few million bucks and shop on Rodeo Drive, 
and we're banking on that in the sense that all it takes is one person 
to sell out Osama bin Laden or to grab him and bring him to the Pakistani 
border where he could be met by American agents, no questions asked. 
And would it likely be one person, perhaps from within the ranks of 
bin Laden's own network or would it possibly prompt sources maybe 
outside of Afghanistan to come forward? Well, $5 million is a lot 
of money. Normally in the past, we've usually offered a million or 
two million dollars. There's enough money to go around here. So this 
could engender a conspiracy against him by, say, a small group of 
people or a break-away group. It might even be an incentive to mercenaries 
to go after him. It's money paid with no questions asked, as long 
as you provide us with Mr. bin Laden and his arrest leads to his conviction. 
But then what happens to them? Do they go on to live happily ever 
after or are they forever targeted by bin Laden's associates? Providing 
that their identity becomes known to Mr. bin Laden's associates, possibly 
they could be targeted. But I think there are a lot of people here 
that believe that once bin Laden is in U.S. custody, that his organization 
may wilt on the vine. Without his money, without his leadership, it 
may not be able to go forward. Quite frankly, you have to put this 
all in perspective. The bombing investigation in Oklahoma City has 
cost the U.S. government today, the bombing investigation and the 
trial to convict Mr. McVeigh and Mr. Nichols, have cost $82.5 million. 
We fired about $90 million worth of missiles at Mr. bin Laden's camps 
in Afghanistan and a suspected chemical weapons facility he was connected 
to in the Sudan. So this is cheap at any price. So you think $5 million 
is well-spent taxpayers' money. If we get Mr. bin Laden, it's a bargain. 
The government is now considering spending well over a billion dollars, 
that's with a B, to upgrade embassy security largely because of the 
threat posed by Mr. bin Laden. So you're saying that the $5 million 
is likely to strike fear in the heart of the person whom it's aimed 
at, in this case, Osama bin Laden. Well, would you like a $5 million 
bounty on your head? It's not something I think most of us would relish. 
Is the $5 million taxable income? I do not believe it is taxable income 
unless it's paid to an American citizen. I think if it is an American 
citizen, as in the case of the Unabomber reward, the American citizen 
is liable for taxes. But I don't believe to a foreign citizen or foreign 
entity that this would be taxable income. In fact, I think you could 
have it in Swiss francs, American greenbacks, and, you know, nonsequential 
bills, however you want it. With a bow around it. We'll get it to 
you. Neil Livingston is the CEO of Global Options, an international 
crisis management company speaking to us from Washington D.C. Thank 
you again, Mr. Livingston. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>