<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981105.2000.0372 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. Afghanistan's Taliban movement 
responded today to yesterday's announced indictment in New York of 
Osama bin Laden. A Taliban spokesman vowed that the suspected terrorist 
would be protected at any cost despite U.S. charges that the millionaire 
master-minded last summer's U.S. embassy bombings in Africa. The State 
Department is offering a reward of up to $5 million for bin Laden's 
capture, a move anti-terrorism experts are applauding. We'll speak 
with one of them in a moment. But first, THE WORLD's Andrew North 
tells us why the Taliban is holding on tight to Osama bin Laden. With 
a $5 million price on his head, Osama bin Laden is probably the world's 
most wanted man. But he could also be the world's most elusive. The 
exiled Saudi millionaire is believed to be in Afghanistan under the 
protection of the Taliban Islamic movement. So far, the Taliban has 
refused to hand him over to U.S. prosecutors. Abdul Hakim Majahed, 
its top diplomat in America, says the Taliban authorities are perfectly 
capable of taking care of bin Laden themselves. We have declared to 
the world that if there is any clear evidence in this regard, we will 
take Osama bin Laden to trial inside Afghanistan. But isn't there 
evidence of some kind that the U.S. has come up with, particularly 
since the bombings of the two embassies in Africa? We are telling 
to the authorities of the United States to provide this kind of evidence. 
Osama bin Laden council denied that he didn't have any hand in this 
bomb blasting. But many say the real reason the Taliban is still sheltering 
bin Laden is not because the movement wants to try him but because 
he has a lot of support within its rank and file. Taliban official, 
Abdul Hakim Majahed says bin Laden's popularity stems from his days 
as a Mujahadin fighter in the 1980s. He has got the good Mujahid during 
Soviet Union time. Good Muslim participating in freedom and the Taliban 
Islamic woman, they have the problem with the public opinion. The 
public opinion is very strong in our country. And according to the 
Rand Corporation's Zelmic Halazad, to turn him over risks offending 
the Taliban's popular base. The Taliban are guided by a code that 
once someone takes refuge in your home as a guest, there's a kind 
of a tribal code that you don't turn him over to those who are pursuing 
him. In other words, bin Laden's hand over would have the potential 
to set off a split within the Taliban. Nonetheless, Taliban official, 
Abdul Hakim Majahed, says the Islamic movement would be better off 
without bin Laden. We do not have any desire of living with Osama 
bin Laden in Afghanistan because he is not in the benefit of Afghanistan. 
No, Afghanistan is not in need of him in any way. But with the posting 
of the $5 million bounty, the Taliban leadership appears to be hardening 
its position on bin Laden. Today, it accused the United States of 
encouraging terrorism by offering such a large reward without providing 
convincing evidence of his guilt. But Gideon Rose of the Council on 
Foreign Relations in New York says bin Laden is clearly guilty. He 
does represent a major threat to U.S. and Western interests in general. 
He is the head of a loose freelance private terrorist network that 
is a new trend in terrorism, not primarily state sponsored in the 
way that some of the older groups were, and with a general desire 
to hurt the United States rather than to achieve a specific political 
objective. Rose also supports continuing military efforts to disable 
bin Laden and his network, but it's still possible that pressure from 
the Taliban's few friends outside Afghanistan such as Saudi Arabia 
and Pakistan will force a change of heart, according to Professor 
Ashaf Ghani of Johns Hopkins University. After all, Saudi Arabia and 
Pakistan are two of the three states that have extended their commission 
to it. And withdrawal of support from these two governments could 
be very detrimental. Professor Ghani also says a promise from the 
United States to back the Taliban's claim to Afghanistan's seat at 
the United Nations would encourage its leadership to turn over bin 
Laden. But that's unlikely to happen anytime soon. Meanwhile, the 
Clinton administration is hoping that a $5 million check will tempt 
someone with close ties to Osama bin Laden to break with Islamic solidarity 
and stop treating the exiled Saudi as a guest. For THE WORLD, this 
is Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>