<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981105.2000.1254 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. It's a perfect example of how 
our planet is getting smaller. When Japanese diners consume less sushi, 
New England fishermen feel the pinch. And when the price of high grade 
tuna drops by half, those American fishermen have a tougher time making 
ends meet. One of them is Eric Hess, who has made his living fishing 
off Cape Cod for more than ten years. These are what we used to call 
hero shots. We're actually commercial fishermen, but these are the 
kinds of pictures that people who come for the day and want to stand 
up with their fish and have their picture taken today. So we do this... 
When he flips through his scrapbook, Hess takes visible pride in the 
snapshots of his most prized catch, the blue fin tuna. There's pictures 
of the fish laying on the deck of the boat and you can see that it's 
about ten feet long, and it takes up most of the cockpit of the boat 
from the trans on the back end of the boat up to about where the steering 
wheel is. So they're not small fish. That is a huge fish. And so how 
much would that tuna weigh? These particular fish are in the 500 to 
600 pound range. So let me ask you then, in the best days of the Japanese 
economy, what would that mean for you? How much would you fetch by 
selling a fish like that? We might have averaged $15 a pound for something 
like that, so... Is that right? There was a period of time when a 
fish like that meant, you know, a payoff. Granted, we might only catch 
one or two of those a week, but compared to the expense of the boat, 
it was lucrative to do it that way at that time. How low has the price 
gone? The price paid to boats in this pass season I think was on the 
order of $7 to $8 a pound, which still sounds like a lot of money... 
But compared to what it used to be... Compares to what it used to 
be, it's... ...a few years ago, $14, $20 even a pound. Right. Those 
were very exciting times. In the prime days of the Japanese economy, 
when you could sell a fish like that, what can you do with the money? 
It happened to coincide with a period of low interest rates, so I 
refinanced my mortgage and put some money towards that. But by no 
means did myself or anyone I know actually run out and by a Porsche. 
I mean, it's really not at that proportion because again the boats 
that we use to chase these fish are $150,000 investments. So, you 
sort of have to structure your debt over a long period of time. But 
the market for these fish is very demanding, and what the Japanese 
look for is a high fat content of the fish among other things: freshness, 
the actual color of the fish's meat. The toro of the blue fin tuna 
is one of the top tier sushi products, and that was marketed aggressively 
by the Japanese to their corporate traditional holidays and corporate 
meetings, and it was a large part of traditional gatherings of the 
Japanese. And recently, we've seen corporations less likely to be 
as extravagant as they were. And that has sort of taken a bite out 
of the demand for tuna, for blue fin. So is it the kind of situation 
now where you're always finding yourself keeping a close eye on what's 
happening with the Asian economy or the Japanese economy specifically? 
Well, for anyone who started an export business to Japan in the lat 
ten years, they've obviously got to be thinking that, you know, whatever 
excess there was, if they can get down to their bottom line and see 
an excess, that's what they should have been putting away for a rainy 
day. And I don't know, as well as a lot of economists, what's going 
to happen in the next few years. Hopefully, the yen rate will stabilize 
again somewhere in the hundred range, which will make it a lot easier 
for us. So the idea is like know that you're not necessarily secure 
when you're dealing with overseas markets? Oh, yeah. The volatility 
in our own stock markets is a good example of what's happened over 
there. The exchange has been all over the road. Demand - last summer, 
we had an E.coli scare. So anything, anything can happen. The Japanese 
have these different holidays, and we come in with a load of fish 
and we think they're really good quality, and we find out that it's 
eel week, you know, it's part of their traditional ceremony that they 
only - they don't eat other fish products; they want eel. So those 
kinds of things have happened a lot. It's highly unpredictable. Well, 
thank you very much for coming in to speak with us. Eric Hess is a 
commercial fishermen out of Barnstable, Massachusetts on the boat, 
the Tenacious. Thanks again for coming in. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>