<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981105.2000.2701 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This week, I want to tell you about a scandal involving a British 
Cabinet minister that's been dominating the media here. THE WORLD's 
London letter writer, Eddie Mayer. Some of the issues the story raises 
go to the heart of Public Radio journalism, its mission and its values. 
Last week, the Secretary of State for Wales, Ron Davis, suddenly resigned. 
On Tuesday morning, he went to see Prime Minister Tony Blair, told 
him of an incident in a public park late Monday night involving three 
other people and offered to quit his job. The prime minister accepted. 
The press has speculated and Davis has denied that he was in the park 
looking to have sex with another man. Davis, who's married, has since 
had to endure lewd claims that suggest he has for years conducted 
himself in the same manner that got George Michael arrested in Los 
Angeles. Indeed, in a BBC interview, Davis was asked three times if 
he's gay. As a result of this story, there's been great public discussion, 
as you might imagine. And the whole thing took a new twist when a 
respected columnist for the "Times of London" appearing live on BBC 
television named another Cabinet minister, a leading figure in the 
government and a household name in Britain, as being gay. That was 
on Wednesday. The press, and not just the tabloids, talked about little 
else after that. All the issues surrounding a Cabinet minister who's 
never discussed his sexuality but never denied suggestions he might 
be gay were in the public domain. One elder statesman has since called 
for a ban on gays at the highest levels of government. Amid this flurry 
of debate the BBC sent a memo to all staff saying that the private 
life of the minister in question must not be discussed on air or referred 
to in any way at all. The media was having a field day. "BBC Censors 
Gay Gay Debate". "BBC Staff in Uproar in Censorship Fight." While 
every paper in the land was discussing the issues behind the story, 
the BBC ignored it. The argument was that the BBC is a public service 
broadcaster. It does not delve into people's private lives. It deals 
with public policy. A nice Sunday morning radio program had to ask 
guests before the show not to raise the issue of the minister's sexuality 
and warned them that if they did, they'd have to cut them off. What's 
the audience supposed to make of this? Is it supposed to applaud the 
BBC for standing by its public service mission and refusing to discuss 
an individual's private business? Or is it being hypocritical, demanding 
answers from the disgraced Ron Davis but not discussing another minister's 
business which is being debated in every other media outlet in the 
land? Would you expect your public radio station to discuss a senior 
government member's sexuality, or at the very least, some of the issues 
it might raise. Or would you expect public radio to rise above it? 
As for what I think, well, I'm a public service broadcaster. My opinion 
is personal. THE WORLD's Eddie Mayer writes us weekly from London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>