<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981105.2000.2514 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If your job is a typical one, your morning consists of getting up, 
having breakfast, and heading out the door to the office. Well, more 
and more heading out the door to the office means walking out of the 
dining room to your study. Telecommuting is on the rise, and faxes 
and computers are enabling increasing numbers of people to work from 
home. This week, the European Commission is promoting telecommuting 
across the continent with European Telework Week. THE WORLD's London 
correspondent Steven Beard is one of those taking part. And actually, 
Steven, I guess it's pretty much the usual routine for you because 
you are sitting there in the comfort of your own home, I presume, 
as usual in your pajamas again today. No, I must tell you, Lisa, that 
in honor of this interview, I have had a shave, a shower, and I'm 
sitting here in a suit. And we all appreciate that, I want to tell 
you, Steven. But tell us about telecommuting and whether that is really 
catching on there in Europe as it has pretty much here in the United 
States. Well, we're told that something like five million people in 
the European union are now telecommuting, and as many as three million 
of those are in Britain. It's difficult to know how accurate these 
figures are but there's no doubt that in Britain, there's a tremendous 
push towards teleworking or telecommuting and for obvious reasons. 
This is a very overcrowded traffic congested island, and getting in 
to work is a day's work in itself. Increasingly, people are deciding 
to stay at home and work there instead. And what are some of the disincentives 
for doing that? What's the reason that Britain needs to push it the 
way it is this week? Well, I don't think it's going to be anything 
like as extensive as it is in the U.S. And the major barrier here 
is the cost of telecommunications. It is still very expensive here. 
It's not as expensive here as it is in continental Europe but it is 
still very expensive. You always have to pay for local calls here, 
which means that, for example, you can't log on to the Internet and 
stay there for several hours at a time. It would be much too expensive. 
And in terms of the incentives for doing it, the idea is that, what, 
it would primarily reduce traffic? What else? Yes, it would reduce 
traffic. There's also the idea amongst some policymakers that it will 
enable people to get a bit more of a life, you know, that they wouldn't 
spend so much of their time slogging into work and slogging out again. 
I live about 25 miles from the center of town and it can take between 
1-1/2 and two hours sometimes just to get into the BBC in the center 
of town. And so for those people who are taking advantage of it this 
week and staying home and doing their work from their own home, kitchens, 
offices, whatever, do these weeks seem to be changing people's lives 
and attitudes? Are they kind of getting into the telecommuting mode? 
No, not at all. In fact, if anybody I think stays at home this week 
especially to celebrate European Telework Week, they'll be fired. 
But it is at least bringing a bit of publicity to the possibilities 
that there is the technology now that you can actually sit at home 
and do an enormous amount of work from your own home. THE WORLD's 
Steven Beard -- I think you sold us on this idea - speaking to us 
from his spare bedroom office in London. Thank you very much, Steven. 
Thank you, Lisa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>