<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981105.2000.2996 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. In an attempt to find an environment 
where they're free to create, free from racism, American black artists 
have often sought refuge in Europe. Jazz musicians Dexter Gordon and 
Bud Powell lived there in the '60s, and the black writers who cross 
the Atlantic include James Baldwin and poet Langston Hughes. I've 
known rivers. I've known rivers ancient of the world and older than 
the flow of human blood in human veins. My soul has grown deep like 
the rivers. For today's musical closure, THE WORLD's Marco Worman 
profiles another African-American artist who had to migrate to Europe 
to fine the peace of mind to create. Driving into Stockholm in a cold 
rain, I didn't find the Swedish capital exactly welcoming, but it 
can be when you want to get away from home. Sometimes it's nice to 
leave your home country. It really is. You take a lot for granted, 
Americans do. Eric Bibb grew up in the folk music environment of Greenwich 
Village. His dad was a folk musician, Leon Bibb. When he was 13, Eric 
went with his dad on a concert tour of the Soviet Union and then on 
to Stockholm. It was here, Eric says, something clicked. People were 
very curious about the way brown skinned people looked here. This 
is a very homogenous society. There was a lot of curiosity and very 
friendly naivete, and I loved out of being that thing in America that 
just has not been fixed. The still unfixed thing is racism. Eric Bibb 
knew that in the early '70s, he'd had enough of it. The friendly camaraderie 
from the folk scene of the '60s which was my baptism had basically 
waned, and divisiveness and strife was just all around. I couldn't 
concentrate on what I loved most. And try as I might, walking down 
Broadway or the wrong part of Harlem at a certain type of night just 
did not give me that combination. When I came to Sweden, I not only 
found friendly people but wonderful musicians, local musicians, and 
musicians from all over the world. So at that time, things have changed 
here too, mind you, but at that time, it was pretty much Utopian for 
a young, you know, African-American who wanted to figure out who he 
was in this whole thing. There was something unique about the atmosphere 
here. It was - You know, Sweden's not a great colonial power. It was 
never, you know, into all of that. It had their messy chapters but 
it's not like France, it's not like England, and there was really 
a lot of good feeling and a lot of sympathy for African-American people 
and African people particularly who were involved in struggles for 
freedom and self-identity. As it turned out, Eric Bibb discovered 
that he even had a family member, jazz pianist John Lewis, who'd also 
made an artistic exodus to Stockholm. This came to Bibb's attention 
when he was first visiting the family of his Swedish bride to be. 
My uncle, my mother's brother, John Lewis, was here early on with 
Dizzy Gillespie. I remember looking through the photo album of my 
wife's family when I was first, you know, was introduced to my in-laws, 
looking through a family album and came to the back page, and there's 
a photo, a glossy photo that her uncle had taken, and it's my uncle, 
you know, looking at me in the picture. I said, "God, you know, it's 
not every day that happens." Eric Bibb's band puts to rest the notion 
that the blues has to be performed by old black men. Backing up Bibb 
and his band, "Needed Time," are Swedish friends and musicians, Olly 
Erickson, Nick Maumasfrom, Yanni Peterson, and Bjorn Gidionson. I 
wonder how it looks for an American, you know, to see, you know, this 
African-American fronting a band and there's all these guys with Swedish 
names and they're playing this music, and they sound like they know 
exactly where to go with it. And it's been a revelation for me to 
really understand that the music that I love to make inspired by the 
roots and traditions that nurture me, that they were a gift to me 
and mine but also to them and us, a gift to the whole world because 
this music, it's universal. This music came to us who needed it so 
badly. It's sort of like, "OK, this is a heavy, heavy, heavy collective 
karma you guys are going through, but here's a gift for you and you 
can share it with the rest of the world, and you can actually come 
to through other side with its aid," you know. Eric Bibb treats his 
Swedish-tinged blues as a gift. He enjoys it. His words are happy 
and hopeful. It's his antidote for an angry society, on he's moved 
beyond. For THE WORLD, this is Marco Worman. Blues from Stockholm, 
courtesy of American Eric Bibb, brings this edition of THE WORLD to 
a close. Thanks for listening. I'm Lisa Mullins. We hope you'll join 
us again tomorrow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>