<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981105.2000.0931 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You just can't count on anything these days. Used to be you could 
depend on the French to make great movies, the Russians to write great 
novels, and the Japanese to prepare great sushi. Now others can fill 
in the film and book gaps but there's no sushi like Japanese sushi. 
From Tokyo, THE WORLD's Lucy Kraft tells us how the fish are faring 
in recession-era Japan. At precisely a.m., the famous wholesale fish 
market in Tokyo's Siji district clangs to attention. Milling buyers 
armed with flashlights and sharp pits have been ambling between the 
meat rows of dark tuna carcasses, each fish bearing a red ID number. 
Then the auction begins. Yabbering prices in a mad morse code, the 
auctioneers rapidly dispatch hundreds of fat tunas where there are 
tunas of all grades and sizes from around the world. But the monsters 
are blue fin tuna, the prime rib of Japanese cuisine flown into the 
Siji fish market from distant ports like Canada and Boston. Only a 
few years ago, blue fin tuna was averaging about $20 a pound, but 
with the recession, demand for high grade tuna has collapsed and prices 
are down by about half. Wholesaler Ken Tadao Nagasaki has ridden blooms 
and busts for nearly 30 years, but the current slump is the worst 
he's ever seen. First of all, starting about five or six years ago, 
the big construction contractors stopped wining and dining their clients. 
Then other public and private officials followed suit. People in real 
estate and the stock market cut back on luxury meals, and average 
consumers had stopped eating at lavish restaurants. Japanese stop 
eating sushi? Perish the thought. But with fancy dining out of fashion, 
sushi aficionados have been forced to go bottom fishing. Well, this 
is just a sort of a cheap sushi restaurant and they serve sets of 
different types of sushi. You can have like a mixed set, or you can 
have eight of the same thing. Atlanta native Matthew Weisner, a restaurant 
critic for the "Minich Daily News," has tracked the rise of fast food 
sushi restaurants. He's an expert on something called Chaiten sushi, 
self-serve restaurants where conveyor belts whisk plates of raw fish 
on rice to customers. You can spend as much as 80,000 yen on sushi 
at a regular place where as Chaiten sushi, you normally wouldn't spend 
more than two. So it's... So $80 versus about $20? Right, yeah about, 
around there. Sushi chefs are heirs to a proud and long tradition. 
They undergo training as rigorous as that of sumo wrestling. The unorthodox 
fare offered at cut rate sushi shops would make sushi masters choke 
on their seaweed. You know, they'll serve fried chicken, salads, different 
types of cakes, and you know, all going around on the same cart. After 
inspecting half a dozen conveyor belt sushi shops, Weisner stepped 
into one and sized up the rolling fare. Well, there's some translucent 
fish, which actually I don't know the name of, with some green onions 
on top, a piece of very old salmon, some red clam looking mucusy. 
It's enough to make sushi gourmets gag, but for the average consumer, 
even low-grade raw tuna known as maguro is better than nothing. There's 
some striated squid, noto seaweed roll, some more translucent fish 
bathed in reds, looks like red eggs. A lot of times, things go by 
and you just have no idea what they are. And you can either eat them 
or not eat them. That's the wonderful choice. For THE WORLD, this 
is Lucy Kraft in Tokyo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>