<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981105.2000.2025 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Americans are finally getting a taste of Mitch and it's not a very 
appetizing one. The storm marched across the Florida peninsula today 
downing power lines and trees and sending roofs flying. But that's 
nothing compared to what the Hurricane Mitch did during its sweep 
through Central America when it killed 9,000 people. The worst damage 
occurred in Honduras and Nicaragua where cholera, dengue fever and 
typhoid threatened to take more lives in the coming weeks. Relief 
missions have begun with the United States providing $70 million of 
assistance to the region in the form of food, helicopters to carry 
it in, and engineers to help rebuild roads and bridges. We have two 
reports on the aid effort, the first from correspondent Peter Gresta 
in La Dalja, Nicaragua. A Nicaraguan military helicopter lands on 
a tiny football field in La Dalja Village perched high in the Matagalpa 
highlands. A crowd of shell-shocked villagers swarms around. It's 
the first time they've seen help from the outside since the damage 
from tropical storm Mitch hit them last week. The people unload the 
cargo of rice, maze, cooking oil, and water purifying kits. La Dalja 
lost 86 mud brick homes; most simply dissolved in the four-day deluge. 
From the drains overflowing in the streams, the wells are full of 
filthy water. Dead animals lie in the fields and the crop has gone 
along with the top soil. "This food is important," the village leader, 
Hiney Adda told me, "but it only solves the immediate problem. We 
also need to start thinking about rebuilding our social infrastructure, 
as well as our farm lands." And it's not just La Dalja that's lost 
its infrastructure. Chris Bacon, an American voluntary service worker, 
saw the damage done in a village further south. What was once a small 
river which may be considered a stream in other countries, had expanded 
to about 300 meters in diameter. They had washed out the cement bridge 
that was there. Houses had been taken down. It kind of tore open the 
whole valley. In the short term, farmers need help to survive until 
the next planting cycle. Without it, a famine in Central America is 
a very real prospect. Seventy percent of Honduras' agriculture is 
gone. Nicaragua lost almost as much. Nicaragua's Air Force chief, 
Major Manuel Sabatiera, briefs his boss, General Kuadra, about the 
country's emergency air lift operation. It's a relatively short briefing. 
Nicaragua has only six of its own helicopters and eight from the American 
military to deliver aid to the half a million people here affected 
by the floods of the past week. With virtually no major roads passable 
anywhere in Nicaragua, General Kuadra argues that all the food out 
in the world is worthless without the aircraft to deliver it. All 
the help we are getting right now is for helicopter. That's why we're 
asking through the United States, through Mexico, and through the 
whole international community in air support. One aid agency said 
trying to provide relief with helicopters is like trying to bail out 
a sinking ship with a teaspoon. What's needed is engineering equipment 
to repair the 2,000 miles of roads and bridges wiped out in the storms. 
It will take hundreds of tons of aid on heavy lowries to solve the 
food crisis. For now though, helicopters will have to do. Peter Gresta, 
Nicaragua. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>