<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981105.2000.2220 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I'm William Troop. As the scale of the damage to Central America has 
become clear, donations have been pouring into everyone, from local 
churches to the Red Cross, in Washington. In Miami, an Evangelical 
organization called World Relief has set up a receiving station at 
the airport to channel donations to Central America. Project manager 
Pablo Vera says the public's response to the disaster has been tremendous 
but the logistics have been difficult. The trouble we're having is 
getting the donations to the Miami area. We don't - The good will 
the people have shown from all the calls that we've received, the 
lines are busy day and night with people that want to get the donations 
there but there's no way to get it there. And unfortunately, we don't 
have a big network across the nation to get the donations to the Miami 
area shipped out. American Airlines has said that they will ship out 
of other airports, but donations have to be prepared for shipping. 
That's time consuming for organizations on the receiving end of the 
public's generosity. Clothing and blankets need to be cleaned. And 
what may seem appropriate to an American donor like a jacket or a 
heavy blanket, could be inappropriate for a recipient in Central America. 
That's why the International Red Cross is taking no chances. We strongly, 
strongly recommend that people make a financial contribution rather 
than a contribution of canned goods or clothing. Ann Stingle with 
the American Red Cross in Washington warns against what she calls 
pipeline blockage. Even if things arrive at the airport in those countries, 
how do they get it out to the people? The distribution systems are 
just destroyed, and things that are inappropriate only end up clogging 
the pipeline for the things that are absolutely necessary. I would 
hate to think that water purification wouldn't be able to get in because 
a load of canned goods is, you know, and these other things are blocking 
the pipeline. That's a lesson Stingle says the Red Cross learned during 
the relief operations for earthquakes in Mexico and Armenia in the 
1980s. Then, too much assistance ended up clogging delivery efforts 
on the ground. Meanwhile, the situation in Honduras and Nicaragua 
remains uncertain. The infrastructure in both countries has been severely 
damaged. Roads and bridges have been washed out, and there aren't 
enough helicopters to deliver the aid in a timely manner. In Nicaragua, 
flood victims are complaining that they're not getting all that was 
promised. The U.S. government is helping out. The Pentagon has donated 
the services of helicopters from the Southern Command in Panama to 
ferry plastic tarps and food to isolated areas. Paul Bell is the U.S. 
regional disaster coordinator based in San Jose, Costa Rica. The helicopters 
are operating, are moving, and we have fuel, we have people on the 
ground. We have search and rescue persons. And I would say at the 
present time, the picture is actually improving rapidly. The sun is 
shining in several places. Some of the roads are being opened. I think 
that we are actually much closer to being able to provide assistance 
than we were 24 hours ago. And there's more U.S. military help on 
its way. As part of the $70 million aid package announced by the White 
House today, more military aircraft are scheduled to be deployed in 
Central America. And the U.S. Agency for International Development 
is putting up some $20 million in emergency food aid. Those shipments 
will start leaving this weekend aboard giant 747s leased by the U.S. 
government. For THE WORLD, this is William Troop. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>