<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.1600.2510 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As Mr. Wollock explained, a more literal definition of the rule of 
law usually implies some form of training of lawyers, judges, or law 
professors. To create an independent judiciary. But to have an effective 
judicial system, a country also needs to have citizens who understand 
what their legal rights are, and how to fight for them. The Columbia 
University Law School in New York has launched a project to promote 
what's known as "Public Interest Law" in Russia and Central and Eastern 
Europe. VOA's Barbara Shotzow has more on that part of our story. 
Public interest law can mean many different things. But for Ed Ricosh, 
director of a new project launched by Columbia University in New York, 
it means putting the law back in the hands of ordinary people. Constitutional 
courts are being set up. And legal reforms are being implemented. 
Experts are scrutinizing independent judiciary. And some of the other 
issues that are very, of course very important. One thing that has 
not gone examined hardly at all, is the extent of which the average 
citizen is able to make use of the courts. Able to make use of the 
law. Mr. Ricosh, an attorney, says public interest law is a term that 
is fairly new. But it represents activities such as human rights advocacy, 
environmental advocacy, and consumer protection. It supports legal 
education. Which provides future lawyers with practical skills. And 
encourages involvement in public interest matters. Law schools are 
particularly well-placed to influence the next generation of lawyers. 
They're particularly well-placed to put resources at the disposal 
of non-governmental organizations who are trying to improve the situation 
of human rights. Or the environment or what have you. And clinical 
legal education provides a conduit for that function. The public interest 
law initative works with American law students who go to Europe to 
assist in legal education advocacy. Bernadette Bruce, a law student 
at Columbia University, has worked in Central Europe. I help and assist 
people at universities who are already teaching law history. Who wish 
to enlarge their curriculum. To include the kinds of law and legal 
studies that they were not able to be involved in during the past 
50 years. Director of the project, Ed Ricosh, says public interest 
law is a changing concept that depends on the people where it takes 
hold. The initiative works to help the people of Central and Eastern 
Europe and Russia develop their own traditions. That report was researched 
and written by New York intern, Katie Dixon. The rule of law, and 
building democratic institutions in former totalitarian countries 
was the subject of today's Dateline. I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>