<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.1600.2154 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Western governments and international organizations have expressed 
alarm. At the speed with which many former totalitarian countries 
have slid into corruption and anarchy on the road to democracy. What's 
lacking is what's become known as "the rule of law." But what does 
that mean? And how is it implemented? The rule of law was the topic 
examined on a Dateline segment, which ran on September 10. And which 
we've decided to repeat today. Here's Pamela Taylor. The challenge 
facing governments from China to Russia, and the former Soviet Republics, 
is how to build democratic institutions to replace Communist ones. 
And prevent a collapse into lawlessness. In many instances, freedom 
has come too quickly. Emerging democracies may have free speech and 
a free press. But people can also be jailed or gunned down in the 
street for exercising that right. Western governments and private 
organizations are trying to help by funding and training leaders in 
the fine art of democratic institution building. To form governments 
based on the rule of law. One such organization is the Washington-based 
National Democratic Institute. NDI was originally established to set 
up and monitor free elections in former Communist countries. Today, 
NDI operates throughout the former Soviet block, the Balkans, and 
also in South Africa, Asia, and Latin America. NDI President Ken Wollock 
gives his definition for the rule of law. Sometimes rule of the law 
is to find a very narrow terms of development of an independent judiciary. 
But also, rule of law can also be interpreted in much broader terms 
of building institution. That provide checks and balances and it moves 
parliament political party. NDI does not engage specifically with 
developed judicial reform. The training of judges. But the work that 
we do relates to the development of political parties - the development 
of parliamentary reform. All go hand in hand with the development 
of the rule of law. We consider it part of a larger rule of law effort. 
Can you explain, more specifically, what kind of institutions you're 
helping to build? Well, there's a variety of institutions - political 
institutions. That are necessary for democratic society. Without these 
institutions, like an independent judiciary, like Parliament, like 
the development of strong competitive political parties. Like strong 
civic organizations that are gauged as a link between elected officials 
and citizenry. What ultimately happens, the society is a political 
vacuum is created. That vacuum is going to be filled by non-democratic 
forces. That will rule with impunity. And which leads ultimately, 
I believe, to instability. And a culture of corruption in society. 
That's exactly what I was going to ask you about next. Because a lot 
of these Communist countries, like the ones in the Balkans, like Russia. 
Have been criticized for descending more into kleptocracy than democracy. 
How do you combat that? Well, hopefully it's a phase that these countries 
are going into. But - and will come out of. Every society, including 
our own, has corrupt practices. But he have institutions in our society 
and in other societies to help minimize those corrupt practices. And 
prevent, as I said, a culture of corruption to take hold. Now, do 
you find that it's more difficult? Or does it make it easier if a 
government has some sort of institution in place already? Even if 
that institution has become corrupt. Or is it easier to go into a 
country like perhaps Albania, which has practically nothing to build 
on? There is no single recipe. Each country is different. And each 
country has to be approached differently. Those countries that have 
been most successful; for example, the Republic of Georgia. And the 
former Soviet Union. Probably the most successful country in this 
regard is the result of a group of young political reformers. That 
is led by the Speaker of the Parliament. That is deeply committed 
to institution reform. So, I would say that the main ingredient are 
individuals that are committed to these types of institution reform. 
As the case in Georgia. Or has been the case in South Africa. Where 
you have a deeply committed group of elected leaders. Provincial assemblies, 
national assemblies. And a government that are trying to build, in 
a very short period of time, a new political system. Do you see any 
indication in Bosnia, of the phenomenon you just described in Georgia? 
Where leaders are coming forth and are giving you hope. Yes. Oh, yes. 
Absolutely. We have been working in Bosnia now, in Bosnia now for 
the last three years. We have seen the emergence of a number of individuals. 
A number of organizations that are beginning to take ownership of 
the process. Today, about a third of the population voted for multi-ethnic 
parties in local elections. You're seeing people who are willing to 
stand up and oppose ultra-nationalism. And new political parties that 
are emerging around peaceful resolution of disputes. And in support 
of a unified country. Ken Wollock, president of the National Democratic 
Institute. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>