<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.1600.2685 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A promising new AIDS drug is being developed that attacks the Human 
Immuno Deficiency virus, or HIV at the very beginning of its lifestyle. 
The drug, known as T-20, is being tested in humans. If everything 
goes well, the experimental medication could become available in about 
18 months. VOA's Jessica Berman reports. Unlike other anti-AIDS therapies, 
T-20 attacks the virus that causes AIDS at an early stage in its life 
cycle. Michael Sag is a clinical investigator at the University of 
Alabama Department of Medicine, in Birmingham. What this drug does, 
is it interferes with the ability of the virus to fuse and enter into 
the cell. At that stage of the life cycle. Becasue right at the beginning, 
if the virus tries to enter the cell, this interferes with that process. 
Dr. Sag explains that existing anti-AIDS drugs such as AZT or 3TC 
interfere with the viruses production of a unique enzyme called reverse 
transcriptaze. The AIDS virus needs reverse transcriptaze to take 
over host white blood cells and turn them into little HIV factories. 
The newest class of drugs on the market, protease inhibitors, refer 
to a protein. Protease, secreted by the mature AIDS virus. Without 
protease, the virus is unable to leave its cell factory, enter the 
bloodstream, and infect other cells. Researcher Michael Sag led a 
study of T-20. Which was published in the November issue of the journal, 
Nature Medicine. He says the findings offered the first proof that 
it's possible to fight HIV very soon after infection. The proof of 
concept in this study shows that a third area of attack is viable. 
And in fact, opens up an entire new vista, or means of drug development. 
That can develop other agents that can attack this part of pur life 
cycle. In the study, T-20 was given to 16 HIV-infected men in four 
different doses. The two low-dose groups showed almost no response 
to the drug. Prof. Sag says there was roughly a ten-fold decrease 
in the viral load of men in the third dose group. It was in the fourth 
dose group, the highest dose group, that we noticed all four patients 
dropped their level of virus in the bloodstream to undetectable levels. 
Within 10 to 14 days after starting treatment. The fall in virus in 
that group was as fast as we've seen with any other drugs. Including 
protease inhibitors. In the study, investigators report no significant 
side effects of T-20, which is a peptide. Because they are a form 
of proteins, peptides are usually well-tolerated by the body. In a 
News and Views column accompanying the article, University of California 
researcher Douglas Richman says there's good news and bad news about 
T-20. Dr. Richman says the good news is that it appears to be at least 
as effective as existing anti-AIDS therapies. The concern about the 
compound is it has to be given by injection. So it will not be a very 
practical drug. Other AIDS drugs are taken in pill form. Even if the 
drug doesn't become a widespread treatment, Prof. Sag conceives of 
it playing one very important role. As an antidote for medical personnel 
who receive needle sticks. Hypodermic needle sticks are the major 
route of HIV transmission for nurses, medics, and dentists. Dr. Sag 
says it's possible that T-20, if administered immediately after a 
needle stick, could prevent an HIV infection from taking root. Jessica 
Berman, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>