<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.1600.1368 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
VOA's Ted Lanfair recently visited the Mount Washington Hotel. That's 
an elegant turn-of-the-century resort in the New England state of 
New Hampshire. It was Gatsby Weekend at the hotel. That's a reference 
to the F. Scott Fitzgerald novel: The Great Gatsby. About the raucous 
decade of the 1920's. Throughout the weekend, music helped carry people 
back to carefree times gone by. For Gatsby Weekend, women dressed 
in slinky flapper outfits. And men in zoot suits, straw hats, and 
even gangster costumes. There were 50 or so classic antique automobiles 
of the period. And much of the music was provided by a - well, listen 
and you may recognize the musical form. A barbershop quartet. You're 
listening to the Top Drawer Four, from Hanover, New Hampshire. Home 
of Dartmouth College. In fact, one of the singers is coach of the 
diving team at Dartmouth. Barbershop singing got its name from the 
Tonsorial parlors of New England, where patrons would sometimes harmonize 
vocally and on musical instruments that the barber would provide. 
But the style of close harmony, in which the tenor, baritone, and 
bass must take their cues from the lead. And all four singers stay 
within a single octave, is a purely American musical form. Barbershop 
singing flourished between 1895 and 1930. When several quartets were 
featured by the fledgling recording industry. And thousands of amateur 
groups sprang up across the country. Although not as popular today, 
there are still almost half a million barbershop singers in the United 
States alone. Including many women, who are called Sweet Adelaides. 
The Top Drawer Four has been together 16 years. Harold Laros, a mortgage 
banker, is the second tenor. That means he carries the lead part. 
My brother was a barbershopper many, many years ago. And he tried 
to get me interested in barbershopping when I was young. Like 19 and 
20. And I wouldn't have anything to do with it. Now that I'm older 
and smarter, and wiser. I just wish I'd started it 20 years before. 
Ron Higgins, who's a factory maintenance manager, is the first tenor. 
We want to touch people. We want to make them happy. We want to make 
them sad. We want to make them reflect on the good things in their 
life. All the things that are in their memory. We want to bring up 
and let them cherish those. And we try to enhance that memory for 
them. Ron Keinhold, the Dartmouth diving coach, is the baritone. He 
has the most difficult part. The one that gives barbershop singing 
its distinctive sound. The baritone is sometimes singing below the 
lead. Sometimes above the lead. Sometimes down pretty close to the 
bass. And if I were to sing my notes without any lyrics, you would 
never guess what song I might be thinking about. And to do that, I 
think the most important thing is to be able to hear the other parts 
well. The bass, the bass, is Gary Richardson. His favorite memory 
of the group is the evening when the Top Drawer Four sang at his daughter's 
wedding. It was one of many times that the group drew close. Not just 
musically. These guys have always been there. In life we have some 
difficult times. We lost a son at 12 years old. And boy, it's so great 
to know that you've got three people who have turned out to be your 
best friends. Because you always know they'll be there when you need 
them. Believe it or not, like many barbershop singers, not one of 
the Top Drawer Four reads music very well. The men call it "ear singing." 
It's not easy, as you'll hear when some of us at VOA tried it. Now, 
perhaps we'd best leave the crooning to the pros. I'm Timid Tenor 
Ted Lanfair. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>