<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.0500.0308 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Central America's misery is still being assessed in the aftermath 
of Hurricane Mitch. Hundreds of thousands of people remain homeless, 
and thousands more are missing in the aftermath of the hurricane. 
The death toll is estimated at nine thousand, but is expected to climb. 
Seven thousand people are believed dead in Honduras alone. The scope 
of the devastation has overwhelmed most relief efforts. Some emergency 
fights are beginning to reach the victims of Hurricane Mitch. VOA's 
Bill Rogers is covering that story. And traveled Wednesday to the 
slopes of Nicaragua's Casistas Volcano. Where several villages were 
swept away in a massive mudslide. He described a scene of terrible 
devastation. Later, after we landed here, we made our way out to the 
tiny community of Colso Tega. At the edge of this huge mudslide near 
where many, many people, as I mentioned before, died. There were bodies 
still there that we could see. That the relief workers have begun 
to burn in an effort to prevent the spread of disease like cholera 
and other diseases. Bill, this seems to be one of the most disturbing 
elements of the story that I've heard so far. Is that the survivors 
of this disaster are really not even going to be able to properly 
bury their dead. Because of the terrible circumstances. Is that what 
you're saying? That is one of the - exactly. That is one of the many 
tragedies of this whole business. We talked to people there who have 
not found their relatives in days. And they know that they're buried 
under the dirt somewhere out there. The authorities are basically 
so desperate, they're just gathering up what bodies they can find. 
And just incinerating them without making any efforts to try to identify 
them, let alone try to contact the relatives. Whole families have 
perished, have died here. Leaving maybe one child, or a husband, or 
a wife. You hear this gain and again: I woke up in the middle of the 
night or really during the early part of the day. I woke up and heard 
the sound of thunder, and I saw a wall of earth just coming down towards 
me. And I ran and ran and then they were just tumbled around. Tossed 
around, scarred and injured, losing their clothes. Because many of 
them emerged from this naked. Because of the force of the earth cascading 
down upon them ripped their clothes off. So those who survived, many 
of them are in very bad shape. Bill, real quick, can you see any signs 
of the relief coming in? They, in this community, there were some 
helicopters that came in during the day. I'm talking about Cosal Tega. 
Came in during the day, bringing in some relief. But people about 
the lack of emergency assistance. They say the food and other supplies 
are not being distributed properly. And I will tell you, even earlier 
this morning, at six o'clock local time. I went out on a helicopter, 
a military helicopter. We went up, all the way up to Northern Nicaragua, 
near the Honduran border. To bring supplies to the community there. 
The helicopter circled a few times, and decided that the conditions 
weren't right for it to land. So it returned to Anauga with the supplies. 
So those supplies were not delivered. And apparently it's happening, 
because of - even though there are no longer torrential rains here. 
The conditions are so bad that these helicopters can't land. That 
of course, is VOA's Bill Rogers. He is covering the aftermath of Hurricane 
Mitch in Nicaragua. He spoke to us earlier. Mitch is now downgraded 
to a tropical storm. It is still causing problems. Tropical storm 
warnings are up for Western Cuba and Southern Florida. As it heads 
for that region with 75 kilometer per hour winds. Landfall of this 
tropical storm is expected today. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>