<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.1600.0580 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Catholic Bishop from the United States has called on world leaders 
to increase their efforts to bring peace to Southern Sudan. Where 
more than one million people have died in 15 years of fighting. Sonya 
Lawrence Green reports from Nairobi. This is John Ricard, president 
of the charity, Catholic Relief Services. Says the only way to end 
the cycle of war, poverty, famine, and death in South Sudan is to 
focus on finding a lasting peace to the 15 year old civil war. Speaking 
on behalf of the Catholic bishops of the United States, we call upon 
the international community to focus on this conflict. Where millions 
of lives are at risk. And where there is a gross daily assault on 
human life and human dignity. And we pray for a just and lasting peace. 
Bishop Ricard spoke to reporters in Nairobi, Kenya, after his three 
day visit to South Sudan. Where he toured the towns of Rumbeck, and 
Marpordi in the Lakes Region. In the south, there were vast areas 
of devastation. We saw bombed churches and empty schools. There were 
classrooms containing huge cachements of live ammunition. Playgrounds 
with destroyed tanks and cannons left by a departing military force. 
We observed hospitals without medicines or medical staff. What little 
treatment is available in these hospitals to the vast populations 
of the regions, was done in open fields with primitive methods. Catholic 
Relief Services, along with other relief agencies, is providing food 
aid to an estimated one million people in South Sudan facing food 
shortages. Officials say poor crop prospects in 1999 mean more misery 
lies ahead. In the meantime, getting relief aid to South Sudan has 
become even harder. This week, 42 aid workers were evacuated from 
Western Ecuadoria. After being attacked by armed bandits. And intensified 
fighting in several areas has cut may Sudanese off from vital supplies. 
Southern rebels have been fighting the Northern Islamic government 
for years. And the war has more or less, turned into a stalemate. 
Bishop Ricard said it is important to look at all the underlying causes 
for the conflict. I believe that it's very important to see this as 
more than simply a religious conflict. Certain elements of religion 
are there. A component. But I think we have to see them in its totality. 
In terms of ethnic, cultural, historical differences between peoples. 
The North and the South. Clearly, the different and unequal distribution 
of the goods of the state, between the North and the South. And it's 
clearly evident that the way the country was formed by the colonial 
powers was an artificial formation of boundaries. Which needs to be 
reexamined. Bishop Ricard says there needs to be a framework, for 
peace talks in Sudan to succeed. He compared Sudan's civil war to 
the conflict in the Middle East. Where diplomacy and an imposed structure 
for serious peace talks has paid off in peace deals. Sonya Lawrence 
Green, for VOA News. East Africa Bureau. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>