<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.0500.2137 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The state of Oregon is still counting ballots on a measure to decide 
whether its citizens will ever go to the polls again. The initiative 
calls for all future elections to be conducted by mail. The votes 
are still being counted early today, but it appears the people will 
give this proposal their stamp of approval. VOA's Carmen Saffost talked 
with Marian County official Alan Davidson about the initiative. He 
explained why it's so popular among voters. There are a number. Mostly, 
it's a convenience for the voter. You're not restricted to a 12 hour 
period on a given day elected by the government to go and cast your 
ballot and exercise your franchise as an American. You have - we generally 
provide the ballots two to three weeks ahead of election day. People 
have their voter's pamphlets, they have the campaign materials. They 
can sit down. They can work their way through their ballot. I don't 
know how it is in a lot of other states, but our ballots have become 
rather huge. Our voters in this election had, on average, 36 or 37 
contests to decide. Everything from medical use of marijuana to who 
their city councilors are going to be. Exercising your rights in democracy 
is not easy, it takes study and time. And that's what our people are 
telling us: that they like to have time. Now, in addition to that, 
we have found that conducting elections by mail was much more efficient. 
We can do it for about 40 percent less cost than we can do a polling 
place election. And we find that we have increased turnout. We don't 
have the low turnout elections any longer, that we used to have. I 
mean they're still unacceptably low, when we're talking only 40 or 
50 percent for a special election. But, we're nor down into the 9, 
10, and 12 percents that we were when we began this program. What 
kind of opposition are you hearing about this measure? Well, the opposition 
primarily is about the "what ifs." What if this increases voter fraud? 
And the response to that, of course, is that we've got 17 years experience 
with it. And have had very little evidence of voter fraud. And what 
little we've had, we've gotten convictions on. Another one is the 
possibility of undue influence that is somewhat within the household. 
Generally, perceived to be the male dominating the female. And we've 
had 40 separate universities do studies attempting to find undue influence 
and has been unable to do that. So, those are the two primary arguments. 
And the idea of the loss of community for not going out to a polling 
place where all of your neighbors are. And in fact, in Oregon, your 
neighbors are not there. They're voting by absentee, so that's kind 
of a spacious argument. But it's been a matter of political controversy 
here. First one party thought it was a good idea. And the other party 
refused to support it. Then the roles reversed. And so we took it 
by initiative petition directly to the people. And they are overwhelmingly 
going to approve it. That was Alan Davidson, the Chief Electing Official 
of Marian County, Oregon. Talking about an initiative that, allowing 
primary and general elections to be conducted by mail. And as you've 
heard, so far it is well received by Oregon voters. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>