<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.0500.3160 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Storyville is the name of an infamous and now defunct prostitute district 
in New Orleans, Louisiana. Jazz music was thought to have originated 
there more than a century ago. But as VOA's Doug Levine tells us, 
Storyville is also the name of a new blues band from Austin, Texas. 
That's beginning to make some noise far beyond its home base. Austin, 
Texas is a long way from New Orleans, but both cities can claim a 
Storyville of their own. The other Storyville originated in Austin's 
honky tonks. Famous for it's raucous blend of West Texas rock and 
blues, gospel, swing, and soul. Guitarist David Grisham says despite 
an ever-growing fan base outside of Texas, the band remains true to 
its musical roots. When you live in Austin, it influences who you 
are. And where you live, obviously an environment and the fans, and 
that's what makes us unique. Storyville won critical praise for its 
1994 debut album: The Bluest Eyes. The New York Post called it: "a 
disc that will find followers of the blues, R&B, and rock. A pleasure 
from start to end." Fans found pleasure in the band's next release: 
A Piece of Your Soul. Storyville's debut on Atlantic Records. Now 
David Grisham says he and the band members are particularly pleased 
with the newest album: Dog Years. We know each other better. We've 
grown as a band playing together. And I think we've wrote better songs 
for this record. And that usually is a pretty good place to start. 
Storyville is sometimes called "Austin's dream band." Guitarists David 
Grisham and David Holt, singer Alfred Milligan, and former members 
of Stevie Ray Vaughn's Double Trouble. Drummer Chris Layton, and bassist 
Tommy Shannon. According to Shannon, their most challenging moments 
usually come in the recording studio. It takes a lot of concentration. 
You've got to listen to every little detail and figure out what you're 
going to do on the spot. To change and make it better. It's hard work, 
I love doing it. I really love doing it. But it's pretty tedious. 
Records and concerts are not the only reasons for Storyville's success. 
Band member David Grisham says younger fans are adding to the growing 
popularity of the blues. Every town, there's like a proud parent bring 
his 12-13 year old son who's a blues guitar player out to meet the 
band. I mean, 10 years ago, there was no way that was going to happen. 
But it's cool, it's a whole new generation of kids who are taking 
an interest in that music. And hopefully keeping it alive. Storyville 
jumped on BB King's Blues Bandwagon last summer, joining the legendary 
guitarist and Louisiana's Neville Brothers for a blues festival tour 
of the U.S. I'm Doug Levine. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>