<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.0500.2658 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Officials at the U.S. Department of Agriculture say the $500 million 
package of U.S. food assistance to Russia announced Wednesday, will 
help Russia avert potentially serious food shortages this winter. 
Following that country's worst grain harvest in 50 years. Rob Siveck 
has details. The U.S. will provide Russia with at least 3.1 million 
metric tons of food grains, meats, and other commodities worth about 
half a billion dollars, beginning in early December. Agriculture Secretary 
Dan Glickman told reporters in Washington that the U.S. is prepared 
to provide additional assistance as necessary. But he stressed that 
the U.S. is attaching two important conditions to its eight shipments. 
First, that our assistance will be distributed properly to those in 
need. And second, that our food aid will be exempted from taxes and 
customs duties. We believe those are essential elements of a successful 
program. And we anticipate receiving prompt assurances from the government 
of Russia on those two matters. Secretary Glickman said the initial 
U.S. food aid will reach Russia in three components: a 100 thousand 
ton package of various food commodities. Such as flour, cooking oil, 
and non-fat dry milk. Will be distributed as a grant to private non-governmental 
groups working primarily with Russia's poor and elderly. One and a 
half million tons of U.S. wheat will be donated to the Russian governments 
specifically for sale in the neediest food deficit areas. And another 
one and a half million metric tons of grains, meats, and other bulk 
commodities will be sold to Russia through a low-interest, long term 
loan provision of the U.S. Food for Peace Program. USDA officials 
say much of the U.S. food aid will be sold through the marketplace. 
And will not reach most individual Russians as a handout. The officials 
say that will prevent any negative price impacts on Russia's struggling 
farm economy. According to private agricultural analyst John Schnitker, 
the 3.1 million tons of food will be a great help in filling Russia's 
food shortfall this winter. It might be as much as a five percent 
addition to their overall grain supplies for the year. And if they 
distribute it properly to those areas and those cities, and those 
people who are most potentially in need. It could be extremely helpful. 
If it just goes into the mill of Russian plutocrats and millionaires, 
then it will be another story. Clear yet, one impact the Russian food 
aid package will have on the U.S. farmer economy. Grain prices are 
currently at 10 year lows because of bumper U.S. harvests and falling 
exports. Russian critics of U.S. food aid have said Washington's real 
aim in sending help is to empty brimming American silos. And to raise 
grain prices for U.S. farmers. While USDA officials agree that any 
movement of U.S. grain to Russia will bolster market prices, they 
won't speculate by how much. Analyst John Schnitker believes the Russian 
aid package is simply not big enough to generate any windfalls for 
U.S. farmers. We have so much corn and soybean. Such large additions 
to the carryover from this year's crop, that this will not have a 
material effect on prices. But it certainly helps clear the decks 
a little bit so that prices maybe won't be so low next year. Private 
grain analyst John Schnitker. USDA officials emphasize that the food 
aid package could provide a boost to Russia's economy as well. They 
say under terms of the U.S. grant, the Russian government has agreed 
to earmark money from the sale of the donated U.S. food commodities 
to help fund economic reform, rural development, and social welfare 
programs across the country. In Washington, I'm Rob Siveck. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>