<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.1600.3007 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thank you, Breck. After long and difficult negotiations in the United 
States, some human rights groups and major U.S. apparel manufacturers 
have reached a compromise agreement on a code of conduct. Aimed at 
limiting worker abuse in foreign factories. Correspondent Elaine Johenson 
reports from New York. A major union has rejected the agreement. The 
agreement is meant to reassure American consumers that the clothing 
they buy is not made in so-called "sweatshops." Where workers are 
underpaid and overworked. Under the new pact, forced labor is out. 
Employers are required to pay either the official minimum wage or 
the prevailing industry wage, whichever is higher in a specific country. 
Factories used by U.S. companies cannot employ children under the 
age of 15. With some exceptions. Nor will wokers be allowed to work 
more than 60 hours a week. The New York-based Union of Needle Trades 
Industrial and Textile Workers, known by it's acronym UNITE. Says 
the agreement hardly guarantees what is called a living wage in countries 
where local wage standards normally are too low to support a family. 
The union also argues the monitoring system is too weak. The anti-sweatshop 
agreement sets up a new entity, the Fair Labor Association. That will 
assign monitors to assess compliance. The Director of Research at 
UNITE, Mark Levinson, says the agreement is a sellout to U.S. corporations. 
And only serves to diminish the chances for real progress. Those employees 
who make a judgment, they argue that it's a first step. We think it's 
actually, perhaps a step backward. In that it sets up these expectations 
that just are agreement. And therefore, is going to take pressure 
off of these companies. However, Michael Possner, Executive Director 
of the Lawyer's Committee for Human Rights, says the issue of living 
wage is complex and differs country by country. He calls the agreement 
a starting point. There is a process here. We have just begun to really 
get our arms around what it's going to take to evaluate what constitutes 
the right formula. For deciding what's an appropriate wage. We will 
work on it. I regard it as a priority. But it is not simply a matter 
of saying we all know what it is. We all can get to it tomorrow. I 
don't think that's the case. The four companies, including Nike and 
Reebok, and five non-profit groups that negotiated the deal. Hope 
dozens of other U.S. companies will sign the agreement. They say they 
could not have enticed reluctant businesses to join. If they had agreed 
to the union's. VOA News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>