<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.0500.1294 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
That's our performers rehearsing at the Classica Theater for Youth, 
which was founded in the United States by a former star of children's 
theater in the old Soviet Union. VOA's Andrew Barrack has this story 
about Ina Shapiro's American dream to enrich children's lives by exposing 
them to Russian-style theater. A native of Leningrad, Ina Shapiro 
was an actress in a repertory company that performed exclusively for 
audiences of children ranging in age from 8 to 16. Every night, an 
audience of about one thousand children. And I just remember how great 
it was. You know, just coming to the great theater place. The gentle 
air, with the beautiful stage. It's a magical place. It's so good. 
There were professional actors, professional directors, professional 
playwrights. Professional building, seven days a week. 11 months a 
year. The theater of a thousand seats, always full. To keep these 
thousand children in the place, it should be something special. By 
special, Ms. Shapiro means high-quality professional actors, costumes, 
and music. And stories with some depth. The sort of things grown-up 
like to see when they go to the theater. When she immigrated to the 
United States 18 years ago, Ms. Shapiro was curious about the quality 
of its children's theater. At that time, we in the Soviet Union, we 
believed that whatever is. And when I saw the children's theater, 
I was shocked. When Ina Shapiro founded the Classica Theater for Youth 
two years ago in a suburb of Washington D.C., it was apparent to local 
actors like Steven Shettler, that getting a job at Classica meant 
serious work. So many theaters around here that are for children tend 
to be amateurish. Actors do get paid, so in the technical sense they're 
professional. But as soon as an actor starts to get jobs and get work 
somewhere else, they leave children's theater behind. It tends to 
be a starting-off place. But after they've got some credits, they 
don't want to work there anymore. They don't think it's - they don't 
think it's very prestigious. Shakespeare's prestigious. Feature films 
are prestigious. Working off-Broadway in some strange experimental 
play in New York is prestigious. But children's theater never has 
had that for some reason. And so you also don't get playwrights who 
want to work there. Because writing plays for children is not prestigious. 
They think it's very simple. And I think that's one of the main things 
that Classica is changing about that attitude. That just because you're 
performing for children doesn't mean you have to be some sort of base 
entertainer. Juggling or falling down all the time. Kids aren't interested 
in that, if there's nothing behind it, the kids start talking. They 
aren't paying any attention. And you can't fool kids any more than 
you can fool adults. Classica performs English translations of stories 
by Russian writers like Anton Checkov and Alexander Pushkin. As well 
as fairy tales like those by Hans Christian Anderson. One of the first 
productions was Zolushka, the Russian version of Cinderella. Again, 
Ina Shapiro. The whole play was that the fairy godmother wanted Zolushka, 
or Cinderella, to understand that she is good and she can believe 
in herself. And she becomes somebody. It is not necessary to change 
physically or become somebody else. If you're good inside, if you 
feel good, if you're nice kind, then people will see it. And they 
will discover you. So that was our message to our audience. Members 
of Classica believe that their kind of theater will attract young 
people away from television, computers and video games. If only for 
an afternoon on a weekend. Classica actor Steven Shettler. At the 
theater, it's a social event. You see real people onstage. You see 
real events taking place and you've got all these other people around 
you who are experiencing it with you. Who's going to win - the technology 
or the children's theater? Theater, it's for centuries. Movies, television, 
whatever happens, radio - it's never stopped theater. And it's only 
for one reason. It's because it's alive. The Classica Theater for 
Youth has performed in the Navarro Auditorium for two seasons. But 
recently moved to a permanent home. An old clothing store renovated 
with stage and 90 seats. A modest home, says Classica founder Ina 
Shapiro. Not the one thousand seats that were taken each night she 
performed in Leningrad many years ago. But it's a first step, she 
says. In winning American appreciation for Russian-style children's 
theater. I'm Andrew Barrack. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>