<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.1600.0358 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Political observers here in the United States continue to examine 
the results of the past Tuesday's midterm Congressional and state 
elections. In which Democrats made unexpected gains in the U.S. House 
of Representatives. VOA's Sarah Williams spoke to Larry Sabato, Director 
of the University of Virginia's Center for Government Studies. And 
asked him whether the results were prompted by the scandal surrounding 
President Clinton. Or by local concerns. If you read the exit polls, 
you'd have to say that it was almost entirely a referendum on local 
issues. And not a referendum on President Clinton. But I think this 
is another good example of how polls misrepresent what people really 
think. Behind this election, undergirding it, was a belief that President 
Clinton either should or should not be impeached. It's important to 
remember that presidential popularity in the state of the economy 
set the parameters of any election. And help to determine the results. 
So, I think it did have an important part to play in this election. 
And if you're analyzing the results fairly, you would have to say 
that part of the message the American public was sending was that 
President Clinton should not be impeached. I was just going to get 
into that. How does this set the stage now for the upcoming Congressional 
procedures regarding Mr. Clinton's situation? It essentially means 
that impeachment is deader than the deadest doornail. It really doesn't 
matter much what the House of Representatives does. In the hearings, 
or even if they vote out articles of impeachment. It will be dead 
on arrival in the Senate, where there is zero chance of 67 votes being 
accumulated to oust President Clinton. So, it's merely a procedure 
that has to be followed now. Because that's what the House voted for. 
Prior to the election. But it has no practical impact. The odd thing 
is that the greater danger now is actually for Democrats. Because 
President Clinton is generally at his best when he's up against the 
wall. He's at his worst when he gets arrogant and when believes that 
he's got the world on a string. That's when he does foolish things. 
And he may well interpret this as a green light from the public on 
his behavior. I don't think the public approves of his behavior. They 
just simply don't want him impeached. Does this at all put the Speakership 
of Newt Gingrich at all, or the rest of the Republican leadership 
at all in any danger? Considering they did lose some seats to the 
Democrats. If the Republican caucus in the House has any sense at 
all - and that's questionable. They will remove most, if not all of 
their current leadership. They desperately need new blood. They need 
younger blood. They need mediagenic blood. They need to get some people 
in office in their leadership, representing them on television. People 
who are likable. People who will not turn off more than half the public 
before they even open their mouths. Which is what Newt Gingrich and 
Dick Armie, and others in the leadership currently do. Political analyst 
Larry Sabato, speaking about the results of the recent elections. 
With VOA's Sarah Williams. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>