<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.0500.2353 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet awaits a decision from 
the British House of Lords as to whether he will be held for extradition 
to Spain or allowed to return home. People in Chile continue to debate 
the issue as well. VOA's Greg Flakas has spent some time on the streets 
of the Chilean capital of Santiago, and has this report. The hustle 
and bustle of everyday life in Santiago has been little affected by 
events in far-off London. Which after heart, involved events from 
two decades past. Many people followed the news here with curiosity, 
but with little sense of connection with their own lives. Still, the 
mere mention of General Pinochet at a public meeting place, like a 
market, can set off a vigorous debate. Market vendor Maria Jose says 
a good healthy debate may help Chile heal. She says, " it would be 
good if the right wing supporters of General Pinochet recognize that 
crimes were committed during his reign from 1973 to 1990. "This, she 
says, "could open the way to national reconciliation." But another 
vendor, Hector, says all Chileans should be indignant over the detention 
of General Pinochet in London. And the attempts to extradite him to 
Spain. He says, " these nations have no right to meddle in the affairs 
of Chile. And that if General Pinochet is to be tried, it should be 
in Chile, not Spain." But neighbor Jose disagrees. He recalls the 
case of Carmelos Torea, a Spanish diplomat accredited in Chile. Who 
was abducted, tortured, and murdered by secret police under General 
Pinochet's command in 1976. Jose says that General Pinochet violated 
this diplomat's status, then why should London or Madrid recognize 
his claim to diplomatic immunity today. Listening nearby, 23 year 
old Anna Louisa expresses her opinion about events that, for the most 
part, occurred before she was born. She says that although she is 
young, she knows what happened in those years. And she believes justice 
should prevail. She says, " 82 year old General Pinochet may be a 
frail old man today, but he wasn't when he was in power 20 some years 
ago. At a time of widely-recognized human rights abuses." Many people 
in Chile today do not feel comfortable talking about those times. 
And would like to set it all aside. They argue that Chile is a different 
country today. Free of dictatorship, and free of the terrorism carried 
out by Leftas, which also claimed many lives. Under a 1990 amnesty, 
neither Mr. Pinochet, nor Leftas guerrilla leaders can be tried in 
Chile for crimes they may have committed during the violent years 
following the 1973 coup. But, the events of the past two weeks in 
London have revived old arguments and exposed many wounds that never 
have healed here in Chile. The dictatorship and the violence may have 
ended in Chile, but the process of reconciliation is far from over. 
Greg Flakas, VOA News, Santiago, Chile. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>