<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.1600.3185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is VOA News Now. For more than 50 years, a daily cartoon has 
figured prominently at the top of the editorial page of the Washington 
Post newspaper. Political cartoonist Herb Block, who pronounces his 
name as simply, Herblock. Has been commenting on the American political 
scene through his art. His sharp observations and insights are the 
subject of a new autobiography: Herblock, a Cartoonist's life. Robin 
Rupley has more. Political cartoons, unlike comic strips, do not always 
show the country at its proudest moments. Herb Block's cartoons have 
chronicled many turbulent eras in American history. He describes the 
beginning of his tenure at The Post as the "fear-filled forties and 
fifties." Referring to how the spread of Communism abroad created 
such anxiety in America. That Wisconsin Senator Joseph McCarthy was 
able to assemble his blacklist of un-Americans. Even the word McCarthyism 
is a Herb Block invention. First appearing in a cartoon. He says he 
is motivated by events that appear to be terrible injustices in society. 
Sometimes I get the early edition of the paper, the next morning's 
paper at night. Sometimes I read it in bed and I'll say: Hey, they 
can't do that! But his ideas for a drawing, he says, may come from 
just about anywhere. You read the papers, you think about what you 
want to say. And you try to put it in a picture. If you were talking, 
you might say that this bill in Congress has no more chance than a 
snowball in hell. Well, if you're a cartoonist, you might draw a snowman 
melting in hell. The 89 year old Herbert Block joined the Washington 
Post in 1946. And has been the winner of three Pulitzer Prizes. One 
of which he shared with reporters Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein, 
for their coverage of the 1974 Watergate hearings. Some of his most 
scathing cartoons were of President Nixon during that time. But that 
wasn't the first time Richard Nixon appeared in a Herb Block cartoon. 
The artist admits to not having a favorable impression of Nixon, even 
when the politician was still a member of Congress in the 1950's. 
Not even from the very beginning, because when he first ran for Congress, 
he had people calling up saying that his opponent, the incumbent, 
was a Communist. After he won the election, he told his Congressman's 
aide: you don't understand, the idea is to win. And I think that motivated 
him all the time. So I didn't care for him from the time he first 
ran for Congress. Nixon's so-called "low-down Congressional campaign" 
was characterized by Herb Block. As Nixon traveling the country in 
a sewer. In 1954, Herb Block's cartoons reflected the concern of many 
who saw real danger in the proliferation of nuclear weapons. He characterized 
the country's fear by drawing a "Mr. Atom" character. Who kept growing 
in size and power. Herb Block describes his point of view as liberal. 
And his instincts as common sensical. Washington Post publisher Catherine 
Graham once wrote "that he appreciates virtue, but his real interest 
is in awfulness. His mind turns to the rascals, the phonies, and the 
frauds." But Herb Block has also used his cartoons as a kind of public 
service announcement. After suffering a heart attack several years 
ago, he wanted to further alert the public about the dangers of smoking. 
You know, at one time, I smoked very heavily. And when I stopped smoking, 
I was thinking about drawing cartoons about the subject. But I thought 
it might seem as if I was one of those guys who stopped smoking and 
wanted to reform everybody else. But then I decided later on, that 
this really was such a danger. And so many bad results. That something 
ought to be done about it. And so I got to drawing cartoons on it. 
As for his longevity at the Washington Post, the editorial cartoonist 
sums it up in his own self-depreciating way. Time flies when you're 
having fun. Herb Block's new book is called: Herblock, a Cartoonist's 
Life. It is published by McMillian Press. This is Robin Rupley. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>