<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.0500.0794 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Winners are savoring their victories. And losers are mourning their 
losses in the aftermath of Tuesday's Congressional elections. Campaign 
consultants and broadcasters are counting their profits from the increasingly 
costly business of electoral politics. VOA's Michael O'Sullivan has 
the details, from Los Angeles. In California alone, $300 million was 
spent in this election. In campaigns for political office, and drives 
to support or oppose policy measures on the ballot. One Los Angeles 
consulting firm earns several million dollars for its work on two 
ballot proposals. One, to support gambling on Indian reservations. 
And the other, to defeat a measure that promised to cut the cost of 
electrical power. The firm's work was, apparently, effective. The 
first measure passed and the second failed, as the clients had hoped 
that they would. Craig Holdman who's project director for the Center 
for Governmental Studies, a private research group. Says political 
spending in California is the highest in the nation. Well, particularly 
in terms of the initiatives on the November 1998 ballot. We've seen 
an increase from over the last 20 years of roughly 1,500 percent in 
terms of campaign spending. For the initiatives on this ballot, we 
have set an all-time global record in terms of campaign spending. 
Proposition 5, for instance, has exceeded $100 million. Supporters 
of Proposition 5, which legalized Indian Casino gambling, outspent 
their opponents by a two to one margin. To bring about the measure's 
passage. Eighty percent of campaign spending goes to advertising, 
which is expensive in California. A 30-second political message aired 
on a television station can cost several thousand dollars. For political 
analyst Craig Holdman, the spending is excessive. And it is evidence 
that California needs to reform its campaign finance laws. He says 
most election spending goes to broadcast station owners and political 
consulting firms. The money tends to go to a very focused set of people. 
Namely the networks and the few campaign consultant firms that exist 
in California. So, the money really doesn't get distributed very far. 
We've got a few people who get very wealthy off of these campaigns 
in California. Other analysts point out that some election funds go 
to direct mail companies, which send out campaign brochures. And political 
pollsters and public relations firms. Money also goes to the producers 
and crews who make the television and radio commercials. Economist 
Jack Kaiser, says in election year, a lot of money is spread around. 
Providing what he sees as a useful boost to the region's economy. 
Mike O'Sullivan, VOA News, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>