<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981105.0500.1919 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Democrats in the U.S. Congress are still glowing with their victory 
of Tuesday. They didn't win control of the national legislature in 
the mid-term election. But they did hold their own in the Senate. 
And they added five seats in the House. For a party that was fearful 
of political fallout from the Clinton Sex Scandal, the results were 
the best that the party or the President could have expected. Now, 
the voter reprieve has given the Democrats an optimistic outlook as 
they plan for the next election in two years. Capitol Hill correspondent 
Paula Wolfson tells us why. Democrats say: Just wait till next time. 
Today is the first day of Campaign 2000. Richard Gephardt, the top 
Democrat in the House, says the days of the Republican majority are 
numbered. I believe with all my heart that we will win this election 
in the year 2000. And we will take back the House. The mood at Democratic 
Headquarters was jubilant on the day after the 1998 election. Congressman 
Martin Frost, who coordinates House campaigns for the party, joined 
the celebration via closed-circuit television from his district in 
Texas. We won because we had great candidates. Great candidates who 
spoke to the issues. Who spoke to the issues that the American Public 
cared about. Mr. Frost says Democrats made a good showing at the polls. 
Because they started planning early. And because they waged an all-out 
effort to energize their supporters. He points to the strong turnout 
by African-American voters in the Southern United States. I would 
look to the Black vote in North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, 
Alabama, Mississippi. All states where Democrats scored victories. 
Either on the gugentorial level, Senatorial level, or Congressional 
level. The Texas Congressman says he never doubted Democrats would 
gain House seats on November 3. But in the weeks leading up to election 
day, there was little evidence to back up his optimism. Just a month 
or so ago, Republicans were predicting to gain for their party, a 
30 or 40 seats in the House. And perhaps as many as five in the Senate. 
Richard Gephardt says their big mistake was focusing too much on impeachment 
proceedings against the President. They want to go for eight or twelve 
months, taking up every issue to possibly smear the Democratic party 
and the President. The people don't want that. They've had it with 
all that. There's been investigations on all that. There are continuing 
investigations on all that. So the people were saying enough. Schedule 
for impeachment hearings later this week. Paula Wolfson, VOA News, 
Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>