<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981025.1830.0065 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. I'm Carole Simpson. The mideast peace deal signed this 
week at the White House is a political victory for President Clinton. 
But for Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian 
leader yasser Arafat, it is an enormous political risk. The size of 
that risk was made clear today when Netanyahu returned home to israel. 
ABC's Gillian Findlay is there. Israel's prime minister returned home 
today to all the pomp and pageantry his government could Muster. The 
man who once called the peace agreement "dangerous," now had to explain 
to Israelis why he's committed to making it work. We received a very 
bad agreement that we have worked and labored to plug the holes in 
it. And we have plugged many of the holes in it and to improve it. 
Not enough, according to many of those who helped elect netanyahu. 
In the West Bank today, Jewish settlers blocked roads to protest the 
deal. The demonstrations continued in Jerusalem tonight, as settler 
leaders met to disown the prime minister and to call for new elections. 
But most analysts here now agree that's not likely to happen. At least 
not immediately. Weekend opinion polls show three-quarters of Israelis 
support the deal. Netanyahu is expected to get approval from both 
his cabinet and Israel's parliament. But then he has to implement 
it. Experience has taught us that there is a tremendous gap between 
signing an agreement and implementing it, and that Netanyahu has an 
endless reservoir of preconditions and pretexts in order to avoid 
implementation. And there are extremists on both sides who would be 
happy to see it fail. In exchange for giving up nd, Netanyahu claims 
he got better security deal. Palestinian police will now be monitored 
by the CIA, insurance, Israel says, that they will crack down on Islamic 
militants. So far, though, the crackdown seems hardest on those Palestinians 
speaking out against the deal. Two leaders were arrested for their 
comments this weekend. And in a further taste of what many fear is 
to come, a police attempt this afternoon to confiscate illegal weapons 
ended in a shoot-out and serious injuries. All of that in the first 
48 hours of what the leaders proclaim is a new start for peace. Gillian 
Findlay, ABC News, Jerusalem. palestinian leader Yasser Arafat was 
in Cairo today to brief the Egyptian president hasni Mubarak on the 
peace deal. Arafat said the real test of Israel's commitment to peace 
will be seen in the coming weeks as the agreement is implemented. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>