<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981025.0951 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jewish settlers, angered over a new Mideast peace deal that gives 
more land to Palestinians, scuffled with police and took to the streets 
across the West Bank on Sunday to protest an agreement that they vowed 
to scuttle. The road-block demonstrations came several hours before 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu returned to Israel, hoping to convince 
hard-liners the deal he made with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat 
was the best possible. Arriving in Israel to a red-carpet welcome, 
the Israeli leader said security concessions won from the Palestinians 
during the nine-day summit outside Washington would justify the ceding 
of more West Bank land. ``We are returning after a long and difficult 
effort to bring ... security and peace to Israel,'' he said. ``We 
achieved such a deal. We achieved the best deal... We did something 
good for the state of Israel.'' In Sunday's widespread demonstrations, 
including one outside of Israel's international airport following 
Netanyahu's arrival, at least 20 settlers _ who were once Netanyahu's 
staunchest supporters _ were arrested and two police officers were 
hurt. ``With the Lord's help, we will use all of our powers to break 
this agreement,'' said settler leader Ahron Dombe. Settler leaders 
said they would carry out an intense lobbying effort on Monday ahead 
of a scheduled no-confidence motion against Netanyahu later in the 
day. Near the settlement of Ofra north of Jerusalem, about 50 settlers 
and their supporters rushed past Israeli police and sat cross-legged 
on the highway. Some settlers wrapped in prayer shawls held morning 
services at the roadside. Police also said settlers burned tires at 
the Karme Tsur settlement north of Hebron. ``I'm here to show that 
this is a sad day,'' said Natan El, 38, an engineer, sitting in the 
middle of the main north-south highway through the West Bank. ``We 
are in danger of losing our land, the land we have returned to after 
2,000 years.'' Tensions over the accord also boiled over in the West 
Bank town of Ramallah, where infighting broke out among Arafat's supporters. 
Members of the Palestinian leader's political faction, Fatah, battled 
Palestinian security forces with rocks and bullets. One 16 year-old 
youth shot in the head, later died of his wounds in a Jerusalem hospital. 
The confrontation broke out after Palestinian intelligence agents 
searched Fatah headquarters, looking for illegal weapons. A crackdown 
on unlicensed arms is one of the provisions of the agreement. The 
clash alarmed Palestinian leaders, who fear the pressures of the implementing 
the U.S.-brokered agreement will wind up pitting Palestinian against 
Palestinian. Many of its provisions, such as reining in Islamic militants, 
disarming political groups and halting anti-Israel incitement, are 
extremely unpopular, and will be difficult politically for Arafat's 
government to impose. By a margin of four to one, Israelis surveyed 
in a poll published Sunday in the Yediot Ahronot newspaper supported 
the new agreement. The poll questioned 505 Israeli adults, and had 
a 4.5 percent margin of error. But politicians across the board predicted 
difficulties for Netanyahu when he brings the agreement before his 
right-wing Cabinet on Monday. The agreement signed at the White House 
Friday calls for an Israeli handover of 13.1 percent of the West Bank 
to Palestinian civilian control. That means some Jewish settlements 
will be surrounded by Palestinian-controlled territory, except for 
access roads. In all, the Palestinians will have full or partial control 
over 40 percent of the West Bank. Twelve hard-liners in Netanyahu's 
government said they would vote against him in the no-confidence vote. 
Netanyahu has only a one-seat majority. But left-wing lawmakers were 
expected to support the prime minister in Monday's vote. Hoping to 
calm fears, Netanyahu attempted to make overtures to the settlers 
on Sunday. But his calls were mostly rejected. ``I say now here to 
our friends listening, you are us, you are us and we are you. We love 
you and we are fighting for you and there is no other government that 
will fight like this,'' Netanyahu said, mentioning settler leader 
Dombe by name. ``I am very, very, very disappointed with the prime 
minister and the ministers who participated in this deal,'' Dombe 
said later. ``Netanyahu is no longer the leader of our national camp.'' 
Dombe said his staff would begin opinion samplings among settlers 
Monday in search of a candidate to challenge Netanyahu. In another 
development, the militant Palestinian Islamic Jihad group said its 
leader in the Gaza Strip had been arrested as part of a renewed crackdown 
by Arafat's police on militants. The group also said dozens of its 
members had been taken into custody. The larger Hamas group also announced 
that one its West Bank leaders was under arrest and being held in 
a Palestinian jail. Israel announced it had arrested three Hamas members 
suspected of shooting to death two Jewish settlers in August. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>