<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981025.0892 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a major rupture within Yasser Arafat's ranks, members of the Palestinian 
leader's political faction fought Palestinian security forces with 
rocks and bullets Sunday. A 16-year old Fatah activist was killed 
in the violence. The fighting followed a move by Palestinian military 
intelligence to seize unlicensed weapons and inspect files belonging 
to Arafat's Fatah faction. A crackdown on illegal arms was among tough 
new security measures Arafat agreed to at last week's Israeli-Palestinian 
summit. The clash alarmed Palestinian leaders, who fear the pressures 
of the implementing the U.S.-brokered agreement will wind up pitting 
Palestinian against Palestinian. Many of its provisions, such as reining 
in Islamic militants, disarming political groups and halting anti-Israel 
incitement, are extremely unpopular, and will be difficult politically 
for Arafat's government to impose. Former Cabinet minister Hanan Ashrawi, 
who was present when the clash began in the West Bank town of Ramallah, 
called it a result of an accord that put too much emphasis on Israeli 
security at Palestinian expense. ``This is very dangerous,'' she said. 
``If this situation is allowed to continue we would be facing an internal 
breakdown.'' The fighting broke out as Marwan Barghouti, the Fatah 
leader in the West Bank, was addressing a group of about 100 supporters 
outside the Palestinian Authority headquarters and the offices of 
Governor Mustafa Isa. Some of the Fatah activists picked up stones 
and hurled them over a fence into the compound and at plainclothes 
intelligence agents who were watching the gathering from the sidelines, 
witnesses said. Intelligence agents hurled rocks back at the crowd. 
But then some of the security agents fired from the second- and third-floor 
windows, with some of the gunfire directed into the crowd. About the 
same time, armed Fatah members arrived on the scene, firing shots 
into the air. Two men were hurt, including a Fatah activist, 16-year 
old Wassim Tarifi, who suffered a gunshot wound to the head. Tarifi, 
a nephew of a Palestinian lawmaker, was taken to Jerusalem's Hadassah 
hospital, and died several hours later of his wound, said hospital 
spokeswoman Yael Bossem-Levy. His injury silenced the gunfire on both 
sides, and leaders from both sides quickly withdrew for a meeting. 
A senior Fatah official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said 
the confrontation followed a search Saturday night of Fatah headquarters 
by about 50 members of Palestinian intelligence. Fistfights broke 
out as the searchers went through files and looked for unlicensed 
weapons, the official said. Barghouti told reporters that police confiscated 
several weapons but refused to elaborate. Barghouti later said the 
police officers who shot at the crowd, should be ``tried and executed.'' 
But Isa, speaking on behalf of the Palestinian Authority, said the 
officers would likely be prosecuted and jailed. Some Fatah activists 
said the confrontation was exacerbated by a personal feud between 
the commander of the raiding party and two Fatah members. Fatah called 
a three-day strike in Ramallah to protest the violence, and graffiti 
denouncing the intelligence agents as ``traitors'' appeared on walls 
near where the clash took place. The fighting occurred entirely in 
Palestinian-controlled areas, and Israeli troops were not involved. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>