<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981025.0875 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mourners ran away or dived for cover Sunday when gunfire whistled 
overhead at the funeral of an 11-year-old Albanian boy believed slain 
by Serbs. Journalists filmed and photographed the chaos. But international 
observers sent to Kosovo to witness such violence left before the 
funeral began, with one observer saying their presence wouldn't protect 
the mourners from more gunfire. The boy's death and the refusal of 
foreign diplomats to attend his burial demonstrated the difficulties 
facing the international community in forcing Yugoslav President Slobodan 
Milosevic to comply with the Oct. 12 agreement that averted NATO airstrikes 
on his forces. The agreement calls for a cessation of hostilities 
and the withdrawal of extra police and military forces sent into Kosovo 
in February as part of an offensive against ethnic Albanians fighting 
for independence. But sporadic violence continues, and there are signs 
of increasing Serb intimidation to prevent ethnic Albanian refugees 
from returning to some villages. Hundreds of people have been killed 
in the fighting and an estimated 300,000 have been driven from their 
homes in Kosovo, a province of the main Yugoslav republic, Serbia. 
British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook said the threat of NATO airstrikes 
would remain in place until Milosevic reduces forces to pre-conflict 
level. ``He has made progress but he needs to try an awful lot harder,'' 
Cook said in an interview with the British Broadcasting Corp. ``I 
think that when on Tuesday we review this, we may well come to the 
conclusion we cannot yet relax our guard, we cannot stand down the 
planes, we need further progress before we relax that order.'' On 
the ground, however, daily violence showed little sign of abating. 
The boy, Shemsi Elshani, was killed Saturday while helping his father 
and cousin chop wood behind this mountain village 30 kms (18 miles) 
west of Pristina, according to the boy's father, Rashit Elshani. He 
blamed Serb police, saying his son died simply because he's Albanian. 
Police have been shooting in the area every night to try to scare 
off villagers, he said. Serb officials were unavailable for comment. 
``Even if you're unarmed, they're going to shoot you,'' Elshani said 
while his only surviving son, 7-year-old Dardan, hugged his leg. ``We'd 
been there for two hours cutting trees and carrying them.'' His wife, 
Hasime, also 37, fainted repeatedly beside Shemsi's bloodied body, 
still clad in the blue jeans, blue shirt and jacket he wore when he 
died. ``They will come to shoot us, and they will take my Dardan and 
slit his throat,'' she said, sobbing. A team of European diplomats 
and an American team of the Kosovo Diplomatic Observer Mission came 
to the house, but all left before the burial. Gunfire from a hill 
about a kilometer (about half a mile) away, the same area from where 
the fatal shots came, sounded several times after the diplomats arrived. 
The Europeans eventually drove away, while the American observer team 
questioned Rashit and called its headquarters before leaving. Villagers 
asked team leader Norman Olsen to attend the funeral because they 
believed his presence would stop further shooting, but he declined. 
``Even though we have armored vehicles, if somebody is determined 
to shoot more people, they won't stop for us,'' Olsen said before 
leaving. ``Our presence at the gravesite will not protect you. If 
any diplomat tells you otherwise, he's wrong.'' Scores of people walked 
up the hillside for the burial in a fresh grave next to six others, 
including an uncle of Shemsi killed Sept. 25 during a Serb offensive 
in the area. When mourners started to disperse, more gunfire erupted 
from the far hill. Some people ran down the hill while others lay 
on the ground Also Sunday, two top NATO generals left Belgrade after 
two days of talks in which they pressured Yugoslav political and military 
leaders for further troop withdrawals from Kosovo, a diplomatic source 
said. Both sides remained tight-lipped about the meetings, but a diplomatic 
source speaking on condition of anonymity said NATO wanted to let 
the Yugoslav leaders know they must do more in withdrawing military 
and special police units in Kosovo back to their barracks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>