<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981025.0238 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A leading Malaysian human rights group demanded Sunday that Prime 
Minister Mahathir Mohamad resign after police clashes with anti-government 
rioters erupted into chaos. An anti-government protest that lasted 
until after midnight Saturday became a riot when hundreds of police 
shot water laced with stinging pepper spray at thousands of demonstrators 
and bombarded a mosque with tear gas. More than 241 people were arrested 
in the rally that spread through various parts of the capital for 
more than eight hours. Injuries resulted on both sides. Calm had returned 
to the capital by Sunday. ``The prime minister, who is also home minister, 
must accept full responsibility for having totally mishandled the 
situation,'' said a statement issued by the human rights group Suaram. 
Mahathir, who has ruled for 17 years, is also in charge of the police 
force. ``He cannot ignore the legitimate discontent of the people. 
We call upon the prime minister to resign so that a general election 
may be held,'' the statement added. Demonstrators have staged a series 
of protests since ousted deputy prime minister Anwar Ibrahim was jailed 
Sept. 20. Protesters demand political reforms, an end to Mahathir's 
rule and Anwar's release. Saturday's demonstration, however, marked 
a defiant turning point as protesters turned violent against police, 
who have declared all demonstrations in support of Anwar illegal. 
The former heir apparent to Mahathir has pleaded innocent to 10 charges 
of graft and sexual misconduct and will stand trial beginning Nov. 
2. Anwar, who has been denied bail, has condemned the charges as false 
and politically motivated. The opposition leader of parliament, Lim 
Kit Siang, in a statement issued Sunday, called for an independent 
investigation into Saturday's violence, saying it was sparked by ``very 
cruel police handling of unarmed and peaceable people.'' Meanwhile, 
a senior Cabinet minister warned that continued rioting could not 
be tolerated, given the May riots in Indonesia that led to ex-President 
Suharto's ouster. ``Demonstrations in Malaysia have now entered a 
dangerous phase with the use of force,'' Education Minister Najib 
Tun Razak was quoted as saying by the Bernama news agency. He urged 
authorities to be firm with protesters in the name of maintaining 
order. The government has threatened to arrest demonstrators under 
the country's dreaded Internal Security Act, which allows indefinite 
detention without trial. At the afternoon demonstration Saturday, 
protesters taunted police in a downtown shopping district. Officers 
warned women and children to get off the streets, which were packed 
with weekend shoppers. Then huge police trucks sprayed the crowd with 
powerful jets of water laced with a pepper chemical. It filled the 
streets with a blue foam and scattered thousands of people, crying 
and coughing from the stinging chemical. Police in civilian clothes, 
some wearing ski masks, chased people through department stores and 
down side streets, grabbing them and tossing them into waiting vans. 
Some were slapped, kicked and wrestled to the ground. Some of those 
detained Saturday were holding shopping bags and it was unclear whether 
they were passers-by or had intended to join the demonstration. Prime 
Minister Mahathir accused rioters of using women and children as shields. 
``Don't blame the government if children are burned during the rioting 
as the authorities have discovered `Molotov cocktails' and kerosene 
at the scene,'' he said Sunday. ``The groups calling themselves reformists 
seeking to uphold justice are the ones who are breaking the law,'' 
he said. Police followed protesters to a mosque where they had gathered 
for evening prayers and to regroup. Police lobbed tear gas into the 
building and protesters responded by chasing officers and pelting 
them with stones. Others hurled bricks. Rioters set fire to a pile 
of tires and debris dragged from roadside garbage bins, creating a 
bonfire in the middle of one street, the Star newspaper reported. 
An Anwar supporter who asked not to be identified said the afternoon 
protest turned ugly when police began arresting people at random. 
``It's sheer frustration,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>