<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981025.1600.1523 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. television networks didn't wait long to pull the plug on some 
new fall shows. Ron tank reports when a series gets canceled, the 
actors are often the last to know. The ax is falling on fall TV. Not 
all of the 36 new fall shows have even debuted yet, and six series 
have already bitten the dust, including "the Brian Benben show." He 
was fired as a news anchor and replaced by someone younger and prettier. 
When shows go, so do their stars. But it's not the sit down with human 
resources, two weeks' notice farewell that corporate America is used 
to. oh, oh, oh! Jenny? Calm down. The makeup room let us know the 
show was gone because their -- their agents canceled them for the 
next week. I found out from an assistant editor. I just was in the 
middle of making another film, and the editor that was -- used to 
edit "Dr. Quinn" was editing our movie, and the assistant, her assistant, 
called and said, "have you heard the news? We're in shock." Somebody 
had called my mom and said that they had heard on "Mark and Brian" 
that the show was canceled. That's how I heard. At least they heard 
the news from a person. Others learn of their fate over morning coffee. 
I remember I read it, and I thought, "what a horrible thing that someone 
printed. Clearly that can't be true, because nobody told me." It's 
usually the actors, though, who find out first. We may be the only 
ones who know about it. Jim Brooks, I remember, he called me. I was 
at a pilates class, and he called me and said, "they canceled us." 
And I said, "where are we all meeting?" He said, "my office." Anyone 
who does his job has nothing to fear. "Naked truth," I heard from 
tea, who came -- who came into the studio. We were still in production. 
And she said, "we're canceled! We're canceled!" Not everyone sheds 
tears, if they've been paying attention to their show's ratings. It's 
never really that big of a surprise. If you follow the numbers, you 
know what's going on behind, you know, behind the scenes. Every hit 
show is on for one year longer than it should be anyway. That's right. 
And we knew we were heading into that -- into that one with all the 
tailwind. The official term is "cancellation," but not everyone likes 
the "C" word. We prefer the term "not renewed." Not renewed is, you 
know, you finished your year, you either come back or you don't. You 
don't. Savage did come back. Like many actors, he went onto another 
series. So far, the current one seems to be "working." Ron tank, "CNN 
Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>