<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981025.1830.0907 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In "focus" this evening -- lessons learned the hard way about transacting 
business in cyberspace. NBC's Soledad O'Brien has our report. 29-year-old 
Frank brucato, a New York City transit cop, had been investing in 
the stock market for about a year, hoping to ride the bull market 
and make a profit. I was going to use the money to buy a ring for 
my girlfriend, sometime next year, and use the money to buy a house 
with. Considering himself a savvy investor, he relied heavily on research 
from the web, discussions with other investors. And when he heard 
rumors about merger plans for a stock he already owned, he says he 
bought more, $22,000 worth of mountain energy, a coal and gas exploration 
company based in Houston. You always want to be on the next Microsoft 
or Intel, basically a company that's going to emerge and do good. 
The stock did great, rising in value from 50 cents a share, when he 
bought it, to a high of $1.75. but in July, as the market hit its 
all time high, the mountain energy stock was plunging. The security 
and exchange commission announced a two-week halt on trading to look 
into the "information disseminated about the company." The stock now 
trades for pennies a share and Frank's $22,000 investment is now worth 
about $400. Officials at the SEC will neither confirm or deny whether 
they are continuing to investigate mountain energy. And the CEO believes 
the company's stock was manipulated by others. The S.E.C. monitors 
the market and keeps and eye on stocks on the web in their Internet 
market watch group. You can't sort bad information from good information. 
And information that Dom comes across the web has an or ra of credibility. 
And there's not only bad information, the SEC has seen cases of out-and-out 
fraud on the Internet. One of the biggest involved a company called 
systems of excellence, which the S.E.C. calls a classic example of 
a pump-and-dump scheme. In return for company stock, a newsletter 
pumped investor interest in the stock, while insiders were dumping 
it. Sga goldstar looked like a well established purveyor of disinterested 
investment advice. In fact it was two individuals, operating from 
an office in Tennessee who published investment recommendations in 
exchange for bribes. The publisher of sga goldstar pled guilty to 
securities fraud, and went to prison. Charles Hutto, the chairman 
and CEO of systems of excellence, was also sentenced to prison for 
fraud. Some start-up companies turn to the Internet to raise money 
and in some cases hold stock offerings on the net. Not all of them 
are safe places to invest. Matthew bowin is in jail, but the pitch 
from his company still appears on the web. He gave investors the chance 
to get in on the ground floor of interactive products and services. 
He placed ads on financial web sites, and raised over $140,000 in 
six months. Bowin was convicted on 54 counts of embezzlement, selling 
unqualified securities and operating a financial scheme. Due to be 
sentenced Friday, bowin now faces up to ten years in prison. Authorities 
have recovered none of the money. Hi, my name is Dave baer, managing 
-- The state of North Carolina, shut down netware international and 
accused chief executive David baer with running a unchartered, U.N. 
insured bank. By the time the netware assets were seized by federal 
authorities, they seized over $2.3 million. Working out of this storefront 
in mooresville North Carolina, the company offered deals on computers, 
faxes, pagers and huge returns on accounts. Customers had to sign 
other members. And were promised under some plans -- no taxes, ever, 
on their money. I'm told that over 2,000 people have sent this organization 
money. David baer denies he was ever in the banking business. Just 
last month, the federal government brought criminal charges against 
him for fraud. The federal deposit insurance corporation is monitoring 
Internet banking. Netware international is one of six "banks" the 
fdic has written special alerts about over the past two years. According 
to the office of the comptroller of the currency, three of those banks 
claim to be based in a place called malchesiak. The U.N. says it's 
not on its roster. The state department's never heard of it. Cyberspace 
is a virtual world, but you can loses real money. Soledad O'Brien, 
NBC news, New York. For more on the dangers of Internet fraud, check 
the "Internet underground" on our web site -- MSNBC.com. it includes 
links to watchdog groups. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>