<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0151 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
State Rep. David Phelps, who is running for Congress in southern Illinois, 
was not surprised when television stations began broadcasting an advertisement 
criticizing his record earlier this month. A Democrat, Phelps was 
prepared for things to get nasty in his race against Brent Winters, 
his Republican opponent, for an open seat in the 19th Congressional 
District. But it was not Winters who sponsored the attack advertisement, 
which pictures Phelps and criticizes his votes on property and income 
taxes in the Legislature. It was the Republican National Committee, 
which has taken advantage of election rules that allow the national 
parties to spend unrestricted funds on advertisements about issues, 
as long as the advertisements don't urge the election or defeat of 
specific candidates. The Democrats used the tactic effectively in 
the 1996 presidential campaign, and some prominent Republicans have 
urged the Justice Department to seek an independent counsel investigation 
of whether President Clinton scripted the plan to evade spending limits 
on his re-election campaign. But at the same time the Republicans, 
flush with the so-called soft money that can be used on issue advertisements, 
are expanding the practice, and spending far more than their opponents. 
Republican House leaders, in fact, have designed the most ambitious 
party advertising plan in any non-presidential election year. The 
plan, ``Operation Breakout,'' calls for spending $20 million by Election 
Day, with $7 million already spent in 60 congressional districts in 
30 states. To subsidize their advertising campaign, Republican House 
leaders have resorted to pressure tactics, assigning incumbents fund-raising 
quotas and using House leaders to lean on their colleagues for contributions. 
Phelps, one of the targets of the Republicans, questioned how an advertisement 
targeting his record in the state Legislature qualifies as a national 
Republican issue advertisement. ``I don't see what this has to do 
with the national Republican Party,'' Phelps said in an interview. 
``When they use the candidate's name and talk about my record as a 
state representative, that has nothing to do with the issues I'll 
be voting on in Congress.'' The chairman of the National Republican 
Congressional Committee, Rep. John Linder, said issue advertising 
is necessary and legal, especially in light of millions spent by the 
AFL-CIO on advertisements attacking Republican House candidates two 
years ago. ``We watched the unions and the Sierra Club spend millions 
on issue ads,'' Linder, a Republican from Georgia, said in an interview. 
``We have every right as a political party to tell America what we 
believe. And that has been affirmed by the Supreme Court five times.'' 
Linder also said that part of getting the party's message out is providing 
information about the records of Democratic opponents like Phelps. 
In addition to the $20 million to be spent on House candidates, the 
National Republican Senatorial Committee is spending at least $6 million 
on issue advertisements in states with closely contested Senate races, 
including North Carolina, South Carolina, Nevada, Kentucky and Wisconsin. 
To maximize the use of soft money _ the unrestricted donations raised 
by political parties from corporations, individuals and interest groups 
_ Republican Party committees in Washington have transferred millions 
of dollars to state party organizations to pay for issue advertising. 
The Democrats have their own campaign. The Democratic Congressional 
Campaign Committee and the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee 
plan to spend at least $6 million each on issue advertisements and 
have also transferred millions in soft money to state Democratic parties. 
Linder is following the lead of the Democratic Party's 1996 presidential 
playbook, when Clinton and the Democratic National Committee pushed 
issue advertising to the limit. Unable to afford the multimillion-dollar 
advertising program proposed by Dick Morris, a consultant to Clinton, 
leaders of the re-election campaign approved instead a plan in which 
issue advertisements were paid for by the national committee with 
a heavy portion of soft money. That plan took advantage of a 1995 
advisory opinion from the Federal Election Commission that said political 
parties could sponsor the same kind of issue advertisements that ideological 
interest groups had been running. The commission also said that the 
parties could use unrestricted donations from individuals, corporations 
and labor unions to pay for the advertisements with a blend of the 
restricted funds, known as hard money. Clinton himself helped script 
the Democratic Party's $44 million blitz of issue advertisements, 
which featured him prominently. Lawyers for the Clinton-Gore campaign 
and the Democratic National Committee said the advertisements were 
legal and that they did not explicitly seek votes for the Clinton-Gore 
ticket. But the 1996 Democratic ad plan has attracted renewed scrutiny. 
Attorney General Janet Reno has ordered a 90-day preliminary investigation 
into whether Clinton orchestrated the plan to avoid the spending limits 
on his 1996 campaign, a charge that lawyers for the president and 
the Democratic National Committee have denied. Reno could recommend 
the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate the advertisements, 
something she has been pressed to do by both the director of the FBI 
and the former head of the Justice Department's Campaign Finance Task 
Force. She must decide by early December. And the Federal Election 
Commission is considering whether to adopt a preliminary report by 
agency auditors that concluded that both Clinton and the Republican 
presidential nominee, Bob Dole, violated their campaign spending limits 
with party-purchased issue advertisements and should each repay $13.4 
million in federal matching funds. None of this has discouraged the 
Republicans from spending record amounts on Operation Breakout. Party 
issue advertisements are supposed to convey a broad party-building 
message and cannot urge voters to vote for or against a specific candidate, 
although they can feature candidates. The Operation Breakout spots 
work around the ban on candidate advocacy by urging viewers to call 
candidates, rather than vote for them. In the advertisement attacking 
Phelps, for example, viewers are urged to call him to protest his 
positions on taxes. In some districts, the advertisements are generic, 
positive party messages extolling the accomplishments of the Republican 
Congress, including a $500-per-child tax credit. In at least nine 
races, the advertisements are negative, customized messages against 
Democrats. ``The enormous campaign finance abuses of the 1996 presidential 
elections are now exploding into 1998 congressional races all over 
the country,'' said Fred Wertheimer, president of Democracy 21, a 
nonprofit group that advocates overhaul of the nation's campaign finance 
laws. ``And this, in turn, is setting the stage, absent reform, for 
the 2,000 national elections being run on an overwhelmingly corrupted 
campaign finance system.'' Both parties are expanding their use of 
issue advertisements to make use of their soft money. Republican Party 
committees have taken in $100.2 million in soft money this election 
cycle, compared with $35 million in the 1994 cycle, while Democrats 
have received $75.6 million, up from about $40 million. Operation 
Breakout's fund-raising goals have strained the Republicans. An initial 
$5 million was supplied by the Republican National Committee, but 
funding from House Republicans was slow to arrive. Speaker Newt Gingrich 
and Linder have pressed their Republican colleagues in the House to 
contribute to Operation Breakout from their own re-election coffers 
or to raise contributions from wealthy constituents. Committee chairmen 
were told that they were expected to bring in a minimum of $100,000, 
and safe incumbents were assigned a target of $50,000, according to 
two Republicans involved in discussions about the advertising program. 
At a leadership meeting after Labor Day, according to a report in 
Roll Call, a newspaper that covers Capitol Hill, Gingrich and other 
House leaders scolded their colleagues for the sluggish pace of contributions 
_ the budget goal was initially $37 million. They warned that members 
who did not contribute might be punished in future committee assignments, 
or even denied committee chairmanships. Among the Republicans who 
were angered by the push was Rep. Philip Crane, who hopes to succeed 
Rep. Bill Archer as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee 
when Archer retires in 2000. Although Crane sent a $25,000 check to 
Linder earlier this month, he also wrote a letter complaining about 
the heavy-handed fund-raising. ``To say Phil Crane is not a team player 
for the party is ridiculous,'' said the Illinois congressman's administrative 
assistant, Kirt Johnson. Johnson said that Crane did not have a lot 
of money to spare after facing an opponent in the primary. Republican 
issue advertisements in Senate races have been a source of controversy, 
too. In Wisconsin, Democratic Sen. Russell Feingold, who championed 
campaign finance legislation that would have outlawed soft money, 
has complained about the $1 million spent by the National Republican 
Senatorial Committee on advertisements attacking his record on a variety 
of issues, including Social Security. Although he is in a competitive 
race against Republican Rep. Mark Neumann, Feingold has told the Democratic 
Party not to use party soft money on issue advertisements in Wisconsin. 
Neumann said his opponent still benefits from advertisements by labor 
and environmental groups. In an interview, Feingold said he would 
rather lose his seat than win re-election with party advertisements 
funded by soft money. ``I recognize that this is a huge risk,'' Feingold 
said. ``But I took it with open eyes. I wanted this election to be 
a referendum on the need to get big money out of politics.'' But the 
Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee does not want to risk losing 
Feingold's seat and bought television advertising in Wisconsin on 
Friday. Feingold has demanded that the committee pull the ads. Republicans 
have transferred millions of dollars to local party committees to 
pay for their television blitz. In 1996, Democrats funneled more than 
$32 million through the state parties to pay for issue ads. In both 
instances, the national political parties were taking advantage of 
state-level formulas that permit more soft money to pay for issue 
advertisements. Federal Election Commission records show that in Wisconsin, 
for example, on Sept. 24, the National Republican Senatorial Committee 
transferred $233,585 in soft money and $78,000 in restricted funds 
to the Wisconsin Republican Party. The same day, the state party paid 
$233,688 in soft money and $77,896 in restricted funds to the media 
firm of Stevens Reed Curio for ``media buy for issue advocacy.'' Records 
show three similar transfers in August and September, with identical 
payments to the Stevens firm, the consultants who designed the committee's 
national issue advertising campaign. The pattern has been repeated 
in other states, according to an analysis of the records for The New 
York Times by the Campaign Study Group, a private research firm. The 
National Republican Senatorial Committee has sent $740,000 in five 
transfers to the Kentucky Republican Party, with the Stevens firm 
receiving nearly identical amounts from the state party for television 
advertisements supporting Senate nominee Jim Bunning. The senatorial 
committee has pumped more than $1 million into Nevada, in six transfers, 
where the Republicans hope to defeat Democratic Sen. Harry Reid. A 
seasoned team of Republican consultants handpicked by party strategists 
in Washington has designed the Republican issue advertisements. Although 
Greg Stevens designed the Senate ads, the creative team for Operation 
Breakout includes four well-known GOP Republican political firms, 
including one headed by Mike Murphy, who was a media consultant in 
1996 to the Republican presidential candidates Lamar Alexander and 
Bob Dole. In some districts, the Republican issue advertisements have 
more than doubled the amount of television advertising on behalf of 
Republican candidates. And in districts where the National Republican 
Senatorial Committee has given the legal limit in direct contributions 
to a candidate, the issue advertisements represent an additional, 
significant form of aid. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>