<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0205 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Steve DeBerg is 44 and trying to play in a sport where old guys are 
swallowed up like raw meat in a zoo. That creaking noise you heard 
Sunday was DeBerg's knees when he walked onto the field as the starting 
quarterback for the Atlanta Falcons. Don't get too caught up in the 
comeback story of DeBerg, who replaced the injured Chris Chandler. 
It turned out to be an ugly fable as DeBerg was overmatched in the 
New York Jets' 28-3 victory over the Falcons. He became the oldest 
starting quarterback in the National Football League, and looked every 
day of it. The most impressive part of DeBerg's story is not the fact 
that he is playing, but the journey he took to get to this point. 
Though DeBerg has been in football since the 1970s, his rebirth really 
began in 1996, when Falcons coach Dan Reeves and his assistants, including 
DeBerg, were fired by the New York Giants. Every one of those coaches 
got other jobs _ except DeBerg. No team wanted him, so in a span of 
only a few years DeBerg went from unemployed to Falcons quarterbacks 
coach to the old man in the sea of bodies. It has been both a glorious 
and a painful trip. Reeves hired DeBerg as the Giants' quarterbacks 
coach in 1995, a move that shocked many. DeBerg had wanted to get 
into coaching for several years, but the worst-kept secret in the 
league was that no team would hire him, because of a belief that he 
had a drinking problem. In fact, when the Giants hired him, several 
executives from other teams called to warn the Giants. For the most 
part, DeBerg was able to keep the fight with his personal demons from 
spilling into the public eye. At least until an embarrassing episode 
in January 1996, when he was stopped by the police while driving in 
New York at 1:50 a.m., traveling eastbound on a westbound street, 
according to a police report. DeBerg, who told the police he had had 
five beers that night, was charged with driving while intoxicated, 
driving while impaired and driving the wrong way on a one-way street. 
His license was automatically revoked because he refused a Breathalyzer 
test, the report said. The charges were later dropped, and DeBerg 
received alcohol counseling as a result of the incident. Many in the 
Giants organization, from players and assistant coaches to front-office 
executives, weren't surprised by the arrest. They knew about DeBerg's 
drinking problem, and were well aware of other instances of alcohol 
abuse. With DeBerg also showing up late and missing staff meetings, 
Reeves eventually tired of the incidents and gave him a stern warning 
to straighten up or face being fired. DeBerg apologized to the staff. 
That was almost two years ago. This past off season, after being out 
of football for more than a year, DeBerg reunited with Reeves as the 
Falcons' quarterbacks coach. DeBerg said in interviews this summer 
that he now drinks only in moderation. There are athletes who fall 
into the pit and never crawl out. DeBerg apparently has made his way 
out. Now comes another tough battle: playing in an NFL that is so 
fast and brutal that no one DeBerg's age has any chance of excelling. 
DeBerg's mobility is terrible, and since the Jets know his arm strength 
is weak, they blitzed him relentlessly. In just under three quarters, 
he was 9 for 17 for 117 yards with an interception. Often, because 
of the continual pressure, DeBerg lobbed the ball harmlessly in the 
air. DeBerg was sacked three times, and his fumble in the second quarter 
was returned for a touchdown. And what may not endear DeBerg to teammates 
is that after the game, he seemed to blame everyone but himself for 
what turned out to be a miserable day for the Falcons. ``From top 
to bottom it seemed we were outperformed, from the playing side of 
it to the coaching side of it, pretty much the whole deal,'' he said. 
DeBerg has what he wants _ another chance to play in the NFL. But 
that died on the field Sunday. He was so bad that he will not start 
another game unless all the quarterbacks on the Falcons' roster come 
down with the bubonic plague. Where DeBerg's success has come is off 
the field. If it is true he has controlled his drinking, that is something 
more impressive than anything he has ever done on the field, or will 
ever do. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>