<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0222 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mike Piazza is set to sign the most lucrative contract in baseball 
history Monday afternoon. Left-hander Al Leiter has apparently agreed 
to all but the fine print of a four-year, $32 million deal that will 
probably be announced early this week, according to one person familiar 
with the negotiations. Now the question is, what becomes of Todd Hundley, 
the Mets' other All-Star catcher? Sunday, Mets General Manager Steve 
Phillips was still not acknowledging that the Mets and Piazza had 
agreed to a seven-year deal worth $91 million. But with Piazza and 
his representatives apparently on their way to New York from Southern 
California, and with those close to Piazza saying the deal was done, 
it has become a foregone conclusion that Hundley will be playing elsewhere 
next season. On Saturday, Phillips acknowledged that a lineup with 
both Piazza and Hundley would not be feasible next season. ``I'm a 
catcher, I'm not a left fielder,'' Hundley said late Saturday night, 
alluding to his 34-game outfield stint this summer that was an attempt 
to work both him and Piazza into the lineup. ``I'm not marketing myself 
as a left fielder. And there are teams that need catching, obviously 
_ teams that I would love to go to.'' There are 12 teams Hundley will 
not be going to, thanks to a limited trade clause he and the Mets 
agreed to after the Mets obtained Piazza from the Marlins on May 22 
while Hundley was still recuperating from off-season elbow surgery. 
Hundley, a friend said Monday, would like to go to a contending team, 
would like to stay in the National League and would prefer to stay 
on or near the East Coast. The teams his agreement prohibits him from 
being traded to in the NL are the Expos, Marlins, Pirates and Brewers. 
The teams he would allow a trade to in the American League are the 
Yankees, Red Sox, Indians, Orioles, Rangers and Mariners. During the 
World Series, a number of teams asked Phillips about the availability 
of Hundley, who hit a 41 homers, a major league record for catchers, 
in 1996. The Cubs, Diamondbacks and Reds appear to be the most interested. 
Despite the situation, Hundley does not appear angry with the Mets, 
an organization he has been a part of since they picked him in the 
second round of the 1987 free agent draft. ``I've grown up in this 
organization,'' Hundley said, ``and Fred Wilpon and Nelson Doubleday 
have taken care of myself and my family financially for life. I have 
nothing but good things to say about those people. They stuck with 
me through all those years. And I realize this is a business.'' Hundley 
said he first realized his days with the Mets were numbered on Memorial 
Day weekend, when he was having a meeting with Wilpon at the co-owner's 
house. Wilpon admitted that he could not bring a player like Piazza 
into a market like New York and not make an effort to re-sign him. 
Wilpon, who has a close relationship with Hundley, said at the time 
that even if it took $100 million to sign Piazza, he would do it. 
Hundley, who is guaranteed $11.7 million the next two seasons, said 
he then saw the writing on the wall. Seth Levinson, Hundley's agent, 
said: ``I absolutely believe that Fred Wilpon and Steve Phillips have 
great respect and care deeply for Todd Hundley. And over the course 
of the 1998 season, Todd came to realize and accept that he is in 
a business.'' Hundley now hopes that the Mets respect him enough to 
trade him to a contending team. There is little doubt the Mets would 
like to trade Hundley before spring training begins. A deal could 
be made sometime between the general managers' annual meetings next 
month and the owners' meetings in mid-December. By then, the Mets 
may have made a deal to re-obtain Bobby Bonilla from the Los Angeles 
Dodgers for reliever Mel Rojas. Even though Bonilla left the Mets 
on less than favorable terms during the 1995 season, Doubleday said 
he would have no problem with Bonilla coming back. And one Mets executive 
said he felt Bonilla's problems in New York had more to do with his 
relationship with the news media than with the fans. Whether the Mets 
do re-obtain Bonilla, however, seems to have more to do with the Dodgers' 
apparent interest in San Diego left-hander Randy Myers (who would 
render a trade for Rojas superfluous) than with the Mets' reported 
insistence on including second baseman Eric Young in the deal. One 
member of the Mets' front office said this weekend that while the 
Mets had inquired about Young's availability, it was not a prerequisite 
to a Bonilla trade. Regardless, by signing Piazza, the Mets have demonstrated 
their willingness to pay a large amount of money for the marquee player 
they did not have at the beginning of last season. By doing so, however, 
the Mets may have been bidding only against themselves. One baseball 
official said Sunday that the Mets may have outbid other teams by 
as much as $30 million. The Rockies were apparently prepared to offer 
the All-Star catcher $60 million over four years. That is a reason 
Piazza's representatives may have jumped at the Mets' seven-year offer 
after less than a week of negotiations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>