<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0086 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With left-center majorities now in power in most of the 15 countries 
of the European Union, its leaders ended a weekend summit meeting 
Sunday in broad agreement that it was time to pursue less restrictive 
economic and monetary policies to guard against a world recession. 
``Europe now has the means to be a growth factor in the world,'' said 
French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin, a Socialist. He spoke after many 
government heads, meeting at the Alpine lakeside resort of Portschach, 
urged coordinated reductions of world interest rates to end the global 
financial crisis. ``Reducing unemployment is the most important single 
question for the people of Europe,'' German Chancellor-elect Gerhard 
Schroeder said Saturday in his debut before his fellow European Union 
leaders. Austrian Chancellor Viktor Klima, who presided over the discussions, 
said Sunday that leaders here agreed conditions were now right for 
interest rate cuts in all 11 countries that will start introducing 
a common European currency, the euro, next year. Schroeder, a Social 
Democrat who led his party to victory in last month's German elections 
and will formally replace Chancellor Helmut Kohl on Tuesday after 
16 years of conservative rule, left many fellow leaders here with 
the clear impression that Germany was determined to strike a new course 
after years of harping on the dangers of inflation. Indeed, after 
years of scrimping and cutting government deficits to get ready for 
the common currency, the euro, Germany and countries that have followed 
its lead now seem set to press the independent European central bank 
to let up a little and allow them to use the new currency to stimulate 
economic growth. Oskar Lafontaine, Schroeder's choice as finance minister, 
sharply criticized Germany's independent Bundesbank on Sunday in a 
speech in Bonn, saying it should ensure growth and employment as well 
as price stability. ``If we don't have a change of course, it will 
be difficult to achieve the necessary growth rates and cut unemployment,'' 
he said. France and Germany have always thought of themselves as the 
European Union's prime movers, and leaders in both countries agreed 
last week that Europe could now follow less restrictive fiscal and 
economic policies and encourage consumer spending. Coordinated growth 
policies, Jospin told his counterparts here, would preserve Europe 
as an island of growth in a global market economy severely shaken 
by recession in Asia, financial collapse in Russia and looming trouble 
in Brazil. Inflation is negligible now, Jospin said, in so many words, 
so why not go for growth? But European governments do not have the 
last word about interest rates _ central banks do. The independent 
European central bank in Frankfurt will decide those for the euro. 
The bank's chairman, Wim Duisenberg, has been skeptical in the past 
week about joining a global push to lower interest rates. Floor rates 
set by central banks in Germany and France are at their lowest levels 
since the 1980s, between 3.2 and 3.3 percent, but are now higher in 
Britain and countries like Italy and Portugal where inflation was 
long a problem. ``The time is right to cut interest rates,'' said 
Massimo D'Alema, Italy's prime minister-designate and a former Communist. 
``The hope is for a general reduction in rates, starting in Germany,'' 
he said. Portuguese Prime Minister Antonio Guterres agreed. ``We are 
all convinced that conditions exist for a significant reduction of 
interest rates at the international level,'' he said. The key European 
problem is unemployment, which at an average of more than 10 percent 
_ 18 million workers in all _ has stubbornly resisted measures by 
conservative and leftist governments alike. Conservatives like Kohl 
blamed it on the rigidities and high payroll taxes of the European 
welfare state, an argument that among leftists only Tony Blair, Britain's 
Labor Prime Minister, by and large accepted. Blair said that he would 
call for a special summit meeting of the world's seven most powerful 
industrial democracies, a group that includes the United States, Canada 
and Japan as well as the biggest Western European economies, by the 
end of this year to discuss the global crisis, if there was enough 
consensus on what a meeting should accomplish. France and Germany 
are pressing the United States for changes in the International Monetary 
Fund and the World Bank that would give European governments a bigger 
say in their decisions. Although their left-wing majorities are trying 
for a common front in economic policy, European states have had a 
much harder time presenting a united face to the rest of the world 
in foreign policy and defense. Blair told his fellow leaders that 
the European Union had far too often shown itself to be ``dithering 
and indecisive'' in the crisis over Kosovo, leaving the American-led 
NATO alliance as the only effective leverage. Blair said that Europe 
should think about ways to develop a capability to use military force 
in situations where the United States did not consider its own interests 
directly involved. He suggested a separable European defense identity 
within NATO. But President Jacques Chirac said that France would prefer 
to develop a military arm for the European Union, a step resisted 
by many of its partners. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>