<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0179 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Years ago, the joke was told of the Jewish matchmaker who had the 
idea of matching up poor Sammy _ a nebbish and a schlumpeh _ with 
Princess Margaret, then the world's most eligible woman. Sammy's mother 
would not hear of it. The princess could not cook and was not Jewish. 
After weeks of persuasion, with the matchmaker showing how the alliance 
with British royalty would help Israel, the mother gave her grudging 
approval. The matchmaker heaved a sigh of relief and said: ``Now for 
the hard part.'' At the Aspen Institute's Wye Conference Center last 
week, matchmaker Bill Clinton helped Palestinians and Israelis move 
to the final stage of their negotiations. Now comes borders, statehood, 
security, water, capital city _ the hard part. Who gained what at 
Wye? The Israelis came away with enforcement of reciprocity. Because 
trust does not exist, CIA monitors will adjudge Chairman Arafat's 
treatment of terror. If the revolving door on jails does not stop 
spinning, Palestinians will rightly be blamed for the resulting freeze 
of negotiations. Just as significant, the salami-slice turnover of 
land is virtually ended. That means a substantial chunk of the West 
Bank remains as an incentive to Palestinians to reach final settlement. 
Without that deal-closer of more territory, the argument would be 
solely over dividing Jerusalem, on which peace hopes would founder. 
Prime Minister Netanyahu, perhaps with Foreign Minister Sharon's knuckle 
in his back, blundered by introducing Jonathan Pollard, an American 
who spied on America for Israel 13 years ago, into the bilateral negotiations. 
Now they are trilateral; Clinton has been handed a card to play. Pollard 
betrayed his country at the behest of foolhardy spooks in Israel who 
were unconcerned about poisoning Israeli-American relations and besmirching 
all Jewish Americans with charges of ``dual loyalty.'' The reckless 
Israelis ignoring that risk were more culpable than the traitor in 
Washington, but were never properly punished by Israel. Pollard has 
a claim of injustice. He bargained a confession of guilt for a prosecutor's 
assurance of no life sentence, thereby saving the United States from 
``graymail'' at trial. Then an infuriated Caspar Weinberger prevailed 
on the sentencing judge to double-cross the defendant. But Netanyahu 
has transformed the prisoner into a bargaining chip. At a coming crucial 
moment, Clinton will push that chip forward, and Sharon may have to 
buy Pollard's freedom by uprooting a couple of West Bank settlements. 
How did Arafat fare at Wye? He got his 13 percent slice and his security 
control of a previous slice, concessions both tangible and substantial. 
He gets several hundred prisoners returned from Israeli jails; at 
the same time, he resisted sending 30 terrorists to Israel for trial 
by promising to try them himself. He was able to sell yet again a 
vow to change the Palestinian charter's vows to destroy Israel, and 
to inveigle the U.S. president into a statehood-advancing visit in 
December to bear witness to the doing of what Arafat long insisted 
was already done. But Arafat did not get off the hook on fighting 
terror. If he flinches from his duty under this agreement, the CIA 
is supposed to blow the whistle and stop the process cold. That discipline 
will be annoying to Arafat; we'll soon see how effective the new American 
Foreign Legion can be. How did Bill Clinton fare? Nobody can doubt 
that this meeting was delayed to give him a pre-Election Day boost, 
but an October surprise has long been a presidential perk. Credit 
him for working hard, long and forcefully to achieve a modest but 
difficult transition. As John Harris reported in The Washington Post, 
Clinton's proven talent for rhetorical ambiguity and slippery tenses 
came in handy in diplomacy. I was about to give Clinton a medium salute, 
but then he had to preach to black ministers that the negotiation 
had been part of ``my personal journey of atonement.'' This one was 
for Monica? That self-absorbed confusion of his need for political 
forgiveness with the nation's need for an effective chief executive 
was smarmy and solipsistic. As JFK would say, ``no class.'' We are 
into the final stage, as Netanyahu urged. Now comes the hard part: 
If they run a municipal corridor to Ramallah, and call it North Jerusalem 
.... 
</TEXT>
</DOC>