<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The first commandment for couples wanting to adopt babies is: Put 
yourselves across. And they do, in spunky performances on videotapes, 
in lush scrapbooks and in professional portraiture smiling on the 
Internet. Many speak on the Web pages that crowd electronic registries 
of ``waiting families.'' Gloyd and Penny, for example, say, ``We pray 
daily for our birth mother and baby _ whoever and wherever they are.'' 
David and Paula promise, ``This child will be overwhelmed by love 
and affection.'' Rex and Carol wait, after 14 years of marriage, with 
a spaniel named Brittney and a vacation home four miles from Disney 
World. This is the essence of demand _ unhappily infertile couples 
_ competing for a smaller and smaller supply of white American-born 
infants. It is an imbalance that professionals in the adoption world 
are calling a crisis, allowing money to play a defining role in determining 
who will succeed in this desperate quest for that which cannot be 
legally bought or sold. ``In this marketplace, it's a sad reality,'' 
said Graham Wright, president of the California Association of Adoption 
Agencies. ``Luck enters into it, but it's like anything else in life: 
If you have enough money, you'll get what you think you want.'' Many 
couples in search of a child are already depleted, emotionally and 
financially, by drawn-out fertility treatments. Still, they will pay 
$15,000 to $20,000 on average, even if they have to mortgage their 
futures, to find their babies. Some will spend much more before the 
day they appear in court to take legal custody of their children. 
And a few, people who have the money for intermediaries to do the 
work, pay up to $100,000 to bring home a newborn. Adoption is, in 
a rough analogy to organ transplants, a legal transfer not subject 
to purchase or bidding. Nowhere in the United States is it legal to 
sell a child, and few say it should be. Nor can anyone sell the right 
to be an adoptive parent: that is conferred by the state, based on 
home studies conducted by social workers. But scarcity has created 
a cast of thousands of intermediaries, who can and do sell access 
to the young women who might relinquish babies. Access can be sold 
indirectly, by an Internet service that sells advertising space to 
couples, for example, or directly, by lawyers or unlicensed brokers 
known as ``facilitators,'' who will either shop couples to pregnant 
women or recruit those who agree to let adoptive families be chosen 
for them. This has left only the thinnest line between buying a child 
and buying adoption services that lead to a child. ``The effect is 
the same,'' said Wright, whose agency, Future Families of Monterey 
Bay, Calif., places older children for adoption and foster care. ``Everywhere 
the baby boomers set their feet, a cottage industry springs up,'' 
said Bernie Riff, an adoptive father. Riff and his wife, Vicki Young, 
adopted their daughter, Jessi, 2 1/2, with the help of a facilitator 
after waiting a long time with an agency that gave them, in Ms. Young's 
words, ``nothing but a binder.'' ``There are consultants and facilitators,'' 
Riff said. ``There are photographers, there are all these little marketing 
things. People do videos. There's no limit to what you can spend on 
these things if you're inclined to and have the resources.'' State-licensed 
adoption agencies, once strictly controlled charitable and paternalistic 
institutions, may be pained by the intrusion of commerce, but now 
they, too, advertise on bus shelters and billboards, and collect scrapbooks 
and videos from would-be parents to show to birth mothers. They mine 
connections with foreign orphanages. They do what they can do to increase 
their supply of children. It is just one measure of growth within 
this fragmented industry that the number of licensed child placement 
agencies has increased by several hundred in just three years, to 
1,764, according to the National Adoption Information Clearinghouse. 
The states impose standards on child-placement agencies requiring 
certified social workers to evaluate prospective parents, counsel 
birth mothers and get relinquishment papers signed. They limit payments 
that can go to birth mothers, who, above all, are not supposed to 
profit from adoption, and they require reports to the courts of all 
payments made by the adopting family. But the laws differ from state 
to state, creating a tangle that itself keeps lawyers busy and would-be 
parents confounded. A few states, like Massachusetts and Connecticut, 
prohibit independent adoptions altogether; some that do allow it, 
like New York, hew to the traditional model and limit lawyers' roles; 
California, the most hospitable to the new entrepreneurialism, allows 
lawyers and facilitators to recruit prospective birth mothers on clients' 
behalf. Louisiana, known for its laxity, allows nonresidents to adopt 
and to pay extensive living expenses for pregnant women. The process, 
while hardly simple, is basically the same everywhere. Every adopting 
couple typically begins with a home study. If parents adopt independently, 
they will probably advertise, although about a dozen states prohibit 
it. Pregnant women who respond or are referred to them are screened, 
and adoptive and biological parents exchange basic biographies. If 
all goes well, the adoptive parents pay modest pregnancy-related expenses 
for the birth mother and, shortly after birth, she legally relinquishes 
the child. (If all does not go well, the biological mother decides 
not to place the child, or, worse, tries to revoke her consent later, 
the adoptive parents have gambled and lost.) Six months to a year 
later, a court finalizes the adoption. An agency will bundle these 
services, with employees making matches, counseling both biological 
parents and adopting couples, coordinating medical care and legal 
services. The costs for domestic infant adoptions range widely. Some 
people adopt infants, joyously and quickly, for $5,000 or $10,000. 
They might, in an independent adoption, locate a woman in their own 
state who has minimal expenses and is certain she wants to place her 
child; without any legal or medical complications, the total cost 
might be several thousand dollars. Placements by state agencies often 
cost nothing. Then there are couples who pay sums approaching $100,000 
for a closed adoption of a white newborn. These gray-market placements, 
which usually involve questionable payments to birth mothers and the 
brokers who find them, have prompted much legislation and public attention; 
still, they are a tiny percentage of adoptions. Finally, the stamp 
of the marketplace is apparent in one troubling fact: In the baby 
bazaar, with children of varying colors, cultures and conditions, 
something resembling a price schedule has emerged. At many agencies, 
race determines fees, said William Pierce, president of the National 
Council for Adoption, an advocacy group for agencies. ``If you have 
40 white couples chasing every white newborn, you don't need a lesson 
in economics,'' Pierce said. ``The only way to stay afloat is to reduce 
your charge for a black baby and charge more for the white ones.'' 
The Product: Not Enough Babies To Meet the Demand If adoption is a 
growth industry, it is not because of any significant increase in 
adoptions. In 1992, according to a rare report on adoptions published 
by the National Center for State Courts, the number of adoptions was 
127,441, a figure that demographers believe has not changed appreciably. 
The authors of the report estimated that two-thirds were adopted by 
stepparents or relatives, or were older children placed from foster-care 
programs. The other third, or about 43,000, constitute the heart of 
the industry: children, domestic and foreign, placed with nonrelatives. 
The National Council for Adoption estimates that infants, which it 
defines as children under age 2, account for 48 percent of all unrelated 
domestic adoptions or about 24,000 a year. At the same time, according 
to a rough estimate by the adoption council, about 1 million families 
are seeking to adopt. ``Adoption from a domestic standpoint is in 
a period of crisis,'' said Paige McCoy Smith, marketing coordinator 
for the Gladney Center in Fort Worth, Texas, one of the nation's biggest 
and oldest adoption agencies. Because less than 2 percent of unmarried 
pregnant women are placing their babies for adoption, they now have 
``the option to be very, very selective,'' she said. Elizabeth Bartholet, 
a Harvard University law professor and adoption specialist with two 
adopted children, agrees. Among young pregnant women, she said, ``most 
of the pressure they are subjected to is to either abort or keep.'' 
A generation ago, unmarried, pregnant women did not have many options. 
Some went to places like Gladney or the Salvation Army's Booth homes, 
where they awaited birth while social workers chose adoptive parents. 
Before 1973, the year that abortion was legalized, about 9 percent 
of births to unmarried women in the United States resulted in adoptions. 
By 1981 that percentage dropped to 4 percent, and by 1988 to 2 percent. 
While the number of unmarried women giving birth has risen each year 
at least since 1965, the net result is a slight decline in the number 
of American-born infants available for adoption. At the same time, 
according to a rough estimate by the adoption council, about 1 million 
families are seeking to adopt. The old-line agencies tried to adapt 
by letting birth mothers choose adoptive parents. But in the late 
1970s, would-be parents began defecting to lawyers who could help 
them adopt independently if they _ or the lawyers _ could find a birth 
mother directly. The scramble also invited a new type of adoption 
agency, promising some kind of edge. American Adoptions of Overland 
Park, Kan., for example, has a ``traditional program'' in which pregnant 
women choose from an array of profiles of families, but it advises 
many clients to sign up instead for another program in which parents 
pay directly for advertisements, and young women who respond are shown 
the profile of that family first. In its letter to applicants, the 
agency says: ``Most traditional adoption programs provide the birth 
parents with the opportunity to select their `ideal' family. Where 
does that leave you?'' The Marketing: Advertising on Buses, Benches 
and Beyond Marketing came naturally to Arty Elgart, who started a 
facilitation service after he adopted his son (from Gladney) 20 years 
ago. It was a matter of enthusiasm and altruism: Working out of his 
auto-parts warehouse in Philadelphia, he made matches as a favor for 
couples he knew, or friends of friends. By most accounts, including 
his own, no one had seen anything quite like it before. Elgart placed 
a small newspaper ad that asked, ``PREGNANT? Young couple wishes to 
adopt baby. Call Mary, 289-2229.'' In the view of the sedate nonprofits 
that dominated the adoption community, this crossed a line of propriety. 
Elgart's matchmaking was legal, since he charged no fee and advertising 
was not prohibited in Pennsylvania. But his marketing, which progressed 
to benches, buses and Burger King tray liners, was called everything 
from unusual to appalling. Elgart has long since turned his mission 
into a full-service licensed adoption agency, named Golden Cradle, 
now in Cherry Hill, N.J. ``Golden Cradle started something,'' said 
Maxine Chalker, executive director of Adoptions from the Heart, of 
Wynnewood, Pa. When she started her agency in 1984, she said, ``in 
the phone book there were maybe three ads under Adoption Services. 
Now there must be 40.'' A modest display ad for Adoptions From the 
Heart is among them. The agency also advertises on bus shelters and 
in malls, and has tried radio and television, though the response 
was disappointing. ``We're always trying to find new things,'' Ms. 
Chalker said. ``It gets harder every year because of the competition.'' 
Some of the competition comes from lawyers who handle independent 
adoptions: ``Now everybody thinks adoption is easy money, especially 
the attorneys,'' Ms. Chalker said. ``Now they're hiring counselors 
to work in their offices, and setting up as agencies without being 
licensed.'' Adoptions From the Heart has 33 staff members and seven 
offices in five states. The agency has an advertising budget of $371,000 
this year, accounting for 16 percent of its total expenses. ``The 
ad budget,'' Ms. Chalker mused. ``It's so embarrassing. It's so much 
money, and that's just to stay in business.'' To stay in business, 
Adoptions From the Heart has also extended its connections in China 
and Vietnam; it has placed 114 babies from China and 16 from Vietnam 
this year, compared with 47 American-born infants. The agency charges 
a fee of $14,700 for placement of a white American infant or toddler; 
legal fees are an additional $2,000 to $3,000, and parents pay any 
medical costs not covered by insurance. The cost of adopting from 
China is $17,235 and adopting from Vietnam is $22,100. ``Our facilitator 
in Vietnam charges $10,000 per baby,'' Ms. Chalker said. ``Can you 
imagine how rich she must be?'' The Sales Agents: Facilitators or 
Lawyers Help With the Process The frontier state for the adoption 
business is California. The state has long permitted lawyers to recruit 
pregnant women. Now, facilitation services, which are unlicensed, 
are also recruiting and screening birth parents, as well as coaching 
prospective parents and finding them professional help. Facilitators 
operate in many states. While their activities often come close to 
legal definitions of child placement, they are generally too new or 
too few to prompt regulation. But in California, legislation enacted 
last year to clarify their role ended up legitimizing a whole new 
class of entrepreneurs. Lil Snee, a facilitator in Los Gatos who co-founded 
an informal trade organization, estimates that 40 to 50 are operating 
in the state. For Ellen Roseman, a facilitator in San Anselmo, the 
main job is coaching prospective parents. ``I make them read everything,'' 
she said. ``It's like taking a college course.'' Then she helps them 
piece together deals with pregnant women, lawyers and agencies, often 
in other states. She charges a flat fee of $3,450. At a recent support-group 
meeting at Ms. Roseman's house on a winding lane in Marin County, 
casually dressed current and former clients, many with babies in hand, 
exchanged stories of false starts and disappointments. ``I think it 
will get easier with time as people know what to expect, but for now, 
it's a free-for-all,'' said Riff, the father from Berkeley said over 
the potluck dinner that followed. For Ms. Roseman, a former flight 
attendant and representative in union negotiations, the enterprise 
is more like putting together a business deal. ``You sit down and 
move around the pieces to do two things,'' she said, ``to make sure 
it's legal and to save money.'' She does not recruit pregnant women, 
but she gets referrals and interviews candidates. ``To really get 
the birth parents ready,'' she said, ``you do what's called shaking 
them out of the trees. You say, `If you have a little feeling down 
here telling you to keep your baby, we've got to talk about that.''' 
Ms. Roseman hounds prospective parents, too. With one, she said, ``I 
insisted that she hit a therapist's office two or three times a week, 
get into meditation and get a massage to relieve her anxieties.'' 
Lil Snee, the Los Gatos facilitator, also does what she calls ``hand-holding,'' 
charging $2,900 for an 18-month contract. Occasionally, clients pay 
her $95 a hour to interview a birth mother. ``It just feels wrong'' 
for prospective parents to ask questions ``about sexual partners, 
about how many men might be the father of this baby,'' Ms. Snee said, 
so she asks the questions instead. ``I bring the clients and the birth 
parents the kinds of families they're looking for,'' she said. That, 
Ms. Snee said, is her metier. ``Let's say you have a Hispanic-black 
baby and you have 20 waiting families,'' she said. ``This birth mother 
is committed, intelligent, clean, but every single waiting family 
wants an Anglo baby with blond hair. Or I probably have about six 
cases where the babies are white, but maybe the mother wanted a certain 
religion, or a home with no children in the family. Maybe she did 
a little drugs and people are afraid of that.'' In some states, matchmaking 
for a fee is illegal except by licensed agencies. Among them is New 
York, where lawyers can handle independent adoptions and advise their 
clients on finding pregnant women, but not make such an introduction 
themselves. In New Jersey, an individual _ say, a lawyer or social 
worker _ may make a match, but may not charge for it. California's 
new law does restrict facilitators' practices. They must identify 
themselves as such in their advertising and must tell prospective 
parents that they are not licensed adoption agencies. They must obtain 
a $10,000 insurance bond to cover claims. But the state does not register 
nor license them, and it does not limit their fees. Randall B. Hicks, 
an adoption lawyer in Riverside, Calif., and the author of ``Adopting 
in America'' (Wordslinger Press, 1995) calls facilitators ``a garage 
industry,'' he said, ``not licensed nor trained to do anything.'' 
He also finds their fees, which can exceed $12,000, out of line. ``They 
find a baby for you,'' he said, ``then they have to turn it over to 
a lawyer or an agency.'' Ms. Snee, who lobbied for a licensing system 
to give facilitators credibility, accepts that that only lawyers can 
transact the actual adoption. But she argues: ``We get so bashed. 
We provide a service, and just because it involves adoption doesn't 
mean we should be the saviors of the world and do everything for free.'' 
Ms. Roseman contends that California's competitive marketplace keeps 
fees down and that expenses for birth mothers are fairly limited by 
the state courts. In the adoptions she handles, she said, ``very little 
money changes hands.'' She earns about $100,000 a year from her business. 
``This is a beautiful house in a beautiful, expensive area,'' she 
said. ``But it's not from the booty of adoption.'' Louisiana, on the 
other hand, ``is wide open,'' Ms. Roseman said. ``I always joke, when 
I want to make a million dollars, I'm going to open an agency in Louisiana 
and I'll be charging $30,000, $40,000, $50,000. I'm going to get fat 
eating bonbons in Louisiana.'' The Factory: Low on Regulations, Louisiana 
Lures Many Louisiana is where Misty and Donnie Smoot ended up two 
years ago, when an agency installed them in a slightly down-at-the-heels 
apartment complex in Baton Rouge. ``I was down there the second weekend 
after I found out I was pregnant,'' said Mrs. Smoot, who lives in 
Nashville. Her husband added: ``They try to get you down there and 
get you stuck.'' It is possible to find a birth mother anywhere in 
the country, send her to live in Louisiana, pay her expenses and fees 
to intermediaries, have her relinquish the child in Louisiana and 
finalize the adoption there, all while living elsewhere. And some 
couples who can afford it, most of them in the Northeast, do just 
that. Most states limit payments to medical, legal and strictly defined 
living expenses. Louisiana does not, though all expenses must be reported 
to the court that finalizes the adoption. The state does not prohibit 
payments to intermediaries, and its Department of Social Services, 
which regulates adoption, receives no information on agencies' fees. 
The Smoots were recruited as birth parents for a couple whose names 
they never knew. They were living in Tennessee and having marital 
problems, Mrs. Smoot said, when she became pregnant. Responding to 
a newspaper classified ad, they said, they spoke to a man named Richard 
in Florida who explained that he had clients interesting in adopting, 
and who referred them to an agency outside Baton Rouge. They were 
given first-class plane tickets for themselves and their two young 
sons and moved into an apartment rented by the agency, Beacon House. 
The agency paid rent and utilities, gave them $150 a week for groceries 
and ferried Mrs. Smoot to doctor's appointments and group meetings. 
Mrs. Smoot estimated that Beacon House had 12 to 20 birth mothers 
in Baton Rouge while she was there. The Smoots were never told much 
about the adoptive parents assigned to them; they said they were given 
a copy of the couple's home study and brief profile, without pictures. 
They spoke to the couple once, by telephone. ``The father was the 
CEO of his company, and their net worth was some ungodly number,'' 
Smoot said. ``The whole home study was about money, money, money.'' 
The arrangement unraveled when Mrs. Smoot was found to be carrying 
twins. Beacon House assured them that both babies would be adopted 
by the chosen parents, but the Smoots heard through the birth-mother 
grapevine that, in the past, the agency had separated twins without 
telling the birth parents. The Smoots switched agencies and went through 
with a semi-open adoption, then returned to Tennessee. A month later, 
Beacon House sued them for breach of a contract that obligated them 
to pay back expenses if they placed their child through an agency 
or lawyer other than Beacon House. The lawsuit, which sought $24,774, 
was dropped. Beacon House and its director, Anne R. Hughes, who also 
acts as the agency's attorney, declined to be interviewed. As the 
Smoots explained it, some women they met were drug users who sought 
a means of support. Some never had any intention of placing their 
children, Smoot said, ``but there was one girl there who was giving 
up her sixth baby to Beacon House. There's several who do that. It's 
like an employer-employee relationship.'' ``This is something the 
adopting parents need to know,'' he continued. He said he and his 
wife were barely screened, either by Beacon House or by the intermediary 
named Richard. ``They should investigate the birth parents a whole 
lot more than they do,'' he said. One source of referrals to Louisiana, 
according to lawyers and investigators, was Richard Gitelman, whose 
facilitation service in Florida was investigated in the 1980s after 
complaints were made. The Smoots said that the ``Richard'' they talked 
to never gave his last name, but several adoption professionals, who 
asked not to be named, said he has referred birth parents to Beacon 
House. Gitelman is said to be favored by older, moneyed couples who 
want quick, closed adoptions. Investigators have placed his fees at 
$50,000 and up; Pierce at the National Council for Adoption said he 
had seen a photocopy of a check written to Gitelman, with endorsement, 
``in the range of $75,000 to $90,000.'' Gitelman, reached at his office 
number in Coral Springs, Fla., refused to discuss his fees or even 
to say whether he is still in business. (His National Adoption Counseling 
Service was declared inactive by the State of Florida in 1996 for 
failing to file its annual report with the state.) Gitelman has never 
been convicted of anything, though he was indicted and he agreed to 
a $7,500 fine and a year's probation in Pennsylvania for interfering 
with the custody of a minor, a pregnant Pennsylvania teen-ager he 
briefly moved to Louisiana in 1987. Fees paid in Louisiana are difficult 
to track. Adoption proceedings are sealed and courts do not submit 
records to state regulators. But James Best, a district court judge 
in West Baton Rouge Parish, where Beacon House is situated, said most 
infant adoptions he had reviewed were smooth and unremarkable. When 
asked if he had ever seen a $50,000 fee to a facilitator, Judge Best 
said, ``If I ever did, I'd probably roll out of my chair and say I'm 
in the wrong business.'' But Lucy McGough, a law professor at Louisiana 
State University and head of the legislature's advisory committee 
on adoption laws, said a few judges told her they had seen $50,000 
fees and did not know how to handle them. ``One was infuriated,'' 
Ms. McGough said, ``because they were reporting high charges and saying, 
`So what's it to you, Mac? All the code says is we have to report 
it, and that's what were doing.''' Ms. McGough's committee is drawing 
up amendments to the adoption laws; in a memo to the committee, Ms. 
McGough voiced concern over ``prime baby adoptions that can bring 
$75,000 to $100,000.'' Meanwhile, she said, none of the parties are 
complaining: ``The adoptive parents are happy as clams.'' The Market 
Price: Children Are Children, But Some Cost More For the old-line 
agencies in this marketplace, ``there are Catch-22's everywhere,'' 
said Pierce of the National Council for Adoption. They are torn between 
the principle that children should not be discounted by race or disability 
and the reality that that is how one creates a larger pool of parents. 
They are torn between the principle that parenthood should not be 
charged for and the reality that social services are expensive. The 
agencies, many of which receive donations or government subsidies, 
say that parents' fees could not cover their costs. Wright in California 
notes that when licensed agencies work with pregnant women, about 
80 percent end up keeping their babies. And for most agencies, he 
said, ``the cost of serving the 80 percent can't be paid for by the 
fees of the other 20 percent.'' At the Gladney Center, fees do not 
come close to covering costs. Thanks to its endowment and its large 
campus, where about half its birth mothers live, Gladney can offer 
an array of services: three dormitories, a health clinic, chapel, 
dining hall, swimming pool and greenhouse, as well as high school 
and community college courses, vocational training, legal representation 
and counseling to be available for the rest of the birth mothers' 
lives. All of this costs the agency, on average, $32,000 per resident. 
But Ms. Smith, the marketing coordinator, said the average placement 
fee is $20,000. Many agencies, including Gladney, use sliding scales 
to accommodate lower-income families. Still, Pierce said, ``the economics 
of adoption is going to cause you to prefer the people who pay the 
higher fee.'' High fees help subsidize the work necessary to find 
homes for hard-to-place children, at least in the agencies that undertake 
the job, he said, adding that, in some states, agencies receive ``bounties'' 
to recruit adoptive families for children in foster care or to place 
disabled children who are costly to the state. ``Say you have a kid 
who's HIV-positive in the hospital costing $1,000 a day,'' Pierce 
said. ``To pay someone to find adoptive parents is entirely reasonable, 
but what does that look like to the public?'' It may also look terrible 
to charge less to place minority or special-needs children, but many 
agencies say they have little choice. Gladney, for one, has a lower-cost 
program for African-American and biracial children. ``Unfortunately, 
we had to create a separate program because adoptive parents were 
simply not coming forward,'' Ms. Smith said. Under that program, the 
agency charges $8,000. Whoever handles them, adoptions in the over-$50,000 
range almost always involve American-born white infants. While most 
are independent placements handled by lawyers, a few agencies market 
themselves by at least hinting at results. Easter House, a Chicago 
agency, notes in a letter to prospective parents that those approved 
this year have waited an average of 34 days to be offered a baby. 
The agency charges $45,000, ``plus some incidentals.'' But high-priced 
agencies, whether blue-ribbon or gray-market, have no shortage of 
customers. ``I hate to say this, because it's going to sound crass,'' 
said Debra Harder, network director for Adoptive Families of America, 
a Minneapolis-based support organization. ``But there are people who 
have the basic philosophy that the more I pay for something, the better 
it will be, not just in terms of the product but in terms of appearances. 
It says a lot about me if I drive a Lexus.'' The Imports: A Rise in 
Enterprise Taps Foreign Supply In international adoption, the scramble 
is entirely different: it is for parents. The Adoptive Families of 
America's current ``Guide to Adoption'' contains ads for 35 agencies, 
33 of which advertise foreign programs. ``Your child is waiting for 
you,'' the headline on one announces. ``We go with you to China!'' 
Most of the long-established agencies involved in international adoptions 
have ``an altruistic, mission-driven sense that every child deserves 
a family,'' Ms. Harder said. ``Now, with additional programs opening 
up in Russia and China in particular, folks are seeing it as an entrepreneurial 
venture.'' Adoption experts say international adoptions have generated 
lots of new businesses, from charitable, church-affiliated agencies 
to walkup offices run by people who make money change hands in Bulgaria. 
Fees to foreign expediters, translators, lawyers and orphanages are 
usually beyond the control of the American-based agencies that make 
the placements. Still, many prospective parents, not wanting the uncertainty 
of dealing with birth mothers, never even consider domestic adoption 
seriously. Adoptions from foreign countries are expected to approach 
15,000 this year. Even so, the supply in foreign countries now exceeds 
the demand here. Susan Soon-Keum Cox, director of public policy at 
Holt International Children's Services in Eugene, Ore., said the increase 
comes largely from Eastern Europe and China. Russia, which had no 
program five years ago, placed more children last year than any other 
country, she said. ``As recently as five or ten years ago, there were 
many more parents waiting to adopt than there were children,'' said 
Ms. Cox, whose agency has placed more than 100,000 children. ``Now 
that's entirely turned around. We're searching for families.'' Barbara 
Irvin, state director of Family Adoption Consultants in Macedonia, 
Ohio, is uneasy about having more children than families waiting for 
placement. ``There are some real tensions now between the child focus 
and the consumer orientation, the human services model and the market 
forces,'' she said. ``Some families start looking for the cheapest, 
the fastest, the `we promise you a child that meets your quote-unquote 
specifications in so many months.' Some of us who have been in the 
field for 20 years get worried about this shift.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>