<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0173 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sunday's victory by John Huston was done in comeback fashion, befitting 
his comeback season. A year ago, Huston was frustrated and disappointed, 
suffering through his worst season on the PGA Tour. He fell out of 
the top 125 on the money list for the first time since turning professional. 
To keep his tour card, Huston was forced to use a one-time exemption 
he had earned as one of the top 50 players in career earnings, and 
he entered this season needing to prove that he could still win at 
golf's highest level. Huston has more than provided that proof. Sunday 
at the National Car Rental Golf Classic, he added to his most satisfying 
season with one of his most impressive victories. Starting the day 
five strokes off the lead, Huston shot a six-under par 66, overtaking 
an impressive group of contenders to defeat Davis Love III by one 
stroke. Huston took the lead for good on the 15th hole and finished 
at 16 under par for the tournament (272). Love shot a 71 and squandered 
a 3-stroke lead that he had held entering the final round. Brent Geiberger, 
who shot Sunday's best round, 65, at Walt Disney World's Magnolia 
Course, finished third at 13 under par. The victory, the fifth of 
his career, earned Huston $360,000 and even more respect among his 
peers. It was his second victory of the year, his first coming at 
the United Airlines Hawaiian Open, when he shot 28 under par to set 
a 72-hole tour record for most strokes under par. And with Sunday's 
victory, Huston moved to No. 9 on this year's money list ($1,438,910), 
almost doubling his previous best year of 1994, when he earned just 
over $731,000. This year, at age 37, the real John Huston returned. 
And the adversity he overcame has made him even more appreciative 
of success. ``At the end of last year, I was totally frustrated,'' 
said Huston, who was bothered in 1997 by a shoulder injury. ``I didn't 
feel good physically. Mentally I was shot. ``I'm thrilled to be sitting 
in this position at the end of this year. I've played consistent all 
the time, and I have not had any times when I was really struggling. 
It has definitely been my best year.'' This was the last full-field 
event of the tour year before this week's Tour Championship in Atlanta, 
which is reserved for the year's top 30 money winners. Several issues 
were settled Sunday, including these: _ The top 125 money winners 
were decided. Those players earned automatic playing privileges for 
next year and avoided next month's qualifying school. Blaine McCallister 
had a terrificround to secure his tour card for next year, shooting 
a 66 to capture the 125th spot on the list. Tommy Tolles also secured 
his card, shooting a 71 to tie for 15th place and move to 115th on 
the list. Dave Stockton Jr., who started the week at No. 125, missed 
the cut and fell to 132nd place. And it was also a heartbreaking day 
for P.H. Horgan III, who shot a 69 but finished 126th on the money 
list, a little more than $4,000 behind McCallister. _ Stewart Cink 
failed in his bid to make the top 30 on the money list after Sunday's 
four-over-par 76. Cink needed to finish tied for eighth or better 
to pass Andrew Magee on the list. But Cink finished tied for 51st 
in the tournament, and he will stay home this week while Magee goes 
to the Tour Championship as No. 30 on the list. _ David Duval virtually 
clinched the 1998 money title, despite finishing tied for 43rd Sunday. 
With just over $2.47 million won this year, Duval is more than $650,000 
ahead of Jim Furyk, who is second on the list. For Furyk to win the 
money title, he would have to win the Tour Championship and Duval 
would have to finish last. But Sunday's spotlight belonged to Huston, 
who also won at Disney in 1992. Huston used an accurate tee-to-green 
game and steady putting to keep the pressure on Love, who hit too 
many erratic approach shots. Playing in the next-to-last threesome 
with Tiger Woods and Fred Funk, who finished tied for seventh place 
at 7 under par, Huston birdied Nos. 4, 5 and 8 to pull into a first-place 
tie with Love and Doug Martin at 13 under par. Martin, who also finished 
tied for seventh, dropped off the pace when Huston and Love both birdied 
Nos. 10 and 11. Huston made a 40-foot putt at No. 11, and when Martin 
bogeyed No. 14 to fall two strokes behind, it became a two-man race 
between Huston and Love, who were still tied at 15 under par. Then 
Love made a costly bogey at No. 15, a par 3, when he hit his tee shot 
into the rough, chipped to 10 feet, then missed the putt. That allowed 
Huston to open a 2-stroke lead with a birdie at No. 16, a par 4, when 
he hit a beautiful 7-iron approach shot to three feet, then made the 
putt. Love scrambled back, making a 15-footer for birdie at No. 16 
to pull within 1 stroke again. But he could not birdie either of the 
last two holes to force a playoff. Love hit a great drive at No. 18, 
but his 9-iron approach shot drifted into the left fringe, about 25 
feet from the cup. With Huston already in the clubhouse at 16 under 
par, Love needed to make his next shot to force sudden death. But 
his birdie attempt from the fringe stopped about a foot short. ``It's 
inexcusable, really, to have an 8-iron and a 9-iron into the last 
two holes, and not get either close to the hole,'' Love said. ``If 
I can drive it that straight, I ought to be able to hit a 9-iron to 
within 10 feet. I just didn't give myself makeable putts. That was 
the difference. But John played well, and I'm happy for him. To do 
what he did this year is quite an accomplishment.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>