<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0083 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In six days, the nation begins the government-mandated changeover 
to digital broadcasting _ a transition with no real precedent. No 
other national technological transition has ever been backed by this 
sort of government decree. Nobody was forced to trade a horse for 
an automobile, a Victrola for a radio, a typewriter for a computer. 
But this change will eventually affect almost every household in the 
nation. Sometime in the next decade or so, by federal mandate, today's 
television stations will go off the air, to be replaced by all-digital 
stations. At that point, everyone will need a digital receiver to 
continue watching television. The change will enable viewers to receive 
vividly sharper and clearer television images. But digital television 
receivers also hold the potential to enrich the medium with user interaction 
of the sort now available on computers. Cataclysmic as the shift may 
seem, however, when the transition begins on Sunday _ and for a good 
number of months to come _ it will be exceedingly hard to notice. 
Yes, more than three dozen stations intend to begin some sort of digital 
broadcasts on Sunday or in the days that follow. And ABC plans to 
broadcast the first network high-definition program on Sunday evening 
_ the 1996 remake of the Disney film ``101 Dalmatians.'' Just don't 
expect many people actually to see the HDTV pictures. About two-thirds 
of the nation's television households receive their programs by cable, 
and the cable industry is fighting hard to avert any federal requirement 
that they transmit the broadcast networks' digital programming. Moreover, 
despite promises by broadcasters and manufacturers over the last year, 
hardly any digital HDTV receivers are on sale today. As the transition 
begins, broadcasters will offer only the tiniest amount of high-definition 
programming _ probably fewer than five hours most weeks from all five 
major television networks combined. Television manufacturers and many 
broadcasters have long argued that HDTV, the premium service that 
digital broadcasting can offer, will be the primary feature motivating 
people to buy digital sets. Nonetheless, for the foreseeable future, 
most networks and local stations will simply be transmitting digital 
versions of their regular programs with no increase in the resolution, 
though digital broadcasting does, by itself, improve the quality of 
the picture a bit. At least 42 stations nationwide will begin digital 
broadcasting in November, many of them starting on Sunday morning. 
The National Association of Broadcasters trumpeted the number at a 
news conference earlier this month, since it is nearly double the 
number of stations that promised the Federal Communications Commission 
last year to begin broadcasting now. The FCC had pushed 23 stations 
in the 10 largest cities to go on the air by Nov. 1 so that consumers 
would have a reason to buy the first high-definition sets during the 
Christmas shopping season. One digital station, WCBS, will start up 
in New York on Sunday. Four other stations will start on Sunday or 
soon after, one each in Los Angeles, Philadelphia, San Francisco and 
Washington. And a scattering of additional stations will begin on 
Sunday or soon after in 18 other cities, including Honolulu, Milwaukee 
and Jackson, Miss. The head of one of those stations, Terry Shockley, 
president of Shockley Communications, owner of WKOW, an ABC affiliate 
in Madison, Wis., said, ``We are prepared and ready on Nov. 1 to carry 
the first high-definition programming,'' the ``101 Dalmatians'' movie. 
Viewers with conventional sets will be able to watch the ABC movie, 
as usual. Only viewers with new digital television receivers will 
be able to receive the high-definition version. For several years, 
digital broadcasts will be transmitted over a second channel that 
each station has received on loan from the FCC. Eventually, stations 
will be able to use only a single digital channel _ and consumers 
will then have no choice but to use digital sets. So far, though, 
television manufacturers _ which have much more to gain from this 
transition than broadcasters do _ have fallen behind in the rollout 
schedule. Only one manufacturer, Mitsubishi, has begun delivering 
HDTV receivers to stores, and most of the stores are using those $7,000 
sets as display models, taking orders from customers who want to buy 
them. As a result, several network leaders grumbled that their first 
broadcasts faced a ``tree falling in the forest'' problem. The momentous 
start of digital broadcasting will be seen by perhaps a smattering 
of consumers who may have bought sets as well as a handful of industry 
executives and others who have been lent prototype receivers by the 
manufacturers. That is one reason the networks are making no great 
effort to broadcast high-definition programming. ``I think we will 
be able to count our viewers on our fingers and toes,'' said Martin 
Franks, a senior vice president for CBS. ``It's fairly clear that 
there are more transmitters than receivers at this point.'' Production 
costs are another consideration. To create a high-definition version 
of a movie for television, for example, a studio must transfer the 
film to a videotape with a high-definition recorder, a process that 
costs about $100,000 a film. ``We don't want to spend money on high-definition 
movies unless there's someone out there to watch them,'' said Charles 
Jablonski, an NBC vice president. NBC has no firm plans to broadcast 
any high-definition programming in the next few weeks, except ``maybe 
a movie, `Twister,' sometime in November,'' Jablonski said. The rest 
of the program day will be filled with digital duplicates of the programming 
being broadcast on the network's conventional analog channel. Analog 
transmissions, so-called because they use electronic signals analogous 
to lightwaves and soundwaves, have long been the technology used in 
television. For much of the early days of digital broadcasting at 
NBC, the analog signal will be run through a device that converts 
it to the precise digital form that is known to the computing world 
and that in the process also improves the resolution, simulating a 
high-definition picture. Some local stations for the other networks 
also plan similarly to ``upconvert'' their analog programming to simulate 
HDTV. Simulated HDTV programs, however, will not be of the same quality 
as those that actually originate in high definition. CBS intends to 
broadcast four of this season's National Football League games in 
high definition, the first on Nov. 8, a New York Jets-Buffalo Bills 
game _ but only in the area around New York City. One other high-definition 
CBS broadcast is planned: the Nov. 18 episode of the medical drama 
``Chicago Hope.'' Over the last few years, CBS has been the loudest 
proponent of HDTV, and early this year the network promised to broadcast 
five hours of it each week at the start. But Franks explained: ``We 
decided to put our energies into the live broadcast of football games 
rather than sitcoms. We think that will be more effective.'' As it 
is, CBS is the only network with current plans to offer any live high-definition 
broadcasts. Since those broadcasts require high-definition cameras 
and a host of related equipment, they are much more expensive and 
complicated to produce. Fox, the network owned by News Corp., plans 
no high-definition programming in the coming months. Long resistant 
to the whole idea of HDTV, Fox executives early this year unsuccessfully 
lobbied Congress to drop its insistence that broadcasters offer it. 
For now, however, Lawrence Jacobson, the network's president, said 
only, ``We're working with some of our movie suppliers, and I think 
we will have some high-definition programming in the broadcast year,'' 
which runs through the spring. Until then, the network will simply 
convert its conventional analog programs to digital form. Fox plans 
no other enhancements. PBS stations are not required to begin digital 
broadcasting until 2003. Nonetheless, seven of them say they will 
begin broadcasting next month. On Nov. 9, the network plans to offer 
its first high-definition program, a documentary about a glass blower 
in Venice. PBS says that show will kick off ``digital week,'' featuring 
several special digital shows and World Wide Web site offerings. Afterward, 
Ervin Duggan, the network's president, said, PBS stations will broadcast 
one HDTV show a month. Paradoxically, ABC has the fullest high-definition 
schedule. Last year, the network got in trouble with Congress when 
its president at the time, Preston Padden, suggested that ABC would 
forgo HDTV and broadcast several channels of pay programming instead. 
Now, as it turns out, ABC is taking the lead, not only with its ``101 
Dalmatians'' kickoff on Sunday but also with one or two high-definition 
movies weekly. ``Our target is three to four hours of high definition 
a week,'' Davis said. Last week, the network released a list of 27 
movies that ABC will broadcast in high definition in coming months; 
no other network is promising even one hour of HDTV each week. But 
viewers who own an HDTV set are still not assured of seeing ABC's 
high-definition broadcasts. The network is dependent on its affiliate 
stations to carry them, and not every one of them will. WJLA, for 
example, the ABC affiliate in Washington, will begin digital broadcasting 
on Sunday to meet the letter of the federal law. But digital does 
not necessarily mean HDTV, and WJLA has declined to go to the expense 
of buying high-definition equipment, despite repeated entreaties from 
the network executives, who are eager for members of Congress to see 
their high-definition broadcasts. So on WJLA, ``101 Dalmatians'' will 
be converted down to a standard-resolution digital show. Jerald Fritz, 
a vice president for Allbritton Communications Co., which owns WJLA, 
said Allbritton did not want to spend $250,000 for a high-definition 
encoder on top of the millions of dollars it had already invested 
in digital transmission equipment. All other ABC stations beginning 
digital broadcasts next month have bought the high-definition equipment, 
network executives said. None of the networks say they plan to experiment 
with multi-channel broadcasting, partly because ABC was severely criticized 
in Congress for proposing the multi-channel concept last year. Using 
digital compression, broadcasters can squeeze three or four standard-definition 
digital programs in the space filled by one HDTV show; but that is 
not the way Congress intended broadcasters to use their second channels. 
Meanwhile, only one network, PBS, plans to experiment with digital 
interactivity, in cooperation with Intel Corp. When PBS broadcasts 
a documentary on Frank Lloyd Wright during ``digital week,'' Duggan 
said, any viewers who have television tuner cards in their personal 
computers will be able to download blueprints, bibliographies and 
other data. Gary Shapiro, head of the Consumer Electronics Manufacturers 
Association, said that his industry shares responsibility for the 
paucity of high-definition programming on the broadcast networks. 
``It doesn't make sense for them to do more until there are more sets 
out there,'' he said. But he, like every other executive interviewed, 
said the public should be patient. ``This is like putting a man on 
the moon _ it's a big technological change,'' he said. ``And like 
getting a man on the moon, you have to take small steps at the beginning.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>