<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0092 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bruce Lehman, who announced Friday that he would step down as commissioner 
of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, is not a man many people 
feel lukewarm about. His loyalists defend him as a visionary who has 
served the public admirably. His critics dismiss him as an intemperate 
despot who does the bidding of big business. But defenders and detractors 
tend to agree on one point: that Lehman has raised the visibility 
of intellectual property by transforming what was formerly a bench-warming 
position into a prominent perch. ``He has been savvy about making 
important people understand why patents matter,'' said Robert Merges, 
professor of law at the University of California at Berkeley. ``He 
essentially has made Washington understand that patent issues are 
important to overall economic strategy.'' Lehman, who was appointed 
in 1993 by President Clinton, said he would resign by the end of the 
year because he had accomplished his goals as commissioner. But there 
has been speculation for nearly a year that Secretary of Commerce 
William Daley, who is Lehman's boss, was pushing him to leave, after 
Lehman became embroiled in a bitter feud with his assistant commissioners. 
``Good riddance,'' said Jamie Love, director of the Consumer Project 
on Technology, which is based in Washington. ``He was terrible on 
the issue of making patents accessible to everyone on the Internet. 
And whatever Hollywood or the biotechnology industry wanted, he would 
do. His responsibility should have been to the public.'' Lehman, whose 
background was in copyrights rather than patents, fashioned himself 
into an intellectual-property czar. And clearly he would most like 
to be remembered for his contributions in the copyright arena. He 
helped, for example, to negotiate the World Intellectual Property 
Organization copyright agreements, which were recently approved by 
Congress. Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, chairman of the Senate Judiciary 
Committee, said the agreements were Lehman's main achievements. ``He 
foresaw the need to adapt copyright law to the needs of the digital 
age,'' Hatch said. Some others agreed. ``From a software industry 
perspective, the legacy he leaves goes well into the new millennium,'' 
said Robert Holleyman, president of the Business Software Alliance, 
a trade association. ``I couldn't overemphasize the importance of 
that treaty, which he was so instrumental in negotiating.'' Lehman 
championed a broad array of copyright changes, in what he hoped would 
be a precedent-setting White Paper on Intellectual Property and the 
National Information Infrastructure. But most of those proposals have 
been rejected, according to James Boyle, now a visiting professor 
at Yale University law school. Among the ideas, since abandoned, that 
were set forth in the 1995 white paper: a proposal that Internet providers 
be responsible for the copyright violations of subscribers. Boyle 
helped persuade 100 law professors to sign a letter criticizing the 
white paper. ``You couldn't get 100 law professors to sign a letter 
agreeing that the sun will rise tomorrow,'' he said. ``But they signed 
this letter.'' Lehman was instrumental in trying to harmonize U.S. 
patent laws with those of other countries. He was a driving force 
behind a 1995 law _ long sought by industry and other countries _ 
which changed the term of a patent. Before the new law, the life of 
a patent extended 17 years from the date it was issued. Now, a patent 
lasts for 20 years from the date of the application _ regardless of 
how quickly or slowly it was granted. The purpose of the change was 
to discourage so-called submarine patents, which popped up after having 
been submerged at the Patent Office for years or decades, often because 
of delaying tactics by inventors who wanted to wait for a particular 
technology to become widespread so as to receive maximum royalties. 
But Lehman's efforts drew the ire of independent inventors, whose 
cause was taken up by such unlikely allies as Phyllis Schlafly, the 
right-wing opponent of abortion rights; Ross Perot, the Texas billionaire 
and sometime presidential candidate, and Francis Modigliani, a Nobel 
Prize-winning economist. The organized resistance of independent inventors 
is the main reason that other so-called harmonization legislation 
that was favored by Lehman has lingered on Capitol Hill for several 
years without becoming law. As the first openly gay man to be confirmed 
by the Senate for a presidential appointment, Lehman entered his post 
with the stated goal of transforming the Patent Office into an agency 
that celebrated diversity. Indeed, two of his top officials were black 
men, Lawrence Goffney and Philip Hampton. But at some point, Lehman's 
relationship with his lieutenants went awry. Last fall, the three 
met with Daley in an effort to settle their differences. By March 
of this year, Goffney and Lehman had become embroiled in a bitter, 
public dispute. Lehman accused Goffney of incompetence, while Goffney 
accused Lehman of cronyism and racism. Both Hampton and Goffney have 
subsequently left the Patent Office for private business. Lehman's 
departure means that soon four of the top five positions in the agency 
will be vacant. Staff members representing Vice President Al Gore 
have privately sought potential nominees to succeed Lehman. An obvious 
candidate is Todd Dickinson, a Philadelphia patent lawyer who earlier 
this year was appointed deputy commissioner. But the real question 
is not so much who will be on the Clinton administration's short list 
but whether anyone will really want the job. The new commissioner 
will have little time to focus on grand policy initiatives. Instead, 
his time will be consumed by the mundane logistics of moving a 5,500-person 
agency into new office space and by shoring up the agency's trouble-ridden, 
billion-dollar effort to update its technological structure. And there 
is no assurance that the new commissioner would have a great deal 
of time to take care of even this business: If a Republican wins the 
presidency in 2000, a Democratic-appointed commissioner would probably 
be replaced. Lehman ``is a very smart guy, a very aggressive guy, 
and he couldn't get past some of these issues,'' Merges said. ``It's 
bound to scare off the next person. ``In Silicon Valley, there's a 
term for this,'' he said. ``It's called an insurmountable opportunity.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>