<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0093 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Anxiety has been running high in this former British colony, which 
has seen its economy buckle, tourism dry up and free-market reputation 
tatter in the 15 months since it reverted to Chinese rule. Now, a 
U.S. telephone company is warning Hong Kong that it could miss out 
on the information age if it does not quickly open its telecommunications 
market. ``Hong Kong's Back Is Against the Wall,'' said a Cassandra-like 
newspaper advertisement recently taken out here by the company, MCI 
Worldcom Inc. ``Hong Kong is teetering on the edge,'' asserted Steve 
Liddell, president of the MCI Worldcom Asia Pacific unit. ``It will 
either embrace the brave new age of telecommunications or return to 
an age of protectionism.'' Hong Kong officials, perhaps not surprisingly, 
do not share the American company's alarm. ``It is not our policy 
goal to be the most liberal telecommunications hub in Asia; that's 
a rather empty thing,'' said Geoffrey Woodhead, a senior adviser to 
K.C. Kwong, the secretary for information technology and broadcasting. 
At issue is whether the Hong Kong government will allow new competitors 
to offer local telephone service in this territory of 6.8 million 
people. For the last three years, Hong Kong has licensed three local 
companies to provide service, in addition to the incumbent monopoly, 
Hong Kong Telecom. A decision on whether to license further competitors 
is expected in the next few weeks. MCI Worldcom, formed in the recent 
merger of the United States' second- and fourth-largest long-distance 
companies, is eager to wire Hong Kong's teeming business district, 
so it can offer a package of voice and data services to the many multinational 
corporations here. The company already offers international service 
to about 100 customers on lines leased from Hong Kong Telecom. But 
it wants to offer corporate customers a complete menu of local and 
long-distance offerings. And it is dangling a bushel of carrots before 
the government here. Among other blandishments, MCI Worldcom has promised 
to make Hong Kong the hub for an Asian fiber optic network that would 
stretch in a vast crescent from Tokyo to Singapore. Just last Thursday, 
the government announced plans to open its international long-distance 
market to free-wheeling competition. But several analysts said they 
expected Hong Kong not to issue any more local phone licenses. MCI 
Worldcom contends that by refusing to let more competitors provide 
the actual direct network connections to local customers, the territory 
would cut off its nose to spite its face. Without sophisticated global 
players, Liddell said, Hong Kong risks losing its status as a global 
financial center. ``If the competitors are limited to three local 
firms,'' he said, ``it's our view that these services simply won't 
be available.'' With its lofty talk and populist appeals to economic 
growth, MCI Worldcom's lobbying campaign is no different from campaigns 
waged by long-distance and local phone companies in the United States. 
But in recession-ravaged Asia, the company's message carries an edge: 
For those countries that pursue it, a competitive telecommunications 
market can be the road to recovery; for those that do not, protectionism 
can lead to economic obscurity. MCI Worldcom notes pointedly that 
Japan and Australia both have fully liberalized local phone markets. 
The company is investing $350 million over 10 years to build a fiber 
optic network in Tokyo and $200 million to build one in Sydney. Though 
Liddell refused to discuss MCI Worldcom's potential investment in 
Hong Kong, it could easily run into hundred of millions of dollars. 
Some analysts say Liddell makes a good case. ``Hong Kong needs to 
jump on opportunities when they present themselves,'' said Lloyd Fischer, 
a telecommunications analyst at Salomon Smith Barney in Hong Kong. 
``They've got a good location geographically, but that's only worth 
so much.'' Indeed, these days, analysts noted, Asia can look more 
terrifying than tempting to potential investors. Bell Atlantic Corp. 
recently took charges of $545 million to write down the value of its 
investments in Thailand and Indonesia. Yet, though Hong Kong has suffered 
along with its neighbors, it is not about to play the needy supplicant. 
Regulators here, who contend that Hong Kong already has one of the 
more open markets in Asia, say they can preserve the territory's status 
as a financial center without handing out local phone licenses to 
any and all comers. ``We see liberalization of telecommunications 
as a means to an end, rather than an end in itself,'' Woodhead said. 
``We hope our telecoms policy will attract people to set up their 
regional headquarters in Hong Kong.'' Certainly, Hong Kong has taken 
some steps to open its markets that go further than other Asian countries. 
It has four local phone providers, compared with Singapore's two. 
And unlike Japan, Hong Kong has no restrictions on the foreign ownership 
of local telephone companies _ a much-contested provision in last 
year's landmark World Trade Organization agreement. In the accord, 
most countries agreed to let foreign companies acquire major stakes 
in domestic phone companies. Only Japan insisted on limiting foreigners 
to no more than 20 percent ownership of NTT and KDD, its main local 
and long-distance providers, respectively. In its announcement on 
Thursday, Hong Kong said it would grant licenses to all companies 
that want to provide international direct-dial service in the territory. 
After Jan. 1, 2000, the licensees can build their own international 
networks here. ``It's not a free-for-all, but there is no question 
that Hong Kong's market is liberalizing,'' said Victor Shvets, head 
of telecommunications research at Deutsche Securities in Hong Kong. 
Having opened its local telephone market ahead of its long-distance 
market, Hong Kong presents something of an anomaly in regulatory circles 
_ a quirk that is a result of the government's having granted Hong 
Kong Telecom a long-term monopoly on international service. Last February, 
it paid the company $864 million to terminate that franchise this 
year rather than letting the monopoly extend through the original 
date of 2006. In contrast, Hong Kong broke open the local telephone 
monopoly in 1995, when it granted licenses to three start-up companies: 
New T&AMP;T, New World Telephone and Hutchison Telecom. All three 
companies are owned by powerful property developers, a circumstance 
that has been no small help in stringing wires into buildings. But 
though the gaggle of local providers has made for a clamorous market, 
it has barely dented Hong Kong Telecom's monopoly. Collectively, the 
three rivals have less than 2 percent of the market. That is largely 
because they have been slow to build networks in Hong Kong's densely 
populated neighborhoods and hilly terrain. Predictably, the upstarts 
are lobbying Hong Kong not to add to their struggles by granting additional 
local licenses. Given that these companies are owned by some of Hong 
Kong's most politically connected tycoons, their arguments carry plenty 
of influence. Hong Kong's government has not hesitated to make decisions 
that benefited the developers, even when those moves seemed at odds 
with the territory's free-market credentials. In June, it suspended 
sales of public land; in August, it intervened heavily to prop up 
the stock market. Several analysts said the developers might have 
an ulterior motive in opposing additional local licenses. If Worldcom 
cannot build its own network, it might feel pressed to buy out one 
of the tycoons. But Liddell, who said Worldcom was not interested 
in such an acquisition, took an unsubtle swipe at the tycoons by suggesting 
that companies that put up apartment towers and ran supermarkets were 
not as able to offer up-to-date communications services as a company 
that focuses on building networks. Hong Kong Telecom has taken a generally 
low profile in this debate, perhaps because it has its own economic 
and political problems. To ready itself for the deregulation of the 
market, the company recently announced plans to slash the wages of 
its 13,800 workers by 10 percent. But it was forced to back down after 
Hong Kong's chief executive, Tung Cheehwa, excoriated the move. Hong 
Kong Telecom is controlled by Cable and Wireless PLC of Britain; the 
Chinese government-controlled China Telecom bought 5.5 percent of 
the company last year. Worldcom is not the only foreign carrier active 
in Hong Kong. British Telecommunications has an alliance with Hutchison. 
And Global One, the joint venture owned by Sprint, France Telecom 
and Deutsche Telekom, offers international service on leased lines. 
But only MCI Worldcom has ambitions to build a soup-to-nuts local 
network. Perhaps that is why the company has chosen to make its case 
so fervently and publicly. Besides, Hong Kong may represent the company's 
best remaining chance to make its local-telecommunications mark in 
Asia. Certainly, MCI Worldcom has hit its share of snags breaking 
into the local phone business elsewhere in the region. Last year, 
before teaming up with MCI, the company bid aggressively for a license 
to offer local phone service in Singapore. But it lost out to a consortium 
that includes BT and NTT. Before that setback, Woodhead said Worldcom 
had suggested that it might move its Asian headquarters from Hong 
Kong to Singapore. Today, though, there is no talk of moving. It may 
be that MCI Worldcom needs Hong Kong as much as Hong Kong needs MCI 
Worldcom. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>