<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981025.0185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rarely, over a period of more than 40 years, have I enjoyed brilliant 
success when fishing for Cole Pond's brook trout, but I keep trying. 
Each fall, the tug of Cole Pond becomes almost irresistible. Atop 
a forested hill at an elevation of 1,376 feet, this 17-acre body of 
water, more than 50 feet deep in the middle, is surrounded by the 
reds and yellows of maples, birch and beech in October, and often 
during the hike up to it, one hears the throbbing wings of departing 
ruffed grouse. The only man-made structure on the pond shore is the 
fireplace of a cabin that burned down decades ago. A now-deceased 
friend of mine, Vic Pomiecko of Claremont, N.H., and I occasionally 
waited out storms in that cabin, and for many seasons we stashed a 
raft _ made of nylon cord and saplings _ in the woods on the east 
side of the pond, lashing inner tubes beneath it for flotation. Most 
of Cole Pond's shoreline does not permit fly-fishing, there being 
no room for a back cast. It does, however, offer a few locations for 
the land-based fly rod devotee, and if one is willing to pack waders 
there is a cove with a hard, sandy bottom just east of where the trail 
reaches the pond. From the mouth of that cove, a wading angler can 
cover a 30-yard stretch with a long line. Nonetheless, those truly 
serious about catching trout would do well to bring an inflatable 
raft or a float tube. Unlike many anglers, I favor waters I know and 
quarry I encountered in my New England boyhood. New England has been 
my home for more than seven decades. I revel in the familiar and at 
the same time am bedeviled by it. On the island of Martha's Vineyard, 
where I have spent most of my life, the lanes and roads, beaches, 
salt ponds and marshes are redolent with memories, some pleasant, 
some searing. And so it is with the hills, streams, ponds and lakes 
of New Hampshire where for nearly 20 years I sought economic sustenance 
as a journalist and fled to the woods for spiritual nourishment, renewing 
acquaintances with mountainside homesteads abandoned a century before, 
stone walls wandering through the woods, once-prized apple trees thrusting 
up through stands of encroaching conifers or a never-failing spring 
emerging from the base of a granite ledge. When my companion Ruth 
Kirchmeier and I visited Cole Pond early this October, I observed 
that the moderately stiff mile-long uphill hike had taken 45 minutes, 
15 minutes more than it did 40 years ago when I was a lad of 35. ``Don't 
fret, you made it yet another time,'' she replied, and set forth for 
a walk about the pond to see if the high-bush blueberries she had 
found up there at the same time last year were available. They were 
not. There would be no Cole Pond blueberry pie when we got home. Three 
other fishermen, all young, visited the pond in the two days we were 
there. The first had no waders or boots. He stood on the shore skillfully 
directing his back cast into a narrow opening behind him and had taken 
one trout about a foot long before we arrived. The second angler arrived 
with an inflated float tube strapped to his pack, which contained 
a pair of waders. On the second day, the third arrived, waders in 
his pack and a float tube in a satchel, accompanied by a golden retriever. 
All three listened politely to a gray-bearded old man puffing on a 
pipe intent on telling what he had learned about a pond he had fished 
before they were born. In 1946, Cole Pond was reclaimed; existing 
populations of suckers, chain pickerel, sunfish and horned pout were 
removed and brook trout were introduced. Since that time, it has been 
managed for trout. Over the years it has yielded quite a few brook 
trout of more than 2 pounds and at least one of about 5 pounds has 
been taken from it. Only fly-fishing is allowed on Cole Pond. As of 
this year, all trout between 12 and 16 inches had to be released and 
only two fish could be kept daily, both less than 12 inches or one 
less than 12 and one more than 16. The intent of this so-called slot 
limit is to provide a quality fishery for large trout. The fishing 
season on Cole Pond closed Oct. 15. Ruth filled her sketch pad and 
poked about the pond while I fished, finding an otter slide, where 
the scat was laden with indigestible bits of crayfish, a species stocked 
in the pond in 1954. Last year when Ruth and I were there, I had been 
startled by three otters rising from the water less than 50 feet in 
front of me. This year, I caught only one trout each day, both a little 
less than a foot long, although once, late on the first day, a trout 
of 2 pounds or more made a pass at my Muddler Minnow as I was lifting 
it from the water. A bit more action would have been pleasing, but 
I was not dissatisfied, even though I consider myself reasonably adept 
at the esoteric art of still-water fly-fishing for trout. We had, 
after all, begun our fall sojourn at the century-old Meccawe Trout 
Club in Reading, Vt., as guests of John Houlihan, a Claremont, N.H., 
dentist. There, using advice given to me by the club's caretaker, 
John Paiva, I had caught 11 brook trout in one day on the club's 10-acre 
man-made pond, keeping four that Ruth and I savored while seated before 
the blazing fireplace in the cavernous lodge where the interior adornments 
include a tattered fishing hat worn by President Calvin Coolidge, 
who was, I was told, a frequent club guest. The mainstay of another 
evening meal was four woodcock given to us by Houlihan, who had gone 
bird hunting that morning. We took the brace of Cole Pond trout back 
to the Vineyard, drank a toast to the pond and to my departed buddy 
Vic, then enjoyed the fish with an almond-butter sauce, brown rice, 
a salad made from our cold frame lettuce and a pie made with apples 
plucked from an abandoned homestead tree. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>