<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981017.0352 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Defying a police order, the wife of dismissed Deputy Prime Minister 
Anwar Ibrahim on Saturday joined thousands of protesters supporting 
the jailed dissident and demanding the resignation of Prime Minister 
Mahathir Mohamad. The appearance at the demonstration by Azizah Ismail 
and Anwar's eldest daughter, Nurul Izzah, marks a new combativeness 
by the family of the anti-government leader. It was the first protest 
in which Azizah has participated and follows a trip abroad this week 
by the 18-year-old Nurul to drum up support for Anwar, who was arrested 
last month after leading rallies against Mahathir's rule. As Azizah 
drove to the crowded street, hundreds of people rushed to her shouting 
``Reforms! Reforms!'' and ``Mahathir Resign.'' She shook hands with 
some from inside her car. Later, police beat protesters with rattan 
canes to get them off the streets and witnesses said dozens of demonstrators 
were arrested. Police fired a water cannon to disperse the crowd of 
nearly 10,000 protesters who had marched to the palace of Malaysia's 
constitutional monarch, demanding that Anwar be reinstated as the 
nation's deputy prime minister. Officers also used batons to push 
away demonstrators who blocked an 8-lane highway near the palace for 
nearly 30 minutes. No injuries were reported, but witnesses saw police 
dragging several people away for detention. Earlier this week, Nurul 
quietly slipped out of Malaysia to meet with Presidents B.J. Habibie 
of Indonesia and Joseph Estrada of the Philippines. Both expressed 
support for the 51-year-old dissident. Mahathir, 72, fired Anwar on 
Sept. 2 and the former deputy was subsequently charged with 10 counts 
of corruption and illegal homosexual acts. The trial begins Nov. 2. 
The prime minister has dismissed international concern over Anwar's 
treatment and defended his sacking saying his former deputy was too 
immoral for public office. Anwar, 51, has denied the charges, saying 
they were trumped up to eliminate the political challenge he had posed 
to Mahathir's 17-year-rule. During Saturday's protest, demonstrators 
mingled with shoppers crowding malls ahead of a Hindu festival. Cars 
honked incessantly in solidarity as protesters held up signs and shouted 
slogans against the government, in the latest of the street demonstrations 
that have erupted regularly since Anwar's arrest on Sept. 20. Witnesses 
said they saw police making several arrests from among the protesters 
who had been warned repeatedly in recent weeks that such gatherings 
were illegal. Many of the shoppers were out buying new clothes and 
gifts for Monday's Deepavali festival during which Hindus light lamps 
in their homes and distribute sweets. About 10 percent of Malaysia's 
22 million people are Hindus of Indian ethnicity. The majority are 
Malay Muslims. On Saturday, Mahathir said during a visit to Tokyo 
that Anwar was being treated well in jail and even had a mattress 
to sleep on. Defiance of police threats of arrest and violence have 
become common since Anwar's firing. Protests were rare in Malaysia 
where even established political parties dared not hold a gathering 
without police permission. Late Friday night, police arrested three 
people for demonstrating at a rally in the southern port town of Malacca 
organized by an opposition coalition that has campaigned for the release 
of Anwar, the national news agency Bernama said. Meanwhile, a government 
minister blamed the foreign media coverage of opposition street rallies 
in Malaysia for scaring away tourists. The hotel occupancy rate had 
dwindled to 54 percent from 67 percent in the same period last year, 
Tourism Minister Sabbaruddin Chik said Friday. ``CNN has been successful 
in portraying the so-called havoc in Malaysia in a manner that will 
keep away tourists from coming here,'' he told reporters. The minister 
also criticized the CNBC news network for what he called distorted 
news coverage. CNBC has denied previous accusations of biased coverage 
by Malaysian officials. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>