<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981017.0176 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Taiwan's top negotiator soaked up Beijing's sights Saturday ahead 
of a meeting with Chinese President Jiang Zemin that was to cap a 
visit hailed as a fresh start in relations. Koo Chen-fu was scheduled 
to spend an hour Sunday with Jiang, in a meeting expected to highlight 
the thaw in ties evidenced by Koo's trip after a three-year hiatus 
in contacts. A breakthrough at the meeting was unlikely. Taiwan and 
China have a rivalry that dates back five decades to the Chinese civil 
war, and as recently as 1996 China was seeking to intimidate the island 
by testing missiles off its waters. But the atmosphere at Sunday's 
meeting in the luxurious confines of Beijing's Diaoyutai state guest 
house should be brightened by an agreement Koo secured earlier during 
his visit this week for China and Taiwan to work toward resuming formal 
negotiations. Beijing suspended those talks in 1995, in anger over 
a trip by Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui to the United States. China 
viewed the visit as an affront to its claims of sovereignty over Taiwan 
and as a sign that Lee was leading the island toward independence. 
Beijing responded by test-firing missiles and holding war games near 
Taiwan, and by suspending negotiations. As China's top leader, Jiang 
oversaw that crisis, which pushed the two sides closer to war than 
they had been in decades. So by agreeing to meet Koo during this visit, 
Jiang appeared to be signaling a desire for some degree of rapprochement. 
Jiang is under pressure from the powerful Chinese military and communist 
old guard to get Taiwan to agree to reunification with the Chinese 
mainland. The island has been separated politically from the mainland 
since Taiwan's Nationalist government fled there after losing the 
Chinese civil war to China's Communists in 1949. Koo declined at a 
news conference Friday to give details about what he expected to discuss 
with Jiang. Koo went sightseeing Saturday, visiting a memorial to 
Chinese nationalist Sun Yat-sen, the prestigious Beijing University, 
and the Forbidden City, the former residence of China's emperors. 
On Sunday, before his sit-down with Jiang, Koo was also due to meet 
Vice Premier Qian Qichen, a former foreign minister. In a sign of 
the lingering distrust between Taiwan and China, Taiwan's vice foreign 
minister, David Lee, claimed Saturday that Qian had recently ordered 
Chinese diplomats to step up efforts to isolate Taiwan diplomatically. 
Lee quoted Qian as having called for a ``face-to-face struggle'' with 
Taiwan to lure away its dwindling number of diplomatic partners. Just 
27 countries now recognize Taiwan, with most having switched recognition 
to Beijing. Lee called on China to clarify Qian's remarks. ``We hope 
the mainland authorities will respond to our goodwill and sincerity 
with the same goodwill and sincerity,'' he said at a news conference. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>