<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981017.0144 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Protesters crammed the sidewalks of a busy downtown Kuala Lumpur street 
Saturday holding up posters demanding the resignation of Prime Minister 
Mahathir Mohamad. Shoppers scurried off with their carry bags fearing 
violence. Riot police deployed to prevent the show of solidarity for 
jailed dissident leader Anwar Ibrahim, however, did not immediately 
try to disperse the demonstrators who mingled with shoppers crowding 
malls ahead of a Hindu festival. The protesters shouted slogans against 
the government, in the latest of the street demonstrations that have 
erupted regularly since Anwar's Sept. 20 arrest. The former deputy 
prime minister was detained after organizing huge anti-government 
protests. Police trucks were lined along the streets in the capital 
city near the major shopping and Independence Square areas. Policemen 
were posted on the sidewalks. Many of the shoppers Saturday were out 
buying new clothes and gifts for Monday's Deepavali festival during 
which Hindus light lamps in their homes and distribute sweets. About 
10 percent of Malaysia's 22 million people are Hindus. The majority 
are Malay Muslims. More than 5,000 people had responded to a similar 
protest call to gather in the area last Saturday. Mahathir fired Anwar 
on Sept. 2 and the former deputy was subsequently charged with 10 
counts of corruption and illegal homosexual acts. Anwar has denied 
the charges, saying they were trumped up to eliminate the political 
challenge he had posed to Mahathir. Anwar's trial begins Nov. 2. Late 
Friday night, police arrested three people for demonstrating at a 
rally organized by an opposition coalition that has campaigned for 
the release of Anwar, the national news agency Bernama said. The arrests 
occurred during a protest by about 3,000 people in the southern town 
of Malacca. Police have declared all such rallies illegal. Opposition 
groups have routinely defied police threats by organizing unsanctioned 
gatherings to call for Anwar's release and Mahathir's resignation. 
Meanwhile, a government minister has blamed foreign media coverage 
of opposition street rallies in Malaysia for scaring away tourists. 
The hotel occupancy rate had dwindled to 54 percent from 67 percent 
in the same period last year, Tourism Minister Sabbaruddin Chik said 
Friday. ``CNN has been successful in portraying the so-called havoc 
in Malaysia in a manner that will keep away tourists from coming here,'' 
he told reporters. The minister also criticized the CNBC news network 
for what he called distorted news coverage. CNBC has denied previous 
accusations of biased coverage by Malaysian officials. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>