<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981017.0326 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
PARIS (AP) - Valentino's clothes swished around with new sparkle and 
sporty verve in his Saturday show of spring ready-to-wear. Versatility 
and ease from beach-to-evening are the bywords of this big fashion 
week, and Valentino catches the spirit. He likes the casual look of 
cardigan-sweater jackets, caftan blouses - almost always decorated, 
of course. These link up with cropped pants and lovely flat sandals. 
There were no more uptight beaded, embroidered suits. Instead, the 
lines were almost folkloric, not quite ethnic. And of course they 
were up-to-date for your rich Barbados traveler or California coast 
dweller. In mostly blacks, whites, sandy shades with big dollops of 
coral, the clothes would be good standby resort wear, skirts on the 
long mid-calf side. Try a lacy full gypsy blouse - a big item here, 
with its low-slung seashell belt over fluid silk crepe pants. Pretty 
lace ponchos came out over white or coral linen trousers, full skirts 
in conical or round shapes would be great at any barbecue or elegant 
soiree. And the master of luxury could not resist orange pleated tulle 
flounces on a skirt with its neat little sleeveless white top. But 
with the many organza blouses, the breezy tiered skirts, the collection 
did have a terrific contemporary offhand look that's welcome today. 
Right up to date, too, and with a much younger light touch, the Herve 
Leger collection hit some fine high notes. The silhouettes were fairly 
narrow, but easy, and the rainbow-painted skirts or bustier tops were 
great fun for color. Changing from his bandage-like wrapped earlier 
styles, Leger went into bright printed wrap skirts or pinstriped versions 
that look anything from stodgy. The young bustier dresses, pretty 
colors in ikat weaves and and details give this collection a good 
deal of youthful clout. Great cut-out looks with flesh or flesh colored 
linen underneath are super for dresses, and sexy bathing suits as 
well - a big line here in cut out lycras. Ribbon embroidery, twisted-rope 
fabrics and hand-painted silks make for evening dresses with a touch 
of haute couture, while white linen trouser suits are a fine sporty 
option in a collection full of young ideas. Meanwhile, Jean-Paul Gaultier 
took a long, cool look at Japan and did clothes from the geisha's 
tea ceremony, Japanese prints or the Ginza - his own way. Fortunately, 
he left out the Sumo wrestlers in this picturesque costume show. Lots 
of drawstring blousons thrown casually around shoulders topped lean 
skirts or pants, the inevitable platform shoes some with white socks 
like Japanese schoolgirls wear. Tank tops or ``Marcel'' t-shirts layered 
over with fishnet were another look borrowed from Japanese fishermen. 
Kimono sleeves all over the place, draped shoulders and even a corselet 
effect, more Gaultier than Japanese style, paraded out in a show that 
sometimes looked like a parody on 19th century prints by Hokusai. 
Trompe l'oeil dresses printed to look like statues draped front and 
back were another clever Gaultier trick. Light voile coverups, a couple 
of obi sashes made into a swimsuit, geisha-style girls in their printed 
robes added to the many Japanese-inspired ideas for couture, probably 
destined for copying - since Gaultier is always a design leader. The 
finale was a flourish on her violin by famous Japanese violinist Vanessa 
Mae, very pretty in her silk dress and big obi bow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>