<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981017.1300.0551 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Former Chilean dictator augusto Pinochet has been arrested in London 
for allegedly murdering Spanish citizens. Pinochet's regime is blamed 
for some 3,000 deaths or vanishings. Tom Mintier reports, keeping 
Pinochet in custody could take some wrangling. It's not really clear 
in Scotland yard hasn't done too much to clarify. The actual details 
of Pinochet's arrest. It occurred last last night, there were reports 
that he's at a medical clinic not a hospital but Scotland yard wouldn't 
confirm that. They have 40 days to hold Pinochet. They can hold him 
until he goes to court for an extradition hearing. During that time 
the Spanish authorities, according to British officials have to provide 
more detailed information an a formal request for extradition. This 
request for the arrest came on Wednesday when a Spanish judge went 
through enter poll and applied for the arrest warrant. It's not clear 
how he traveled to lofrn Don, whether he came in a Diplomatic passport 
or not, according to the foreign office that he did not need a visa 
to travel to the Yu flighted kingdom. As we have seen a fury of activity 
that has taken place as far as the chileans saying they will seek 
his release. It's going to be very, very difficult to sort all this 
out in the coming days and weeks. Pinochet is in fact a life long 
senator in Chile as a senator he is immune under prosecution according 
to Chilean law. How does that apply to the rest of the world? There 
is an extradition treaty signed in 1989 between Spain and the United 
Kingdom. If he's going to be extradited to Spain it will be under 
that existing treaty. It is something for the home secretary to make 
the decision whether this arrest warrant will stand up, giving Pinochet 
status whether they will be able to go ahead and make the extradition. 
So I'm sure the lights will be burning brightly at the home office 
late night as they start working on the paper qork for this extradition 
hearing. If he traveled on a diplomatic passport, we're not sure if 
that's the case, because he has that, will he be required to testify? 
That is something that probably is going to be, again, under discussion 
at both the foreign office and the home office, exactly the details 
of how pinochet was traveling. When we called the foreign office we 
were told he did not need a visa to visit the Yu flighted king domg 
which may be an indication that he was traveling on his diplomatic 
passport coming here for medical treatment. Again, it depends on if 
circumstance of the travel and the arrest. It is something we probably 
will not know until at least two more days take place. Simon Mintier, 
thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>