<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981017.1000.1469 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They provide the memories of a lifetime, and a visual chronicle of 
baseball history. Peter viles takes us behind the scenes to see how 
TV producers and directors cover the world series. Four, three, two, 
one. The main control room for fox baseball coverage. 14, stand by 
for a wide shot. Ready one, take one. Ready 14 to camera one. Good. 
Right there. Director Bill Webb has covered 3,000 games. He tells 
the camera men what to focus on, and weaves a story from 19 separate 
cameras and shifting from one shot to another. You know what I try 
to do? And my camera guys are excellent at picking it out. Is the, 
like the clenched hands, the praying hands. The first game here in 
Atlanta, there was a lady who was biting a tomahawk, in the bottom 
of the ninth. You know, things like that bring out more of the emotion. 
And plus, the players add to it. To his right is the producer, John 
filipelli, who controls instant replays. Give me the catch on Tucker. 
Keeps score, coaches a team of three announcers, and sets the tone 
for game coverage. There was a play with Tucker when he crashed into 
the outfield wall. That, hopefully, will be as memorable to you as 
the catch itself, is the sound of the catch. This catch by Michael 
Tucker. One more look. In an effort to keep it a 1-1 game. That sound 
came from this Mike, one of 45 fox places around the stadium to capture 
the sounds of the game. I think we have probably 8 or 12 in this outfield 
wall right now. We're not gonna miss anything. We wanna take the viewer 
to a place they haven't been before. Let them hear things they haven't 
heard, let them see things they haven't seen. Even the bases are bugged. 
These Mike caps get abused a lot. All of this is controlled by 80 
producers and technicians who work from this TV village underneath 
the stands. They travel as a pack, in chartered jets, the trucks are 
rented locally, and connected to the stadium by ten miles of cable. 
In this truck, producers create up to 50 graphics per game. Galarraga's 
a right-handed batter, I hope. This computer controls the fox box, 
a trademark scoreboard that is always on the screen. One, two, three. 
The guys will explode off the base, and it goes to the next inning. 
This truck houses 19 tape decks, solely for instant replays, and the 
main control room, where the producer and director call the shots. 
What's next? is it? We'll get to it. And five. Fade it out. Ready, 
four. Take four. And try to turn fox's $575 million investment in 
baseball rights into a dramatic miniseries. There is nothing -- nothing, 
like postseason baseball. No knock on other sports. They're all great 
in their own way on their own terms. But postseason baseball is the 
most dramatic, the most interesting, I think, of any moments in any 
sports. The emotion is there. There is story line, there is drama, 
there is tension, everywhere. You don't have to look very far to find 
it, because everything is on the line for these teams. Peter viles, 
"CNN Financial News," Atlanta. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>