<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981017.1830.0062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. There are indications tonight that there just might 
be progress, in the Middle East peace conference under way on Maryland's 
eastern shore. President Clinton has entered the talks once again, 
and may do so again tomorrow. The White House originally wanted to 
host it at camp David, but it was rejected, for fear of comparisons 
to Jimmy Carter's Middle East breakthrough. But the sight of an American 
president, with big domestic problems, shuttling back and forth between 
two sides, two leaders, distrustful of each other after years of bloodshed. 
It all seemed familiar. So did the violence in the Middle East, even 
while the talks go on. We begin tonight with NBC's Bob Kur, covering 
the talks in Maryland. Brian, it's an all-out, high-stakes diplomatic 
challenge. President Clinton spending the next couple of days on what 
he calls "Intense efforts" to get Israel and the Palestinians to reach 
some important agreements and move ahead with the peace process. At 
midday, Mr. Clinton left for the talks, accompanied by national security 
adviser Sandy Berger. Officials said the president carried fresh proposals 
-- an attempt to bridge gaps between the sides in long-stalled negotiations. 
He met first with Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, who has threatened 
to declare Palestinian statehood unilaterally next spring unless there's 
progress. Then, a meeting with Israel's prime minister Netanyahu. 
He won't return more land to the Palestinian's without firm guarantees 
of security for Israel. The setting -- a secluded conference center 
near the chesapeake bay on maryland's eastern shore. But even as the 
talks took place, Palestinians, in territory occupied by israel, demanded 
release of prisoners as part of any deal. A key Israeli hard-liner 
stressed the importance of negotiations. I believe that we have to 
reach some peace, and we are going to make every effort to do it. 
The goal is to have Israel withdraw from an additional 13% of the 
West Bank. In return, Palestinians would take new steps to fight terrorism 
and protect israelis from attacks. Israel wants Arafat to -- extradite 
suspected terrorists, find and dismantle bombmaking facilities, seize 
and hand over weapons, and renounce a charter calling for Israel's 
destruction. The Palestinians want -- safe, unhindered passage on 
the West Bank, in gaza, and better access to jobs. Also help with 
an airport, seaport and an industrial park. Arafat clearly wants to 
improve the day-to-day life of Palestinians, clearly wants more control 
over military territory. Netanyahu wants to return home as a peacemaker. 
Both have incentive to make this happen. Tonight, a top White House 
official says there has been some progress today, but he adds, in 
these talks the ownous is on the negotiators, knots the mediator. 
They are telling us that any deal will require new U.S. aid to both 
of them. In any event, the president will be staying over very late 
tonight and returning tomorrow. NBC's Bob Kur at the White House, 
thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>