<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0139 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following is some of the major legislation that the 105th Congress 
approved or failed to approve. WHAT CONGRESS DID: 1997 BALANCED BUDGET: 
Approved legislation aimed at balancing federal budget by 2002. The 
legislation extracted $115 billion in savings over five years from 
Medicare and slowed the growth of discretionary spending. It included 
a $24 billion program to provide health care coverage for up to five 
million uninsured children, to be financed by increasing federal tax 
on cigarettes by 15 cents a pack over five years. TAX CUT: Approved 
first federal tax cut since 1981, $95 billion over five years. Bill 
included cuts in taxes on capital gains and estates, new tax credits 
for families with children and tax credits for higher education. FOOD 
AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION: Cleared legislation to modernize the FDA 
and speed up process for approving prescription drugs and medical 
devices. MEDICARE: In Balanced Budget Act, made vast changes in Medicare, 
offering new health insurance options to elderly, broadening coverage 
of preventive services and creating financial incentives for managed 
care plans to serve rural areas. CHEMICAL WEAPONS TREATY: Senate approved 
Chemical Weapons Convention, which bans development, production, acquisition, 
stockpiling, transfer and use of chemical weapons. GINGRICH REPRIMAND: 
House voted to reprimand Speaker Newt Gingrich and fine him $300,000 
for bringing discredit on the House by using tax-exempt money to promote 
Republican goals and giving House ethics committee untrue information 
for its inquiry. PAY RAISE: Approved a 2.3 percent cost-of-living 
pay increase for members of Congress, the first increase in five years, 
adding more than $3,000 to base pay of $133,000. 1998 TRANSPORTATION: 
Approved largest public works program in nation's history _ more than 
$200 billion over next six years for roads, bridges, buses, subways 
and ferries in virtually every Congressional district. INTERNAL REVENUE 
SERVICE: Passed legislation overhauling the IRS. Law gives new rights 
to taxpayers who get into serious disputes with IRS, establishes outside 
board to oversee IRS management and policies, and strengthens role 
of taxpayer advocate, an internal ombudsman for complaints from individuals. 
HIGHER EDUCATION ACT: Approved legislation that reduces interest rate 
on federal college loans to lowest level in 17 years. Bill expands 
Pell grants for college students, includes money for improved teacher 
training and recruitment, and allows colleges to notify parents when 
students are caught in drug and alcohol violations. PUBLIC HOUSING: 
Amended 1937 law that established the framework for public housing. 
New legislation revamps public housing and gives local housing officials 
more authority. IMF FINANCING: Approved $18 billion for International 
Monetary Fund with new restrictions on its loans to foreign governments. 
FARM ASSISTANCE: Agreed to include $6 billion in emergency farm aid 
as part of $60 billion agriculture spending bill. TAX CUT: Approved 
$9.2 billion in tax cuts over 10 years. Package renews several expiring 
business tax credits and provides limited relief to farmers, self-employed 
people and some families. NATO EXPANSION: Senate voted to expand NATO 
to include Poland, Hungary and Czech Republic. IMPEACHMENT: House 
voted to begin full-scale, open-ended inquiry into possible grounds 
for impeachment of President Clinton. WHAT CONGRESS DIDN'T DO: TOBACCO: 
Senate failed to cut off Republican filibuster of legislation to regulate 
tobacco products. Bill would have raised price of cigarettes $1.10 
a pack over five years, cost tobacco companies $516 billion over 25 
years, given government new authority to regulate tobacco advertising, 
and imposed penalties if smoking by teen-agers did not decline. MANAGED 
CARE: House-passed bill to define patients' rights and set uniform 
nationwide standards for health insurance died in Senate. ABORTION: 
Senate, 64-36, failed by 3 votes to override Presidential veto of 
bill banning a form of late-term procedure that opponents call partial-birth 
abortion. House voted to override veto, 296 to 132. FAST-TRACK AUTHORITY: 
House failed to renew negotiating authority that would allow President 
to negotiate trade agreements that Congress could accept or reject 
but not amend. EDUCATION SAVINGS ACCOUNTS: Passed legislation expanding 
a program that would allow contributions of up to $2,000 a year to 
special savings accounts for students in elementary and secondary 
schools. Money would have to be used for expenses like tutoring, computers 
and school tuition. President vetoed the bill on the ground that it 
weakened public education. CAMPAIGN FINANCE: House approved bill that 
would ban unlimited, unregulated donations to political parties and 
curb issue-advocacy commercials by outside groups in the 60 days before 
an election. Senate failed to break a Republican filibuster on similar 
bill. BANKRUPTCY: House passed bill to overhaul bankruptcy system 
and make it more difficult for consumers to walk away from debts. 
Bill died after Senate Democrats opposed it and White House threatened 
a veto. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>