<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0034 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In this city's second death penalty trial since the state revived 
capital punishment three years ago, a Brooklyn man was convicted of 
first-degree murder Friday by a jury that will now decide whether 
to sentence him to death for killing another man while robbing him 
of his jewelry. The jury in state Supreme Court in Brooklyn found 
that Jermaine Page, a 24-year-old ex-convict, fired the shots that 
killed Marvin McIntosh, 28, in a 1996 street robbery near Page's home 
in East New York. The jury rejected the defense argument that the 
fatal bullets had been fired by a teen-ager whom the prosecution described 
as a second gunman on the three-person robbery team. The teen-ager 
faces trial on a charge of second-degree murder, which is not punishable 
by death. If the jury decides to sentence Page to be executed by lethal 
injection, rather than to life in prison without the possibility of 
parole, when it convenes Oct. 27 for the penalty phase of the trial, 
Page will join the only other convicted murderer to receive a death 
sentence under the 1995 law that restored capital punishment in New 
York state. In June, the other man, Darrel Harris, was sentenced to 
death in the same Brooklyn courthouse, after a jury in the state's 
first trial under the law convicted him of first-degree murder for 
killing three people in a robbery at an illegal social club. In yet 
another trial under the statute, a jury in Buffalo began hearing testimony 
Friday on whether to impose a death sentence on Jonathan Parker, whom 
the panel last week convicted of first-degree murder for shooting 
a police officer to death last year. As the verdict was announced 
in Page's monthlong trial, the defendant, a man with closely cropped 
hair and a slight goatee, bent his head downward and shook it from 
side to side as he stood at the defense table. In its 12 hours of 
deliberations during three days, the jury rejected an alternative 
charge of second-degree murder, which is punishable by a maximum sentence 
of 25 years to life in prison. That charge simply accused Page of 
being part of a team of robbers who killed McIntosh, an employee of 
a private mail service who lived on Staten Island, without specifying 
who fired the fatal shots. ``He is a very sad young man,'' one of 
Page's lawyers, Steven Chaikin, said of his client after speaking 
with him after the verdict. Chaikin declined to comment on the jury's 
action, although he and Page's other lawyer, Gary Villanueva, are 
expected to ask Justice L. Priscilla Hall next week to set aside the 
jury verdict as not warranted by the evidence. Chaikin also declined 
to say what the defense would argue, should the judge sustain the 
verdict, to try to persuade the jury that mitigating factors dictated 
that Page should be sentenced to life in prison rather than execution. 
Under the law, mitigating factors include circumstances like the defendant's 
having been mentally or emotionally disturbed or under the influence 
of drugs or alcohol at the time of the murder. None of the testimony 
at the trial so far has indicated any such condition, but that does 
not preclude the introduction of evidence during the penalty phase. 
One of the prosecutors, Joseph Alexis, an assistant district attorney, 
said after the verdict, ``There is no joy or happiness that anybody 
can derive from this.'' ``One young man has already lost his life 
and another young man is going to begin the penalty phase with his 
life on the line, in an absolutely senseless but brutal murder,'' 
Alexis said. ``But the jury weighed the evidence very seriously and 
came back with a verdict that they thought was just and that I think 
is just.'' McIntosh's grandmother, Martha Reese, who had reared the 
victim from age 2, said she was glad of the first-degree murder conviction 
and believed Page should be sentenced to death. ``My son is gone,'' 
she said. ``He could have robbed him but he didn't have to take his 
life.'' But a sister of the victim, Jezebel McIntosh, said of the 
sentence, ``The Creator runs the show and the Creator will make that 
decision.'' Page's relatives would not talk to reporters as they left 
the courtroom. His wife, Onika, wept in the hallway. Justice Hall 
reminded the 12 jurors that they could not discuss their decision 
publicly because the trial was not over, given the jury's role in 
sentencing the person it convicts of first-degree murder. Prosecutors 
said that McIntosh was slain on the night of May 22, 1996, while standing 
in front of a girlfriend's home in East New York, Brooklyn. They said 
he was wearing a gold chain and a large gold pendant shaped like a 
bulldog's head, with rubies for eyes. Prosecutors said that Page and 
two others approached him to steal the jewelry _ which had cost McIntosh 
$1,000 _ and that when he began struggling, Page and the teen-ager, 
Darryl Gilmore, then 15, shot him. Gilmore has pleaded not guilty 
to second-degree murder. Alexis told the jurors that Page ``wasn't 
satisfied'' with having earlier won money from McIntosh in a dice 
game but also wanted ``to put that pendant around his neck and call 
it his own.'' Aside from maintaining that Gilmore had fired the fatal 
shots, Chaikin and Villanueva argued that the encounter was a dispute 
over the dice game but not a robbery. Both sides presented witnesses 
to back their versions. Both Page and McIntosh had criminal records. 
Page had been released on parole just six weeks before the killing 
after having serving two and a half years in prison for attempted 
assault stemming from a shooting. Another prosecutor, Barry Schreiber, 
told the jury that the killing was an execution, perhaps hinting at 
why Brooklyn District Attorney Charles Hynes decided to seek the death 
penalty for Page. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>