<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0138 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The 105th Congress, which is to wrap up its final legislative business 
this week, rejoiced a year ago over a landmark bipartisan balanced-budget 
agreement. It provided the biggest tax cut since the height of the 
Reagan years. But the big question now is whether the 105th will be 
remembered instead for something else: the bitter, protracted preoccupation 
with President Clinton's personal life and his lies about it. And 
Congress is not through yet. This Congress is not officially adjourning 
but merely fading away, subject to a recall before the end of the 
year to decide whether to impeach the president. ``This may be a memorable 
Congress, but not for its string of legislative achievements,'' said 
Norman Ornstein, an expert on Congress at the American Enterprise 
Institute. Ornstein sees the 105th Congress as framed by bookends, 
beginning with a House vote on reprimanding Speaker Newt Gingrich 
for ethics violations, and closing with a House vote to open an impeachment 
inquiry into Clinton. It was punctuated in the middle by a coup attempt 
against Gingrich. ``This tells you a great deal about the mood of 
this Congress and the tone of this Congress _ difficult, partisan 
and acrimonious,'' Ornstein said. It also explains some of the fervor 
for the conservative agenda pursued, off and on, by Gingrich. It was 
his conservative flank that sought to overthrow him and the conservative 
flank he needed to placate. Conservatives were so unhappy earlier 
this year that some of their leaders threatened to bolt from the Republican 
Party. To keep them happy, Republican leaders brought numerous conservative 
social causes up for votes _ abortion, school prayer, flag-burning, 
displaying the Ten Commandments on public property. None of those 
issues made it into law, nor did economic-based matters like school 
vouchers and relief from the marriage tax penalty. If they had passed 
the Senate, President Clinton would have vetoed them. Conservatives 
were restless, and then along came the investigation into Clinton. 
Many analysts suggest that the longtime visceral hatred of Clinton 
by conservatives, who had failed to achieve any significant legislative 
goals, was the prime force behind the drive to impeach him. ``There 
is no more important moral challenge facing the country right now 
than holding Clinton accountable,'' said Bill Kristol, editor of the 
conservative Weekly Standard. ``It's not displacement for conservatives 
to focus on that. They regard his behavior and his lying about it 
and his possibly getting away with it as embodying almost everything 
that is wrong with America today.'' But a New York Times/CBS News 
Poll the week before last confirmed what Republicans had suspected: 
that their obsession with impeachment had hurt their standing with 
the public. Approval ratings of Congress the week before last slipped 
to 43 percent from a high of 56 percent in September. Most voters 
could not name a single thing this Congress had done. Those who could 
cited impeachment. For those not obsessed with the Monica Lewinsky 
scandal, there was some hope. After Congress voted Oct. 8 to begin 
an inquiry into impeachment of a president, for only the third time 
in history, lawmakers found themselves with serious unfinished business, 
including how to keep the government functioning into the next fiscal 
year. They had not even passed a budget blueprint to guide their spending. 
It was Clinton who stepped in to save Congress from itself, and perhaps 
save himself as well. In a remarkable 11th-hour display of his power 
and his political finesse, the president changed the national conversation 
from Ms. Lewinsky, a former White House the intern with whom he had 
an affair, to education. When Congress and the White House agreed 
on their final budget for the coming fiscal year, both sides reveled 
in the money for new teachers. And both Democrats and Republicans 
quickly took this accomplishment home to show voters for the Nov. 
3 midterm elections. The truth was, they had little else in hand. 
Both parties lost their signature issues this year. Republicans could 
not produce a tax cut. Democrats could not produce what they call 
a patient's bill of rights. Neither could they raise the minimum wage, 
force tobacco companies to settle or overhaul the campaign finance 
system. Without these banners to march under, both sides were happy 
to boast of hiring new teachers and to dig into the much-delayed budget 
for billions of dollars worth of home-state projects to please voters. 
And on the final spending bill they attached hundreds of policy items 
that did not have the sweep of, say, changing the health-care system, 
but responded to one constituency or another. These include requiring 
federal health plans to cover contraceptives, making it easier for 
high-tech companies to bring in highly skilled foreign workers, and 
restricting pornography on the Internet. ``We live in the era of little 
initiatives,'' said Marshall Wittmann, director of congressional relations 
at the Heritage Foundation, a conservative research group. ``What 
we have seen is the product of divided government. They reach a murky 
middle ground, and that's what this budget deal is and it's really 
the story of the 105th. But who's to complain when you have peace 
and prosperity?'' Ross Baker, a political scientist at Rutgers University, 
saw the same outcome. ``Did anything they did rise to the level of 
wide public recognition?'' he asked. ``I think not. So much attention 
was focused on things that didn't pass _ campaign finance reform, 
the tobacco bill _ that the modest accomplishments tended to be drowned 
out.'' That said, the 105th Congress set in motion several policy 
questions that could stretch into the next millennium. For the first 
time in three decades, Congress is ending its session with a surplus, 
in part due to the balanced-budget agreement. This offers a whole 
new way of thinking as it shifts from deficit-driven restraint to 
fresh fields for both parties. The most promising legacy of the 105th, 
its agreement not to spend more than it took in, was short-lived. 
The bounty of an anticipated $70 billion surplus this year was too 
tempting for Congress and the White House. They tried abiding by their 
pre-determined spending limits, then spent more, skimming off about 
$20 billion and calling them ``emergencies'' so that they did not 
have to offset them with cuts elsewhere. ``Keeping the politicians' 
hands off a surplus is like throwing Tootsie Rolls in front of a child 
and saying, `Don't touch!''' Wittmann said. ``The deficit restraint 
is off, the guard-rails are gone.'' Still, being able to anticipate 
a surplus for some years poses new challenges to the parties. The 
big debate will be whether to spend it or save it, whether to shore 
it up to bolster Social Security or to cut taxes or pay off the debt. 
The surplus achieved in this Congress will set the debate for years 
to come over what the nation can do, in peacetime, when it has the 
will and the wallet. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>