<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0133 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When New England trampled Kansas City by 40-10 last week, the Patriots 
gained the bonus of an orderly setting for the undesirable Jets Monday 
night. Although many in New England still admire Coach Bill Parcells, 
that is how plenty of others there feel about Parcells and his Jets. 
Undesirables. The Patriots would like to smack both by a score of, 
oh, 80-10. New England is 4-1 and cruising, having won four straight. 
The Jets are 2-3 and reeling, having lost by 20 points at St. Louis. 
Now, Patriots Coach Pete Carroll, the former Jets coach, gets the 
Jets on his turf. Parcells, the former Patriot coach, brings a scarred 
and scratched Jets team to Foxboro, Mass. It is at quarterback, though, 
where the difference is most glaring. Vinny Testaverde moves from 
backup to starter as the Jets continue to flip-flop at quarterback. 
Drew Bledsoe, however, starts his 49th consecutive game for the Patriots. 
And it is not just the streak. It is his game. Bledsoe is putting 
it all together now. He is in his sixth season and he looks like an 
actor who has rehearsed and rehearsed and talked those lines through 
in front of the mirror and, finally, on stage is delivering not only 
the perfect words but also the texture and the pitch and the emotion. 
Bledsoe is throwing it long and throwing it short and making wonderful 
decisions. He is showing a new mobility, some truly fancy footwork 
for a guy who is 6 feet 5 inches tall, 233 pounds and heretofore was 
known to move more like cement than water. And here is the killer 
_ Bledsoe is developing a killer instinct. Parcells might not recognize 
the guy. This is where he wanted Bledsoe to improve most, to take 
charge and not be a wimp, and, so, Parcells as Patriots coach rode 
him and rode him some more to try and bring the killer instinct to 
the surface. Seldom did it happen. Instead, Bledsoe ended up nearly 
wanting to kill Parcells. In imagination, of course. Of course. Right? 
Well, it is happening now, the killer instinct, and Bledsoe will display 
it against the Jets, against Parcells, for certain. Against the Chiefs, 
he was merciless. When the Chiefs made a mistake, he pounced on them. 
Jump offsides? I'll take that free play, Bledsoe seemed to say, and 
Wham! A 40-yard strike, deep downfield. Come after me with the blitz? 
Wham! I'll make you pay. Buy some time. Find the open guy. On the 
blitz, there is always an open guy. Bledsoe zeroing in. It was not 
always this way. He has passed for big yards before but appeared to 
show a reluctance to truly lead. To provide killer instinct. Last 
season New England lost in the playoffs, 7-6, at Pittsburgh. Late 
in the game the Patriots gained the ball with several chances for 
Bledsoe to drive for a winning field goal or make a winning play. 
He and the Patriots could not do it. And on the Patriots' final drive 
he simply dropped the ball and turned it over. He is the franchise. 
He earns the Patriots top dollar. He has to make a play in a 7-6 playoff 
game to win it, his detractors said afterward. Some of his biggest 
supporters did, too. Maybe Bledsoe, too, later felt that way. Here 
is why. After the Chiefs game, after the Patriots rookie back Robert 
Edwards provided another dazzling performance, Bledsoe was asked if 
he was surprised by Edwards. His answer was of course not, that Edwards 
was a first-round draft choice and that was what he was supposed to 
do. Takes one to know one _ the position, the task, the responsibility 
of a big-time draft pick. Especially at quarterback. Edwards is from 
the University of Georgia and he is running hard. He is filling the 
big shoes of Curtis Martin, now a Jet. Edwards' running complements 
Beldsoe's passing. Ernie Zampese is the Patriots' new offensive coordinator. 
Every defensive opponent thinks he knows Zampese. But Zampese just 
keeps tinkering, bringing his arsenal of knowledge to the forefront. 
He is giving Bledsoe a calm and a perspective in tutoring that he 
has not quite had as a pro. Not like this. Zampese is special. Carroll 
nurtures Bledsoe and so does the Patriots' personnel chief, Bobby 
Grier, and certainly, too, does the owner, Robert Kraft. But Bledsoe 
looks as if he is taking more care of Bledsoe. Expanding his shoulders 
and carrying the burden but playing with a freedom that suggests the 
burden is much lighter. He ranks fifth in the American Conference 
in passing (a 97.2 quarterback rating) and second in third-down passing 
(27 of 41, 64.2 percent and a 104.7 quarterback rating). The Patriots 
rank first in passing offense in the A.F.C. Bledsoe needs 352 passing 
yards vs. the Jets to reach 20,000 for his career. In his first five 
seasons he passed for 18,348 yards. Only Dan Marino in league history 
passed for more (19,422). ``The way Drew is playing right now, it 
is something to really see,'' said Ty Law, the Patriots big-play cornerback. 
``Drew is a new man this year. He's ready. If he keeps playing like 
he has, we are going to go a long way. When Drew is playing like this, 
I like my chances with him more than with any quarterback in this 
league.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>