<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0126 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At Giants Stadium Sunday, the starting quarterback for the Giants 
and the backup quarterback across the field for the Arizona Cardinals 
will share an uncommon history. Danny Kanell and Dave Brown have each 
been Giants starting quarterbacks, and each comprehends the capricious 
nature of the assignment. Each played well initially and drew praise; 
each then fell on harder times and drew the bulk of the blame for 
defeat. Brown's rocky period lasted nearly two and a half years. Kanell 
has had just two successive bad games for the 2-4 Giants. Nonetheless, 
he has heard the first serious criticism of his professional career. 
Since Kanell replaced Brown in the starting lineup 12 months ago, 
he has started 16 games, a full National Football League season. Comparing 
Kanell's statistics in his 16 starts with Brown's first 16 starts 
as a Giant in 1994-95 is revealing for how similarly the two fared. 
Each won 9 games in those first 16 starts. Each gave up 17 interceptions. 
Their passing yardage was just 86 yards apart _ Brown with 2,691 yards, 
Kanell with 2,605. It's easy to forget how competently Brown played 
in 1994, when he was 9-6 as a starter. His quarterback rating over 
his first 16 games was higher than Kanell's (71.2 to 67.8), although 
neither of those ratings would be considered good in a league where 
the average rating is about 77 and the leading quarterbacks have ratings 
higher than 100. It's interesting to note that the Giants are throwing 
more with Kanell, who has attempted about five more passes per start 
than Brown did. And Kanell has completed more touchdowns (18) than 
interceptions, while Brown had just 12 touchdowns in his first 16 
starts. But there are two glaring _ and illuminating _ differences 
in their statistics. Kanell has been sacked 32 times, and Brown was 
sacked 44 times. The Giants' offensive line may have improved; more 
likely, it's indicative of a change in offensive philosophy. Kanell 
isn't holding the football in the pocket as long as Brown once did. 
Consider that Kanell's average gain per passing attempt is 5.6 yards. 
Brown, playing for Dan Reeves, who favored long, slow-developing pass 
routes rather than a lot of quick passes to running backs, averaged 
7 yards per pass attempt. That doesn't necessarily equate to efficiency; 
indeed, Kanell's recent woes have been amplified because so many of 
his passes have been for short gains, something that could also be 
the byproduct of the pressure Kanell has felt in the pocket. Brown's 
passing statistics _ and his record as a starter _ declined the longer 
he played. In the Giants organization, there's no real concern yet 
that Kanell is facing a similar fate, but the 24-year-old Kanell is 
in the midst of the worst slump of his football career. In the last 
two Giants games, losses to Tampa Bay and Atlanta, Kanell has thrown 
three interceptions and just one touchdown. Tellingly, he has been 
sacked six times. His completion percentage has been just 46.9. He 
has looked unsettled in the pocket at times and has rushed his passes, 
which destroys rhythm and accuracy. ``He has looked a little jumpy,'' 
Coach Jim Fassel said of Kanell on Friday. ``But that's what you get 
with a young quarterback. When you're not functioning, the burden 
shifts to the quarterback, and sometimes the young guys aren't able 
to keep that pace. ``But people have to remember, it's really just 
been the last two games. That's all.'' Fassel, however, understands 
that the scrutiny of Kanell's performance is mounting. ``Look, I was 
here when they booed Phil Simms,'' said Fassel, a Giants assistant 
coach in 1991-92. ``That's a guy who is a legend around here now. 
People get upset, and when the team loses, all they see is the quarterback. 
``People say he's the reason we lost. He's not the reason we lost. 
There's a lot more to it than that. But I understand that fans get 
frustrated. I want them to care. Our fans at home can help us a lot 
with their enthusiasm. They can give a young quarterback a lot of 
confidence.'' Or they can help erode his confidence. Brown's inability 
to help the Giants have a winning season like the one he experienced 
in his first year as a starter became an albatross that Brown never 
overcame. Maligned and booed at home, Brown was released by the Giants 
last winter and it was considered by most a merciful gesture. Besides, 
at the time, Kanell had a 7-2-1 record as a starting quarterback. 
Why, he had never even lost consecutive games he started, not in high 
school, college or the NFL. That streak was broken four weeks ago. 
Now Kanell can't help but hear the grumbling about his play, though 
he tries to ignore it. ``When people see me, they're nice to me,'' 
he said last week. ``They're not going to say stuff to my face. But 
from what I've heard, some people are talking it out. I don't let 
it get to me. ``That's part of the job of being a quarterback, especially 
in this town. You have to be able to take the heat and enjoy the attention 
when times are good.'' He has experienced both sides, and at 9-6-1, 
Kanell's winning percentage is unquestionably acceptable. But Sunday 
afternoon, when Kanell and Brown meet on the field to talk before 
or after the game, Brown will be able to tell his good friend _ if 
he hasn't already _ that a good start does not insure long-term success. 
After leading the Giants to a 9-7 record in his first 16 starts, Brown 
won just 14 of his next 37 starts for the Giants. That includes the 
game on Oct. 5, 1997, when Kanell relieved Brown in the second quarter 
and rallied the Giants to victory over the Dallas Cowboys. It was 
Brown's last start. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>