<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0109 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Four years ago this month, Haiti's future seemed so promising that 
people here were dancing in the streets. American troops had just 
overthrown a brutal dictatorship, President Jean-Bertrand Aristide 
was on his way back from exile, and a procession of foreign aid donors 
and investors was following in his wake. Today, those hopes for an 
era of prosperity and stability have evaporated, and with them the 
patience of most Haitians. A 16-month political squabble between Aristide 
and other leaders of the fracturing Lavalas coalition has left the 
country without a working government, the population to fend for itself, 
and Haiti's foreign allies disillusioned and exasperated. In an effort 
to break the impasse, the United States has sent one high-level emissary 
after another, with nothing to show for it but broken promises and 
frustration. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright; Anthony Lake, 
the former national security adviser, and Bill Richardson, the former 
U.N. delegate, all have tried to negotiate a settlement _ and all 
have failed. As a result, the Clinton administration, which four years 
ago was hailing Aristide's restoration as a major foreign policy triumph, 
has changed its tune. ``It's a national disaster,'' said Chavannes 
Jean-Baptiste, leader of the country's most prominent peasant group 
and a former Aristide ally. Because of the impasse, President Rene 
Preval, Aristide's hand-picked successor, has been unable to get a 
government budget drawn up and approved for a second consecutive year. 
In the cities, civil servants _ teachers and doctors included _ have 
gone months without being paid. In rural areas, grievous social problems, 
like an illiteracy rate that is the highest in the hemisphere and 
a life expectancy that is the lowest, go unattended but for the work 
of private relief organizations. Foreign donors have pledged more 
than $1 billion in aid, but much of that money remains on hold because 
government ministries, some now without senior staff, are unable to 
organize programs or comply with other requirements for spending the 
money. What is worse, there are no signs that the stalemate will end 
any time soon. ``All the institutions are paralyzed and the Cabinet 
is not functioning,'' Jean-Baptiste said. ``Misery is advancing, public 
services are lacking, aid is not flowing and there is no budget to 
confront the emergency. The situation is one of total desperation 
and confusion, and nobody is opening an exit door.'' The crisis began 
in June 1997, when Prime Minister Rosny Smarth resigned to protest 
what he described as efforts by the Aristide camp to undermine his 
program. Since then, Preval has sought four times without success 
to nominate a new prime minister who can win the approval of Parliament, 
which is dominated by a left-center party of former allies who accuse 
Aristide of reneging on promises of power sharing and of trying to 
install a dictatorship. ``The heart of the matter is the use Aristide 
has made of his influence and his domination from the sidelines, with 
the president's complicity, of many institutions in this country,'' 
said Gerard Pierre-Charles, the main leader of the party, the Organization 
of the People in Struggle. The worse the situation becomes, he added, 
``the more Aristide likes it, because he has this messianic idea that 
he and only he will be the one to save Haiti from chaos.'' In private, 
many American policy-makers, too, express irritation at what they 
describe as Preval's passivity and Aristide's duplicity, while in 
public, Washington is showing signs of mounting impatience with the 
squabbling. ``Frankly, we have been disappointed that Haitian political 
leaders have taken so long to resolve their differences,'' Albright 
said during a visit here in April, when Preval was on his second attempt 
to name a prime minister. ``The Haitian people deserve a democratic 
form of government and they deserve the ability to have the fruits 
that the international community is trying to give them.'' Preval 
declined requests for an interview, and members of Parliament aligned 
with him were back in their home districts, where communications have 
been disrupted by Hurricane Georges. Aristide, who holds no public 
office and spends most of his time in his walled mansion on the outskirts 
of the capital, was unavailable for an interview. He was said to be 
traveling abroad, and associates said they did not wish to speak on 
his behalf. On the streets, the mood is one of despair with the situation 
and anger at political leaders. In a poll the U.S. Information Service 
conducted in cities and towns here this summer, nearly three-quarters 
of those surveyed said they would leave Haiti if they could; more 
than 60 percent said they did not intend to vote in the next election, 
and a majority said that elected officials ``care nothing at all'' 
about their problems. ``If this were Monaco or Luxembourg, you could 
just laugh and say it's all a commedia dell'arte,'' said Frantz Voltaire, 
a respected intellectual who has served as chief of staff to former 
Prime Minister Robert Malval, who was Aristide's representative here 
during the military dictatorship. ``But it's not. There is poverty 
everywhere and growing misery on the streets.'' Diplomats and employees 
of international relief organizations say they worry that the impasse 
is also eroding faith in democracy. Ordinary Haitians seem unsure 
whom to blame for the paralysis, but know that because of it, prices 
of food and other necessities are rising, unemployment is growing, 
salaries are stagnant and the promises of better times made in 1994 
are going unfulfilled. ``We were all hoping that something good was 
going to happen,'' said Wilner Andre, 35, an unemployed father of 
four. ``But to me, democracy is just a word that the Lavalas government 
uses to make money. You vote, and nothing changes, so why bother to 
vote? The big eaters are still in power.'' What appears to be keeping 
the country afloat, diplomats and political and business leaders say, 
is the money that Haitians living abroad, especially in the United 
States and Canada, are sending back home. Those remittances are estimated 
at $500 million to $700 million this year, or more than double the 
entire government budget. But that money has not been enough to halt 
a conspicuous slide in every measure of life here. Per capita income 
has dropped to about $250 a year, and last month, when the United 
Nations published its annual ``human development index,'' Haiti, already 
the poorest nation in the hemisphere, had slipped to 159th in the 
world. At the start of the decade, when Aristide was first elected 
to office, after 33 years of dictatorship, Haiti had ranked 124th 
on the scale. By contrast, the Dominican Republic, which shares the 
island of Hispaniola with Haiti, ranks 88th. Among the poor, people 
like Donasyon Dieusibon, 33, the mother of five who has been a fruit 
vendor since dropping out of school at age 10, say they can feel that 
deterioration in their daily life. The new school year, for instance, 
began on Oct. 5, but Ms. Dieusibon, a widow, is keeping her children 
at home, even though she recognizes that education is their only hope 
for a better future. ``Life is always hard, but things are worse now 
than they have ever been,'' she said as she tried to sell bananas 
outside the main post office here. ``Just look at the streets. There's 
no activity, and so I can't sell anything. That means I can't afford 
to buy books or supplies or clothes for my children, and so they are 
not going to attend school this year.'' Ordinarily, Haitian diplomats 
might be able to mitigate some of that damage through lobbying for 
aid in foreign capitals. But Foreign Minister Fritz Longchamp acknowledged 
that, because of the impasse, more than half of Haiti's 32 missions 
abroad are currently without ambassadors, including those in the United 
States, France and Canada. For similar reasons, the justice system 
is also stalled, eroding faith in the rule of law. Judges who have 
resigned or been dismissed for corruption have not been replaced, 
meaning that many cases, including some against those accused of human 
rights abuses under the dictatorship, are not being heard, much less 
decided. ``The whole country is on hold, and if this mess is not resolved 
soon, we are going to have not only an institutional void, but also 
a major constitutional crisis,'' warned Lionel Delatour, leader of 
a business group that supports economic and political reforms. ``We 
have had our window of opportunity, but it is closing,'' he added. 
``The political actors are unwilling to budge, and civil society is 
too weak to have its voice heard or to play a broker's role. We are 
so deep in the hole that we can no longer see how to get out.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>