<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0173 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three months after a spate of highly publicized padlockings heralded 
the arrival of the Giuliani administration's crackdown on this city's 
sex shop industry, a string of legal victories by adult-business owners 
has turned what looked like a speedy rout into a war of attrition. 
Since the crackdown began in late July, 59 of the 144 strip clubs 
and adult video stores affected by a new zoning law have closed or 
shifted to nonadult entertainment, city officials say. But state judges 
have continued to uphold a legal strategy that for now is allowing 
many of the shops and clubs to stay open under the new law. To the 
frustration of their opponents, adult video stores and some strip 
clubs that limit pornography sales and nude dancing to less than 40 
percent of their floor space are continuing to be declared ``nonadult'' 
by state judges, which enables them to remain open. But how long the 
businesses can withstand their plunging profit margins and soaring 
legal expenses remains to be seen. Herald Price Fahringer, the lawyer 
representing the majority of the 144 sex shops affected by the new 
law, said the two Harmony Theaters in Manhattan that were closed in 
the first round of padlockings wanted to adjust to meet the 40 percent 
standard and reopen. But he accused the Giuliani administration of 
systematically denying the businesses the building permits they need 
to reconfigure. Fahringer said he would file a lawsuit in federal 
court in Manhattan within the next two weeks accusing the city of 
unfairly blocking building permits and harassing the sex shops through 
repeated health and fire code inspections. ``I have a memo that was 
circulated in the Buildings Department that they were to put a stop 
to the issuing of building permits for adult clubs,'' Fahringer said. 
``I think that shows the city is interested in simply closing these 
business, not getting them to conform with the law.'' Last month in 
Queens, Judge Alan LeVine ordered the reopening of a strip club padlocked 
under the new law, ruling that the city had unfairly delayed issuing 
a building permit. The law bars any business that devotes a ``substantial 
portion'' of its floor space or merchandise to adult entertainment 
from operating in residential areas or within 500 feet of a school, 
a house of worship or another sex shop. Over the objections of lawyers 
for the city, LeVine ruled that Goldfingers, at 92-77 Queens Boulevard 
in Rego Park, could reopen with only curtains cordoning off the 40 
percent ``adult'' section of the bar, court officials said. The judge 
had ordered the club to build permanent walls but said that as long 
as the city refused to issue the building permit, the club could reopen 
with only curtains. Steven Fishner, who is Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's 
criminal justice coordinator, said health and fire inspectors were 
visiting the strip clubs, but said the clubs had not been made targets. 
``We're treating them as we treat all other businesses,'' he said. 
But Fishner said one Manhattan strip club, Dangerous Curves, at 127 
E. 47th St., was padlocked two weeks ago after it failed to correct 
a violation discovered during a Health Department inspection. He also 
said that in the last six weeks, the city has issued criminal summonses 
at 11 sex shops that it says violate the new zoning law. The summonses, 
unlike the lengthy nuisance abatement court actions the city is using 
to padlock the clubs, can only result in fines. Fahringer cited the 
summonses as an example of the unusual tactics the Giuliani administration 
was using, and pointed out that zoning violations were usually resolved 
with administrative hearings, not padlock orders and summonses. Over 
all, the crackdown has succeeded in closing 39 adult businesses and 
changed the tone of New York's once-growing sex shop industry. Many 
adult video stores have torn down their more overt signs and constructed 
adult back rooms that make up less than 40 percent of their floor 
space. Strip clubs have been hit much harder, and many have had to 
dismiss dancers. Still-employed dancers complain that their earnings 
plummeted when they began dancing with bikinis on to avoid having 
their clubs considered ``adult.'' But in a Sept. 23 ruling, Judge 
Steven Fisher of Queens presented what could prove to be salvation 
for the strip clubs. Causing angry protests from local residents, 
Fisher allowed Wiggles, a strip club at 96-24 Queens Boulevard, Rego 
Park, to reopen after it restricted nude dancing to a room that made 
up less than 40 percent of its floor space. That was the first ruling 
to apply the 40 percent standard to strip clubs. And last week, Judge 
Arthur Lonschein in Queens ruled that the formerly all-adult Fair 
Theater in East Elmhurst, Queens, could remain open because it was 
now showing adult films on less than 40 percent of its screens. The 
rulings all come in the wake an August ruling by Judge Stephen Crane 
of Manhattan that the 40 percent standard was valid. Crane's ruling 
was a major setback for the Giuliani administration and allowed Show 
World, a Times square sex shop that was one of the chief targets of 
the crackdown, to remain open. But Fishner pointed to other rulings 
in the city's favor, and warned that the city may appeal rulings it 
disagrees with. And watered-down sex shops, he predicted, will not 
prove to be economically viable. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>