<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0113 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With congressional elections just around the corner and the House 
impeachment inquiry of President Clinton set to start shortly afterward, 
public opinion polls are more numerous, more important and possibly 
more confusing than usual. In any election year, pollsters try to 
predict which voters will go to the polls and what they will do when 
they get there. Turnout is important, but issues and circumstances 
like the state of the economy are what often drive the result. But 
this year, the conventional wisdom has it, turnout is everything. 
If the presidential sex scandal galvanizes Clinton opponents, Republicans 
win. If the widespread public distaste for impeachment proceedings 
mobilizes a backlash vote, Democrats may gain the upper hand. So pollsters 
are focusing even more than usual this year on figuring out who will 
really take the trouble to vote, searching for that mythical beast 
known as the ``likely voter.'' In assessing pre-election polls, here 
are some things to look for: Accurate Sampling Good polls start with 
good samples of the population from all geographical areas and segments 
of society. In recent decades, this has been accomplished by ``random 
digit dialing,'' in which a computer selects area codes and exchanges 
and then makes up the last four digits at random to form complete 
telephone numbers. For decades pollsters have demonstrated how 1,000 
or so people can accurately represent all adults in the entire nation 
_ plus or minus a few percentage points, the potential fluctuation 
that is inherent in every poll because it is a sampling rather than 
a census. Likely Voters In the period leading up to any election, 
pollsters make a big mistake if they try to represent all adults in 
their polls. In the 1996 presidential election, only about 49 percent 
of all adults actually voted. In the 1994 midterm election, about 
39 percent voted. Thus, it is critical to screen for likely voters 
by discarding the opinions of half to two-thirds of all adults polled. 
Each polling organization has its own screening method. The Gallup 
Organization, which polls for USA Today and CNN, has one of the most 
elaborate and well-tested systems. It gives respondents points for 
voting in past elections, their current intention to vote and their 
knowledge of where to go to vote, among other factors. Respondents 
score from zero to seven points; Gallup then picks those respondents 
with the most points, working down until they reach a percentage of 
the total group that is equal to the expected nationwide turnout (expected 
to be 39 percent this year). The New York Times/CBS News Poll, by 
comparison, screens in several ways. ``Likely voters'' in this year's 
polls are those who say they voted in either 1996 or 1994, who say 
they are paying attention to this year's campaign, and who say they 
will definitely vote in November. ``More likely voters'' differ by 
saying they voted in both 1996 and 1994. The Times has found that 
its polling results become more pro-Republican when the focus is limited 
to likely and more likely voters, suggesting that if turnout is lower 
than usual this year, it will help Republicans. But Gallup does not 
find nearly so strong a pattern, suggesting that the contest remains 
very close at all levels of turnout. Gallup vice president David Moore 
maintains that the organization's standard ``likely voter'' questions 
should still be adequate even in this unusual year. Moore says a person 
who shows little history of voting in past elections but who becomes 
motivated to vote this year by the presidential scandal or the impeachment 
hearings might well be overlooked as a likely voter. But he added 
that he thought the people most likely to be roused to vote by the 
scandal or hearings would probably be strong Republicans or strong 
Democrats who are already frequent past voters. Phrasing of Questions 
Even though the latest Gallup and Times/CBS News polls issued last 
week agree in many areas, Gallup found that most Americans believe 
their incumbent Representatives deserve re-election. The Times/CBS 
News poll, on the other hand, found Americans to be narrowly split 
on the issue. Closer examination suggests that the discrepancy may 
be due to the different wording of the questions. Gallup asked: ``Please 
tell me whether or not you think each of the following political officeholders 
deserves to be re-elected. First, most members of the House of Representatives; 
second, your own representative.'' The Times/CBS News poll linked 
re-election to job performance, and also asked whether it is time 
to give new candidates a chance, thus offering a potential reason 
why a respondent might prefer not to re-elect an incumbent. Both sets 
of questions clearly show that people like their own Representative 
better than they like Congress in the aggregate, and both organizations 
find, each using its own questions, that willingness to re-elect incumbents 
is higher now than it was in 1994. Multiple Polls It is a pollster's 
maxim that the truth lies not in any one poll but at the center of 
gravity of several polls. When polls agree, it often means the findings 
are solid. But when they disagree, it often means the findings are 
more fragile or tentative. The best advice, therefore, is to track 
the findings of several organizations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>