<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0107 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A few hours before boarding the plane that would take him to Washington 
for the peace talks that started last week, Israeli Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu stood on a stage here and handed out etched glass 
trophies to 53 foreign businessmen whose companies had each sunk $50 
million or more into the Israeli economy. As the executives filed 
by, each exchanged a greeting with the prime minister that was drowned 
out by a big band blasting ``Blue Moon'' and ``I Did It My Way.'' 
Netanyahu turned to the audience, composed mostly of Israeli business 
executives, to relay the comments as if they were an informal poll. 
``About a third said, `Do everything you can to bring peace,' and 
another third said, `Don't give away the store,' '' Netanyahu reported. 
``The rest just said, `Good luck.' '' The Israeli business leaders 
responded by giving Netanyahu an unsolicited poll of their own. They 
interrupted his tally to applaud the sentiment for peace, then clapped 
only politely through the rest. This weekend, Netanyahu and Yasser 
Arafat have been wrangling in Maryland over land, guns and limits 
on sovereignty. Back home, it is striking how the business community 
not only has accepted what it sees as the inevitability of an independent 
Palestinian state, but is already preparing to profit from it. Israeli 
executives are hardly peaceniks. The military industry is still at 
the technological heart of the economy, and corporate leaders tend 
disproportionately to be former high-ranking military officers. But 
they have clearly concluded that a settlement with Arafat is in their 
interest. And they voice rising impatience with a peace process that, 
as one leading industrialist grumbled last week, has so far produced 
``too much process and not enough peace.'' Netanyahu is ultimately 
governed by his own conceptions of Israeli security as well as his 
partisan political constraints. But he cannot be unmoved by the business 
consensus that a peace deal would provide an economic boon to his 
constituents. Many Israeli CEOs, in fact, say that beyond a negotiating 
breakthrough at the Wye Plantation summit, what they really are waiting 
for is a final accord with a sovereign Palestinian state, because 
that would remove remaining regional barriers to Israeli exports and 
investments. Globalized though the Israeli economy might now be, they 
say, its greatest opportunity for further growth is here in the Middle 
East. The awards ceremony that Netanyahu took part in was at a two-day 
international business conference organized by the prime minister's 
office to commemorate Israel's 50th anniversary. There was much bold 
talk of ``privatizing peace'' through joint ventures with Arab partners, 
including a Gaza industrial park, a $60 million Israeli-Palestinian 
investment fund backed by the World Bank, and two bi-national projects 
with Jordan _ a tourist airport on the Red Sea and a duty-free industrial 
zone straddling the Jordan River. ``This kind of cross-border cooperation 
costs a lot less than an F-16, and it offers a much better return 
on investment,'' said Omar Salah, a Jordanian investor in the free 
zone project. The seemingly strong business consensus for a peace 
settlement does not necessarily translate into direct pressure to 
cut a deal, however. Israeli corporate leaders are cautious about 
overt intervention in politics and diplomacy, and most are not natural 
allies of Netanyahu and his Likud bloc. They are closer to the political 
and military leadership that governed under the Labor Party. ``My 
fear is that business criticizing the government will help them, not 
us,'' said Dov Lautman, chairman of Delta Galil Industries and board 
chairman of the Peres Peace Center, an institute that promotes joint 
Israeli-Palestinian business ventures. Still, even Israeli economic 
officials talk about potential peace dividends. ``We hope that the 
peace process is successful, because then we will be able to do what 
all other countries in the world do, which is trade with our neighbors,'' 
said Max Livnat, senior deputy director general of the Trade and Industry 
Ministry. ``There can be no dispute that a peace process will be good 
for the Israeli economy,'' said Jacob Frenkel, governor of the Central 
Bank. ``This is not a political statement, it is a factual statement. 
Our ratings agencies, our investors, all look at the geopolitical 
situation, and they vote with their feet.'' In the days following 
the signing of the Oslo accords five years ago, business leaders within 
and outside the region began holding conferences on the brave new 
business world of a peaceful Middle East. Multilateral lenders and 
money-center bankers drew up plans for regional investment funds and 
a Middle Eastern Development Bank. But momentum flagged as the peace 
process stalled. Now, however, with talks resuming, some of the optimism 
is returning. Israeli executives were talking confidently last week 
of a free trade bloc that would include Israel, Jordan and an independent 
Palestine as an almost immediate byproduct of a peace settlement; 
under this vision, broader regional trading arrangements could eventually 
extend west through Islamic Africa, east to the Persian Gulf states 
and north into Lebanon and Syria. Israel as the hub of a Middle Eastern 
free trade area no longer seems so improbable here. The Israelis like 
to note that theirs is the only country with free trade agreements 
with both the United States and the European Union. This is true technically, 
as the West Bank and Gaza is not a country. But the Palestinian Authority 
has free trade privileges from both Washington and Brussels. It also 
has open trade with Egypt and Jordan, and a de facto customs union 
with Israel. For potential Middle Eastern trading partners, disentangling 
the Palestinian-Israeli interrelationship would be more difficult 
than simply embracing it as a single market. And any regional trade 
arrangement that included the Palestinians but omitted the Israelis 
would be like NAFTA without the United States, or the European Union 
without Germany. Israel's economy is now far larger than that of all 
its contiguous neighbors _ Lebanon, Syria, Jordan and Egypt _ combined. 
Per capita gross domestic product stands at $17,000, well within European 
norms, and some 20 times greater than Jordan's and Egypt's average 
incomes. The peace process has already been good for business, Israeli 
executives say. The Arab boycott of Israel _ and of multinationals 
that did business here _ began to fracture after the Oslo accords 
were signed. Foreign investment climbed dramatically from $400 million 
yearly before 1993 to a reported $2.4 billion in 1996, as dramatized 
by last week's parade of CEOs from Boeing, Unilever, Nestle, Cable 
&AMP; Wireless, Johnson &AMP; Johnson, Motorola, and other multinational 
heavyweights. Israeli businessmen are penetrating markets in Asia, 
Africa and the former Soviet bloc, and Japan, long conspicuously absent 
from the Israeli business scene, opened a trade promotion office here 
last year. Oslo may get more credit than it deserves. The Israeli 
expansion of the 1990s was also fueled by the worldwide growth of 
investment in emerging markets. And most of the high-tech companies 
nurtured by this capital influx have their origins in the Israeli 
defense industry, not in the peace process; their natural markets 
are in the United States and Europe, not the Middle East. But the 
impact of expanded international opportunities should not be underestimated, 
Israeli business leaders say. ``The economic benefits of the peace 
process are irrefutable,'' said Benjamin Gaon, an industrialist. ``Our 
diplomatic relationships have doubled, and we have open business relationships 
around the world. Gone are the days of secret dealings through intermediaries.'' 
``The business community should not just reap the rewards of the peace 
process, but should assist it, even lead it,'' he added. ``Peace is 
too precious a thing to be left in the hands of politicians, or even 
generals.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>