<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0018 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani gained a crucial victory Friday in his battle 
to keep a referendum on the future of Yankee Stadium off the Nov. 
3 ballot, as a state appellate court upheld his right to replace that 
referendum with one on campaign finance. The sponsor of the stadium 
referendum, City Council Speaker Peter Vallone, immediately filed 
papers to appeal to the state's highest court, the Court of Appeals. 
But administration officials were buoyed by the ruling, a strongly 
worded, unanimous decision by a five-judge panel in the Appellate 
Division of state Supreme Court in Manhattan. The decision overturned 
a a Bronx judge's ruling that the mayor's ballot proposal, an amendment 
to the City Charter dealing with campaign-finance limits, should not 
be on the ballot because it had been devised solely to keep off the 
stadium question. The appellate panel, with three Democrats and two 
Republicans, relied heavily on the precedents set in a similar Yonkers 
referendum case that the Court of Appeals itself decided in 1984. 
``I think the Yankee Stadium referendum is dead,'' said the mayor's 
corporation counsel, Michael Hess. Giuliani called the decision ``a 
victory for government over politics.'' But Vallone was not giving 
up. ``The referendum is very much alive,'' he said. The appellate 
decision was only part of a hectic afternoon of sparring over the 
referendum issue. There was an emergency meeting of the City Board 
of Elections, impromptu news conferences by the litigants and maneuvering 
in a related federal suit that culminated in a judge's order Friday 
night to speed up preparations for tens of thousands of absentee ballots 
that have been delayed by the referendum dispute. The saga of the 
dueling referendums, which ultimately became an issue in the campaign 
for governor, began when the City Council authorized a citywide vote 
on whether city funds could be spent for a new stadium if the Yankees 
leave their city-owned site in the Bronx when the team's lease ends 
in 2002. Vallone has been pressing the issue in his campaign as the 
Democratic candidate for governor. But the mayor opposed the referendum 
because he wanted the option of bargaining with the Yankees' principal 
owner, George Steinbrenner, for a new stadium site on Manhattan's 
West Side to keep the team from abandoning the city for New Jersey. 
So Giuliani appointed a charter revision commission to draft a referendum 
on new campaign finance rules, knowing that the law provides that 
a charter-related referendum bumps any other referendum off the ballot. 
The Council's lawyers challenged the mayor's referendum in court, 
however, claiming that it was invalid because his charter commission 
had failed its legal duty to review the entire charter. Last week, 
a state Supreme Court judge in the Bronx, Douglas McKeon, agreed and 
struck the mayor's referendum from the ballot. The mayor then appealed, 
leading to Friday's decision by the appellate judges, Richard Andrias, 
Angela Mazzarelli, Eugene Nardelli, Ernst Rosenberger and David Saxe. 
The Council had sued for a preliminary injunction against the mayor's 
campaign finance referendum, but the appellate court said ``plaintiffs 
did not show a likelihood of success on the merits'' of the underlying 
case. The judges also said the Council had failed to demonstrate ``irreparable 
injury,'' noting that even without a referendum, the Council could 
block a new stadium through its budget and land-use powers. But the 
decision focused mostly on the issue of whether the mayor's commission 
had sufficiently reviewed the entire City Charter. In citing the Court 
of Appeals' own standards set forth in the Yonkers case, the panel 
saw a direct parallel. ``Just as in New York City today,'' the judges 
said, ``the mayor and City Council of Yonkers were engaged in a power 
struggle in which the mayor appointed a charter revision commission 
specifically to pre-empt the City Council's referendum proposal (which 
would have curtailed certain mayoral powers) from appearing on the 
ballot.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>