<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981021.1162 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An ethnic Syrian man with a Spanish passport was sentenced Wednesday 
to death for spying for Saudi Arabia and for plotting to assassinate 
Yemen's prime minister. Sixteen Yemenis also were convicted after 
they confessed to collaborating with the Syrian, Nabil Ezziddin Nanakali. 
The Court of First Instance sentenced them to prison terms ranging 
from 18 months to three years. It acquitted five others, including 
two who were tried in absentia. Convictions and sentencing are handed 
out in the same session in Yemen. Nanakali, 45, told the court that 
he worked for Saudi intelligence, which he claimed assigned him to 
assassinate Prime Minister Abdel Karim al-Iryani in 1997. He said 
the Saudis also asked him to carry out bombings and attacks on tourists 
as well as to gather information. Saudi Arabia had denied after the 
trial began that Nanakali worked for its intelligence service. The 
court disregarded the 16 Yemenis' claim that their confessions were 
extracted under duress during the investigations in the capital San'a 
and later in Aden. All the defendants were arrested last year. Their 
lawyers said they will appeal the sentences. In a separate case, a 
San'a court on Sunday sentenced three men to death and nine others 
to prison terms of six to 10 years for a series of bombings in eastern 
Yemen in 1996 that killed a number of soldiers. In July, Yemen's Interior 
Minister Hussein Mohammed Arab accused Saudi Arabia of involvement 
in an attempt on his life saying some of the tribesmen who took part 
in an armed attack on his convoy sought refuge in Najran in southern 
Saudi Arabia. He also said some Yemeni dissidents who were involved 
in bombing and unrest received monthly payments from Saudi Arabia. 
Yemen is still reeling from a 1994 civil war that nearly tore apart 
the union reached in 1990 between the conservative north and the socialist 
south. The government says subsequent acts of violence were directed 
from abroad. Yemen and Saudi Arabia have long been locked in a territorial 
dispute. Yemen contests Saudi Arabia's claim to three Red Sea islands, 
as well as parts of the Empty Quarter, a vast desert with potentially 
lucrative oil fields. In 1995, Saudi Arabia sent 20,000 troops and 
hundreds of tanks across the frontier before Syrian mediation secured 
a cease-fire and withdrawal. The two countries share a 2,000-kilometer 
(1,300-mile) frontier. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>