<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981021.1600.1502 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The television networks didn't wait long to pull the plug on some 
new fall shows. Ron tank reports, when a series gets canceled, the 
actors are often the last to know. The ax is falling on fall TV. Not 
all of the 36 new fall shows have even debuted yet, and six series 
have already bitten the dust, including "the brian Benben show." He 
was fired as a news anchor and replaced by someone younger and prettier. 
When shows go, so do their stars. But it's not the sit down with human 
resources, two weeks' notice farewell that corporate America is used 
to. oh, oh, oh! Jenny, calm down! The makeup room let us know the 
show was gone because their agents canceled them for the next week. 
I found out from an assistant editor. I just was in the middle of 
making another film, and the editor that used to edit "Dr. Quinn" 
was editing our movie, and the assistant, her assistant called and 
said, "have you heard the news?" We were in shock. Somebody had called 
my mom and said that they had heard on "Mark and Brian" that the show 
was canceled. That's how I heard. At least they heard the news from 
a person. Others learn of their fate over morning coffee. I remember 
I read it, and I thought, "what a horrible thing that someone printed. 
Clearly that can't be true, because nobody told me." It's usually 
the actors, though, who find out first. We may be the only ones to 
know about it. Jim Brooks, I remember, he called me. I was at a class, 
and he called me and said, "they canceled us." And I said, "where 
are we all meeting?" And he said, "my office." Anyone who does his 
job has nothing to fear. "Naked truth," I heard from tea, who came 
into the studio, we were still in production. She said, "we're canceled! 
We're canceled!" Not everyone sheds tears, if they've been paying 
attention to their show's ratings. It's never really that big of a 
surprise, if you follow the numbers, you know what's going on, you 
know, behind the scenes. Every hit show is on for one year longer 
than it should be anyway. That's right. And we knew we were headed 
into that one with all the tailwind. The official term is "cancellation," 
but not everyone likes the "C" word. We prefer the term "not renewed." 
Not renewed is, you know, you finished your year, you either come 
back or you don't. Savage did come back. Like many actors, he went 
onto another series. So far, the current one seems to be "working." 
Ron tank, "CNN Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>