<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981021.2100.1806 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There has been much talk recently act who the president could be talking 
to. We might be relying on for guidance, who's available for counseling 
to him in Washington. In another era they had names like McCloy and 
at Kin son, they were the wise men. They were career public service 
people who were available to a string of presidents when a crisis 
called for it. We welcome tonight our guests who co-authored the book. 
Walter issacson is the managing editor of "time" magazine, Evan Thomas 
is with "Newsweek" magazine. They wrote the book, "the wise men: six 
friends and the world they made." They both join us tonight from New 
York. It was when they were clap rating on this book that they made 
a pact to always dress identically. Gentlemen, welcome. Hi, Brian. 
Evan, let's begin with you. Walk us through who the wise men were. 
Harryman, McCloy, lovet, bohlen, they were all graduates of fancy 
eastern schools. They worked on Wall Street, at the state department. 
They were the group that after word war II saw communism was a threat 
and America couldn't just afford to come home again but had to do 
something about Russia. They had key positions in government, mostly 
at the state department, which allowed them to make policy. They were 
authors of the the containment doctrine. Are they necessarily, Evan, 
anachronisms, all of them were fairly well off and educated. Is that 
gone? It'S' not gone but much for diffuse, and it's not as pure and 
undistilled as it was with this group. This group believed from blirt 
R birth that they had a mission to go forth and establish the American 
century. They knew our time would come after world war I I and I think 
they felt that better than anyone today. Some people still feel that 
today, but not as pasht gnatly. Walter issacson, I asked you a few 
years ago if you were going to author the book today about current 
events and present-day America, only to find out you'd been asked 
this question 250 times before, who would be the wise men in the next 
edition, who are the on the current roster? And I'm going to ask you 
that now. We got a lot of people who are wise men want-to-bes, and 
some probably deserve to be. I think as Evan said you've got Strobe 
Talbot, Richard Holbrooke, people like that. But I tell you, you can't 
have the wise men today. With this investigative culture we have today, 
it's a far more antagonistic society, people get torn down a lot more, 
and a person like lovet or McCloy, they had the conflicts of interest, 
and nobody particularly cared about so much back then, but if they 
were in the Arena now, they'd be torn apart by special prosecutors, 
by the press. Walter, how about a punch of names I just scribbled 
down? Carter, Strauss, Dole, Moynihan? Well, you have Bob Strauss 
I think you talked to today. He's a good, wise head. He's not called 
on to advise presidents the way the McCloys and lovets used to be, 
and perhaps he should be. Vance, perhaps, but he's also not somebody 
calls in so much these days. Anybody you mentioned are distinguished 
gentlemen. The Washington culture doesn't value these people anymore. 
These people are not the ones that are tapped. And I think they might 
be a little bit hesitant to get in the Arena the way it is so messy 
these days. Somssomssoms, is it presidential nar selfishness that 
the president should be relying on others, that the closest person 
to this president aside from his wife is Bruce Lindsey, a little known 
man with not the most extraordinary title in the White House, but 
what is the specific change bringing us up to present day? Well, you 
never confuse Bruce Lindsey with a wise man. He has qualities, but 
he's the private counselor, the body man. Right. You know, I'm sure 
that Clinton would love to have the advice of wise men. He has one, 
Vernon Jordan, but unfortunately right now he's sort of a codefendant, 
if that's the right word, in the Lewinsky scandal, so he can't rely 
on him. Sure, every president would like to have good advisors, but 
as Walter was saying, it's hard to do because of this show, because 
of 24-hour cable, because there are three, at least three 24-hour 
channels whacking away at you. Washington is a different world today. 
And is it a bad thing by definition that there isn't a core group 
that the names don't spring to mind? Let's say we were faced with 
a national crisis tomorrow morning. Yeah. I'm sorry. I think it's 
really bad that you're missing people whose goal in life is to find 
a common ground. You have, as Evan said, television shows and everything 
else in which you get a lot of credit for tearing things apart, for 
being antagonistic. You have the same culture in Washington. Nobody 
gets praised for saying we can come together and find the common ground. 
And that's what the wise men were all about. It's far more partisan 
these days. There's a risk of getting too nostalgic about this. When 
Lyndon Johnson summoned in his wizz men about what to do about Vietnam, 
they said go for it. So, the wise men aren't always right. Nonetheless, 
on balance, yeah, it would be nice to have them back. Their advice 
to Johnson on Vietnam, were they capable as a group, given their background 
and the kind of inherent militarism, not really a dove among them, 
of saying anything else at that time? no. But I think the problem 
was because they were not in government, they really didn't have the 
best possible information, they were going on their ing stints and 
their kind of innate hawkishness or feeling that America had to defy 
the communist threat. When they thought about it a few years later, 
they then led the charge to get us out of Vietnam. Walter issacson, 
do you think the decline in wise people, and we should bring it up 
to a gender-neutral 1990's definition, is part of the whole 1990's 
package, and that is decline in public discourse, decline in the faith 
we put in our institutions, some would argue no institutions anymore? 
The publication you are managing editor of used to speak with a single 
voice. yes. Perhaps there is a much more diffuse culture, be it just 
in terms of information. There used to be a couple of mag seens like 
ours, three networks. You know, people got their nfingts in a very 
filtered way. Now you have thousands of sources of information. To 
get heard, it's useful to be antagonistic or devicive. That world 
doesn't exist anymore. Evan's right. You don't want to get too nostalgic 
about it. You had people with great conflicts of interest, people 
who were protecting their own interests in society and stuff. But 
generally, they put the needs of the country above party, and they 
put principal above partisanship. And it would be nice to at least 
regather that notion that a Howard Baker, the Bob doles, and the Bob 
strausses, people could all get together and say we're in a certain 
mess on a few things here. I mean, it's not that hard to figure the 
way out of some of the messes we're in. It's not tha difficult. If 
a few wise men were actually called for and -- to get together and 
say what would you do, they could probably figure it out. But the 
society's not asking them to do it. We kind of regard politics as 
a spectator sport these days and like it when it's rough and tumble. 
It's a bit of a shame. Walter issacson of "time," Evan Thomas of "Newsweek," 
book is called "the wise men." We expect sales to Spike after this 
evening. Hope so. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>