<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0447 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The law that the Japanese Parliament recently passed to rescue broken-down 
banks commits several blunders. It does not require insolvent banks 
to close. It does not require banks to disclose losses. It does not 
require wobbly banks that accept taxpayer money to lend to creditworthy 
borrowers _ the primary purpose of a bailout. The obvious prediction 
is that Japan will remain credit-starved, dragging down other economies 
in Asia and beyond. But the prediction may be wrong. The law takes 
the important step of injecting public money into failing banks. Despite 
its flaws, the measure might pry open clogged credit lines and channel 
money to companies in need of a fresh start. As Adam Posen of the 
Institute for International Economics, author of a new book on the 
Japanese economy, says, ``The bill will succeed despite itself.'' 
Japan's banks are buried in bad loans and confront an economy that 
has slipped into recession. Thus they are loath to lend even to reliable 
customers. But if banks do not lend, companies cannot invest, and 
the economy cannot grow. The crisis has been worsened by an accounting 
system that allows banks to mask losses. Fanciful financial reports 
have scared away investors and creditors. Worse, the phantom bookkeeping 
pretends that borrowers can repay impossibly large loans. Japan needs 
its banks to wipe bad loans from their books so borrowers can start 
afresh. To that end, the law creates three pots of public money totaling 
about $500 billion, more than 10 percent of Japan's annual output. 
The United States' savings and loan bailout in the 1980s cost about 
2 percent or 3 percent of output. The first pot, about $150 billion, 
will pay off depositors at banks that close. Their assets will be 
transferred to a government agency for resale to private investors, 
much the way Resolution Trust Corp. worked in the United States. The 
second pot, also around $150 billion, will be used to nationalize 
insolvent banks that the government decides to keep open. The government 
will run these banks until private owners take over, mirroring the 
way the Roosevelt administration handled the 1930s banking crisis. 
The third, most controversial pot has no U.S. parallel. It will pump 
about $200 billion into private banks that the government deems shaky 
but solvent. In return, the government will get stock. The idea is 
that the taxpayer money will build up the banks' capital so they can 
resume lending. Daniel Tarullo, formerly President Clinton's top adviser 
on international economic policy, is not convinced the plan will work. 
``There is no clear mechanism for moving the $500 billion out the 
door of government and into banks,'' he says. ``Banks have to ask 
for assistance. But by asking for assistance, the bank managers identify 
themselves as incompetent, invoke intrusive government monitoring 
and put their jobs in jeopardy. That is hardly an incentive to play 
along.'' Critics ask why the government should bail out supposedly 
solvent banks. Besides, nothing in the law forces banks that take 
public money to write down loans to feasible levels. Tarullo points 
out that the ruling party has a history of letting banks serving agriculture 
and construction _ its core supporters _ do as they want. The legislation 
is vague, critics point out, relying on bureaucrats to fill in the 
blanks. That might have worked well when the finance and other ministries 
were all-powerful. But now they are largely discredited, and the ability 
of the bureaucrats to discipline private markets is dubious. The threat 
is that insolvent banks, operating under the cover of a bogus accounting 
system and a compliant government, will limp along, draining resources 
from productive parts of the economy. Tarullo paints a picture of 
continued drift. Perhaps, Posen says, Japan's recent past is not prologue. 
Yes, the parliament should have forced banks that take public money 
to write down old loans and use the cash to issue new loans. But, 
he says, there are good reasons to believe all this will happen anyway. 
He argues that the discipline of international capital markets, which 
have largely shut off Japan's banks, will force banks to take the 
government bailout. On Wednesday, three major Japanese banks were 
reported to be preparing applications. Posen also predicts that these 
banks will be forced by public pressure and new political forces to 
pass along cash to worthy borrowers. He points out that the law was 
not written according to Japanese custom by bureaucrats in the Finance 
Ministry but was drafted, at the request of cabinet officials, by 
a younger generation of Parliament leaders. U.S. officials have been 
clamoring for the Japanese to clean up their bank mess _ no matter 
how. The bailout passed by the Parliament will waste lots of taxpayer 
money. It will not dispense justice. It will not by itself turn the 
Japanese economy around _ fiscal measures will also be needed. But 
by throwing serious money into locked credit lines, the law does take 
an essential step toward ending Japan's immediate crisis. For now, 
that might be all the world needs. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>