<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0401 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States and NATO worked Wednesday to keep the military pressure 
on President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia as he continued to resist 
complying with international demands to withdraw Serbian army and 
police forces from the province of Kosovo. A day after NATO's supreme 
commander, Gen. Wesley Clark, met with Milosevic and Yugoslav military 
leaders to demand more withdrawals, there were no signs Wednesday 
that any of the forces were in fact pulling back, NATO and administration 
officials said. Richard Holbrooke, the U.S. envoy who brokered the 
agreement last week that averted NATO strikes on Serbian-dominated 
forces in Yugoslavia, said Wednesday that Milosevic was failing to 
comply. And Holbrooke forcefully reiterated NATO's warning that it 
might still resort to force if he has not complied by a new deadline 
of Oct. 27. ``If the situation is not rectified in the next six days, 
it can only lead to the most dramatic consequences,'' Holbrooke said 
at a meeting in Paris of the contact group made up of the United States, 
Russia and European powers that coordinate policy in the Balkans. 
While Milosevic has allowed diplomatic observers to return to the 
province and relief aid to resume, he appears determined to challenge 
NATO's resolve to carry out its threats. During his meeting with Clark 
on Tuesday, he repeatedly tried to impose conditions on his compliance, 
demanding that NATO lift the new deadline for using force in exchange 
for more withdrawals, a NATO official said. ``He's going to take it 
down to the wire,'' the official said, referring to next Tuesday's 
deadline for compliance. NATO faced increasing pressure Wednesday 
from Russia to drop its threat of force now that Milosevic has agreed 
to accept a cease-fire, allow refugees to return to their homes and 
permit hundreds of international monitors on the ground and unarmed 
reconnaissance jets in the sky to verify that the crackdown on ethnic 
Albanians in Kosovo does not resume. At NATO's headquarters outside 
Brussels, Russian officials told NATO Wednesday that Russia would 
not take part in the aerial overflights until the alliance revoked 
the ``activation order'' that gives Clark the authority to use force 
once the new deadline passes. At the United Nations, Russia was also 
resisting a new Security Council resolution, proposed by Britain and 
France, that would support last week's agreement and back it up with 
an authorization to use force. From the start of the showdown with 
Milosevic, the United States has said NATO did not need authorization 
from the United Nations to use force to stop what amounted to an internal 
conflict within a sovereign state. Other NATO members have disagreed, 
preferring to have explicit authorization, which Russia, an ally of 
the Serbs in Yugoslavia, has vowed to veto. The Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in Europe, which will send monitors to Kosovo to verify 
compliance with the agreement, is also awaiting a resolution before 
starting its work, the organization's chairman, Foreign Minister Branislaw 
Geremek of Poland, said Wednesday. NATO is scrambling to draft plans 
for a ``rapid reaction'' force that would be able to extract the OSCE 
monitors in the event of a crisis. American and NATO officials said 
such a force is likely to include helicopter-borne commando squadrons 
based in neighboring Macedonia, but planning has just begun, meaning 
it could be weeks before the monitors start their work in large numbers. 
NATO has demanded that Milosevic withdraw 4,000 to 5,000 army troops 
and 3,000 to 4,000 special police officers that poured into the province 
when the conflict erupted last winter. That would still leave about 
12,000 soldiers and 6,000 police officers based in the province. After 
withdrawing one army and one police battalion over the weekend, Milosevic's 
forces have in recent days responded to renewed attacks by Kosovo's 
rebels by stepping up their presence. A Pentagon official said Wednesday 
that aerial photographs had shown an increase in armored units involved 
in clashes with the rebels, who appear determined to undercut the 
agreement. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>