<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0245 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Overhead garage doors have more components than any other door in 
the house, and periodic maintenance is necessary to keep them functioning 
smoothly and to eliminate potential problems before they become major 
headaches. When an overhead garage door fails to operate properly, 
the problem can usually be traced to one of these causes: the mounting 
screws that hold the brackets or tracks have worked loose so the door 
sticks or binds as it moves; the rollers that guide the door have 
jumped the holding track; the hinges or rollers bind because they 
are dirty, corroded, or damaged; the springs have lost some of their 
tension. There are two types of overhead garage doors: one-piece doors 
that have a rigid, lightweight panel that swings up as a single unit 
and sectional garage doors that have several horizontal panels joined 
together by hinges _ these doors fold as they move. Sectional garage 
doors have more complex mechanisms than one-piece units, but both 
models require periodic servicing. When inspecting the door, first 
look at all the hardware _ the hinges, rollers, and brackets. Make 
sure that all holding screws and bolts are tight. If you attempt to 
tighten a loose screw and find that it has stripped its threads, pull 
it out and replace it with a carriage bolt. Drill a hole through the 
door and insert the carriage bolt from the outside; secure it with 
a nut and washer from the inside. Inspect the door rollers to make 
sure they are in good condition, then check to see that the roller 
spindles are parallel to the door seams and are not bent. Bent or 
broken rollers should be replaced (most home centers stock these parts). 
Lubricate the spindles and roller bearings twice a year with lightweight 
oil; also squirt a few drops of oil on the door hinge pins. All overhead 
doors travel in their upward path along metal tracks. One-piece doors 
have two tracks hanging from the ceiling joists. Section doors also 
have two overhead tracks, but these curve down into vertical tracks 
on either side of the door opening. Rollers, mounted in door brackets, 
travel in the tracks to keep the door on course. Tracks should be 
level (or slightly pitched toward the back of the garage), plumb, 
straight, and free of dirt and debris. Bent tracks will allow the 
rollers to pop out and make it difficult to raise or lower the door. 
Dirt and debris can cause the rollers to bind. Use a level to inspect 
the tracks at least once a year. Make sure that horizon members are 
level and vertical sections are plumb. Hold a long metal ruler against 
the tracks to check for straightness and make sure all sections are 
in line. Measure the distance between the tracks to be sure that they 
are parallel and equidistant apart. If they are not correctly aligned, 
use a wrench to loosen the holding brackets, then gently tap the tracks 
into place. Tighten the brackets after making this adjustment. Wipe 
the inside of the tracks clean, then spray them with silicone lubricant. 
Heavy-duty springs are coupled to the door with braided cable. They 
assist the operator in lifting and closing the door. All overhead 
garage doors have either tension springs (sometimes called an extension 
spring) or torsion springs. Tension springs are mounted in pairs, 
one on either side of the door; they extend and are under tension 
when the door is down. Torsion springs are mounted crosswise above 
the door opening and are always under tension. If the springs are 
adjusted correctly, the spring tension will keep the door in place 
when the bottom of the door is within three feet of the ground. If 
raised above that level, the door should slowly raise by itself. Before 
attempting to readjust the springs, make sure that all the other components 
are lubricated and functioning properly. Tension springs are adjusted 
by repositioning the S-hook at the end of the braided-lift cable (one-piece 
doors have the S-hook and bracket but not the cable). This hook, above 
the opening on either side the door, fits into one of a series of 
holes in an overhead bracket. Raise the door and use blocks or clamps 
to hold it in place. Move the hooks forward (away from the springs) 
to increase the tension. Remember to make the same adjustment on both 
door cables. Torsion springs are adjusted by inserting an iron bar 
into a slot at the end of the spring, then twisting it to tighten 
an internal ratchet mechanism. While this sounds simple, it can be 
dangerous because the spring is under heavy tension. It is best to 
leave tension-spring adjustment to a professional. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>