<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0493 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Imagine yourself as a toll taker on the Garden State Parkway. An elderly 
couple pulls up to the booth at Raritan and asks directions to Florida. 
You tell them to take the Garden State to the New Jersey Turnpike 
interchange, follow it to Interstate 95 and go south, all the way. 
They are confused and strain to hear. You say it again, more slowly. 
Meanwhile, the next driver leans on his horn. He is fuming when he 
reaches the booth, veins bulging in his neck. How dare the toll taker 
keep him waiting! Joe Turant, an area manager for the New Jersey Highway 
Authority, stood at a lectern before six new toll takers, suggesting 
what to do next. Address the customer as ``sir.'' Apologize for the 
delay. Explain the need to help a lost driver. Then Turant asked the 
students to consider how much time to give to the elderly couple during 
rush hour, balancing friendliness and efficiency. ``Everything in 
this job is judgment,'' he said. The situation was one of many that 
the new toll takers considered in a daylong orientation session at 
a maintenance yard in Monmouth County. How to respond to a sexual 
proposition. What to say when a threatening dog leans from a car window. 
How to handle a driver who refuses to pay. Until this week, the Highway 
Authority trained its new toll takers individually at their assigned 
station on the 173-mile roadway. The class is an effort to instill 
in the toll takers the idea that they are the ``ambassadors'' for 
the authority, the only employee most drivers ever see. Turant said 
drivers are crankier than ever these days, what with heavier traffic, 
longer rush hours and hectic lives. The best way to de-escalate conflict, 
he told the students, is to combine a sense of humor with a thick 
skin. The newcomers at Wednesday's class join about 350 full-time 
toll takers working at 30 plazas from the New York border to the tip 
of Cape May. On an average day, toll takers collect $500,000, mostly 
from 25- or 35-cent tolls. A single toll taker sees about 2,500 drivers 
during an eight-hour shift, with each transaction lasting between 
three and 30 seconds. After the classroom instruction, the new employees 
will spend one day observing a veteran toll taker, another day sharing 
duties with the experienced worker and a third day taking tolls under 
supervision. By the middle of next week, they will be in booths alone. 
The job has a starting wage of $10 an hour and good benefits. Applicants 
must be high school graduates and must pass a drug test and a criminal 
check. They are taught technical and personal skills. Toll takers 
must be able to identify vehicles by sight. They must make change 
using the fewest coins and bills possible. They must balance their 
cash drawers at the end of the shift. They must know how to extinguish 
a car fire, deal with a driver having chest pains, and call police 
during a robbery. They must be presentable. There is no smoking or 
eating in the booth. Radios are allowed, if the volume is low. Gum 
chewing must be discreet. Uniforms are to be pressed and shoes polished 
daily. Tardiness is not tolerated. The students here included two 
part-time toll takers just awarded full-time status; one highway-maintenance 
worker transferred to the toll booth; a retired appliance salesman; 
a former cook who had lost his job, and a carpet installer changing 
careers after back surgery. Most were bemused by the elementary instructions 
about punctuality, manners and grooming. ``I was taught that by my 
father,'' said Peter Laccitielle, 51, the former carpet installer. 
``If I didn't do it, I got a crack in the head. But today it's a different 
world.'' Cliff Miller, the director of tolls, said employees were 
not as polished today as in the past, perhaps because of less rigorous 
public education and the end of compulsory military service. ``We 
have seen over the years that we can't take anything for granted,'' 
he said. The lesson of the day was flexibility, rolling with the punches. 
That included the teacher, who drew laughs when he told of the mishaps 
in making the training video. In one section, a toll taker is frightened 
by a barking dog, without leash or muzzle, that seems to be about 
to spring through an open car window. But in take after take, the 
dog remained silent, refusing to sound threatening. Undaunted, Turant 
crouched on the floor of the car. ``That was me in the back seat barking,'' 
he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>