<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0388 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the 105th Congress cast its final legislative vote Wednesday, it 
stood identified less with any signature bill than with the paralysis 
of American politics at century's end. For it was a year in which 
much of the partisan energies went into blocking initiatives, not 
passing them. Republicans stymied the Democrats' drive for regulation 
of health maintenance organizations, overhaul of campaign finance 
laws and anti-tobacco legislation. And President Clinton took such 
a strong stand against tax cuts in the first year of a government 
surplus that even Senate Republicans refused to embrace the tax-cutting 
fervor of their more ideological brethren in the House. In part this 
represents the tradeoffs of a government divided between a Democratic 
president and a Republican-controlled Congress. But in many ways the 
stalemate runs far deeper. With the Cold War gone and the surplus 
changing deficit politics that had defined the two parties for decades, 
Republicans and Democrats alike have been left grappling for an agenda 
for the new millennium. And it is a quest that fractures both parties. 
``There are all these books and articles that have been written about 
the end of things,'' said Bill Curry, a former domestic policy adviser 
to Clinton, ``the end of history, the end of ideology, the end of 
the business cycle. We're not at the end of ideology but we are at 
the end of the ideology of these two parties.'' From the other side 
of the spectrum, in remarkably similar tones, Rep. David McIntosh, 
R-Ind., one of the conservative firebrands of the House, said, ``The 
leaders who took us into the majority, you get the sense they're coming 
up with stale ideas and are not focused on bringing the next agenda 
forward.'' Both parties have been thrown off course not just by the 
changing times but by the nation's antipathy to sweeping change in 
a period of prosperity. Clinton tried and failed to carry out a major 
overhaul of the nation's system of health care coverage early in his 
first term, only to see the voters turn over control of Congress to 
the Republicans. Then Speaker Newt Gingrich and his fervent conservatives 
took their turn and tried to use a government shutdown in 1995 to 
make Clinton accede to the Republican call for sweeping tax cuts and 
a scaling back of the Great Society programs. But one year later, 
their standard bearer was unable to capture the presidency and Gingrich's 
House majority fell to only 11 seats, one of the most precarious for 
either party this century. ``It's a time at which big ideas failed,'' 
said Andrew Kohut, director of The Pew Research Center for the People 
and the Press. ``Given those failures and given the fact that this 
is a time of relative tranquillity, it's hard to get people going 
on big ideas.'' The response of the two parties has been a fallback 
to look-alike agendas and a politics of small gestures that gives 
neither a broad mandate. ``The ideal political place to be at the 
end of this millennium is to have Republican policy and Democratic 
language,'' said Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster. ``That is the 
perfect place for the American people.'' So Clinton in 1996 embraced 
the Republican idea of a balanced budget and then added grace notes 
on education and health care and the environment. Going in to this 
election, the Republicans have not put forward a new Contract With 
America but instead are mostly running on welfare overhaul and a balanced 
budget pact with a tax cut, which were the achievements of 1996 and 
1997. Learning from Clinton's strategy of co-opting Republican issues, 
they agreed in the final spending bill of this session to $1.1 billion 
for new teachers in order to neutralize the traditional Democratic 
advantage on the education issue. Beyond that, sending his majority 
home to campaign with a final balloon-filled rally, Gingrich also 
took credit for stopping federal funding for needle-exchange programs 
for drug addicts and in almost nostalgia tones, he said that Congress 
had included some funding for Ronald Reagan's Cold War era dream of 
a ``Star Wars'' missile defense system. But the final hours of the 
session put in sharp relief the fractures in the Republican party 
that had haunted Congress all year, causing the House and Senate to 
fail to pass a budget for the first time since 1974 and costing Republicans 
the large $700 billion tax cut that House leaders had proposed in 
early summer. Conservatives took turns denouncing the Republican leadership 
in the final hours of the session while Gingrich fired back at his 
critics on the right, calling them a ``perfectionist caucus'' who 
lacked maturity. And Wednesday, he said the Republican Congress had 
failed to pass a major election-year tax cut ``in my judgment because 
the Senate blinked.'' Issues are already looming on the horizon for 
the next Congress, chief among them ensuring the solvency of the Social 
Security system for the Baby Boom generation. Gingrich and other House 
Republicans are vowing to push earlier and harder for a large tax 
cut. Gingrich said Wednesday, ``you can be much bolder'' in the year 
after an election. The Democrats want to try again to regulate health 
maintenance organizations and overhaul campaign finance laws. And 
the economic turmoil in Asia and Russia could yet cause serious tremors 
in the American economy. But there is little sign that the current 
political stalemate will change. Most strategists are now predicting 
that the November election will only reinforce the status quo and 
produce no large shift in the balance of power. ``People are more 
or less both content with national conditions and disgusted with national 
politics,'' Kohut said. ``So there ain't much going on.'' The struggle 
over whether to impeach President Clinton is likely to distract Clinton 
and consume much of the energy in Congress. It will also tie Clinton 
closely to the liberal Democrats who have been his strongest defenders, 
keeping him from being free to side with the Republican majority. 
Adding to the likely polarization, Republicans may have to find other 
ways to placate conservative activists if they do not ultimately have 
the votes to remove Clinton from office. In both parties the true 
battle for a new agenda is likely to come in the next presidential 
race. ``The big serious political agendas are presidential agendas,'' 
said William Kristol, editor of the conservative Weekly Standard. 
``Clinton's not going to have one in 1999 and the Republican Congress 
isn't either. The interesting action will be in both parties in 2000.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>