<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0246 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When William Yokoyama started seventh grade, he had already been using 
a home computer for more than six years. He could easily use it to 
do word-processing, surf the Internet, draw pictures, make charts 
and graphics, and write simple game programs. In the first week of 
computer classes in his middle school ``they were teaching how to 
power up,'' recalled William, 14, of Chula Vista, Calif., who is now 
in the ninth grade. The class goal was to learn how to type a business 
letter. William wanted more of a challenge. Some of his equally computer-literate 
friends stayed in the class because ``they thought it was an easy 
A,'' he said. ``I'd rather have fun while I'm trying to get an A.'' 
Teachers at his school, Bonita Vista Middle School, agreed with William 
and his father, Irv Yokoyama, and moved William into a course where 
he could use the computer as a research tool to study subjects like 
the environment and atomic energy. Such is the new national classroom 
challenge faced daily by teachers and parents, now that computers 
are common in schools and in most homes where there are children: 
how to teach and stimulate both the computer ``haves'' and the ``have-nots.'' 
Those students who have access to home computers come to the classroom 
with skills far beyond those who don't, most of whom need several 
lessons just on booting up and moving the mouse. As the United States 
continues its romance with technology, the issue is arising more often 
among educators. The percentage of households with home computers 
has jumped from 33 percent in 1995 to 45 percent this year, according 
to ZD Market Intelligence, a market research company. More telling, 
58 percent of households with children have computers, up from 52 
percent a year ago. While not all educators agree that there is a 
problem, or even that computers should be used extensively by grade-school 
pupils, many say that the playing field is clearly not level for the 
child who does not have technology as close as the bedroom or the 
family room. ``Any student who has a computer in the home has a decided 
advantage over kids who don't,'' said Ken Tobin, a science-education 
professor at the University of Pennsylvania and the director of teacher 
education at the university. The computer has become such a key communication 
and research tool in education that many students will use the Internet 
before going to the library, said Paul Myers, associate professor 
of computer science at Trinity University in San Antonio. In 13 years 
of teaching his class on ``Computers and Society,'' he has found that 
he no longer needs to spend the first two weeks giving instructions 
on keyboarding, because usually every student knows how to do it. 
The balance has now tipped to the point where Myers says educators 
are encouraging students to visit the library so that they don't forget 
how valuable a resource books are for research. ``I think there is 
an issue here; the issue of the haves and have-nots,'' said David 
Tremblay, senior industry analyst for ZD Market Intelligence, based 
in La Jolla, Calif. ``Lower-income households are much less likely 
to have personal computers. You can't assume everyone has a computer.'' 
Morton Sherman, schools superintendent for Cherry Hill, N.J., a Philadelphia 
suburb, which has 10,600 students, doesn't see children who don't 
have home PCs as the top issue in education. But ``it's a growing 
issue,'' he said, adding: ``And it's not just a matter of having or 
not having, but whether they are being used. We have a responsibility 
to support these kids. There are also teachers who are haves and have-nots. 
``There were kids in the '70s and '80s who didn't have calculators,'' 
he said. ``Technology is an essential tool; it's not a luxury. For 
those who do not have it, the gap is getting wider.'' Income is certainly 
a factor. Among households with annual incomes of $75,000 or more, 
68 percent have computers. Among households with annual incomes of 
$20,000 or less, only 19 percent do. But at the same time, there are 
also more computers available in school buildings, according to Quality 
Education Data, a private education research company in Denver. There 
are now 85,900 public schools with computers, out of a total of 87,200 
in the United States. While some technologically savvy people are 
starting to question the need for computers in the schools at all, 
educators like Tobin and many school administrators and teachers advocate 
granting access to computers after school hours through libraries, 
other community centers and the schools themselves if teachers are 
willing to open the doors at night. Nearly 80 percent of the students 
in the affluent Cherry Hill district have home computers, said John 
Scarinci, the district technology director. He compares not having 
a home computer to not having an Encyclopaedia Britannica in the 1960s. 
``It's less convenient,'' he said, for students without home computers. 
But he said students could get access at the library or at a friend's 
house, much as he did growing up without an encyclopedia at home. 
Parents also seem to be feeling more pressure to buy computers for 
their children, and as prices drop, more families can afford them. 
A new basic computer system that might have cost $4,000 five years 
ago now sells for less than $1,000. A browser that hooks up to a television, 
WebTV, can be bought for $200 or less with discounts, and used computer 
equipment is only $300 to $500, Scarinci said. ``It's the price of 
a television set.'' Chip and Daisy Gilliland, of Port Richey, Fla., 
whose three children range from a baby to a second-grader, are shopping 
for their first personal computer. ``A lot of other kids do have computers,'' 
said Mrs. Gilliland. ``They feel bigger and smarter using the computer. 
With all the technology we want to get the kids used to using the 
computer. We wouldn't have thought of it just for ourselves.'' A college 
freshman, Matthew Fusfield, who graduated from Cherry Hill High School 
East in June, agrees that students do better with computers at home. 
He got his first computer in fourth grade and helped the district 
set up its computerized bulletin-board system when he was in high 
school. ``The computer is an advantage in education,'' he said. ``It's 
a tool. It's not an absolute necessity, but research is much quicker.'' 
Fusfield said he had often helped others learn about computers during 
class. Educators see this trend of students with experience helping 
other students as changing the dynamics of the classroom and sometimes 
the philosophy of teaching. Students not only teach other students 
but sometimes even teach the teacher. ``It changes a lot of the power 
pieces in the classroom,'' said Judith McGonigal, a teacher in the 
Haddonfield School District in southern New Jersey. ``The kids that 
have more experience become the co-teacher in the classroom. You are 
the co-learners with the kids.'' Still, because of the cost of computer 
equipment and the constant changes and upgrades required, many rural 
and urban districts can't afford to keep up with more affluent suburban 
districts. And even in districts like Cherry Hill, the gap between 
haves and have-nots could grow in the next year as the school opens 
up an interactive message system for teachers, administrators and 
students called Cherry Hill Live. The district tries to accommodate 
all students now by giving them computer time in the classroom and 
in labs. This year Cherry Hill stopped using computer teachers to 
teach technology skills in elementary school and instead has the regular 
classroom teacher take children to the computer lab once a week. There 
are at least one or two computers in most of the classrooms in the 
district. ``We are moving away from technology as a subject and using 
it as a tool,'' Scarinci said. In kindergarten at Cherry Hill, the 
classroom teacher, Ellen Specter, says that the students who gravitate 
to the two computers during free time are often those who have computers 
at home. In her morning class, 15 of the 23 students have computers. 
In the afternoon class, 17 out of 20 do. Every class starts with Mrs. 
Specter giving instructions like ``Point to the monitor, point to 
the keyboard, point to the mouse.'' Some children point to a rabbit 
icon on the screen instead. Students have to find the yellow notepad 
icon on the Student Writing Center software made by The Learning Co. 
of Fremont, Calif. They get a list of words to click on and can change 
the border on their screen. Soon the children can be heard saying 
things like ``Mrs. Specter, mine's stuck!'' and ``Something happened, 
Mrs. Specter.'' But there are also voices saying ``Cool!'' and ``Look!'' 
``Some students are not used to moving the mouse,'' she said. ``Two 
of them still don't know how to put their hand on the mouse. I see 
a wide range of skills depending whether they have a computer at home 
and whether they are allowed to use it.'' A computer teacher, Rita 
Mitchell, at Lindenwold Elementary in southern New Jersey, has classes 
where usually about half the children come from homes without computers. 
``Where I find the biggest difference is in third grade,'' she said. 
``The kids who have it at home know a whole lot more about computers 
than those who don't. Their drawings are more sophisticated. I have 
to make sure that I keep all the children on task and that I'm not 
losing them. I have to have a bag of tricks to give them something 
else to do.'' Sometimes she will let more advanced students try out 
new software so that they have something to do while others get used 
to handling the mouse. With 16 Macintosh computers in her lab, she 
divides the classes of about 30 students roughly in two. In one group 
she places those who have computers at home along with those who may 
not have computers but who follow directions well. In the other group, 
she will put students who don't have computers and who may have more 
trouble learning. She also puts children who need more help next to 
children who have a computer and can help them. Finding and creating 
a curriculum that allows students to go at their own pace is the solution 
for many teachers. It is the same approach many have used for years 
to encourage slow readers while also challenging students who read 
above their grade level. ``The term is `differentiation,''' said Mrs. 
McGonigal, who has taught for 30 years. ``Each learner goes into it 
where they are. You're not teaching everyone the same thing.'' When 
students get to fourth and fifth grade and do more research on the 
Internet and can bring in projects with complex graphics and color 
charts, teachers see even more advantages for those who have home 
computers. ``When it gets to the Internet, I see more expertise,'' 
said Ginger Hovenic, executive director of the Harborside School in 
San Diego and a consultant to the Classroom in the Future Foundation, 
which trains teachers to use technology. ``You can see the kids who 
have spent a lot of time exploring things That's when I see the big 
gap begin to happen.'' Some schools, like Robert Smalls Middle School 
in Beaufort, S.C., have a program under which students can lease a 
laptop, in this case for $15 a month, if their parents cannot afford 
to buy one. One teacher, Melissa McFeely, is a believer in the program. 
Last year, out of 21 students in her homeroom, 19 were from low-income 
families. All but three of those 19 students leased a laptop. ``More 
and more families are going to give up other things to have computers 
in the home,'' she said. Peer pressure may also force the issue of 
getting a computer at home. It's now cool to be good at the computer, 
but that status may make the kids who do not have the technological 
tools at home even more uncomfortable. Karen Marshall, a New Jersey 
mother of four who used to work as a computer-classroom aide, said 
she felt that students were sometimes embarrassed to say they did 
not have a computer or they did not have the skills other children 
had on the computer. ``I had some kids who had never touched a computer, 
but didn't want to admit it,'' she said. ``There's a lot of pressure 
to be computer literate, and the majority of kids don't want to admit 
it if they can't do it. If these issues aren't addressed in education, 
the gap could widen between the kids who have the knowledge and the 
kids who don't.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>