<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0443 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is a congressional race that is so tightly competitive that it 
has lured to the Ohio Valley a cavalcade of prominent politicians 
from throughout the country. Stumping on behalf of the Democratic 
candidate have been Hillary Rodham Clinton, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, 
former Gov. Ann Richards of Texas and Rep. Maxine Waters of California, 
head of the Congressional Black Caucus. Campaigning with the Republican 
candidate have been former senator and presidential candidate Bob 
Dole, Rep. J.C. Watts of Oklahoma and Jack Kemp. What has attracted 
these politicians is a high-energy campaign in which Steve Chabot, 
a conservative Republican incumbent, is facing a formidable challenge 
by Roxanne Qualls, a moderate Democrat and popular mayor of Cincinnati. 
The race in Ohio's 1st Congressional District, with its mix of Cincinnati 
neighborhoods, suburbs and manufacturing industries, is one of a handful 
in which Democrats believe they have a chance to unseat a Republican. 
As the divergent political ideologies of their out-of-town supporters 
suggest, it is also a race whose candidates offer starkly different 
political views. Democrats enlisted Ms. Qualls, 45, largely on the 
strength of her showing in Cincinnati's council elections, in which 
the highest vote-getter is named mayor. She became mayor in 1993 and 
was re-elected last year with 12 percent more votes than the second-place 
finisher. Chabot, also 45, is a former Cincinnati councilman who was 
sent to Washington in the 1994 election that swept a wave of new Republicans 
into Congress. By defeating Rep. David Mann, Chabot ended nearly 18 
years of Democratic dominance in the district. Chabot opposes abortion 
and favors vouchers to allow public school students to attend private 
schools. His opposition to the federal budget agreement is passionate. 
``In my view, both sides are making a wrong decision,'' Chabot told 
about 70 voters at a forum recently in Springfield Township, in suburban 
Cincinnati. ``I believe you have to have tax cuts.'' Chabot grew up 
on Cincinnati's quiet, middle-class west side. In the city's Westwood 
section, a highly Catholic area where residents use ``parish'' and 
``neighborhood'' interchangeably, Chabot lives a few doors down from 
his mother's home and a few blocks from the Roman Catholic church 
where he married his high school sweetheart 25 years ago. Chabot portrays 
his opponent as a tax-and-spend liberal. ``She has opposed property 
tax cuts for the city of Cincinnati,'' he said. ``And she has opposed 
getting rid of a whole layer of bureaucracy at City Hall. And she 
favored the transportation bill in Congress, which was a pork-filled 
product if there ever was one.'' Ms. Qualls is single and lives a 
few blocks off Martin Luther King Drive, one of a few white residents 
in the city's predominantly black, working-class Avondale section. 
The former owner of a home remodeling company, she entered politics 
after working as executive director of Cincinnati Citizens Action, 
an environmental and consumer advocacy group. Ms. Qualls supports 
the right of women to have abortions, strenuously opposes school vouchers 
as ``skimming promising students out of public schools without dealing 
with the problems of the public schools,'' and praises the federal 
budget agreement as ``the kind of bipartisan compromise that comes 
with governing.'' She tells voters that Chabot is so rigidly conservative 
that he often votes against programs that would benefit the district. 
``He stands there talking about the value of education, but he has 
a record of voting against Head Start, and voting against college 
loans,'' Ms. Qualls said. Although there has been little polling since 
a survey commissioned by the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee 
early this year showed the race to be a dead heat, several local political 
experts say the race remains extremely tight. Cincinnati, where Ms. 
Qualls has received large margins in council races, accounts for about 
half the congressional district's population. And Ms. Qualls is likely 
to win most of the black vote, which makes up about 30 percent of 
the district. But the district is part of Ohio's conservative heartland, 
where Chabot is likely to hold more sway. Chabot has not won by huge 
margins. Two years ago, he was re-elected by a margin of 11 percent 
in a race with a far less well-known opponent. In that campaign, labor 
unions spent heavily on television advertisements against him. This 
year, the unions are running television advertisements attacking Chabot 
for opposing using the entire budget surplus to shore up Social Security. 
And they are also backing efforts to get voters to the polls. Both 
candidates contend that turnout will be critical. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>