<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0248 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the opening section of this deeply felt, deeply conflicted memoir 
of growing up in an unhappy family, ``Truth Comes in Blows,'' Ted 
Solotaroff recounts the final two years in the life of his impossible 
father. In that time of enraged dying, Solotaroff came back into his 
father's life after many years of estrangement. He had become a successful 
editor and author in New York City, while his father had sold his 
plate-glass business and was living alone in Livingston, N.J., having 
recently driven away his fourth wife. Solotaroff writes of trying 
without success to arrange for his father's care. He writes of getting 
the old man to tell him something of his background and youth. The 
wall between them seemed to be cracking. And then one day his father 
``called to say that he wasn't feeling well, couldn't get moving, 
would I come a little early and give him a massage.'' A massage? Solotaroff 
reports that he felt queasy about the prospect of putting his hands 
on his father's body. He thought of Noah and Ham in the Old Testament 
and the story's implication that he should honor the dignity of his 
father's nakedness. But he relented and gave the old man deep satisfaction. 
And the reader is prompted to wonder how he was able to do so, how 
he was able to get past his rage at the many blows his father had 
struck him and to tap the deep well of tenderness that overflowed 
not too long afterward when his father stopped answering the phone 
and the author and his wife discovered him dead on the floor of his 
bedroom and, picking up his father's fallen eyeglasses, he found himself 
weeping. In what follows, Solotaroff tells of growing up in the 1930s 
and '40s, a Jewish boy of shaky identity with his religion, in a lower-middle-class 
family in Elizabeth, N.J. Much will seem familiar, particularly to 
people of the author's age: the shadows of the Depression and the 
clarity of World War II; the struggle to fit into an ethnically diverse 
community; the discovery of, first, sports and then of achievement 
in the classroom; the anxieties of sex and the seductions of radical 
politics. Solotaroff writes of these matters eloquently. If he now 
and then deviates into abstractness on the role of the common man 
in World War II and the significance of the birth of Israel, his more 
personal set pieces are irresistible: for instance, his making up 
his own ``idiotic'' lyrics to the Michigan Wolverines football fight 
song to express his idealization of ``the American heartland.'' Hail 
to ye fields and forests Loudly proclaiming weather, Hail, hail, oh 
hail, oh hail, The man from Michigan. Or his account of an interview 
with a high-school English teacher who sensed that a classroom cutup 
might be harboring some writing talent: ``She sat back in her chair, 
gave me a long scrutinizing, slightly amused look, and said, `Do you 
have even the slightest idea what a paragraph is?''' But dominant 
in his childhood were two experiences: first, a leap from a playground 
swing when he was 5 that because of his father's neglect left his 
nose broken and twisted to one side and convinced him that he was 
ugly despite all those around him who loved his smile. And even more 
overwhelming, his sense that living within him were two warring people: 
on one side the artistic child who reflected his mother's gentle temperament, 
and on the other the imperious bully who was his father. How did the 
author heal these wounds and conflicts? Within the 20-year span of 
what he recalls, that he did so successfully is not at all clear. 
In his late teen-age years he had his nose surgically straightened 
(only to break it again during a boxing match in the Navy), but little 
evidence exists that his self-image improved, at least by the time 
he goes off to attend the University of Michigan in the book's closing 
pages. As for the turmoil engendered by his parents' endlessly disintegrating 
marriage, his story is one of confusion and continual wrong turns. 
Even when his parents finally divorce and he breaks away from his 
father, he doesn't seem to have dug to the roots of his parents' conflicts 
or untangled the emotional undergrowth inevitably vegetating within 
him. It seems clear at the end that he is going to have trouble with 
women. All of which confusion has the paradoxical effect of making 
Solotaroff's story more forceful and plausible. For how many 20-year-olds 
have even begun to understand themselves? Yet clearly Solotaroff understands 
himself in retrospect. In the memoir's final scene, having come home 
from college to visit his mother, he talks with her about a poem by 
Delmore Schwartz and acknowledges her artistic influence on him. If 
the scene seems a little forced, it conveys as you read it that in 
maturity the author resolved his conflict by embracing what his mother 
_ so long belittled by his father as weak and foolish _ had managed 
to imbue in him. And then, as you close ``Truth Comes in Blows'' _ 
the title of which comes from a question posed by the narrator of 
Saul Bellow's novel, ``Henderson the Rain King,'' ``Does truth come 
in blows?'' _ you recall the tenderness of that reluctant massage 
Solotaroff gave his father and his father's groaning pleasure in receiving 
it. It seems to have happened so long ago that you wonder why Solotaroff 
told the story of his father's death at the beginning instead of at 
the end, when we would have appreciated more fully the extent of the 
man's selfishness and thus the wonder of his son's capacity to forgive. 
But by placing his father's death at the end he would have shifted 
the emphasis of his book from survival to forgiveness. And the survival 
of the succeeding generations is what this memoir is really about, 
survival despite all the terrible blows that the truths of history 
deliver. PUBLICATION NOTES: `TRUTH COMES IN BLOWS: A Memoir' By Ted 
Solotaroff Illustrated. 285 pages. W.W. Norton &AMP; Co. $23.95. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>