<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0376 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two groups of researchers say they have found ways to make bone marrow 
transplant operations considerably safer and to expand the pool of 
donors. The unrelated studies, being published on Thursday in The 
New England Journal of Medicine, are milestones in the field of transplantation, 
and their techniques can be put into use immediately, Dr. Jon Van 
Rood, considered the father of bone marrow transplants, said in a 
telephone interview from the Netherlands. With practice, a method 
described in one of the articles could eventually double the number 
of transplant recipients who survive, Dr. Van Rood said. The other 
study suggests that, while 30 percent of patients today never find 
a suitable match, eventually none may have to go without a donor, 
the doctor said. About 30,000 transplants worldwide are performed 
each year on patients whose marrow, the vascular tissue that fills 
the cavaties of most bones, is unable to make sufficient blood, either 
because of a genetic defect or because of a disease like leukemia, 
which prevents the body from producing the right combination of blood 
cells. Dr. John Hansen, a transplant expert at the Fred Hutchinson 
Cancer Research Center in Seattle, said that the success of bone marrow 
transplants varies with the disease and other factors. For genetic 
disorders like aplastic anemia, the transplants work about 90 percent 
of the time. For cancers that affect the bone marrow, such as chronic 
myeloid leukemia, transplants can be effective 70 percent of the time, 
while for acute leukemia the rate is about 60 percent. Bone marrow 
transplants are considered to be particularly difficult. A successful 
transplant can cure fatal diseases, but the procedure often results 
in fatal complications of its own. The transplanted marrow may reject 
the body and vice versa, the marrow may die off without taking hold, 
or infection may overwhelm the patient. Researchers try to match the 
bone marrow type of the donor and recipient, to decrease the chances 
of an incompatibility that can cause a fatal rejection. Rejection 
is determined in large part by immune system chemicals called HLA 
antigens (for human leukocyte group A). The difficulties lie in determining 
the characteristics of an acceptable HLA match, and in having a wide 
enough pool of donors to provide the matches. In one paper, a team 
from Kyushu University in Japan and other centers, led by Dr. Takehiko 
Sasazuki, reported that using a more sophisticated matching system, 
relying on DNA rather than just blood matching in the selection of 
donors, can double the survival rates for transplants. Using 440 patients, 
this was the largest and most complete study to examine the critical 
factors in matching, Dr. Van Rood said. The paper reported that HLA 
antigens that appear to match by blood-test techniques actually have 
a variety of subtypes that can be identified only by DNA testing. 
It is the subtypes that may actually be the most important determination 
of success. Matching the subtype of one antigen (HLA-A) was found 
to be important for survival during a transplant. For patients who 
received marrow matching in this antigen, 63 percent survived the 
transplant, while among those who had a mismatch, only 38 percent 
survived. A perfect match between three antigens resulted in 11 percent 
of patients developing severe rejection disease, while mismatches 
of two or more led to 43 percent of patients getting the disease. 
One curious finding was that for one antigen, HLA-C, a mismatch apparently 
enabled patients to beat their leukemia at a greater rate. Only 12 
percent who did not match suffered a recurrence of leukemia during 
the study period, while 23 percent had relapses when this antigen 
matched. For most donors, a near-perfect match provided the best results. 
But for those who cannot find a match from their family or from donor 
agencies, the second group of researchers suggested a method that 
would still make transplant worthwhile. Written by Dr. Franco Aversa 
and his colleagues at the University of Perugia, Italy, the study 
said that some bone marrow previously considered an unacceptable match 
could be used if it is treated before the transplant. The pre-treatment 
removes from the donated marrow most of the immune system cells, called 
T-cells; increases by tenfold the immature cells that will grow into 
mature blood cells after the transplant, and makes sure that the patient's 
own bone marrow is destroyed before introducing the donated marrow. 
Because the 43 patients who received the pre-treatment in the Italian 
study were extremely ill, few, if any, were expected to survive, but 
18 months later after the transplants, 12 of the 43 were still alive. 
Van Rood said that doctors could start using the techniques right 
away. ``But if you think of it as a violin performance, when you hear 
a good performance, can you immediately do it yourself?'' he said. 
``I think not. It will take much work and practice. But the potential 
for higher survival is there.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>