<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0377 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Yankees-Padres World Series could conclude as the lowest rated 
ever. Last year's Cleveland-Florida Series yielded the lowest previous 
rating, a 16.7. Through three games, the 13.4 average rating is down 
four percent from last year's 14.0. Game 3 on Tuesday posted a 15.4 
(down from 15.6 for Game 3 last year). Expectations of a sweep weren't 
likely to send Wednesday night's ratings soaring, so beating 1989's 
16.4 ratings low for the World Series is in sight. ``Obviously, the 
ratings are disappointing, but we don't control the outcome of the 
games,'' said Vince Wladika, a spokesman for Fox Sports, who noted 
that Fox has won the prime-time ratings in all three World Series 
nights. World Series ratings have been in decline since the late 1980s, 
a time when baseball was more potent nationally and cable options 
less pervasive. Ten years ago, the five-game Oakland-Los Angeles World 
Series rated a 23.9. The classic Mets-Boston fall classic in 1986 
weighed in with a 28.6. Gone are the days when a game could generate 
a Super Bowl-like 40.0 rating, as the sixth game of the 1980 series 
did. In 1978's Yankees-Los Angeles series, none of the six games rated 
below a 30.1. An education in quantum mechanics is not required to 
analyze Fox's ratings. Pick one or more reasons: (a) The Yankees were 
huge favorites, facing San Diego, a smaller market than Atlanta, which 
was thought to be a more viable opponent. (b) Game 1 was competitive, 
requiring a Yankee comeback to win 9-5, but Game 2 was a blowout almost 
from the start, souring viewers enough to stay away early from Game 
3, which, though exciting, put the Yankees up 3-0. (c) Neither Mark 
McGwire nor Sammy Sosa was playing. (d) Viewers were offended by Fox's 
salacious promos for ``Ally McBeal'' in which Calista Flockhart scissors-locked 
John Ritter's head with her legs, and can't understand why ``That 
70's Show'' is still labeled a comedy. About the only thing that can 
salvage decent ratings for Fox would be a three-game winning streak 
by San Diego, to set up a showdown in Game 7. But let's not go around 
feeling sorry for Fox. They knew they were buying a property that 
no longer garnered 30 ratings, and even at lower levels, the ratings 
have still enabled Fox to win the ratings on each of the games' nights. 
Still, shouldn't World Series ratings be soaring, the fitting coda 
to a giddy season made special by McGwire and Sosa's home run records. 
Weren't we all persuaded that baseball was no longer recovering, but 
was back, at full-throttle, ready to maul football and basketball? 
What happened to the autumnal afterglow? Here's one theory: fans were 
agog about McGwire and Sosa because of the sense of anticipation that 
each game promised. If you weren't a St. Louis or Chicago fan, you 
cared only about when each man would hit his next home run. So even 
if one man hit a home run in the first inning, the anticipation that 
he would hit another later in the game, would keep you riveted. Adding 
to the excitement were the days when each man would homer on the same 
day, or one would tie the other, or one would go ahead of the other. 
A World Series that begins with the winningest team in American League 
history winning the first two games scores doesn't offer great promise 
to casual fans who would tune in believing something special was in 
the offing. Not surprisingly, the rating for the first half hour of 
Game 3 was a mere 10.0. It rose rose steadily, peaking at a 17.2 from 
10-10:30 p.m., and settling in at a 15.5 in the final half hour. But 
the low initial viewer tune-in hurt. Luckily, Fox has not pared its 
on-air efforts, even if the ratings are down. Tim McCarver's analysis 
has been stellar without being repetitive and Joe Buck's play-by-play 
has mixed the basics, analysis and wit into a fine brew. Noting early 
in Game 3 how groundskeepers at Qualcomm Stadium had painted the chewed-up 
outfield with gallons of green paint, Buck said, ``They say the game 
isn't played on paper, but this one is being played on paint.'' Then 
he asked, ``What kind of hop do you typically get off paint?'' Bob 
Brenly, the second analyst, said, ``It depends if it's oil-based or 
water-based.'' The game's production offered tasty morsels like a 
split-screen view of how San Diego starter Sterling Hitchcock's wind-up 
has changed from 1995 to 1998, a ``hot zone'' batter's graphic overlaid 
on the strike zone, and a soundbite of San Diego's Tony Gwynn tell 
batting coach Merv Rettenmund, who was wearing a microphone, that 
Yankee starter David Cone's fastball didn't have ``giddyap.'' Fox's 
best moment came in the tough criticism leveled by McCarver and Brenly 
of Yankee rightfielder Paul O'Neill's errant throw in the sixth inning, 
and San Diego Manager Bruce Bochy's decision not to use closer Trevor 
Hoffman to start the eighth, not using Greg Myers to pinch hit for 
Carlos Hernandez, and wasting the ace pinch hitter John Vander Wall 
as a pinch runner. And, can you believe it? Only one Fox prime-star 
_ Gillian Anderson of ``The X Files'' _ was ``found'' by Fox's cameras 
inside Qualcomm. There might have been more, but Fox has canceled 
a bunch of series lately. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>