<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0036 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The day before the playoffs began, David Cone was asked to pick one 
Yankee who might shine in the post-season. Scott Brosius, Cone replied, 
adding, ``He's got that glint in his eye.'' And so he does. Brosius, 
who hit a home run in Game 1 last Saturday night, slugged two more 
home runs in Game 3 of the World Series on Tuesday night, including 
a three-run shot in the eighth inning that gave the Yankees a 5-4 
victory over San Diego in the first Series game here in 14 years. 
The homer also gave the Yankees a commanding lead of three games to 
none in the four-of-seven-game series. No team has ever come back 
from that deficit to win the final four games of a World Series. The 
Yankees' Andy Pettitte will try to finish the Padres off on Wednesday 
night, pitching against San Diego's ace, Kevin Brown, in an effort 
to nail down the Yankees' 25th World Series title and second in three 
seasons. A victory would give the Yankees 125 in the regular season 
and post-season, more than any team has ever won. ``This is the type 
of thing that you've dreamt about as a kid,'' Brosius said. ``I've 
done this in my backyard a hundred times.'' But this was the first 
time in the World Series, with 64,667 fans screaming at him, hoping 
he would fail, hoping the Padres would hang on to to a 3-2 lead in 
the eighth inning and give them a chance to even the Series in Game 
4 on Wednesday. The Yankees had been fighting uphill all night, it 
seemed. Cone started and had not allowed a hit in the first five innings, 
but he acknowledged later that he had been laboring. Cone managed 
to find a way, somehow. Between innings on Tuesday night, Cone would 
throw his first warm-up tosses lightly, stiffly, like a 10-year-old 
trying to throw a snowball while wearing three sweaters and a parka 
in the winter. With the long commercial delays between innings, most 
pitchers throw 12 to 15 warm-ups. Cone rarely threw one or two more 
warm-ups beyond the typical allotment of eight. His stuff seemed quite 
ordinary, his first fastballs clocked at 87-88 miles an hour, and 
Cone seemed unable to command his fastballs consistently; he threw 
only 53 percent of his pitches for strikes. After Tony Gwynn's first 
at-bat, in which he lined out to left field, he returned to the dugout 
and told the Padres' hitting coach, Merv Rettenmund, that Cone did 
not have a good fastball, and Rettenmund agreed. In a scoreless game, 
Cone led off the Yankees' sixth with his third hit in eight career 
at-bats in the World Series, and the Yankees eventually had the bases 
loaded and one out against Sterling Hitchcock. But Bernie Williams 
struck out and Tino Martinez popped out, ending the inning. After 
having spent a half-inning running the bases, Cone allowed a leadoff 
single to Hitchcock _ turnabout _ and a walk to Quilvio Veras, ``the 
key to the inning,'' Cone would say later. Gwynn pulled a single through 
the right side, and when the inning was over, San Diego led, 3-0. 
But Brosius led off the Yankee seventh with a home run, spurring a 
two-run rally that had the Yankees trailing by 3-2 in the eighth inning, 
with San Diego intent on delivering a lead into the hands of its dominating 
closer, Trevor Hoffman. With the left-handed-hitting Paul O'Neill 
leading off the eighth for the Yankees, Padres Manager Bruce Bochy 
elected to start the inning with left-hander Randy Myers on the mound. 
Myers walked O'Neill, putting the tying run on base, and Bochy then 
called for Hoffman, who converted 53 of 54 save opportunities and 
had allowed only two home runs during the regular season. The Qualcomm 
Stadium crowd roared, the loudest that Yankees Manager Joe Torre said 
he had ever heard from a crowd, anywhere, any time. But it was apparent 
immediately that Hoffman, who had not thrown in a game in six days, 
was pitching at less than his best. Typically, Hoffman throws a fastball 
at 92-94 mph. His first fastball to Bernie Williams on Tuesday night 
was clocked at 88 mph, and Williams drove a pitch to the base of the 
wall in right field, where it was caught, a 355-foot out. When Williams 
returned to the dugout, he mentioned to teammates he was out in front 
of Hoffman's fastball, and word was passed down the line. With Martinez 
batting, Hoffman began pitching passively, throwing his slider and 
his change-up, and Martinez also drew a walk. Dave Stewart, San Diego's 
pitching coach, went to the mound. From the stands, Yankee scouts 
noticed that Hoffman wasn't throwing his change-up for strikes, as 
he usually does. Brosius was the next batter, having already got another 
late briefing from the hitting coach Chris Chambliss: His change-up 
is his best pitch, Chambliss reminded Brosius. Change-up, fastball. 
Brosius couldn't remember for sure, but he thought he had faced Hoffman 
in this year's All-Star Game. His arm packed in ice, Cone stood in 
the middle of the visitors' clubhouse in the eighth inning and watched 
Brosius bat on television Tuesday night, like the rest of the world. 
Two runners on base, the Yankees down a run. Brosius tried checking 
his swing unsuccessfully on the first pitch, a ball in the dirt, then 
took two more off-speed pitches for balls; later, Hoffman would lament 
the fact that he had thrown a slider out of the strike zone and fallen 
behind in the count. Hoffman threw a fastball, 89 mph, and Brosius 
fouled it off. Hoffman came back at him with another fastball, 91 
mph. Brosius swung, and on the television screen Cone watched, the 
ball soared directly toward the lens. Oh, my, Cone said he was thinking, 
_ is that going to make it. The Yankees' players leaped off their 
bench, to follow the ball's flight. Go, go, some yelled, as San Diego 
center fielder Steve Finley ran back to the wall, Hoffman staring 
at the numbers on the back of his jersey. When the ball carried over 
the fence, Brosius thrust both arms into air halfway between first 
and second, and some Yankees bounced happily and high-fived. San Diego 
scored a run in the bottom of the eighth, shaving the lead to 5-4, 
and back-to-back singles gave them two out and two on in the ninth 
inning, with the tying run at third, potential winning run at first. 
But Mariano Rivera blew a high fastball past the swinging Andy Sheets 
to end the game on a strikeout, and the Yankees burst from their dugout 
once more, rushing to hug Rivera, and Brosius, with the glint in his 
eye. One hundred and twenty-four down. One to go. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>