<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0284 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If there is one institution that would seem to be threatened by the 
information superhighway, it's the U.S. Postal Service. The world 
of e-mail, Web pages and software downloads seems to offer everything 
the old paper-based world of information delivers but offers it almost 
instantaneously. Many have been wondering whether something known 
colloquially as snail mail can compete. The answer is that it won't 
compete directly, but it will keep applying the same kind of computer 
power that underlies e-mail and other electronic wizardry to the task 
of moving paper mail. The fact is that new technology rarely destroys 
the old. It usually melds with the old, allowing both to do what they 
do best. Last year, letter carriers delivered 630 million pieces of 
mail a day. The post office now uses computerized sorting machines 
to route most of the mail. Most bulk mail, like bills, is printed 
with bar codes that are representations of ZIP codes and easy for 
computers to understand. The machines direct the path of a letter 
with house-level precision. Mail with bar codes goes directly to machines 
that can read the codes. Mail without bar codes but with printed addresses 
is handled by large mail-sorting machines with built-in cameras for 
taking pictures of addresses. A computer interprets the images, finds 
the best matching addresses and directs a printer to mark bar codes 
on the envelopes to speed further sorting. Today, the post office 
is concentrating on building even more sophisticated computer systems, 
with advanced optical character recognition (OCR) technology, that 
will read handwritten envelopes. Bill Dowling, a vice president for 
engineering at the Postal Service, said, ``Our online OCR machines 
handle 40,000 envelopes an hour and 80 percent of machine-printed 
mail we read.'' When letters without bar codes go into the first sorting 
machine, the computers try to interpret the address in the fraction 
of a second between when the letter passes by the camera and when 
it passes by an ink-jet printer that sprays on bar codes in fluorescent 
ink. Finding the answer in this short amount of time is called online 
processing. The original computer machines doing this job relied upon 
VAX minicomputers, which were manufactured by the old Digital Equipment 
computer company that is now a division of Compaq. Today, each machine 
is equipped with 11 additional 200-megahertz Pentium Pro chips that 
analyze the address images together. These extra chips run a stripped-down 
version of Linux that the Postal Service customized for high-speed 
parallel processing of addresses. There are currently 875 OCR machines 
distributed throughout the country at different sorting centers. Many 
smaller branches and local post offices have cheaper, faster sorting 
devices that can read only bar codes. If the computer cannot recognize 
the address in the short amount of time available to it _ perhaps 
because the address is handwritten _ the letter and the digital image 
of the address are put aside for off-line processing. First, a Silicon 
Graphics computer tries to interpret the image with more sophisticated 
algorithms (mathematical approaches) that take several seconds to 
search for an answer. If these computers cannot read the address, 
the image of the address is finally given to a human, who reads it 
and types it into the system. Then the batch of envelopes with addresses 
that were hard to read are processed again. This time, the correct 
bar code is sprayed on each envelope so it can be sorted at local 
post offices. Both the printed-character and handwritten-character 
recognition packages rely heavily on a large database containing every 
address in the country. ``We have an excellent digit recognizer so 
we can recognize the ZIP code and correlate the city and state,'' 
said Ed Kupert, a manager of image-handling technology for the Postal 
Service. ``Then we can recognize the house number. From this, we can 
create a lexicon of every street that has a house with that number 
in the ZIP code, and the computer picks the best match.'' Kupert said 
the current software recognized about 37 percent of handwritten addresses. 
The Postal Service hopes to increase this rate to 50 percent with 
a new software version that will be installed in time to handle the 
Christmas rush, he added. The Postal Service is also following the 
lead of other delivery companies and using technology to add new features 
to the seemingly simple process of delivering a letter. One option 
would use special bar codes to track the flow of individual envelopes 
in much the same way that package delivery businesses like Federal 
Express and United Parcel Service follow packages. Credit-card companies 
and mortgage holders may want to be able to know if the payment check 
is really in the mail _ and if so, when it got there, Dowling said. 
Tracking individual envelopes moving through the system is technically 
possible, and advertisers are interested in the capability. Dowling 
said the Postal Service would be able to tell direct-mail companies 
exactly when a piece of mail arrived, allowing them to coordinate 
other marketing efforts, like follow-up phone calls or television 
commercials. Dowling conceded that the Postal Service would face some 
stiff competition from electronic bill-paying systems using the World 
Wide Web. But he said the people who assume that Web-based systems 
will win underestimate the value of printed material to the people 
sending the bills. ``If you open your utility bill,'' he said, ``you 
probably get some warm and touchy statement about how good they did 
during the last heat wave. The bill itself is an advertisement.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>