<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0466 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A former Communist became Italy's prime minister Wednesday, the first 
ever to do so, and he quickly appointed an eclectic Cabinet that is 
not solidly to the left. If Parliament approves the Cabinet of the 
new premier, Massimo D'Alema, he will be the only former Communist 
to head a major Western European government. But D'Alema, 49, chose 
a cabinet that has something for everyone: Communists, conservatives, 
and six women. That is twice the number who served under the departing 
prime minister, Romano Prodi, whose center-left government collapsed 
two weeks ago, when it lost a parliamentary election by one vote. 
Among other compromises, D'Alema was forced to give such key ministries 
as Defense and Communications to supporters of Francesco Cossiga, 
a former Christian Democrat who now leads a small center-right party. 
There are at least 17 parties in Parliament. Seven are represented 
in the new government, eight if you include Prodi's Olive Tree coalition. 
D'Alema's effort to forge across-the-board allegiances to secure a 
majority signals a classic Italian paradox: A government whose stated 
goal is the introduction of a two-party system is itself a mirror 
of the patchwork quilt of small, constantly mutating parties that 
is the source of Italy's chronic political instability. D'Alema, who 
tried and failed to pass reforms in Parliament this year, has already 
pledged to make electoral reform a top priority. Many Italians wonder 
how he will manage. ``I find it hard to believe that so heterogeneous 
a coalition will be prepared to reform the electoral system,'' said 
Sergio Romano, a former diplomat and political expert. ``Too many 
people behind this government, like Cossiga, thrive on the very system 
of proportionality that the reform is supposed to change.'' The irrepressible 
Cossiga, 70, is distrusted by left and right in Italy, but having 
survived the collapse of the old political system dominated by the 
Christian Democrats, of which he was a leader, he created the Union 
of Democrats for the Republic six months ago and is now a power broker. 
Cossiga navigates from one political side to another. While he was 
president of Italy in 1991, D'Alema's party sought to have him impeached. 
Cossiga's new bond with D'Alema has infuriated his former allies in 
the opposition. ``We shall see how men who only yesterday insulted 
and attacked each other can stay clasped together in a grab for power,'' 
said Silvio Berlusconi, a media tycoon and former conservative prime 
minister. Mostly, however, Italians are waiting to see how the Communists 
and Cossiga's forces will clash at Cabinet meetings. Some government 
priorities _ like passing a 1999 budget that allows Italy to meet 
the requirements for joining a single European currency in January 
_ seem widely shared and well within reach. D'Alema reappointed the 
two top economic ministers, who are credited with helping Prodi trim 
Italy's bloated economy and qualify for membership in the euro last 
spring: Carlo Azeglio Ciampi will stay on as treasury and budget minister, 
and Vincenzo Visco will continue as finance minister. Italy's respected 
foreign minister, Lamberto Dini, was also reappointed. D'Alema has 
already said he will present to Parliament the same budget that caused 
Prodi's government to collapse. Fausto Bertinotti, general secretary 
of the Marxist Communist Refounding Party, withdrew his support from 
Prodi over budget disputes. But that move quickly split Communist 
Refounding. A more moderate faction led by Armando Cossutta, unwilling 
to be blamed for sabotaging the first center-left government in 50 
years, split off, forming yet another small leftist party, the Italian 
Communists' Party. A week ago, Cossutta vowed that he could never 
join forces with Cossiga. He relented, and his party was rewarded 
with the ministries of justice and regional affairs. There are new 
faces, like Giovanna Melandri, 36, a member of D'Alema's Democratic 
Party of the Left, who was named Minister of Culture and Sports, and 
Enrico Letta, 32, a member of the Popular Party, who will take over 
European Affairs and is the youngest member of the Cabinet. But D'Alema 
also brought back Giuliano Amato, 60, a former prime minister and 
one of the few Socialist leaders who escaped unscathed from the scandals 
that toppled former Prime Minister Bettino Craxi, who is now living 
in exile in Tunisia. Amato was awarded a newly revived post, minister 
of institutional reform, which includes drafting new electoral laws. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>