<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981021.0496 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nearly 160 years ago, Alexis De Tocqueville observed that Americans 
lacked an appreciation for what he called the ``pleasures of mind.'' 
Instead, he wrote, they ``prefer books which may be easily procured, 
quickly read, and which require no learned researches to be understood. 
They ask for beauties self-proffered and easily enjoyed. ... They 
require strong and rapid emotions, startling passages, truths or errors 
brilliant enough to rouse them up and to plunge them at once, as if 
by violence, into the midst of the subject.'' Those words remain, 
in fact, a pretty good description of the impulses that drive American 
popular culture, what one might call a constant quest for ever greater 
sensationalism. But the characteristics Tocqueville ascribed to our 
books, poetry and theater are now no longer confined to amusements; 
they have leached into almost every aspect of American life. Any putative 
Tocqueville looking at America today would see a whole Republic of 
Entertainment in which strong and rapid emotions, startling passages 
and rousing truths pervade journalism, politics, education, religion, 
art and even crime. Indeed, ours seems to be a world molded in the 
image of the movies and intended for our viewing pleasure. To most 
of us, this has been obvious for some time in the country's public 
life. However serious their subtexts may be, news events like the 
O.J. Simpson trials and Lewinskygate are vastly entertaining spectacles 
that are promoted, packaged and presented very much like the latest 
Hollywood blockbusters, only these stories happen to be written in 
the medium of life. What has been less evident than the transformation 
of public events into entertainment, however, is something arguably 
much more important: the extent to which entertainment has gradually 
infested our own personal lives, converting them into ``movies'' too. 
It is not just that audiences may find daily life as entertaining 
as fictionalized stories, as ``The Truman Show'' and the director 
Ron Howard's forthcoming ``edTV'' have it. It is that over the years 
our moviegoing and television watching has been impregnating the American 
consciousness with the conventions and esthetics of entertainment, 
until we have become performers ourselves, performing our own lives 
out of the shards of movies. One might even think of American life, 
including quotidian American life, as a vast production in which virtually 
every object is a prop, every space is a set, every person is an actor 
and every experience is a scene in a continuing narrative. It has 
been a long process that has brought us to this point _ a process 
that may have been set in motion by the country's very active sense 
of democracy. In Europe, where the class hierarchy was rigid and class 
distinctions obvious, any sort of personal theatricality, aside from 
that of self-conscious, rebellious Bohemians, was limited to the upperclasses, 
which could afford flamboyant display. But in America, where class 
boundaries were more porous and distinctions less apparent, citizens 
quickly learned that how one looked and behaved largely determined 
how one was perceived, prompting Walt Whitman to lament the ``terrible 
doubt of appearances.'' This emphasis on class by style infused 19th 
century American life with a kind of subtle theatricality as the middle 
class and later the working class imitated the affectations of the 
gentry in hopes of being regarded as gentry themselves. By the early 
20th century, though, these old models of gentility had yielded to 
new models in the mass media, especially the movies, and the change 
ushered in a marked difference in aspiration. What had begun in the 
19th century as a way of appropriating class became in the 20th a 
way of making one's life more closely approximate the glamorous visions 
one read about in novels and picture magazines or saw on the screen. 
Today, with the burgeoning of mass culture, this everyday performance 
art may be America's most ubiquitous art. Though obviously not everyone 
is willing to concede that he or she is becoming a performer, there 
are telltale signs everywhere that ordinary life is cinematic. Take 
fashion. There was a time when fashion was, as Tom Wolfe once put 
it, the ``code language of status,'' a way to express where one stood 
in the social order. Nowadays, when nearly everyone has access to 
designer clothes, even if it is only a pair of jeans, fashion is less 
expressive than imaginative. What one wears doesn't necessarily convey 
who one is; it projects who one wants to be _ which makes clothing 
into costume. It is certainly no coincidence that America's most popular 
and influential designer, Ralph Lauren, has demonstrated the greatest 
appreciation for the costume functions of fashion. What Lauren, born 
Ralph Lifshitz, understood from his own love of the movies as a boy 
growing up in the Bronx was that people would pay to transform their 
lives into their cinematic fantasies: safari outfits to make one a 
colonialist from ``Out of Africa''; denim jackets and jeans to make 
one a cowboy from a Hollywood western; finely tailored English suits 
to make one an aristocrat from any number of crisp drawing room melodramas. 
At the same time, he realized that these transformations were more 
than a matter of costuming. With his home furnishings and accessories 
as well as his ad campaigns, Lauren sells an image of life, a kind 
of collage of movie fantasies that, in his own words, ``represent 
living, not fashion'' and that, more specifically, provide the ``whole 
atmosphere of the good life'' that movies had always purveyed. One 
writer called him the first image manager, which is exactly what he 
is. He (italics)gave(end italics) the middle class what the upper 
classes and celebrities had always had: a conscious esthetic. What 
Ralph Lauren is to the materials of image, Martha Stewart is to their 
deployment. Like Lauren's, Ms. Stewart's origins were humble, but 
like Lauren, she has an instinct for transporting her followers from 
their daily grind. Identifying with the bedraggled, unfulfilled, unappreciated 
middle-class housewife, Ms. Stewart, as a life style consultant, offers 
a vision of domestic perfection that owes more to movies and television 
sitcoms than to reality. ``We have come to realize that the creation 
of a fine family, a lovely life style and a comfortable home is kind 
of a national art form in itself,'' she told her readers of her syndicated 
column with a nod to the theatricality of it. So devout an esthete 
is Ms. Stewart that she has even issued instructions on how to shovel 
the snow from your sidewalk: ``Always leave an inch of snow so it 
looks nice and white. Esthetics are very important in snow removal.'' 
While designers like Lauren and life style counselors like Ms. Stewart 
are in the business of image management, more and more architects 
are in the business of creating the sets on which the life movie could 
unfold. Stores like Niketown and malls like the Mall of America outside 
Minneapolis or Horton Plaza in San Diego, theme restaurants like the 
Hard Rock Cafe, Planet Hollywood or Jekyll and Hyde, and hotels, museums, 
churches and schools were now furnishing stages for the performance 
of shopping, eating, sleeping, watching, worshiping or learning. As 
Andy Warhol once said of New York restaurants, ``They caught on that 
what people really care about is changing their atmosphere for a couple 
of hours'' _ that is, escaping into their own life movies. Nor was 
the set restricted to individual spaces. Whole areas had become back 
lots, to use the Hollywood term for the studios' old tracts where 
outdoor scenes were shot _ areas like West 57th Street and the South 
Street Seaport in New York or Peachtree Center in Atlanta or Navy 
Pier in Chicago. The intellectual historian Thomas Bender, looking 
at the way America's inner cities were being colonized and commercialized 
by chain stores, theme restaurants and other tourist attractions, 
summoned a new urban vision in which the city was an ``entertainment 
zone _ a place to visit, a place to shop; it is no more than a live-in 
theme park,'' which he believed was designed to hide a grittier, dirtier, 
more problematic city from us. Even so, if many of us now live on 
stages, dress in costumes and follow esthetic guidance, these things 
are only symptomatic of a larger reconceptualization of life itself. 
Nearly 50 years ago, the sociologist David Riesman identified the 
emergence of a new type of social character in America that he called 
``other-directed,'' by which he meant, essentially, that one's goals 
were directed toward satisfying the expectations of others _ an audience. 
By definition, other-directed Americans were conscious of performance 
and of the effects of affect, a self-consciousness that led another 
sociologist, Erving Goffman, to conclude that in the 20th century 
``life itself is a dramatically enacted thing.'' In Goffman's analysis, 
every American was engaged in a series of plays and a series of roles, 
an ``exchange of dramatically inflated actions, counteractions, and 
terminating replies'' _ in short, an enactment of the scenes of daily 
life. What Goffman didn't seem to foresee when he was writing in the 
late 1950s was how much more complex the performance would become, 
how many more scenes and roles there would be to play on a daily basis 
and how much farther the front stage would extend into the backstage 
until the show never seemed to end. In effect, the demands of daily 
performance at work, at school, at social engagements, even at home, 
would become so onerous that one could no longer be compared to a 
classical actor digging into his kit bag to find a character the way 
a Laurence Olivier had. Rather, Americans were on stage so often that 
they were forced to become Method actors mastering the art of playing 
themselves by, as Elizabeth Taylor once described the technique, ``making 
their fiction reality.'' Daily life had become a show. ``A whole day 
of life is like a whole day of television,'' Andy Warhol observed, 
anticipating ``The Truman Show.'' ``TV never goes off the air once 
it starts for the day, and I don't either. At the end of the day the 
whole day will be a movie.'' But if one lived a movie, as Warhol said, 
it wasn't just the day that qualified as a performance; it was the 
entire life. It was (italics)life(end italics) now that had a beginning, 
a middle and an end like conventional movies. It was (italics)life(end 
italics) now that was increasingly being plotted to let the ``actor'' 
live out his or her fantasies, albeit within the restraints of physical 
appearance, financial resources, talent, cooperation and a myriad 
of other impediments. One now chose a genre to which one aspired and 
then eased into the role. If you wanted to be a young professional 
or a Bohemian artist or a man of leisure or an outdoorsman, you conformed 
your life to the conventions of each. You dressed the way they dressed, 
acted the way they acted, associated with the kinds of people with 
whom they associated. Though in practice this was all somewhat amorphous, 
what really seemed to illustrate how rapidly personal life was advancing 
toward theater was the advent of a new profession: self-styled ``life 
coaches,'' reportedly 1,500 of them as of last year, who advise clients 
on how to reorient their lives to reach what one coach calls fulfillment 
but what someone else might call a happy ending. What the coaches 
do, along with routine ego boosting, is replot the client's life. 
They tell him how he should organize his time, how he should deal 
with business matters, whether or not he should host a party or take 
a trip. ``It's like painting a canvas for a `life assignment,' '' 
said one coach. Few people are as overtly self-conscious about their 
life movies as these clients, but a good many Americans are still 
embarked on a campaign to live out their life vision as it has been 
shaped by mass culture. ``At one point in cultural history we asked 
whether movies furnished an adequate likeness of real life,'' the 
psychologist Kenneth Gergen once observed. ``The good movies were 
the more realistic. Now we ask of reality that it accommodate itself 
to film. The good person, like the good party, should be more `movieistic.' 
'' Or to put it another way, where we had once measured the movies 
by life, we are learning to measure life itself by how well it satisfies 
the narrative expectations created by the movies. In doing so, we 
have been changing not only the contours of our lives but the very 
justification for our existence. Traditionally, realizing one's dreams 
was only one part of the life experience. It was understood that a 
full life necessarily entailed both our failures and our triumphs, 
our agonies and our ecstasies. This was why Aldous Huxley's brave 
new world seemed so terrifying even though its inhabitants were in 
a perpetual state of bliss. In Huxley's view, they had sacrificed 
their humanness to their happiness. Clearly we have not yet arrived 
at the point where we can shape our lives to our specifications as 
writers shape movies, but we are probably closer to living in ``Pleasantville,'' 
to cite the title of the new film about a 1950s television universe 
of unruffled joy, than any previous generation. In the movie, the 
town of Pleasantville is disturbed by the arrival of ``real'' humans 
who bring with them a pungent taste of ``real'' life. In our own Pleasantville, 
though, the issue is not how much more exciting reality is than our 
movie and television glosses; it is how little reality seems to count 
when life itself is a gloss. After all, when life is a movie, who 
needs reality? Huxley notwithstanding, that may just turn out to be 
the central question of the next millennium. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>