<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981021.2000.1258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. State Department officials got 
an unpleasant note in the mail today from the Mexican government. 
It was a diplomatic letter formally asking the United States to scrap 
plans for a nuclear waste dump I the Texas town of Sierra Blanca, 
just 20 miles from the border. Texas, Maine, and Vermont all plan 
to send low-level nuclear waste to the proposed dump. After first 
agreeing to the plan, Mexican officials now say that the dump would 
pose a danger to the health of Mexican residents along the border. 
THE WORLD's Frank Contrares has this report from Mexico City. One 
of Mexico's most famous rock groups, Caveta Cuba led a few thousand 
protesters in song one recent Sunday here in the Mexican capital. 
The demonstration to protest the possible opening of a nuclear waste 
dump on the border took place outside the U.S. Embassy. It was an 
unusual protest because all of Mexico's political parties turned out. 
We are here to remind our neighbors to the North that we are not their 
backyard to use as a garbage dump. We are here, free men and women 
who love Mexico, who are worried about future generations, to demand 
respect for human lives. That was Victor Arduna of the Conservative 
National Action Party. One of the other speakers was Christina Alcallaga 
of the Ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party. She says her party 
opposes the opening of the waste dump based on the North American 
Free Trade Agreement. There's a part of NAFTA called the Environmental 
Site Agreement that says waste which could harm water systems should 
not be placed near the border. We have to intervene to demand that 
the U.S. respect this agreement. That is why all political parties 
here are united. Such political unity is rare in Mexico, to say the 
least. The usually divided Mexican Congress has united to send telegrams 
to President Ernesto Zedillo and Bill Clinton urging that the waste 
dump be moved to another location. Laura Itzel Castillo, a member 
of Congress from the left leaning party of the Democratic Revolution 
has traveled to Texas to talk to state officials there. She's convinced 
that Sierra Blanco was chosen as the site for the dump because it's 
a mostly Mexican-American community with little political power. We 
cannot permit this. All Mexicans must fight with conviction against 
this environmental racism on the part of the United States. It will 
not pass. Critics at the dump at Sierra Blanca argue that nuclear 
waste could be buried in a part of Texas that is prone to earthquakes. 
They claim that could cause water to leak into the dump site and eventually 
contaminate water systems along the border. Reuben Alvarado is chief 
engineer at the Texas Low Level Radioactive Waste Disposal Authority. 
Earthquakes are no real threat, according to Alvarado, who has been 
intimately involved in the decision to place the dump in South Texas. 
When all things are taken into consideration, the transpecos of Texas 
is a very stable part of the Earth's crust. It is correct and opponents 
like to say this, that the transpecos is the most seismic reactive 
part of the state. But when you compare it to Southern California 
or other places on the Pacific Rim, you know, through Japan or down 
through Chile or up in Alaska, or even if you compare it to the area 
around Salt Lake City, it's almost seismically inert. I mean, there's 
really not much going on. Those words are no real comfort for Mexican 
citizen, Roberto Figueroa, whose family lives in Chihuahua State on 
the border of Texas. He fears that the waste dump will only make the 
environment, which is already highly polluted there, even worse. We 
are very much concerned about the fact that we have literally Mexico 
on nuclear bomb. We are going to be affected, and that's a fact. Texas 
officials meet tomorrow to decide if the Sierra Blanco site is safe 
enough to hold nuclear waste. If they give it the green light, crews 
will begin digging huge craters in the rocky earth there and waste 
from Vermont and Maine could be shipped as soon as next year. From 
THE WORLD, this is Frank Contrares in Mexico City. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>