<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981021.2000.2021 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD, a co-production of the BBC World Service, PRI, 
NWGBH in Boston. I'm Lisa Mullins. Chilean President Eduardo Frei 
returned from an overseas trip today only to face political turmoil 
over last week's arrest in London of former military leader Augusto 
Pinochet on charges of genocide, torture, and terrorism. Frei says 
the position of his government which insists the general has diplomatic 
immunity, has already been made clear and that he'll be consulting 
his Cabinet. While Pinochet's fate has yet to be decided, THE WORLD's 
Alajandro Martins reports his arrest is already sending shock waves 
through Chilean political life. A week ago, Chilean President Eduardo 
Frei left his country for a routine meeting in Portugal. Today, he 
returned to a very different country from the one he left. Augusto 
Pinochet, the former dictator who ran Chile with an iron fist for 
nearly two decades, is once more at the center of controversy. Since 
his arrest in London on Friday, supporters and opponents of General 
Pinochet have staged daily demonstrations on the streets of Santiago 
for those who suffered under his regime. Pinochet's arrest is a time 
for celebration. An estimated 3,000 people were killed or disappeared 
during his 17 years in power, but many Chileans still support the 
general. They believe the 1973 coup that put an end to the democratically 
elected government of President Salvatore Allende saved the country 
from the threat of communism. Anan Briones heads the Pinochet Foundation 
in Santiago. There was really a war here, not only in Santiago but 
everywhere. And Allende had brought into Chile a considerable group 
of geredes that had been trained in Cuba or Russia, whatever, and 
these people really were very strong in trying to fight the military. 
So actually, they were not atrocities for us, were casualties. Ricardo 
Israel is a professor of political science at the University of Chile. 
He says that General Pinochet is once again deeply polarizing Chilean 
society. Pinochet is a fear for the Chileans, and this arrest put 
us as a country back to square one, back to a situation and to the 
debate that we thought that we have overcome in a process of transition 
to democracy. For the past eight years, Chile has not only managed 
a peaceful transition to democracy, but has also become one of the 
most dynamic economies in Latin America. And the Chilean authorities 
are now concerned that this carefully steered ship could go off course 
because of pressure from foreign governments. President Eduardo Frei 
has made it clear what he expects from other countries when it comes 
to the fate of General Pinochet. Respect for Chilean laws, respect 
for the sovereignty for our country or our decision, and respect for 
the Chilean cause, that is what I wish to say. It's becoming increasingly 
difficult for President Frei to keep the debate around General Pinochet 
from affecting his government. Chilean politicians have become deeply 
polarized. Conservatives say they will stay away from Parliament until 
the general is released, while socialists in the ruling coalition 
are refusing to back the government's official protest over Pinochet's 
arrest. As the debate around General Pinochet intensifies, President 
Frei may find it hard to keep social and political stability in a 
country still haunted by its past. For THE WORLD, this is Alajandro 
Martins. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>