<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981021.2000.2484 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
All week, we've been looking at the legacy of slavery in the Americas. 
Today, we try to answer a simple question: To what degree are any 
of us connected to our roots? For the descendants of slaves, the answer 
can be complicated. In Jamaica, for example, most citizens are descendants 
of Africans brought to the island as chattel. With such strong connections, 
a visitor to Jamaica might well expect to find a nation that celebrates 
its African heritage, but it isn't necessarily so, or at least not 
yet. From Jamaica, THE WORLD's Boris Maksimov has this report. Silence 
may or may not be golden, but it does speak volumes. Consider this, 
for example: 160 ago, slavery was abolished in Jamaica, a nice round 
date, a momentous event in the history of the nation, and yet there's 
silence. There are no big or small celebrations marking the event, 
no commemorative stamps, no nothing, really. I think some of us have 
allowed ourselves to become separated from who we are. That's Dr. 
Olive Lewin, the director of Arts and Culture Problems at something 
called The Grace Kennedy Foundation in Kingston, Jamaica. When emancipation 
came, the people who were then emancipated were more emancipated than 
we are today, because nobody can give you emancipation. You have to 
emancipate yourself. Olive Lewin spent decades looking traces or remnants 
for anything that is left of the old ways, of the old culture, talk 
to people in remote villages who still remember the past. These sources 
are not just national treasures because we say so; they are national 
treasures, and we never really know ourselves until we know what they 
have to tell us. So what do they tell us about the past, about Jamaica, 
about what happened after slavery was abolished those 160 years ago? 
Well, about 30 years ago, Olive Lewin came across a village in the 
hills of the western part of Jamaica, a village with a strange name: 
Abayokuta. And that name was a clue, a clue to the past. The name, 
Abayokuta, is straight from Nigeria. After emancipation, the Yoruba 
speaking former slaves settled here in the West Moreland parish, and 
in the shadow of a huge rock in the side of the mountain. Hence the 
name, Abayokuta, means under the rocks in Yoruba. And there's more. 
There's a place in Western Nigeria also sitting in the shadow of a 
rock and also called Abayokuta. That in itself was enough to bring 
the Nigerian writer, Wallace Savinca to Jamaica to check it out. The 
villagers came out to greet the eminent guest with drums. All that 
happened more than ten years ago. The occasion was caught on videotape 
but now sits on the shelf in the African Caribbean Institute of Jamaica 
in Kingston. Back then, there was still one, one old woman who remembered 
a few rods of Yoruba and whom. is the rock. The rock. Good, that's 
what I wanted to know. That's what I wanted to know. Exciting stuff. 
It isn't every day that one stumbles across such a direct connection 
with Africa. The process of getting to the village is a small epic 
in itself. You drive through barely passable roads up the hills, down 
the dales, past a large mango tree, and park by the small waterfall. 
From here, it's the shortest walk on the gravel road, uphill, of course. 
And here, a discovery awaits. A sudden realization that time moves 
in one direction only, that things change and disappear. Soon after 
Savinca's visit, Abayocuta was hit by a mudslide and most of the villagers 
moved away to the cities. The old woman who still remembered a bit 
of the Yoruba language has died. Less than ten houses remain in the 
village and less than 20 people. Breadfruit trees are growing here 
and there, and a lot of chickens are rummaging around. And that's 
about it. One of the oldest remaining villagers is Robert Fenton. 
He's 84. And even he is not terribly sure of the history of the place 
anymore. It's Cahalabayocuta. What does it mean? I don't know. I believe 
when this village was established, the people there were slaves, born 
people. And they came and - they bought it. These people bought their 
lands after when slavery abolished. The loss of memory both personal 
and communal is palpable here, though Mr. Fenton does remember that 
there were people in Abayocuta that spoke a language from Africa. 
Those people died. Can you speak any? No. When I was very small, there 
was a man that came from Africa, and he' bring news to the people 
from Africa. I could remember the song that he sung for the people 
was Rayeejay Oballe. And do you know what it means? Let Jesus come 
into your heart. Nobody remembers much of the past in Abayocuta anymore. 
The past year is literally that: past, gone, never to return. A profound 
sadness envelopes the place. Amid the greenery in the shadow of the 
rock, a few old people try to make a living farming. Nobody comes 
to visit. And the few outsiders who care like Olive Lewin are left 
contemplating what was or might have been. And that's very sad that 
the root changed because what we needed to do was to get as much as 
we could from these people before they left us. It's late now, it's 
late now. Back in the village of Abayocuta, Howard Simmits, one of 
the very few young people remaining there spends his time trying to 
figure out how to leave the place and singing Bob Marley songs about 
redemption under the gathering storm clouds. And all I ever heard, 
redemption song. For THE WORLD, this is Boris Maksimov. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>