<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.0600.1349 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Computers affect the way Americans learn, communicate and conduct 
business. The high-tech devices are also being used in a number of 
other ways, including music composition. Dan Noble has details. This 
piece is entitled "City Walk." It was composed on a computer and played 
electronically by Yershey Sipiyesky, a Polish-born educator and composer. 
Through his New Century Music Project, Professor Sipiyesky says that 
he hopes to expand the use of technology in music composition. New 
Century Music is a project that incorporates technology to concept 
music, meaning when I'm sitting here with you, I'm trying to prepare 
some music through my keyboards and so on. I also recreate the aspect 
of orchestra. It's not a typical symphony orchestra, but something 
again that might come as a combination of Japanese koto with violin 
and drums. So I have a possibility of calling on orchestras from all 
over the world and putting them together and creating these unusual 
sounds. So they don't have to be at one place? You just bring them 
in on your computer. Yes. I bring the sounds, the types of sounds. 
It's called technically "sampling," which these sounds are stored 
in the memory of the computer. But these are raw sounds. It makes 
no music. But the raw sounds create a variety of possibilities. And 
New Century Music really addresses the issues of using technology 
to create expressive and communicative music. Computer cannot write 
good music as word processor cannot write a great book. But it is 
a tool that allows us to explore variety of thing. According to Professor 
Sipiyesky, who teaches at the Department of Performing Arts at American 
University in Washington, D.C., for a creator of music, one of the 
most interesting aspects is to create new sound almost immediately. 
Let's say that we want to create a sound that is close to what an 
accordion would sound like. Normally, I would have to go and look 
for the type of accordionist that I like and make him learn to play 
my piece. And in this particular case, I can use what's called a synthesizer, 
which is really a keyboard which has a computer inside to store particular 
type of sounds that I can recall at will and immediately use for composing 
particular piece of music. And so here is, for instance, something 
that is close to an accordion sound and I'll try to play a little 
piece. All right. This was something close to what an accordion would 
sound, but more interesting is the fact that now composers can invent 
sounds that instruments normally cannot do - let's say like jungle 
or rain or something of that type. For instance... But what effect 
does the new technology have on musicians? Are they still needed? 
Again, Yershey Sipiyesky. The future for the musicians has changed. 
You really don't need that many average violins because, for instance, 
today recording studios can correct and make three or four violins 
sound as if it were a big orchestra. Nevertheless, they need those 
four good violins to do it. And I think that combination of synthesizers, 
modern technology and life acoustic instruments is the wave of the 
future. So yes, musicians are needed, but they will not be needed 
to do sort of the dirty job of holding a note, as an accompaniment, 
but more of being an artistic partner. For his efforts in the areas 
of teaching and technology, Professor Sipiyesky recently received 
an award from the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers. 
I'm Dan Noble. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>