<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.1700.1349 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many Americans could quickly name five American sports stars or famous 
actors, but what if you asked people in this country to list five 
great American poets? Chances are very few could do it even though 
poets make an important contribution to our culture. But there's one 
American poet who just about everybody has heard of. VOA travel reporter 
Ted Lanfare visited this great writer's home, which has become something 
of a shrine. He's Robert Frost, the great bard of New England, who 
wrote poetic masterpieces in the first half of this century. "Two 
roads diverged in a wood, and I - I took the one less traveled by." 
And this. "The woods are lovely, dark and deep. But I have promises 
to keep and miles to go before I sleep." Frost wrote these words in 
a farm house in the White Mountains of northern New Hampshire. Today, 
that house and a barn out back are called simply "Frost Place." Two 
rooms in the farm house are full of Frost's possessions and first 
edition signed copies of some of his poetry, including "The Wood Pile," 
"Birches" and "The Death of the Hired Man." Frost Place director Donald 
Sheehan says Robert Frost once presented a book of his poems to a 
New Hampshire friend named Joe Fobes . And in the flyleaf, he wrote 
a lyric poem he had just completed and was really excited about. And 
he wanted Joe to see it. And so he wrote it in the flyleaf. And of 
course, that's "Stopping By Woods on a Snowy Evening," his most famous 
lyric. Each July for a week, a big poetry festival is held in the 
barn at Frost Place. Indeed, Frost Place is a living memorial to Robert 
Frost. Each summer, a poet-in-residence comes to live in the house, 
to write and to meet with visitors and other poets. Two summers ago, 
the poet-in-residence was Jeff Skinner, from the University of Louisville 
in Kentucky. He called it humbling to be living in Frost's house and 
sleeping in his bed. It's quite spooky in a way. But I think that 
Frost had a very informal dimension to him in spite of the fact that 
he wrote in fairly formal patterns. He would expect me and everybody 
else to take their ease if he approved of the idea, and I'm sure he 
would have. Do you sense his presence in any way? Do you get an inspiration 
here? I think I see it in the way people behave who come here to see 
the Frost house. And there's a kind of awe people have, and I feel 
the same thing. But I live here, so - and I have two teenage daughters. 
Is it mystical to them? no. Writing poetry, says Jeff Skinner, boils 
from some mysterious internal place, from joys and sorrows. It's not 
a good choice, really. The rewards are generally slim and the money 
is generally not good. But what I get from the actual process of writing, 
from finishing a poem is immense. It's a lot of pleasure. And my life 
otherwise is like most other people's lives. It has its ups and downs. 
You know, poets are different creatures. They just happen to have 
this gift for expression. Frost Place director Donald Sheehan looks 
like a poet with a long white beard - but he's not. He is a professor 
of Latin at Dartmouth College. We walked together through the woods 
that so inspired Robert Frost. Tacked to trees along what's called 
"the poetry trail" are samples of Frost's best lyric poems written 
at Frost Place. Donald Sheehan stopped to read the first one, "Evening 
in a Sugar Orchard." "From where I lingered in a lull in March outside 
the sugar house one night for choice, I called the firemen with a 
careful voice and bade him leave the pan and stoke the arch. Oh, fireman, 
give the fire another stoke, and send more sparks up chimney with 
the smoke." In addition to vivid word-pictures about New England, 
Robert Frost wrote about the tragic effects of the industrial revolution 
- the abandoned farms and empty houses in the region he loved. Each 
summer at the annual Festival of Poetry at Frost Place, other poets 
also tell of the human experience in lines that rhyme and lines that 
don't. They read their work amid a profusion of wild flowers, soaring 
trees and woodpiles here on poetry's hallowed ground. I'm Ted Lanfare. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>