<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.1700.0536 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Authorities in Belgrade reversed a ban on three independent Serbian 
newspapers imposed last week. But as we hear from Central European 
correspondent Art Shimes, the papers are not planning to resume publication 
immediately. The decision to lift the ban comes one day after the 
Serbian parliament passed a new media law imposing restrictions on 
what can be published or broadcast. The law imposes large fines and 
the possible confiscation of equipment for those who violate the restrictions. 
Critics say the new law is vague and makes it difficult to determine 
what is and is not permitted. The law replaces a recent government 
decree that banned the publication of news stories that spread, in 
its words, "fear, panic and defeatism." Authorities used that decree 
last week to shut down three independent newspapers - the Nvevy Telegraph, 
Danas and Najaborba. They also closed down two independent radio stations 
and pressured television stations to stop transmitting foreign broadcasts, 
including the Serbian language VOA TV programs. The media crackdown 
has left most Serbs with no alternative to official news sources. 
Independent domestic media, plus foreign broadcasts, have been an 
important source of impartial news as the crisis in Serbia's rebellious 
Kosovo province has unfolded. The banned newspapers plan to publish 
probably Monday after they have registered their publications in Montenegro, 
the smaller and more liberal republic in Yugoslavia. But since the 
newspapers will continue to be written, edited and printed in Belgrade, 
it is not clear that they can avoid the new media law in Serbia, Yugoslavia's 
dominant republic. Vesta Vuyaja, a journalist on the recently banned 
Danas newspaper, is among the reporters and editors fighting the new 
restrictions. She says the penalties for violating the new law are 
exceptionally harsh. It means that, in 24 hours, any media could be 
closed because if you publish something that the government doesn't 
like, you can be closed in 24 hours, and the penalty is - I will tell 
you - about 230,000 deutsch marks. That fine of more than $80,000 
could likely bankrupt most any independent media outlet in Serbia. 
Serbian Information Minister Alexander Vuchich says the large fines 
are necessary to punish what he calls "anti-state" information. He 
presented the new legislation as a human rights law, telling parliament 
was about freedom of public information. The campaign against independent 
media has been spearheaded by the head of the Serbian Radical Party, 
Voyoslav Sheshel, who has described the programs of foreign broadcasters 
as "psychological warfare." Art Shimes, VOA NEWS, Prague. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>