<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.0600.3161 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Joni Mitchell is one of the most important singer-songwriters in American 
popular music. Her protest song, "Big Yellow Taxi" and her album, 
"Blue," have become classics in the folk genre. But Joni Mitchell 
doesn't consider herself a folk singer. She sees herself as an unclassified 
performer falling somewhere between jazz greats Miles Davis and rock 
legend Bob Dylan. And her new CD, entitled "Taming the Tiger," doesn't 
sound like anything else on the radio right now. As VOA's Catherine 
Coll explains, that's both the album's strength and burden. Joni Mitchell 
has refused to rest easy in the folk-pop world that she helped create. 
Some years ago, she turned away from pop music and embraced a more 
complex jazz-based sound. And while this switch has allowed her to 
thrive creatively, her record sales have slipped. As she puts in the 
title track from her new release, "I'm a runaway from the record biz." 
Joni Mitchell portraying herself as a fed-up musical outcast on the 
title track to her new CD, "Taming the Tiger." Not that she hasn't 
been in the spotlight recently. Joni Mitchell took home two Grammy 
Awards including album of the year for her 1994 release "Turbulent 
Indigo." She's also been out on tour with Bob Dylan selling out concerts 
across North America. Last year, she was inducted into the Rock and 
Roll Hall of Fame, and she's received numerous other honors, including 
Sweden's Polar Music Prize, a sort of musical version of the Nobel 
Prize. And perhaps it's this history that makes "Taming the Tiger" 
such a wonderful piece of work. It's a mature album from a mature 
artists, who's bemoaning how boring and formulaic hit songs are today. 
And she doesn't fear any reprisals from the music industry. But it's 
not all bitter business in this collection. Several songs, including 
"Love Puts on a New Face," and "The Crazy Cries of Love," reflect 
on happy relationships. The crazy cries of love - Joni Mitchell off 
her new CD "Taming the Tiger." Another high point on this disc is 
"Facelift," where unexpected humor lightens a tense encounter with 
her mother. That's Joni Mitchell singing "Facelift" from her new CD, 
"Taming the Tiger." The CD ends on a bittersweet note with an instrumental 
version of the title track. And as with most recent Joni Mitchell 
records, this one is not for those with a short attention span. The 
lyrics are thoughtful and worth listening to again and again. I'm 
Catherine Coll. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>