<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.0600.0672 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now that negotiations are underway involving Britain, Spain and Chile, 
at issue is Britain's detention of former Chilean dictator Augusto 
Pinochet, who is wanted in Spain for crimes allegedly committed against 
Spanish citizens in Chile during his dictatorship. This case may help 
break new ground in international human rights laws by making it harder 
for those accused of crimes against humanity to escape justice. VOA's 
Bill Rogers looks at possible legal implications of the Pinochet arrest 
in Britain. British authorities detained the former dictator at a 
London hospital, where he had undergone back surgery. In recent years, 
it has become more common for nations or international tribunals to 
reach across national borders to apprehend those suspected of genocide, 
torture and other crimes against humanity. According to many human 
rights monitors and legal scholars, the detention of General Pinochet 
further strengthens this trend in international human rights law. 
Joel Solomon of Human Rights Watch explains. That's where the very 
important step forward is taking place in this case because international 
law does recognize, for crimes against humanity, that any country 
has jurisdiction over those crimes. Many, many years ago, we saw a 
similar concept in piracy, where any country could try a pirate even 
if the country bringing the pirate to court didn't suffer the acts 
of that particular pirate. Later, we saw these principles in the Nuremberg 
trials. So this is something that has been around as a concept for 
quite a while, but it's new that the Spanish government is apply it 
and that's why it's such an important step forward. General Pinochet, 
who relinquished power in 1990, traveled to Britain with a diplomatic 
passport. His lawyers are claiming diplomatic immunity to contest 
his arrest and possible extradition to Spain. But the 1961 Vienna 
Convention on diplomatic relations would seem to exclude the former 
dictator. The convention says diplomatic immunity is not designed 
to protect an individual, but to ensure the functioning of diplomatic 
missions. Legal experts note General Pinochet was not on diplomatic 
business when he traveled to London. But even if he is successful 
in fighting extradition, Joel Solomon of Human Rights Watch believes 
an important precedent has been set. I think that the message will 
remain, no matter what the outcome, of the Pinochet detention. The 
message will remain that dictators cannot expect safe haven abroad 
just because they've been able to carve out some safe haven at home. 
And that will be positive no matter what happens with General Pinochet. 
General Pinochet, who led a military coup that overthrew an elected 
Marxist government in 1973, is accused of presiding over a bloody 
dictatorship. Some 3,000 people were killed in Chile and hundreds 
of others disappeared during his rule. However, General Pinochet was 
granted immunity from prosecution under Chile's constitution, which 
was drafted and adopted while he was in power. Bill Rogers, VOA NEWS, 
Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>