<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.1700.0355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Palestinian police carried out several arrests in recent days aimed 
at weakening the militant Palestinian group HAMAS in the West Bank 
town of Hebron. News of the arrests comes as Israel, in the Mideast 
peace negotiations here in the U.S., continues to demand a broader 
crackdown on militants by the Palestinian Authority. Al Pessin reports 
from Jerusalem. The new Palestinian moves against Hamas in Hebron 
began three weeks ago when police raided a house which Hamas allegedly 
used to build and store explosives. The Palestinian governor of Hebron, 
Aziz Amer, confirms that the arrest of the owner of that house - Mohammed 
Jamal Nacha, led to the arrests of 10 to 15 more alleged Hamas activists 
during the following weeks. I know that, at the beginning, they arrested 
Mohammed Jamal Nacha, and after that, they arrested many other persons 
from Hebron District. They are now in the jail and the Palestinian 
- with the Palestinian Authority. Mohammed Jamal Nacha is now being 
described in local news reports as a top leader of the Hamas military 
wing in Hebron. According to one report by the Associated Press, Mr. 
Nacha was arrested with a letter from a more senior Hamas leader, 
which identified the other Hamas activists who were arrested later. 
The letter is reported to have been written by senior Hamas official 
Halad Maschal, who lives in Jordan. An Israeli attempt to assassinate 
Mr. Maschal failed last year and resulted in an embarrassing scandal 
in which Israel was forced to released dozens of Hamas prisoners and 
the group's spiritual leader to gain the safe return of its secret 
agents. In addition to the arrests related to the bomb factory, the 
Palestinian police say they've rounded up another approximately 15 
alleged Hamas activists, who are believed to be linked to the man 
arrested in Israel on Monday for throwing two hand grenades at a crowd 
at a bus station. Hamas claimed responsibility and Israel says the 
man confessed to that attack and two others in Hebron in the last 
two months. The man, Salim Sarsur, is reported to be a long-time supporter 
of Hamas who only recently became active in its military wing. After 
one of the attacks he claims to have carried out - throwing hand grenades 
at Israeli troops in Hebron - the Hebron governor vowed to find and 
prosecute the perpetrator. But three weeks later, Salim Sarsur was 
35 kilometers away in the bus station in the southern Israeli town 
of Beersheba throwing more grenades. Governor Amer says the arrests 
in Hebron in recent weeks prove the Palestinian Authority is serious 
about cracking down on what he calls "terrorists who hurt Palestinian 
interests." But for Israel, the lesson is the opposite - illustrating 
insufficient Palestinian efforts if the same man, living in Hebron 
and working for Hamas, really carried out three attacks in less than 
two months. These issues are prominent in the Wye Plantation talks 
as officials wrestle with questions of how arrested militants will 
be treated and how to judge the extent of the Palestinian Authority's 
crackdown to determine if it is enough to trigger reciprocal Israeli 
troop withdrawals. Al Pessin, VOA NEWS, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>