<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.0600.2208 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Refugees are at the heart of an agreement here in the United States. 
Several times in the past few years, the southeastern state of Florida 
has been the target of waves of asylum seekers from nearby countries, 
notably Cuba and Haiti. The cost of feeding, sheltering and processing 
in some cases hundreds of thousands of people has fallen largely on 
Florida. Yesterday, the state of Florida and the U.S. government signed 
an agreement promising both will respond to any future mass migrations. 
It's the first agreement of its kind between the federal government 
and a U.S. state. Details from VOA's Michael Bowman in Miami, Florida. 
Immigration and Naturalization Commissioner Doris Meissner and Florida 
Governor Lawton Chiles signed the migration agreement in the state 
capital, Tallahassee. Under the accord, the federal government bears 
primary responsibility for responding to a mass exodus of rafters 
from Haiti, Cuba or elsewhere bound for the state of Florida. INS 
spokesman Andrew Luberes says the agreement stipulates federal authorities 
may call upon state and local governments for assistance in dealing 
with a crisis with the federal government paying for most, if not 
all, of the costs. INS, as the lead federal agency, will coordinate 
responsive law enforcement operations and the state will be reimbursed 
for authorized expenses incurred. In 1994, Florida declared a state 
of emergency amid what Governor Chiles described as an inadequate 
federal response to an exodus of thousands of Cuban rafters into the 
Florida Straits. The INS says it has no information indicating another 
mass departure is imminent from either Cuba or Haiti, but federal 
and state officials say it makes sense to be prepared. In addition 
to periodic mass migrations, Florida receives a steady flow of immigrant. 
State officials say the cost of providing social services to wave 
after wave of new arrivals is staggering. INS spokesman Luberes says 
the accord signed in Tallahassee covers only crisis operations, and 
is not a commitment by the federal government to pay for all local 
costs associated with immigration. This is for an emergency. This 
is what we and Florida will do together when there's a mass influx 
of aliens. This does not deal with the normal assimilation of immigrants 
or all our efforts to combat illegal immigration. Florida officials 
say concerns about sudden mass migrations in no way reflect an anti-immigrant 
bias or a discounting of the contributions made by generations of 
newcomers to the state. Michael Bowman, VOA NEWS, Miami. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>