<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981021.0600.0882 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cuban President Fidel Castro has admitted he sent Cubans to spy on 
the United States. Mr. Castro also accuses the U.S. government of 
spying on his country. President Castro's comments were made to the 
U.S. television network CNN, and come one month after 10 suspected 
Cuban spies were arrested in Miami, Florida. VOA's Michael Bowman 
reports. President Castro says Cuba has dispatched what he termed 
Cuban citizens to the United States to infiltrate exile groups that 
oppose his government. Interviewed by CNN while attending the Ibero-American 
summit in Portugal, the Cuban leader action is justified given what 
he called the substantial espionage capabilities of the United States. 
He went on to accuse Washington of having spies in Cuba, a charge 
that has been dismissed by U.S. officials. Of the 10 suspected Cuban 
spies arrested last month in south Florida, five have pleaded guilty 
to acting as unregistered agents in the United States. Among other 
things, they are accused of trying to infiltrate U.S. military bases. 
Their detention constituted the largest roundup of suspected Cuban 
spies since the 1959 Cuban revolution. In the interview, President 
Castro denied his agents tried to penetrate U.S. military installations, 
saying his government was seeking information regarding any possible 
terrorist attacks against Cuba by exile groups. He said he has little 
interest in U.S. strategic affairs, adding he does not believe the 
United States plans direct aggression against his country. President 
Castro's open acknowledgment of spying on the United States is unusual. 
Harry Vandon, professor of international affairs at the University 
of South Florida, says few leaders speak openly about their nation's 
espionage activities. What is interesting is that he would do that. 
Oftentimes, political leaders just tend to ignore it or deny it when 
confronted. Professor Vandon compares Mr. Castro's admission of maintaining 
spies in Florida with President Dwight Eisenhower's admission in 1960 
that the United States had been flying over the former Soviet Union 
with the U2 spy plane. Also on the CNN interview, the Cuban leader 
spoke about President Clinton, calling him "highly intelligent" and 
"well educated." Mr. Castro said Cuba is open to discuss any matter 
with the United States without preconditions, but added that the current 
sex and perjury scandal in Washington appears to have put the Cuba 
issue on the back burner. Michael Bowman, VOA NEWS, Miami. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>