<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981102.1830.1131 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We'll take "A closer look" this week at service by which we mean the 
kind of service that people do or do not get from other people. In 
a service economy, which increasingly America has become, one might 
think that personal service was even more value than it has been in 
the past. But it does not seem to be the case, at least one survey 
we looked at finds people reporting customer satisfaction in general 
falling every year for the last four years. Denise Ettinger says she 
knows all about bad service. I feel like I've been taken advantage 
of by companies that don't seem to want to back up the products that 
they are selling, and even if they do provide a customer service, 
they don't have qualified service technicians. There was the $999 
stove she bought. I had a problem with this oven for approximately 
four years, and I had to replace the oven with another model. And 
they wouldn't come and take it away. They just left it here, sitting 
in my hallway, taking up all this space. And the $150 garage door 
opener that didn't work. In that case service was so inconsistent. 
They've sent about six or seven repairmen. One person suggested that 
I put a surge protector on, and then the next serviceman that they 
sent said, "why do you have this on here?" Maybe Denise Ettinger is 
unlucky. But not according to Texas A&M professor Leonard Berry. I 
give service in America a C-minus. Professor Berry teaches a class 
on service. He says that as the number of complaints rise, there's 
a message for america's corporations -- It's good business. Companies 
make more money that deliver good service. In the '50s and '60s, people 
had more time, and service seemed so much better. But the experts 
say that in today's America, something else is missing. It's more 
than a business issue, improving service. It's more than a financial 
or economic issue. This is a quality of life issue, this is a central 
issue in American life today. Denise Ettinger agrees. I could be spending 
quality time with my children rather than sitting at my computer writing 
letters, or having to threaten them with an attorney's letter, or 
going to a better business bureau or the consumer advocates department. 
We all know she's not alone. But as ABC's JuJu Chang reports tonight, 
consumers actually may be bringing some of this on themselves. All 
agents are busy, please hold. I'm sorry. Please remain on the line. 
In a time of corporate cost cutting, customer care is often the first 
thing to go. We have seen a transformation from flabby inefficiency 
to lean mean machine, and the machine is is now a little too mean. 
Customers complain that airlines are the meanest of all. They cut 
meals service and saved roughly $100 million a year. Since the '70s, 
legroom has shrunk by three inches to squeeze in more passengers. 
It's hideous, it seems more and more, it's way too crowded. Overall, 
customer satisfaction has dropped stea claes fornell. They have replaced 
people and put machines in instead. Banks cut one in every ten tellers 
in the past decade, but it's not just corporate downsizing that's 
doing away with the human touch. Banks are also trying to please their 
customers, who want access to their money any time, any place. Please 
enter your card number now. In addition to convenience, consumers 
also want the lowest prices. We'd like the butterball Turkey. Which 
is why no-frills discount stores are so popular. Our shopping priorities 
have helped revolutionize the way companies tailor their service. 
We are, in fact, saying to the companies, "look, what we really care 
about is the low prices and we'll tolerate the lower service." So 
bargain hunters are in part to blame for the erosion of service. But 
there's another explanation, a healthy economy? Ideally you never 
want pizza on a rack waiting for delivery people, but I can't find 
enough people. Frank meeks says when the economy was bad, he'd get 
hundreds of overqualified job seekers. 1629 -- Now he's had to sweeten 
the pay and benefits just to find a few good delivery men. Everybody's 
having a tough time in finding enough people, and when you don't have 
enough people, in a dominos business, or in an office situation, it's 
tougher to have great service. So if the wait seems longer, the assistance, 
less courteous, you're right. But in some ways, you asked for it. 
I need a pickup. JuJu Chang, ABC News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>