<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981102.0955 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Overwhelmed by death and chaos, Central American officials on Monday 
estimated more than 7,000 people died in floods and mudslides triggered 
by Hurricane Mitch. As many as 1,500 people were buried near this 
town in northwest Nicaragua when the crater lake of the Casitas Volcano 
collapsed, sending a wall of mud and debris onto villages below. ``It 
looked like a line of helicopters flying really low and coming at 
us. You could see houses, trees, everything being covered,'' said 
Ricardo Antonio Garcia, a 23-year-old farmer whose leg was amputated 
after being crushed in the mudslide. Nicaraguan Vice President Enrique 
Bolanos said the slide apparently killed 1,000 to 1,500 people and 
that some 600 other people died elsewhere in the country. ``We perhaps 
will never know how many people died,'' he said. In neighboring Honduras, 
``more than 5,000 people'' probably died, Dimas Alonzo, operations 
chief for the National Emergency Committee, told a local radio station. 
He said the exact number would never be known. Many parts of Honduras 
remained cut off almost a week after Mitch barreled into the Bay Island 
of Guanaja with 180 mph (290 kph) winds. The storm pounded across 
the isthmus, dropping up to 25 inches (63 centimeters) of rain in 
a six-hour period, before dissipating Monday in southern Mexico. The 
president of Honduras told CNN's Spanish-language network the flooding 
was so extensive that 70 percent of the upcoming harvests had been 
lost. ``There are many hundreds of dead,'' President Carlos Flores 
Facusse told CNN. ``There are bodies that are floating in the rivers'' 
and people on rooftops awaiting rescue, he said. AP photographer Victor 
Caivano, who visited Guanaja, said only 10 of the 146 houses in Mangrove 
Bight survived the storm, which hovered over the island for two days. 
The island, where flowers once abounded, was a desolate gray, with 
naked sticks of trees jutting out of the mud. Virtually all of Honduras 
suffered flooding, from the lowland marshes on the Atlantic Coast 
to the mountains, hills and plateaus of the interior. Floodwaters 
receded in the Honduran capital of Tegucigalpa on Monday, but some 
residents carried machetes and guns because of reports that looters 
with automatic rifles had attacked several houses. All four bridges 
across the Rio Choluteca, which splits the city of 800,000 people, 
were damaged and remained out of service Monday. Many victims have 
waited days without aid. In Chinandega, about 50 miles (80 kilometers) 
northwest of the Nicaraguan capital, Managua, Garcia said relatives 
pulled him from the debris after the mudslide Friday. He and 40 others 
were taken to a one-room, hilltop shack overlooking the village of 
Rolando Rodriguez. ``We thought that help would come but it never 
did,'' Garcia said. He said a 3-year-old girl beside him was so badly 
injured she could not move. ``When she asked me for water, I would 
drink some and give it to her from my mouth.'' By the time rescuers 
finally arrived Sunday, three of the injured had died. But the 3-year-old 
girl survived. Miguel Rostran Laguna, 42, who was in a hospital bed 
beside Garcia, said that from the door of the shack, ``All you could 
see was mud where the village had been. Nothing is left of Rolando 
Rodriguez.'' It was unclear how many residents of Rolando Rodriguez 
and nearby villages had escaped. By early Monday, soldiers had found 
360 bodies, army spokesman Capt. Milton Sandoval said. The international 
Red Cross on Monday tripled its appeal for assistance to those hit 
by Mitch, to dlrs 7.4 million. In Washington, President Clinton said 
the U.S. government was providing dlrs 2 million in food, medicine, 
water and other emergency relief supplies. ``We'll be looking at what 
else we can do,'' Clinton said. At least one rescue effort led to 
additional deaths: the mayor of the Honduran capital and three others 
died Sunday in a helicopter crash while surveying flood damage. Tegucigalpa 
Mayor Cesar Castellanos, 49, had been seen as a likely presidential 
candidate in 2001 elections. Officials in neighboring El Salvador 
were assessing the impact of floods caused by the storm. The National 
Emergency Committee listed 74 dead, 106 missing and 27,000 homeless. 
But its own regional affiliate in San Miguel province reported 125 
dead there alone. Guatemala reported storm-related 33 deaths. Mexico 
reported one. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>