<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981102.0426 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat agreed Monday to a request by Israeli 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to postpone the start of their land-for-security 
agreement by several days. Netanyahu said earlier in the day that 
the 12-week agreement could not be implemented until it has been ratified 
by his Cabinet and the Israeli parliament. The agreement was to have 
taken effect at midnight, but the Israeli Cabinet will only to discuss 
it on Tuesday, with no date set for a vote. Parliament will not vote 
on the agreement until next week. As part of the agreement signed 
Oct. 23, Israel is to withdraw from 13 percent of the West Bank over 
12 weeks, with each phase accompanied by Palestinian security measures. 
In the first week, no major Israeli steps are required. The Palestinians 
are to outline their plan for fighting Islamic militants to the United 
States, and several Israeli-Palestinian committees are to begin meeting. 
Arafat said he received a call from Netanyahu on Monday. ``He asked 
me for some days to delay implementation of what had been agreed upon,'' 
Arafat told reporters in the West Bank town of Ramallah. Asked whether 
he agreed, Arafat said: ``Yes.'' U.S. officials said that despite 
the delay, the timetable should not be disrupted. ``It is the U.S. 
position that the schedule would be unaffected,'' said the U.S. Embassy 
spokesman, Larry Schwartz. In new tension in traditionally Arab east 
Jerusalem, meanwhile, Israeli police scuffled with a senior Palestinian 
Authority official, Faisal Husseini, and his bodyguards who were protesting 
the construction of a Jewish enclave in the Palestinian neighborhood 
of Ras al-Amud. Police clubbed the bodyguards as they clung to Husseini, 
the top Palestinian official in Jerusalem. One Palestinian was wrestled 
to the ground and screamed in pain as a police officer squeezed his 
head. ``It is forbidden for Israel to take unilateral actions,'' Husseini 
said, breathing quickly after the confrontation with the police officers. 
Husseini was referring to a standing U.S. request that both sides 
refrain from creating facts on the ground. The United States has been 
trying to get Israel to stop the expansion of Jewish settlements in 
the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Washington also wants to avoid a unilateral 
declaration of statehood by the Palestinians in May 1999, when the 
five-year period of Palestinian autonomy ends. The Israeli daily Haaretz 
said Monday that the United States believes it has obtained a verbal 
assurance from Netanyahu that Israel would not engage in a ``substantial'' 
expansion of settlements. Netanyahu denied the report, saying Israeli 
would keep building to accommodate the natural population growth in 
the settlements, but would not establish new communities. On Monday, 
work continued on the expansion of Kiryat Arba, a settlement of 6,000 
residents just outside the tense, divided West Bank town of Hebron. 
Workers were paving roads and working on the utilities for a 200-apartment 
neighborhood, said the mayor of Kiryat Arba, Zvi Katzover. In other 
developments Monday, Palestinian police identified a 19-year-old Hamas 
activist as the suicide bomber in last week's attack on an Israeli 
convoy in the Gaza Strip. The assailant was Suhib Timraz, a resident 
of the Jebaliya refugee camp, said the commander of the Palestinian 
security forces, Brig. Gen. Ghazi Jabali. The attack killed an Israeli 
soldier and the assailant, but 40 Israeli school children in the convoy 
escaped unharmed. On Sunday, a leaflet by the Hamas military wing, 
Izzedine al Qassam, made unprecedented threats against Arafat, saying 
he had ``reached the point of treason'' by arresting more than 100 
Hamas activists in response to Thursday's suicide bombing. Arafat 
dismissed the threats with a wave of the hand. ``It's not the first 
time and won't be the last. You know that I have faced many things 
like that. I don't care,'' said Arafat who has survived several attempts 
on his life. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>