<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981102.0471 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The death toll in an attack on a remote northeastern Kenyan settlement 
now stands at 142, a district official said Monday. North Eastern 
Provincial Commissioner Maurice Makhanu said another 34 graves had 
been found over the weekend after the Oct. 24-25 attack at Bagala 
about 200 kilometers (125 miles) west of Wajir. He said 59 people 
were still missing, and seven had been hospitalized in Wajir with 
serious injuries. It was not clear how many bodies were in each of 
the newly discovered graves. Some of the graves found earlier contained 
as many as five bodies. Makhanu said an earlier decision to open all 
the hastily made graves to obtain a more precise death count had been 
overturned out of respect for the Muslim victims. A day after Muslim 
leaders criticized the government for failure to act following the 
attack, Makhanu said President Daniel arap Moi would visit the wounded 
Wednesday in Wajir, 240 kilometers (150 miles) north of Garissa, the 
provincial capital. Makhanu blamed rebels of the Oromo Liberation 
Front from neighboring Ethiopia for the attack, but he did not offer 
any proof. At the same time, he said he did not rule out clan-based 
banditry as the cause of the attack. Conflicts over scarce grazing 
land and access to water in arid northeastern Kenya are not uncommon 
among the pastoralist people who live there. In the capital, Nairobi, 
the daily East African Standard chided the government for its delay 
in explaining the cause of the attack which the newspaper said ``has 
created room for rumors and a number of other wild theories...'' During 
a peaceful demonstration in Nairobi Monday, North Eastern Province 
student leader Abdille Yussuf Mohamed said the government has to protect 
all its people, ``otherwise you exclude that part of Kenya.'' On Sunday, 
members of the Supreme Council of Kenya Muslims criticized government 
neglect of the region and opposed exhumation of the bodies, saying 
it would be an insult to Muslims whose religion does not permit it. 
SUPKEM deputy secretary general Ibrahim Lethome said the government 
would do better to mobilize security personnel to rescue the kidnapped 
and recover stolen livestock. Makhanu said the attackers had been 
seen herding the 1,785 head of cattle and 2,075 camels in neighboring 
Eastern Province. He said military helicopters and soldiers had been 
dispatched from Garissa and Wajir to capture the animals. In a fax 
to news agencies late last week, the Oromo Liberation Front denied 
any role in the attack which it said pitted members of the Boran and 
Gabra tribes against Kenyan ethnic Somalis of the Degodia sub-clan. 
Instead, the OLF said, the attack was a continuation of an earlier 
conflict fostered between the Borana and Degodia by the Ethiopian 
government in southwestern Ethiopia, the home of the Oromo people, 
who are the largest ethnic group in Ethiopia. ``The Ethiopian agents 
who instigated the conflict in Ethiopia in 1997 managed to extend 
it to Kenyan territory,'' the statement said. Borders drawn by colonial 
powers cut across ethnic lines in Ethiopia, Somalia and Kenya The 
OLF seeks independence from Ethiopia for the southern Oromia region. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>