<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981102.0431 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a sign of new cooperation, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat on 
Monday agreed to a request by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
to postpone the start of their land-for-security agreement by serveral 
days. Netanyahu, in turn, said he would try to stick to the timetable 
of the 12-week agreement and carry out the first troop pullback in 
the West Bank as close to the original date of Nov. 16 as possible. 
While the leaders compromised, tensions grew between the two sides 
in traditionally Arab east Jerusalem. Israeli police scuffled with 
a senior Palestinian Authority official, Faisal Husseini, and his 
bodyguards who were protesting the construction of a Jewish enclave 
in the Palestinian neighborhood of Ras al-Amud. Police clubbed the 
bodyguards as they clung to Husseini. One Palestinian was wrestled 
to the ground and screamed in pain as a police officer squeezed his 
head. The peace agreement was to take effect at midnight Monday, or 
exactly 10 days after it was signed by Netanyahu and Arafat at the 
White House. However, Netanyahu said Monday that he could not start 
implementation until the agreement has been ratified by his Cabinet 
and by Israel's parliament. The Cabinet is to begin its debate on 
Tuesday, but it is not clear when it will vote. The Israeli parliament 
session on the accord is scheduled for Nov. 11-12. As part of the 
agreement, Israel is to withdraw from 13 percent of the West Bank 
over 12 weeks, with each phase accompanied by Palestinian security 
measures, such as confiscation of weapons. Netanyahu said in a statement 
that in the first two weeks, the Palestinians would have to take a 
series of steps, such as presenting their security work plan to the 
United States. Israel's first real test will come two weeks into the 
accord when 2 percent of the West Bank are to be transferred from 
sole Israeli control to shared rule with the Palestinians and another 
7.1 percent are handed over to sole Palestinian control. ``If the 
agreement is approved by the Cabinet and the Knesset, we will be able 
to abide by the (withdrawal) date stated at the White House (16/11/98), 
or a few days later at the most,'' the statement said. Arafat said 
he received a call from Netanyahu on Monday. ``He asked me for some 
days to delay implementation of what had been agreed upon,'' Arafat 
told The Associated Press in the West Bank town of Ramallah. Asked 
whether he agreed, Arafat said: ``Yes.'' As part of the agreement, 
the United States has urged both sides to refrain from unilateral 
actions, such as expanding Jewish settlements and declaring Palestinian 
statehood unilaterally in May at the end of the five-year period of 
Palestinian autonomy. The Israeli daily Haaretz, citing U.S. diplomatic 
officials, said Monday that the United States believes it has obtained 
a verbal assurance from Netanyahu that Israel would not engage in 
a ``substantial'' expansion of settlements. Netanyahu denied the report, 
saying Israel would keep building to accommodate the natural population 
growth in the settlements, but would not establish new communities. 
On Monday, work continued on the expansion of Kiryat Arba, a settlement 
of 6,000 residents just outside the tense, divided West Bank town 
of Hebron. Workers were paving roads and working on the utilities 
for a 200-apartment neighborhood, said the mayor of Kiryat Arba, Zvi 
Katzover. In other developments Monday, Palestinian police identified 
a 19-year-old Hamas activist as the suicide bomber in last week's 
attack on an Israeli convoy in the Gaza Strip. The assailant was Suhib 
Timraz, a resident of the Jebaliya refugee camp, said the commander 
of the Palestinian security forces, Brig. Gen. Ghazi Jabali. The attack 
killed an Israeli soldier and the assailant, but 40 Israeli school 
children in the convoy escaped unharmed. On Sunday, a leaflet by the 
Hamas military wing, Izzedine al Qassam, made unprecedented threats 
against Arafat, saying he had ``reached the point of treason'' by 
arresting more than 100 Hamas activists in response to Thursday's 
suicide bombing. Arafat dismissed the threats with a wave of the hand. 
``It's not the first time and won't be the last. You know that I have 
faced many things like that. I don't care,'' said Arafat who has survived 
several attempts on his life. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>