<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981102.0241 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Defense attorneys for Malaysia's ousted deputy prime minister Anwar 
Ibrahim lost a crucial opening gambit in his corruption trial Monday. 
They contended that the jailed dissident's graft charges should be 
thrown out because the lower house of Parliament had repealed the 
special anti-corruption law before the criminal charges were filed 
against Anwar. High Court Judge Augustine Paul dismissed the defense 
strategy, saying that because the law was still under review by the 
upper house of Parliament, it was still on the books. The politically 
charged trial of Malaysia's one-time heir apparent began amid tight 
security and under the scrutiny of international human rights officials. 
Riot police armed with automatic rifles blocked some 200 supporters 
of Anwar from reaching the courthouse. Anwar faces five counts of 
corruption and five counts of illegal sex acts, charges he vehemently 
denies and says were cooked up to undermine his growing challenge 
to the 17-year leadership of Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad. Defense 
attorneys also called Monday for the judge to hold Mahathir in contempt 
of court for tainting the case by saying Anwar should be convicted. 
``You should hold this man for contempt,'' said Raja Aziz Addruse, 
who leads a team of nine defense lawyers. Mahathir was quoted in local 
papers as saying a conviction would help preserve racial harmony in 
the ethnically diverse Southeast Asian country by easing the growing 
unrest. Mahathir could be called as one of the 52 witnesses to testify 
against Anwar, lawyers said. ``His name is on the list. We believe 
he might be called,'' said Kamar Ainiah, a defense lawyer, after the 
hearing adjourned until Tuesday afternoon. Demonstrations in support 
of Anwar have been held regularly since his arrest Sept. 20. A full-scale 
riot broke out Oct. 24 when police fired tear gas at a mosque and 
people retaliated by throwing stones and bricks. ``I can't expect 
a fair trial,'' said Anwar, who was brought into the courtroom through 
an underground tunnel. He was pale and gaunt. His sister said he had 
lost nearly 20 pounds (9 kilograms) during the ordeal. ``I am in good 
health,'' he told reporters from the dock, where four policemen stood 
guard. He hugged his wife and children and was later seen sharing 
a candy bar with his wife, Azizah Ismail. He said prison life was 
not bad, relatively speaking. ``They don't harass and beat me up.'' 
The 51-year-old politician, who has called for political reforms and 
Mahathir's resignation, did not wear the neck brace he had sported 
during previous court appearances. He had said he was assaulted by 
police on his first night in custody, 18 days after Mahathir fired 
him. Paul began hearing arguments Monday about four counts of corruption. 
Anwar will be tried later for one more charge of abuse of power and 
five illegal sex acts. Mahathir, 72, said he fired his deputy on moral 
grounds because homosexual acts are illegal in Muslim-majority Malaysia. 
More than 100 reporters and international observers hoping to watch 
the legal proceedings milled about outside the court building. The 
High Court faces Independence Square, where several pro-Anwar protests 
have taken place. Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch were 
among the groups that sent representatives to the trial. ``We will 
totally monitor Anwar's trial to examine the nature and basis of evidence 
brought against him and to assess the proceedings in light of international 
standards on fair trial,'' said Amnesty's Mark Daly. Although the 
judge dismissed pleas by the defense to accord special status to observers, 
representatives of some rights groups were allowed to sit in the public 
gallery. Anwar faces a maximum of 14 years in prison for each of the 
corruption charges linked to his alleged abuse of power during his 
tenure from 1993 until his dismissal Sept. 2. Each illegal sex charge 
is punishable by 20 years in prison and a whipping with a rattan cane. 
On Nov. 14, the court will break for more than one week as Malaysia 
plays host to a meeting of 20 world leaders for the Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation forum. The trial was conducted partly in English and partly 
in the local Malay language. Paul had initially ruled that the trial 
would be conducted in English because of the large number of foreign 
observers and media. But last week, the chief justice ordered the 
trial to be conducted in the language of majority Malays. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>