<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981102.0728 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia (AP) _ U.S. envoy Christopher Hill met with top 
officials in Belgrade on Monday, trying to jump-start the stalled 
effort to get Serbs and ethnic Albanians to agree on a political settlement 
for Kosovo. Hill held separate talks with Serbian President Milan 
Milutinovic and European Union envoy Wolfgang Petritsch after arriving 
from the Macedonian capital Skopje. He plans to continue his shuttle 
diplomacy in Kosovo's capital Pristina on Tuesday. The U.S. ambassador 
to Macedonia, Hill is leading international efforts to bring the two 
sides closer to a political solution for the secessionist Serbian 
province, where hundreds of people have been killed this year in authorities' 
crackdown on militants. ``We continue to work with both sides, going 
back and forth,'' said Philip Reeker, Hill's spokesman, when asked 
about the status of talks. As part of last month's Kosovo peace deal, 
Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic pledged to reach a basic agreement 
by Monday with the ethnic Albanians on an interim settlement leading 
to self-rule. But most ethnic Albanians still prefer independence 
for Kosovo _ a southern province of Serbia, the dominant republic 
in Yugoslavia. Reeker said the West had never looked at Monday as 
a deadline. ``This (promise) was to show their compliance and that 
they are actively pursuing negotiations,'' he said. He said direct 
talks between Serbs and ethnic Albanians are not merited until the 
two sides get closer to a settlement. In Kosovo, temperatures dropped 
to near freezing and a stiff wind Monday brought the first winter 
weather for refugees struggling to return to their homes. People along 
a central road north of Malisevo, 40 kilometers (25 miles) southwest 
of Pristina, complained that harassment by Serb police prevented them 
from moving back to their villages in the region. Ahmet Morina, 25, 
drove 13 family members huddled under plastic sheeting on a tractor-pulled 
cart to a relative's house because police fired shots at them and 
took their 30 cattle, killing three, the day before at Quka Goareve 
village. In nearby Bubavec, relatives of Murat Kryezim, 53, told how 
they finally were able to return to the family home on Saturday to 
collect his bones, which had been lying outside his house since a 
shell killed him during a Serb attack on July 28. ``We tried a few 
times, but police would shoot and keep us away,'' said Kryezim's niece, 
Sadbere, next to a canvas bag containing his remains. The Kosovo Information 
Center, close the province's ethnic Albanian leadership, claimed that 
the Serb military on Monday shelled the village of Jablanica, 55 kilometers 
(35 miles) southwest of Pristina, for the third straight day. Meanwhile, 
efforts to put as many as 2,000 international monitors on the ground 
in Kosovo to verify the status of Milosevic's promises continued proceeding 
slowly. The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which 
is putting the mission together, expects to have most of the monitors 
in place by year's end. The arrival of about 50 Britons and 70 Americans 
in Kosovo later this week will increase the force's size to more than 
200, OSCE officials said. Tony Lloyd, Britain's minister of state, 
met with top OSCE officials in Vienna, Austria, to discuss the state 
of the Kosovo mission and see if anything can be done to speed up 
deployment. He said afterward that the monitors' safety is the top 
priority. In Pristina, a statement from the Kosovo Liberation Army 
said the KLA had met over the weekend with international diplomats 
who eventually will become part of the verification mission. ``Both 
teams agreed that there can be no movement forward without KLA's participation 
in the peace-establishing process and serious negotiations,'' the 
rebels said in a statement sent to ethnic Albanian media. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>