<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981102.0734 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
South African troops weren't sufficiently prepared when they entered 
Lesotho for a military intervention last month, their commanders told 
a committee in parliament Monday. Meanwhile, a convoy carrying 800 
South African soldiers rumbled out of the neighboring kingdom on Monday, 
reducing troop strength of the intervention force by almost one-quarter. 
The withdrawal came after South Africa's armed forces chief, Gen. 
Siphiwe Nyanda, announced the situation in Lesotho had stabilized. 
South African troops crossed into the mountainous kingdom on Sept. 
22 to quell an army mutiny and unrest linked to the May election, 
which the ruling party won by a landslide but which opposition parites 
claimed were rigged. Botswanan soldiers joined the intervention, waged 
on behalf of the Southern African Development Community, a day later. 
Dozens of people died in what commanders had thought would be a peaceful 
intervention. Deputy Defense Minister Ronnie Kasrils said the intervention 
had prevented a civil war in Lesotho. But Nyanda said the SADC must 
establish security and military guidelines for the carrying out of 
such operations in the future. A lack of time for proper planning 
and practice drills led to the operation's ``weakness,'' South Africa's 
joint operations chief, Lt. Gen. Deon Ferreira, told parliament's 
foreign affairs and defense committees. Commanders on the ground had 
complained that they didn't have the proper weapons or enough troops 
at the start of the mission. Instead of a peacekeeping operation, 
the intervention turned into a mini-war because the South Africans 
hadn't announced to Lesotho's people they were coming. Lesotho troops 
_ both mutineers and loyalists _ thought they were being invaded and 
fought the South Africans. During the combat outside the capital, 
Maseru, mobs went on a looting and arson spree that destroyed most 
of its business district. The intervention has cost South Africa's 
army more than 24 million rands (dlrs 4.2 million) and has depleted 
its already strained budget, the commanders said. Monday's withdrawal 
reduced the number of South African and Botswanan soldiers in Lesotho 
from 3,500 to 2,700. No timetable was set for the withdrawal of the 
rest of the forces. Nyanda said the intervention force troops needed 
to know what to do with Lesotho Defense Force weapons currrently under 
their control and what strategy to follow with regard to disarmament 
of the country's civilian population. Lesotho Prime Minister Pakalitha 
Mosisili told the National Assembly in Maseru that he requested the 
military intervention because Lesotho's armed forces had failed to 
maintain law and order. Opposition parties _ which received 39 percent 
of the vote in the May election but only one of 80 seats in parliament 
_ have reportedly agreed to a proposed interim committee which will 
prepare for new elections.The committee is also tasked with proposing 
a more democratic and representative electoral system. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>