<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981102.0174 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Monday that the land-for-security 
agreement with the Palestinians will get off to a late start because 
Israel's Cabinet and parliament have not yet approved it. The agreement 
was to take effect Monday, but the Cabinet will only to discuss it 
on Tuesday, with no date set for a vote. Parliament will not vote 
on the agreement until next week. U.S. officials said that despite 
the delays, the timetable should not be disrupted. Under the plan, 
Israel is to withdraw from 13 percent of the West Bank over 12 weeks, 
with each phase accompanied by Palestinian security measures, such 
as the confiscation of illegal weapons. In the first week, no major 
Israeli steps are required. The Palestinians are to outline their 
plan for fighting Islamic militants to the United States, and several 
Israeli-Palestinian committees are to begin meeting. ``It is the U.S. 
position that the schedule would be unaffected,'' said the U.S. Embassy 
spokesman, Larry Schwartz. Netanyahu played down the importance of 
the delay. ``There conceivably could be a delay, but I think we can 
limit it to a technical delay of a few days. So I don't think there 
will be a problem,'' Netanyahu told reporters. The prime minister 
also said he was confident parliament would ratify the agreement, 
but appeared less certain about the backing of his Cabinet ministers. 
``I am sure the Knesset will approve it, assuming it passes the government,'' 
he said. Netanyahu said he was acting on the recommendations of the 
attorney general, Eliyakim Rubinstein. Earlier Monday, legislator 
Hanan Porat, an avowed opponent of the agreement, had asked Rubinstein 
to make a ruling on the issue. Netanyahu denied media reports that 
Israel had agreed to slow the expansion of Jewish settlements in the 
West Bank and Gaza Strip as part of the agreement with the Palestinians. 
Netanyahu said Israel would keep building to accommodate the natural 
population growth in the settlements, but would not establish new 
communities. On Monday, construction continued on the expansion of 
Kiryat Arba, a settlement of 6,000 residents just outside the tense, 
divided West Bank town of Hebron. Workers were paving roads and working 
on the utilities for a 200-apartment neighborhood, said the mayor 
of Kiryat Arba, Zvi Katzover. In other developments Monday, Palestinian 
police identified a 19-year-old Hamas activist as the suicide bomber 
in last week's attack on an Israeli convoy in the Gaza Strip. The 
assailant was Suhib Timraz, a resident of the Jebaliya refugee camp, 
said the commander of the Palestinian security forces, Brig. Gen. 
Ghazi Jabali. The attack killed an Israeli soldier and the assailant, 
but 40 Israeli school children in the convoy escaped unharmed. A Hamas 
leader, Ismail Hanieh, distanced the group from a leaflet in which 
the armed wing of Hamas, Izzedine al Qassam, made unprecedented threats 
against Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. In the leaflet, Izzedine 
al Qassam said Arafat had ``reached the point of treason'' by arresting 
more than 100 Hamas activists in response to Thursday's suicide bombing. 
Hanieh said the leaflet was not issued by Hamas. He said the group's 
policy is to avoid civil war at all costs. It is not unusual for Hamas 
to issue conflicting statements since the shadowy group is broken 
up into small cells that often don't know of each others' activities. 
Also Monday, lifted a 50-day blockade on Palestinian areas in a move 
described as a good-will gesture. Some 60,000 laborers will be permitted 
to return to their jobs in Israel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>