<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981102.0763 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At least 7,000 people may have died in Central America in floods and 
mudslides unleashed by Hurricane Mitch, officials in Nicaragua and 
Honduras said Monday. Dimas Alonzo, chief of operations for Honduras' 
National Emergency Committee, estimated at least 5,000 people died 
in his country. ``We will never know how many people died,'' he said 
on local radio. In northern Nicaragua, between 1,000 and 1,500 people 
were buried in a 32-square-mile (83-square-kilometer) area below the 
slopes of the Casita volcano, Vice President Enrique Bolanos said 
Sunday night. At least 600 more people were killed elsewhere in Nicaragua, 
Bolanos said. Earlier Monday, the International Red Cross said it 
was tripling the amount of assistance it is seeking for those hit 
by Mitch, to dlrs 7.4 million. ``It is almost impossible to get an 
overview of damage in this huge region, but help can't wait,'' said 
Santiago Gil, head of the Americas Department of the International 
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. Decomposing bodies 
protruded everywhere from mud let loose when an overflowing volcano 
crater caused a hillside to collapse and cover four villages in northern 
Nicaragua. Soldiers reached the area Sunday, two days after the catastrophe. 
They found 360 bodies, burying most where they lay because the rotting 
corpses posed a health threat, army spokesman Capt. Milton Sandoval 
said. A journalist who flew to the area on a military helicopter said 
a body _ sometimes just an arm sticking up out of the mud _ could 
be seen over a wide area. The stench of rotting flesh was almost unbearable. 
One resident, Francisco Manuel Pineda, sat on a tree trunk above what 
had been his village of El Porvenir _ 50 miles (80 kilometers) northwest 
of the capital, Managua _ and recounted what other survivors had told 
him: ``It was raining torrentially. They heard something like a fleet 
of helicopters, and within minutes an avalanche of mud, tree trunks 
and rocks wiped out everything,'' he said through tears. Pineda had 
left his village Friday morning to buy medicine. He hitched a ride 
with the military Sunday to see what was left of his world. There 
wasn't much. He found no sign of his house, his wife, his father, 
his mother, his brothers, his sisters or his sons. All were believed 
buried in the mud. ``We saw corpses everywhere. Hands, legs and the 
entire bodies of two girls who were decomposing in the mud,'' he said. 
``There were more than 60 corpses in plain view.'' It was unclear 
how many residents of the villages of El Porvenir, Versalles, Rolando 
Rodriguez and Santa Narcisa may have fled in time to avoid the mudslide. 
Dr. Marcos Espinosa said in a telephone interview that 126 survivors 
from the four villages had been treated at a hospital in nearby Chinandega 
for ``fractures and serious wounds'' that had become infected after 
the victims spent nearly two days in the mud. President Arnoldo Aleman 
declared three days of national mourning in what he said was the country's 
worst natural disaster since an earthquake killed 5,000 people in 
1972. Turmoil caused by the storm took additional lives Sunday, when 
the mayor of the Honduran capital and three others died in a helicopter 
crash while out surveying flood damage in that country. Tegucigalpa 
Mayor Cesar Castellanos, 49, had been seen as a likely presidential 
candidate in 2001 elections. And a C-47 cargo plane crashed Sunday 
in western Guatemala, killing 12 people aboard and injuring six. The 
accident may have been caused by bad weather associated with Mitch, 
airport officials in Guatemala City said. The plane apparently was 
operated by a Protestant missionary group with ties to the United 
States, but the victims' nationalities were not known. In all, Nicaragua 
reported 585 confirmed dead; Honduras, 246. El Salvador said 140 people 
died and Guatemala reported 33. Mexico reported one death from the 
hurricane. In the Caribbean, the U.S. Coast Guard widened a search 
for a tourist schooner with 31 crew members aboard that hasn't been 
heard from since Tuesday. Elsewhere Sunday, army rescue helicopters 
evacuated 52 famished and ailing men, women and children from San 
Francisco Libre, a Nicaraguan town on the northern banks of Managua 
Lake, 25 miles (40 kilometers) north of the capital. In that community 
alone, 1,600 families were left homeless. One survivor, Candido Mejia, 
58, was so weak he could barely give his name after he and his two 
children were airlifted to safety. Townspeople said they had to climb 
trees and onto roofs last week when the lake flooded the farming community. 
No deaths were reported, but many residents had not eaten for several 
days. Rescue workers left behind rice, corn, beans and other provisions 
before taking the sick to get medical care. By late Sunday, Mitch's 
winds, once near an astonishing 180 mph (289 kph), had dropped to 
30 mph (48 kph), and the storm _ now classified as a tropical depression 
_ was near Tapachula, on Mexico's southern Pacific coast. Mitch was 
moving west at 8 mph (13 kph) and was dissipating. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>