<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981102.0966 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
BELGRADE, Yugoslavia (AP) _ U.S. envoy Christopher Hill met with top 
officials in Belgrade on Monday, trying to jump-start the stalled 
effort to get Serbs and ethnic Albanians to agree on a political settlement 
for Kosovo. Hill held separate talks with Serbian President Milan 
Milutinovic and European Union envoy Wolfgang Petritsch. He plans 
to continue his shuttle diplomacy in Kosovo's capital, Pristina, on 
Tuesday. Hill, the U.S. ambassador to Macedonia, is leading international 
efforts to bring the two sides closer to a political solution for 
the secessionist Serbian province, where hundreds of people have been 
killed and an estimated 300,000 displaced this year in the Serb authorities' 
crackdown on militants. As part of last month's Kosovo peace deal, 
Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic pledged to reach a basic agreement 
by Monday with the ethnic Albanians on an interim settlement leading 
to self-rule. However, Hill said the West had never looked at Monday 
as a deadline. ``They indicated a willingness to try and reach an 
agreement by this date,'' Hill said of the Serbs' agreement last month. 
``But it was more an expression of a willingness to move ahead quickly.'' 
``Obviously an agreement depends on the willingness of the other side 
to move with the same date,'' he said. He characterized Monday's talks 
with Milutinovic as informal, saying they talked about a draft political 
settlement for Kosovo. In Kosovo, temperatures dropped to near freezing 
and a stiff wind brought the first winter weather for refugees struggling 
to return to their homes. People along a central road north of Malisevo, 
40 kilometers (25 miles) southwest of Pristina, complained that Serb 
police were preventing them from returning to their villages. Several 
reported that police shot at them when they attempted to return to 
family homes. The Kosovo Information Center, which has close connections 
to the province's ethnic Albanian leadership, claimed that the Serb 
military on Monday shelled the village of Jablanica, 55 kilometers 
(35 miles) southwest of Pristina, for the third straight day. Efforts 
to put as many as 2,000 international monitors on the ground in Kosovo 
proceeded slowly. The monitors will determine whether the Serb leadership 
is keeping its promises, including ending the crackdown and allowing 
refugees to return home. The Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe, which is putting the mission together, expects to have 
most of the monitors in place by year's end. The arrival of about 
50 Britons and 70 Americans in Kosovo later this week will increase 
the force's size to more than 200, OSCE officials said. Shaun Byrnes, 
head of the American observer team within the larger monitor contingent 
already in Kosovo, said the total U.S. observer presence in Yugoslavia 
now numbers 140, including those in Kosovo and the newer arrivals 
in Belgrade. He confirmed that the multinational observer mission 
in Kosovo has met frequently with the Kosovo Liberation Army, which 
has been at the forefront of the armed struggle for independence of 
the majority Albanian Kosovo province, to explain terms of the Oct. 
12 agreement mandating an end to hostilities. The threat of NATO airstrikes 
pressured government authorities to sign on to the agreement. In Paris 
on Monday, judicial officials said that a Brussels-based French NATO 
commander, Pierre Bunel, has been arrested for allegedly supplying 
information on the planned strikes to Serb authorities. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>