<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981102.0467 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some critics compare Inter Milan's recent woes to the sinking of the 
Titanic. Despite a star-studded roster featuring Brazilian superstar 
Ronaldo, the Milan powerhouse has tumbled to three consecutive Serie 
A defeats, including Sunday's humiliating 3-2 home loss to low-ranked 
Bari. The collapse has sparked violent protests by fans and put coach 
Gigi Simoni's job in serious jeopardy. ``The next two games will be 
decisive for Simoni's future,'' club president Massimo Moratti said 
following Sunday's defeat, which dropped Inter six points behind league 
leader Juventus of Turin after seven rounds. With a record of 3-1-3, 
the team is running nine points behind last season's pace. ``I'm bitterly 
disappointed as well as all Inter supporters for the poor performances 
and bad results,'' added Moratti, an oil industrialist who made huge 
investments in the last two years to strengthen the team. The big-spending 
policy resulted in a dlrs 27.1 million deficit in the last fiscal 
year. Simoni's future as Inter's coach will depend on the outcome 
of Wednesday's Champions League game against Spartak Moscow and Sunday's 
league match against crosstown rival AC Milan. Simoni, in his second 
season at Inter, is a conservative coach who never earned the full 
support of fans despite guiding Inter last season to the UEFA Cup 
title and a second-place finish in ther Serie A standings. Inter has 
allowed 12 goals in seven league games this season, including five 
in one match against Lazio of Rome. The 5-3 rout by Lazio started 
Inter's losing streak, which continued with a 1-0 loss to Turin's 
archrival Juventus and the upset by Bari. It's the first time since 
1994 that Inter has suffered three straight league defeats. In Italian 
sports dailies, Monday's headlines about Inter's loss to Bari were 
as big as the ones devoted to Michael Scumacher's and Ferrari's failure 
in the Japanese Grand Prix. ``Inter is like the Titanic,'' said the 
Milan sports daily Gazzetta dello Sport. Inter still is in the running 
for a quarterfinal berth in the Champions League, with 6 points in 
three matches. But its debut in the European competition, following 
a 10-year absence, was spoiled by a 2-0 loss to Real Madrid. Simoni 
has complained that injuries and post-World Cup fatigue of key players 
has prevented him from fielding the same team in consecutive games. 
Inter has especially suffered from the absence of Ronaldo, the key 
to Inter's sensational results last season. The young Brazilian striker, 
suffering from World Cup stress and tendinitis in both knees, has 
played only two full games and the second half against Bari so far. 
Though in questionable form, Ronaldo still scored three goals in league 
and cup action and led his team close to a last-minute miracle draw 
against Bari. The flashy Brazilian earned and converted a penalty, 
fed Francesco Colennese for Inter's second goal and nearly scored 
the equalizer in injury time. Italian veteran star Roberto Baggio, 
also troubled by a knee injury, is another long-time absentee from 
the starting lineup. France's World Cup player Youri Djorkaeff, Uruguayan 
Alvaro Recoba and Brazilian Ze Elias are all sidelined with injuries. 
``As soon as we can play at full force, I'm sure that Inter will fight 
back,'' said Ronaldo, the league's top scorer with 25 goals in his 
first season in the Italian league. However, Inter fans seemed to 
have lost their patience already. They hurled eggs at the bus taking 
Inter players to the San Siro stadium for an Italian Cup game last 
week and booed and jeered the players following Sunday's defeat. And 
time seems to be running out for Simoni. Italian media are already 
speculating about his possible successor _ former AC Milan coach Fabio 
Capello. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>