<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981102.1600.1493 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The life of queen Elizabeth I is heading to theaters with a little 
help from the history books, and a lot of effort from makeup artists. 
Bill Tush goes behind the scenes. You are still my Elizabeth. I am 
not your Elizabeth. I am no man's Elizabeth. She was the first queen 
Elizabeth, whose reign lasted four decades in what was referred to 
as the golden age of England. She brought culture, peace and prosperity 
to her nation. And now, she is brought to the big screen with the 
help of some movie magic. Every morning, the makeup was about 2 1/2 
hours or so. I'd often fall asleep in the makeup trailer and wake 
up and go, "oh, my god!" You know, because it was -- you know, I did 
look a little bit like an alien, because they sort of had bleached 
my eyelashes and shaved my hairline. And, you know, my social life 
was just appalling. Don't be fooled by the look of the actress or 
the film. This historical tale is extremely contemporary. It had such 
a curious number of elements to it, you know. Two Australian actors 
in principal roles of a fundamentally very English story, with an 
Indian director, and an extraordinary, like, cross-section of the 
best of British, to the French actors. It could have made a very curious 
kind of a salad, you know? Adding to that salad, a virtual unknown 
in the lead role. And according to the director, a bit of fate that 
brought her there. One day, I was sitting in the producers' office, 
and they were running a Promo reel of "Oscar and lucinda." And I'm 
sitting here, and I suddenly looked at this, and I saw Kate in that 
half a minute promo reel, and I knew why I was not supposed to cast 
anybody else. Secrets, madam! You have no secrets! The world knows 
that lord Robert visits your Chambers at night. At the heart of the 
story is the question of how much personal sacrifice a leader must 
make in order to rule effectively. We do start to get resonances with 
now, because people are intrigued and fascinated, almost obsessed, 
by the notion of the private lives of great public personalities. 
And this is a fantastic story on that level. I do find it fascinating 
that when we were in England last week, people were making parallels 
between Elizabeth's situation with the elizabethan paparazzi, I guess, 
and Diana. And now we're sort of in the states, people are talking 
about Clinton and how his personal life is up for grabs rather than 
his political platforms, which is kind of, I guess, a similar situation 
that Elizabeth found herself in. Sometimes, history replays itself 
on the screen of life, too. Bill Tush, "CNN Entertainment News," New 
York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>