<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981102.1830.0735 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
nbc news "in depth" -- election eve and the struggle for power in 
the u.s. senate. republicans, already in the majority, are hoping 
to win enough races tomorrow to give them a sharper political edge. 
maybe even to withstand filibusters. tomorrow, voters will cast ballots 
in 34 senate races. republicans now occupy 55 seats. they hope to 
add five more, giving them control of 60 seats -- the exact number 
needed to stop a favorite delaying tactic of the minority party, the 
filibuster. tonight, two of the most hotly contested races. where 
liberal democrats are trying to hold onto power. we begin our "in 
depth" coverage with nbc's kelly o'donnell in california. barbara 
boxer calls it "the race of her life." are you ready to exercise your 
power tomorrow? are you ready? the year's second most expensive senate 
contest. tonight, boxer, one of the senate's most liberal democrats 
in a nail-biter of a fight. i'm used to it because every race i've 
had has been very hard. her challenger -- a relative political unknown 
republican state treasurer matt fong, campaigning today in fresno. 
tomorrow we're going to send her packing. hi, everybody. boxer's reputation 
-- feisty, even too aggressive. staunchly pro-choice, an advocate 
for gun control. this race is about issues because matt fong and i 
don't agree on any of them. fong, described as wooden, mild-mannered, 
low-key, surprising many here by giving the incumbent a serious challenge. 
she's an extremist. she's far out to the left. fong's critics counter 
that he is too far to the right. they point to fong's $50,000 donation 
to a conservative religious group that opposes gay and abortion rights. 
still, republicans, nationally, believe they can win. this is a very 
important race for the country and california is a kind of indicator 
for how the rest of america is going to move. early on, boxer's political 
and family ties to the president were a real concern. her daughter 
married hillary rodham clinton's brother. now she says her loyalty 
to mr. clinton hasn't hurt. boxer raised millions during campaign 
visits from the president and mrs. clinton. outspent on tv, fong turned 
on the attack, airing his first negative ads this past weekend. barbara 
boxer -- too liberal and ineffective for california. tonight, boxer 
knows it's a race too close to call. her campaign spent $15 million 
to fight and now must count on voter turnout to win. kelly o'donnell, 
nbc news, los angeles. this is gwen ifill in wisconsin, where the 
election may turn simply on money. senator russ feingold spent six 
years trying to convince his colleagues that big money corrupts politics. 
i could've had $10 million. most of it would've been from out of state. 
senators usually reap millions of dollars in special interest money 
for their campaigns. not feingold. standing, he said, on principle, 
he refused most outside money. but that decision may prove his undoing. 
his opponent, able to match him dollar for dollar, has made this a 
neck-and-neck campaign, leaving feingold, in the campaign's final 
days, in serious trouble. everybody said the same thing to me six 
years ago they're saying now -- "you're gonna lose if you don't go 
negative. you're gonna lose if you don't take more money." and they 
were wrong! national democrats tried to help by paying for tv ads. 
feingold stopped them. even as republican challenger mark neumann 
was happily accepting outside aid, ridiculing feingold for obscure 
budget votes -- sorry, no more tax dollars for russian monkeys. and 
attacking feingold on abortion, flag-burning and gun control -- they 
have a right to know feingold's on the wrong side of these issues. 
the result -- a classic dead heat. wisconsin has become a national 
test case for campaign finance reform. if feingold doesn't win tomorrow, 
the democrats will lose a senate seat, and any chance of ending the 
political money chase. a money chase that once seemed unseemly in 
wisconsin, the land of clean campaigns. i think, in wisconsin, we've 
always felt we're immune from the excesses and abuses of big money 
and big politics in washington. but i think this race is showing us 
that we're not. even feingold has benefited from the very money he 
promised not to take. as outside groups poured $779,000 into the state 
to attack neumann, whose surprising strength has attracted national 
political support. but feingold has his friends, too. some things, 
money just can't buy. gwen ifill, nbc news, appleton, wisconsin. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>