<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0353 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Boston, of course, would never do anything so utterly uncouth as to 
boom. But consider: Big cranes are in such demand here that builders 
have been looking for them as far west as the Mississippi. Architects 
are in short supply. Downtown commercial real estate has the lowest 
vacancy rate in the country, local monitors say, and the highest average 
rental rates, topping even San Francisco's and New York City's. Hotel 
rooms are often so difficult to get that reservation clerks might 
as well be Cabots or Lodges, for all the airs they put on. Consider, 
too, that for the first time in more than five years new office towers 
are going up in downtown Boston, with one planned to rise higher than 
the landmark Prudential Center. Warnings of the dreaded ``Manhattanization'' 
of downtown can again be heard. And this: Boston, its face already 
changing with the $11 billion highway project known as the ``Big Dig'' 
is embarking on a new project so grandiose it has been compared to 
the creation of the graceful Back Bay section a century ago: development 
of the 1,000-acre Seaport district in South Boston, the last great 
chunk of convenient empty land on the water. (Water that was once 
the filthiest urban harbor in the country and is now, thanks to a 
nearly complete $4billion clean-up, possibly the cleanest.) The city, 
said the Boston Redevelopment Authority director, Thomas O'Brien, 
using the local vernacular, ``is wicked hot.'' For some, it is already 
too hot. In legendary working-class neighborhoods like the Italian 
North End and traditionally Irish South Boston, apartment rental and 
sale prices have nearly doubled in the last two years, as white-collar-wearers 
have invaded and some blue collars have been squeezed out. And advocates 
for the poorest Bostonians worry about still-greater crowding and 
displacement. But overall, Boston's resurgence is seen by many urban 
experts as spearheading a hopeful trend among aging northern cities 
emerging from decades of decay. Planners talk about an ``urban surge'' 
or ``comeback cities,'' spurred by factors as varied as plummeting 
crime rates, the strong national economy, the return of empty-nesters 
to walkable lives and the disdain that many young, educated professionals 
feel for the suburbs they grew up in. They qualify carefully. The 
greatest population and employment growth is still occurring in the 
suburbs and ``exurbs,'' farther out, and many urban cores continue 
to crumble, losing people and jobs. Many parents still spurn urban 
school systems. And of course it is sunny cities like Atlanta, Phoenix 
and Las Vegas that have been booming loudest. But from Chicago to 
Cleveland to Pittsburgh to Baltimore, urban scholars also note mounting 
signs of a popular willingness _ even eagerness _ to live and work 
and play in once-shunned downtowns and centers, and of both public 
and private willingness to invest there. ``I think the traditional 
downtowns of older cities are now being kind of re-imagined by people,'' 
said Alex Krieger, chairman of Harvard's department of urban planning 
and design. ``Instead of places where you get blue-collar jobs, which 
is the mid-century view of the city, they're being re-assimilated 
in the consciousness of Americans as places of culture, leisure, entertainment, 
bar-hopping and service-sector jobs.'' ``This is one of the most interesting 
changes in turn-of-the-century American society,'' he said. ``There's 
this amazing shift from the city as a place where you live because 
you can't afford to live anywhere else, to a place where you go to 
have fun.'' And among resurging eastern and midwestern cities, some 
urban scholars say, Boston seems to be coming back the best, helped 
by huge public projects but also by a right-place-right-time position 
in the strong economy. In a way, such a high-stepping comeback seems 
only fair. The 20th-biggest city in the United States, with nearly 
600,000 people, Boston suffered disproportionately in the last recession. 
As New England hit the worst economic times of any region since the 
Depression, the Boston-area overbuilding of the mid-1980's turned, 
by the end of the decade, to speculative despair. It took until last 
year to regain all the recession jobs lost and sop up the extra office 
space. But now, history seems to be smiling again on the intellectual 
and cultural peacock of a town that calls itself The Hub and the Athens 
of America. In a traditional toast, Boston is also called ``The Home 
of the Bean and the Cod''; but now at just the right time, it is more 
of a home to the bit and the doc _ a capital of financial services, 
medicine and high technology, all fields that have particularly thrived 
in this thriving economy. That economic diversity should help cushion 
Boston from financial shocks like this summer's stock market ``correction,'' 
said Thomas Menino, Boston's first Italian-American mayor and a nuts-and-bolts 
kind of guy whose business-friendly approach has helped fuel the city's 
growth. ``Boston depends on four different economies _ academia, health 
care, mutual funds and tourism,'' he said, speaking in the cavernous, 
concrete-beamed City Hall office that he unhappily compares to a racquetball 
court. ``Most cities depend on one segment of the economy.'' Of late, 
economic uncertainty has led to tighter credit for commercial real 
estate deals here, and economists predict a slowing in the city's 
growth rate. They also warn of an impending labor shortage, particularly 
of skilled workers. But at the same time, they point to the flip side 
of prosperity. In the Italian North End, for example, Nancy Caruso, 
a pillar of the dense, sauce-scented neighborhood who has lived there 
for 50 years, said she got cards and letters almost every day asking 
whether she might not like to sell her small building. Buildings bought 
by speculators in the 1980's for $200,000 would now bring perhaps 
$600,000, she said. ``Within the last two years, it's started to boom 
again, and last year it was very booming, and this year, it's just 
gone crazy,'' she said _ to the point that Italian families who had 
moved to the suburbs and now want to come back find they cannot afford 
it. The North End situation, though nice for owners, also illustrates 
the great downside of the city's current vigor. Boston housing has 
long been some of the most expensive in the nation, but the soaring 
prices lately have been squeezing poorer residents ever harder, particularly 
new immigrants. ``Every neighborhood in Boston has very strong pressures 
in its residential market,'' said O'Brien, of the Boston Redevelopment 
Authority. Real estate brokers say that in South Boston, the heavily 
Irish enclave that gained ill-fame for its opposition to busing in 
the 1970's, rents have shot up perhaps 70 percent in the last 18 months; 
and in the traditional triple-deckers that have usually housed a family 
on each floor, the population is changing. ``What's happening is that 
the families that have lived here for so long are really becoming 
displaced,'' said Mike Foley, regional vice president for Jack Conway 
and Co. Realtors. ``We're renting to three or four individuals who 
can pay $500a piece. Two years ago, you might have been getting $800 
for those same apartments. The marketplace has increased so drastically 
that South Boston families can't afford these rents.'' Among Boston's 
poorest, the economic energy has helped. Marc Germain, a social worker 
in the Dorchester section, said, ``It's easier to get a lot of young 
people, who are traditionally unable to get into the labor market, 
jobs.'' But it has also hurt, said Charlotte Kahn, director of the 
Boston Foundation's Persistent Poverty Project. With the city's high 
cost of living, she said, ``for people on fixed incomes or minimum 
wage, it has always been tough, and in this kind of boom environment, 
it becomes that much tougher. And when you factor in welfare reform, 
which is due to start in December, nobody knows what that's really 
going to mean for people _ because in this environment, with costs 
rising and job opportunities contracting, it could be very tragic 
for a lot of families. We're already seeing an increase in homelessness.'' 
(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM) Boston's growth also creates problems for those 
in the path of development _ like George Hagerty, an artist with a 
studio in the historic Fenway Studios building near the chichi boutiques 
of Newbury Street. He protests that his light will be ruined if plans 
go forward for a neighboring skyscraper over the Massachusetts Turnpike, 
and that in these times of bullish building, sometimes, ``People get 
squished.'' ``We could either succeed or fail very badly at changing 
the face of Boston,'' he warned. (END OPTIONAL TRIM) The burst in 
Boston's civic energy, some city leaders say, seems to come not only 
from economic forces but from social changes as well, changes in a 
city so known for paralyzing political fights that former Governor 
William Weld said not long ago it had boomed ``in spite of itself.'' 
For well over three decades, for example, an elite, rather secretive 
group called The Vault, founded in 1959 by mainly Yankee bankers and 
businessmen to help create a ``New Boston'' in the dismal post-war 
years, was seen as a leading force in shaping the city. That group 
imploded nearly two years ago, and is officially defunct. Now, said 
Ira Jackson, an executive vice president at BankBoston, a broader, 
more open, more inclusive group of business, labor, neighborhood and 
political leaders has been coalescing, with more of a tendency to 
consult each other, collaborate, and even be friends, and more of 
a ``getting-it-done'' approach to everything from crime reduction 
to education. Take Boston's push to host the Democratic National Convention 
in 2000. Boston has never hosted the convention, Jackson noted, in 
part because it could not get its act together compete for it. This 
time, when Democratic scouts came around and visited everything from 
the city's tallest building, the blue-mirrored John Hancock tower, 
to its popular new amphibious-vehicle tours through the Charles River 
and around town, it was different. ``The notion you could get business 
guys to sit down with labor and community leaders and the Republican 
governor and the Democratic Speaker and everybody at a big lovefest 
at the top of the Hancock or at 7:00 in the morning at Filene's Basement!'' 
Jackson exclaimed. ``Or taking a Duck Tour with delegates and driving 
the thing onto the floor of the Fleet Center! All those things happened. 
It couldn't have happened in Boston ever before.'' The new model for 
city development, said Thomas Piper, an urban-planning research scientist 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is the way Boston is 
approaching the gargantuan project of developing the new Seaport district, 
which is expected to take a good 20 years to complete. The area, which 
already includes the World Trade Center exhibition complex, the just-opened 
$220-million Federal courthouse and the just-opened Seaport Hotel, 
was the subject of a special town meeting-like conference in May, 
and the city's plan for it is now absorbing widespread comment from 
groups ranging from neighborhood defenders to the Boston Society of 
Architects. Interested residents can even check out a 3-dimensional 
Seaport plan on the Internet. (BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM) ``It's a challenge 
to the imagination,'' Piper said, comparing the project's scale to 
the development of Battery Park City in Manhattan. The Seaport can 
also be seen, Piper said, as the shape of the urban future: a mega-project, 
made possible by an environmental clean-up, that will offer enticing 
recreational spots, serve pedestrians well, and embody broad public 
input. (END OPTIONAL TRIM) Lively debate is also already under way 
about what to do with the 27-acre empty swath that will be left over 
when the Big Dig has succeeded in sinking the unsightly main highway 
known as the Central Artery. Boston has recovered and then some, but 
not all by itself, all acknowledge. It has been blessed by $17 billion 
in infrastructure investments, including a $1 billion renovation of 
Logan Airport, brought home by long-serving and powerful congressmen 
and contributed by a wealthy state that makes its capital here. The 
seaport district will have a subway line and turnpike exits courtesy 
of the Big Dig, for example, and the North End is red-hot in part 
because soon, it will no longer be cut off from the rest of the city 
by the Central Artery. (BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM) ``Boston is exceptional'' 
in its comeback, said Alan Altshuler, a professor of urban planning 
at Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government and a skeptic about 
the talk of urban resurgence. ``There's been massive infrastructure 
investment focused here.'' Other skeptics would agree, pointing out 
that the concentration of poverty in many cities has continued to 
rise. They also note that, while there are many projections of a coming 
urban population influx, in fact, not even fashionable centers like 
Denver and Portland have seen much population growth in the 90s compared 
to the suburbs. That cities are doing better is undeniable, they say, 
but at best that means a new stability, not a full-fledged renaissance. 
(END OPTIONAL TRIM) Krieger of Harvard reflects the optimistic outlook: 
``The point is that, thought about most broadly, there is substantial 
reinvestment in the cores of our cities,'' he said, ``and that is 
quite different from a generation or two ago in America, or even a 
decade ago.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>