<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0094 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is a slick calling card, a glossy photo with Ohio State's colors 
of crimson and silver nicely pulling out Joe Germaine's laser-locked 
brown eyes from behind his face mask. Heck, actors get auditions for 
television pilots with far less glamorous head shots. The copy on 
the 8-by-11 Heisman flier is concise. It pulls at blue-collar heart 
strings. It covers the dramatic arc of how the Buckeye quarterback 
was ignored coming out of high school, banished to a junior college, 
became a part-time starter and finally was handed the reins of the 
nation's consensus No. 1 team as a senior. ``He wasn't being considered 
for the Heisman Trophy. He is now,'' it concludes with all the subtlety 
of a fast-food advertisement. It will be out in the mail to Heisman 
voters Monday morning. But is it too late? John Cappelletti, Penn 
State's Heisman winner in 1973, recently argued that November is the 
proper time to begin identifying the best college player in the nation. 
Hearing Cappelletti tell it, he was only an East Coast grinder until 
the seventh game of the season and voters started to take note of 
a pretty good Nittany Lions team winning in Happy Valley. ``Now it's 
crazy,'' Cappelletti said earlier this season at a reunion of that 
undefeated team. ``You got guys being put on the list and taken off 
in the span of a weekend as soon as the season starts. One bad performance, 
you're out. A big game you're in.'' Everyone's guilty of the Dow Jonesing 
of college players. The school's athletic departments _ Georgia's 
Champ Bailey and Oregon's Akili Smith _ had brief Heisman run ups 
Syracuse's Donovan McNabb remains the Big Blue of Heisman prospects: 
a solid performer but not sexy enough to bet the ranch on. The ex-coaches 
and players on the sports networks also tout their choices on a 24-hour 
cycle. Yes, this newspaper has added and dropped names from its Sunday 
``Heisman Watch'' graphic as the season has progressed. This year's 
Heisman race, however, has bubbled along at a low boil. None of the 
candidates so far have captured anyone's passions in the way Peyton 
Manning and Charles Woodson did last year. Perhaps mercifully, the 
new Bowl Championship Series rankings have provided new material for 
grousing and graphics. They are intended to match the two best teams 
in a title game by factoring in computer data and strength of schedule. 
Last week, the uproar was about UCLA being ranked No. 1 ahead of Ohio 
State _ despite the Buckeyes' position atop the news media and coaches 
polls. The arguments, predictably, were short-lived. By waxing Indiana, 
38-7, Ohio State (8-0) remained No. 1 in the voting polls and recaptured 
the top spot in the New York Times Computer Ranking. The Bruins (7-0), 
however, fell across the board because of a narrow, 28-24, comeback 
victory over lowly Stanford (1-7), The Times' No. 91 ranked team. 
UCLA fell to No. 4 in The Times poll, No. 3 in the news media poll 
and No. 4 in the coaches. So when the BCS ranking is released Monday 
look for Ohio State and Tennessee to be ranked No. 1 and No. 2, followed 
by Kansas State and UCLA. And alas, the shouting will commence until 
another shuffle next week. In the meantime, Texas' Ricky Williams 
has a new challenger for the trophy he certainly deserves. Germaine's 
Heisman candidacy officially kicked off in the fourth quarter of the 
Indiana game when his coach, John Cooper, elected to leave him in 
deep into the fourth quarter so he could surpass 300 yards passing. 
In Cooper's tenure at Ohio State, the only other time he helped a 
player look good on the stat sheet was in 1995 when Eddie George was 
in Heisman contention. George won it that year, deservedly so. And 
Germaine got his 351 yards, which set school records for most consecutive 
300 yard games (four), the most in a season (five) and most in a career 
(six). Germaine is a strong runner-up, as is UCLA's Cade McNown. Both 
are guiding undefeated teams. McNown has received more attention _ 
though Germaine has better numbers: 2,214 yards and 17 touchdowns 
to McNown's 1,861 yards and 13 touchdowns. Germaine is savvy enough 
to know that, however moving his late-blooming tale is, it has cost 
him in the all-important hype department. ``I'm sure splitting time 
last year didn't help,'' Germaine said of the dual-quarterback arrangement 
he shared with Stanley Jackson. ``But it's something that in November, 
I'm in position to win the award that goes to the best college player.'' 
Germaine has passed, led and won his way into that position. No one 
should fault the Ohio State sports information department for not 
moving sooner, either. Restraint and an embarrassment of riches prompted 
its deliberate approach. In the beginning of the season, Ohio State 
believed linebacker Andy Katzenmoyer or wide receiver David Boston 
might emerge as contenders. Katzenmoyer made the already difficult 
road for a defensive player impossible when he had to sweat out classes 
in golf, music and AIDS Awareness in summer school to be academically 
eligible. Boston is a worthy candidate for the Biletnikoff Award given 
to the nation's top receiver, but he is far from the best player in 
the nation. Still, it is amazing that anyone believes Williams' claim 
on the Heisman is suspect. He needs only 294 yards to break Tony Dorsett's 
Division I-A career yardage record after a dazzling 150-yard performance 
against Nebraska in Texas' 20-16 upset Saturday. He had been handicapped 
by the perception that the Longhorns weren't winners. Well, they're 
6-2, ranked No. 9 by the Times computer, finally entered the Top 25 
in the news media and coaches polls, and can play in the Big 12 championship 
game if they beat Oklahoma State, Texas Tech and Texas A&AMP;M. Nebraska's 
defensive coordinator, Charlie McBride, unequivocally cast his vote 
for Williams and characterized his performance against the Cornhuskers 
as one of ``a man against boys.'' The more impressive endorsement 
came from hundreds of Nebraska fans who waited after the game to give 
Williams a standing ovation as he left the field. This, after Nebraska's 
nation-leading 47-game home-winning streak had been snapped. No softies, 
some Big Red faithful have been known to hurl more invective than 
applause at opponents from that same vantage point. Still, they cheered 
excellence. Williams was moved. ``It's the most fun I've ever had 
playing a game,'' he said. The Nebraska fans know something about 
the game. Their team has won three of the last four national championships. 
They cast their votes. No glossy head shots for them _ simply an appreciation 
of the hard-hitting, helmet-to-helmet kind. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>