<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0412 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A group of major utilities announced a number of costly transactions 
Monday aimed at helping make them more competitive in a deregulated 
market. But the deals also demonstrate how shareholders in these companies 
are facing greater risk and may have to wait longer for a payoff. 
Money that in the past was generally paid out in dividends is increasingly 
being used to help finance major deals, as those of Monday, in an 
effort to get into businesses where there is more growth. ``Earnings 
have become more volatile; the dividend is no longer sacred,'' said 
Robert Rubin, a utilities analyst for Bear, Stearns. On the other 
hand, he said, as utility companies enter into faster- growing businesses, 
there is ``greater risk but there is also the greater potential for 
rewards.'' In a move to strengthen its position to sell power in the 
wholesale market in the Northwest, where many states are opening their 
utilities to competition, PP&AMP;L Resources, the parent company of 
a major utility that serves Pennsylvania, announced that it was buying 
13 power plants in Montana for $1.6 billion. In another transaction, 
CMS Energy Corp., the parent company of Consumers Energy, a big Michigan 
utility, said it had reached an agreement to acquire Panhandle Eastern 
Pipe Line Co. and other related assets from Duke Energy Corp. Duke, 
which serves the Southeast, is based in Charlotte, N.C. Under the 
terms of the deal, CMS is paying $1.9 billion in cash and assuming 
$300 million in debt. Monday's horse trading is a good example of 
how utilities, once stable companies that rarely entered into the 
fray of mergers and acquisitions, have become rife with such transactions. 
That means much more volatility and risk for stockholders, some of 
whom had sought utility stocks as a safe haven after the sharp declines 
in stocks and mutual funds in mid-August. Utilities are changing rapidly. 
Some are selling their power plants and shrinking to become mainly 
transmission companies; others are buying and building power plants 
to become major sellers of electricity and natural gas; some are seeking 
mergers to become bigger so as to compete more effectively, and a 
few large utilities have gone after acquisitions overseas, particularly 
in Britain. At the same time, representatives of large utilities based 
in Europe are prowling around the United States looking for takeovers 
to allow their companies to quickly enter the market here. One state, 
California, has deregulated its utilities and eight others plan to 
do so. The drive to deregulate is also risky. In California, voters 
will cast ballots Tuesday on a proposition, which if approved, could 
put the state deregulation efforts in limbo. It would also increase 
the risk to shareholders of the stocks of the state's three major 
utilities. Recent polls, however, show that support for the proposition 
has eroded in recent weeks. Even with all the uncertainty deregulation 
has brought, some analysts think that utilities still provide more 
stable earnings and fewer nasty surprises. Morton Pierce, head of 
mergers and acquisitions for the law firm Dewey Ballantine, said that 
even after deregulation utilities are still under the watchful eye 
of state commissions and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, 
which oversees the industry. ``I'd be very surprised if you found 
one investing in hedge funds and buying a casino,'' he said. The announcements 
Monday were an example of how utilities are pursuing transactions 
where the payoff may be years away. PP&AMP;L Resources, which delivers 
electricity to 1.2 million customers in Pennsylvania, cut its yearly 
dividend in August to $1 a share from $1.67. While this was a blow 
to stockholders, Rubin said it freed more cash for the company to 
expand. The decision to buy power plants in Montana is aimed at getting 
a source of low-cost power _ about 2,600 megawatts of generating capacity 
_ to sell wholesale in a region where deregulation is advancing more 
quickly than in some other parts of the country. William Hecht, chairman 
and chief executive of PP&AMP;L Resources, said in an interview that 
the dividend reduction freed about $100 million in cash for the utility 
but that it was not directly linked to help finance its power-plant 
purchase. Shares of PP&AMP;L gained 6.25 cents Monday, to $27.1875. 
Montana Power rose $1.6875, to $45. The move by CMS Energy is one 
of a series to strengthen its position in the Midwest as a supplier 
of natural gas. Last summer the region suffered power shortages, and 
the expectation is that many new gas-fired plants will be built. Dan 
Scotto, the utility analyst for Carnegie, Childs &AMP; Co., said that 
CMS is an example of a utility that is a growth company that generally 
does not increase the dividend. Instead, he said, it uses its cash 
to reinvest in its business. Shares of CMS rose $2.125, to $46.1875, 
while shares of Duke Energy gained 18.75 cents, closing at $64.875. 
William McCormick Jr., chairman and chief executive of CMS, said that 
the utility wanted to become a major supplier for the new plants and 
that the acquisition helped to tie together its own natural gas business. 
``It links together our whole system,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>