<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0362 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia's capital city, which has seemed unwilling to muster even medium 
dudgeon anymore on questions of politicians and politics, is suddenly 
buzzing over an allegation that virtually all Muscovites regard as 
a given: that the government is corrupt. The accuser is Grigory Yavlinsky, 
a respected if ideological reformer and legislator who was the first 
politician to tout Yevgeny Primakov for the post of prime minister 
last month. On Monday, in a move blunt even by the bare-knuckled rules 
of Russian political debate, Yavlinsky gave Primakov a letter seeking 
investigations of the conduct of his two highest-ranking aides, two 
subordinates directly beneath them, and a ranking official of the 
state tax service. The letter is signed by three members of Yavlinsky's 
Yabloko political faction, which holds a sliver of seats in the lower 
house of Parliament. But the message belonged to Yavlinsky himself, 
who said at a news conference Monday night that ``corruption is an 
absolutely rotting element of all power bodies, and probably most 
of all in the Russian government.'' Among 16 specific charges, Yavlinsky's 
letter questions whether First Deputy Prime Minister Yuri Maslyukov, 
a Communist and the government's senior economic adviser, steered 
government money or favors to businesses in which he or his relatives 
held an interest. It also asks whether First Deputy Prime Minister 
Vadim Gustov, the former governor of the Leningrad region, has funneled 
favors to businesses that financed his gubernatorial campaign. Elsewhere, 
Yavlinsky's letter raises questions about the agriculture minister's 
conduct when he held the same post in the last days of the Soviet 
Union, and later as an official of a major bank. And it asks what 
favors several officials granted to businesses seeking exemptions 
from government rules, and what benefits those exemptions brought 
about. Maslyukov's office alone has received more than 300 requests 
for special treatment from businesses and other groups, he said. A 
spokesman for Maslyukov, perhaps the central target of Yavlinsky's 
charges, called them baseless and shallow, and said they were an attempt 
to split the government so free-market advocates could retake power. 
Monday night, Primakov responded dismissively to the complaints, calling 
the charges ``general phrases'' and adding that Yavlinsky's blanket 
allegation of government rot suggested that the Yabloko faction was 
infected with corruption as well. Primakov also joked about Yavlinsky's 
decision last month to turn down his offer of a job in the new government, 
saying Yavlinsky must have rejected it ``because he did not have enough 
money to pay for the post.'' Ordinary Russians may fail to see the 
humor. The network television program ``Itogi,'' a blend of America's 
``60 Minutes'' and ``Meet the Press'' with a dash of Larry King tossed 
in, focused on Yavlinsky's charges on Sunday, before the Yabloko letter 
was released. Asked to register their opinion on whether Primakov's 
government was indeed corrupt, 16,500 people responded within a few 
hours. More than 92 percent of them answered ``yes.'' That is not 
entirely unexpected. Corruption was a fact under Soviet rule, both 
among regular citizens striving to eke out a living and high officeholders. 
It is probably safe to say a majority of Russians and many foreigners 
have been shaken down by a local policeman or city official, and it 
is accepted fact that the shift to capitalism made many government 
officials rich overnight. On the other hand, Primakov's gruff, fatherly 
manner and his lifetime career in foreign affairs rather than politics 
ran counter to that image. He has become not just the most popular 
figure in the Russian government _ not exactly a high honor these 
days _ but also one of the few seen as having clean hands. In that 
respect, Yavlinsky has suggested, the government's defensive response 
has not been encouraging. A senior official in President Boris Yeltsin's 
administration has said there is no known evidence to support the 
charges, and the state prosecutor general has threatened to sue Yavlinsky 
for libel if he cannot prove them. Primakov has gone no further than 
to suggest that Yavlinsky take his evidence to prosecutors. Just why 
Russians might get exercised about bribery and theft now, when expectations 
of politicians' performance already are dragging bottom, is not completely 
clear. Communists were unable to summon a healthy showing for a protest 
last month against Yeltsin, the man blamed for most of Russia's troubles. 
Nor has the public generated much enthusiasm for any of the candidates 
who want to succeed him. Yavlinsky is one of them, and there was speculation 
that he was campaigning against corruption to set himself apart from 
the pack. That he is campaigning seems beyond doubt: He began railing 
against bribery and theft in vague terms a week ago on television, 
and has gradually gotten more specific and more ominous in subsequent 
interviews in The Daily Telegraph of London and on Russian radio. 
His news conference Monday, in which he also blasted Primakov's economic 
program as aimless, capped a week in which he has claimed a prime 
spot on national television and on the front pages of most major newspapers. 
Yavlinsky has said he still supports Primakov, who draws support from 
both Communists and liberal reformers, as the best choice to unite 
Russia in a time of turmoil. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>