<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0247 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I read in the paper that the FAA is recommending that pilots not take 
Viagra within six hours of flying. I, personally, was not aware that 
Viagra abuse was a problem among airline pilots, but now that I know, 
it is just another good reason to take a bus when I take my next scheduled 
vacation to Paducah, Ky. Airline travel is stressful enough without 
having sex-crazed pilots chasing the flight attendants up and down 
the aisles, scaring the babies and possibly upsetting the beverage 
cart. I like my airline pilots to be calm and composed, sort of like 
astronaut Alan Shepard was when he asked Mission Control for permission 
to pee in his space suit. When the airplane suddenly drops 3,000 feet 
and we, the passengers, are plastered to the ceiling along with the 
peanut snacks, in-flight magazines and 50 tons of carry-on luggage 
everyone crammed beneath their seats, I want the pilot to come on 
the intercom, yawn once or twice and then drawl something about us-all 
possibly encountering some turbulence though he's fixin' to fly around 
it but just to be on the safe side and not agitate those pencil-necked 
geeks in Washington, he's going to leave that li'l old seat belt light 
on, but it's nothing to worry about, just as that smoke pouring out 
of the starboard engine is nothing to worry about, either. Enjoy your 
flight. Thats the kind of pilot I want, not a pilot who comes on the 
intercom with ``(Can't Get No) Satisfaction'' blaring in the background, 
shouting, ``Hey, everybody! Guess what! I'm flying the airplane naked!'' 
I want a pilot whose clothing tastes run to jeans, plaid shirts and, 
if possible, suspenders. I don't want some aging frat boy with a bad 
toup and several pounds of gold chains dangling from his neck. I want 
a pilot who concentrates on the altimeter, air speed gauge and all 
the rest of those little lights and switches up there, even if he 
hasn't the faintest idea what they do. I don't want a pilot who's 
flipping through Penthouse magazine while we slam into the side of 
a mountain at 600 mph. I want a pilot who worries about crosswinds, 
airport traffic and maybe the drunk back in coach who mistook a laptop 
computer for a urinal. I don't want a pilot who's worried about beating 
Wilt Chamberlain's record. (And I don't mean points per game.) If 
a pilot is gulping fistsful of Viagra when he's supposed to be going 
through the preflight checklist, you've got to wonder if his head 
is really in the game. To his clouded way of thinking, an emergency 
at 35,000 feet is running out of body oil, not a short in the electrical 
system. The other danger, aside from the fact that a naked pilot may 
get something caught in the landing gear, is that Viagra users sometimes 
have difficulty distinguishing the colors blue and green, the same 
colors used in runway lights and cockpit instruments. Although I am 
not versed in the finer points of aeronautics, it occurs to me that 
the sky is blue and the earth is green and that these are two things 
a pilot should never, ever get confused. While I am not suggesting 
that a pilot should drink heavily before taking to the air, even a 
nervous passenger with four martinis under his belt can usually distinguish 
between sky and ground, assuming he is awake. The real problem, of 
course, would come if he had swallowed a couple of Viagras with his 
gin, which is yet another reason why bus travel is the way to go. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>