<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0088 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Marcus Camby has confined himself to the grounds of a rambling estate 
he has rented near the Knicks' practice facility. Barely visible from 
the road, a stone-and-iron gate mark the passage to the walled-off 
world Camby seldom leaves at night. It is better this way. If there 
is anything Camby has learned in his turbulent two years in the National 
Basketball Association, it is this: It's harder for trouble to find 
you if it does not know where you are. Although he is only a two-hour 
drive from his old neighborhood, a decayed pocket of Hartford, Conn., 
known as the North End, Camby has allowed few people to know where 
he lives now. But there is one person from his past whom he still 
embraces as tight as a blanket in the cold: Tamia Murray. Murray is 
a former hustler who sold drugs, mixed in a seamy nightclub scene 
and pulled countless scams in order to endure the streets of the North 
End. And during a sordid saga that played out at the University of 
Massachusetts, Murray played a prominent role in an agent scandal 
that left the school stripped of its 1996 Final Four appearance and 
left Camby's name disgraced. Murray was on the take as agents, including 
Wesley Spears and John Lounsbury, plied Camby and his friends with 
cash, gifts, rental cars and prostitutes at UMass. Often, Murray has 
been considered a dangerous side effect to Camby's life. But this 
is Camby's best friend. How do you ask a player to detach himself 
from the past? How can he commit a ghetto sin and turn his back on 
a confidant who helped him survive a neighborhood? ``People say cut 
loose from the past, but they really don't know,'' Camby said, standing 
inside a gray mansion decorated with black-and-white photos of Muhammad 
Ali and Martin Luther King in the living room. ``I listen to what 
they are saying and stuff, but I don't pay attention to them. It's 
how I feel inside. Tamia is guy who will always be in my corner, and 
I'll always be in his corner. ``I don't care what anyone says about 
him. People might say he's in my life because he can get this or that 
or because I'm this or that, but I don't see it that way.'' He sees 
Murray as one of the only people he can trust. And so Murray is never 
far away. Without an outside income, Murray drives Camby's cars, lives 
at the estate and has many of his expenses paid for by the Knicks' 
24-year-old forward. Although teams are prohibited from discussing 
players during the NBA's ongoing lockout, there are those within the 
Knicks' organization who have privately wondered if the friends from 
Camby's past, like Murray, could lead the team's newest player into 
some precarious situations. This issue is not isolated to the Knicks. 
The league is concerned about the growing number of its athletes, 
especially the younger players, who now have entourages. In the league's 
rookie orientation session, players are cautioned about associating 
with unsavory crowds. Camby understands these concerns but believes 
he and Murray have it all worked out. In the past, particularly when 
caught up in the dizzying feel of the money that washed over Camby 
and Murray at UMass, Camby failed to consider the repercussions of 
his actions _ and those of his friends _ away from the court. ``You 
have so many people coming at you that you have to really sit down 
and think, `OK, what am I about to do here?''' Camby said. ``That's 
the one thing I didn't do. I did things spontaneously, and I was going 
with the flow. Now, everything I do, I analyze it. Should I do it? 
Should I not? Is this a bad situation or not? Most of the time the 
answer is easy: I don't leave my house. I figure if I don't leave 
my house, I can't get into any trouble.'' It is hard to imagine Camby 
falling into trouble. He is an affable, well-spoken and respectful 
person. But he realizes that few see this side of him. He out to prove 
that he can be not only a young asset for the aging Knicks, but also 
a decent and responsible person who has set up the CambyLand Foundation, 
which focuses on the educational needs of children. In all likelihood, 
his detractors will roll their eyes at this image reclamation project. 
Camby is still booed when he plays against the Celtics at the Fleet 
Center in Boston, where the fans believe he betrayed UMass by accepting 
money from agents, infractions punished by the National Collegiate 
Athletic Association. Although Camby repaid UMass the $151,000 it 
lost in Final Four tournament money, he rankled some by saying he 
felt no guilt over his actions. He has been portrayed as a greedy 
kid without a moral compass. But those close to Camby paint a different 
picture. They see a kid who always tried hard to avoid trouble, to 
the extent that he turned his back on the men who used to gamble on 
his high school games at Hartford Public. ``I remember these guys 
who used to go to the games and bet other guys that Marcus would get 
30 points by halftime,'' Camby's cousin, Reggie Jackson, said. Some 
say the real trouble began when agents started using cash to get cozy 
with Camby's friends, like Boris Wray and especially Murray. While 
no one, including Camby, is making an excuse for his gross missteps 
at UMass, there is an explanation for how Camby, who grew up under 
the eye of a strict and loving mother, ended up with his name smeared 
in a scandal. ``Basically, it all comes back to me,'' Murray said 
recently as he sat in the driver's seat of Camby's Range Rover parked 
on the main drag of the North End. ``If I had never started taking 
cash from certain individuals, none of the bad stuff that went down 
would have ever happened.'' He wants the blame. Bring it on. As Murray 
explained himself, his rock-hard exterior, complete with two scars 
from the bullets he took at ages 11 and 14, began to melt. Unexpectedly, 
his eyes welled with tears. ``Of course I felt like I let him down,'' 
Murray said. ``Of course I felt bad. You care about someone, you're 
not wanting to hurt them. ``But you've got agents who have millions. 
And they are coming at individuals who have nothing. Marcus didn't 
know where the money was coming from. If I want to give someone in 
this neighborhood $10, they don't ask where it comes from. They take 
whatever they can get. If you can get cash, anyone would take it. 
Thing is, no one outside this jungle understands that mentality.'' 
One World, Two Paths _ A Homebody Star, a Streetwise Pal Murray and 
Camby grew up in the North End's unsightly Bellevue Square project, 
which has since been renamed and renovated. Although crime has decreased 
41 percent in the last four years, according to police department 
records, the North End is a place where residents say kids still hit 
the ground when a car backfires in fear of a drive-by shooting. In 
the first 10 months of this year, there have been 10 homicides. In 
1994, a year after Camby graduated from Hartford Public, there were 
17 murders, 48 sexual assaults, 488 robberies, 605 aggravated assaults 
and 799 burglaries in the North End, an area noted as the worst crime 
zone in the city. Beneath the violence that has long scarred this 
neighborhood, there were two kids who were as tight as matches in 
a matchbook. Camby and Murray spent their days shooting hoops and 
unloading their energy with a game of tag through the hallways of 
the projects at night. As close as they were, they grew up very differently. 
Murray was the same age as Camby, but while he was on the streets 
trying to make a dime, Camby was performing in an elementary school 
play. Same neighborhood, different worlds. Recently, Marcus' mother, 
Janice Camby, was sitting in the living room of a two-story brick 
home in a suburb of Hartford, with the smell of bacon floating in 
from a gourmet kitchen. ``Bellevue Square is a long way from here,'' 
she said, looking around the house her son bought for her after he 
signed a three-year, $8.4 million deal with the Toronto Raptors two 
years ago. ``When we were looking for a place, Marcus liked this house. 
He liked the high ceilings.'' Any house would have been fine with 
her. This is not a woman wed to luxury, not when she still keeps a 
jar of pennies as a centerpiece in the living room ``because you never 
know when that rainy day is coming.'' She is wary by nature. She had 
to be in order to raise three children safely in the projects. So 
Janice made sure her son was bused to a school in the suburbs until 
he was in high school, wanting to send him as far away from the gangs 
as possible. ``It was so bad that my mom wouldn't even let me go to 
the courts,'' Camby said. ``I had to cut out the bottom of a milk 
crate and hang it up beside the house.'' The routine was simple: Camby 
walked in from school, called his mother, then sat with Ruby, his 
grandmother, in the apartment and watched the soap opera ``Guiding 
Light.'' ``I was addicted to it,'' Camby said. Around 6 p.m., when 
his mother came home, he was allowed outside until the street lights 
came on. Although his father was rarely part of his childhood, Camby 
had structure and the necessities. Working as a family advocate for 
Hartford's Community Renewal Team, for which she often tracked down 
welfare checks for families, Janice Camby could afford the two gallons 
of milk Camby consumed every three days. She earned enough to keep 
a tidy apartment filled with the staples for a growing boy, like shoes, 
clothes and Nintendo. It is a childhood that sounds almost normal 
until Murray interjects some reality. ``Truthfully, Marcus didn't 
have it better,'' Murray said. ``Everyone around here has mice and 
rats and roaches. The rats are as big as your foot. You turn over 
in your bed, and there's a rat in there with you. You pour cereal 
and roaches fall out. You're lucky if you have cereal. Most kids get 
grits because their moms are raising them alone and there's no money.'' 
And no hope. Murray played basketball and was athletic but was not 
marked with a gold star like Camby. ``When you're 6-11 and the tallest 
kid in New England, you've got potential,'' Jackson, Camby's cousin, 
said. ``People were always steering him in the right direction, like, 
`Yo, man, don't get lost here, because you can make it.' He had a 
lot of people to push him.'' Murray was one of them, one of his protectors. 
If there was a fight in a club, Murray made sure Camby was out of 
harm's way. If a gang-related shooting was known to be in the works, 
Murray told Camby to stay home. Murray watched out for Camby, but 
who was watching out for him? ``Truthfully, I was a hustler my whole 
life,'' Murray said. ``I never really worked. I was more in the jungle 
than Marcus was. He was in it but near the gates. I was in the heart 
of it, doing whatever I had to in order to survive. I didn't have 
any money. So when individuals came up to me with money _ and all 
I know is the street _ I'd take it.'' Mingling With Agents _ Paying 
the Price For Easy Money Murray was the perfect target for agents 
who want to woo future clients by getting close to a best friend or 
family members. With Camby projected to be a top draft pick out of 
UMass, his million-dollar future had agents counting money in their 
heads. There were a lot of unidentified agents, with names much bigger 
than Spears' and Lounsbury's, who were trying to pave a trail to Camby 
through Murray. During Camby's junior year, Murray, who made the hour 
drive to UMass from Hartford to attend each home game, began making 
the easiest money of his scrabbled life. ``There were situations when 
I'd go to games at UMass and certain individuals would ask me to walk 
to the bathroom, and they'd hand me cash,'' said Murray, referring 
to agents. ``Marcus didn't know at first. You've never had anything 
in your life, and guys are in front of you wanting to fulfill your 
every wish. What do you do?'' Murray played along. He became Camby's 
middleman, particularly with Spears. Often, Spears handed Murray the 
cash and gifts. Sometimes Camby saw the money, sometimes Murray just 
kept it. Although he may have been oblivious at first, Camby soon 
discovered how lucrative the agent fawning could be. Then the party 
was crashed. Once Camby decided to sign with ProServ, which negotiated 
his $8.4 million rookie deal with the Raptors, the agents who had 
courted him felt jilted and the alleged stories of extortion were 
revealed. Throughout the allegations, Murray could have left Camby 
on his own. Instead, he stuck by him, and the two friends came to 
an epiphany. Things had to change. ``I haven't hustled anyone since 
that situation with the agents,'' Murray said. ``I stopped doing anything 
that would draw negative attention to Marcus. I used to hustle from 
10 a.m. to 1 a.m.'' Murray used to cut deals on the very street where 
the Range Rover is parked on this fall day. It is early afternoon, 
but across the street, there is a man buying liquor cases out of the 
back of a van. About 50 yards away, a car parks next to another. A 
window rolls down and a package is exchanged for money. ``This is 
the ghetto; there's nothing you can't sell to make money,'' Murray 
said. ``Me, I was a hustler. Everyone knew that's how I got my money.'' 
As he sits in Camby's car, living off Camby's riches, a cynic would 
wonder if Murray was hustling Camby right now. ``I couldn't do that 
to Marcus,'' Murray said. ``I mean, you have to understand. I have 
a heart, too. I have a conscience. There are things I have done that 
are wrong, real wrong. But I'd never do anything to Marcus.'' As close 
as he is to Camby, he realizes that if there is a target on his back, 
his best friend could go down with him. That is why he purged himself 
from his past two years ago. But two years ago, on a visit back to 
the neighborhood, Murray didn't know that simply standing on the corner 
of Vine Street in the North End could cause trouble for Camby, as 
well. That was proved in an incident that is remembered by people 
on the streets. One night, a car crawled past Murray as he chatted 
with a woman on the sidewalk. A few minutes later, the three men who 
had been in the car stood before Murray with chrome pipes in one hand 
and revolvers in the other. The woman fled. This was not about some 
old scam Murray had pulled in the past. ``These people knew that me 
and Marcus were tight,'' Murray said. ``They put two and two together 
and knew that if they got me, they'd get some free cash. They knew 
that Marcus wouldn't go to the police. Around here, what goes on in 
the streets has to stay on the streets.'' Murray said he knew if he 
bent to their demands to get in their car, no one would ever see him 
again. He said that despite being slapped with a gun and hit with 
a pipe, he kept his footing and darted away as one man shot at him. 
With this memory dancing in his head, Murray lets out a nervous laugh. 
``I was Houdini that day,'' he said. As Camby's cousin Jackson said, 
``You never know what Marcus would have gone through if Tamia hadn't 
gotten away.'' Murray added: ``You know what you learn? Because of 
how tight I am to Marcus, I can't even stand on a street corner. If 
something happens to me, it happens to Marcus.'' A Wall of Protection 
_ Workouts, Movies And Biding Time Together, Camby and Murray have 
mourned friends who have been murdered and have escaped close calls 
when it looked as if their own numbers were up. Together, they hang 
out in a mansion now, isolated from trouble. The circle around Camby 
has drastically closed in the last two years. It includes Murray, 
but not Wray. As one friend put it, ``Boris is doing things that probably 
aren't best for Marcus.'' Murray has a room at the house where leather 
couches sprawl in front of television sets the size of department 
store windows. Movies and video games, that is how the two entertain 
themselves. Otherwise, Camby bides his time during the lockout by 
working out. He has added 20 pounds of muscle to his 6-11 frame, requiring 
his tailor to resize his suits. Right now, he is the young forward 
in wait after a June trade by the Knicks that sent Charles Oakley 
to Toronto. ``I'm jumping out of my skin,'' Camby said. ``I can't 
wait to get out there and play in the Garden and show people what 
I'm really all about.'' This is a fresh start for Camby. His injury-prone 
days in Toronto _ where he had to play while news of his misdeeds 
at UMass were exposed _ are in the past. And so, Camby promises, are 
the distractions. ``Tamia knows that I can't do things that I might 
want to do because I'm in the limelight,'' Camby said. ``The friends 
I do have know it's like, `Hey, you can't do certain things because 
you're my friends.''' This fact was clear three days after the NCAA 
handed down penalties to UMass in June 1997. That is when Camby was 
spotted weaving on a road in South Windsor, Conn., not far from the 
luxury home he bought for his mother. According to reports, police 
pulled him over, smelled marijuana in the car, found two burned ``roaches'' 
and arrested him. To avoid a marijuana possession charge, Camby agreed 
to perform community service. Those close to Camby say the marijuana 
was not his, but a friend's. If so, Camby's associations had hurt 
his name once again. And this was after the agent scandal, after Camby 
was thought to have learned from his past mistakes. No doubt, Camby 
will be watched carefully now. One false step in New York _ where 
heroes are showered in ticker tape and the fallen are ridiculed in 
headlines _ and Camby's future earnings could be jeopardized. ``My 
past is behind me,'' Camby said. ``There aren't going to be any other 
distractions. I know that and the couple of friends I still have, 
they know that, too. Tamia and I have learned from the past.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>