<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With their new interim peace accord stopped in place the day it was 
formally to begin, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat both insisted Monday that the carefully sequenced 
security-for-land plan can still proceed nearly on schedule. To the 
surprise of his Palestinian and American counterparts, Netanyahu announced 
late Sunday that the accord signed in Washington on Oct. 23 would 
not ``come into effect'' until it is ratified by Israel's Cabinet 
and Parliament, delaying the next promised withdrawal of Israeli troops 
from the West Bank. Netanyahu phoned Arafat Monday to report that 
Israel's Attorney General had said Israel's commitments would not 
be binding until the Cabinet and Parliament act, a process expected 
to take a week or more. Netanyahu's spokesman said Arafat ``accepted'' 
this explanation, as well as a pledge to begin withdrawing Israeli 
troops from a further 2 percent of the occupied territories in two 
to three weeks. ``They asked me for a few days,'' Arafat said Monday 
evening in Ramallah. ``They asked me to accept it, and I accepted 
it.'' There was extended debate in Israel on Monday over whether Israeli 
legal norms mandated some formal ratification for the Wye Memorandum, 
named after the place in Maryland where negotiations were held. But 
American and Palestinian officials saw Netanyahu's bid for time as 
a political rather then a legal necessity, as he tries to protect 
his narrow majority against right-wing defections and left-wing attacks. 
Netanyahu's government survived a motion of confidence by a single 
vote Monday. It might have fallen had it not been for the support 
of Israeli Arab legislators aligned with Arafat _ probably the least 
likely saviors Netanyahu ever envisioned. As repeatedly noted Monday 
by Palestinian negotiators and Netanyahu's critics on the left, the 
Wye Memorandum states flatly that it ``will enter into force 10 days 
from the date of signature,'' or Nov. 2, without reference to any 
subsequent ratification or approval procedures. Still, American diplomats 
here, while acknowledging that they were caught off guard by Netanyahu, 
stressed what they saw as the positive significance of his well-publicized 
consultation with Arafat and Arafat's conspicuous refusal to criticize 
the unexpected delay. Netanyahu's advisers downplayed the move, predicting 
the Cabinet will approve the memorandum by Wednesday, with the full 
Parliament following suit next week. Independent analysts concur that 
the Wye pact should win strong majority backing in the legislature. 
``If anything, this will delay redeployment by two or three days, 
that's all,'' said David Bar-Illan, a government spokesman. ``So we 
will begin implementing the withdrawal by the 18th or the 19th, instead 
of the 16th.'' Arafat vowed to adhere to the original timetable, including 
the presentation to the CIA on Monday of a plan for seizing illegal 
weapons and arresting terrorism suspects. American officials confirmed 
receiving such a plan Monday and said it fulfilled Palestinian commitments. 
But it remained unclear whether it was presented as a document or 
as a verbal briefing, and, if the latter, whether this would satisfy 
Israeli demands for a detailed, written statement on counterterrorism 
strategy from the Palestinians. At the same time Monday evening that 
Arafat was saying that his plan had been presented and ``discussed'' 
with both the Americans and the Israelis, the Netanyahu government 
was contending that the Palestinian plan is incomplete and thus not 
in compliance with the Wye accords. Netanyahu finds himself forced 
to balance carrying out the Wye accord against his own short-term 
political survival, and his negotiating partners appear to appreciate 
the difficulty of this high-wire act. Over the next 12 weeks, if the 
Wye pact is put into effect as planned, Netanyahu must turn over another 
13 percent of the West Bank to Palestinian control in three stages, 
moves certain to provoke bitter public protests from right-wing Israelis. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>