<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0273 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The talented and prolific William Boyd has written half a dozen good 
novels already, most of them set in exotic locales where Europeans 
struggle with the exigencies of foreignness. His new novel, ``Armadillo,'' 
is set in London, which is a shift for him. But the storytelling talents 
that marked Boyd's earlier books are fully in evidence in this entertaining 
novel, which gives us one of the more likable, lost and perplexed 
central characters yet to appear in his oeuvre. The character this 
time is Lorimer Black, who works successfully as a loss adjuster for 
an insurance company, a loss adjuster being a kind of investigator 
who makes sure that insurance claims are legitimate. Lorimer has ``ink 
dark hair and a serious-looking, fine-featured but pallid face,'' 
an exotic look that is a clue to another identity that he keeps carefully 
concealed. His birth name is Milomre Blocj. He is known as Milo to 
his Gypsy family, which runs a car service and bears roughly the same 
relationship to Lorimer as a hack driver would to an Oxford don. Boyd 
loves to pit all-too-human characters against perverse bad fortune, 
giving them enough slack to try to redeem themselves, and this is 
what happens to Lorimer, a kind of secret foreigner amid the British. 
Most obviously, Lorimer is caught up in a puzzling intrigue at GGH 
Ltd., the company where he works. He comes to be suspected of disloyalty 
by his boss, a man named Hogg in good Dickensian fashion who is a 
menacing and paranoid version of the character played by Edward G. 
Robinson in the movie ``Double Indemnity.'' Lorimer is also beset 
with the problem of a new company director named Torquil Helvoir-Jayne, 
a figure with all the charm of a pit bull without the pit bull's loyalty 
or courage. On the periphery of Lorimer's professional world is a 
beautiful actress named Flavia Malinverno, unhappily married to a 
juggler named Gilbert from whom he tries to steal her away. Then there 
is Lorimer's family, including an older brother, three older sisters, 
a mother and a grandmother, most of whom lean on him, the worldly 
success of the family, for loans and emotional support. Lorimer is 
oddly disconnected from the British world he has made his own, while 
his family members seem just disconnected, period. When his mother 
calls one day to tell him that his father has died, she rushes to 
say: ``Sorry to bother you, darling. Bye.'' Other ingredients: Lorimer 
collects ancient warriors' helmets, the helmets seeming _ though this 
is vague _ to emblemize the armadillo of Boyd's title. He buys flowers 
from a shopkeeper named Marlobe, a furious, profane man who dreams 
of carrying out mass slaughter. Lorimer is an insomniac and goes to 
a clinic called the Institute of Lucid Dreams, where he is treated 
by a psychologist named Alan Kenbarry. The doctor tells him: ``The 
lucid dream is, in a way, a vision of a perfect life ... You want 
to enter that perfect world where everything can be controlled ... 
Rid yourself of that desire and deep slumber will return.'' This panorama 
of eccentrics and knaves takes on a kaleidoscopic, almost manic quality 
in ``Armadillo,'' which seems to have been written by a profane 1990s 
version of S.J. Perelman. But Boyd's zany, exaggerated characters 
are endowed by their author with a gift for the kind of spicy dialogue 
that keeps them entertaining. In one episode Lorimer goes to a weekend 
party at the country house of Torquil Helvoir-Jayne, brilliantly, 
acidly fashioned by Boyd into a stunning satire of British manners, 
a circus of individual solipsism, conjugal aggression and generalized 
deceit, the country weekend from hell. Hapless but intelligent, Lorimer 
watches as his world goes to pieces. A brilliant coup that he scores 
in his work as a loss adjuster goes awry, so that not only are the 
authors of a false insurance claim murderously angry at him but so, 
for some inexplicable reason, is his boss, Hogg. He begins to receive 
death threats. Somebody torches his car. His pursuit of Flavia Malinverno 
runs aground both because of her elusiveness and her husband's menacing 
jealousy. Lorimer does not, any more than Kafka's K, understand why 
his world is being torn apart, though he does know that for the most 
part his world is made up of bluster and hypocrisy. At one point he 
watches Hogg, who has just dismissed him, stride off ``with his burly 
bosun's swagger'' and accept a cheroot from the chairman of the company. 
The image captures the undercurrent of moral brutality of Lorimer's 
world. A kind of redemption comes in the end for Lorimer, though it 
is a confused and ambiguous one. He tries to puzzle out exactly what 
went wrong, but neither he nor the reader ever understands exactly 
what has happened. Even at the very end, just when Lorimer seems to 
have won the heart of Flavia, matters remain uncertain. The lesson 
seems to involve the untrustworthiness of others and the overall precariousness 
of a world where the moral order appears as images in a fun house 
mirror. PUBLICATION NOTES: ARMADILLO By William Boyd 337 pages. Alfred 
A. Knopf. $24. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>