<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0234 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is midafternoon on the eastern coast of a chronically sleep-deprived 
nation and if you listen carefully, you can hear the whoosh of cappuccino 
makers and the ripping open of No-Doz boxes and the yawns of night-shift 
workers and the sighs of pilots as they check their watches to see 
how much longer they must keep their aircraft aloft. They are the 
sounds of the struggle to stay awake, a major enterprise in a country 
that long ago exchanged the effortless biological cycle of sleep and 
waking for the tyranny of electric lights, job-plus-kids living, graveyard 
shifts and packages that absolutely, positively have to be there overnight. 
About two-thirds of workplace accidents in the United States are caused 
by human error, studies show, many of them the result of a failure 
of alertness at critical times. Jet-lag sufferers, all-night workers, 
the elderly and the multitude of Americans with disorders like sleep 
apnea and narcolepsy wage a continual battle against excessive daytime 
sleepiness. And staying awake supports a multibillion-dollar industry 
that serves up a variety of stimulants, legal and illegal, and sleep 
promoters, offering hope that a good night's sleep will bring alertness 
the next day. Yet the search for artificial compounds to enhance wakefulness 
is a chronicle of limited success. Caffeine, for all its appeal, is 
not especially potent, and in high doses can be unpleasant, causing 
irritability, tremor and excessive urination. Amphetamines, the wonder 
drugs of the 1950s and '60s, quickly opened a Pandora's box of side 
effects and abuse. The drugs keep people awake, but they also produce 
euphoria and the jitters, revving up the central nervous system and 
causing the heart rate and blood pressure to jump. And once the effects 
wear off, users soon crave more of the drug. Fearful of lawsuits, 
drug companies gave up trying to improve alertness, and for 20 years 
have devoted most of their efforts to developing new sleep-promoting 
drugs, seeking to maximize high quality sleep while minimizing day-after 
hangovers. But that may soon change. By Dec. 31, the Food and Drug 
Administration is to decide whether a new compound called modafinil 
can be marketed as a treatment for excessive sleepiness associated 
with narcolepsy, a severe sleep disorder that afflicts about one in 
1,000 Americans. Approval of the drug would also open the door to 
``off-label'' use, allowing doctors to prescribe it for other conditions. 
If modafinil goes on the market, many sleep scientists believe, it 
could usher in a new era of wakefulness compounds and help researchers 
unlock the mysteries of sleep and waking. But at the same time, the 
arrival of the drug will raise profound questions about how, as a 
society, Americans choose to cope with their perpetual lack of sleep 
and their constant campaign to stay awake. Modafinil, to be sold under 
the trade name Provigil, is licensed to Cephalon Inc., a small pharmaceutical 
company in West Chester, Pa. Since its discovery by French scientists 
in the late 1970s, the compound has stirred interest among sleep researchers 
because it appears to work entirely differently from other alertness 
drugs. ``This is the first drug in history to selectively promote 
wakefulness in a way analogous to how the brain normally wakes up,'' 
said Dr. Dale Edgar, associate professor of psychiatry and behavioral 
science at Stanford University, who conducted preclinical trials of 
Provigil for Cephalon and has done other animal studies of the drug 
financed by the Air Force Office of Research. ``Modafinil is certainly 
not a real substitute for getting sleep. That would be a misuse of 
this drug. But I personally believe it has great promise for a much 
wider range of sleep disorders.'' In human trials, modafinil appears 
more effective than caffeine without causing the anxiety, euphoria 
and cardiovascular effects of amphetamines. Four years of on-the-market 
experience in France, where the drug is sold as Mododial, and clinical 
trials financed by Cephalon in this country have revealed few side 
effects. The most common complaints are mild headache and slight nausea, 
and these are infrequent. Preliminary studies suggest that modafinil 
is nonaddictive and that it does not induce tolerance in users. Dr. 
Jed Black, director of Stanford University's Sleep Disorders Clinic 
and a participant in the clinical trials, said subjects taking the 
drug reported feeling ``naturally alert, like they'd taken a good 
nap and felt good.'' And modafinil does not seem to touch off rebound 
sleepiness _ the ``crash'' familiar to amphetamine users _ after it 
is discontinued. If all this sounds too good to be true, it could 
turn out to be. More than a few promising drugs have shown serious 
problems once they became widely prescribed. The diet drugs Fen-phen, 
withdrawn from the market after patients developed heart valve problems, 
are a case in point. ``You've got to have the drug out there, and 
you've got to see what it does,'' said Dr. Philip Smith, director 
of the Johns Hopkins University Sleep Disorders Center, who was not 
involved in the Provigil trials. ``It would really mean something 
to have a medication that can stimulate the brain and keep it awake 
without juicing the whole system. The proof is in the pudding.'' Clinical 
trials of new drugs are typically small (558 patients at 39 sleep 
disorder clinics around the country took part in two trials of Provigil), 
and the studies are almost always financed by the drug company that 
wants to market the compound, a fact that some experts believe limits 
the usefulness of the research. And while France has four years of 
experience with Mododial, prescription of the drug there is tightly 
controlled, and its users have been limited to patients suffering 
from narcolepsy or from idiopathic hypersomnia, another relatively 
rare sleep disorder. Many questions about modafinil remain to be answered. 
Scientists do not know, for example, how long the drug can keep people 
awake, and they are only beginning to discover its effects on judgment, 
reaction time and other aspects of cognitive and physical performance. 
In one study, by Dr. Ross Pigeau, Dr. Joseph Baranski and their colleagues 
at the Canadian Defense and Civil Institute of Environmental Medicine, 
41 military reservists were deprived of sleep for 64 hours, given 
modafinil, an amphetamine or a dummy medication and were required 
to perform a repeated series of cognitive tasks. Those subjects on 
modafinil and amphetamines performed significantly better than those 
given a placebo. But the modafinil group, while experiencing fewer 
side effects than the amphetamine group, was also more likely to be 
overconfident, overestimating abilities after performance declined 
_ a problem that, if it proved common, could severely limit the drug's 
use in the general population. The biggest unanswered question about 
modafinil, however, is: How does it work? Central nervous system stimulants 
like amphetamines achieve their effects by increasing levels of chemical 
messengers in areas of the brain associated with arousal, and also 
with pleasure and locomotor activity. In particular, amphetamines 
act on a brain chemical called dopamine, which scientists believe 
is responsible for the euphoria the drugs produce and also their potential 
for abuse. Modafinil, in contrast, does not appear to affect dopamine, 
or if it does, it does so only very weakly. Nor does the drug seem 
to target other neurotransmitters _ adrenaline and serotonin, for 
example _ affected by amphetamines. Caffeine blocks the action of 
the chemical substance adenosine, which scientists believe promotes 
sleep. But modafinil, studies have found, seems indifferent to adenosine 
as well. Instead, work by Dr. Michel Jouvet, a French sleep researcher, 
and his colleagues suggests that modafinil increases cellular activity 
in an area of the brain adjacent to the suprachiasmatic nucleus, or 
SCN, the body's circadian clock. And this fits nicely with scientists' 
best guess as to how the brain maintains wakefulness, a theory developed 
by Edgar of Stanford. According to Edgar's theory, the sleep-wake 
cycle represents a battle between oppositional forces: the SCN, on 
the one hand, and the pressure to sleep on the other. The SCN, through 
communication with other brain areas, acts like an alarm ringing throughout 
the day to fight back sleepiness and maintain wakefulness. In the 
morning, when sleep pressure for humans is low, the SCN does not need 
to work very hard to keep a person awake. But as the day goes on, 
sleep pressure builds, and the bell rings louder and louder to fight 
off fatigue. At night, the clock's output diminishes, the clock stops 
ringing and the built-up sleep pressure rushes in, swooping the tired 
day warrior into the Land of Nod. Modafinil, Edgar and others believe, 
may act by somehow invoking the clock's natural alerting mechanism, 
keeping the alarm ``ringing'' well beyond the time when it normally 
shuts off. And if this is the case, modafinil and other drugs like 
it would offer the possibility of literally doing away with sleep, 
fooling the body into staying ``naturally'' awake for long periods. 
Would such a drug be a cure for shift workers and jet lagged travelers 
and overworked mothers with bills to pay and reports to file? Who 
would be permitted to take it? Police officers? Soldiers? Airplane 
pilots? These are questions, says Dr. David Dinges, chief of the Division 
of Sleep and Chronobiology in psychiatry at the University of Pennsylvania, 
that society will have to address sooner or later, as the new generation 
of wake-promoting drugs emerges. ``We are on an inexorable march to 
uncovering the biology of wakefulness and manipulating it,'' Dinges 
said. Modafinil may not live up to expectations. ``But when such a 
drug does arrive, it will change the world. Is it OK for us to become 
a nation that doesn't sleep? Until we know what sleep is for, and 
why it is so overwhelming, we're not going to be able to say it's 
OK to find a substitute for it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>