<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The climate of fear in Kosovo during the Yugoslav government's offensive 
against ethnic Albanian rebels has caused the rural health system 
to collapse, aid workers and the few remaining health workers say, 
and hundreds of civilians may have died as a result. The workers also 
say that doctors who have been treating civilian victims of the war 
have been arrested, beaten and in at least two cases killed by the 
government forces. While aid workers contend that they see a pattern 
of attacks on doctors, it is unclear whether it is an intentional 
effort to destroy the health care system or the inevitable result 
of war. Many of the doctors who previously served Kosovo's rural population 
have been afraid to give medical care to civilians in areas controlled 
by rebels, aid officials say. The few doctors who remained behind 
rebel lines are working without supplies and equipment, and in many 
cases their clinics have been destroyed. Doctors say that even with 
a cease-fire that is allowing many civilians to return to their villages, 
fear among doctors and their patients is so high that people continue 
to die needlessly for lack of care. Kosovo is a province of Serbia, 
which is the larger of the two republics that make up Yugoslavia. 
Ninety percent of the province's residents are ethnic Albanians. Government 
troops have destroyed many villages, including health clinics, and 
hundreds of civilians have died during the offensive. Many civilians 
in rebel-held areas are afraid to go to government-controlled areas 
for needed care, international medical officials say. Confronting 
a panorama of misery and illness, those officials say they do not 
have exact numbers of civilians who have died without treatment or 
of physicians who have be stopped from treating the ill. But they 
say that about 20 doctors have been arrested or have fled the country 
and that hundreds of civilians may have died because of the collapse 
of the rural health care system. The officials, fearful that their 
efforts will be stopped by the government, declined to give their 
names. ``This is a systematic policy on the part of the government,'' 
said a senior official of an international health agency, who spoke 
on the condition of anonymity. ``It is intended to remove medical 
people and to destroy the rural health care as much as they can get 
away with. It's working fairly well.'' Yugoslav goverment officials 
said that there was no policy of intimidating health care workers 
and that the doctors who had been arrested were guilty of supporting 
armed insurgents. In the area of Kosovo around Orahovac, and in other 
areas, civilians are afraid that if they leave rural zones where the 
rebels dominate to seek health care in the regional hospital, they 
will be arrested. For these people, medical care has virtually stopped, 
except for the simplest treatments or for care offered by the occasional 
visiting foreign doctors from aid agencies. Local doctors say that 
many of their colleagues have fled or have been arrested, sometimes 
on charges of aiding the rebels. Those remaining work without adequate 
medication or even electricity. On a rural road in that region on 
Sunday, a panic-stricken man, a father for 10 minutes, flagged down 
a passing car and said: ``My wife just had the baby, and then she 
lost consciousness. Get her to the hospital. No one from this area 
is safe taking her there.'' The nearest medical clinic was destroyed 
by government forces. A district health center in Malisevo is empty 
of staff and medicine, its doors barricaded and possibly booby-trapped 
by the Serbian police like other places in this area. The new father 
thought the presence of a journalist in the car would offer protection 
so that he could get his wife to the hospital. They had returned only 
the day before from three months of living in the open in the forest 
while hiding from government forces who had overrun and looted their 
village. Shukrije Krasniqi, 19, was quivering as her husband, Qamil, 
and his relatives wrapped her in blankets against a freezing drizzle, 
and put her in the car. His mother, Hanife Krasniqi, considering the 
idea carefully, decided to go too. The husband, fearing arrest, stayed 
behind. At the government hospital in Orahovac, the staff said Mrs. 
Krasniqi had suffered kidney failure and was close to death. They 
criticized her mother-in-law for not having made sure that she received 
good prenatal care. The mother-in-law took it, stiff with anger. She 
forced a smile and apologized. They transferred Mrs. Krasniqi from 
the car in which she had arrived to a filthy gurney with a torn, stained 
plastic cover and shoved it into an ambulance, banging her head against 
the spare tire. After demanding money to pay for gasoline, they sent 
her to the hospital in Pristina, the provincial capital, two hours 
away. She remained in critical condition there late on Monday. The 
baby girl survived. After destroying many villages and displacing 
more than 250,000 people, the government has withdrawn many of its 
forces from Kosovo under threats of NATO air strikes. But the fear 
remains. And as civilians who fled begin to come out of hiding and 
return to their villages, they and the doctors who cared for them 
report that many villagers died while on the run. ``We woke up to 
the sound of artillery shells coming in, and we just started to run,'' 
said a doctor in the village of Kisna Reka, describing the residents' 
earlier flight. ``There was no time to take medicine.'' He would only 
give his first name, Ismet, saying he feared arrest. ``In the mountains 
the old people and the babies were the weakest, and we could not help 
them all,'' he said. ``Unfortunately, some died.'' His clinic was 
destroyed. He has put together something makeshift and rather primitive. 
``This is where I will stay for a long time,'' he said, ``because 
for me it is too dangerous to leave.'' Asked if he was perhaps being 
too cautious, he quickly named four doctors, personal friends, two 
of whom had been killed, he said, and two of whom had been arrested. 
In central Kosovo two other doctors sat in their hideout on Sunday. 
Though they were well behind rebel lines, a 9-millimeter pistol was 
within quick reach on a window ledge. ``I haven't moved from this 
area for eight months,'' said Dr. Gani Halilaj. ``I know what will 
happen if they get me.'' The other physician, Dr. Fadil Beka, said, 
``Whenever the police interrogate someone from around here they always 
ask where the doctors are. But I have a good conscience, I know that 
doctors are to help people, anyone who needs their help.'' Beka, a 
surgeon, estimated he has done 300 operations in three months, somewhat 
less than half on wounded rebel fighters. The two doctors said they 
are only physicians in an area with about 15,000 people and that lack 
of medical supplies along with unsanitary living conditions have killed 
many of their patients. The clinic they put up to replace the one 
destroyed in the military offensive also houses 13 people. ``Three 
days ago I had a patient with tuberculosis,'' Halilaj said. ``Now, 
four others in his family have it too.'' Beka, speaking of the regional 
health center in the nearest town where the two doctors once worked, 
said, ``Before the offensive five other doctors used to come here, 
our colleagues from Glogovac. But it is too dangerous now and they 
won't take the risk.'' The U.N. refugee agency says nearly all of 
the estimated 50,000 refugees who had been living in the open have 
now gone home or have been taken in by others. The American State 
Department says some 10,000 still have no shelter. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>