<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0443 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The boutique owner said he had been lucky. He had heard from well-connected 
friends that Libya's dreaded ``purification committees'' would soon 
be back in action to enforce the spirit of the 1969 revolution against 
the monarchy by insuring that shopkeepers kept their prices at officially 
dictated limits. But it wasn't until Col. Moammar Gadhafi, the Libyan 
leader, reinforced that message in a speech in early October that 
the shopkeeper, who would provide only his given name, Mohammed, realized 
just how lucky he had been. ``Prices must be cut by whatever means, 
and if they are not cut, there will be violence,'' Gadhafi declared, 
adding that shopkeepers who did not act quickly might find that demonstrators 
would ``set their shops ablaze.'' No such violence has been reported. 
But on Tripoli's main streets, the warning was enough to persuade 
at least half the shopkeepers to close, fearful that raids by the 
committees would expose their prices as too high. Only shopkeepers 
like Mohammed, who had hurried ahead of time to negotiate revised 
prices for his foreign-made trousers, belts and shirts that he said 
will barely allow him to scrape by, have managed for now to remain 
in business. And what had become a thriving private sector, rich with 
imported clothes, foods and electronic and computer equipment, is 
again wrestling with the uncertainties imposed by a government practiced 
at unpredictability. ``This is not fair, but what is fair in this 
country anyway?'' said the wife of a shopkeeper who had to shut his 
business when the prices dictated by the committees meant that he 
would have to sell his goods at a loss. The crackdown by the purification 
committees, made up of army officers and students, is the second since 
they were formed in 1996 as part of what Gadhafi called an effort 
to curb ``speculation and corruption.'' In a country where most salaries 
have been frozen since 1981 and most people rely heavily on subsidized 
government goods, the drive has been popular among poorer Libyans, 
who cannot afford the Italian-made chocolates and cheeses that had 
been on display in now-shuttered shops on fashionable Gargarech Street 
here. But the enforcement tactics have infuriated many others, who 
describe them as an example of the deliberate confusion that many 
say can make living and doing business in Libya a maddening struggle. 
``The main purpose is to prevent people from getting too rich,'' a 
Western diplomat said. ``The conception is that people need to know 
that there is a certain limit beyond which people are punished, and 
punished severely, so that no one gets too comfortable.'' Private 
business is encouraged, though 70 percent of Libya's economy is still 
controlled by the state. But no one is free to set his own prices, 
and every shopkeeper must post an official list obtained from the 
government that in theory limits profits on each sale to 10 percent. 
In practice, some traders, like those everywhere, try to earn much 
more. But because Libya is officially a jamahiriya, or state of the 
masses, anyone tempted to violate the rules must keep watch not just 
for the police but also for members of ``revolutionary committees'' 
who report at periodic ``popular conferences'' about shopkeepers found 
to be charging prices that are too high. Under a 1996 law, any Libyan 
can be punished by death for speculating in currency, food, clothes 
or housing during a state of war or blockade _ including the U.N. 
sanctions that have been imposed since 1992, because of Libya's refusal 
to surrender suspects in the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am jetliner over 
Lockerbie, Scotland. In practice, the penalties have been less severe. 
But in the first crackdown, which lasted from the summer of 1996 to 
mid-1997, Tripoli-based diplomats said they believed that many dozens 
of people were arrested, while hundreds more were fined or ordered 
to shut their shops for good. And as memories of that episode have 
begun to fade, and prices began to creep back up, Libyan officials 
said it was only natural that Gadhafi issued his latest warning. On 
visits in which a reporter was accompanied by a government escort, 
shopkeepers said they had nothing to complain about. They said they 
believed that most of the shops that are closed now will soon reopen, 
once their owners negotiate new price lists with the authorities. 
But out of the escort's earshot, others said they feared that the 
government's latest efforts to force prices downward would eventually 
drive them out of business. ``This is the way the government wants 
it,'' complained a taxi driver, Ahmed, who like everyone who criticized 
the government, would not allow his full name to be published. ``They 
allow business to be good for two or three years, and then they knock 
everything back down.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>