<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0379 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Environmental regulators in California and Washington are preparing 
to require steep reductions in air pollution from cars and want to 
apply similar rules to sport utility vehicles, pickup trucks and minivans. 
Detroit's Big Three automakers have accepted that all these vehicles 
will have to become much cleaner. But they say that it is unrealistic 
to demand that full-size sport utility vehicles like the Chevrolet 
Tahoe and full-size pickup trucks like the Dodge Ram meet the same 
pollution standards as cars. The fight is centered now in California, 
where the California Air Resources Board is scheduled to vote Thursday 
on a plan that would reduce allowable car emissions of various smog-causing 
gases by up to 75 percent for vehicles built after 2003, and would 
require virtually all light trucks to meet these standards too. Once 
the board approves a plan, it takes effect without any further regulatory 
or legislative action but could be challenged in court. Detroit automakers 
have allied themselves with California landscapers, construction contractors, 
farmers and other small businessmen in a bid to force the board to 
authorize separate standards for full-size sport utility vehicles 
and pickup trucks. With help from Detroit, the California businesses 
have set up a group called Californians for Realistic Vehicle Standards. 
The group contends that automakers will not be able to sell affordable 
work vehicles if state regulators do not make an exception. The address 
of the month-old lobbying group is the Sacramento headquarters of 
the California Chamber of Commerce, while the group's telephone number 
is that of the Sacramento office of Burson-Marsteller, an international 
public relations firm often used by the auto industry. Detroit automakers 
provided the bulk of the money for the new group, but small businesses 
have also made contributions, said Allan Zaremberg, the chamber's 
president. Environmental Protection Agency officials were also drafting 
new air pollution regulations that would take effect for vehicles 
built after 2003, and hoped to issue them for public comment by early 
next year. The agency wants to apply car standards to minivans, mid-size 
pickup trucks and mid-size sport utility vehicles for the first time, 
and is waiting to see what will happen in California before deciding 
what to do with full-size sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks, 
people familiar with the agency's plans said. An agency official said 
Monday that the EPA had not yet made any decisions and would evaluate 
whatever California does. The federal agency has been following California's 
lead in a series of automobile emissions reductions for more than 
25 years. Sport utility vehicles, pickups and minivans are classified 
as light trucks and have been regulated as work vehicles for decades. 
All but the smallest are allowed to emit more gases that cause smog 
per mile than cars. Full-size sport utility vehicles and pickups are 
currently allowed to emit three times as much smog-causing nitrogen 
oxide per mile as cars, for example. Cars and light trucks alike pollute 
far less now than in the 1950s because of innovations like catalytic 
converters. But with three-quarters of all light trucks now used by 
families instead of businesses, regulatory interest in them has been 
rising. Air pollution standards are set in terms of grams per mile, 
but large light trucks have big engines that pump through considerably 
more air per mile and therefore tend to pollute more. It may not be 
technically possible to make full-size sport utility vehicles like 
the Chevrolet Tahoe and full-size pickup trucks like the Chevrolet 
Silverado meet car standards, said Sam Leonard, the director of vehicular 
emissions policy at General Motors Corp. The staff of the air resources 
board estimated that it would add $96 to $304 a vehicle to meet the 
new rules. The American Automobile Manufacturers Association, a trade 
group for domestic automakers, has made a counter-proposal to the 
California regulators. It wants even deeper reductions in car emissions 
than California has proposed. Minivans, mid-size pickup trucks and 
mid-size sport utility vehicles, like the Ford Explorer and Chevrolet 
Blazer, would be required to meet these very low car standards for 
the first time in the proposal from the automakers. But full-size 
sport utility vehicles and full-size pickup trucks would be allowed 
to emit twice as much of a key pollutant, nitrogen oxide, as cars. 
This would still represent a steep reduction in pollution from these 
vehicles, Leonard said. This proposal was rejected by the staff of 
the California Air Resource Board because the total reduction in pollution 
from cars and light trucks would be 10 percent less than under the 
staff's plan. The domestic automakers' proposal reflects their business 
interests. The California car market is dominated by Toyota Camrys, 
Honda Accords and other Asian brands, while Detroit has had the most 
success in the state in selling very large light trucks like Lincoln 
Navigators and GMC Yukons. Asian automakers, most of which have their 
headquarters in California and considerable political clout as a result, 
are not supporting the domestic industry's plan, contending that car 
pollution standards should not be tightened beyond the California 
board's initial proposal. While Detroit's automakers have presented 
a united front in their California lobbying, they have shown different 
degrees of enthusiasm. GM and Chrysler Corp. have taken a hard line. 
But Ford Motor Co. perceives a marketing advantage in offering cleaner 
light trucks. Its chairman-elect, William Clay Ford Jr., is a longtime 
advocate of environmental causes. Beginning with the 1999 model year, 
all Ford sport utility vehicles are roughly as clean as current cars; 
the California Air Resources Board tested a 1999 Ford Expedition full-size 
sport utility and found that it came fairly close to meeting the proposed 
new standard. Kelly Brown, Ford's director of vehicle environmental 
engineering, said that Ford was working on even cleaner Expeditions 
but was not sure when they could be built. But Brown said that most 
of the California board's proposals were feasible. ``About 90 percent 
of what they asked us to do, we can do,'' Brown said, adding that 
Ford's interest in cleaner light trucks had caused a rift within the 
auto industry. ``It makes you the skunk at the picnic at an industry 
meeting.'' The California plan, which was drafted by the air resources 
board's staff, has two concessions to the auto industry, but domestic 
automakers argue that these are inadequate. The first concession is 
that very large light trucks weighing more than 8,500 pounds when 
fully loaded will be permitted to meet more lenient standards. This 
includes some very large pickup trucks, four-wheel-drive versions 
of the Chevrolet Suburban and an even bigger sport utility vehicle 
that Ford plans to introduce next year that will be the world's largest 
sport utility vehicle. The second concession is that 4 percent of 
each manufacturer's light trucks weighing less than 8,500 pounds fully 
loaded will also be allowed to meet a more lenient standard, provided 
they also can carry large quantities of freight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>