<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0249 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is called Pilates, and I had been hearing about it for some time 
but dismissed it as a faddish '90s workout. It fit the mold perfectly: 
It had the requisite exotic name (pronounced puh-LAH-tees), you had 
to go to a gym to do it, and celebrities hailed it as a miracle workout 
that managed, with perfect '90s perversity, to give shapely women 
the bodies of 12-year-old boys. Pilates, I had heard, involved archaic 
equipment with names like ``the reformer'' and ``the barrel,'' but 
that was about all I knew when I arrived at TriBeCa Bodyworks, a Pilates 
studio on Duane Street, determined to see if my bias was well-founded. 
A model-thin woman blew by me, a single line of sweat dripping down 
her radiant cheek. Great. I hated the place already. Alycea Baylis-Ungaro, 
the owner of the studio, had instructed me to bring loose clothing 
and to wear socks. No sneakers were necessary. Showing me to the changing 
room, she whispered, ``Even men do Pilates. We get a lot of them.'' 
It is true. During my workouts at least one-third were men. Besides, 
there is, as I soon learned, nothing feminine about Pilates. The exercise 
method was invented by a man, Joseph Pilates, a boxer and physical 
therapist from Germany. Obsessed with body conditioning, he developed 
the framework for Pilates while serving as a nurse during World War 
I. So that patients could exercise in bed, he redesigned a hospital 
bed and developed simple exercises. Modern Pilates apparatus relies 
on the use of springs to provide resistance, much like weights, but 
easier on the body. He opened the first Pilates Studio in the United 
States in New York City in 1926. A workout developed that long ago, 
when athletes smoked and tennis players wore long pants? Still, I 
signed up for three one-hour Pilates sessions. The first, Alycea said, 
would just be introductory. For $65, she would lead me through the 
fundamental exercises. Later sessions would get more intense, Alycea 
promised, at $55 a session. A bargain! I could not quite believe I 
was handing over this much money to exercise. I am a reasonable person. 
I live near a park. I own a pair of sneakers. Why not just put them 
on and run around the park? The reason became clearer with each exercise. 
Alycea took me to the reformer, a long, low, bedlike apparatus with 
a flat, padded carriage that slid back and forth the length of the 
bed. It made a dentist's chair look friendly. Alycea had me lie face 
up on the carriage, with my knees bent and my feet on a raised steel 
bar at the end of the apparatus. I was to straighten my legs as I 
pulled in my stomach. The carriage, which is set on three long springs, 
was difficult to slide out, then snapped back against the end of the 
apparatus with a loud ``Bang!'' that echoed through the studio. Heads 
turned. Alycea did not look pleased. The next time, I was told, do 
it smoothly, no banging. And I was told to stop arching my back. Pilates 
exercises are designed to protect and strengthen the back. ``The more 
distance you put between your belly button and your spine, the more 
pressure you put on your back,'' Alycea said. By changing the position 
of my feet on the steel bar and pushing, I worked different muscle 
groups in my legs while working my stomach muscles. ``It's a real 
New York workout because it's really efficient,'' Alycea said. ``You 
have to use all your muscles at once.'' And you get it all in a neat 
and snappy 60 minutes. We moved on to more complex movements, my least 
favorite being the ``hundreds.'' Lying face up on the reformer, I 
had to raise my feet six inches, suck in my stomach, squeeze my buttocks 
together and, holding a stirrup set on springs in each hand, keep 
my arms at my sides and bounce them up and down, 100 times. With so 
many details to focus on, you hardly feel the pain. I was beginning 
to understand why Pilates called his workout contrology. For every 
exercise that focuses on strengthening muscle, another stretches the 
body and encourages balance. And each movement _ whether a derivative 
of the sit up with legs jutting in the air, or lying flat and pulling 
on leather harnesses attached to springs _ involves stabilizing the 
core of the body, the torso and buttocks, while moving the arms or 
legs. (This is the part that appeals to women: The movements are small 
and repetitions are short, so you tone muscle without bulking up.) 
After about a half hour on the reformer, Alycea introduced me to ``the 
Cadillac,'' which looked a lot like a gurney with harnesses and pulleys. 
After more stomach exercises, including sit ups and leg lifts, Alycea 
had me lie on my back and put my feet into the harnesses. With my 
feet above my head and my back raised off of the mat, I was hung like 
a side of beef. Then, using my stomach muscles, I had to pull my body 
down to the mat against the resistance of the springs, curling my 
spine, vertebra by vertebra. It felt as if I was stretching every 
bone in my back. But there was no pain. Instead, I felt stress ebbing 
until it was gone. I could have done it all day. But that was not 
the best part. Alycea had me sit up and stretch to touch my toes while 
she pushed and rubbed my back. I was forgetting about the $65. I left 
my first session with my stomach muscles dazed and confused, but I 
was still troubled that I had not broken a sweat. But when I arrived 
for my second session, Alycea reminded me that the reformer workout 
did not get longer, it got faster. ``And that's where the aerobics 
come in,'' she said. And did they ever. I was more relaxed with the 
machines and my movements became smoother and faster. But when I slowed 
down, I heard about it. At most Pilates gyms, you do individual sessions 
with a personal trainer to learn the movements _ there are more than 
500 _ until you get up to pace. After about 30 sessions, you can advance 
to what is called a duet _ two people with a trainer _ then to groups 
of three and four. I had never employed a personal trainer, but I 
found that having one by my side was surprisingly comforting. I liked 
having someone there to coddle me while I suffered through the workout. 
Besides, it is far too easy and tempting to cheat with Pilates. What 
is extraordinary about Pilates is its broad appeal. Some professional 
dancers do it to maintain flexibility and stay fit without adding 
excess stress to their bodies. And unlike running or aerobics, Pilates 
is good for the elderly, people with injuries, and even pregnant women. 
``They do it right up to delivery,'' Alycea said. As for me, Pilates 
was a revelation. I had not realized how tight my muscles had become 
working in an office, slouching over a computer keyboard. By the third 
session, I was a convert. I was getting the aerobic workout I wanted 
while regaining some of the flexibility I had lost. But if I start 
to get that 12-year-old boy look, I just may have to ease off. For 
a while, anyway. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>