<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0410 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As Doug Flutie walked off the field on Sunday, fresh from leading 
the Buffalo Bills to a big victory as quarterback for a franchise 
that has had a lot of big victories, he was surrounded by a mob of 
people. The team's public-relations man walked with his arm around 
Flutie, playing the role of a blocker watching Flutie's backside, 
protecting him from the news media throng. There were dozens of microphones 
jammed into Flutie's face, cameras rolling, questions yelled at him 
as if he were campaigning for governor. It was one of those scenes 
that once in a while causes even the most bitter sports fan to crack 
a smile. Watching a good man get revenge on a sometimes arrogant league 
is a pleasant thing. Of course, Flutie appreciates the situation. 
In a quiet moment away from the attention, he was asked if it had 
sunk in that the man who over a decade ago couldn't get a job in a 
National Football League mail room is one of the main reasons why 
the American Football Conference East has become the best conference 
in pro football. Flutie smiled that smile that graces the box of his 
new cereal, Flutie Flakes. ``Yes,'' he said, ``funny how things work 
out.'' Funny, indeed. For the last few years, the AFC East has been 
one of the more boring divisions in football. Now, by far, it is the 
most competitive and fun division to watch, full of great coaches, 
solid quarterback play and good defense. The Jets, Miami, Buffalo 
and New England are all tied for first place, with 5-3 records. It 
is the first time since 1987, in any division, that there are four 
or more teams tied for first this late in the season. ``We're stacked 
up like club sandwiches,'' Jets Coach Bill Parcells said. Flutie is 
the wild card. If he were still stuck playing his football in the 
Canadian Football League, where his biggest television audience in 
America was 10 inebriated snowboarders watching ESPN2, the division 
would not be the same. He adds that much. But there are other reasons, 
just as important, why the AFC East has become the showcase division, 
stealing the title from the NFC East, the last powerhouse division 
in football. Those reasons include: -- The Great Migration. A number 
of coaches and players have left the NFC East and joined their AFC 
counterparts. Jimmy Johnson coached the Dallas Cowboys to three Super 
Bowls and is now with Miami. Parcells paid a lot of toll money crossing 
the George Washington Bridge from the Giants to the Patriots and then 
back to the Jets. The Dolphins were a soft team under Don Shula in 
the 1990's, but then came Johnson, who hardened Miami with his brutal 
inside-rushing drills, something Cowboys players to this day insist 
helped add an extra layer of toughness. Under Rich Kotite, practice 
for Jets players resembled a round of golf. Now, if Parcells isn't 
screaming at players to work harder during practice, he's walking 
out in disgust. Parcells likes tough veterans _ he had a bunch of 
them with the Giants _ and some of those players went with him to 
the Jets. They brought that hard-hitting, nasty NFC East style of 
football to the AFC East. Pepper Johnson spent much of his career 
with the Giants and Keith Byars made his name mainly in Philadelphia. 
Offensive lineman Jumbo Elliott played with the Giants, and is now 
with the Jets. ``When we went to the Super Bowl,'' Patriots quarterback 
Drew Bledsoe said recently, ``Bill brought a lot of NFC East players 
to the Patriots and they were key to us getting to the championship. 
David Meggett was a good player for us, as he was with the Giants. 
Now, you can see Bill is doing the same thing in New York.'' -- The 
Quarterback's Best Friend. Remember the late 1980s when Dan Marino 
and Jim Kelly would get into 42-40 shootouts? Not anymore. The AFC 
East is about ball control and defense _ just like the NFC East used 
to be. There has been great quarterback play in the division, with 
Flutie and the Jets' Vinny Testaverde leading the league with 102.7 
and 101.6 ratings. But the running backs have been the key. New England's 
Robert Edwards, Miami's Karim Abdul-Jabbar and John Avery, Buffalo's 
Antowain Smith and the Jets' Curtis Martin have all played well. They 
are the main reason why three of the top four teams in the AFC in 
time of possession are in the East _ Buffalo is second at 32 minutes 
1 second, Miami third at 31:37 and the Jets fourth at 31:06. Miami 
is also first in the conference in red-zone offense because Abdul-Jabbar 
is so good at scoring near the goal line. And Buffalo is tied with 
the Denver Broncos for second because Smith is one of the most powerful 
inside runners in the league. Defensively, Parcells and his coordinator, 
Bill Belichick, have slowly turned an average group of players into 
a top unit. In their last three games, the Jets have given up an average 
of 234 total yards a game and 3.5 yards per rushing attempt, down 
from 334 yards and 4.4 yards a carry in the first five games of the 
season Miami has one of the top-ranked defense in football, just like 
the Cowboys had the top defense under Johnson. -- Attitude. Flutie 
embodies it. Bills players like Rob Johnson personally, but the man 
Flutie replaced five weeks ago, several players said, doesn't have 
the inner confidence Flutie has. The players said that Flutie is flat-out 
cocky _ not in a bad way _ but Flutie believes there is nothing he, 
or a team he is quarterbacking cannot do. That confidence comes from 
Flutie's being told his entire career that he couldn't do something, 
only to constantly prove people wrong. Now, Flutie is a great story 
in a division of great stories. The Broncos, in the AFC West, are 
the class of the conference and the league. If Buffalo, Miami, the 
Jets or New England have Super Bowl aspirations, the road goes through 
Mile High Stadium. But maybe that Flutie magic goes beyond the Bills 
and can elevate the AFC East to the point where one of them could 
beat the Broncos in the playoffs. If Flutie can sell his own cereal, 
anything can happen. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>