<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0420 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a small hiccup upward last spring, daily and Sunday newspaper 
circulation continued to decline, according to figures released Monday, 
but the group that has kept these unflattering industry measurements 
is on the verge of giving publishers a chance to supplement the old 
numbers with new data about their sales and readership. Paid circulation 
is now down almost 11 percent from its 1984 peak of 63.3 million readers, 
according to a report from the Audit Bureau of Circulations. For the 
six months ended Sept. 30, total paid circulation was down three-tenths 
of a percent compared with figures from the period a year earlier. 
Sunday circulation slipped more than twice as fast, down eight-tenths 
of a percent. At a meeting later this week, the governing board of 
the audit bureau is expected to give preliminary approval to the first 
new reporting format in years, enabling publishers to supplement their 
standard reports with an additional set of ``total distribution'' 
figures, which would include heavily discounted and complimentary 
copies not counted in the current paid circulation figures. For instance, 
The Wall Street Journal, published by Dow Jones, has prepared a ``statement 
of total circulation'' for the six-month period ended in March. The 
total circulation listed was more than 75,000 more than the newspaper's 
official paid circulation. For more than a year, some publishers have 
been seeking to expand the formal reporting options offered by the 
audit bureau, whose 34-member governing board includes advertisers 
and newspaper and magazine publishers. A second vote expected this 
week is likely to approve standardized readership surveys. ``There 
is no question that many in the industry have been frustrated and 
searching for new and better ways to grow circulation,'' said Jeremy 
L. Halbreich, the former president and general manager of The Dallas 
Morning News, who is moderating a debate on the question at the audit 
bureau's annual meeting later this week. The Dallas paper is owned 
by the A.H. Belo Corp. ``This is not a palliative for that,'' he added. 
``It's a recognition that in today's media market place, the competition 
is stiffer than ever before. For certain segments of the potential 
audience, newspapers need some additional marketing flexibility.'' 
After years of decline in paid circulation _ which audit bureau regulations 
define as copies sold at a discount of 50 percent or less off the 
newsstand price _ industry executives had taken some comfort from 
the figures released in March, which showed the first overall gain 
in paid circulation in years. Monday's circulation report, however, 
was a sobering reminder of the difficulty the business has competing 
for attention with television, radio, the Internet, magazines and 
other distractions. Three of the five largest newspapers in the country 
saw circulation declines, including a steep drop of 25,000 copies 
at The Wall Street Journal, the nation's best-selling newspaper. The 
Journal's average daily circulation dropped almost 2 percent, to 1,740,450 
from 1,774,880 in the period a year earlier. The New York Times and 
The Washington Post also registered declines. The Times dropped to 
1,066,658, down more than 0.7 percent from 1,074,741 in the period 
a year earlier. The drop put it behind The Los Angeles Times, which 
is owned by the Times Mirror Co. The Los Angeles Times saw its average 
circulation gain 1.7 percent, to 1,067,540. The Washington Post reported 
a circulation of 759,122, down 1.8 percent from its September 1997 
total of 772,937. Sunday circulation at The New York Times and The 
Washington Post also decreased. Sunday circulation at The Times sank 
to 1,627,099, down almost 2 percent, from 1,658,718 in the period 
a year earlier. The Post's Sunday circulation dropped to 1,090,082, 
down about 1.7 percent from its 1997 total of 1,099,174. Among the 
top five newspapers, Gannett's USA Today continued its long upward 
trend, with circulation rising to 1,653,428, up 1.5 percent from 1,629,665 
last year. The report, said John Morton, an industry analyst who runs 
his own firm, Morton Research, in Maryland, ``shows the continued 
weakness in newspaper circulation.'' ``It shows the sluggishness in 
circulation continues unabated,'' he added. ``These figures are a 
hangover of the time when everybody was raising their rates so rapidly. 
In the good old days, it used to take six or eight months to recover 
form a price increase. Now it takes anywhere from two to three years.'' 
But John Sturm, the executive director of the Newspaper Association 
of America, said that over all the September losses were more than 
offset by the March gains, making the year's results ``basically flat.'' 
He acknowledged, however, that he had thought the September figures 
would show ``more positive territory.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>