<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0471 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the Jets' resurgence to a four-way tie atop the American Football 
Conference East, the unheralded defense is playing a critical role. 
But exactly who are these guys who baffled the Kansas City Chiefs 
and a national television audience on Sunday? Who exactly is Rick 
Lyle, the lineman who batted away two Elvis Grbac passes as if he 
were a free safety? Who is Dwayne Gordon, the linebacker who ran back 
an interception for a touchdown? Or Corwin Brown, a backup defensive 
back who intercepted Grbac on the 1-yard line? It's simple. They are 
a collection of bargain-basement free agents. Not a million-dollar 
acquisition among them. Seven starters were acquired during the Bill 
Parcells era. All of them were let go by their previous teams. At 
least one came with some baggage packed with controversy. In fact, 
since one of those players, middle linebacker Pepper Johnson, splits 
the position with another former free agent, Gordon, the Jets are 
using eight free agents for the bulk of the defensive work. Yet, for 
a unit that will never be compared to the Sack Exchange _ it is ranked 
25th in the National Football League in sacks _ the Jets' defense 
boasts favorable numbers: _ They are co-leaders in the NFL with fewest 
touchdown passes permitted (seven). _ They rank seventh in the league 
in yardage allowed; a turnaround after finding themselves 30th, and 
last, after Game 1 at San Francisco. _ Only four teams in the league 
have given up fewer points a game than the Jets (17.3). Not coincidentally, 
almost all the free agents (Lyle and his fellow linemen Ernie Logan 
and Anthony Pleasant, linebackers Johnson and Bryan Cox, cornerback 
Otis Smith and free safety Jerome Henderson) have a connection with 
Bill Belichick, who runs the defense, and Scott Pioli, whose personnel 
evaluations have been pivotal in the Jets' reversal of fortune. The 
three linemen all played for Belichick in Cleveland, where Pioli was 
a personnel scout. Johnson, who starred under Parcells with the Giants, 
eventually performed in Cleveland under Belichick. Smith and Henderson 
played for New England, where Parcells was head coach and Belichick 
his top assistant. Only Cox and Gordon didn't have a history with 
the Jets' brain trust, although Parcells and Cox often ran into each 
other at Gulfstream Park race track in Florida. Each owned horses. 
Parcells wasn't bothered by Cox's history of being fined by his own 
teams for his outspoken comments or by the league for on-the-field 
behavior. Cox has replaced last season's top draft pick, James Farrior, 
who suffered a season-ending injury. So after half a season, this 
mostly no-name defense has helped the Jets win five of their last 
six games, and may erase the remaining questions, if there are any 
left, of Parcells' ability to judge talent. Asked Monday about Parcells' 
success with reclamation projects, Gordon replied: ``It's just taking 
chances. I think maybe he sees some things in people that others don't. 
When I came here, one of the first things he said to me, after one 
of our first scrimmages, `Why didn't you play in San Diego?' Right 
then and there, I knew he appreciated what I could do on the field. 
He's going to tell each and every player what he needs, so there is 
no confusion. There is no: `I don't know what I'm doing wrong. I don't 
know why I'm not making the trip.' You know why and you need to work 
on correcting that problem so you can go on trips.'' Smith, for example, 
was beaten for nine touchdowns last season. He has not been touched 
for one this year. He didn't even permit Andre Rison one reception 
in the 20-17 victory at Kansas City. Henderson wasn't even starting 
until two games ago, when an angry Parcells benched rookie Kevin Williams, 
who was late for a team meeting. Now Parcells has decided to leave 
Henderson in. ``What we've got going now,'' Lyle said, ``is knowing 
how to do it _ and to make sure we carry it forward.'' Brown is one 
of Parcells' trusted special-teams lieutenants from the Patriots days. 
A year ago, the Jets were winning games with their special teams as 
the offense was trying to establish itself. This season the unit hasn't 
had a big Leon Johnson punt return as it did last year, nor has it 
generated a crushing kickoff _ until Aaron Glenn's 62-yarder on Sunday. 
There has been more pressure on the defense to produce this season, 
especially since the Jets are facing a harder schedule. ``I think 
that finally some of the guys are believing we can do it,'' Brown 
said. ``I know that the other teams are starting to think so.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>