<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0197 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Depression among older people is an often unrecognized and untreated 
problem that can tarnish the golden years for millions of people who 
might otherwise find joy, not anguish, in their old age. That includes 
older people in nursing homes as well as those living independently. 
Experts estimate that as many as 90 percent of depressed elderly Americans 
are not being treated. More than five million Americans age 65 and 
older _ nearly one in six _ suffer from serious, persistent symptoms 
of depression, and another one million have major clinical depression, 
an immobilizing disorder that can lead to suicide. From 1980 to 1992, 
suicide rates rose by 9 percent among all Americans 65 and older and 
by 35 percent among those aged 80 to 84. Only a small percentage of 
those deaths are believed to represent a calculated escape from an 
incurable, incapacitating illness. Most older people contemplating 
suicide see their primary care doctor within the month before killing 
themselves, and 40 percent make that visit in the week before committing 
suicide. Rarely do these doctors detect suicidal potential in older 
people before it is too late. The failure to treat depression in the 
elderly, as in younger people, is a costly mistake. It can lead to 
a loss of self-reliance and the ability to live independently, which 
in turn increases the burden on other family members and the cost 
of daily care and medical care. Depression increases the likelihood 
that a serious physical illness will develop or get worse. Depressed 
older people make more medical visits, require more tests and stay 
longer in hospitals. Also lost is the contribution they can make to 
their families and society, including caring for children and elderly 
friends, meal preparation, tutoring and volunteer work for myriad 
social and cultural organizations. Many mistaken beliefs and expectations 
about depression and aging impede effective treatment that would brighten 
the days of older people, improve their physical health and enhance 
their relationships with family members and friends. MYTH It is natural 
to become increasingly depressed with age. FACT Dr. Barry Liebowitz, 
an expert on the emotional disorders of aging at the National Institute 
of Mental Health, said, ``Depression is not the outcome of natural 
processes of aging and should not be considered normal.'' Advancing 
age per se does not cause depression. MYTH Of course older people 
are depressed; their spouses and friends are dying all around them. 
FACT The death of spouses, companions and friends can cause profound 
sadness and sometimes even major depression, but at any age mentally 
healthy people bounce back from such losses and, within a year or 
so, find new sources of support and pleasure. Untreated depression, 
on the other hand, often results in social isolation, which only exacerbates 
the depression. MYTH So many older people have serious health problems, 
why wouldn't they be depressed. FACT Mentally healthy people of any 
age who have chronic physical disabilities or diseases soon learn 
to adapt to their limitations and get the most out of life that they 
can. It is not so much that illness causes depression as that depression 
increases the risk of illness, functional decline and even symptoms 
of dementia. Sometimes, however, the biological consequences of a 
health problem _ not the person's reaction to it _ or the medications 
used to treat another illness can cause depression. For example, as 
many as 40 percent of stroke victims experience changes in brain chemicals, 
and those changes result in chronic depression. Experts also suspect 
that there are many other older people who become depressed following 
hidden strokes, including transient ischemic attacks. MYTH Older people 
who are healthy and financially secure have no reason to be depressed; 
they should be happy about their good fortune. FACT With rare exception, 
depression is a medical illness. People who are ill with diabetes 
or arthritis, say, are not expected to cure themselves by changing 
their mental outlook. If people who are depressed could ``look on 
the bright side,'' ``pull themselves together '' or ``be grateful 
for all the good things'' _ as they are often told to do _ they would. 
What they need is concern, compassion and effective treatment. At 
any age, depression can be difficult to diagnose because it has many 
different causes and symptoms. In older people, the picture is often 
complicated by the coexistence of other serious physical problems 
that overshadow the depression. Too often, depression is overlooked 
because it is seen as ``understandable'' in light of the person's 
other problems. But whether depression is precipitated by death of 
a spouse or a heart attack or it seems to strike out of the blue, 
it warrants professional attention. In every case, relief of the depression 
can facilitate a person's return to normal functioning. Among the 
elderly, the classic symptoms of depression _ deep sadness and lack 
of pleasure in people and activities they once enjoyed _ are often 
replaced by irritability and apathy, a pervasive disinterest in life 
and what it may have to offer. Other common hallmarks of depression 
in the elderly include difficulty concentrating, memory lapses, loss 
of appetite, diminished energy and a physical slowing down. These 
symptoms are easily mistaken for signs of age _ and disregarded. Liebowitz, 
writing in The Decade of the Brain, a publication of the National 
Alliance for the Mentally Ill, pointed out that ``depression is chronic 
and recurring and requires long-term treatment accompanied by lifestyle 
changes and, commonly, environmental manipulations. Social support 
_ particularly from family members _ is critical.'' In other words, 
treating depression in the elderly is similar to treating it in younger 
people. But there are some important differences. Dr. Herbert Harris, 
also of the National Institute of Mental Health, noted that adverse 
reactions to antidepressant drugs are more common in older people, 
who tend to develop unwanted side effects even at relatively low doses. 
Doctors must also look out for adverse interactions with other medicines 
the patients take. Sometimes the patient must try several different 
treatments in succession before the one with the most benefit and 
fewest side effects is found. Older people who are depressed can also 
be their worst enemies. Compliance with treatment tends to be poor 
and short-lived, particularly in light of drug side effects, the number 
of drugs many of them have to take for other conditions and the lack 
of follow-up by the prescribing physician. Another inhibiting factor 
in effective treatment is the belief of doctors and family members 
that depression is the least of an older person's problems and not 
worth treating. Yet, Dr. George Alexopoulos, a psychiatrist at Cornell 
University Medical College, reports that treating depression in a 
patient with Alzheimer's disease, for example, improves both the depression 
and the symptoms of dementia. And among patients with heart disease 
and those living in nursing homes, treating depression improves physical 
functioning, decreases pain, improves the person's outlook and prolongs 
life. Help for Depression The following organizations can provide 
helpful information about the detection and treatment of depression 
for people of all ages. National Alliance for the Mentally Ill, 200 
North Blebe Rd., Suite 1015, Arlington, Va. 22203, 1-800-950-6264, 
www.nami.org. National Depressive and Manic Depressive Association, 
730 North Franklin St., Suite 501, Chicago, Ill. 60610, 1-800-826-3632, 
www.ndmda.org. National Foundation for Depressive Illness, P.O. Box 
2257, New York, N.Y. 10116, 1-800-248-4344. Depression/Awareness, 
Recognition and Treatment Program, National Institute of Mental Health, 
5600 Fishers Lane, Suite 10C03, Rockville, Md.20857, 1-800-421-4211. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>