<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0421 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On the day before the season was supposed to start, Billy Hunter, 
the executive director of the National Basketball Players Association, 
said Monday that no agreement was imminent in the labor impasse and 
that he thought the season would not begin until next year. Hunter's 
remarks dispelled any notion that the team owners and the players 
were headed toward a settlement any time soon, despite long, intensive 
bargaining sessions last week. ``My gut tells me that in January we 
could be playing,'' he said in a conference call with reporters. ``I 
would anticipate the season would start around the first part of January.'' 
Russ Granik, deputy commissioner of the National Basketball Association, 
said he agreed with Hunter that an agreement was not close. Hunter's 
declaration came after representatives of the owners and players met 
for about two and a half hours at a New York law firm. Union officials, 
speaking on the condition of anonymity, said the divide was over the 
mechanics of an escrow system proposed by the owners. The plan would 
have been put into effect after two or three years of employing a 
luxury-tax system to curb salaries. In those escrow plan years, the 
sides would determine at the end of each season how much revenue was 
devoted to player salaries. If a target number was exceeded, part 
of the escrow money would be returned and distributed to all 29 teams. 
It was unclear how far apart the sides were. Hunter said that he was 
trying to stop recent news media speculation that an agreement would 
be reached as early as this week. ``I don't know where that information 
came from, but I can indicate that I don't see any possibility at 
all of reaching an agreement this week, and I can't say how soon it 
will be,'' he said. Before the disagreement on how the escrow system 
should be put in place, the biggest stumbling block was what revenue 
percentages should be after the system had been in place for a few 
years. The players are asking for 60 percent; the owners are offering 
50. No talks are scheduled until Tuesday, when NBA Commissioner David 
Stern, Granik and the league lawyers will meet with Hunter, union 
president Patrick Ewing and their legal team. Hunter said an earlier 
plan to have full negotiating teams present was scrapped. Hunter said 
that Monday was used to iron out some of the mechanics for calculating 
salary caps and other issues. ``There was little or no progress,'' 
he said. Under a normal schedule, players would have gone through 
their last practices Monday before openers around the country tonight. 
Meanwhile, fans of professional basketball are split over who is more 
justified in the labor dispute, according to the latest nationwide 
New York Times/CBS News Poll. The players are supported by 36 percent 
of fans, while 29 percent side with the owners, according to the poll. 
Nine percent said neither side was more in the right, and 25 percent 
didn't have an opinion. Male fans are evenly divided: 32 percent support 
the players and 34 percent endorse the owners' position. Female fans' 
sentiment was more inclined to be with the players: among the women 
interested in professional basketball, 41 percent sided with the players 
and 24 with support the owners. The telephone poll was conducted Oct. 
21-25 with 1,118 adults, 39 percent of whom said they were very or 
somewhat interested in professional basketball. The margin of sampling 
error for basketball fans in the poll is plus or minus 5 percentage 
points. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>