<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0290 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Until Binjamin Wilkomirski's truth came into conflict with his own 
legal identity, the slim memoir of his Jewish childhood in the concentration 
camps of Poland was hailed as a ``small masterpiece,'' a searing sketch 
of death and horror _ rats rummaging among corpses, starving babies 
sucking fingers to the bone, a dying mother's last glimpse of her 
son. International Jewish groups showered the 155-page memoir, ``Fragments,'' 
with endorsements and prizes: the National Jewish Book Award in the 
United States, the Prix Memoire de la Shoah in France and the Jewish 
Quarterly Literary Prize in Britain. The U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum 
sent the first-time author and Swiss musician on a six-city fund-raising 
tour last fall. The book was translated into more than a dozen languages, 
an achievement considered the biggest global success for a Swiss book 
since ``Heidi.'' But the shards of Wilkomirski's ``knife-sharp'' memories 
had more edge than any of his publishers or backers envisioned. His 
identity is now in doubt and his publishers are in the awkward position 
of insisting that they believe that he is a Latvian Jew who survived 
the Holocaust. This despite legal records identifying him as the son 
of a Swiss woman and indicating he was born two years later than indicated 
in the subtitle of the original German edition of the book. While 
some publishers plead for a reprieve or an ``editorial habeas corpus'' 
for the author, the international debate about the authenticity of 
the memoir has exposed the tensions between art and commerce. Nonfiction, 
for example, sells better than fiction with an author who plays the 
role of promoter and poster child, and the prestige of endorsements 
give such books almost invincible credibility. ``Fragments'' was first 
published in Germany in 1995, but it was not until this summer that 
questions were raised publicly about Wilkomirski's bleak memories 
of childhood, dating from 1939 to 1948. Wilkomirski's literary version 
is that he was a Latvian Jew whose earliest memories are of the beating 
death of his father in the winter in Riga, followed by fragmented 
images of imprisonment at the age of 3 or 4 in Majdanek in Poland 
and a second concentration camp that he never identifies. These scenes, 
described in a child's unflinching voice, were recovered through therapy, 
Wilkomirski says, and he has participated in seminars in Europe describing 
the techniques. But the counterimage of Wilkomirski's life is far 
more mundane. The one that has emerged from legal records and Swiss 
news reports is that he is Swiss, was born in February 1941 in Biel 
to an unmarried Protestant woman, Yvonne Grosjean, and was later adopted 
by an upper-middle-class Zurich couple, all of whom are now dead. 
The manuscript was circulated by a respected and prominent literary 
agent in Switzerland to publishers, including a Jewish imprint of 
a well-known German publisher, Suhrkamp Verlag. The American publisher, 
Schocken Books, an imprint of Random House, relied in turn on the 
judgment of the German publisher. Suhrkamp did do some checking with 
experts and asked for further verification, which resulted in an afterword 
in the book that noted contradictions between Wilkomirksi's memories 
and legal records. ``You've got his declaration where he is clarifying 
his position,'' said Thomas Sparr, an editor at Suhrkamp, who noted 
that his company accepted Wilkomirski's explanation that he could 
not find his original birth records and that he had doubts about the 
reliability of his adoption records. ``Why shouldn't we trust our 
authors? The book was published three years ago, and I did not get 
any hint that it was wrong.'' Other publishers also trusted Wilkomirski's 
sincerity and were impressed by his prose, which was so plain and 
powerful that The New York Times included the memoir on its list of 
notable books for 1997. ``We are not private investigative agencies, 
nor finally can every publisher vet every manuscript and every author 
on an adversarial basis. It's unthinkable. It would be a travesty 
of the relationship with the author,'' said Carol Janeway, Wilkomirski's 
U.S. editor and translator, who called the memoir ``remarkable testimony.'' 
Ganzfried said he asked the author whether he had a prison tattoo. 
He said Wilkomirski told him that he lacked one because he had been 
part of a medical experiment. ``In one film, he claimed to have lived 
in Switzerland only from 1948, and he describes all these scenes after 
the war,'' said Ganzfried. ``Then I found in the local school files 
of Zurich that he attended first grade in April 1947. I found a picture 
of him in the summer of 1946 in the garden of his adoptive parents 
from a photo book of his relatives.'' Eventually, he started searching 
local government offices and found Wilkomirski's adoption records. 
The 1941 birth date conflicts with the prominent subtitle of the book, 
which appeared in most foreign versions: ``Fragments: A Childhood 
1939-1948.'' Letters from officials in Biel and Zurich verified the 
information. And Wilkomirski's former lawyer, Rolf Sandberg, confirmed 
that he had obtained records with similar information after a request 
from the German publisher for more verification before publication 
of the book. ``I told them I didn't doubt what his memory had to say,'' 
Sandberg said, ``but I had to leave it to them what to make of this 
whole story. I could only say I have these documents and they prove 
that he is the son of Ms. Grosjean, but you can say: `I don't trust 
it. I know better.' And that is what he says.'' In the months before 
the book was first published, Suhrkamp received a letter of warning 
from Hanno Helbling, an editor at a Swiss newspaper, who said friends 
of Wilkomirski had told him that the manuscript was fiction. ``They 
wrote me back that they had examined the situation and they were sure 
that the thing was authentic,'' said Helbling, who is retired and 
lives in Rome. ``The publisher maintains his belief or he makes believe 
that the story is authentic, but I think nobody believes it any more.'' 
In fact, all publishers of the book are still supporting Wilkomirski's 
account, largely because of assurances from Suhrkamp. So too are groups 
like the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum and the New York-based Jewish 
Book Council, which discussed its award for the book at a recent board 
meeting and decided to take no action and adopt a ``no comment'' policy. 
Wilkomirski has largely retreated from public view and did not respond 
to requests for comment, although he has occasionally issued statements 
in writing. ``I would like to answer you thoroughly, but I must ask 
you to be so kind as having a little patience,'' he said in a brief 
message by e-mail that promised a response in three weeks. ``My health 
is in rather poor condition. I am very weak and it takes me a lot 
of strength to answer questions, which cannot be answered in only 
a few sentences.'' In the afterword of his book, he briefly addressed 
the record of his 1941 birth by saying: ``This date has nothing to 
do with either the history of this century or my personal history. 
I have now taken legal steps to have this imposed identity annulled.'' 
Sandberg, the lawyer who gathered the adoption records for the author, 
said that Wilkomirski had not to his knowledge taken any legal steps 
to challenge the records. ``At that time, he didn't do it because 
he just said somehow it's not worthwhile and it's much too expensive 
to do. It's very difficult, and if you don't have a real necessity 
I don't know why you would do it because in the end I don't think 
it would change much.'' Shortly before the annual Frankfurt Book Fair 
in Germany, which brings together publishers from all over the world, 
Wilkomirski sent a statement in German to all his publishers describing 
the current climate of debate as a ``poisonous'' atmosphere of ``totalitarian 
judgment and criticism.'' Wilkomirski acknowledged that the Swiss 
legal documents were not fake but suggested that a third party ``who 
is no longer alive'' had manipulated and replaced the papers. He also 
criticized Holocaust historians who had attacked his work, complaining 
that they were not expert in research about children who survived 
that period. He quoted Deborah Dwork, the Clark University director 
of the Center for Holocaust Studies. But he receives no support from 
Dwork, who like other American historians expressed troubling doubts 
about the book for several reasons, from a lack of dates and specific 
names to a simple disbelief that a 3-or 4-year-old child could have 
survived incarceration in two death camps because children younger 
than 7 were usually steered to the crematoriums unless they were twins 
used for experimentation. ``If indeed these Swiss documents are accurate, 
if they are authentic,'' Dwork said, ``then the onus now falls on 
Wilkomirski to demonstrate why they are inaccurate. Until that time, 
I do not accept `Fragments' as historically accurate.'' Dwork expressed 
sympathy for Wilkomirski, saying that she had met him when both received 
an award from the Jewish Book Council. He appeared, she said, to be 
a deeply scarred man, adding that she does not blame him for the controversy 
because she thinks he believes in his identity. It is the publishers 
that she takes to task, saying they exploited him. Rabbi Marvin Hier, 
the dean and founder of the Simon Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles, 
said he considered it highly improbable that such a young child could 
have survived two concentration camps without an adult protector among 
the guards. ``I think what you see is that when you wear the mantle 
of the survivor, there's a certain amount of trust, and no one has 
the concern that a survivor would make something up.'' The author 
and Holocaust researcher Konnilyn Feig said that when she read Wilkomirski's 
book two years ago, she marked in the margins her impression that 
the text read as if he had not been there. It lacked specific detail, 
she said, and was so vague ``anything that could have happened also 
could not have happened.'' She said what troubled her most was that 
a case like this could give Holocaust deniers ammunition. ``I think 
it's a shame that people get awards; at least the fake Hitler diaries 
didn't get awards. The sad thing is that whether it's true or not, 
this man evidently got himself very integrated with all of the survivors. 
And then if it is not true, he has done a terrible thing to survivors.'' 
Many historians observed that the whole issue would never have arisen 
if the book had simply been published as a novel, but the title would 
have lost selling power without an author to bear testimony as a witness. 
In retrospect, why didn't the German publisher release the book as 
a novel, given some of the late warnings? Sparr, the Suhrkamp editor, 
offered a simple explanation: ``The author is not declaring it as 
fiction.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>