<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0424 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following are excerpts from two hours of videotaped testimony shown 
Monday in U.S. District Court during antitrust proceedings against 
Microsoft Corp. David Boies, a trial lawyer for the Justice Department, 
questioned the chairman and chief executive of the company, Bill Gates. 
DAVID BOIES: Have you ever had discussions within Microsoft about 
the desirability of trying to undermine Sun because of what Sun was 
doing in Java? BILL GATES: I said to you part of our activity is to 
go out and work with customers to see what it takes to have them choose 
to license our products. And that's in competition with many other 
companies, including Sun. Q. I'm not now talking about what you do 
in competition with other products or other companies. What I'm talking 
about is whether or not you've had discussions with people within 
Microsoft in which you talked about the need to undermine Sun, using 
those words, if that will help you, within Microsoft? A. I don't remember 
using those words. Q. You don't? A. No. Q. Do you think you did use 
those words or you just don't know one way or the other? A. I don't 
know. Q. Would it be consistent with the way you felt about Java for 
you to have told people that you wanted to undermine Sun? A. As I've 
said, anything about Java you've got to show me a context before I 
can answer because just the term Java itself can mean different things. 
Q. Did you have discussions with Apple in which you were trying to 
get Apple to agree to help you undermine Sun? A. There was some discussion 
about what run-time A.P.I.'s [application program interfaces) Apple 
would support, whether they would support some of ours or some of 
Sun's. I don't think I was involved in any discussions myself with 
Apple about that. Q. Well, let me show you a document and try to probe 
what you mean by being involved. Let me give you a copy of a document 
that has been previously marked as Government Exhibit 265. A portion 
of this document is an e-mail message from you to Paul Maritz and 
others and the portion I'm particularly interested in, and you can 
read as much of the three-line e-mail as you wish, is the last sentence, 
which reads, ``Do we have a clear plan on what we want Apple to do 
to undermine Sun?'' Did you send this e-mail, Mr. Gates, on or about 
Aug. 8, 1997? A. I don't remember sending it. Q. Do you have any doubt 
that you sent it? A. No. It appears to be an e-mail I sent. Q. You 
recognize that this is a document produced from Microsoft's files 
do you not, sir? A. No. Q. You don't? A. Well, how would I know that? 
Q. Do you see the document production numbers down at the bottom? 
A. I have no idea what those numbers are. Q. Let me go back to the 
e-mail, Mr. Gates. What did you mean when you asked Mr. Maritz whether 
or not, ``We have a clear plan on what we want Apple to do to undermine 
Sun''? A. I don't remember. Q. Did you personally participate in any 
conversations with Apple in 1997 and 1998? A. Of any kind? Q. Let 
me be a little more specific. Did you participate in any conversations 
with Apple in 1997 or 1998 concerning what Apple would or would not 
do that would affect Microsoft competitively? A. Well, there were 
some conversations with Steve Jobs about Microsoft Office ... Q. And 
did you participate in those conversations? A. I talked to Steve Jobs 
on the phone I think twice. Q. And what was the nature of your conversations 
with Mr. Jobs? A. Well, Steve had ... Steve called me up and said 
that he had become the C.E.O. of Apple, sort of, and that Gil Amelio 
wasn't the C.E.O. of Apple. And he raised the question of was there 
some beneficial agreement that we could enter into different than 
we'd been discussing with Gil. And it wasn't a very long call and 
the conclusion was that Greg Maffei would go see Steve. Q. Was it 
your understanding that Microsoft Office for Macintosh was believed 
by Apple to be very important to them? A. I really have a hard time 
testifying about the belief of a corporation. I really don't know 
what that means. Q. Well, sir, in making the decisions as to what 
you would ask of Apple, did you believe that what you were offering 
Apple with respect to Microsoft Office for Macintosh was important 
enough to Apple so that they ought to give you something for it? A. 
I have no idea what you're talking about when you say ``ask.'' Q. 
Well, let me show you a document that has been previously marked as 
Government Exhibit 268 ... The first part of this purports to be a 
copy of an e-mail from Don Bradford to Ben Waldman with a copy to 
you, Mr. Maritz and others on the subject of ``Java on Macintosh/IE 
Control.'' Did you receive a copy of this e-mail on or about Feb. 
13, 1998? A. I don't know. Q. Do you have any reason to doubt that 
you received a copy of this e-mail? A. No. Q. The first paragraph 
reads, ``Apple wants to keep both Netscape and Microsoft developing 
browsers for Mac _ believing if one drops out, the other will lose 
interest (and also not really wanting to pick up the development burden.) 
Getting Apple to do anything that significantly/materially disadvantages 
Netscape will be tough. Do agree that Apple should be meeting the 
spirit of our cross-license agreement and that Mac-Office is the perfect 
club to use on them.'' Q. Do you have an understanding of what Mr. 
Bradford means when he refers to MacOffice as the ``perfect club to 
use on Apple''? A. No. Q. The second sentence of that paragraph, the 
one that reads, ``Getting Apple to do anything that significantly/materially 
disadvantages Netscape will be tough.'' Was it your understanding 
in February of 1998 that Microsoft was trying to get Apple to do something 
to disadvantage Netscape? A. No. Q. Do you know why Mr. Bradford would 
have written this in February of 1998 and sent a copy to you? A. I'm 
not sure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>