<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0377 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a campaign season that lacked any raging national issue greater 
than President Clinton's tribulations, Americans are expected to trickle, 
if not stream, to the polls on Tuesday in a midterm election that 
will inevitably be interpreted as a referendum on the fate of the 
President. In election eve dashes around the country, Democrats and 
Republicans sought to disprove forecasts that less than 40 percent 
of eligible voters will participate. They implored voters to take 
part in an election where the outcome of many important _ and excruciatingly 
close _ races could hinge on a very small number of votes. In fact, 
analysts predicted that of the millions of people expected to go to 
the polls, the decisions of only about 200,000 people in 50 competitive 
House contests could make a 15-seat difference. While the reverberations 
over Clinton's relationship with Monica Lewinsky have not openly figured 
as a consequential issue on the campaign trail _ and voters in both 
parties tell pollsters they want to put the scandal behind them _Republicans 
and Democrats alike agreed that the outcome cannot help but guide 
the House's approach in its impeachment inquiry. The outcome also 
could affect the fate of Speaker Newt Gingrich; conservatives in his 
party have warned that if the performance of Republican House candidates 
is less than impressive, they may blame it on him. ``Clinton's fate 
is on the line and Gingrich's fate is on the line,'' said Ralph Reed, 
a Republican strategist in Atlanta. Both politicians devoted the closing 
hours of the elections to imploring their loyalists to vote. ``These 
races are very, very close,'' Clinton said on Monday in a radio interview 
with Hispanic reporters. ``There are almost three dozen close House 
races that could go one way or the other,'' he said. ``There are seven 
close Senate races that could go one way or the other. And we need 
a strong turnout.'' On Monday night, at a rally in Roswell, Ga., Gingrich 
said it had been ``a great campaign'' for his party. ``I think tomorrow 
we have a chance to win some very startling victories all over the 
country,'' he declared, sarcastically heaping praise on the president: 
``Bill Clinton's contribution to the demise of the Democratic majority 
has been significant.'' Most Republican and Democratic strategists 
held firm with predictions of modest Republican gains in the House, 
where all 435 seats are up for grabs, though a few pointed to recent 
surveys that they said suggested that Democrats could gain seats. 
The strategists also said they anticipated a Republican gain of no 
more than a few seats in the Senate, and predicted that there would 
not be an appreciable shift in the Republicans' domination of governor's 
offices in the 36 gubernatorial races. Still, politicians and analysts 
in both parties noted that there had been no obvious tide favoring 
Republicans or Democrats. ``It's much more uncertain now than '94 
or '96 _ I'm a lot less comfortable with predictions,'' said Stuart 
Rothenberg, editor of a nonpartisan newsletter that tracks races nationwide, 
as he pored over the latest polls. ``I'm almost expecting a few major 
surprises.'' But echoing other experts, he added, ``The most likely 
outcome in the House is low to mid-single digit gains for the Republicans 
and in the Senate, a Republican net gain of two or three'' seats. 
Since World War II, the president's party has never gained seats in 
the House in midterm elections; on only three occasions has it won 
seats in the Senate. While for months, much of the attention in the 
campaign of 1998 has centered on House races, in the closing days 
some of the most dramatic contests have been for the Senate. Incumbent 
senators who are in particular trouble are Carol Moseley-Braun of 
Illinois and Harry Reid of Nevada, both Democrats, and Alfonse D'Amato 
of New York and Lauch Faircloth of North Carolina, both Republicans. 
Curtis Gans, director of the Committee for the Study of the American 
Electorate, predicted that turnout would be between 36 percent and 
38 percent of eligible voters, a decline from the 38.8 percent who 
voted in 1994. But, noting that this campaign's subtext is ``the possible 
removal of a president,'' Gans offered a caveat. ``Anyone in this 
climate who would venture a hard prediction about either turnout or 
result,'' he said, ``has a degree of hubris that will probably suffer 
its comeuppance on Election Day.'' The scrambling for votes on Monday 
capped a campaign season that has been anything but predictable. Month 
after month, candidates on both sides waited anxiously to see what 
impact the White House scandal would have on their fates. But even 
on the eve of the election, the answer was not entirely clear. At 
the start of the year, it appeared to be an incumbent's political 
season because voters seemed relatively content. Certainly, they were 
not riven by the restlessness and dissatisfaction that drove the midterm 
season four years ago _ and led to the historic Republican takeover 
of the House. Because Republicans hold only a slim 11-seat advantage 
in the House, many Democrats triumphantly predicted that they would 
take back the House. Early this year, the Democratic Congressional 
Campaign Committee put out a thick book of maps and statistics. ``These 
factors demonstrate the momentum needed to put Democrats back in charge 
of the House of Representatives,'' the booklet said. But many of the 
most optimistic Democrats stopped talking up a Democratic triumph 
after Clinton admitted in late August that he had had an inappropriate 
relationship with Ms. Lewinsky and had misled the public about it. 
And many of the party's candidates complained that they could not 
capture any attention on their issues _ from education to health care 
to protecting Social Security _ because the press was preoccupied 
with the scandal. Still, Republicans who had gleefully predicted that 
the Lewinsky matter was their ticket to huge victories have also scaled 
back their expectations in the face of polls showing that voters do 
not care to hear more about the scandal _ and may even blame Republicans 
for trying to keep it alive. The result is that on the eve of the 
election, the dynamic may be not so different from what it was 10 
months ago: Voters do not seem to want massive change. Races are being 
fought over local issues. And many incumbents seem safe. In a contrast 
with the election of 1994 _ an anti-incumbent year _ many lawmakers 
highlighted their backgrounds as Washington insiders who knew how 
to get things done. No matter the outcome, it is bound to influence 
how the Congress handles the impeachment inquiry. ``If Democrats either 
hold their own or pick up a few seats you could make the argument 
that voters, through their inaction, said, `I don't want to deal with 
that issue; leave it alone,''' said John Hutchens, a Democratic strategist 
in Denver. ``If Republicans are much stronger than we are anticipating 
right now, it would probably provide some real momentum for those 
hearings.'' Ed Brookover, political director of the National Republican 
Congressional Committee, which channeled millions of dollars into 
recent commercials in districts across the country to remind voters 
of the Lewinsky matter, said, ``I still think that our voters are 
turning out to send him a message. They don't like what he's done 
and how he's conducted himself.'' Dismissing Democrats who contend 
there will be a backlash against the Clinton advertisements, Brookover 
said, ``We're not having candidates screaming to take them off the 
air.'' At the request of Sen. Olympia Snowe, R-Maine, Brookover said 
the committee today began broadcasting one of the scandal commercials 
in Portland, Maine, to help Ross Connelly, a Republican who is trying 
to oust Rep. Tom Allen, a Democrat. Republicans said an unimpressive 
showing for their party's candidates could damage Gingrich. Already, 
officials of the Republican Governors Association, which is meeting 
in New Orleans after the election, has scheduled an unusual meeting 
with party officials around the country and major donors _ congressional 
leaders are not invited _ to decide how the party might be better 
defined by politicians outside Washington. ``If the Republicans don't 
do as well as either the political class or the Republican base thought 
they should have,'' Reed said, ``it could accelerate the search for 
leadership outside Washington.'' While national polls are not reliable 
indicators of how candidates will perform in local races, several 
new polls on Monday reinforced the impression of an evenly-matched 
competition between both parties. The Gallup Organization polled 1,105 
registered voters Thursday through Sunday for CNN and found 49 percent 
supporting Democratic candidates and 45 percent for Republican candidates. 
The Pew Research Center polled 743 voters from Wednesday through Saturday 
and found 46 percent for Democratic candidates and 44 percent for 
Republicans. Another poll by CBS News of 509 voters on Saturday and 
Sunday found 49 percent supporting Democrats and 48 percent for Republicans. 
And a poll by ABC News taken Thursday through Sunday, with 1,070 voters, 
found 49 percent preferring Democratic candidates and 46 percent preferring 
Republicans. The results of each of the polls are within the margin 
of sampling error. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>