<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0230 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By CHARLES LEVENDOSKY c. 1998 Casper (Wyo.) Star-Tribune The 40-pound, 
4,000-page Omnibus Appropriations Bill (HR 4328) had lots of room 
to hide anti-environmental riders. And it did. Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W.V., 
called the bill an `elephantine monstrosity` that hadn't been read 
in its entirety by anyone in Congress. Now, it's the law. And the 
monstrosity walks. The 105th Congress, which just adjourned, takes 
the prize for having the worst environmental record of any recent 
Congress. It even beat the rape-and-scrape record of the 104th Congress. 
The 104th Congress passed 30 anti-environmental laws, the 105th topped 
that with 44. Aiming at the red zone on the cough meter: The omnibus 
spending bill prohibits the Department of Transportation from updating 
standards for allowable air pollution from automobile and other vehicles. 
Another rider on the bill discourages ride sharing and car pooling, 
which have been effective in reducing air pollution in urban areas. 
Three other provisions grant a highway project in Alabama a total 
waiver from environmental review, and allow a New York highway project 
and a California toll road project to continue, no matter how harmful 
their environmental impacts. Bottoming out on the ignorance meter: 
In 1993, President Clinton launched an initiative designed to show 
how the conservation of natural resources helps local economies, and 
conversely, to show the real cost of environmental degradation. The 
omnibus bill prohibits the Economic and Statistics Administration 
and the Department of Census from continuing these studies. Congress 
would rather not know the real cost of rape-and-scrape politics and 
doesn't want the public to know, either. In a twist of irony, this 
same bill directs the Office of Management and Budget to do a cost-vs.-benefits 
analysis of federal regulations and programs. Conservation groups 
see this as a way to attack environmental measures. Paybacks to various 
industries for campaign contributions: Hard rock mining reform is 
once again delayed by HR 4328. In addition, the bill delays when the 
Oil Valuation Rule will go into effect _ saving the oil and gas industries 
nearly $66 million in royalty payments. A hunk of that money would 
go to public schools. The bill delays the phase-out of the pesticide 
methyl bromide until the year 2005. Methyl bromide destroys stratospheric 
ozone with a vengeance. More adults and children will be put at risk 
for skin cancer. The omnibus bill allows the Bureau of Land Management 
to re-authorize grazing permits without any environmental review. 
And the bill more than doubles the logging on 2.5 million acres of 
national forest land in California's Sierra Nevada ecosystem, including 
significant old-growth trees. Taxpayers will be billed for more than 
100 miles of logging roads through the area. The bill subsidizes more 
logging in the Tongass National Forest in Alaska. And HR 4328 would 
sell trees in the national forests to pay for so-called stewardship 
contracts with private companies to restore national forests in the 
Pacific Northwest. A valuable hardwood forest in Tennessee and Kentucky 
called the Land Between the Lakes will be taken from the Tennessee 
Valley Authority and given to the U.S. Forest Service. The forest 
had been set aside for educational purposes as well as habitat for 
migratory birds. The bill creates incentives to log the 170,000-acre 
forest. The bill removes several land parcels that are within a federally 
protected area, the Coastal Barrier Resources System along the Florida 
coast, for private real estate development. The fragile coastal barrier 
system was set aside in recognition of its important ecology. The 
area is used by loggerhead and green sea turtles and the endangered 
piping plover for nesting. Further, HR 4328 covers any houses and 
buildings on those hurricane-prone parcels with federal insurance 
_ paid for by U.S. taxpayers. And the bill allows a single senator 
to block funding aimed at promoting policies in developing countries 
that are environmentally sound and protect the climate. The provision 
could be used to renege on the Kyoto climate protocols and the 1992 
Rio Earth Summit treaty. Now that's paybacks, big time. But those 
provisions aren't the whole story. HR 4328 prohibits the Department 
of the Interior from purchasing any more land in Alaska, unless the 
secretary of the interior seeks to exchange public land for the private 
land desired. This slows down the process of acquiring parcels in 
that state's national parks. The bill also removes funding for strategic 
planning in the national forests under Forest and Rangeland Renewable 
Resources Planning Act. And the spending bill prohibits the U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service from using federal funds to reintroduce the grizzly 
bear into the Selway-Bitterroot ecosystem. Reintroduction is seen 
by many wildlife organizations as vital to grizzly bear recovery in 
the lower 48 states. This monster legislation was clumped together 
haphazardly and zapped into life. And now the people have to live 
with it _ as it clomps through our forests and over our lands like 
an enraged Cyclops. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>