<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0411 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two days after vowing to cut off all cooperation with U.N. arms inspectors, 
Iraq allowed a small team of maintenance technicians to change film 
and make repairs on some surveillance cameras on Monday in the company 
of Iraqi chaperones. The Iraqis have been sending mixed signals about 
the scope of their ban since it was announced on Saturday, and some 
diplomats suggested Monday that Baghdad may be tempering its edict 
slightly in the wake of sharp criticism from Russia and France _ the 
two nations on the Security Council most willing to back Iraq. Iraq 
has found no sympathizers with its latest move, which is likely to 
be the subject of a Security Council resolution later this week. The 
United States took over the council presidency for November on Sunday, 
and is expected to push for some strong response, although no one 
is expecting a call for military action. Discussions on a resolution 
are to begin Tuesday. Monday the Iraqi National Assembly, dominated 
by President Saddam Hussein's Baath Party, predictably endorsed the 
government's new ban. The assembly had been used periodically over 
the last year to threaten this kind of cutoff. Officials of the U.N. 
Special Commission, which is charged with ridding Iraq of biological, 
chemical and prohibited missile systems and the ability to resume 
making them, said in New York on Saturday that the Iraqis had left 
open the possibility of maintenance work. But at the United Nations, 
Iraq's representative denied that any access to sites under monitoring 
would be permitted. On Monday, Iraq also allowed two teams from the 
International Atomic Energy Agency to conduct routine monitoring visits, 
under an exemption to the ban that President Saddam Hussein made on 
Saturday. The Iraqis have said they can work with the nuclear inspectors 
from the energy agency but not with those of the Special Commission, 
known as UNSCOM, which they want restructured. Iraq also wants the 
commission's executive chairman, Richard Butler, dismissed. On Monday, 
Secretary-General Kofi Annan's spokesman said Annan was standing by 
Butler. ``The secretary-general has full confidence in Richard Butler 
as the head of UNSCOM,'' said the spokesman, Fred Eckhard. He also 
said the camera maintenance ``in no way constitutes an adequate monitoring 
function.'' Annan, speaking to reporters before a meeting with Butler 
and his deputy, Charles Duelfer, on Monday morning, described Iraq 
as being ``in total breach of Security Council resolutions.'' Iraq's 
hopes of having the nuclear file closed early was also set back on 
Monday when the director general of the energy agency said that new 
Iraqi restrictions would undermine his inspectors' confidence that 
intrusive inspections could stop and long-term monitoring begin. The 
nuclear file was the only program close to closure, with the same 
techniques used to detect Iraq's clandestine nuclear program in the 
past expected to be used to monitor its future compliance. Now the 
effectiveness of the monitoring plan is in doubt, the agency's head, 
Mohamed Elbaradei, told the General Assembly. ``It must incorporate 
a robust detection and deterrence capability so as to provide substantial 
assurance of the absence of prohibited activities and material in 
Iraq,'' said Elbaradei, adding that a restriction on site visits introduced 
in August ``seriously weakens'' the agency's work and makes it harder 
to give assurances that Iraq is not engaging in clandestine activities. 
The agency maintains that Iraq no longer has the ability to make nuclear 
weapons, an assertion that contradicts evidence from William Scott 
Ritter Jr., an American specialist in the concealment of clandestine 
programs who resigned from Butler's commission in August. Ritter, 
who has accused the Clinton administration and the secretary-general 
of adopting a new policy of deliberately avoiding confrontations with 
Iraq, has said Iraq has the capacity to assemble three nuclear bombs. 
Last week, the agency told the Security Council it had no evidence 
for these assertions. Independent arms experts say they have also 
been unable to substantiate the charge. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>