<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0370 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim went on trial Monday in 
a corruption case that has gripped the region and come to symbolize 
the political convulsions that can flow out of economic distress. 
Anwar, who was ousted as Malaysia's No. 2 official on Sept. 2 and 
arrested two weeks later, was led into the courtroom just after 9 
a.m. Hundreds of riot police officers with automatic weapons, truncheons 
and shields ringed the High Court building in central Kuala Lumpur. 
Anwar listened while a prosecutor read off four charges of corrupt 
practices: accusations that he obstructed a police investigation of 
his sexual activities. If he is convicted on any of the four counts, 
Anwar could be imprisoned for as long as 20 years. Anwar has also 
been charged with five counts of sodomy, for which he will be tried 
later. He has pleaded not guilty to all charges. The trial has ratcheted 
up the tension in Malaysia, where Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad 
has come under fierce public criticism for his treatment of Anwar. 
On Monday about 200 people milled peacefully behind barriers well 
away from the court, apparently heeding warnings that the police would 
crack down on protests. With world leaders, including President Clinton, 
converging on Kuala Lumpur in two weeks for the annual meeting of 
the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum, fears of unrest are likely 
to grow. While most of Monday's session was devoted to legal maneuvers, 
Anwar commandeered the proceedings after court adjourned in the afternoon. 
Still standing in the dock, a gaunt but galvanized figure, he delivered 
a stinging denunciation of the conduct of the case so far. Speaking 
to the press gallery, he criticized the attorney general, Mohtar Abdullah, 
who said on Saturday that Anwar could be tried on additional sex-related 
charges later. ``How do you expect me to get a fair trial if the A.G. 
acts in this manner?'' said Anwar, who appeared relaxed in a cream-colored 
open-neck shirt and dark pants. ``He is not professional.'' Anwar 
also had harsh words for his former boss, Mahathir. He said the prime 
minister had not disclosed the full cost of his new residence, saying 
it was ``bigger than the palace'' of Malaysia's king. And he said 
his record as deputy prime minister as described by Mahathir was a 
lie. Anwar then theatrically put his hand over his mouth, saying, 
``Tomorrow, I think they'll get me.'' In late September, Anwar, 51, 
appeared in court with a black eye, which he said was a result of 
a police beating. That Anwar would publicly denounce Mahathir on the 
first day of his trial illustrates the extent to which this case is 
part of an epic power struggle between men who have dominated Malaysian 
politics. Anwar was once Mahathir's protege _ doted on by the doctor, 
who has been prime minister since 1981. Anwar, a suave intellectual 
and author of a book, ``The Asian Renaissance,'' was the anointed 
successor of Mahathir, 72, with a dual portfolio as deputy prime minister 
and finance minister. But as the Asian crisis devastated Malaysia, 
the men clashed over economic policy _ with Mahathir favoring a staunchly 
nationalistic strategy while Anwar preferred a more global approach. 
As Anwar became bolder, he became a rival and, finally, an enemy. 
On Sept. 1, Mahathir abruptly imposed sweeping controls on Malaysia's 
capital markets, over the strenuous objections of Anwar. The prime 
minister also scuttled his deputy's economic program, which had relied 
on a strict regime of the type championed by the International Monetary 
Fund. The next day Mahathir forced out Anwar, saying he was unfit 
to be the leader of Malaysia. Rumors that Anwar had had extramarital 
affairs with women and men had been simmering for several months. 
After the dismissal, the prime minister said he believed the rumors. 
Anwar maintains that the accusations about sex are a pretext to remove 
a rival. In particular, Anwar's aides have said that the charges of 
homosexual conduct were intended to destroy him politically since 
homosexuality is considered taboo in this Muslim country. But Anwar 
has only grown in popularity since his arrest. He has rallied tens 
of thousands of people, who have marched through the streets here 
shouting, ``Reformasi!'' The chant was made famous in Indonesia this 
year when President Suharto was forced to step down after 32 years 
in power. They have also called for the resignation of Mahathir, who 
led Malaysia through a period of rapid economic growth before the 
economic crisis. ``Anwar is aware that this whole thing is political,'' 
said K.S. Jomo, a political economist at the University of Malaya. 
``He is politicizing the trial. But it is political, so why pretend 
that it is not?'' Even in the dock on Monday, Anwar seemed to be campaigning 
for the support of Malaysians and the international community. He 
denied suggestions that he was opposed to a salary increase for civil 
servants. And he sought to distance himself from a government-orchestrated 
bailout of a Malaysian conglomerate, saying that Mahathir had lied 
about his role in it. But first Anwar has to survive this trial. The 
judge turned away a motion Monday to throw out the case because Anwar 
is being prosecuted under a law that is about to be repealed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>