<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0244 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Galloping through the Sonoran desert, we were all horse hoofs and 
dust, stirring fragrant creosote and mesquite as we pulled up at the 
edge of a cool cottonwood grove in Coronado National Forest to admire 
the green Rincon Mountains in the distance. High on horseback was 
a painless way to tour the Arizona desert, with horsehide rather than 
our shins facing down the cactus needles. Our horses easily scaled 
rugged hills, giving us stunning views of saguaro rising like telephone 
poles from the desert scrub. On our visit in mid-June, crowns of daisylike 
blossoms topped the stubby limbs of the saguaro, and other cactus 
varieties blossomed too, the remnants of a lushly dramatic spring 
after El Nino's rains. My husband, Joe, and I were staying at Tanque 
Verde Ranch outside Tucson, which offers good horses, hearty ranch 
food, comfortable rooms and majestic scenery. Thirty minutes from 
the center of the city, the ranch abuts Saguaro National Park and 
the national forest and, with the Park Service, maintains a large 
network of good riding trails. In addition to several trail rides 
every day, the ranch gives daily lessons in horsemanship _ both brief 
and more extensive lessons on Western-style walking, trotting and 
loping, or cantering. The ranch's 75 rooms are arranged in 18 pink 
stucco buildings, secluded amid plots of carefully tended cactus and 
mesquite. A long hacienda with wide veranda is the main house, with 
a timber-ceilinged dining room that opens onto a large outdoor pool 
with a cascading waterfall. Next to it are a fitness center with indoor 
pool, sauna and five tennis courts, one with lights. It was a relief 
to discover that the bungalows did not have televisions. Children 
have a well-organized supervised all-day camp that keeps them separate 
from their parents. And, as it turned out, my husband and I ended 
up on separate tracks during large parts of our four days. While I 
was out loping through the countryside, he was back at the ranch playing 
tennis or sunning by the pool. This is because guests are divided 
into two groups: lopers and nonlopers _ that is, those who prove steady 
on a loping, or running, horse, and those who either are unsteady 
or cannot get their horse to run. Wranglers give a test. I passed; 
he did not. My husband has been on dozens of trail rides, but he didn't 
have the kind of experience that enables a rider to get a horse into 
a gallop on a blazing hot day when it would rather be munching hay 
in the shade. The wrangler said Joe needed to ``communicate with the 
horse.'' ``You can't communicate with the dead,'' he replied. Still, 
in its information for visitors the resort makes the wranglers' role 
clear: Their judgment is final on all matters. The wrangler was matter-of-fact. 
To us five women and to one man, he said, ``You passed.'' To the four 
others, he said, ``You can all come back for another lesson.'' Joe 
decided not to. Instead, he and I agreed that we would take a daily 
walking ride each afternoon together, and I would go on the loping 
rides alone at 7 a.m. and 10 a.m. He was a good sport, partly because 
he knew how much I was looking forward to riding again after several 
years out of the saddle (as it turns out he has since become a pretty 
good rider himself). Experienced riders quickly discover the ranch's 
inner sanctum _ a world of strong, responsive horses, small riding 
parties and good gallops through dusty washes of the Gila River system. 
For other guests, the walking rides turned out to be satisfyingly 
strenuous climbs in the mountains, and among other activities are 
hikes with a naturalist, mountain biking, fishing (for catfish), tennis 
and swimming. Several others were spending their week hiking and mountain 
biking. That the ranch can provide two parallel experiences is not 
surprising, given its history. Founded in 1868 by a Mexican cattleman, 
who called it La Cebadilla after the wild barley along the river, 
the ranch soon became a place for both horsemen and greenhorns. Like 
many Western ranchers of the era, the owners quickly discovered that 
Easterners were willing to pay large sums of money to play cowboy. 
They changed the name to Tanque Verde _ green tank, or pool _ because 
they thought it more appealing for advertising. Even though Tanque 
Verde sold off its cattle business in the late '50s, the owners still 
graze 300 head of cattle. During our stay, every spare hand went up 
into the national forest to help drive the herd to greener summer 
pastures. The line of demarcation between wrangler and resort is the 
mesquite fence of the corral and the ranch's spacious tack house. 
As one approaches, the horses stir, a few running the others off. 
All the storied Western breeds and coats are there _ paints and appaloosas, 
bay and chestnut quarterhorses, registered mustang ponies and even 
a saddle mule. We visited during the off-season, when the resort was 
only about half full, a bonus because we had no trouble getting our 
favorite horses for every ride. Despite warnings about desert summers, 
the weather was fine, with highs in the 90's, sunny and dry days, 
and evenings in the 60's, perfect for tennis under the lights. Later, 
snuggled on lounge chairs under blankets, we looked at stars that 
seemed light-years closer than they did at home. Meals were a highlight 
_ plenty of good food and communal tables with funny, smart dining 
companions. After dinner, naturalists presented slide shows on insects, 
caves and gems. Our small but well-planned room, with a stone corner 
fireplace and enough tile to suggest a Spanish influence, had a tiled 
bath, refrigerator and shady porch to escape the sun. The room was 
one of four in a casita overlooking a lush grass lawn, kept alive 
by a small underground sprinkler. An opportunistic desert wren had 
harvested dry tendrils to build herself a nest in the gnarls of a 
cholla cactus. Cement paths, illuminated by walkway lights, seemed 
precariously placed on the desert floor. Prickly pear and saguaro, 
barrel cactus and ocotillo were set among mesquite trees and creosote 
bushes, all carefully labeled with botanical signs. Our first dinner 
was the twice-weekly steak-fry in the cottonwood grove, a Texas-sized 
affair prepared on a cinder-block barbecue the size of a railroad 
car. Red gingham covered the picnic tables, weighted with kerosene 
lanterns, and a guitar-playing cowboy with a microphone sang standards 
like ``Red River Valley'' and ``Tumbling Tumbleweeds.'' He even yodeled, 
much to the amusement of several small boys there with their families. 
What looked like 100 pounds of New York strip steaks sizzled over 
the mesquite fire, along with a few chicken breasts and a couple of 
hamburgers. Ranch beans, corn on the cob and home fries laced with 
peppers and onions filled vats heating on another part of the grill. 
There was also a buffet table of crudites, pickles and fruit, but 
the traffic went to the grill. Early next morning in the lodge, where 
we gathered for coffee before our ride, a petite woman from London 
traveling alone confessed that she'd had two steaks. ``Haven't eaten 
it for two years,'' she said, explaining, ``mad cow disease.'' Still 
on Eastern time, we were up and ready for the Sunday breakfast ride 
at 6:45. Since we had not yet taken the loping test, we went on the 
walking ride. The three lopers mounted first, as I looked on enviously. 
Then the wranglers sized us up and picked our horses. Trail horses 
are often sour, stubbornly following the horse ahead and resisting 
the rider, so I was pleased that mine seemed immediately responsive 
and game. The children arrived separately, on their own ponies, with 
their own counselors. They ride in the morning, take horsemanship 
lessons in their own ring, go swimming and have their own naturalist 
walks. Later, in the lodge, where tankards of lemonade and ice water 
attract a steady flow of guests, I saw two teen-age boys we'd met 
at breakfast. ``Are you going mountain biking?'' one asked. ``No, 
nature walk.'' ``Oh, we did that yesterday. We saw a rattlesnake and 
a king snake. The rest was a girl talking about cactus and flowers. 
You might like it.'' The nature walk, led by an anthropologist named 
Vivian MacKinnon, gave us a good sense of how the Indians survived 
in the desert. They harvested century plants, which look like aloe 
on steroids, for fibers and natural needle and thread (the Spanish 
figured out how to ferment them for tequila); they ground mesquite 
seeds into flour, and ate pea pods from paloverde, wild barley, range 
hackberries and buds and fruit from cholla and prickly pear. Having 
noticed how the horses managed to avoid brushing against cactus, we 
asked if this was true of other Sonoran creatures. Vivian said this 
was mostly the case, though accidents do happen. Some get careless, 
she said, ``and every so often you'll see a bird that has accidentally 
crucified itself on a cactus.'' She showed us an area called the bird 
ramada, which has various feeders and a bench for watchers. Two resident 
rattlesnakes set up housekeeping underneath the feeders, waiting for 
prey to drop from the sky. In this desert climate, death seems so 
much a part of the landscape that there is no warning for bird enthusiasts. 
Vivian said that rattlesnakes had got a bad rap in movies. They're 
not likely to attack unless you step or ``accidentally sit on one.'' 
There was a near-miss the day before, she told us. A guest triumphantly 
spotted one of the snakes poking its head languidly out of its dirt 
hole. The woman fell to her knees and poked her finger within inches 
of the snake's nose. ``Here he is!'' she shouted. Horrified, Vivian 
pulled the woman's arm back. Vivian, who has an infectious joy about 
her job, ended the tour at the cottonwood grove with a snack made 
entirely of ingredients ancient people would have used _ mesquite 
flour, corn meal, honey, prickly pear fruit _ though we doubted they 
would combine them, as she had, to make thumb-print cookies. Next 
day, I decided to attend a few more horsemanship classes, mostly to 
ride better Western style. Until this trip, I had mostly ridden English. 
Classes are limited to 12, but on this day, there was only one other 
person in class. The wrangler, Shawn Armstrong, asked us to move around 
the ring so he could assess us. My horse picked up a comfortable jog. 
Then Shawn had us lope. We both rode to one end of the spacious ring 
and took turns, as though we were coming out of a chute. I felt a 
little awkward. Shawn told me to relax. My legs, used to English style, 
were too tight on the horse. He lengthened my stirrups until my feet 
just barely touched them. Then he told me to loosen the reins. They 
were already very loose, but I let them out even more. ``Now go back 
and do it again.'' We set off, legs loose, reins flying. It felt free, 
and the horse responded, running evenly. I turned and did it again. 
I was grinning madly. I couldn't wait to get out on the trail. If 
You Go Tanque Verde Ranch, at 14301 East Speedway, Tucson, Ariz. 85748, 
(520) 296-6275, fax (520) 721-9426, has a range of accommodations, 
from a small standard room to a suite overlooking the mountains. (Rates 
vary by season and room size: singles $200 to $310; doubles $235 to 
$380.) Most rooms have fireplaces and porches. Prices include unlimited 
riding, meals, lessons, nature walks and all activities. At the twice-weekly 
steak-fry, beer ($2.25 to $3), wine ($3.50) and mixed drinks ($2.75) 
are sold at a cash bar. Otherwise, beer and wine are served on a cash 
basis at meals. For guests staying four nights or more, the ranch 
provides free transportation from Tucson airport, about half an hour 
away. We enjoyed the freedom of having a rental car to go into town 
for such odds and ends as picking up the morning paper. The high season 
is January through April, when the days are warm and sunny, the nights 
cool. During this time, and over Thanksgiving, Christmas and Easter 
holidays, the ranch does not guarantee a horse for every rider; horses 
are assigned first-come, first-served. While we had plenty of activities 
in June, the ranch is more crowded in the high season, and has a more 
structured program, adding a tennis pro, for example. Long-sleeved 
shirts help protect from sun and mesquite scratches, and riding boots 
or sturdy shoes with heels are strongly recommended. The ranch makes 
helmets available, though given the heat on our visit, most riders 
wore straw cowboy hats. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>