<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0232 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Standing in his study, a waltz playing in the background, Bill Patrick 
reached into an old green duffel bag, pulled out a garden sprayer 
and pointed out an inconspicuous detail at its tip. ``That gives it 
a lot more zip,'' he said. Pumping the sprayer vigorously four or 
five times, he produced a large cloud of fine particles that hung 
in the air like fog. He smiled approvingly. His mock attack with deadly 
germs had gone perfectly. ``So if I were a terrorist and had a liquid 
product, I'd choose this sprayer,'' he said. How serious is the threat? 
``It scares the hell out of me,'' replied Patrick, 72, a cheerful 
man who seems haunted by dark visions. ``It's just a matter of time. 
It's not if. It's when.'' In ways obvious and otherwise, the United 
States is fast becoming better prepared to defend itself against the 
menace of biological terrorism. And the thanks, in part, go to Patrick. 
For two decades, he worked for the federal government in secret laboratories 
behind barbed wire, helping to harness germs for war, overseeing ranks 
of scientists and engineers. He himself holds three secret patents 
and shares two others. After President Richard Nixon ended the offensive 
program, Patrick turned his efforts to finding ways to ward off biological 
attacks from armies and terrorists, foreign or domestic. In the deserts 
of Iraq, working as an inspector for the United Nations, he helped 
shatter the wall of deception around Saddam Hussein's germ warfare 
program, which had secretly grown enough pestilential microbes to 
kill everyone on Earth several times over. Patrick has now gone public. 
Quietly, he has mounted a personal campaign to educate senior government 
officials, policy experts and ordinary citizens about the risks of 
germ terrorism and how to combat it. To do so, he gives talks, writes 
books and grants interviews, opening a window on the once-secret world 
of germ warfare. This man of dark expertise, a father of two, lives 
in a comfortable home atop a wooded hill here, surrounded by classical 
music, his wife, Virginia, and a small dog named Billy the Kid. Patrick 
loves black humor, and his business card proudly bears a skull and 
crossbones while his consulting firm's stationery is topped with an 
image of the grim reaper. He also likes to shock guests with displays 
of simulated biological warfare. ``It's interesting to get people's 
reaction,'' he said with a mischievous look as he pushed forward a 
handful of glass vials. Just two pounds of such germs, he said, ``can 
go a long, long way in terms of hell and havoc.'' William Capers Patrick 
III was born on July 24, 1926. The only child of a produce broker, 
he grew up in Furman, S.C., a town of 150 people. He wanted to be 
an astronomer. But Army service in the World War II showed him the 
near miracle of penicillin, just coming into wide use. After the war, 
he went to college eager to cure diseases and aid the new field of 
antibiotic medicine. He received a bachelor's degree in biology from 
the University of South Carolina in 1948 and, a year later, a master's 
degree in microbiology from the University of Tennessee. While working 
for a company in Indiana that made the new wonder drugs, he got a 
call from an old teacher who had gone to work on secret federal projects. 
The mentor encouraged Patrick to sign up. ``He said, `You'll find 
this the most interesting work in the world,''' Patrick recalled, 
adding that it was ``hard to turn down your professor.'' In 1951, 
after getting a top-secret clearance, Patrick began working for the 
Army at Fort Detrick, in Frederick, Md. The base was the heart of 
the government's secret mission to prepare for biological combat, 
and work there was expanding rapidly as the conflict in Korea escalated. 
Wary of growing communist power, Patrick excelled and quickly became 
a team leader, dazzling supervisors with an array of achievements, 
including methods he developed to grow lethal germs and freeze-dry 
them for dispersal. By 1965, he was head of ``product development,'' 
leading about 80 scientists, engineers and technicians who worked 
to turn bacteria, fungi, viruses and microbial toxins into ``products'' 
meant to kill and incapacitate people in gruesome ways. When the military 
secretly tested the deadly germs in remote locales, Patrick was often 
the senior Fort Detrick official present. For example, in 1968, he 
was among those watching as jets spread germs over barges, anchored 
at sea a thousand miles southwest of Hawaii. The barges were packed 
with hundreds of rhesus monkeys and guinea pigs, half of which died. 
The American public knew nothing of such tests. But people did know 
that Fort Detrick was germ central for the military, so antiwar protesters 
of the era often marched outside its gates. Indeed, three of his colleagues 
were accidentally exposed to germ agents and later died. Patrick himself 
came down with Q fever, a disease meant to immobilize enemy troops 
with fevers, headaches, chills and coughing. In November 1969, Nixon 
abruptly ended the program. Skeptics said he did so to foster an image 
as a peacemaker. Federal experts later attributed the act to pragmatism. 
Germ weapons, they said, were judged superfluous for a state already 
heavily armed with conventional, chemical and nuclear arms. Patrick 
spent the next few years dismissing people and dismantling the laboratories 
and plants he had helped build. ``We flooded the market with all these 
microbiologists, chemists, physicists,'' he recalled. ``It was a real 
bad time.'' In 1972, at Washington's urging, most nations renounced 
germ warfare as immoral and repugnant. Fort Detrick went from ``black 
to white,'' Patrick said. Switching hats himself, he went to work 
there developing germ defenses at the newly established U.S. Army 
Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases. But the switch 
was difficult. He retired from the agency in 1986, at 59. ``It's a 
different world,'' Patrick said. ``Defense studies are so much more 
complicated. It takes 18 months to develop a weapons-grade agent and 
10 more years to develop a good vaccine against it.'' ``I was offensively 
oriented,'' he conceded. ``And that's my expertise today.'' As history 
would have it, his dark knowledge became increasingly valuable to 
the federal authorities in the 1980s and 1990s as germ threats and 
attacks grew in number. In 1985, Patrick helped the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation prove that followers of the Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh 
in Oregon had poisoned salad bars with salmonella in an effort to 
keep voters away in a local election. More than 750 people fell ill. 
In 1990, as the United States and its allies prepared to force Iraqi 
invaders from Kuwait, he helped evaluate the risk of a germ attack. 
Responding to such advice, the American military began a crash program 
to vaccinate troops against deadly anthrax. In 1992, at a secluded 
spot around Washington, Patrick debriefed the Russian defector known 
as Ken Alibek, who said that Moscow had secretly produced hundreds 
of tons of anthrax, smallpox and plague germs, ready to spur Armageddon 
despite having signed a treaty banning such arms. Patrick interrogated 
him for the Central Intelligence Agency, testing his credibility. 
``We got right down to it,'' he recalled. ``I won't say we fell in 
love, but we gained an immediate respect for one another.'' In 1994, 
Patrick joined a U.N. team to investigate a factory complex in Iraq 
spread across seven miles of desert. His observations there helped 
show that microbe driers ostensibly for making herbicides were actually 
meant to produce deadly germs in large quantities. The next year was 
a turning point. The Iraqis admitted, finally, to having undertaken 
a vast effort to prepare for biological war. The same year, the Japanese 
cult Aum Shinrikyo released nerve gas in Tokyo subways, killing a 
dozen people and injuring thousands. Patrick aided the American authorities 
in tracking the cult, helping to discover a series of failed germ 
attacks and learning that the biological assaults were meant to kill 
millions. A cultist later testified that the sect had even attacked 
two American naval bases near Tokyo. In his efforts to raise public 
awareness about biological terrorism, Patrick has taken many routes, 
some more visible than others. He quietly advised Richard Preston, 
author of ``The Cobra Event'' (Random House, 1997), a novel about 
a germ terrorist's attack on New York City. The book so alarmed President 
Clinton that he had his intelligence experts assess its credibility. 
Patrick himself is a co-author of ``Jane's Chem-Bio Handbook'' (Jane's 
Information Group, 1998), an antiterrorism guide for health professionals. 
It discusses germ agents, how terrorists might spread them and how 
to avoid, diagnose and treat illnesses. ``Contrary to reports in the 
lay press, municipal water supplies are very difficult to contaminate,'' 
he wrote, explaining that ``dilution and diffusion factors as well 
as chlorination'' weaken such assaults. Patrick's voice is authoritative 
and at times contentious on different kinds of germ defenses. He is 
critical of vaccines, despite a Clinton administration push to stockpile 
them for crises. A smart adversary, he holds, will usually be able 
to find a way around immunizations, most readily by choosing a different 
germ or by modifying an old one. As a first line of defense, Patrick 
urges tightening controls on legitimate germ commerce _ an inconspicuous 
trade that has helped scientists study and crush diseases around the 
globe. But American germ banks have also inadvertently delivered noxious 
microbes to hostile armies and domestic terrorists. ``We've got to 
have better controls,'' Patrick said. ``We've got to make it a penalty 
for these cultures to get out.'' Washington is starting to limit germ 
sales in the United States, but no parallel effort yet exists among 
the world's 1,000 or so other microbe banks. Patrick also criticizes 
lax security at airports and major government buildings. He loves 
to perform his own impromptu tests by dragging bags filled with germ 
paraphernalia through checkpoints at places like the Pentagon, the 
State Department and Washington's Dulles International Airport. Grabbing 
his old green duffel bag, he displayed its jumble of sprayers, glass 
vials, plastic bags and simulated agents _ a witch's brew of biological 
malice. ``Nobody's ever stopped me,'' he said, shaking his head. ``Nobody's 
ever stopped and asked, `What's all this stuff?''' Perhaps Patrick's 
most novel enthusiasm centers on strengthening major government buildings 
and even individual homes against germ attack by adjusting their air 
flow. He has strongly urged private and federal officials to adopt 
such measures, which are said to be planned for New York City's $15 
million crisis control center. His idea, which he calls positive pressure, 
is to bolster ventilation systems so a gentle breeze blows outward 
through a building whenever a door or window is opened. In theory, 
this wind would keep the structure safe from dangerous germs by automatically 
sweeping them away. ``It's so simple,'' Patrick said. ``As bad as 
biological warfare is, this is an effective way of keeping things 
under control.'' Patrick said he had no guilt about his long labors 
to develop germ weapons, only a sense of foreboding. Terrorist attacks 
with germs are inevitable, he said. The government is taking a number 
of prudent safeguards and in no way is exaggerating the threat, so 
far as he can tell. The big uncertainty, Patrick added, is how severe 
the attacks will be and whether the United States has the wherewithal 
to protect itself adequately and defuse the potential harm and mayhem. 
It must try to do so. ``We don't have any other option,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>