<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981102.0196 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Although eclipsed by the attention given John Glenn's return to space, 
the crew of the shuttle Discovery is conducting one of the most ambitious 
and diverse programs of scientific and commercial research yet attempted 
on a nine-day mission. Along with the aging-related research involving 
Glenn, the seven-member crew is methodically working through scores 
of experiments ranging from solar physics and astronomy to the design 
of new drug delivery systems, studies of artificial bone, and testing 
insulation material for the construction industry. A major event planned 
for Tuesday is the recovery of the Spartan solar observation spacecraft, 
which was released from the Discovery on Sunday for two days of studies 
centering on the Sun's hot, outermost layer, the corona. The 3,000-pound 
Spartan has been trailing the Discovery by about 30 miles. It is to 
be snared by the shuttle's robot arm and returned to Earth in the 
orbiter's cargo bay. Glenn is being poked and prodded during the mission 
because of similarities between what happens to astronauts in space 
and bodily changes due to age, like loss of bone and muscle mass, 
greater susceptibility to infection and sleeping difficulties. The 
experiments require him to provide 10 blood samples and 16 urine samples 
while in space. Speaking from the shuttle on Sunday, Glenn said he 
did not like being stuck with needles and tried to avoid Dr. Scott 
Parazynski, the crewmate responsible for most of the blood collection, 
whom the senator sometimes calls ``Igor'' or ``Count Dracula.'' ``As 
much as I like Discovery, there's no place to hide when he comes after 
me,'' Glenn remarked. The bloodletting is part of a ``protein turnover'' 
experiment to study muscle wasting by tracking protein building and 
breakdown. Data are collected in six three-day sessions held before, 
during and after the flight. Each session, including two in space, 
requires five blood samples each taken from the 77-year-old senator 
and a fellow crew member, 35-year-old Pedro Duque. In order to track 
the formation of new protein from amino acids, both men take capsules 
of alanine, an amino acid tagged with a special molecule that can 
be found in newly built protein. Simultaneously, the subjects intravenously 
receive another tagged amino acid, histidine, which measures protein 
breakdown. Along with blood, urine samples will also be returned to 
Earth, where the tagged molecules will be measured. In addition, Glenn 
and another crewmate, Dr. Chiaki Mukai, 46, are doing sleep studies 
by wearing specially instrumented suits and caps to measure breathing, 
chest expansion, eye movement and brain waves when they go to bed. 
Most of the Discovery's crew members either conduct or take part in 
long hours of research, with little free time. And these undertakings 
do not include some experiments that require little or no human attention, 
like work on an electronic nose for detecting toxic compounds. The 
nose is a three-pound box full of chemical sensors connected to a 
small, palmtop computer. The sensor array, developed by NASA and California 
Institute of Technology researchers, is designed to detect a variety 
of gases and gas mixtures by mimicking the way the human nose detects 
changes in the air. Because astronauts in the confines of the planned 
international space station must breathe filtered and recycled air, 
researchers say they need a monitoring system that detects the accumulation 
of potentially harmful gases before they become a problem. Many of 
the more than 80 experiments aboard the Discovery are housed in a 
pressurized laboratory in the cargo bay that is connected to the shuttle's 
crew quarters by a tunnel. This laboratory, privately owned and operated 
by Spacehab Inc., of Vienna, Va., contains research like an experiment 
with aerogel, the lightest solid known. Aerogel, which has a hazy 
blue appearance, is a porous material so light and ethereal that it 
has been nicknamed frozen smoke. Tests show that a single window pane 
of aerogel has the insulation properties of up to 30 panes of glass 
and trapped air. If this material can be made transparent, perhaps 
by modifying under weightless conditions the size or uniformity of 
pores that compose most of it, aerogel could revolutionize the thermal 
window industry, scientists at the space agency say. Spacehab also 
houses a bioreactor, a device that allows cell cultures to be grown 
in space in rotating cylinders. Astronauts are tending several experiments 
for growing human cells, including research into making artificial 
and synthetic material more acceptable for human implantation by seeding 
it first with bone cells. This work, researchers said, could lead 
to synthetic bone to repair limbs damaged by accidents or for dental 
reconstruction. Other experiments, like the Hubble Space Telescope 
Orbital Systems Test, or HOST, developed by NASA's Goddard Space Flight 
Center in Greenbelt, Md., are in the shuttle's open cargo bay. A platform 
in the bay contains several instruments and devices tentatively scheduled 
to be installed on Hubble during its next servicing mission in the 
year 2000, said Rud V. Moe, payload coordinator at Goddard. The Discovery 
is flying at an altitude of about 340 miles, twice the normal shuttle 
orbit, mainly so the HOST package is exposed to conditions normally 
found at Hubble's elevation. The instruments include a faster computer 
with more memory to control the telescope's operations and a solid-state 
data recorder that will back up a similar device installed two years 
ago in place of Hubble's original mechanical tape recorder. HOST is 
also demonstrating a mechanical refrigeration system that could cool 
detectors on Hubble's Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer, 
a valuable instrument that is no longer working because it has exhausted 
its supplies of super-cold liquid coolants stored in pressurized bottles. 
The instrument requires cool detectors to measure the heat of distant 
objects. The new system, if shown to work in space, could extend the 
operation of the infrared instrument for more than five years, Moe 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>