<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981102.2000.3320 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Since 1994, the worldwide music expo has been Europe's meeting place 
for artists, record labels and promotors involved in world groups 
and traditional music. This year's Womex as it's known has just wrapped 
up in Stockholm, Sweden. The World's Marco Werman was there and tells 
us about the least inhibited music marketing gimmick he's ever come 
across. The Stockholm city conference center, a 19th century high 
school building was wall-to-wall bodies. Sometimes these faces from 
around the globe are so eager to talk about the music they love that 
they didn't care whether anyone spoke their language. They just extolled 
the virtues of their artists, trying to land distribution deals and 
first time record contracts. The schmoozing in the world music biz 
didn't end at the conference center. Across the street from the Womax 
hall, the Swedish traditional dance band, Vasa was holding a party 
at Stockholm's central bodit, the main bath house. So I was handed 
a towel, undressed with the members of Vasa and their guests and stepped 
into the heat of a dry sauna along with Vasan guitarist Roger Tolroth 
and his buddies. We're in the sauna in Sweden in Stockholm and we're 
one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10, 11, 12 guys 
doing things together. So we're having a good time and drinking beer. 
Right there was the point at which the sauna's heat momentarily melted 
down my tape recorder. So I gave the machine and myself a breather. 
After a nice shower, the sauna survivors came back out to the lounge 
and the stable singers on the stereo. They're all feasting on a meal 
of herring and hot boiled potatoes and lots of beer. Oh, yes, the 
music. That's what Vasan's party was all about, right, music. So another 
Swedish group, Halling, treated the guests to a little Polska, a Scandinavian 
kind of polka. The heat of the sauna and the ensuing food and alcohol 
must have made the performance a little shaky at first, but a few 
members of Vasan picked up their instruments and joined in the jam 
and pulled the room out of the doldrums. The business lesson to be 
learned from this night at the worldwide music expo is simple. If 
you want to make a successful pitch to your clients, get them to take 
off their clothes, relax and play them some tunes. For the World, 
this is Marco Werman. Music to get steamed by from Swedish traditional 
band Vasan brings this edition of the program to a close. Our coverage 
of immigration issues is made possible by a grant from the National 
Endowment for the Humanities. In Boston, I'm Lisa Mullins. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>