<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981102.2000.2024 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This past weekend in his weekly radio address, President Clinton called 
on voters to elect a Congress that would spend more money on public 
schools. Here's how the Republican response sounded. That of course 
was only one version of the GOP response, a version the party makes 
available to more than 200 Spanish-language radio stations in the 
United States. Republicans hope such overtures to Spanish speaking 
Americans will bear fruit tomorrow, when Hispanic voters will help 
decide scores of election contests. As the World's Patrick Cox reports, 
tomorrow's vote is but an early skirmish in what promises to be a 
protracted political battle for the rapidly growing Latino vote. In 
the political courtship of Hispanic voters, this year's boudoir is 
California. This TV ad for gubernatorial candidate Dan Lundgren represents 
the first time a California Republican running statewide has so specifically 
targeted the state's more than 2 million Latino voters. Lundgren's 
Democratic opponent Gray Davis is also putting out Spanish language 
ads, but it's the Republican Lundgren who's bucking party tradition. 
Luis Atiaga can testify to that. The director of the San Francisco-based 
Latino Issues Forum was taken aback last month when he visted east 
Los Angeles. I saw almost exclusively Lundgren for governor posters 
and propaganda and zero Davis for governor placards and billboards. 
Atiaga says the California GOP has never targeted east LA the way 
it's done this year. It's really the first time that I've noticed 
that happen. But so far at least, it appears California Hispanics 
aren't falling for Republican advances. One poll last week found Latinos 
voting 6-to-1 in favor of the Democrat Gray Davis. Not surprising 
perhaps this is a state who's outgoing Republican governor Pete Wilson 
championed moves to end affirmative action and through Proposition 
187, benefits to illegal immigrants. Still, Latino Republicans like 
California GOP political director Mike Madrid, remain optimistic. 
The great thing about this party and its positions and its platform 
is that with the Latino community, we do not have to change our message 
one bit. What we do need to do is a better job of the PR campaign 
if you will as a perception game. But that's a simplistic view at 
the Latino political world, according to Rudolfo de la Gaza of the 
University of Texas. De la Gaza, who specializes in Hispanic voting 
patterns, says Republicans need to understand that Hispanic voters 
are more than God-fearing small business owners. They are divided 
on abortion. They are very supportive of immigrants. They deeply support 
the single and substance of Spanish language and then beyond that, 
Latinos support programs to employ people if they can't get jobs. 
Now those are not Republican positions. But they may one day become 
so if the GOP wants to stay competitive. Hispanics are voting in ever 
greater numbers just when the rest of the electorate is voting less. 
According to the Census Bureau, in 1996, one million more Hispanics 
voted than in 1992, while the non-Hispanic vote shrank by 10 million. 
Within 50 years, Latinos are expected to make up at least a quarter 
of the population. Hispanics by no means automatically vote Democrat. 
On average about 2/3 do, but certain national groups, Cubans, Nicaraguans 
are more likely to vote Republican. Given the increasing sophistication 
and complexity of the Hispanic electorate, state parties like the 
California Democrats and the Florida Republicans are making conscious 
efforts to bring Latinos into the political process. But those are 
the exceptions. Louis DiSippio, author of Counting the Latino Vote. 
You know, that differs, the Latino experience from that of say Irish 
immigrants a hundred years ago who were met at the boat literally 
and figuratively by political machines that were trying to get them 
to participate. Hispanics started organizing politically after the 
second world war. At first, both parties shunned them, but in 1960, 
John Kennedy's presidential campaign, desperate for votes in the southwest, 
set up so-called Viva Kennedy Clubs. It paid off. The overwhelmingly 
Democratic Latino vote delivered Texas to Kennedy. Ever since then, 
Republicans have been playing catch up. They've recently made inroads 
among Hispanics in Texas, Arizona and New Mexico. But DiSippio says 
these advances may be short lived. The dilemma that these efforts 
will face is that in the year 2000 the moral conservatives will again 
come to dominate the party and they will speak in more exclusionary 
terms. Pat Buchanan is a good example. So these efforts that we'll 
see sort of in between presidential elections to reach out to Latinos 
I think will disappear in the period when most Latinos will pay attention 
to the Republican party again which is in the year 2000. In addition, 
surveys show that a surge of newly naturalized Hispanics overwhelmingly 
favor the Democrats. More than one million Hispanics have become eligible 
to vote in the past five years. A full 80 percent of the naturalized 
Latinos asked in a California poll last week, said they'll vote Democratic 
tomorrow. And this group of citizens votes in higher numbers than 
Latinos who've been citizens for decades. According to Lydia Camario 
of the Southwest Voter Registration Project in San Antonio, these 
new Americans are exacting revenge on the Republican party, which 
they blame for approving restrictive immigration regulations two years 
ago. They've been here, some of them 5 to 50 years, paying taxes and 
at the eleventh hour, the rules are changed. And so these individuals 
understand that the only way they're going to protect themselves is 
by becoming American citizens, registering and casting their vote 
and using that vote as a weapon for respect and dignity and accountability 
to those who govern us. Although the short-term anger and numbers 
appear to be working against Republicans, the GOP may have the chance 
to gain in the long term. In Texas, Republican Governor George W. 
Bush backs bilingual education and opposes California's Proposition 
187. Bush is way ahead in the polls and he's expecting up to 40 percent 
of the state's Latinos to vote for him. Camario says the GOP could 
learn a lot from Governor Bush. Bush is working very, very hard, not 
only by speaking the language and campaigning in cities like El Paso, 
places where Latinos are very much a part of that community, but he's 
also one of the first GOP governors to suggest that if Prop 187 were 
to become a national issue, he would never accept it here in Texas. 
And so a lot of the Latino vote are going to thank him. In New York 
City, there's a different flavor to Hispanic culture and politics 
than in the west. Here the rhythms of Puerto Ricans, Dominicans and 
Cubans vie for preemminence along with a host of smaller national 
groups. But as in California, on the airwaves, most of the Latino 
endorsements and political ads this election are for Democrats. In 
the Bronx, the Latino population is swelling, 47 percent of Bronx 
County and nearly all of the voters and party volunteers among them 
are Democrats. This is the only section of New York that voted against 
popular Republican mayor Rudolph Guiliani last year. 38-year Bronx 
resident Carlos Arena can't imagine ever voting Republican. The Republicans, 
they ain't here for the poor, for the people who have money and businesses. 
We need jobs. We don't have no business and a lot of people like myself, 
we went to college. We have credentials, but we can't get no jobs. 
Democratic party loyalty here is rooted in class as much as ethnic 
concerns. Both inform the political voices of New York's Latinos. 
Bronx County Democratic Party Chair Roberto Ramirez says the challenge 
for Democrats is to understand and respond to those voices. We're 
a mix of people who come from all over the world with a lot of similar 
areas that unite us, language, culture, music, the historical experience 
of migration and immigration to the United States. All of this is 
giving us an opportunity to build on those commonalities and now move 
forward to a citywide political force. But here, as in California, 
Republicans have awakened to the potential of the Latino vote. The 
GOP has lured away one of New York's best known Puerto Rican Democrats 
and last month, New York Republican Senator Alfonse D'Amato, who's 
up for reelection, speedily organized relief flights to Puerto Rico 
and the Dominican Republic in the wake of Hurricane George. A few 
days later, in front of a battery of television cameras, New York 
Governor George Pataki and Mayor Guiliani thanked D'Amato for his 
efforts in English and in Spanish. Three white Republican politicans 
tossing out bilingual sound bites. For the World, this is Patrick 
Cox. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>