<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981102.2000.2998 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For almost 200 years, there were rumors about Thomas Jefferson and 
one of his slaves, Sally Hemmings. Well now there's proof. DNA test 
results announced last week show that the nation's third president 
fathered at least one of the children born to Sally Hemmings. Many 
still find it hard to believe that Jefferson secretly fathered black 
children while publicly opposing the mixing of the races. Racial mixing 
has become a more accepted part of history in other countries where 
slavery was practiced. In Cuba today, more than half the population 
is mestizo, a mixture of black, Indian and white. Our ongoing series 
on the legacy of slavery in the America's continues with this report 
from the World's Maria Zareas in Havana. The first slaves brought 
to Cuba in 1523 by the Spaniards came from neighboring Hispanola Island, 
known today as the Dominican Republic and Haiti. To begin with, there 
were 300 slaves. Later on during the 18th century, a massive influx 
of slaves from remote areas of west Africa began in earnest. It was 
then that Cuba had its first taste of a particularly rich and culture. 
The musical heritage of African slaves has been preserved by generations 
and generations of black Cubans. You can hear these rhythms almost 
anywhere on this island. We're a joyous people. We can improvise a 
rumba on any street corner at a moment's notice, just like that. That's 
the way we are. is the director of Afro-American, an all-black group 
in Havana. When most slaves arrived in Cuba, they were not allowed 
to develop their culture or their religion. They were brought here 
to work in agriculture, in the sugar cane fields. But when they did 
have some free time, they could only do one thing. They could organize 
religious rituals like the ones they had back home and it's precisely 
those rituals that we still perform here today. This is a song dedicated 
to, one of the African deities revered by followers of Santeria, a 
blend of African rituals and Catholicism practiced by nearly 80 percent 
of the population. Maria Eana Faguava is a historian at the University 
of Havana. The African slaves were forced to change everything once 
they arrived in Cuba. Religion was no exception and out of this confrontation 
with the Spanish culture, a so-called new religion is born. The slaves 
would be seen as if adoring the Catholic saints while in reality they 
were paying tribute to African deities. For many Cubans like, the 
religious legacy of the African slaves is ever present. One of the 
legacies they left us is that black people have become more religious 
than whites. Whites used to pretend that they didn't believe in Santaria, 
but in the middle of the night, when no one was looking, they would 
go to their santero and ask for spiritual advise. This secretive relationship 
between races in Cuba wasn't limited to religion. The physical mixing 
of the races also began in secrecy, but as this racial diversity manifested 
itself in society, popular culture began to reflect it. This scene 
is typical of the vernacular theater, a form that fear, born in the 
twilight of Spanish colonial rule. The main characters are a Spanish 
man, a mulatta, a woman of Indian and black background and a black 
man, always played by a white man wearing black make up. The play 
is a comedy in which the mulatta and the black man usually win a moral 
victory over the Spaniard. is an exerpienced Cuban actor. He's played 
the character of the Spanish man many times. Some people say that 
our theater is racist, because we have a white man wearing make up 
playing the part of a black man. Well, I don't think that's racist. 
The reality is that our own venacular theater comedies have all but 
disappear from the stage. Yaguno says the vernacular theater does 
not enjoy official support and as a result is rarely performed on 
stage nowadays. But he believes that this type of theater is still 
relevant in today's Cuba with its rich mixture of races and cultures. 
For the World, I'm Maria Zareas in Havana. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>