<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981102.2000.1257 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During the depression of the 1930's, one American industry did just 
fine. Hollywood gave people what they wanted, escapism, whether in 
the form of Fred and Ginger dancing their way through Manhattan or 
a giant gorilla doing a less graceful conga on the Empire State Building. 
We'll these days, Hollywood is trying to sell tickets during another 
economic crisis, the one overseas, where American films do more than 
half their business. The World's Clark Boyd takes us to the movies. 
From Armagedon's Texas-sized asteroid hurtling toward earth to Something 
About Mary's gross out humor to Saving Private Ryan's Normandy invasion, 
it's been quite a season for Hollywood. Somebody dial 911. But now 
as these American movies hit screens worldwide, the studios are worried, 
worried that global economic crisis will translate into box office 
flop in their overseas markets. Film industry analyst Hal Fogle says 
that fear is well founded. If the dollar strengthens against the currencies 
lost countries and the countries actually collapse in terms of their 
economic performance, you can't expect much in the way of purchases 
of movie tickets, of video cassetts or for that matter, television 
programming. But Christopher Dixon, an analyst for PaineWebber is 
more optimistic. Hollywood is alive and well. There's continued demand 
in the international market for American films. Americans films will 
be number one and number two in market share in every territory around 
the planet. The recent quarter we saw decline of around 6 to 7 percent, 
but that was really due to tough comparisons. Last year, you had the 
Lost World, Jurassic Park and Men in Black, whereas this year you 
had a picture like Godzilla. So clearly it came down to product. That's 
Saving Private Ryan to you and me. It's now at Moscow's Kodak co-owner 
Ray Markovich. The crisis began August 17 which was the day of the 
ruble devaluation and we opened Armaggedon on August 20th. Armaggedon 
had been selling out virtually every show during its run. We followed 
Armageddon with The Mask of Zorro. The Mark of Zorro did well, but 
nothing close to Armaggedon. But Markovich says that Saving Private 
Ryan is not drawing in the big audiences that the film enjoyed here 
in the states. Markovich thinks that's because in Russia right now, 
misery doesn't love company. It's definitely very serious and our 
sales for that film have not been anywhere close to the sales for 
Armaggedon, so I think what we've seen is that one, in times of crisis, 
serious films don't do as well. And two, that the economic crisis 
is having an effect on our customer based. Yes, Private Ryan is playing 
to big audiences in Japan. That's good news for Hollywood, because 
Japan is the largest foreign market for American films. From his office 
in Singapore, Jeff Hardy, the motion picture association's vice president 
for Asia, says that as Japan goes, so goes the region. And Japan's 
going well. Admissions have been expanding, increasing in Japan and 
it's, admissions have held up quite steadily in many of the countries, 
most of the countries in fact, despite the economic problems. But 
Hollywood is feeling the Asian economic crunch. Weak local currencies 
have sapped overall box office revenues in recent months and the construction 
of American-style multiplex theaters has slowed in Thailand and Malaysia. 
Still, Hardy says, the future looks bright. In the near to long term, 
we're very optimistic. Markets such as China that really have not 
been tapped, India, which is really only beginning to come around 
and so we see a lot of potential in the markets. Moviegoers in Mexico 
City, Buenos Aires and other Latin American cities are enjoying. In 
fact, Latin America may just be on the verge of becoming a mother 
load for Hollywood. That's according to the motion picture association's 
director of Latin American operations, Sean Spencer. Throughout Latin 
America, by the end of 1999, there are probably going to be another 
1500 to 2000 new multiplex theaters open. Argentina, Chile, you've 
got a lot of new ones, but it's not limited to those markets. There 
is new theaters going in in Peru, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, 
Colombia, everywhere. And that's good marketing, says industry analyst 
Hal Vogel who dismisses fears that movie companies may become dependent 
on overseas markets. After all, the growth potential ultimately long 
term is in those markets and right now, some of these countries are 
hurting. So it's a temporary slowdown. But ultimately one would have 
to expect that these countries will bounce back. And when they do 
bounce back, you can bet that Hollywood will be waiting with the likes 
of Antz, Beloved, Soldier, Pleasantville, Bride of Chuckie, Urban 
Legend, Practical Magic. Sometimes I wonder if I... OK, you get the 
pictures. For the World, this is Clark Boyd. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>