<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981102.2000.2653 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today was the day the Wye River land for security agreement between 
Israel and the Palestinians was supposed to go into effect. But such 
was not the case. The Palestinian authority did meet today's deadline 
for showing the United States a work plan to combat extremist violence, 
but Israel's parliament has yet to approve the accord. This is expected 
next week though. And Aaron Miller, U.S. deputy special coordinator 
for the middle east, says the Wye River process is proceeding. Both 
sides have different political processes which are necessary to gain 
support for the agreement. And Israel at the moment is in the midst 
of going through its legal, political process of seeking support. 
This is the result of a two-year effort in which both parties have 
been involved in painstaking negotiations with us. It's come to some 
very tough decisions and made some commitment to one another that 
I believe both parties intend to respect. So while I don't want to 
minimize the significance of any delay, I think we expect that in 
fact the agreement will be implemented, yes. And on the other hand, 
when we look at what's happening in terms of the Palestinian authority 
right now, does things seem quite so clear. I mean how concerned are 
you about the danger of a civil war among the Palestinians now that 
we have so far in uncorroborated message from the armed wing of the 
Hamas this weekend, threatening to turn its guns on the Palestinian 
administration of Yassar Arafat and in fact attacking Yassar Araft 
himself. Yeah, I don't want to, I don't want to get into commenting 
on the internal politics of either the Israelis or the Palestinians, 
but I think it's quite clear that the Palestinians undertook, when 
they signed the agreement certain commitments and obligations that 
preempt number one. Number two, Palestinians have always told us, 
first and foremost, that the threat of terrorism is the Palestinian 
national interest and that they have to do everything they possibly 
can not at the request of Israel or the United States, but because 
it's a Palestinian national interest to preempt terror and to combat 
terror. So you're not concerned that it will in the end undermine 
the Palestinian end of the accord? I think Hamas is a threat to Israel. 
Hamas is a threat to the Palestinian authority and Hamas is a threat 
to those who want to pursue a just and durable and real Israeli/Palestinian 
peace. Talk about the CIA's involvement under the Wye accord. The 
CIA's going to be heavily involved in trying to help administer Palestinian 
security measures. There seems to be increasing concern that this 
might put the CIA in an awkward and untenable role. Do you agree with 
that? I don't. I think there's more continuity with respect to our 
role and the role of the CIA than contrast. We've been involved in 
counter-terrorism efforts since the summit of March 1996 and probably 
well before that. I think what is new is the fact that the CIA will 
be playing a monitoring role. But I think it's a necessary one. And 
it's one that all the parties seem comfortable with. There's one other 
additional point I think I'd like to add with respect to the significance 
of the agreement. The fact is that over the last several years, we've 
had a fundamental impasse, a crisis of confidence between Israel's 
and Palestinians. And what this agreement does is to suggest that 
that the process of Israeli/Palestinian peace making really does have 
a future. So for those Americans who might be disenchanted of some 
of the interruptions that have followed the signing of the accord, 
you're saying don't be disenchanted. Don't be disenchanted. Recognize 
one fundamental reality that despite the traumas and all the crisis 
that this process has endured over the last five, five to eight years, 
the fact is that Israelis and Palestinians despite it all and despite 
their differences with one another and despite the imperfections of 
the negotiating process, have made a strategic decision to find an 
alternative to the conflict that has taken too many lives and focused 
too much energy in the wrong direction. The fact is, they've made 
this commitment. They want to see it through and with their courage 
and determination and our support, we will see it through. Aaron Miller 
is deputy U.S. special middle east coordinator. Mr. Miller, thank 
you very much. You're welcome Lisa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>