<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981102.2000.0851 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton has a new warning for Saddam Hussein. This afternnoon 
Mr. Clinton called Iraq's announcement that it will stop cooperating 
with UN weapons inspectors completely unacceptable. He said if Baghdad 
was hoping to divide the international community, it was mistaken. 
As for the warning, it was subtle but unmistakable. Mr. Clinton said 
he'll be consulting with U.S. allies in the days ahead and no options 
will be off the table. The World's Alan Dow has our story. One London 
newspaper likens Iraq's latest defiance of the UN resolutions with 
the story of the three pigs. Today's editorial in the Independent 
says the United States and Britain have huffed and puffed but still 
haven't managed to blow Saddam Hussein's palace down. The deputy prime 
minister Terek Aziz says Baghdad is halting cooperation with the weapons 
inspectors because Washington and London have kept the sanctions in 
place. Who was against lifting the sanctions? Not Russia, China and 
France, the United States. Britain. Britain is helping the United 
States in that. If we have implemented UN resolutions and we have 
more problem in continuing the process of implementation if the sanctions 
are lifted. We heard this Iraqi argument before, just as we've heard 
threats of military action before. Hazio Tamorian, a London-based 
writer on Iraqi affairs, says this time the west will have to do more 
than threaten. Iraqi leader provokes a crisis to bring the U.S. and 
the British armada to its presence, only to dismiss them after some 
negotiations if things become very tough. And I think of course the 
United States and the British government also know this and they are 
tired of sending an armada to his presence only to be dismissed, only 
for example the UN general secretary, Mr. Kofi Annan to buy time for 
him or the French and the Russians vetoing some resolution. This time 
if they go in and this is the real challenge, they'll have to do something 
quite serious. Tamorian isn't alone in that view. Even the liberal 
Independent newspaper is saying the time for talking is over. John 
Rantool is the paper's senior editorial writer. We take the view now 
that we need to balance carrots with sticks because it's all very 
well lifting sanctions and hoping that it might break down the support 
for his regime and his ability to portray himself as a martyr of the 
Muslim world. But we can't allow Saddam Hussein to carry playing brinkmanship 
with his observance of the UN rule. And we have to threaten the use 
of force and if he doesn't comply with UN resolutions in full on the 
monitoring of his weapon capability, then force must be used. I mean 
some air strikes may well be justified. I mean it's a position that 
the liberal press in this country has come round to in Kosovo, in 
the former Yugoslavia and it's the position that we hold in this part 
of the middle east as well. Saddam may be hoping the United States 
and Britain are distracted by other foreign and domestic issues, but 
U.S. defense secretary William Cohen says Washington is prepared to 
act unilaterally if necessary. We always have that capability. We 
prefer to act through our allies and with our allies and hopefully 
that will be the case if we have to take any action at all. As for 
the weapons inspectors, their chief, Richard Butler is determined 
that they stay put, whatever Baghdad says. We've got our full team 
there. I have no intention of removing them. We're there. We're up 
and running and capable, ready to resume work. This latest standoff 
may be resolved only if Saddam Hussein backs down. If Saddam's main 
goal is to get the sanctions lifted then Butler has a message for 
the Iraqi leader. The bottom line is this. You are quite close to 
getting towards the end of most of the disarmament issues. Secondly, 
you know exactly what we need, the truth. You own it; you can give 
it to us. We will be objective. We will get the job of verification 
done and get to the end of this if you cooperate. Now that's a true 
and clear promise. It's the best way to go and I hope they're listening. 
The last time there was a standoff with Baghdad over the UN weapons 
inspections, UN Secretary General Kofi Annan brokered a face saving 
compromise. But now the time for diplomacy may have passed. For the 
World, I'm Alan Dow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>