<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981102.2000.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mitch is now a mere tropical storm but as a Hurricane it was devastating. 
At one point during its destructive sweep through the Carribean last 
week, Mitch became the fourth most powerful Atlantic storm of the 
century. It is the deadliest hurricane to hit central America since 
Fifi killed 3000 people in Honduras in 1974. Mitch's death toll is 
now put at more than 6,000 mostly due to floods and landslides. In 
a moment we'll speak with a reporter in Managua about the relief operations 
there. But first we turn to the world's William Troop. Mitch has been 
pounding central America for over a week now. At first, it took aim 
for Belize and Honduras. Then it seemed headed for the Yucatan peninsula 
in Mexico. Then it stalled. But even as the storm was downgraded, 
it began dumping record amounts of rain on central America. Now after 
days of uninterrupted downpours over the region, the extent of devastation 
brought by Mitch is finally becoming apparent. Rivers throughout the 
region have swelled to 10 times their normal size. Mountains have 
turned into giant mudslides that have devasted countless communities. 
In Nicaragua, officials say up to 1000 people may have died in one 
location alone. A volcano named Casitas in the north of the country, 
apparently filled with water before unleashing rivers of mud that 
wiped out houses on its flanks. Hornacio Luis, editor for Nicaragua's 
La Prensa newspaper calls the devastation at Casitas a modern day 
Pompeii and he says his reporters are shocked to hear of entire families 
that disappeared in the deluge. he had about say five, members in 
the families. That included the mother, father, sisters, daughters, 
brothers, nieces nephews in some cases even grandsons, grandchildren. 
They were wiped out. They don't exist any more. The United States 
has provided $2 million in funding for emergency supplies and is sending 
a third airlift of shelter materials and food to the area., Nicaragua' 
minister for foreign cooperation, says his nation is getting help 
from other countries too. get some helicopter from Panama. I would 
like to say to all the people that we need the solidarity international 
from the community for Nicaragua which 5 percent of the population 
as I tell you is in bad condition. The International Federation of 
the Red Cross says the situation in Nicaragua and neighboring Honduras 
has overwhelmed local rescue efforts. It has mobilized the force of 
5000 volunteers from Mexico, El Salvador and elsewhere to help out. 
But it will take weeks just to figure out exactly how damage Mitch 
has done. Macarena Aguilar of the International Federation of the 
Red Cross says the situation in Honduras could be even worse than 
the one in Nicaragua. It went beyond any prediction of devastation. 
It wasn't expected that the storm stays in its stationary position. 
The northern part of the country was completely devastated and then 
the situation in Tegucegalpa in the capital as the storm went inland. 
The latest conversation that I remember with the president of the 
Red Cross in Honduras just kept on say, I mean my God. I see rain 
everywhere. It just doesn't stop raining. Meanwhile, tropical storm 
Mitch continues to churn on. It's now hovering over Guatemala and 
appears head for the Mexican state of Chapas. Heavy rains there last 
month have already saturated the ground and the Mexican government 
is taking Mitch's imminent arrival very seriously. For the World, 
this is William Troop. Peter Gresta is the BBC Correspondent in Managua, 
Nicaragua. Peter we are hearing about casualties in the thousands 
there. Can you tell us how vast the devastation is, so far as you 
can tell? It's huge. I mean at the moment the aid agencies are still 
trying to work out just how big it is. The weather has only just started 
to break and they're only just starting to get the helicopters in 
the air to find out and survey the damage. But what we do know is 
that across the country at least 2500 kilometers of roads are impassable 
and that means that the aid operation is going to be very, very slow 
and very, very long. And I understand the area that was hardest hit 
is an area around the Casitas volcano where there was a mud slide. 
Tell us about that. Yeah, I don't know if that's the area that was 
hardest hit in one sense, but it's certainly the most devastating 
tragedy that we've seen so far. What happened, what we believe happened 
was that the extinct, the crater of the extinct volcano filled up 
with a huge lake of water and the crater simply couldn't withstand 
the pressure and it burst and sending a massive cascade of rocks and 
mud and water flooding down on the community beneath. Now we know 
that there are about 1800 people who lived in those communities. Of 
those, we know, although we don't know the final death toll, we do 
know that only about 120 survivors have been found so far. And so 
rescue crews are still out at work which I imagine is a pretty tough 
job logistically to get out to points like that. It's extraordinarily 
tough. There is no road access to the area. Helicopters are the only 
way in or by foot and rescuers are trying to move in as best they 
can. But I have to say that the Casitas volcano area is a low priority. 
Most of the people that are there are almost certainly dead and the 
authorities are saying that there's really not much point wasting 
time or effort on corpses when there are plenty of other people in 
desperate need who are still alive who need help. And what kinds of 
situations are they and people outside of the area where the mudslide 
hit? A very desperate situation. A lot of them haven't had food or 
drinking water, clean drinking water for several days now. Disease 
is a massive problem. They're trying very, very hard to get both food 
and water out to these people. But you've got to remember again that 
helicopters can only carry a very limited amount of supplies to those 
areas. One official I spoke to at the Care international aid agency 
says that it's a bit like trying to bail out a ship with a teaspoon. 
There simply aren't enough helicopters in this country to meet the 
need. But the only way that the aid agencies are going to get to those 
people who really do need the help the most is by opening the roads. 
And that's a massive engineering task. I know you said that the weather 
is starting to break now. Does it seem as though at least in terms 
of the weather itself that the worst is over or is it likely that 
the conditions will continue? No, I don't think the conditions will 
continue at all. The forecasters are saying that Hurricane Mitch is 
all but broken up. There are still a few scattered showers around. 
But here in Managua we're seeing some blue skies believe it or not. 
In fact as I speak, I'm looking out at some blue skies over Managua. 
So I think that the weather has finally broken and it seems that at 
least in one area, there's a bright spot on the horizon. At this point, 
tell us what the priorities are in terms of the rescue crews and where 
their attempts are focusing. The most needed task clearly is to rescue 
those people that are still in life threatening situations and I know 
that the aid agencies and the government are mobilizing what few helicopters 
they have to try and reach those people. The task immediately after 
that though is to reopen the roads. There is no way that the authorities 
can deliver enough aid simply by air. They're absolutely going to 
have to reopen the roads and the government has commandered as much 
privately owned and publicly owned engineering equipment as it possibly 
can to focus all their energies on rebuilding the bridges and repairing 
the roads just so that they can get the access opened again. The BBC's 
Peter Gresta speaking to us from Managua, Nicaragua. Thank you for 
the update Peter. Not a problem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>