<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981102.1600.3188 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the run up to tomorrow's midterm U.S. elections, both Republicans 
and Democrats have been waging a fierce last-minute campaign over 
the television and radio air waves, hoping to get their supporters 
out to the polls. VOA's national correspondent Jim Malone reports 
that in the last few days of the campaign, both parties have been 
highlighting the sex and perjury scandal involving President Clinton 
but for different reasons. Republicans expect to gain seats in both 
the House and Senate on November 3rd, but just to make sure, they've 
launched a $10 million ad campaign in the last week aimed at reminding 
voters about the Clinton/Lewinsky scandal. Should we reward their 
opposition to more welfare reform, and should we reward not telling 
the truth? That is the question of this election. Reward Bill Clinton 
or vote Republican. The key to this election will be which party gets 
more of its core supporters to polls on election day. Republicans 
have launched this latest ad blitz to whip up interest in the campaign 
among key voter blocks like conservative Christian activists. Democrats 
have countered the Republican blitz with a $3 million ad campaign 
of their own, which urges the Republican-led Congress to stop attacking 
the president and move on to issues which matter, like education and 
health care. In addition, special interest groups which support Democratic 
candidates like People for the American Way are also running television 
ads urging the Congress to end its preoccupation with the White House 
sex and perjury scandal. OK, the president let us down but that's 
no excuse for Congress to stop doing all they can on health care or 
public education or jobs. Are they going to listen to us or Ken Starr? 
You know what? We still have the last word. It's vote. For his part, 
the president says Republicans can run ads on any subject they want. 
And while Mr. Clinton says he prefer if Americans vote on issues not 
personalities next Tuesday, he also realizes many voters will have 
his performance on their minds when they go to the polls. I hope the 
American people have seen in me over these last few weeks a real commitment 
to doing what I told them I would do from the beginning, to try to 
atone to them for what happened and to try to redouble my efforts 
to be a good president. Both the Republican and Democratic ads are 
running in selected congressional districts around the country where 
the races are tight and could be tipped either way depending on which 
party does a better job of mobilizing voter turnout. Thomas Mann is 
a political analyst with the Brookings Institution here in Washington. 
He says the Democrats are making a last minute bid to match the Republican 
effort to energize core supporters. Low turnout is likely in most 
districts and states to work to the advantage of the Republican Party. 
That is why so much energy is going into efforts to mobilize Democratic 
core constituencies. The Republican and Democratic television ads 
will be broadcast right through election day on November 3rd when 
voters will elect all 435 members of the House, 34 of 100 U.S. senators, 
and 36 state governors. Jim Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>