<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981102.0500.2712 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Delegates from throughout the world are gathering in Buenos Aires, 
Argentina today for a 12-day conference on global climate, and most 
importantly, how to stop global warming. VOA's Rick Nunez has that 
report. The Buenos Aires conference is a follow-up to the global climate 
meeting held last year in Kyoto, Japan. The Kyoto conference produced 
a controversial treaty that would require industrialized nations to 
reduce their release of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and 
methane. Some scientists believe these and other chemicals contained 
in emissions from automobiles and industry are connected to global 
warming. The Kyoto agreement would obligate the United States and 
other developed countries to reduce their output of greenhouse gases 
to seven percent below the levels generated in 1990 by the year 2012. 
The accord calls for further cuts in subsequent years. The United 
States Senate has yet to ratify the document. An especially controversial 
part of the treaty would exempt China, Brazil, Mexico, and other developing 
countries from the mandated cutbacks in emission. Critics in the United 
States say the Kyoto agreement is not only too expensive to implement 
but is fatally flawed. Mike Buckner represents the United Mine Workers 
of America. He says adopting the treaty will cost the United States 
between 1.3- and 1.7 million jobs by the year 2005. He believes efforts 
to combat greenhouse gas emissions will be meaningless unless they 
involve developed and developing nations alike. You can't resolve 
this issue without including developing countries. Over the next 20 
years, 75 percent of the emissions that are going to go into the atmosphere 
are going to come from these exempt countries. And anyone who thinks 
that we can resolve this as the United States and the E.U. alone is 
kidding themselves. We shouldn't do this harm to American workers. 
We shouldn't give up a million jobs in the American economy for a 
treaty that is self-defeating and cannot achieve its objective. But 
some say the treaty is not meant to favor the developing world unjustly 
at the expense of the United States and other industrialized nations. 
Catherine Silverthorn is the staff attorney for the U.S. Public Interest 
Research Group, a nonprofit organization that monitors environmental, 
consumer, and other issues. Ms. Silverthorn says the Kyoto agreement 
contains a separate set of obligations for developing countries. Right 
now, they're obligated to report on what their emissions are, and 
many of them have taken on a lot more serious policies in terms of 
reducing their emissions in the United States. I mean, there's a number 
of developing countries that have stopped subsidizing polluting fossil 
fuels, but the United States hasn't done that. There's a number of 
developing countries that are really aggressively promoting renewable 
energy. Ms. Silverthorn says the industrialized world must take the 
lead in reducing output of greenhouses gases given its historical 
role as chief developer and promoter of these chemicals. Many of the 
companies that revolutionized the use of such gases have become increasingly 
interested in finding more efficient energy sources that do less harm 
to the environment. At the same time, the firms are distancing themselves 
from the debate over the Kyoto protocol. General Motors, one of the 
largest corporations in the world, has joined the Monsanto Chemical 
Company, the British Petroleum Company, and the World Resources Institute 
in a partnership to find common ground among business, government, 
and environmental interests. The new alliance is calling for reduced 
emissions of greenhouse gases and increased support for research and 
climate change. Rick Nunez, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>