<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981102.1600.0693 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton has a lot at stake when Americans go to the polls 
for congressional elections on Tuesday. Mr. Clinton is barred from 
seeking a third term, but his political fortunes in terms of impeachment 
could hinge on the outcome of the elections, which will likely decide 
the margins of Republican control in both the House and Senate. Public 
opinion polls suggest Republicans are more energized than Democrats 
to vote in this year's elections, and our national correspondent, 
Jim Malone, has been checking around to see if that's true. The conventional 
political thinking in this election year is that Democrats are so 
demoralized by the White House sex and perjury scandal that they might 
stay home and not vote on November 3rd, giving Republicans a great 
opportunity to expand their majorities in both the House and Senate. 
But some Democrats, including President Clinton, take issue with that 
scenario. For example, Democratic Congressman Charles Rangel of New 
York argues that the Republican-led impeachment drive in the Congress 
could actually spark an angry backlash by Democratic voters in November 
which could translate into marginal Democratic gains. The unfairness 
of which the president had been treated by the Judiciary Committee, 
the release of the video, the release of other information and the 
vote that was taken, that question of fairness has energized a lot 
of the the president's base. In fact one Democratic congressional 
candidate in Maryland is making anger over the impeachment drive the 
central issue of his campaign. Democrat Ralph Nees is taking on moderate 
Republican incumbent Johnny Marella who says the voters he talks to 
are fed up with the Clinton/Lewinsky scandal and want to move on to 
other issues. Are we going to move forward and really look at and 
resolve the major issues that face us not only nationally but also 
internationally, or are we going to be obsessed with Monica Lewinsky, 
Linda Tripp, and Ken Starr, and all the things that we've been discussing 
now for months and months and months? Enough is enough. Let's resolve 
this. Let's get this over, and let's get forward with the nation's 
business and the world's business. But not all Democrats agree that 
a voter backlash related to the impeachment inquiry of President Clinton 
is going to happen. Maryland's Democratic Lieutenant Governor Kathleen 
Kennedy Townsend says most of the voters she's spoken to have other 
concerns. I haven't seen a big backlash at the moment. I think there's 
a lot of anger at Kenneth Starr, the fact that he's taking on the 
president with a sort of single-mindedness. But to tell you the truth, 
most people aren't talking about. They're really talking about at 
this point, you know, what's going to on in education, how has our 
environment been cleaned up. We don't have those kind of conversations 
as much as I thought we might. In fact, political analysts say the 
president's impeachment troubles are having a widely varied impact 
on some key constituencies in both political parties. George Washington 
University professor Sonya Jarvis has been watching the impact on 
two important groups: conservative Christian activists in the Republican 
Party, and African-Americans in the Democratic Party. Recent polls 
have suggested that the Christian Coalition base has been energized 
by the current scandal in the White House whereas the polls suggest 
that even though black voters care, we have not seen that same degree 
of energy. Professor Jarvis also suggest that Democrats have some 
work ahead of them if they plan to whip up a backlash in support of 
the president on November 3rd. Is to what extent that voters feel 
this upcoming election is a referendum on the president that how their 
vote, how they vote for members of Congress will influence beyond 
going impeachment inquiry. I don't think that we see much evidence 
from a number of polls suggesting that the voters have made that connection. 
Republicans, by the way, put little stock in Democratic claims of 
a backlash on November 3rd. They confidently point to numerous public 
opinion polls which indicate the Clinton/Lewinsky scandal has energized 
conservative voters around the country and increase the likelihood 
of Republicans expanding their 22-seat majority in the House of Representatives 
and their five-seat edge in the Senate. Jim Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>