<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981102.1600.3394 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> MISCELLANEOUS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many of our local FM and medium wave affiliates are about to take 
a two-minute break. This is VOA News Now. Well, all of us here at 
VOA News Now try to keep you informed around the clock about all the 
business and news that you're interested in. First of all, we bring 
you a complete world news update of both the top and bottom of every 
hour. And if you're interested in news from across the USA, be listening 
at 14 minutes after the hour universal time. And you can learn about 
your favorite athletes and sports teams by tuning in our sports update 
at 18 minutes after the hour. And during the business week, you can 
get the latest financial figures during our business report at 49 
minutes past the hour. And using a properly equipped computer linked 
to the Internet, you can watch us and hear us on the Internet. You 
just type in www.voa.gov. Once again, that's www.voa.gov. Well, we're 
coming very close to 22 hours universal time and that means we're 
closing down on all frequencies to the Middle East, North Africa, 
and Europe except for 1548 kilohertz medium wave to the Persian Gulf 
region. In Europe during next hour, VOA News Now can be heard on WRN1 
via Astra, Channel 22, audio subcarrier 7.38 megahertz. VOA News Now 
continues to East Asia on 7.215, 9.77, 9.89, 11.76, 15.185, 15.29, 
15.305, and 17.735 megahertz. In Africa, you can tune to 6.035, 7.415, 
11.975, 12.08, and 13.71 megahertz, plus 909 and 1530 kilohertz medium 
wave as VOA News Now continues. This is your direct connection to 
America and the world. This is VOA Express. Hi, there, Ed Kowolski 
on your music channel VOA Express sitting in today while Bernie Bernard 
takes the day off. Hope you're ready to charge into a brand new week 
and I'm going to help you with another hour of today's hits and your 
favorites from the '80s and '90s including 'N Synch, Alanis Morrisette, 
Simple Minds, Janet Jackson, the great new song from the Goo Goo Dolls,, 
London Beat, Eagle Eye Cherry, Mister, Mister, UB4U, the Fugees, Ace 
of Base, and more. Let's check with the newswroom for the latest... 
I'm Bill Hazzerd, VOA News. Defense Secretary William Cohen has begun 
a trip to Europe and the Persian Gulf to consult with U.S. allies 
about Iraq's latest refusal to cooperate with U.N. weapons inspectors. 
Mr. Cohen began the trip after President Clinton met with his security 
advisers in Washington. Mr. Clinton says Iraq's defiance is unacceptable 
and will only deepen international resolve to force Baghdad to comply 
with U.N. disarmament mandates. State Department spokesperson James 
Rubin identifies the next step. The next step is clearly for the council 
to make clear that this is unacceptable and that this decision is 
in flagrant violation of the requirements of the Security Council. 
Chief U.N. weapons inspector Richard Butler outlines what's next. 
It's pretty simple. The council's made binding international law. 
Iraq has to be disarmed under that law. If it refuses to comply and 
do the things required, and that's what we appear to have on our hands 
now, the council, of course, has to consider what steps it will take 
to see that... 
</TEXT>
</DOC>