<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981102.0500.0480 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It has been three days since South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission released its report. The reaction has been anger and reconciliation. 
Most of the report describes the gross human rights violations committed 
in the name of the former white leaders, but abuses committed by the 
African National Congress are also cited, and that's what stirred 
the outrage. Some ANC leaders argue that their activities in a battle 
against oppression cannot be placed beside those committed by a government 
devoted to repression. Alex Belida in VOA's Johannesburg bureau explained 
the ANC position. Their argument, and indeed it's reflected in the 
Truth Commissions report is that theirs was a just struggle. The ANC, 
on the other hand, says that it's unfair to say that what they did 
in the context of that just struggle can in any way be considered 
criminal and then therefore equate it with the crimes committed by 
the white minority government. That's their major objection. And so 
just by virtue of the fact that they're included in the same report 
don't rank us with them is the kind of attitude? That's right. But 
where it gets a little bit more interesting is that whereas you had 
Deputy President Tabu Embeckee who is the current president of the 
ANC and the man likely to succeed Nelson Mandella next year when Mr. 
Mandella retires has been amongst the biggest critics of the report. 
He said in a statement issued by his office on Saturday that no member 
of the ANC could ever accept any effort, including that of the Truth 
Commission, to, in its words, criminalize the actions of the liberation 
struggle. The problem is that President Nelson Mandella himself has 
said, "Yeah, the ANC committed human rights violations and no one 
can deny that." So again, it does beg the question: How much reconciliation 
has really occurred by release of this report? It seems that it has 
stirred up a lot of bad memories and bad feelings. Well, that's true, 
but you'll have to I suppose take into account that the reaction is 
coming mainly from political parties, political leaders, and particularly 
people who have been identified in the report itself. By and large 
I think you can say that it has, by raising the past, raise the consciousness 
of the people and so reinforcing the idea as Desmond Tutu, as President 
Mandella has said, such things should never happen again. I think 
one of the most moving signs of the reaction by and large of the people 
to the process - not necessarily the report but the entire Truth and 
Reconciliation process which has gone on for more than two years - 
is something called the register of reconciliation, which was set 
up by the Truth Commission offices where people could come in and 
make statements. Most of those statements happen to come from white 
South Africans. And I recently went through the register and just 
looked at selected things that were there but you have one doctor 
writing, "It is within measurable guilt that I assume responsibility 
for my role in our shameful past. I am so deeply sorry." A woman wrote, 
"I am sorry for the senseless suffering of so many people and that 
I did not have the courage to try and make a difference." You have 
very, very evidently remorseful statements like that. You also have 
the occasional statements from black South Africans who write, as 
one man did - It's an example I cited recently of a man who said he 
grew up in Suweto, suffered tear gassings, whippings, and general 
racism I guess you'd call it, and he admits he's battling to forgive 
white South Africans. He went on then to say that the need to forgive 
and to help build a new country is really an extension of the same 
struggle that brought about the end of apartheid. Alex Belida spoke 
to us from VOA's Johannesburg bureau. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>