<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981102.1600.1305 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A ritual is taking place across America, a ritual as old as the nation 
itself. Voters are preparing to go to the polls and candidates are 
sprinting to the finish line in an election year marathon. VOA's Paula 
Wolfson takes us to the state of Ohio for a day in the life of one 
campaign for the U.S. House of Representatives. As night gives way 
to an autumn dawn, the candidate hits the road. Seated in a van that 
also serves as a makeshift campaign office, Bob Ney travels the familiar 
frost wind streets of his district. A member of his staff is at the 
wheel. The Republican congressman is on the phone. Hello, how are 
you? There was an energy some would find jarring in the early morning 
hours, but there is much to do and not a moment to waste even for 
an incumbent who is leading in the polls. But no candidate can win 
unless he or she goes out and talks to potential voters. At Swiss 
Hills School, the congressman meets with hundreds of students and 
teachers in a packed auditorium. They want to know about local issues, 
about his family, and his plans for the future. Only one person asks 
about the Monica Lewinsky scandal. The answer is brief. I voted for 
the inquiry because in the inquiry, which is not an impeachment, but 
it's an inquiry whether we should impeach as we try to weigh the evidence. 
The school visit is a staple of American campaigns. On the local and 
state level, big rallies are not the norm. Instead, candidates build 
ties to the voters in smaller, less formal ways, like to a group of 
business owners, a chat with a teenager who sells hamburgers at a 
neighborhood restaurant, a stop at a local fire station to receive 
an endorsement. JERRY EHRLACH, PRESIDENT, LOCAL 2541, INTERNATIONAL 
ASSOCIATION OF FIREFIGHTERS: My name is Jerry Ehrlach. I'm president 
of Local 2541 of the International Association of Firefighters. Congressman 
Ney has received the endorsement of the International Firefighters... 
In the small town of Belair, three reporters look on as the local 
firefighters union announces it is backing the Ney campaign. The event 
with the candidate posed before a lime green fire truck, is his only 
meeting of the day with the media. And like most candidates in the 
region, Bob Ney uses the opportunity to focus on news that 300 workers 
at a local steel plant may lose their jobs. He tells the reporters 
he sent a letter to the president urging him to take steps to fight 
imports of subsidized steel. I'm writing what you would call I guess 
part of plea letter to the president of the United States pleading 
out this is serious; it's way past time for the president to act. 
The letter was carefully drafted with his staff in a phone call made 
during the long drive from one event to another. The phone is his 
life line to his campaign headquarters, a suite of offices in an otherwise 
unoccupied red brick building on Main Street in St. Clairesville, 
Ohio. Hi, Ma'am, I'm calling on behalf of Congressman Bob Ney. Congressman 
Ney has... In one room, volunteers and campaign staffers make phone 
calls to would-be voters. In another, letters are drafted to various 
constituent groups while issues are researched for the day's final 
event, the last formal debate with Mr. Ney's Democratic opponent, 
Bob Birch. Young staffers in sweat shirts and jeans are in constant 
motion. It is organized chaos. The scene stands in contrast to the 
quiet at the debate site. The crowd is small. A passerby says that's 
because the local high school athletic teams play on Friday night. 
He jokes that in this part of the country, football comes before politics. 
But the candidates debate the issues as if before a full auditorium, 
knowing that in a nonpresidential election year when turnout is traditionally 
low, each vote is precious. I want to talk about us. I was a boy here. 
My family's been here for three or four generations now. I'll be buried 
here. I commute back every weekend. I don't live in Washington D.C. 
The sky is black when the debate ends and participants emerge into 
the cool evening air. But the day is not over. There are late night 
strategy meetings ahead, and by the light of the moon, teams of volunteers 
plan to fan out across the district to place hundreds of green and 
white campaign signs along the highways and country roads. Sleep will 
wait till November 4th, the day after the 1998 congressional election. 
Paul Wolfson, VOA News, St. Clairesville, Ohio. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>