<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981102.1600.2105 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The term "civil society" dates back to the 19th century. It refers 
to people who form pressure groups to advocate things like individual 
liberty, democratic representation, and human rights. The idea was 
power in numbers, that civil organizations could exert more influence 
on their governments than individual citizens. Today, the civil society 
concept is enjoying a rebirth in many European nations and developing 
countries as a means of transforming authoritarian governments into 
truly democratic ones. The development of national and international 
civil societies is today's topic on Dateline. Here's Linda Cashden. 
Since the end of the Cold War, the question of how best to foster 
democratic principles throughout the world has been a pressing one 
for academics and policymakers. VOA correspondent Nelson Brown reports 
many in Africa believe the traditions of civil society could help 
stabilize the continent and promote democratic principles. If a huge 
sign could be placed over the African continent, it might read, "Democracy 
under construction." In the four decades since the end of most European 
colonial rule in Africa, democracy has experienced its ups and downs 
and can still be described as a work in progress. Many African scholars 
and policymakers believe an important element is known as civil society, 
an expression that has gained increasing recognition since the end 
of the Cold War. Professor Peter Ekay, a Nigerian born scholar who 
teaches African-American studies at State University of New York at 
Buffalo says civil society simply means that freedom of individuals 
to associate as they will. He was part of an international group that 
came together in 1994 in Washington D.C. to examine and define the 
expression. It was crime describe and capture the contemporary political 
needs of Eastern Europe and African nations especially, following 
the collapse of the Cold War in the late 1980s, and the extreme effort 
to understand and remedy the political crisis that flow from the Cold 
War. Professor Ekay says civil society is an expression borrowed from 
western ideas of the 19th century in order to express political problems 
outside the West today. The African scholar says one of the problems 
was something he calls command state politics, adopted in Eastern 
European, Africa, and large portions of Asia during the Cold War. 
He says many countries imitated the command of politics also known 
as authoritarian rule of the Soviet Union. He says during that time, 
individual freedoms were lost, often with the tacit approval of Western 
nations as they sought allies in the fight against communism. But 
Mr. Ekay says even without the Cold War, African history is full of 
historical crises that have threatened individual freedom. He looks 
back to the Arab conquest of the seventh century and to European colonialism 
of more recent times. He says once African nations gained independence, 
individual freedom did not necessarily follow. He says two leading 
African liberationists, Kwami and Kwuma of Ghana, and Guinea's Ahmed 
Sekioturay did not liberate their people. imperialists, could have 
become oppressors denying individuals elementary rights of free speech 
in Ghana and Guinea. In country after country, rulers claimed that 
the security of the nation requires that individuals lose their freedom. 
The African scholar says in post Cold War Africa, the international 
community and African people are calling on leaders to permit more 
individual freedom. He says to many scholars and policymakers, the 
best way to sustain democracy is by allowing civil society to flourish. 
VOA correspondent Nelson Brown. The civil society concept is also 
growing on an international level these days, as national civil society 
groups form links to organize around broad global issues. Environmental 
and human rights activists, for example, are collaborating across 
national borders and pressuring governments around the world. Professor 
Martin Shaw at the University of Sussex in England is an expert on 
the growth of an international civil society. Civil Society means 
networks and institutions and people outside the state who are organizing 
to represent themselves and to represent ideas and values. And international 
civil society means when that civil society network is on the international 
scale. Martin Shaw, professor of international relations at the University 
of Sussex in England. Georgetown University professor Mamoon Fandi, 
says several global trends have helped to cultivate today's international 
civil society. With the collapse of communism, we found a great deal 
of excitement at the local level in Eastern Europe. And also gives 
hope to many people throughout the third world that local activities 
can make a difference. But I think what has been impressive in general 
terms is the growth of the national civil society from human rights 
organizations that have been there for a long time like Amnesty International, 
Human Rights Watch with a variety of sections for different areas, 
Middle East and Asia, and Latin America, as well as Eastern Europe. 
And then we had all kinds of issues that came up from environmental 
issues to the AIDS epidemic, so health issues as well as environmental 
issues contributed to a great deal of activities. And as the world 
opens up, we see a great deal of transnational activity in various 
areas. In the areas of finance, we see a great deal of migration throughout 
the world. All of his requires a great deal of organizing. And so 
the rise of international civil society is certainly linked to movements 
on the local level, whether it is movements of people, refugees, and 
migrant workers and other things or the opening up of particular systems 
like the experience in Eastern Europe. Professor Mamoon Fandi of Georgetown 
University here in Washington. While the concept of a national civil 
society is still mainly confined to academics and policymakers, Professor 
Shaw says there is ample evidence that the bond between national civil 
societies are in fact flourishing. There's evidence of lots of different 
kinds. I mean, first of all, there is the evidence simply of the growth 
of national civil society. Civil society used to be mainly strong 
in the West and now is increasingly important in East and Central 
Europe, the former Soviet Union, in parts of Latin America, Africa, 
Asia, in many parts of the world. And these national civil societies 
are linked up because the idea of civil society has become a common 
idea. Beyond that, the evidence I think has to do with the ways in 
which international linkages of various kinds have been established. 
It's to do with the networks that exist of social movements. There 
are networks of activists, for example, engaging with the environmental 
policymaking purposes. Whenever you have an international environmental 
summit, you also have an unofficial summit alongside it of which all 
the nongovernmental organizations and social movements are represented. 
That's one example of one area in particular in which civil society 
actors have been linking up internationally in a very effective way. 
As nations come closer together to deal with global threats, ozone 
depletion, for example, and the current economic crisis, Mr. Shaw 
says the role of an international civil society becomes even more 
important. What we really have is an increasingly interlocking system 
of states which link up with each other and which cooperates with 
each other. I think what's important about international civil society 
is it means that civil society has the possibility to influence this 
interlocking network of states, that states become more coordinated, 
so the society have become more coordinated, and society will therefore 
have more say. Martin Shaw, professor of international relations at 
the University of Sussex in England. Developing national and international 
civil societies was the subject of today's Dateline. I'm Linda Cashden. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>