<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981102.0500.0787 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In just about 26 hours, voting places will start opening for the United 
States' 1998 election. As is the case every two years, all 435 seats 
in the U.S. House of Representatives will be before the voters on 
Tuesday, and congressional correspondent, Paula Wolfson, reports that 
most signs indicate modest gains for the Republican Party. In 1994, 
in the middle of President Clinton's first term in office, Republicans 
won control of the House of Representatives with a call for change. 
People described the victory as the political equivalent of a whirlwind 
or a tidal wave. In 1998, at the halfway point in Bill Clinton's second 
term, the winds of change are still. After all the political posturing 
of recent years and the dramatic developments of the last ten months, 
it appears the new House of Representatives will look a lot like the 
old one. Political analyst Charles Cook says a significant shift towards 
the Republicans was detected early in the year as the public learned 
more about President Clinton's legal and political troubles. Mr. Mr. 
Cook says in recent weeks, the Republican advantage has declined. 
At this point, we're figuring, you know, you're going to see Republican 
gains in the House single digits, maybe ten seats, something like 
that, but not in the 15-20 something like that that we were talking 
about a month ago. Polls across the country are predicting a status 
quo House election, one with little movement for either party. The 
numbers tell the story. One hundred House members running for reelection 
have no major party opposition, and there are very limited number 
of seats with no incumbents seeking office. They are called open seats 
and traditionally have provided the greatest opportunity for rival 
parties to build their power base in the House. Thomas Mann is a congressional 
scholar at the Brookings Institution in Washington D.C. He says only 
about 60 of the 435 House races are even close, and many of those 
are open seats where no one has the advantage of incumbency. We have 
a relatively small number of open seats. In past years, we've had 
40, 50, 60 plus, as high as 70. This time, we have 34 open seats: 
17 Democratic, 16 Republican. That's the place where we're almost 
certain to get some party change. Traditionally, the party that does 
not hold the White House, in this case the Republicans, makes substantial 
gains in elections that occur in the middle of a presidential term. 
But Mr. Mann says this year, congressional Republicans face a mix 
of voter apathy, complacency, and disillusionment. The pending impeachment 
hearings have been a mixed blessing. At first, they were seen as a 
means to energize support among anti-Clinton Republicans, but Charles 
Cook says Democrats are now using the issue in some districts to mobilize 
members of their party who believe the president is being treated 
unfairly by the Republican-dominated Congress. The president's problems 
have added a national component to congressional races, which traditionally 
have been won or lost on local issues. And while most political observers 
refuse to call the 1998 election a referendum on the president, there 
is no denying the end result could have a big impact on Bill Clinton's 
future. Just days after the election, the House Judiciary Committee 
will hold its first impeachment hearing. Thomas Mann says if Republican 
election gains are low, the panel will complete its work quickly. 
If it's a very modest pick up that now seems most likely to people 
and there are no new crashing revelations coming from the independent 
counsel, I think the hearings will be brief and the effort will be 
made to find some way out before the end of the year. The Judiciary 
Committee that meets in November and December will be hold over from 
the old Congress. A new House of Representatives will be sworn into 
office on January 6th. Paul Wolfson, VOA News, Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>