<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981102.0500.2237 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Nigeria's capital Sunday night, the warring sides from Guinea-Bissau 
signed an agreement to end their nearly five-month-old civil war. 
It involves the deployment of a West Africa peacekeeping force as 
VOA's John Pitman reports. The agreement was signed after two days 
of marathon talks between Guinea-Bissau's President Joao Bernardo 
Vieira, rebel leader General Anchamani Monay, and the 16 members of 
the Economic Community of West African states, ECOWAS. In signing 
the accord, the two sides reaffirm their commitment to the cease fire 
they signed in July, but the centerpiece of the accord is clearly 
a provision for the deployment of the West African peacekeeping force, 
ECOMAN for Guinea-Bissau. The rebels had long opposed such a force, 
however, they agreed to accept the peacekeepers when Senegal and Guinea-Conacree 
agreed to withdraw the troops they had sent to support President Vieira. 
Under the terms of the accord, the foreign troops will be withdrawn 
simultaneously with the deployment of the ECOMAN peacekeepers. A date 
has not been set for the hand over, but diplomats close to the talks 
say it will happen soon, possibly within ten days. The new ECOMAN 
force will be charged with keeping the two rivals apart and with guaranteeing 
security along Guinea-Bissau's border with Senegal. Insecurity along 
that frontier helped spark the civil war in June when President Vieira 
accused General Monay, who is in the Army's chief of staff, of smuggling 
weapons across the border to Cazanont separatists in Southern Senegal. 
For its part, Senegal had previously resisted withdrawing its troops 
because it was unconvinced its border would be secure. However, after 
Sunday's agreement was signed, Gambia's foreign minister said Senegalese 
President Abdou Diouf had given the plan his blessing. The peacekeeping 
force will also guarantee the free movement of humanitarian groups 
throughout the country. Virtually all of the 350,000 residents from 
Guinea-Bissau's capital, Bissau, were forced to flee their homes during 
the war. Most have been dependent on emergency food aid supplied by 
the U.N. ever since. To facilitate the delivery of humanitarian supplies, 
the Abuja agreement also calls for the immediate reopening of Bissau's 
airport and seaport. The agreement also addresses the political issues 
which fueled the conflict. Under the terms of the deal, a transitional 
national unity government made up of representatives from President 
Vieira's government and the military Junta will guide the country 
to new presidential and general elections. Those elections are to 
be held before the end of next March, however an exact date has not 
been set. Gambian Foreign Minister M.L. Sadat Job says this provision 
is essential to long-term peace in Guinea-Bissau. This is a cardinal 
achievement and these elections will be observed by ECOWAS, the community 
of Portuguese speaking countries, and the international community. 
The peace accord still needs to be implemented, but diplomats who 
witnessed the negotiations here in Abuja say both sides do appear 
committed to end the war that has ruined their country's economy and 
killed hundreds of civilians and soldiers. President Vieira and General 
Monay are expected to return to Bissau on Monday to begin the process 
of implementing the terms of the agreement. John Pitman, VOA News, 
Abuja. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>