<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981102.0500.1357 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the days before the United States midterm election, much attention 
is usually focused on particular contest battles in races that become 
particularly tight and controversial and interesting. But one very 
closely watched election fight does not involve individuals. In the 
state of Washington, voters decide Tuesday whether to retain affirmative 
action programs. "Newsweek" magazine contributing editor Ellis Coast 
is an expert on American racial issues and he's among those observing 
affirmative action initiatives in the United States. Steve Ember reports 
on some of his views. Proposition 200 on the Washington state ballot 
is virtually identical to a similar California initiative passed in 
1996, which rolled back the state's affirmative action programs. Somewhat 
ironically, the major supporter for the Washington proposal stopping 
certain programs that help minority Americans is an African-American, 
Ward Connerly, a California businessman who started his own state's 
effort. Opposing the initiative and thus supporting programs that 
help black and Hispanic Americans are many of the state's biggest 
corporations mostly run by whites, including Boeing, Microsoft, and 
clothing retailer, Eddie Bauer. Support and opposition for the measure 
has also been divided mostly along party lines: Republicans for, Democrats 
against. "Newsweek" contributing editor Ellis Coast, a longtime observer 
of American civil rights issues, says the Washington state initiative 
has taken on national significance attracting financial and political 
support for both sides from afar. The anti-affirmative action forces 
have poured a lot of money into Washington state in an attempt to 
try to get some activity, some momentum going behind the issue. I 
think if they're successful in Washington state, it's going to be 
a big encouragement to them, and they will continue to raise more 
money and try to push this in other states. If they're not, they're 
going to have to sit back and reflect on whether that's the most effective 
utilization of their time. Mr. Coast, former columnist for the "Chicago 
Sun-Times" and "New York Daily News" says if the Washington initiative 
passes, it's earliest impact would likely be on state college admissions. 
He says that happened after votes approved the two-year-old California 
initiative ending affirmative action. It clearly is having some effect, 
and particularly on university admissions, and university admissions 
to graduate schools, law schools, medical schools in particular. And 
now as a response of the Proposition 209 in California, which abolished 
affirmative action within the state government are pretty much going 
just by test scores in terms of how they admit people. And the result 
of that is that there's been a large drop. The declines in professional 
school admissions have mostly affected African-Americans and Hispanics, 
while admissions of Asian-Americans have often increased. Ellis Coast 
suggests that the affirmative action initiatives have raised a larger 
public policy issue. And it brings certainly to the forefront a very 
critical question about the role of public universities: Are, in fact, 
public universities supposed to educate people who get the best scores 
on tests or are they supposed to serve the needs of a broader community? 
And I think that's one of the debates that will be pursued in California 
and in Washington state. Mr. Coast adds that just the existence of 
such initiatives raising questions about the use of affirmative action 
in California and Washington state is likely to erode governmental 
efforts to hire or admit students based on racial preference. Whatever 
happens with the initiative, the long-term perspective for affirmative 
action is not that it's going to disappear because it won't. But I 
think that certain types of affirmative action, and most particularly, 
the sorts of affirmative action that are mandated by state governments 
are going to become much less pervasive. Ellis Coast, contributing 
editor of "Newsweek" magazine discussing state initiatives ending 
affirmative action practices. The state of Washington will decide 
the issue in a Tuesday referendum. I'm Steve Ember. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>