<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981102.1600.0446 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The death toll across Central America may exceed 6,000 from massive 
flooding and mudslides caused by Hurricane Mitch. The storm struck 
Honduras last week then dumped torrential rains from Nicaragua to 
the Yucatan Peninsula. The International Red Cross has appealed for 
$7.5 million to help assist the storm victims. At the White House, 
President Clinton deplored the terrible tragedy. He said the United 
States is sending $2 million in emergency assistance and is looking 
at what else America can do to help. Meanwhile, thousands of distraught 
Central American immigrants here in the United States are desperately 
trying to contact family members and loved ones in their native countries. 
Correspondent Michael Bowman reports from Miami where large quantities 
of disaster relief supplies are being collected. Honduran immigrant, 
Zola Enamarados, says for days she has been trying to learn news of 
her sister who lives in the northeastern Honduran city, El Progresso. 
Ms. Enamarados says she knows nothing of her sister's fate. She says 
her sister is poor and has no telephone. Ms. Enamarados says she and 
other members of her family are extremely worried. The Honduran immigrant 
is not alone in her worries. Vast regions of Central America are devastated 
and isolated by flood waters. Nicaragua's counsel general in Miami, 
Lucia Calvanaldez Salazar, says communication and transportation is 
virtually impossible in her country. Ms. Lucia Calvanaldez Salazar 
says 70 percent of Nicaragua's roads have been destroyed. She says 
the country's northwestern region is completely cut off from the rest 
of the country. The counsel general says Nicaragua has suffered a 
level of devastation that is almost unimaginable. Ms. Calvanaldez 
Salazar says the destruction in Nicaragua is worse than that suffered 
during an earthquake in 1972 when 10,000 people were killed and worse 
than the destruction Nicaragua suffered during its civil war of the 
1980s. She says some regions have been harder than others but stresses 
all of Nicaragua is suffering. In many U.S. cities, immigrant groups, 
charitable groups, and relief organizations are actively responding 
to the tragedy. Many groups were already mobilized to help Caribbean 
nations devastated in September by Hurricane Georges. In Miami, Catholic 
Charities director of Emergency Operations, Peter Coates, says fire 
stations throughout the city are serving as collection sites for desperately 
needed food and emergency supplies bound for Central America. We're 
again asking for water and clothing and canned goods and dried beans 
and cleaning supplies, baby formula, and dried milk, powdered milk, 
our priority items as well. Mr. Coates says Catholic Charities, also 
known as Chitos, is in contact with U.S. airlines, as well as shipping 
companies trying to arrange speedy delivery of all donated material. 
He says getting the food and supplies to Central America is one battle; 
insuring the relief material reaches the neediest people is another. 
This is a monstrous operation with regard to the logistics difficulties 
on the ground in isolated areas. We'll be working with others so that 
our supplies get to those areas that are most in need. And basically 
through church based networks, there is a church in almost every community 
in Central America somewhere, and of course we would distribute through 
the Chitos organizations to all of the victims regardless of their 
religion. Mr. Coates says South Floridians and Americans in general 
have always proven themselves to be extremely generous in responding 
to tragedies in far away lands, and he expects no less from them now. 
Michael Bowman, VOA News, Miam. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>