<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981102.0500.2565 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
China says it formally established diplomatic relations with Tonga 
over the weekend. Taiwan used to have relations with Tonga but it 
broke them off and China picked up the slack. VOA's Roger Wilkison 
reports Taiwan charges that China is trying to restrict its international 
living space. It is the latest diplomatic victory for China and its 
long-running campaign to deprive Taiwan of all of its diplomatic partners 
by the year 2000. Tonga is the fourth country this year that has switched 
diplomatic recognition from Taipei to Beijing. Tonga's action follows 
that of South Africa, the Central African Republic, and Guinea-Bissau. 
Tonga's defection leaves Taiwan with only 26 diplomatic partners, 
mostly poor nations, and Africa, Central America, and the Caribbean. 
China considers Taiwan a renegade province and denies it the right 
to have official relations with other governments. The two rivals 
have used financial aid, technical assistance, and private investment 
to lure away each other's diplomatic partners. Taiwanese Premiere 
Vincent Siew visited Tonga last year to celebrate the birthday of 
the island's King. He also agreed to build several poultry farms and 
a feed factory. But Taiwanese officials say China upped the ante by 
promising to help Tonga build a commercial satellite. The Chinese 
confirmation of Beijing's establishment of diplomatic ties with the 
tiny island came Monday when the official Shinwa News Agency published 
a joint communique signed by the two states. But the accord was signed 
a week ago when Tonga's foreign minister visited the Chinese capital 
and met with President Jiang Zemin. Tonga's switch from Taipei to 
Beijing comes only two weeks after a landmark meeting between Chinese 
and Taiwanese negotiators during which the two sides promised to consider 
renewing a cross straight dialogue that was broken off two years ago 
when Taiwan sought to raise its international profile. Taiwanese officials 
say the squabble over Tonga could hurt efforts to thaw relations between 
the two rivals. Meanwhile, Taiwanese officials confirm that Taiwan's 
Foreign Minister, Jason Hoo, has left the island on a secret visit 
to a foreign country in a bid to break Beijing's diplomatic embargo. 
They would not specify which country Mr. Hoo is visiting, but a Taiwanese 
newspaper, the "United Evening News," says Mr. Hoo traveled to Bahrain 
and may also go to Jordan and the United Arab Emirates. Roger Wilkison, 
VOA News, Beijing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>