<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981102.0500.1893 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Wye River agreement takes effect on this Monday despite the fact 
that the Israeli Cabinet has not yet approved it. A senior U.S. official 
says that delay should not affect the agreement complex timetable. 
VOA's Al Pessin reports from Jerusalem. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu says he will not ask his Cabinet to approve the agreement 
until a Palestinian security plan is presented as promised. That plan 
is due on Monday. The Wye agreement says the plan will be given to 
the United States not Israel, but a senior U.S. official who spoke 
here on condition of anonymity says the United States expects Israel 
to be satisfied with the plan. The official also said he expected 
the Israeli Cabinet to have enough information to approve the accord 
on Sunday. The Palestinian Cabinet approved the agreement on Friday. 
The U.S. official says the accord will go into effect on Monday even 
if the Israeli Cabinet has not voted by then. At the same time, Israel 
and the Palestinian authority are to resume full security cooperation 
and an Israeli-Palestinian U.S. committee is to start work to monitor 
security issues. Senior Israeli and Palestinian security officers 
met Saturday night to begin that process. On Sunday, the militant 
Palestinian group, Hamas, threatened to turn its military wing against 
the Palestinian authority in response to the first steps in its promised 
crackdown on such groups. Also this week, Israeli and Palestinian 
negotiators are to begin talks on a final peace agreement. Those talks 
are far behind schedule and are to be completed by next May. The two 
sides intentionally left some of the most difficult issues to this 
final stage, including the future of Jerusalem, possible Palestinian 
statehood, and the fate of Palestinian refugees. In addition, Israeli-Palestinian 
committees are to resume work on various interim issues such as the 
Gaza airport and Israel's next promised interim West Bank withdrawal. 
The senior U.S. Middle East mediator, Dennis Ross, is coming to the 
region this week to make sure everything which is supposed to happen 
actually happens. If it does, the Palestinians are to begin implementing 
their security plan and Israel is to make the first of three scheduled 
West Bank withdrawals by the beginning of next week. With the peace 
process moving again, Israel marked the third anniversary of their 
assassination of Itzhak Rabin. Saturday night, more than 200,000 people 
attended a memorial rally in the square in Tel Aviv where he was killed. 
There was a ceremony at Mr. Rabin's gravesite in Jerusalem on Sunday, 
and special required commemorations in all Israeli schools and a special 
session of parliament. Peace activists were incensed Sunday morning 
when right-wing Israelis at a compound in East Jerusalem built a new 
fence and began to clear a lot for future construction. The compound 
is owned by an American Jew but the government has barred construction 
at the site in the Rasalamud Arab neighborhood. News reports say Prime 
Minister Netanyahu himself approved the preparatory work at the site 
apparently to try to ease criticism of the Wye agreement from right-wing 
members of his coalition. Al Pessin, VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>