<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981014.1830.1283 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight on our series, the HMO nation, we'll take "A closer look" 
at managed care and mental health. Mental illness can mean many things, 
manic depression, a whole range of things. It very often means needing 
money to get help. 140 million Americans now have some kind of mental 
health coverage through managed care. That's twice as many as five 
yearsing. But we emphasis some kind of coverage. By certain measurements, 
the value of the benefits that patients are receiving is half what 
it was a decade ago. And that can very often mean pressure. Here's 
ABC's Rebecca chase. 14-year-old Daniel triplett was diagnosed with 
severe depression. After two weeks at a treatment center, doctors 
discharged him. They discharged him in the midst of his crisis. The 
crisis was not resolved. Ten days later, Anita and David triplett 
found their son dead, with a bullet through his head. We're totally 
devastated. He was our only son. He was our only child. The tripletts 
learned from Daniel's medical records that their son talked about 
suicide. The tripletts are suing managed company, saying it forced 
a "precipitous discharge" by cutting off benefits. United behavioral 
health would not comment on the case. It boils down to the bottom 
line, which is the profit they make if you deny the services. Managed 
care has had a profound impact on the delivery of mental health services. 
More people than ever have coverage. Out-of-pocket costs are lower. 
And there is more accountability but there is growing concern that 
many people who need treatment are not getting it. The operative principle 
is short-term therapy. A managed-care company will approve the minimal 
number of days. For hospitalization. They'll want that person out 
as soon as possible. For example, the average hospital stay has gone 
from 28 days to 5. there is more pressure to prescribe drugs in lieu 
of therapy. And the limit for out-patient therapy has dropped from 
50 visits to 20, if you can get it authorized. What's the insurance? 
Here at ridgeview institute, clinicians no longer get a one-time approval. 
They have to repeatedly ask for more time to treat their patients. 
But psychiatrists have learned that if they ask for too much time, 
managed-care companies may not refer patients to them anymore. We've 
basically moved from a system that encouraged overutilization to one 
that encourages underutilization. In other words, we've moved from 
a system that wasted money to one that wastes lives. In his suicide 
note, Daniel wrote, "there is something in my mind that makes me need 
to kill myself." His parents believe that had their son been allowed 
to stay in treatment, he might have changed his mind. Rebecca chase, 
ABC News, media, Pennsylvania. many people tell us to get the best 
HMO coverage, you have to make a lot of noise. To your HMO, of course, 
but also to your employer, who's paying for it. This can be a huge 
obstacle for people with mental health issues, who are often reluctant 
to let people know they are ill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>