<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981014.0260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
MANILA, Philippines (AP) _ ``Super typhoon'' Zeb slammed into a northern 
Philippine province Wednesday, dumping rain, knocking down trees and 
electrical posts, and forcing more than 9,000 people to flee their 
homes, disaster relief officials said. At 5 p.m. (0800 GMT), Zeb was 
centered over Kalinga province, and its maximum sustained winds had 
weakened to 175 kilometers (110 miles) per hour, with gusts of up 
to 210 kph (131 mph), the Manila weather bureau said. The Red Cross 
said 9,000 people living on the eastern coast of Luzon Island have 
been evacuated to avoid floods. About 4,000 of them fled four towns 
in Camarines del Sur province in Luzon's Bicol region. There were 
no immediate reports of casualties. Red Cross Secretary-General Lourdes 
Loyola said the extent of the typhoon's damage will not be known for 
at least three days because many of the hardest hit areas were remote 
villages. The Office of Civil Defense said at least 10 electrical 
posts were toppled in Malig town in Isabela, about 320 kilometers 
(200 miles) north of Manila. A bridge in nearby Jones town was closed 
to traffic due to flooding. A major road to the mountain city of Baguio 
also was closed because of fears of landslides. Electrical distributors 
in the northern Philippines cut power early Wednesday to prevent accidents 
as heavy rains flooded many areas in Isabela. Many remote towns have 
been reported isolated due to flash floods. Executive Secretary Ronaldo 
Zamora ordered government offices in the affected areas to close early 
in the afternoon. He said police and disaster relief offices would 
remain open to help. Five northern provinces, including Isabela, Cagayan, 
Quirino, Aurora and the Batanes Island group, have been placed on 
maximum storm alert as Zeb was expected to hit these areas hardest, 
said forecaster Susan Dampog. The storm was expected to be over the 
South China Sea by late Thursday. The weather bureau said Zeb, the 
strongest of eight storms to hit the Philippines this year, was expected 
to pick up strength as it moved toward southeast Taiwan. In Taiwan, 
the weather bureau said Zeb was expected to slam southern areas late 
Wednesday and batter the entire island Thursday. It said Zeb will 
be the most powerful typhoon to hit the island since 1996, when Herb 
killed 70 people and caused U.S. dlrs 545 million in damage to crops 
and fish farms. In southeastern Taitung, police said a man was swept 
out to the sea by two-story high waves Wednesday as he was fishing 
near a port. The official Central News Agency said several airlines 
have canceled domestic flights to the southern port city of Kaohsiung 
and nearby islets. But officials said international flights were not 
affected. A storm gains ``super typhoon'' status if its maximum sustained 
winds reach 220 kph (138 mph). Last month, tropical storm Vicki struck 
the northern Philippines, causing at least 52 deaths on land. A ferry 
also sank during the storm south of Manila, leaving 70 passengers 
dead and 80 others missing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>