<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981014.0505 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
China and Taiwan held their highest-level meeting in five years Wednesday 
amid mixed signals that the estranged rivals from the Chinese civil 
war were ready to resume formal negotiations. Taiwan's top negotiator, 
Koo Chen-fu, was given a warm greeting by his Chinese counterpart, 
Wang Daohan, as they began what was billed as an informal get-together 
at the city's historic Peace Hotel. Wang and Koo walked into the hotel's 
ballroom together, stood side by side and shook hands before the camera. 
They exchanged pleasantries that were inaudible due to the din of 
some 200 Taiwan reporters observing the encounter. Soon after arriving 
in Shanghai aboard a commercial flight, Koo said he looked forward 
to his meeting with Wang as an opportunity ``build mutual trust.'' 
``It is better to start talking sooner rather than later,'' he said. 
After the meeting, aides to both Wang and Koo said the talks had proceeded 
in a ``peaceful atmosphere'' conducive to exchanging views. While 
emphasizing the importance of the meeting, their comments still evinced 
the divisiveness that has kept the two sides far apart. Koo's spokesman, 
Shi Hwei-yow, suggested that mainland China should learn from Taiwan's 
experience with democratic and economic progress. Wang's assistant, 
Tang Shubei, obliquely criticized Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui for 
suggesting China was divided under two governments. Going into the 
talks, Koo said he had set no preconditions. The get-together billing 
_ something less than formal talks _ illustrates the distrust that 
has frustrated efforts to restart negotiations Beijing broke off three 
years ago. Angered by Taiwan's perceived drift away from eventual 
reunification, Beijing then launched missiles and war games near the 
island, raising tensions to their worst level since the height of 
the Cold War. Wang, an 84-year-old ex-mayor of Shanghai and mentor 
to Chinese President Jiang Zemin, and Koo, an 81-year-old business 
tycoon and senior figure in Taiwan's ruling Nationalist Party, head 
government-backed organizations that handle mainland-island ties in 
the absence of formal relations. The elder statesmen held their first 
and last meeting in Singapore in 1993, ushering in a brief period 
of cooperation. Expectations were high that their second encounter 
would improve the atmosphere, if not formally re-establish routine 
negotiations between their offices. After two days in Shanghai sightseeing, 
talking with Wang and attending an opera with him, Koo will travel 
to Beijing to meet President Jiang and top officials handling Taiwan 
affairs. Beijing and Taipei have restated old negotiating positions. 
China wants revived talks to focus on political issues leading to 
reunification and has renewed a 3 1/2-year-old proposal that would 
allow the island to keep its capitalist system and military as long 
as it submits to Beijing's rule. Taiwan has rejected that autonomy 
formula and said reunification should wait until China is more democratic 
and prosperous. It also has urged Beijing to recognize that the two 
sides are ruled separately. Ever since Mao Tse-tung's Communists forced 
Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalists off the mainland in 1949, China has 
viewed Taiwan as a renegade province to be retaken by force if necessary. 
Meanwhile, Taiwan wants talks to focus on practical issues, like fishing 
disputes, to build confidence. For the sake of the current talks, 
the two sides appeared to have found ways around the dilemma. Koo 
indicated that Taiwan expected political issues to arise during such 
talks. Tang, Wang's spokesman, said that a ``political dialogue'' 
would include all issues, including reunification, and virtually declared 
victory after Wednesday's meeting. ``We say political dialogue. Taiwan 
says constructive dialogue. But the common point is everyone agrees 
to a dialogue,'' said Tang. ``I can tell you this type of political 
dialogue has already started.'' Economic and political pressures are 
edging both sides toward a short-term accommodation. Trade last year 
totaled dlrs 26.4 billion, and Taiwanese businesses have invested 
dlrs 38 billion in the mainland over the past decade. Airlines and 
shippers are establishing routes that only thinly respect Taiwan's 
ban on direct contacts with China. Better ties with China could help 
the Nationalists win business community support in December's general 
elections. China's President Jiang is believed to be under pressure 
from the military and Communist Party hard-liners to get Taiwan to 
agree to reunification. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>