<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981014.0265 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Amartya Sen, an Indian expert on poverty and hunger who teaches at 
Britain's Trinity College in Cambridge, on Wednesday won the Nobel 
Economics Prize. He was awarded the prestigious prize ``for his contributions 
to welfare economics,'' which have helped in the understanding of 
the economic mechanisms underlying famines and poverty, the Royal 
Swedish Academy of Sciences said in its citation. Sen, 64, has done 
work including studying the Bangladesh famine of 1974 and other catastrophes 
in India, Bangladesh and the countries of the Sahara. Sen, whose first 
name is pronounced Ah-MAR-tya, joined Trinity College this year after 
teaching at Harvard University, among other institutions. Sen's work 
deals with development economics, the study of the welfare of the 
world's poorest people. His best-known work challenges the common 
view that the shortage of food is the most important explanation of 
famine. On the basis of studies of several catastrophes, he shows 
that ''famines have occurred even when the supply of food was not 
significantly lower than during previous years'' without famines, 
the citation said. Part of his explanation of the 1974 Bangladesh 
famine is that flooding throughout the country significantly raised 
food prices, while work opportunities for agricultural workers declined 
as one of the crops could not be harvested. Due to these factors, 
the real incomes of agricultural workers declined so much that this 
group was disproportionately stricken by starvation. Americans Robert 
Merton and Myron Scholes won the 1997 prize for their work on how 
to value so-called ``derivatives'' such as stock options. The award 
caught the attention of many because it recognized work with clear 
practical applications, rather than the highly theoretical work that 
usually gets the prize. However, their work was tarnished last month 
when the hedge fund in which they were partners, Long -Term Capital 
Management, went bust, necessitating a dlrs 3.6 billion bailout. It's 
not clear whether Long-Term Capital's failure was due to misapplication 
of Merton's and Scholes' theories or whether the theories themselves 
are faulty. But the debacle inevitably taints a prize that many have 
criticized. The economics prize was not established in Alfred Nobel's 
will and was started in 1968. Creating the prize offended those who 
believe Nobel's will should be followed to the letter. The economics 
prize was the fifth of the six Nobels to be given this year, and the 
last one announced in Stockholm. The peace prize, the last in this 
year's series, is to be announced on Friday in Oslo, Norway. Each 
prize is worth 7.6 million kronor (about dlrs 963,000 at Friday's 
exchange rate). The physics prize was won Tuesday by three researchers 
at American universities _ Robert B. Laughlin, Horst L. Stormer and 
Daniel C. Tsui _ for their discovery that electrons in strong magnetic 
fields act in unexpected ways, including creating a new form of ``quantum 
fluid.'' The chemistry prize on Tuesday went to Walter Kohn and John 
A. Pople _ also affiliated with American institutions _ for advances 
in quantum chemistry. On Monday, the medicine prize was given to three 
Americans _ Robert Furchgott, Louis Ignarro and Ferid Murad _ for 
their work on discovering properties of nitric oxide, a common air 
pollutant but also a life-saver because of its capacity to dilate 
blood vessels. The literature prize was awarded last Thursday to Portuguese 
novelist Jose Saramago. The prizes are presented on Dec. 10, the anniversary 
of the death of Nobel, the Swedish industrialist and inventor of dynamite. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>