<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981014.0130.0045 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
"Headline News." I'm David Goodnow. Belgrade says it is moving forward 
to comply with united nation's demands in Kosovo. Its state-run agency 
reports the Yugoslav government has outlined a plan it says will lead 
to elections in the province by next year. This follows an agreement 
reached Monday, which put NATO air strikes on hold. It calls for Yugoslav 
President Slobodan Milosevic to pull troops out of Kosovo, and allow 
about 300,000 refugees to return. It also includes long-term land 
and air monitoring by an international force. And it would set a timetable 
for talks about autonomy, for Kosovo's ethnic Albanians. Andrea Koppel 
looks at the role Americans will play in monitoring compliance. In 
order to make sure Yugoslav President Milosevic complies with NATO 
demands, CNN has learned an American will lead the international civilian 
verification force in Kosovo. And a that a significant number of these 
observers will be Americans, including some unarmed military officers. 
It will include about 2,000 international inspectors in Kosovo who 
will serve as watch dog to ensure that the cease-fire holds and the 
Serb forces withdraw. Case in point. Despite Milosevic's assurances 
to the contrary, a senior NATO diplomat tells CNN 85% of Serb army 
troops deployed in Kosovo and 75% of Serb paramilitary police are 
still there, blocking humanitarian aid from reaching tens of thousands 
of homeless ethnic Albanians. As part of the agreement between U.S. 
envoy Richard Holbrooke and President Milosevic, the first small contingent 
of this ground verification force will begin to move into Kosovo Wednesday 
to make sure substantial and credible progress is made on Serb troops 
withdrawals and aid to Kosovo Albanians by Saturday's deadline and 
beyond. There's not a time limit on the verification mission. Presumably 
they will be there so long as it's necessary. Some however, worry 
the longer these unarmed international observers remain in Kosovo, 
the greater the chance they might become targets of Serb forces. Although 
their purpose may be to monitor the cease-fire and to monitor the 
withdrawal of the troops, they in effect can become hostages to Mr. 
Milosevic's whim. In addition to ground verification, NAto will also 
operate air reconnaissance with unarmed planes like the U-2s and other 
systems to quickly detect any violations. While not arming the ground 
verification force, officials are working on some type of protection 
for it. And in the event there is a more serious threat, NAto will 
have a force stationed just off the coast to rapidly evacuate the 
monitors. Andrea Koppel, CNN, at state department. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>