<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981014.2100.1804 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With only three weeks left until election day, political campaigns 
are kicking into high gearks a lot of money being spent for TV spots 
in races that are still too close to call. A lot of candidates can 
be found doing whatever it takes to take the lead, often in the form 
of Negative TV ads that attack an opponent's personal character. Linda 
Vester reports tonight on another report of the new 1990's development, 
a record low level of public discourse in the era of Ken Starr and 
Monica Lewinsky. Chuck Schumer always puts politics over people. Al 
D'Amato's attacking Charles Schumer on taxes because Al D'Amato's 
been raising taxes on working families for three decades. The headlines 
tell the story. It is a fact of life in modern day politics. With 
deep war chests of campaign cash, poll results and focus groups at 
their fingertips, many candidates have abandoned issues and believe 
they're better off attacking their opponents. I'm going to say this 
again. I did not have sexual relations with that woman. There's a 
reason people don't take the high road and it's the same reason you 
don't see billions of Americans watching public television. What works 
is the low road, what's popular is the low road. People remember the 
Negative ads. As consultants we always say, look, when these ads cease 
to work, we'll stop making them. The latest poll results say it's 
a tossup whether New York renal Al D'Amato keeps his Senate seat or 
Charles Schumer takes it away. But what is sure is that both are waging 
one of the most expensive and nastiest campaigns in the nation. There's 
more to New York state than just Brooklyn. Al D'Amato's lying about 
Chuck Schumer on crime. Negative ads have been around since the birth 
of our republican. The difference was they put them up with posters, 
or handed out handbills. Now you have the nuclear weapon, television. 
Some republican candidates have made the investigation of the president 
the central focus of their Negative ads even though these candidates 
aren't rung against Bill Clinton. Even democratic candidates are mocking 
the obsession with the Monica Lewinsky scandal. A silver hat pin from 
you-know-who. Some politicians want to spend the next two years fighting 
over these issues. This is the year in which we watched a congressman 
call the President a scumbag. What do you expect right now? This is 
the way the ads are going to be. The question for many is have they 
gone too far? You do have people, you do have candidates, you do have 
consultants who are worried about the backlash, concerned they maying 
going over the line. But this year not all campaign ads are Negative. 
Note worthy for a different reason, many aren't even in English. Conventional 
wisdom has it that the democrats are the party more likely to appeal 
to minority voters but some republican candidates are trying to change 
that perception. Governor George bush, son of the former president, 
is running Spanish-language ads for his re-election campaign in Texas 
and in California, Matt fong is trying to talk Barbara boxer's seat 
with ads in Spanish and two different Chinese dialects. They've recognized 
that demographically this country will look completely different 20 
years from now and really making an attempt to build up the republican 
party. You have to give them credit for actually having foresight. 
It's been a long time since I've used "foresight" and "political party" 
in the same sentence. Ultimately, when it comes down to how these 
ads are received, only one opini matters, public opinion. Linda Vester, 
NBC news. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>