<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981014.2100.1035 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Close observers of Bill Clinton's political and thus social style 
have noticed a clear pattern to his public appearances this election 
season. In a big departure, by extension, from his usual on the road 
behavior. Gone for now the sprawling open-air rallies with 2,000 sets 
of hands lined up to shake afterwards. As to why, that is the subject 
of James Bennet's story in tomorrow's "New York Times." Also late 
new polling numbers tonight. James Bennet is with us now from the 
north lawn at the White House to talk about both subjects of the James, 
what has changed about this president on the road or in Washington? 
Well, he's pursuing what his advisors are calling a modified rose 
garden strategy, staying in the oval office, popping out occasionally 
to make some high-sounding proument about foreign policy or the budget 
and otherwise confining his activities to fundraising. Not doing the 
kind of rallies that have traditionally energized him. If he chose 
another course, of course, we'd be all over him. That's true and there 
was talk a month ago about democratic candidates simply not wanting 
him around. That appears to have changed recently and he's getting 
a much warmer reception from the democratic party faithful at least. 
Numbers being released tomorrow, beginning with congressional approval 
as the public sees it, falling fairly steeply from September to a 
43% approval rating in October. Then the president's job approval, 
what some see as a consistently outstanding number. As high as 70, 
as low lately as 61. 63 now. And the Starr investigation, 75% of the 
people asked about it by "the New York Times" believe it to be a waste 
of time. 72% of the people also can't name an accomplishment of this 
Congress. What does this tell you? That congressman boehner's view 
of Washington is not widely accepted out there in the land right now. 
Most Americans, as you say, can't name a single thing this Congress 
has done. Overwhelmingly they think the impeachment inquiry is a political 
act rather than a legitimate constitutional exercise. You mentioned 
that democrats had been reluctant to have the president as a gefment 
at rallies. Changing their mind. Paris glendening, governor in Maryland 
-- what happened there to bring about the change? Say month ool he 
didn't show up for an event this silver spring, Maryland, and cancelled 
a joint fundraising appearance with the president. Since then he's 
seen some democratic loyalists defect from him. He's in a tough re-election 
campaign and he's turned to the president to try to bring back some 
of the base voters. There he was with the president at a different 
elementary school on Tuesday. Just a month ago he said Mr. Clinton 
was not a good role model for young people. Clear lir, he's had a 
change of heart. There is, sadly, news on the Paula Jones-Ken Starr 
front. Reported by Nina Totenberg for NPR, it is basically that, an 
allegation that there were many contacts months ago between Paula 
Jones' lawyers and Ken Starr. And what do you know about this and 
how it might affect what's going on? It's been reported that the contacts 
were actually before Ken Starr was named independent prosecutor, as 
many as six contacts between him and one of Paula Jones' former lawyers, 
Gil Davis. Those contacts were evidently not disclosed by Mr. Starr 
when he applied to the justice department in January for permission 
to pursue the Monica Lewinsky allegations, which were obviously intimately 
tied to the Paula Jones civil suit. There is some question as to whether 
the justice department, Janet Reno, the attorney general, would have 
regarded that as a conflict of interest and not permitted Mr. Starr 
to conduct this entire investigation had she known about those contacts. 
The justice department is now reviewing that. James, one more question 
before you go, back to our first question -- how long will these stories 
about the president as kind of a prisoner of Pennsylvania avenue go 
on, do you sni At least through the election. Everybody here is -- 
think? At least through the election. Every here is holding their 
breath for November. The White House is trying to lower expectations 
about how well the democrats are going to do. In the second term of 
every president where the president has had two terms, it's been a 
main reversal for the party. They're all waiting, hoping at least 
for a status quo election that will strengthen the president's hand 
going forth in the impeachment inquiry this winter. James Bennet, 
thanks. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>