<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981014.1830.0458 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Kosovo there are reports that the Serb forces are beginning to 
move out and that NATO air strikes won't be necessary just now, but 
warplanes will remain ready just in case. Albanian refugees are reluctant 
to return to their homes. They are waiting for them to get into place. 
Today Richard Holbrooke, the man who negotiated the standdown, described 
for me the ordeal of the deal. Nine days of heated difficult negotiations, 
meetings with Slobodan Milosevic, a man with a bloody record, nine 
days that may have saved thousands of lives. Did you yell at each 
other? No, we don't yell, but it got pretty damn heated. Is he his 
own man? In the end, and this cannot be stressed too highly -- he 
runs that place. He agreed to withdraw so-called Serbian security 
police and to allow observers to see that he keeps his word. Some 
people are saying that Milosevic got exactly what he wanted. In order 
to avoid being bombed, he let 2,000 foreigners at will verifying compliance. 
He's going to let NatO fly at will over Kosovo, looking down with 
cameras. And he had to move on the politics why would he want that? 
What is he like as a negotiator? He's tough. He's smart. He knows 
how to mix belligerence and threats with changing subjects. Holbrooke 
spent eleven-hour days with Milosevic, who would sometimes joke, sometimes 
take a drink at the bargaining table, sometimes become pointed day 
four. Holbrooke is joined by general Mike short. Milosevic leaned 
forward and said, "so you're the general that's going to bomb us?" 
And Mike short reeled back for an instant, but he held his cool and 
he said, "I'm going to do whatever I'm ordered. I'd rather use the 
U-2s, but it's up to you." The aggressive stance worked. What do you 
think made the difference in him, finally agreeing to the terms you 
were laying out there? That he had no where else to go? I think that 
he recognized that the western world's slow-moving democracies had 
caught up with his outrageous behavior. Our fighters were on the bases 
in Italy, and we were moving. Did he ever say to you or suggest in 
anyway, "oh come, Mr. Holbrooke, your country's not prepared to move 
here"? He did ask me several times, "would you be crazy enough to 
bomb us over our security police?" And I said, "yeah, we're just that 
crazy." You've spent hours and hours with Milosevic. What drives him? 
Power! Nine days. A handshake. A promise. And now a breathtaking waiting 
game. Will Milosevic keep his word? We'll be keeping you posted on 
that story. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>