<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981014.1830.1283 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Our other major mystery of the night involves as many as 60 members 
of a cult who have simply vanished, and their family members are very 
worried they could be involved in some kind of suicide pact. NBC's 
Jim Avila has that story. They've vanished. I'm concerned for their 
lives. Homes abandoned and up for sale. We love him, and we really 
want him back. Belongings sold. Cars returned to dealers, cryptic, 
hurried notes attached. The Denver religious doomsday cult known as 
"concerned Christians" cannot be found, and families from across the 
country fear another mass suicide. If they are told to do something 
that's irrational, I think they would do it in the name of God, The 
lord is inside of me, and he speaks the truth. Kim Miller, the cult 
leader, a 44-year-old minister who claims to be God's only prophet. 
He speaks through my mouth. His judgments are ready to begin. In fact, 
Miller told his followers that Denver would be the first to go, the 
apocalypse beginning last Saturday, October 10th. He died on the cross 
for our sins, and now we're to go to our deaths as well. So last week, 
the cult left town. 60 known concerned Christians cut off from the 
world. This group is neither concerned nor Christian. Bill honsberger 
is a cult watcher, tracking Miller's group for a decade. He says the 
cult is totally brainwashed, dangerously willing to die at the minister's 
command. That kind of power is extremely manipulative and very scary. 
He can get these people to do anything. Nikki Weaver saw that power 
first hand. Her mother and step father are missing concerned Christians. 
Nikki escaped the group two years ago. My mother, when I was probably 
ten years old, she told me that if God told her to kill me, she would. 
Miller is not wanted for any crime. No warrants, no official police 
interest, but a former member. The last to leave the cult, now living 
in Idaho and afraid to show his face, says Kim Miller is dangerous. 
It's a doomsday cult in my opinion. He will say it's time. It's going 
to be another heaven's gate. So where are they? Family members can 
only guess. One lead is Jerusalem. Miller spoke of dying on the streets 
there, but an advance man named Craig Schmidt sent to Israel three 
months ago to prepare the way cannot be found either. Shalom, Mr. 
Schmidt? Ah no, he's not here. In fact, all anyone can say for sure 
is that 60 people convinced the world is about to end have left home. 
Jim Avila, NBC news, Denver. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>