<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0017 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ghosts have hung over Yankee Stadium all season, David Cone once remarked, 
as the Yankees pursued their place among the greatest baseball teams 
in history. But other ghosts haunted them, ghosts of a very recent 
past, until the Yankees won the American League pennant Tuesday night 
with a 9-5 victory over the Cleveland Indians in Game 6. The Yankees, 
who will play in the World Series for the 35th time and the second 
time in the last three seasons, exorcised the awful memory of their 
1997 playoff elimination by the Indians, who have not won a World 
Series in 50 years. Faced with a 2-1 deficit in games in this series, 
the Yankees came back to win Games 4, 5 and 6, saving the Game 2 goat, 
Chuck Knoblauch, from the eternal disgrace that befell Fred Merkle 
and Bill Buckner. Before a crowd of 57,142 at Yankee Stadium on Tuesday 
night, Scott Brosius hit a three-run home run, Derek Jeter lashed 
a two-run triple and Ramiro Mendoza and Mariano Rivera provided flawless 
relief pitching to help win a game in which the Yankees nearly blew 
a 6-0 lead. Now, in the World Series, the Yankees can establish their 
legacy once and for all, after winning 114 games in the regular season, 
three straight in the Division Series against Texas and four of six 
in the ALCS with Cleveland. The New York Yankees, in the World Series 
for the second time in three seasons, will play host to the winner 
of the National League Championship Series, San Diego or Atlanta, 
in the first two games of the Series on Saturday and Sunday nights. 
The Padres lead that playoff, 3 games to 2, with Game 6 to be played 
Wednesday afternoon in Atlanta. David Wells, unbeaten in these playoffs, 
is likely to pitch Game 1 for the Yankees, who have won a combined 
121 games this year in the regular and post-seasons, a record. If 
the Yankees had lost the league series to Cleveland, the glossy memory 
forever stuffed into the mental album of despair borne by devastated 
fans would have been the image of Chuck Knoblauch, the Yankee second 
baseman, standing at first base in the 12th inning of Game 2 and pointing 
dramatically to the baseline while the ball lay untouched behind him 
and the Indians scored the run that would decide the game and even 
the series at 1-1. Knoblauch, booed angrily by fans in his turn at 
bat immediately following that mental mistake last Wednesday, would 
never have been forgiven. But the Yankees took two of three games 
in Cleveland over the weekend and took control of the series as and 
Knoblauch at least earned a finite probation for good behavior _ he 
admitted his mistake the day after _ and for his good play. Knoblauch 
reached base in four of five plate appearances in Game 5 on Sunday 
and started a pivotal eighth-inning double play in the Yankees' 5-3 
victory. When Knoblauch was announced before his first plate appearance 
Tuesday night, many among the 57,142 rose and cheered, as if to say, 
``You're forgiven, for nine innings.'' Knoblauch placed the Cleveland 
starter Charles Nagy on the defensive in the first inning, fouling 
off a two-strike pitch, and then another and another and so on, until 
Nagy had thrown nine pitches. Even after Knoblauch grounded out to 
shortstop, a core of fans cheered him, understanding that he had chopped 
away a small piece of Nagy and given the Yankee hitters to follow 
a chance to see what Nagy did or did not have. Derek Jeter chopped 
a roller toward third base and hustled out a single, and with the 
count 2-2, Jeter broke from first on a hit-and-run and Paul O'Neill 
lined a curveball to right for a single, Jeter moving to third. Bernie 
Williams singled home one run and a sacrifice fly by Chili Davis scored 
another, and the Yankees had a 2-0 lead right away _ the fifth time 
in the six games of this playoff they had scored in the first inning. 
Nagy threw 27 pitches in the inning, 18 after Knoblauch's at-bat. 
Joe Girardi smacked a single one out into the second inning for New 
York, and Knoblauch then pulled a fastball into the left-field corner, 
where Indians left fielder Brian Giles fielded the carom perfectly 
before allowing the ball to pop out of his glove as he prepared to 
throw. Girardi scored and Knoblauch had a double, his first extra-base 
hit since Sept. 26. The Yankees kept the pressure on Nagy in the third. 
Williams had the second of his three hits and then should have been 
called out when Cleveland second baseman Enrique Wilson flipped the 
ball to second for an apparent forceout on a grounder by Chili Davis. 
But Ted Hendry _ the umpire who came under fire from the Yankees in 
Game 2 over his decision to not call interference on the play that 
Knoblauch botched _ called Williams safe. Two batters later, Scott 
Brosius _ who nearly hit a three-run homer in his first at-bat _ smashed 
a three-run homer over the center-field wall. Jeter, as usual, burst 
from the dugout clapping, a brigade of teammates following. The Yankees 
had a 6-0 lead with David Cone on the mound. No problem. Except that 
Cone appeared to suffer some sort of a leg injury covering first base 
in the third inning, and he imploded in the fifth, allowing three 
straight hits (one of which hit Hendry on the backside, in another 
moment of ignominy for the umpire) and then a bases-loaded walk to 
force home a run. Cone struck out Manny Ramirez for the second out 
and the crowd roared. But Jim Thome blasted a titanic grand slam on 
Cone's next pitch, silencing Yankee Stadium. Just like that, the Indians 
had drawn to within 6-5. But Cleveland's defense gave away three runs 
in the bottom of the sixth, an inning that began with the Gold Glove 
shortstop Omar Vizquel botching an easy throw to first. Girardi walked 
and with one out, Jeter launched a high drive to right-center. Ramirez 
charged back to the wall, looking up and leaping dramatically, only 
to be guilty of resembling Knoblauch in Game 2: he ignored the baseball, 
which landed behind him at the base of the wall as Ramirez climbed 
it. Two runs scored, and so did Jeter one out later on another single 
by Williams. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>