<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The flapping American flags on lampposts and the pages of a paperback 
flipped by a shop owner on a bench outside her antiques store were 
the only things moving on a recent afternoon in downtown Marceline, 
Mo. There was one customer and one waitress down at Mom's Coffee Shop. 
Both were smoking. It was a landscape out of ``The Last Picture Show,'' 
except for the new street sign. It read ``Main Street USA,'' beneath 
a halo of mouse ears. Almost 650 miles but a light year away in Fort 
Collins, Colo., the pedestrian mall known as ``the old town'' was 
thriving with after-school activity. There was a line to use the phone 
at the Paris on the Poudre cafe; teen-agers painted each other with 
trial-run Halloween makeup outside an Aveda shop. Pool balls clacked 
in the back room of the new cigar bar. This is a tale of the two main 
streets that inspired the ultimate urban fantasy: Disneyland's Main 
Street, U.S.A., a frothy row of gingerbread storefronts intended to 
invoke the true grit and boisterous optimism of turn-of-the-century 
America. While not quite a search for the meaning of Rosebud, this 
is a visit to see what, if anything, remains in these two towns of 
the spirit that moved two of the Magic Kingdom's creators: Walt Disney, 
who lived in Marceline from 1905 to 1910, moving there when he was 
5, and later mythologized his hometown on Disneyland's Main Street, 
and Harper Goff, an art director from Fort Collins, whose earliest 
renderings for the Disney park evoked his birthplace. In the mid-1950s, 
these two men would freeze-frame their childhood memories in the amber 
gloss of a theme park, first in Anaheim, Calif., and then around the 
world. And while Disney specialists point out that there were other 
sources (and other team designers), none have turned out to be such 
poignant two-way streets of inspiration as Marceline and Fort Collins. 
For Marceline, 100 miles northeast of Kansas City, at a defunct railroad 
juncture, the per capita income has stalled just above $10,000, and 
the Disney connection may be its greatest hope for survival. In Fort 
Collins, on the other hand, where recent boom years have ignited explosive 
growth and waves of newcomers have arrived in search of the good life, 
the natives have become increasingly wary as gentrification begins 
to look suspiciously like Disneyfication. ``It's a kind of preservation 
happening throughout the country, not just in Fort Collins,'' said 
Richard Francaviglia, a historical geographer and author of ``Main 
Street Revisited'' (University of Iowa Press, 1996), a study of several 
hundred small town centers. ``As people are lovingly restoring their 
towns, they're also filtering it through so many lenses _ of memory, 
popular culture _ that they're creating something that never actually 
existed before.'' Disneyland's bright pastels and gingerbread turrets 
are not much in evidence in Marceline, but locals still point out 
the garbage dump _ a former slag pit outside Disney's bedroom window 
that he commemorated as Magic Mountain. This one-strip town (population 
2,650, down from 3,000 in 1905) is trying to transform itself into 
the official Hometown and hitch its fate to the Disney juggernaut. 
Walt Disney lived in Marceline for just over four years, while his 
father tried and failed to run a farm. Disney Senior was a jack-of-no-trades 
who kept his family on the move. His youngest son, born in Chicago, 
always maintained that he was just a small-town boy, albeit one who 
grew to be the preeminent interpreter of the nation's PG fantasy life. 
It was in the Marceline of the early 1900s that Walt first sketched 
barnyard animals and fell in love with trains. In 1956, Disney and 
his brother Roy came back to town for the first time, to dedicate 
the public swimming pool, and then Walt returned in 1960 for the opening 
of Walt Disney Elementary School. Disney brought in his own artists 
to decorate the gymnasium with Disney-licensed characters that still 
prance around the basketball court. Though his years in Marceline 
were few, they were apparently golden. And the folks who live there 
still seem to believe that they've been sprinkled with ``pixie dust,'' 
as Kaye Malins, the director of the town tour and a touchstone for 
Marceline's Disney boosters, put it. ``We're an atypical town in that 
we're still here,'' she said as she stooped to pick up a crumpled 
cigarette pack, the one bit of trash visible on downtown Kansas Avenue 
_ renamed ``Main Street USA'' in August to cement the Disney connection. 
``The other towns up and down the track are gone,'' she added. ``We 
have a lot of community pride. We still have that magic that Walt 
sensed the moment he stepped off the train in 1905.'' The abandoned 
train depot will be transformed into a Walt Disney-Santa Fe Railroad 
Museum in anticipation of Walt Disney's 100th birthday in 2001. The 
town tour attracts several thousand visitors each year. On a recent 
weekday, about 60 visitors and locals gathered around the gazebo on 
the town green for the tour that Ms. Malins choreographed with an 
appealing mix of Disneyesque production values and home-made props. 
Six high-school girls in knee-socks, short black skirts and red plaid 
vests _ modeled after the plaids worn by Disneyland employees _ pantomimed 
with cheerleader grace key events in the Disney-Marceline cycle, such 
as the time Walt and his sister painted a cow in tar pitch on the 
side of their house (where Kaye Malins now lives). Over at C.U. Murray's, 
the local department store selling overalls and sewing needles, its 
fourth owner, Veda White, recalled Walt and Roy's 1956 visit. ``Back 
then nobody knew he was that big of a deal; he was just walking around 
like anyone else,'' she said. She stood beneath a five-foot blow-up 
of a photograph showing Disney disembarking from the Santa Fe passenger 
car and being greeted by Ms. Malins' parents. (Rush Johnson, her father, 
was Disney's partner in a plan, interrupted by Disney's death, to 
turn his childhood home into a working-farm theme park.) ``I see a 
great deal of potential,'' Ms. White said. ``People are coming back 
to small communities. They want to visit the life here. I like to 
see the city people gape. They're thinking, `Does this still exist?' 
'' Barely. ``It's been rough since the railroad moved,'' Ms. White 
said. In 1986, when the Missouri division headquarters of the Santa 
Fe Railroad closed in Marceline, 100 local families lost their source 
of income. ``I've seen the postcards; it's a singularly unlovely town,'' 
said Karal Ann Marling, the curator of `` The Architecture of Reassurance: 
Designing Disney's Theme Parks,'' which opened last week at the Cooper-Hewitt 
National Design Museum in New York. ``Walt was disaffected, and like 
many of his generation, he was starting to feel the loss of community 
that characterized the '50s.'' ``His view of Marceline was a child's 
eye view of a perfect place _ always clean, and safe and bright,'' 
she added. ``He only visited there twice. He probably sensed the fragility 
of his own memories.'' To get closer to the architectural oompah characteristic 
of Disneyland's Main Street it's necessary to visit Fort Collins, 
a thronging college and technological boom-town fast leaving its farming 
roots in the dust of development. ``Disney's Main Street has been 
hugely influential as to how we see the environment,'' Ms. Marling 
said. ``The iconography, with its gingerbread, its porches, its awnings, 
its domesticity of scale, still connects with people.'' In Fort Collins, 
there are the mansard roofs, the jig-jag rhythm of irregular shop 
facades, lacey Victorian ironwork and the distinctive fish-bone street 
plan, where side streets feed into the main artery, College Avenue. 
Disneyland's City Hall is clearly drawn at three-quarters scale from 
the courthouse in Fort Collins, with its exuberant up-thrust tower. 
The red brick fire station is more than just an echo. Walt Disney 
never set foot in Fort Collins, but he was impressed by the vivid 
tales told by Harper Goff, the son of a local newspaper editor. With 
a population of 106,000, Fort Collins today is more than seven times 
what it was in 1950, when the population stood at 14,000. The city, 
which was dry from 1896 to 1969, was once described as a town ``with 
wide streets and narrow minds.'' Home to Colorado State University, 
in recent years it has started to draw new technology companies, following 
Hewlett-Packard. In the last six years, the rent on a one-bedroom 
apartment has jumped from $450 a month to $750, a far cry from 1976, 
when half the buildings in the old town were boarded up. Today, Banana 
Republic is said to be looking for space there. The red stone buildings 
have been sand-blasted to near perfection. Concrete planters are brimming 
with hardy begonias. Cafes outnumber grocery stores and personalized 
T-shirts are easier to find than banks. The old town has the slightly 
artificial charm of, well, a theme park, and many local citizens seem 
loathe to play up the Disney association. ``I don't know that I'd 
even tell anybody about that,'' said Bob Blase, a contractor and the 
son of a third-generation Fort Collins farmer. It was only a few years 
ago that Jill Gardner Stilwell, the director of the Fort Collins Museum, 
learned about the Goff-Disney connection. It was when someone tried 
to sell the museum a presentation drawing by Goff of the Valley of 
the Jolly Green Giant, a commission from the Green Giant frozen foods 
company. Goff had incorporated some Fort Collins buildings into his 
drawing of the Valley. Wouldn't the museum want it? ``I think that's 
when we learned he'd worked for Disney, too,'' she said. Now that 
the preservation of its architecture is secure, people in Fort Collins 
seem most concerned about preserving its sense of small-town neighborliness. 
Norm Cook, a retired freight dock receiver who has lived in Fort Collins 
since the '40s, ticks off the names of businesses that have been in 
operation since he was a child. ``There's Garwood's Jewelers, J. Pitner's 
Menswear, and Al's newstand, where it still smells like popcorn and 
tobacco like it did when I was little,'' he said. ``But the town's 
growing like a weed. I don't feel much community spirit anymore.'' 
Main Street, U.S.A. in Anaheim is experiencing its own growing pains. 
Tony Baxter, a former ice cream scooper during the '60s, who graduated 
to a senior vice president at Walt Disney Imagineering, worries that 
Disneyland's ``Meet Me in St. Louis''-era imagery has become obsolete. 
``It was the creation of a generation that grew up in a certain period 
and were nostalgic about it and wanted to share their memories with 
their grandchildren,'' he said. Seated in a Victorian red armchair 
in Walt Disney's private one-room apartment above the fire station 
_ within earshot of the train blasts, mini-parades and announcements 
_ Baxter said the challenge is ``to find new experiences as nostalgia 
loses its edge and becomes a curiosity.'' The strategy: celebrate 
with Hallmark sincerity the most generic seasonal rituals _ Christmas 
candle-light tours, harvest festivals, spring flower shows _to keep 
attendance numbers high. The Disney Co. could learn a thing or two 
from Marceline's town spirit. On Sept. 30, as the last tour of the 
season was winding down, two volunteers _ vice presidents at a local 
bank _ started taking down the flags, and waved to Ms. Malins, who 
was seeing the last visitor off. ``We know we have to change or we'll 
be gone,'' she said pensively. ``We're all trying to hold onto something, 
but we've got something no one else has: Walt Disney's name, and it's 
the most powerful in the world.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>