<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Indians' Manny Ramirez has become the answer to the old Sesame 
Street brain teaser: one of these things doesn't belong. Here is this 
amazing power hitter _ the other Dominican slugger _ who has found 
himself in the company of Mickey Mantle, Reggie Jackson and Babe Ruth. 
But unlike those famed hitters just ahead of him in their post-season 
knack for the home run, Ramirez isn't gregarious, loquacious or depicted 
in black-and-white film reels. Ramirez is the shy player raised in 
the Washington Heights section of Manhattan, a hitter recognized in 
his own neighborhood, but rarely celebrated on a national scale. This 
is not only about personality, though. While he had 45 home runs and 
145 rbi this season, and used the American League Championship Series 
to reach fourth on the all-time post-season homer list behind Mantle 
(18), Jackson (18) and Ruth (15), Tuesday night's Game 6 explained 
exactly why Ramirez has failed to wow everyone. His glorified bat 
died at the most inopportune moments for the Indians, and his defense 
unraveled under pressure, allowing the Yankees to soar into the World 
Series after taking Game 6 on Tuesday night at Yankee Stadium. The 
Indians needed Ramirez's bat to catch up to the Yankees as they built 
a 6-0 lead. But with the bases loaded in the fifth, Ramirez struck 
out. Then Jim Thome stole the home-run marquee from Ramirez, Thome's 
grand slam off David Cone in the fifth inning pulling the Indians 
to within a run of the Yankees. The tight game was lost, though, in 
large part because of Ramirez. In the sixth inning with runners on 
first and second, Derek Jeter lined a pitch to right-center field. 
For some unknown reason, Ramirez made a mad dash for the wall, as 
if he was about to leap and bring back a home run into the park. Trouble 
was, Jeter's ball hit at the foot of the wall, well below the shoe 
tops of Ramirez. Instead of catching the ball for an out, Ramirez 
misjudged the entire sequence. He was not charged with an error, but 
his play enabled the Yankees to take an 8-5 lead on Jeter's triple. 
``I took a peek at the ball and ran right toward the wall,'' Ramirez 
said. ``I saw the ball. I didn't think it was going out, but I thought 
it was going to the wall. I turned and saw it hit. I was surprised 
where it landed.'' If ever the Indians needed Ramirez to emerge as 
a star on the national stage, it was on Tuesday night as the Indians 
faced elimination. ``We all need to do what we can,'' Ramirez said 
after his team lost Game 5 to the Yankees. ``You have to credit their 
pitching. They have been able to keep us out of the flow. We almost 
got David Wells, but we came up empty. We have to try and turn it 
around in New York.'' Throughout this series, Ramirez hit well enough 
_ .333 with two home runs and four rbi _ but like many of his fellow 
teammates, he has been unable to bring home base runners in the tense 
moments. If Ramirez needed extra incentive to deliver for his team, 
all he had to do was look up in the stands. Unlike the rest of the 
Indians, Ramirez was not expected to be in a position to have to dodge 
insults and ice at Yankee Stadium. ``He is in front of his home crowd, 
so you know he's excited,'' his teammate Omar Vizquel said. At times 
in his career, Ramirez has seemed less than enthused. He has been 
criticized for his cavalier approach to catching fly balls. Against 
Boston in the division series, Ramirez was caught launching into a 
premature home run trot. His stroll to first turned a certain double 
off the wall into a long single. Until Tuesday night, his effort had 
not been an issue in the ALCS. You could tell just how much Ramirez 
wanted to come into his old neighborhood and take center stage at 
Yankee Stadium. For a fleeting moment, he did that in Game 1 when 
he delivered a home run that ultimately went uncelebrated in the Indians' 
7-2 loss. In Game 3, Ramirez muscled out another pitch against Andy 
Pettitte. But because of Thome _ who hit two homers in that game _ 
Ramirez's climb among the best home-run hitters in baseball history 
went unnoticed. Part of this anonymity is because of his reclusive 
personality. Part is due to forgettable nights like Tuesday night. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>