<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0088 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Lyric Opera of Chicago, which has been notably committed to performing 
contemporary operas, has come to the rescue of a nearly forgotten 
work, Martin David Levy's ``Mourning Becomes Electra.'' Commissioned 
and given its premiere by the Metropolitan Opera in 1967, it was produced 
two years later in Germany and then disappeared until the Lyric Opera's 
current production, which I attended on Friday night. The opera is 
based on Eugene O'Neill's Gothic trilogy of the same title, which 
was based in turn on the Oresteia trilogy of Aeschylus. O'Neill's 
long-winded 1931 work transplants the mythological characters to a 
small New England coastal town during the Civil War. King Agamemnon 
and his tormented family become the Mannons, headed by the stiff Gen. 
Ezra Mannon, who has been a distant husband to his younger wife, Christine 
(the Clytemnestra character), and who is feared by his son, Orin (the 
Orestes character), but adored by his daughter, Livinia (the Electra 
character). With a streamlined libretto by Henry Butler and an Expressionistic 
score by Levy, the three-act opera lasts some two and one-half hours 
(minus intermissions). The Met went all out in 1967 for its premiere, 
with a cast including Evelyn Lear, Marie Collier and a young baritone 
named Sherrill Milnes in the role of Adam, the bastard son of Ezra's 
deceased brother. The reception was generally enthusiastic, but Levy's 
score got caught up in the battle engulfing contemporary music at 
the time between the hard-line atonalists and the composers who clung 
to tonality. Recently, New Jersey-born Levy, who was then just 34, 
said that he had felt intimidated back then by the hard-liners. In 
moments where he wanted his music to take off and sing, he restrained 
himself; when he wrote sumptuous harmonies, he clouded them over with 
dissonant clusters. But, with the support of the Lyric Opera, he has 
revised the work. ``I see the revision as a cleaning up, removing 
the dirty varnish and restoring the opera to something close to my 
original vision of it,'' he said in a recent interview. It would be 
easy to question why he did not do this in the first place, but Levy 
was not the only composer at the time to fear he would not be taken 
seriously unless he force-fed his score a diet of tone rows. Be that 
as it may, the work as now presented still seems indebted to Strauss 
(particularly ``Elektra'') and Berg. The score teems with surging 
Expressionistic music, and at times goes over the top, skirting close 
to 1940s movie melodrama. But the story, which drips with recrimination, 
murder, suicide and incest, invites it. There is, however, a rhythmic 
inventiveness and pulsating drive to the music that seems a bracingly 
American aspect of Levy's Expressionism. And, as someone who knows 
the ways of the theater, he can create characters through music. For 
example, a hymnlike tune for brass, unnerved by a snare drum riff, 
is associated with the patriarch Ezra: it sounded like some ironic 
retort to the Valhalla leitmotiv from Wagner's ``Ring.'' And when 
Christine, who has been carrying on an affair with Adam, explains 
to Ezra why their marriage is a sham, the orchestra drives home her 
points with slicing, upwardly sweeping arpeggios. Levy wanted his 
score to sing, and now it does, not with tunes, exactly, but with 
a quality of continually unfolding line that the composer describes 
as his brand of ``florid 20th-century bel canto.'' If anything, he 
has not allowed the lines to sing enough, and there is too much formulaic 
shooting into the stratosphere of the soprano range for dramatic effect. 
Still, Levy has given us an engrossing musical drama, and the Lyric 
Opera has given him a remarkable production, directed by Liviu Ciulei 
with a debt to Greek tragedy. The sets, also by Ciulei, are starkly 
powerful, especially the Mannon mansion, with its eerily sloping, 
cold white marble walls. The cast was superior, but the dramatic soprano 
Lauren Flanigan, in her company debut, must be singled out for her 
mesmerizing, poignant and sometimes terrifying portrayal of Christine. 
Her gleaming voice soared over the orchestra, which Levy has wisely 
reduced from the original 90 to 76 players. The soprano Cynthia Lawrence 
was also very strong as Livinia. The robust-voiced, handsome Welsh 
baritone Jason Howard as Adam, the tenor Randolph Locke as Orin and 
the bass Kevin Langan as Ezra, as well as Alicia Berneche, Brett Polegato 
and Raymond Aceto in supporting roles, were all excellent. How ``Mourning 
Becomes Electra'' stacks up against the works of Strauss, Berg or 
other giants is to me a boring question. Let history decide. A fascinating 
new opera held my interest and stirred the audience. --- But, if it 
helps place Levy's achievement, I can say that ``Mourning Becomes 
Electra'' is a stronger work than ``La Gioconda'' of Ponchielli, which 
was performed at the Lyric Opera on Saturday night in a production 
owned by the San Francisco Opera. The title role of the suicidal street 
singer in Venice during the time of the Inquisition was a favorite 
of prima donnas like Renata Tebaldi and Zinka Milanov, and the 1876 
opera is notable for some famous arias and the ``Dance of the Hours'' 
ballet. But there is considerable padding in this four-act work, and 
it's not surprising it has lost favor. What brought it back this time 
was the interest of the dramatic soprano Jane Eaglen, who clearly 
felt that her abundant, plush voice was ideal for Gioconda. She sang 
with her customary opulent tone and lyrical distinction, but not much 
passion or incisiveness. The South African tenor Johan Botha brought 
impressive vocal heft but insufficient Italianate style to the role 
of Enzo. The company's admired longtime artistic director, Bruno Bartoletti, 
who is retiring from that position, conducted. But the work to attend 
this fall in Chicago is Levy's opera. Let's hope another company takes 
it up as well. How about the company that commissioned it in the first 
place? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>