<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0041 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ghosts have hung over Yankee Stadium all season, David Cone once remarked, 
as the Yankees pursued their place among the greatest baseball teams 
in history. But other ghosts haunted them, ghosts of the very recent 
past, until the Yankees won the American League championship on Tuesday 
night with a 9-5 victory over the Cleveland Indians in Game 6. The 
victory means that the Yankees, starting Saturday night, will play 
in the World Series for the 35th time and the second time in three 
seasons. It means they have exorcised the awful memory of their 1997 
elimination by the Indians in the first round of the playoffs. Faced 
with a 2-1 deficit in games this series, the Yankees came back to 
win Games 4, 5 and 6, saving the Game 2 goat, Chuck Knoblauch, from 
the eternal disgrace that befell the likes of Fred Merkle and Bill 
Buckner. Before 57,142 fans at Yankee Stadium on Tuesday night, Scott 
Brosius hit a three-run home run, Derek Jeter stroked a two-run triple 
and Ramiro Mendoza and Mariano Rivera pitched flawless relief in a 
game in which the Yankees nearly blew a 6-0 lead. Now, in the World 
Series, the Yankees can establish their legacy once and for all, after 
winning 114 games in the regular season, three straight in the division 
series against Texas and four of six in the American League Championship 
Series with Cleveland. The Yankees will play host to the winner of 
the National League Championship Series between San Diego and Atlanta 
in Games 1 and 2 of the World Series on Saturday and Sunday nights. 
The Padres lead that playoff, 3 games to 2, with Game 6 to be played 
on Wednesday in Atlanta. When Tuesday night's victory was over, when 
the players were damp and covered with the sweet smell of Champagne, 
Jeter spotted a head of perfectly coiffed gray hair in the middle 
of the Yankees' clubhouse. ``Hold on,'' Jeter yelled out. ``Hold on. 
Somebody's dry around here.'' And with that, he reached and emptied 
a bottle of bubbly over the Yankees' principal owner, George Steinbrenner, 
who flinched and laughed. ``I got him,'' Jeter said, escaping. Inside 
the trainers' room, the Yankee players took turns shouting into a 
phone, to Darryl Strawberry, their teammate who is recovering from 
surgery to remove a cancerous tumor from his colon. Knoblauch was 
among those who spoke to him before the game and after. We're thinking 
of you, Knoblauch told him, and Strawberry was probably thinking of 
Knoblauch. The second baseman ignored the baseball in the Game 2 loss 
to argue a call as the decisive run scored, and throughout the 48-hour 
wave of hysteria that follows each playoff loss in this city, Knoblauch 
was a pariah. If the Yankees had lost the series, the image of Knoblauch 
standing at the base and pointing dramatically would have become the 
glossy memory forever stuffed into the mental album of despair borne 
by devastated fans. Knoblauch, booed angrily by fans in his at-bat 
immediately following the mistake last Wednesday, would never have 
been forgiven. But the Yankees took two of three games in Cleveland 
to take control of the series and Knoblauch had played well, earning 
him at least a period of finite probation for good behavior. When 
Knoblauch was announced before his first plate appearance on Tuesday 
night, many rose and cheered, as if to say, You're forgiven, for now. 
``The hair on the back of my neck stood on end, to have them react 
to me that way,'' Knoblauch said later. Knoblauch placed the Cleveland 
starter, Charles Nagy, on the defensive, fouling off a two-strike 
pitch, and then another and another and so on, until Nagy had thrown 
nine pitches; even after Knoblauch grounded out to shortstop, a core 
of fans cheered him, understanding that he had chopped away a small 
piece of Nagy and given the Yankee hitters a chance to see what Nagy 
did or did not have. Jeter chopped a roller toward third and hustled 
out a single, and with the count 2-2, Jeter broke from first on a 
hit-and-run and Paul O'Neill lined a curveball to right for a single, 
Jeter moving to third. Bernie Williams singled home one run and a 
sacrifice fly by Chili Davis scored another, and the Yankees had a 
2-0 lead right away _ the fifth time in the six games of this playoff 
they had scored in the first inning. Nagy threw 27 pitches in the 
first inning, 18 after Knoblauch's at-bat. A double by Knoblauch helped 
produce another run in the second inning, and when Brosius launched 
his three-run homer to straightaway center field in the third inning 
_ prefaced by Umpire Ted Hendry's blown call that aided the Yankees 
_ New York led, 6-0. David Cone on the mound, no problem. Cone imploded 
in the fifth, however. ``I just lost it,'' he would say later. He 
allowed three straight hits (one of which hit Hendry on the backside, 
in another moment of ignominy for the umpire) and then a bases-loaded 
walk to force home a run. Cone struck out Manny Ramirez for the second 
out and the crowd roared. But Jim Thome blasted a titanic grand slam 
on Cone's next pitch, his fourth homer of the series, silencing Yankee 
Stadium. Just like that, the Indians had drawn to within a run, at 
6-5. But Cleveland's defense gave away three runs in the bottom of 
the sixth, an inning that began with the Gold Glove shortstop Omar 
Vizquel botching an easy throw to first. Girardi walked, and with 
one out Jeter launched a high drive to right-center. Ramirez charged 
back to the wall, looking up and leaping dramatically, only to be 
guilty of the same infraction as Knoblauch in Game 2: he ignored the 
baseball, which landed at the base of the wall, at the side of Ramirez. 
Two runs scored, and Jeter would, as well, on another single from 
Williams. Mendoza pitched three scoreless innings in relief of Cone, 
before Rivera closed out Cleveland in the ninth. When Rivera picked 
up Vizquel's grounder in the ninth and threw to first for the game's 
final out, the Yankees rushed from the dugout for the requisite hugs 
and head slaps and handshakes. But they seemed subdued, more relieved 
than exhilarated. They kept their Champagne spraying to a minimum, 
and nobody was dumping shaving cream or pudding on each other. Cone 
walked through the clubhouse carrying the A.L. championship trophy 
and was stopped by the voice of his manager. ``Nice going, buddy,'' 
Joe Torre said to Cone, reaching out and hugging him; Torre had tears 
in his eyes, and as they looked at each other for an instant, Cone's 
lower lip quivered. They had overcome the ghosts of 1997, that had 
beaten Cone and Torre and all of them. ``It's nice,'' Cone said, ``to 
get past Cleveland after losing to them last year.'' David Wells stood 
in front of his locker, slowly pulling the cork from a bottle. ``There's 
another step to go,'' he said. ``But there's a time and a place to 
party.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>