<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0202 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
My friend Liz DeGennaro called the other day to say she was thinking 
about going on line for the first time. She figured that she would 
liberate her Macintosh Power PC from the closet, where it has resided 
in the months since she left graduate school, set up a family computer 
station in the corner of an almost-renovated bedroom and then ``do 
a little e-mail, some Web surfing, some research.'' At least that's 
what I think she said, because her baby, Emma, was cooing into the 
phone receiver and on my end of the line, my baby was rhythmically 
hitting my leg with an unplugged surge protector. ``The only problem 
is I don't know which online provider to use,'' Ms. DeGennaro shouted. 
``I figured you would be able to recommend one.'' One would think 
so, especially since I have no fewer than four online accounts, none 
of which I am willing to give up. I keep multiple accounts because 
my greatest fear is that at any moment, a system outage will block 
my access to e-mail. I have even gone so far as to rummage in my husband's 
desk to find a password to enable me to set up one of his online accounts 
on my computer, as a backup to the backup's backup. But since I doubted 
that Ms. DeGennaro shared that little anxiety (and since my baby was 
now trying to eat the surge protector), I reflexively gave her the 
same advice I've been dispensing for years: ``You'll be better off 
with a small local provider. Try Panix _ it's the oldest online provider 
in the New York area.'' Almost as soon as I hung up the phone, however, 
I started to doubt my own advice. The conventional wisdom that called 
for hooking up with a small local provider might have been sound a 
few years back, when there were far fewer choices and the process 
of configuring equipment was complicated enough to require hours of 
hand-holding from sympathetic technical support workers. But in an 
atmosphere where thousands of online providers, both local and nationwide, 
compete aggressively for new customers, choosing one has become trickier. 
I got a firsthand lesson in just how tricky when I went on line to 
compare features touted on the Web pages of a handful of providers. 
Each one offered different levels of service, technical support and 
prices _ and none seemed to have it all. For instance, Echo oozed 
a sense of online community but offered local dial-up service only 
in the 212 area code. Mindspring had an excellent graphical interface, 
a toll-free number for 24-hour tech support and a competitive price 
of $19.95 a month, but it seemed too generic for a first-time user. 
GST Whole Earth Networks is reliable and rarely serves up a busy signal, 
but a phone call to the tech support staff, on the West Coast, is 
a toll call. And Panix was expensive: $32.50 a month. America Online 
came the closest to supplying all the items on my wish list. But when 
I called Ms. DeGennaro to describe the service, she said she would 
be put off by the cloying user interface, the relentless advertisements 
and AOL's annoying habit of disconnecting idle users. Thoroughly confused, 
I phoned Ruth Chatterton, a consultant for Telechoice, a telecommunications 
consultancy that recently surveyed 1,550 readers of Interactive Week 
for PC Week magazine to ask about the quality of their online providers. 
After I explained the situation, Ms. Chatterton said, ``Hmm, you found 
out that there is no easy answer.'' That's because all Internet access 
is not created equal: phone lines have quirks, modems can be configured 
differently and connection speeds vary. ``If you have the same online 
provider as your friend, and she lives down the street from you and 
dials into a different phone number, she could have an entirely different 
service from you,'' Ms. Chatterton cautioned. That said, the survey's 
respondents said the best online providers _ based on reliability, 
quality of technical support and price _ were AT&AMP;T Worldnet, GTE 
Internetworking, MCI Communications, Sprint Communications and UUnet 
Technologies. But the truth is that choosing a first online provider 
is as personal a decision as buying your first car. After hours of 
sorting through the fine print of service agreements, options and 
price, you might find yourself driving off the car lot in a convertible 
just because it's red. That's fine, as long as you consider these 
things first: _ Performance. Ask friends if they are happy with their 
providers. When you dial, you should connect on the first or second 
try. Repeated busy signals mean that a provider doesn't have enough 
phone lines to handle customers' needs. Once connected, you should 
stay connected. ``Some providers can disconnect you after as little 
as five minutes of inactivity,'' Ms. Chatterton warned. ``They don't 
always advertise that feature.'' _ Services. Ask about such features 
as free storage space for personal Web pages, toll-free dial-up numbers 
when you travel, the availability of an old-fashioned shell account 
with a Unix command-line interface, to enable you to telnet in from 
any computer and technical support. The first time that a software 
upgrade makes it impossible to check e-mail, you'll be thankful if 
your provider has a 24-hour, toll-free number. _ Price. Monthly costs 
can range from $7.95 to $35, depending on how much time you will be 
on line. A rule of thumb: plenty of nationwide carriers like Mindspring 
and Earthlink offer good value for less than $20 a month. After I 
phoned Ms. DeGennaro to report, she said she still did not know which 
provider to choose and there was no real hurry because she just found 
out that the guy who was supposed to finish the room renovation was 
too busy. So I gave her a final piece of advice: go over to a friend's 
house to take a test drive before deciding. Before she gets here with 
Emma, I will put the surge protector on a high shelf. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>