<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981014.2000.2701 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The World's Eddy Maher dropped us another line from London today. 
Eddy's been reading some old diaries and this week's newspapers and 
he tells us he's noticed a connection. On Sunday, six American B-52 
bombers arrived in Britain, in Gloucestshire, as NATO again cranked 
up the pressure on the Serbian leader, Slobodan Milosevic, to comply 
with UN demands. All the talk in the Sunday political shows was of 
the effectiveness of the use of force. Amid a of calls for air strikes, 
Richard Holbrooke, looking to me, increasingly despondent and tired, 
continued his diplomacy. At one stage last week, I saw him on TV talking 
about the winterizing of Kosovo by which he meant the coming of winter, 
but who wouldn't lose a grasp for the language amid the whirligig 
of discussions he's endured. For most of Sunday, there was gloom. 
By Monday morning, my newspaper line was, "NATO Close to Deal on Serbia." 
And as it turned out, air strikes are on hold for a few more days 
in the hope that talking will win out over bombing. The arrival of 
the B-52s reminded me of a similar event, more than ten years ago 
when U.S. aircraft sent by Ronald Reagan used Britain as a stopping 
off point on the way to bomb Libya. Those times are being remembered 
in a fabulously indiscreet set of diaries, serialized in their Sunday 
newspaper here. The diaries were written by Woodrow Wyatt, a former 
MP turned journalist, and friend of everyone who was anyone. I'm not 
exaggerating. He would advise Prime Minster Margaret Thatcher almost 
daily, take dinner with the Queen Mother almost as frequently and 
knew most British business leaders by their first names. They were 
all the power brokers of Thatcher's Britain. They all confided in 
him and now, after his death, his diaries in which he recorded details 
of the highest level conversations have been made public. Revelations 
include the apolitical royal family raising a toast to Margaret Thatcher 
at the end of meals and how the Queen Mother didn't want to wear black 
after the death of the Duchess of Windsor. But an entry from April 
25th, 1986, highlights the parallels between the bombing of Libya 
and the talks in Belgrade and Brussels over the past few days. Talking 
to the Queen Mother, Woodrow Wyatt asks her what she thinks of the 
U.S. bombing raids on Libya which had happened ten days earlier. The 
reply he quotes her as giving, I remind you, is 12 years old. "Between 
us," she said, "I think it was a mistake. They were not very accurate 
with their bombing and I can't see how it's going to do any good in 
stopping terrorism." Maybe some of those involved in the Kosovo discussions 
were reading the same serialization as me. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>