<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981014.2000.0893 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The clock is now ticking for Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic to 
withdraw his troops from Kosovo or face NATO air strikes. Milosevic 
has until 1 a.m. Saturday, not just to start pulling his forces but 
to begin admitting 2,000 European ground monitors into the Serbian 
province. As the Serb troops leave, there are fears that ethnic Albanians 
who make up 90 percent of Kosovo's population will exact revenge on 
the few Serb civilians who choose to remain. One of those staying 
put is Orthodox Priest Sava Yanyich Unlike many in the Serbian Orthodox 
hierarchy, Father Sava has been a thorn in the side of Serbian Nationalist 
authorities and he's criticized extremists on all sides of recent 
Balkan conflicts. Father Sava preaches at the 14th century Decani 
Monastery in southern Kosovo. We really think that it is good that 
there have been some signs that the situation in Kosovo might be improving 
and I really believe that this might be a good start for a peaceful 
resolution of the conflict which we always prefer to fighting of course, 
which we always condemned. Nothing really can be done by violence. 
Tell us something of what you're hearing from the Albanians who speak 
to you. Well, so far -- we heard about this agreement yesterday and 
today I have talked to some Albanian neighbors here in Decani because 
we are bringing them food and medicines. We organize the humanitarian 
aid for both Serbs and Albanians in the area and they called me and 
they seem to be very friendly and they were really also afraid of 
possible military attacks, at least they said so, because they really 
have fear that it might deteriorate, things here, and probably make 
the cycle of violence active again. So they were afraid of attacks, 
not just from NATO, but they were afraid of retaliatory attacks as 
well from the Serbs? Well, it is possible because it could be very 
difficult to say what might happen if the NATO attacks occurred because 
the population might be very radical, especially the Serbs. And it 
is also possible to expect from Albanian extremists to use these attacks 
and to surge on the Serbian people here and that could really make 
a real here. You're a man of considerable prominence. They write about 
you in the newspapers in the United States. You've got an international 
web site. Are there any significant American officials who are coming 
to listen to you and to speak to you and to the people who also share 
your views? I traveled with Bishop Artemije to the United States three 
times this year and we met with many congressmen and senators. So 
we are very active and we have a lot of contacts with American officials. 
I think a lot of them know about us. Finally, we know that some Serbians, 
based on what they know of the past, what they fear of the future, 
are leaving the area. You're a Serb yourself and the head of a very 
important Serbian institution. If, heaven forbid, the Albanians decide 
to turn on the Serbs and massacre back, will you leave the area yourself? 
Well, we monks here, we really don't want to leave the area and we 
believe that something like that will not happen. We really are going 
to stay. Someone wants to kill us, well, we are ready to suffer that, 
of course. But, I really try to be an optimist and I think that something 
like that would not happen. And of course, I appeal on international 
community and especially on American administration and the American 
people that they also show solidarity with the Serbian people as well, 
not to only with Albanian. In fact, this is the exam for the Europe 
and the world whether we are going to go further away to the 21st 
century or go back to the Dark Ages. And I think that we must be very 
well aware that such things cannot be allowed again. I mean, killing 
of civilian population. Father Sava Yanyich, an orthodox priest, spoke 
with us from his office at the Decani Monastery in Southern Kosovo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>