<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981014.2000.2025 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1994, Hutu militias in Rwanda murdered an estimated 800,000 Tsetses 
and moderate Hutus. The victims' cries echo today, not just in the 
central African nation, but in Western capitals. Yesterday, Rwanda's 
Tsetse dominated army announced it had killed hundreds of Hutu rebels 
in a major offensive in the past week. And in the United States and 
Europe, soul searching continues, provoked by a single haunting question, 
could the killing have been prevented? The World's Jeb Sharp has been 
listening to the debate and she had this report. Philip Garavich, 
a staff writer for the New Yorker magazine went to Rwanda a year after 
the genocide to try to make sense of what had happened and of the 
world's response to it. The result is his new book titled, "We Wish 
to Inform You that Tomorrow We Will be Killed with our Families." 
Garavich dispels the myth that the genocide was the result of chaos 
and anarchy or even age old ethnic hatreds. Rather, he says, "It was 
the logical outcome of a premeditated political strategy by advocates 
of a racist ideology called Hutu power to destroy the Tsetse population." 
What happened in Rwanda in 1994 was the single most unambiguous case 
of full fledged state sponsored genocide, an attempt to systematically 
eliminate an entire category of humanity since the extermination of 
European Jewry in World War II in Europe. The cry after the second 
World War was never again, but it did happen again. In this case, 
it happened three months after the Canadian commander of UN peacekeeping 
forces in Rwanda, General Romeo DeLaire warned that the government 
was identifying Tsetses and training Huto militias to kill them. Philip 
Garavich says major world powers simply chose not to act. The American 
official position at the time was that we should get out in a hurry. 
The Rwandans have studied in great detail the history of international 
intervention forces, essentially to the effect that quite often if 
you attacked them, they ran away. On the first morning of the massacres, 
ten Belgian Blue Helmets were taken prisoner, murdered, mutilated 
and within a very short order, it was decided instantaneously really 
that the force should be reduced. Two hundred-fifty people were left 
there in an ineffectual form. General DeLaire said with 5,000 men 
and a free hand he could have stopped this. Once the United States 
and others pulled out, the killing proceeded at an astonishing pace, 
800,000 people in three months. That's five and a half people per 
minute. Allison DeForge of Human Rights Watch who was in Rwanda when 
the killings began believes outside military intervention could have 
stopped the bloodshed. It could have happened very effectively. Within 
two or three days it could have cut it short. But if you had not wanted 
a troop intervention, there were other means available. There was 
a complete and total condemnation embargo of these people, embargo 
of arms, the jamming of the radio of genocide, none of which would 
have required any form of military action and which will not have 
required an extraordinary amount of expense and we did not do any 
of it. Last spring, President Clinton apologized to the Rwandan people 
for the international community's failure to stop the genocide. But 
at the time there were compelling arguments made against U.S. intervention. 
Former Deputy Assistant Secretary for Peacekeeping, Sarah Sewell, 
while not defending U.S. inaction, says it was understandable. As 
the genocide in Rwanda was beginning, the United States had its eye 
on a number of international crises and most notably among them, we 
had just experienced an extraordinary humiliation in the context of 
the ongoing operation in Somalia in which 18 American servicemen were 
killed. In that context, Sewell says, Congressional pressure to bring 
the troops home won out. But the events of 1994 raise a larger question 
than Rwanda. Is the U.S. military prepared to stop genocide anyway? 
To answer that question, military planners need to consider how to 
distinguish between genocide and civil war, whether safe havens along 
ethnic lines are appropriate and when it's justifiable to override 
local laws to apprehend suspected killers. In addition, any particular 
attempt to prevent genocide carries its own costs and risks. For example, 
Barry Posen, a political scientist at MIT, argues preventive action 
in Rwanda would have taken a much bigger military operation than many 
have suggested. There's no handy way to get to this country and establish 
a land line of communication. There's no ports. It's the middle of 
nowhere. Several tens of thousands of troops into a very bloody civil 
war, as well as a very bloody genocide, this is a daring operation. 
You're running the risks of at least a minor military disaster and 
potentially a major one if somebody guesses wrong. But Philip Geravich, 
the New Yorker staff writer, says the debate should not be confined 
to political and military strategy. He wants the public to decide 
once and for all whether it believes in protecting people from genocide. 
The most distressing thing is to see a false promise of protection 
extended in the form of whether it's a safe haven in Bosnia peacekeeping 
forcing Rwanda so that individuals who are in danger make choices 
based on the idea that somebody, the world, is there to save them 
and then find themselves abandoned and defenseless and wiped out. 
That's grim. If there's a cost for intervention, Garavich says, there's 
also a price for turning away. His book on the Rwandan genocide asks 
readers to consider whether that's a price they're willing to pay. 
For The World, I'm Jeb Sharp. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>