<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981014.2000.1258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're about to visit a city of living history, American Civil War 
history. Americans on the losing side of the war between the states 
moved here to build a new live for themselves. Today the town's coat-of-arms 
incorporates the confederate flag and its residents are engaged in 
an effort to reconstruct their 130 year old history. The city is called 
Americana and it's in the south, the south of Brazil. The World's 
Alejandra Martines takes us there. Americana is a small textile center 
with a population of 200,000, about a hundred miles from the city 
of Sao Paulo. English names are common here. One neighborhood is called 
Villa Jones, a part of town named in honour of Allison Jones' ancestors. 
They came after the Civil War at the end of 1866. Jones is a successful 
businessman in Americana and a member of the fraternity of American 
descendants, a group dedicated to keeping alive the memory of the 
town's American founders. Jones still speaks English at home. His 
was one of the 270 American families from the south, more than 2,000 
people in all who emigrated to Brazil soon after the end of the war. 
Well, they were very disappointed with the outcome of the Civil War. 
They had most of their property burnt. What couldn't burn was stolen. 
A lot of the women were raped and they had to start their life all 
over so they decided that they just might as well start elsewhere. 
American families were welcomed by the Brazilian ruler at the time, 
Emperor Pedro II. There was a worldwide cotton shortage and the Emperor 
was hoping to attract Americans because of their agricultural expertise. 
He offered them cheap land and even subsidized their journey. Slavery 
was still allowed in Brazil. But Jones says very few of the settlers 
brought slaves with them. They set up a colony where they grew not 
only cotton but also watermelons, peaches and pecans. The rolling 
hills in this part of Brazil reminded the settlers of their native 
Georgia and Alabama. A few remnants of their lives are on display 
in a small museum in a village just outside Americana. Well on this 
we have some of the things that were used by the Americans and they 
were brought with them, like a coffee grinder, a waffle iron and a 
butter churner, a hand butter churner. Americans brought with them 
everything they would need to start a new life, including their own 
doctors, pastors and teachers. The museum offers unique glimpses into 
the early days of Americana. There is a wedding dress. There are telegrams, 
letters and even photographs of the first settlers. This is the picture 
of Colonel William Norris which was the leader of the group of immigrants 
to this part of the country. He left when he was right in his 60s, 
so it must have been pretty hard for him to leave the U.S. Yes. It 
was very difficult and when he called his son, Robert Norris, and 
told him, "Son, I need you to go with me to Brazil." His son replied, 
"Father, I would go with you to hell if necessary." It wasn't exactly 
hell but life was hard for American families as they settled in a 
country not only with a different language but also with a different 
religion. The cemeteries in Brazil were owned at the time by the Catholic 
church which didn't allow the burial of Protestants. When the first 
settler died, American immigrants established a small cemetery on 
a hillside, a few miles from Americana. The cemetery is one of the 
most poignant reminders of the American presence here. This is where 
we have a lot of the families represented. Some of them are Carr and 
we have some McKnights and we have some Fergusons. Jones has visited 
the U.S. only twice and says that people are always amazed to learn 
that there is a town in Brazil with a confederate flag in its coat-of-arms. 
I had an interesting experience by people trying to place me by my 
accent. So they would keep saying different names of southern states 
and I'd say farther south, until they got to Florida. And they said, 
"But there is nothing south of Florida." I said, "You're mistaken. 
There are some big countries south of Florida and that's where I come 
from." The fraternity of American descendants wants more people in 
the U.S. to learn about their history. They come from universities 
in Alabama, which have already expressed interest in carrying out 
research here. But much work remains to be done to reconstruct the 
lives of American settlers in the remote south of Brazil. For The 
World, this is Alejandra Martines in Americana. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>