<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981014.1700.0470 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While Britain is taking a leading role in resolving the Kosovo crisis, 
it is coming under fire for some of its own practices. A gypsy human 
rights group voiced concerned about Britain's decision to require 
Slovaks to get visas before entering the country. The rights organization 
says it fears Britain will use the new visa policy to bar gypsies 
or Roma which the group says are trying to flee racist- racist policy 
and persecution in Slovakia. Stephen Bolst reports from Budapest. 
The European Roma Rights Center, the gypsy human rights group based 
in Budapest, says Britain's decision to reimpose visa requirements 
for Slovaks will send a bad message to other countries in the European 
Union. Most EU countries have signed what is known as the Shannon 
Treaty that permits border crossing without passports or other controls 
within the European Union. But, the gypsy human group's executive 
director, Dmitrini Petrova, says she fears the British policy might 
encourage the other EU countries to take similar steps. Ms. Petrova 
says there is a tendency to keep gypsy or Roma, asylum seekers outside 
the European Union regardless of which country they come from. If, 
let's just hypothetically imagine, for some reason Hungarian Roma 
or Polish Roma start to emigrate to any one Shagan country, the Shagan 
countries will, I think, reintroduce visas for the Hungarians and 
the Poles no matter how democrat Hungary or Poland may be, because 
of Europe's racism toward the Roma. British officials says the visa 
policy is necessary because more than 1000 Slovak gypsies have requested 
asylum in Britain so far this year. Many of them simply for economic 
reasons. Earlier, many gypsies from the Czech Republic arrived in 
Britain on their way to Canada after a controversial television program 
promised them a better economic life there. But, Ms. Petrova says 
most Slovak Roma are not fleeing their country for economic reasons. 
The Roma who immigrate to England are Roma who in fact are better 
off economically, who have better living conditions and we are convinced 
that Roma escape persecution. She charges the Slovak authorities refuse 
to help the Roma community during recent floods in which 20 gypsies 
died. Ms. Petrova also says she is concerned about growing right-wing 
skinhead activity in Slovakia. We have information about dozens of 
cases of a assaults on Roma by skinheads. The skinhead movement is 
on the rise. There have been cases of killing by skinheads. There 
was this most dramatic case when skinheads burned to death Mario Guara, 
a young Slovak Roma person. And there have been other cases which 
have resulted in death. Last month, several Slovak opposition parties 
won the general election that ousted Nationalist Prime Minster Vladami 
Metra. Human rights groups have charged that Mr. Metra indirectly 
supported racist attacks against gypsies. But, Ms. Petrova says it 
would be wrong to conclude that the situation will improve any time 
soon under a new Slovak government. Stephen Bolst for VOA News, Budapest. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>