<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981014.0600.1375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton and leaders of America's Arts Community 
emphasize the importance of the arts for children by honoring ten 
groups. She presented the First Annual Coming Up Taller Awards at 
a recent White House ceremony. Richard Rayal has details. As Honorary 
Chair of the President's Committee of the Arts and Humanities, the 
First Lady, joined by Attorney General Janet Reno and Health and Human 
Services Secretary, Donna Shalala saluted a large section of America's 
Arts Community. We meet here today to celebrate the power of the Arts 
to transport and transform young lives. We are here to honor those 
who are using the arts to give young people a chance both to take 
a bow and to come up taller than ever before. Mrs. Clinton noted that 
two years ago the President's Committee on the Arts and Humanities 
presented a landmark report profiling more than two hundred programs 
offering children a chance to improve their lives with exposure to 
the arts. She said that the study showed that young people who participate 
in the arts are more likely to attend college than those who do not. 
And, they come from a variety of backgrounds throughout the United 
States. The successful programs highlighted in that report are as 
diverse and imaginative as the children they serve. As children right 
here in Washington are learning to make cellos sing, others in Mississippi 
are learning to reach deep into their souls with the delta blues. 
As children in New York are rising on point with lessons in classical 
ballet, others in Los Angeles are soaring through modern dance. In 
communities across America, poets and actors, dancers and musicians, 
painters and museum curators and other caring adults, are helping 
children discover their creative potential through the arts and humanities. 
They're offering children safe stable environments in which to learn 
and providing them the opportunity to develop new skills and aspirations. 
One of the groups Mrs. Clinton honored at the Awards Ceremony was 
the Galloped Performing Arts Academy of New Mexico. A member of the 
arts academy, 13-year old, Alfred Con Jr., lives on the Navajo Indian 
Reservation in Pine Springs, Arizona. He currently is performing in 
a touring dance theatre production about native American life. And 
he told the White House audience that he appreciates how the arts 
have helped his people gain more respect. I have seen very false depictions 
of my culture. And I'm glad to be a part of a program which values 
it and portrays us properly. In addition, it gives everyone the right 
message on every day choices and challenges. In addition to the Galloped 
Performing Arts Academy, the other recipients of the Coming Up Taller 
Awards include the Appalachia Media Institute of Whitesburg, Kentucky; 
The Experimental Gallery of Seattle, Washington; Paul Deaf Youth Theatre 
of Boston, MA and Urban Smarts of Chicago, IL. They were chosen by 
a jury made up of people from the arts committee. At the White House 
event, the Coming Up Taller Award celebrated not just successful students 
involved in the arts but also volunteers from the Arts community. 
Among them was James McDaniel, a television film and theatre actor 
who is best known for his role as Lt. Arthur Fancy on the Emmy Award 
winning television drama "NYPD Blue." Mr. McDaniel has helped the 
award winning group called the Fifty Second Street Project which provides 
theatrical experience for young people in New York City. Mr. McDaniel 
described in an interview how he became involved with the New York 
group through it's founder and artistic director, Willie Realey. He 
said, look I'm doing this thing with these kids. Um, would you help 
me out? You know, we're all unemployed so, I said, "Yeah, sure". And 
it turned into a way of life for me. I'm on their board, um, I love 
the project dearly. I live in LA now so it makes things a little difficult 
in the day-to-day involvement with the children. But, you know, I 
help out in other ways. Like I sing in the White House for them. Actor 
James McDaniel who performed a skit and sang with student Candy Godoya, 
member of the 52nd Street Project. Among the groups honored by First 
Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton at a recent White House ceremony. I'm 
Richard Rayal. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>