<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981014.1700.2698 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And mention lasers and our thoughts often turn to Luke Skywalker battling 
an arch-villain each armed with weapons of concentrated light. Imagine 
the biggest laser in the world. As Brian Sislak reports it's not a 
science fiction fantasy. It is soon to be reality and it's not from 
Hollywood either, but it is based in California-Livermore to be exact, 
roughly 60 kilometers from San Francisco and it's enough to make George 
Lucas and Steven Speilberg green with envy. What it will be is the 
world's largest laser. It consists of 192 laser beams, each of which 
are about a foot in diameter in a building that's about the size of 
a municipal football stadium. That's William Hogan. He's senior scientist 
for the National Ignition Facility, NIF for short at the Lawrence 
Livermore National Laboratory. Now, half way complete, this $1.2 billion 
laser will after the turn of the millennium attempt something never 
done before to ignite a fusion reaction that will put out more energy 
than it took to start it. Fusion, the Holy Grail of nuclear physics, 
is the opposite of fission, the atom splitting process that powers 
conventional nuclear reactors. Fusion derives energy from pushing 
together or fusing the nuclei of heavy hydrogen atoms, deuterium and 
tritium, into helium. It's the same reaction that fuels our sun and 
all the other stars. As Bill Hogan describes it, the star fuel the 
NIF laser will turn into energy will be in a capsule no bigger than 
the one your pharmacist gives you. The target is a cylinder made out 
of gold, about the size of a cold capsule, inside of which is a little 
bb sized spherical shell of plastic and inside of that spherical shell 
of plastic is a very tiny amount of deuterium, tritium fusion fuel. 
So what we're trying to do is to use the lasers to compress and heat 
that little bb-sized capsule of fusion fuel to enormous temperatures 
and pressures to cause the fusion reaction to ignite. The temperature 
will be 100 million degrees Celsius and the fuel will achieve 20 times 
the density of lead. Those are the same conditions that exist inside 
the center of the sun, or any other star for that matter. The objective, 
says William Hogan, is to get a fusion profit of 10 times as much 
energy coming out of the reaction as the laser puts into it. But, 
it will be the first time that fusion has ever done that. If we fail, 
we are not an energy source. If we succeed, then it would pay for 
the country to consider it in one of our options for an energy source. 
Lasers represent one road towards the so far elusive goal of profitable 
or sustained fusion. The dominant approach to date has involved the 
Tokenmac, a circular tube inside which magnets compress hydrogen fuel 
until it gets hot enough to fuse and ignite. Bill Hogan says neither 
of the competitive fusion approaches has yet achieved the desired 
objective. But,... At this time, we're both approximately at the same 
position with respect to the fact that we both think the next machine 
we build could be a net energy producing machine. We happen to be 
in the middle of construction. The magnetic fusion people have not 
gotten approval to proceed with a large machine of the type that would 
use magnetic fields to compress. And so, we may have a little bit 
of an advantage right now. William Hogan says the Livermore group 
does have a potential competitor in France. Like the Livermore laser, 
the French device will have the duel purpose of doing fusion research 
and simulating nuclear weapon decay. If all goes as planned, the Livermore 
laser will be fully online in 2003 with the first ignition experiments 
in 2005. Even if that ambitious timetable is met, experts say a practical 
demonstration of fusion generated electric power probably will not 
occur until 2025. But if and when it does, it will realize the dream 
of clean limitless energy from hydrogen one of the most abundant elements 
in the universe. I'm Brian Sislak. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>