<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981029.1830.0869 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three democratic incumbents face a tough fight this election. They 
all burst on the political scene the same year, "the year of the woman." 
Now, six years later, each senator has her own individual struggle. 
Here's ABC's Linda Douglass. They are members of a historic sorority, 
swept into the Senate together six years ago. Do you swear to tell 
the whole truth -- Back then, the country had just witnessed the spectacle 
of Anita hill trying to convince an all-male committee of senators 
that she had been sexually harassed. Women candidates and women voters 
rose up. The Senate has its way of doing things. It's time to shake 
that place up. It was called "the year of the woman." But this time 
around, things have changed. "The year of the woman" has turned into 
"the year of the woman target." No longer are the women fresh faces. 
They are incumbents, with all of the baggage that brings. I ask unanimous 
consent -- In Washington, senator Patty Murray fought for more teachers 
by working with democratic leaders. So her opponent, Linda Smith, 
calls her "one of the good ol' boys." Patty Murray followed the most 
liberal democrats every time. Like male incumbents, all of the women 
are being attacked on their records. I'm Carole Mosely-Braun. I know 
I have made some mistakes and disappointed some people. Illinois' 
Carole Mosely-Braun faced questions about her finances and got in 
trouble over her visits to the dictator of Nigeria. Peter! Peter! 
Her opponent, millionaire Peter Fitzgerald, now leads in the polls. 
First lady Hillary Rodham Clinton was called to the rescue. I want 
every woman who voted for Carole the last time to think very hard 
about what is at stake. But Mrs. Clinton's husband has not made things 
easy for democratic women candidates, particularly California's Barbara 
boxer, who is related to the Clintons by marriage. Boxer has a record 
of demanding punishment when republicans are accused of sexual harassment, 
but she has tried to minimize the president's sex scandal. My opinion 
is it's time to move on. Her opponent accuses her of having a double 
standard. Your hypocrisy at the way you just presented yourself is 
ear-splitting. This year, just being a woman is not enough to win 
women's votes. Now candidates, both male and female, are competing 
on several issues that matter to women, like education and health 
care. How are you doing? The agenda has moved beyond women's rights. 
Even conservative male senators claim they have been sensitized to 
women's concerns. Thanks to senator launch Faircloth breast cancer 
stamp, we now have a Chance to make a real difference. The three women 
senators see that as a triumph. They say, but for them, those issues 
would not be on the front burner. The debate changes and we force 
the votes. Being in the room makes a difference. Having a women in 
the room makes a difference on the kind of discussion that take place. 
They are hoping women will believe that, in the year of "the woman 
senators in trouble." Linda Douglass, ABC News, Chicago. Five days, 
as we said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>