<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981029.1830.1252 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight we're going to take "A closer look" at the future of television. 
At the Smithsonian air and space museum in Washington and in several 
other cities around the country today, hundreds of people got a much 
sharper look at John Glenn's launch. They were watching on high-definition 
television, hdtv. The Japanese were on hand for the launch today with 
hdtv. This was a special broadcast. Starting this weekend, for the 
first time, TV stations in the countries' largest cities will begin 
transmitting digital programming specifically designed for hdtv. Is 
it a worthwhile experiment? First, the technology. Here's ABC's Gina 
Smith. Clearer pictures. You feel like you're actually in the picture 
sometimes. Incredible sound. You could hear every word, nothing was 
unclear. Everything was so clear. And futuristic new capabilities. 
Imagine watching a show on cooking and being able to pull up the menu 
and print out the recipe from a printer connected to your television 
set. To hear promoters talk about it, digital television is nothing 
short of a broadcast revolution, as dramatic as the switch from black 
and white to color 34 years ago. The pictures are impressive. We can't 
show you on your current television screen, but a top-notch digital 
set can show programs up to three times more clearly. Digital TV is 
just a new way of broadcasting signals to a TV set. Unlike the ee 
trek tro magnetic waves that your TV is using now, digital tVs use 
ones and zeroes, just like a computer or compact disc player does. 
And because ones and zeroes take up a lot less space than radio waves, 
digital TV gives broadcasters more room to play with. Surround sound. 
Not all programmers will use the space for better sound and pictures, 
some will use it to add new viewing options. Let's check camera four 
here. They might let you decide the best angle for viewing a baseball 
game. Or find out more about topics that interest you. It could take 
years for digital TV to live up to its promise, but no one is promising 
that the quality of what you get -- If you press print now, I'll give 
your car a free lube job. -- will improve at all. Gina Smith, ABC 
News, New York. So what are the chances that hdtv will live up to 
the lofty promises? There are plenty of roadblocks in the way, not 
the least of which is the fact that there are only a tiny number of 
sets now used in the United States. Here's ABC's John Martin. Very 
few Americans own hdtv sets, and even if they get them, there isn't 
much to see just yet. True, CBS will show some football games and 
ABC is about to show movies, like "101 dalmatians." It's a matter 
of financial risk. And even though this technology is here, a lot 
of people in the industry are not certain it will really catch on. 
One reason is price, new hdtv sets can cost up to $10,000. The number 
of these that are going to be sold, I don't think is going to be flying 
out the door, yet. My concern is that if I go with this, it's really 
expensive. If I go with that, it's a lot cheaper. So does it make 
sense for a consumer to buy an expensive set when there's not much 
to see? Well, this is the chicken-and-egg scenario -- when does the 
programming come versus when is the product available? It's more than 
just product, one company, Sinclair broadcasting, owns nearly 60 stations 
and says it is unwilling to invest in transmission equipment until 
the sets are perfected. I think that we're faced with the potential 
of a great train wreck when this service gets into the hands of the 
public. Sinclair technicians insist -- rooftop antennas are not lined 
up with the signal. There's a dispute. To zee nouns the broadcasters. 
Most of them are waiting for somebody else to take the lead, somebody 
else to take the risks, somebody else to make the investments, somebody 
else to develop the business model. So we've got a lot of followers 
and hardly any leaders. But even those who so it's a big risk. The 
capital expenditures for this endeavor is daunting and will continue 
to be. Daunting, too, for consumers who wonder where to put their 
money. "If industry doesn't make the system work well soon," said 
one analyst, "Hdtv will probably fizzle." John Martin, ABC News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>