<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981029.0874 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Heavy rains flooded low-lying areas Thursday across western Europe, 
including this historic spa town where elegant tree-lined boulevards 
once strolled by kings and queens were under water. Flood alarms sounded 
in Baden-Baden just after midnight. By Thursday morning, German soldiers 
were sandbagging the swollen Oos River that runs through the center 
of the luxurious resort, located in the Black Forest near the southwest 
border with France. The train station also was flooded. ARD television 
reported that 20 Roman Catholic nuns from a convent near Baden-Baden 
also joined in to help sandbag. Harsh storms that started late Tuesday 
killed at least three people _ one in Germany, one in the Czech Republic, 
and one in Switzerland. All were involved in vehicle accidents with 
trees uprooted by wind. Power cuts, traffic snarls, and highway closings 
were reported Thursday in Austria and the Netherlands as well as in 
Germany. A train derailed on the Memmingen-Munich route in Bavaria 
after hitting a herd of cows that had wandered onto the tracks. Eight 
cows were killed and the train engineer and a passenger were injured. 
The cows made their way onto the tracks after storms apparently knocked 
down an electric fence, a railway spokesman said. About 500 soldiers 
and engineers were deployed to the Dutch province of Groningnen and 
Drenthe to shore up dikes sodden by rain-swollen canals and rivers, 
Dutch army spokesman Hans Hardenbol said Thursday. The Linz area of 
upper Austria and some Vienna suburbs were flooded, and some Austrian 
towns were without electricity after gusts blew down power lines. 
In Switzerland, a 28-year-old man was killed in the northern Thurgau 
region when the car he was driving hit a tree that had fallen across 
the road. Boats on Lake Biel in the northwest were ripped from their 
moorings, and police were called out to recover them. In northern 
Germany, residents in the flooded town center of Bad Gandersheim fled 
their homes in rubber dinghies. About 1,000 police and firefighters 
from the nearby city of Braunschweig arrived during the night to pump 
out basements after the Leine River swiftly rose about a meter (three 
feet). Fifteen people were treated for hypothermia or shock. The Mosel 
River, which meets the Rhine in southwest Germany, was also rising, 
and smaller rivers _ the Glan, the Nahe and the Sieg _ had flooded 
into several small towns. Barge traffic on some stretches of the Mosel 
was shut down. Police also closed a section of the autobahn outside 
the town of Pforzheim, south of Baden-Baden. Mudslides in the town 
of Rastatt, in the same area, destroyed three houses, according to 
the interior ministry in nearby Stuttgart. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>