<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981029.0882 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An Islamic militant rammed an explosives-laden car into an Israeli 
army jeep that was escorting a bus full of elementary school students 
Thursday. The powerful blast killed the attacker and a soldier. An 
Israeli commander said the jeep had swerved to keep the car away from 
the children. The anti-Israeli group Hamas claimed responsibility 
for the suicide attack that also injured three Israelis and four Palestinians. 
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called Palestinian leader 
Yasser Arafat and told him he must wage all-out war on terrorism if 
he wants Israel to go pull back troops in the West Bank over the next 
12 weeks, as promised. Arafat vowed to track down the masterminds 
of the bombing, and in an unprecedented move placed Hamas leader Ahmed 
Yassin under house arrest and had dozens of the group's activists 
detained. Netanyahu is under intense pressure from Israeli hard-liners 
to call off the deal and the terror attack, the second this week, 
makes it increasingly difficult for him to defend sell the land-for-security 
agreement at home. The blast went off at about 7:30 a.m. (0530 GMT) 
at the Gush Katif Junction in the southern Gaza Strip. At the time, 
the Israeli school bus convoy guarded by two jeeps was passing by. 
Nine-year-old Eran Ayoube, who was on the bus, said he had just finished 
his daily traveler's prayer and said ``amen'' when he heard a loud 
boom and the windows around him were shattered. His 10-year-old sister 
Adar said children began to cry and were ordered by the driver to 
drop to the floor of the bus for cover. ``There was terrible smoke 
everywhere. I thought I was going to be burned,'' Adar said, sitting 
on her bicycle parked on a sidewalk outside her home in the Jewish 
settlement of Kfar Darom. The Israeli army commander in the Gaza Strip, 
Maj. Gen. Yom Tov Samia, said the officers in the lead jeep had noticed 
the Palestinian car trying to get close to the bus and blocked the 
vehicle, thus taking the brunt of the blast themselves. The bomb was 
so powerful that the jeep flipped over on its side. The jeep and the 
bomber's car, registered to a Palestinian in the nearby town of Khan 
Yunis, were scorched and mangled. Yigal Kirshenzach, a Gaza settler, 
said the jeep was still burning an hour after the blast. ``Parts (of 
bodies) are scattered all over. There is oil, gas, blood,'' Kirshenzach 
told Israel radio. Pieces of black debris were scattered over a 50-yard 
(50-meter) radius. A black, scorched shoe lay in the middle of the 
road. The Israeli army said that immediately after the blast, Israeli 
soldiers chased what they thought were suspects fleeing the scene. 
Troops opened fire, wounding one Palestinian man. Palestinian police, 
in turn, fired on Israeli troops, but no one was injured in the exchange 
that lasted several minutes, the army said. The roof of a nearby farm 
shack collapsed from the force of the explosion and three Palestinian 
girls were injured, their relatives said. Two girls were hospitalized 
and a third remained at home with cuts to the back and hand. After 
the attack, the Israeli children were taken to their school in Gush 
Katif settlement bloc before returning home to Kfar Darom. In school, 
the children talked about their experience. The children spoke of 
the big boom and flames and many asked about their friends on a second 
bus, said Principal Yitzhak Amitai. In a call to Israel radio, a man 
who said he spoke for Hamas read a claim of responsibility. ``It's 
a revolution until victory,'' the caller said, suggesting the attacks 
would continue. A Hamas official in the West Bank said the group felt 
it was being targeted by the new peace agreement and that it had nothing 
to lose by launching attacks in hopes of derailing the accord. Several 
hours after the attack, Palestinian police placed Yassin under house 
arrest. Officers sealed off the area around his Gaza City home and 
questioned passers-by. Earlier in the day, Yassin has said that despite 
an expected crackdown, Hamas did not want to engage in a bloody confrontation 
with the Palestinian Authority. Netanyahu said he expected an all-out 
crackdown on the militants as a condition for implementation of the 
peace agreement. ``I told him (Arafat) that the test will be ... the 
absolute enlistment of the Palestinian Authority against terrorists,'' 
Netanyahu said. ``He told me he had just emerged from a meeting a 
meeting with his security chiefs and had given them instructions in 
that spirit,'' Netanyahu said. Arafat condemned the bombing. He said 
he would arrest the masterminds and ``try them for deliberately harming 
the Palestinians' national interests.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>