<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981029.1243 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hurricane Mitch wore itself out pounding the Honduran coast and became 
a tropical storm on Thursday. But floodwaters continued to rise after 
up to 25 inches (63 cms) of rain, and the danger of disease set in 
on communities cut off from food, water and medicine. Already, at 
least 32 people have died, and a yacht with 31 people aboard was missing 
off the Nicaraguan-Honduran border. A U.S. Coast Guard airplane was 
searching for the boat Thursday. Mitch, which on Tuesday ranked among 
the century's most powerful storms, weakened to a tropical storm on 
Thursday as it moved slightly inland. At 2100 GMT, sustained winds 
were only 60 mph (95 kph), down from 180 mph (290 kph) early Tuesday. 
A hurricane has sustained winds of at least 75 mph (120 kph). The 
storm had hardly moved since its peak, and on Thursday was tearing 
into the same coastline and tourist islands it had been lashing for 
three days. On the Bay Islands, about 25 miles (40 kms) off Honduras' 
coast and popular with divers and beachcombers, at least 14 people 
died and many houses were destroyed. There were few details because 
the islands were cut off except for occasional phone service. Along 
the coast, incessant rain had flooded at least 50 rivers, knocking 
out bridges and highways and putting many towns under water. More 
than 150,000 were forced to seek higher ground. ``My God, this thing 
is getting ugly,'' said 13-year-old Juan Padilla as he watched the 
swollen Chamelecon River sweep cars, trees, cattle and pieces of houses 
down toward the Caribbean Sea in La Lima. In addition to the dead 
on the Bay Islands, Honduras reported nine other deaths and Nicaragua 
eight. Mexico said an American was thrown from his boat south of Cancun, 
Mexico, on Monday and presumed dead. And the Antigua-registered Fantome, 
a 240-foot (73-meter) sailing yacht with 31 people aboard, had been 
missing since Tuesday, said the U.S. Coast Guard, which sent a C-130 
plane to search for it. The Fantome, owned by Windjammer Barefoot 
Cruises, was on a six-day cruise through Belize and Honduras' Bay 
Islands when the storm hit, said company spokesman James Canty. He 
said the boat radioed Tuesday that it was heading east to avoid the 
hurricane, and hadn't been heard from since. He said the passengers 
were of various nationalities, but he didn't know which. Honduran 
officials said more than 200 towns and villages had been isolated 
by the storm, left without power, telephones or clean drinking water. 
More than 72,000 people were staying in shelters, and countless others 
were managing on their own. In La Lima, 110 miles (175 kms) northwest 
of the capital, Tegucigalpa, entire neighborhoods were in waist-deep 
water and hundreds of families had set up tents _ made of scraps of 
tarp and wood _ on the highway that runs through town. ``Last night 
the water just kept rising, so we decided to come onto the highway,'' 
said Jose Antonio Galindo, 36, who makes his living collecting firewood. 
La Lima is part of the Sula Valley, Honduras' richest agricultural 
zone, filled with banana plantations and home to more than 200 export 
factories. Officials said 40 percent of the 250,000-acre (100,000 
hectare) valley was flooded. Agriculture Minister Pedro Arturo Sevilla 
said grain, citrus and banana crops had been damaged ``and the economic 
future of Honduras is uncertain.'' In the short term, food, water 
and medicine already were running out in communities isolated by the 
storm. ``Today I just ate manioc with salt, and tomorrow I don't know 
what I'll do,'' Maria Gonzalez, 28, said in the northern coastal town 
of Tela. She held her 6-month-old son Jose in her arms. In La Ceiba, 
which is cut off from the rest of the country by two downed bridges, 
10,600 of the city's 40,000 residents were staying in 18 shelters. 
Many had run out of food. Treated water also had run out, prompting 
warnings that epidemics could break out. ``You don't know what it 
is to have your children crying because they're hungry, and to not 
be able to do anything,'' said Jorge Tulio Romero, 31, who fled to 
a shelter with his children ages 5, 3 and 10 months. ``It's tremendously 
painful.'' With the weakening storm seemingly anchored off Honduras, 
officials in Mexico to the north eased emergency measures on the Caribbean 
coast of the Yucatan Peninsula. More than 20,000 tourists had abandoned 
Cancun and nearby resort areas, leaving hotels at about 20 percent 
of capacity. Houston accountant Kathy Montgomery said that she and 
her friend Nina Devries had tried to leave Cancun but found all the 
flights full. ``It's been horrible,'' said Montgomery, as she and 
her friend drank cocktails at an outdoor restaurant. ``We couldn't 
go out on a boat, we couldn't go snorkeling. ``Even Carlos' N Charlie's 
and Senor Frog's are closed,'' she said dejectedly, referring to two 
restaurants. ''Some vacation.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>