<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981029.0254 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Randy Johnson, perhaps baseball's most explosive pitcher, is now on 
the free-agent market. And Albert Belle, explosive because of both 
his bat and his temper, is already attracting attention. Both the 
New York Yankees and Mets said Wednesday they have contacted Belle's 
agent, and other teams are thought to be interested, too. It was unclear 
if the Yankees' interest in the outfielder is genuine, or if they 
were just sending a message to Bernie Williams, who is unsure whether 
he'll re-sign with the World Series champions. Yankees owner George 
Steinbrenner said he isn't bothered by Belle's tempestuous past. ``Nobody's 
history scares me,'' Steinbrenner said. ``We have a discipline in 
the organization that has proven itself.'' Belle generally prefers 
to avoid reporters and would have trouble doing that in the Yankees 
clubhouse, where dozens of writers and cameramen spend hours each 
day. Joe Torre's team was been a model of tranquility this year, and 
Belle doesn't appear to be a good fit. ``Who comes from deeper problems 
that Darryl and Doc?'' Steinbrenner said, referring to Darryl Strawberry 
and Dwight Gooden. ``Yet they accepted the discipline and accepted 
the direction.'' Steinbrenner made an appearance Wednesday to donate 
two dlrs 100,000 checks from the Yankees foundation to repair buildings 
destroyed by Hurricane Georges. One will pay to rebuild the Dr. Carl 
Th. Georg Regional Children's Hospital in San Pedro de Macoris, Dominican 
Republic. The other will fund reconstruction of the Center for Senior 
Citizens in Jurabo, Puerto Rico. Even though he's technically no longer 
a Yankee, Williams will personally deliver the checks in Puerto Rico, 
his native country, and the Dominican Republic, along with team officials. 
Mets general manager Steve Phillips said he talked with Belle's agent, 
Arn Tellem, but about a different player. ``You'd certainly have to 
be interested in him offensively and what he's done,'' Phillips said. 
``Any team in baseball would like to add his offense to their club. 
But does he fit? I can't tell you yes or no.'' Belle hit .328 with 
49 homers and 152 RBIs last season. He agreed to a dlrs 55 million, 
five-year contract with the Chicago White Sox in November 1996, but 
has a unique clause in his deal that allowed him to become a free 
agent Tuesday and also gave him the option through Nov. 25 of returning 
to his White Sox contract. Arizona general manager Joe Garagiola Jr. 
said he intends to have Williams in for a visit next month. Diamondbacks 
manager Buck Showalter was Williams' manager in New York from 1992-95. 
Williams' agent, Scott Boras, is seeking a deal at least seven years 
long and exceeding the dlrs 91 million Mike Piazza got from the Mets. 
``Here's a player who was the American League batting champion, a 
Gold Glove center fielder. I think it would be useful, if he wants 
to, to have a conversation with him,'' Garagiola said. ``He is one 
of the most attractive players on the market.'' Meanwhile, David Cone 
and the Yankees postponed a decision on whether he will exercise a 
dlrs 5.5 million player option for next season. The deadline, originally 
midnight EST Wednesday, was pushed back to Nov. 4. Johnson, who filed 
for free agency Wednesday, led the majors with 329 strikeouts, going 
10-1 with a 1.28 ERA in 11 starts after Houston acquired him from 
Seattle on July 31. The Astros have said they want to re-sign him, 
but the 35-year-old left-hander hasn't said whether he wants to stay. 
The Diamondbacks are interested because he lives in the Phoenix area. 
In other free-agent news, the San Diego Padres exercised their dlrs 
1.9 million option on postseason hero Jim Leyritz. Philadelphia center 
fielder Doug Glanville, who would not have been eligible for salary 
arbitration until after next season, agreed to a three-year contract 
worth dlrs 5,575,000. Glanville, who led the National League with 
678 at-bats last season, will make dlrs 525,000 in 1999, up from a 
dlrs 260,000 base this year. He gets dlrs 2 million in 2000, dlrs 
3 million in 2001 and a dlrs 50,000 signing bonus. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>