<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981029.0247 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Palestinian suicide bomber on Thursday drove an explosives-laden 
car into an Israeli army jeep escorting a bus with 40 elementary school 
students, killing himself and an Israeli soldier. The Islamic militant 
group Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack that also wounded 
three Israelis. ``It's a revolution until death,'' said a caller to 
Israeli radio who read a statement he said was issued by Hamas, which 
opposes the Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement. Israel said the attack 
would not hold up implementation of the land-for-security agreement 
signed last week in Washington, but demanded that the Palestinian 
Authority do more to fight terrorism. In a first response, the Israeli 
army sealed the Gaza Strip, barring Palestinians from leaving or entering. 
The armored school bus was damaged, but none of the children was hurt 
in the powerful blast. After the attack, the children were taken to 
their school in the Gush Katif bloc of Jewish settlements rather than 
being returned home to the nearby Kfar Darom settlement. In school, 
the children talked to teachers and counselors about their experience. 
The children, ranging in age from about six to 14, talked of the big 
boom and flames and many asked about their friends on a second school 
bus, school officials said. Witnesses said the blast went off at about 
7:30 a.m. (0530 GMT) at the Gush Katif Junction in the southern Gaza 
Strip. At the time, the Israeli convoy was passing by. Palestinian 
Jaber Yamawi said he was waiting at a bus stop when he heard the explosion. 
``I saw one Israeli jeep blow up and burn completely,'' said Yamawi. 
``I saw them take out two soldiers in ambulances and after that there 
was gunfire.'' Abdel Razek Majaida, a senior Palestinian police official, 
said the driver of the booby-trapped car had waited until the school 
bus arrived, then detonated the explosives in the vehicle. Yigal Kirshenzach, 
a Gaza settler who prepares bodies for burials, said the jeep was 
still burning an hour later. ``Parts (of bodies) are scattered all 
over. There is oil, gas, blood. Things we see too often lately,'' 
Kirshenzach told Israel radio. Paramedics said three Israelis were 
wounded in the blast and taken to hospitals. Maj. Gen. Yom Tov Samia, 
the commander of Israeli troops in the Gaza Strip, said the jeep leading 
the convoy bore the brunt of the explosion and that one of the soldiers 
in the vehicle was killed. Samia also said the identity of the suicide 
bomber was known and that he was a resident of the nearby Palestinian 
town of Khan Yunis. There were initial reports by Palestinian witnesses 
that Israeli soldiers or settlers opened fire randomly after the explosion, 
wounding three Palestinians, but the reports could not be confirmed. 
Amin al Hindi, a senior Palestinian security official, said his forces 
were cooperating with the Israelis and that the Palestinian Authority 
would respond harshly. ``This incident is aimed at destroying the 
peace process and we will take measures,'' al Hindi said. Implementation 
of the new peace agreement is to begin Monday, and Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu's senior adviser, David Bar-Illan, said there would 
not be any delay. Under the accord, Israel is to withdraw from 13 
percent of the West Bank over 12 weeks in exchange for a Palestinian 
crackdown on Islamic militants. However, Bar-Illan said Israel would 
be watching the Palestinian Authority's response to the bombing closely. 
He also held Yasser Arafat's government indirectly responsible for 
the attack. ``We blame them for lionizing and glorifying terrorists 
on the one hand while giving lip service to fighting terrorism,'' 
he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>