<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981029.0239 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Government tanks rolled along a Kosovo highway toward this provincial 
capital Thursday, while U.S. and European envoys urged ethnic Albanian 
rebels not to take over checkpoints vacated by police and to begin 
talks as soon as possible. At least 21 tanks and six other vehicles 
were seen heading toward a military base in Pristina, apparently part 
of the on-going redeployment of government forces demanded by NATO 
and the U.N. Security Council. An agreement reached Oct. 12 with U.S. 
envoy Richard Holbrooke required Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic 
to remove or redeploy forces in Kosovo, which were increased dramatically 
after he launched a crackdown on ethnic Albanian separatists on Feb. 
28. As the draw down continues, rebels of the separatist Kosovo Liberation 
Army have been milling around positions vacated by Serb police and 
Yugoslav troops. Scores of uniformed KLA guerrillas marched in formation 
at Wednesday's funeral of a guerrilla killed by a Serb land mine in 
Dragobilje, about 40 kilometers (25 miles) southwest of Pristina. 
That was unthinkable three days earlier, when Serb police manned a 
checkpoint on the road to Dragobilje and shooting between the sides 
erupted nightly. With the fighting subsided, diplomatic efforts are 
now focusing on efforts to bring Milosevic and the ethnic Albanians 
to the conference table to negotiate the long-term future of the province. 
Special U.S. mediator Christopher Hill, who has been spearheading 
efforts toward peace talks, urged the rebels Wednesday not to increase 
tensions by taking over former Serb checkpoints and bunkers. Hill 
told reporters that the Americans and Europeans are insisting that 
the KLA not try to exploit the situation created by the departure 
of virtually all the special police and troops sent to Kosovo after 
Milosevic launched his crackdown. Reinforcing that demand, the special 
European Community envoy for Kosovo, Wolfgang Petritsch, urged the 
Kosovo Albanians to begin a ``constructive dialogue'' with Milosevic 
on self-rule for the majority Albanian province, which is part of 
Yugoslavia's main republic Serbia. Petritsch said it was of ``particular 
importance'' for the Kosovo Albanians to take advantage of this ``historical 
moment'' to resolve the crisis. Ethnic Albanians comprise 90 percent 
of Kosovo's 2 million people. Most want independence. The Americans 
and Europeans, however, do not support independence, fearing it would 
lead to similar demands by ethnic Albanian communities elsewhere in 
the southern Balkans. With Yugoslav forces drawing back, NATO has 
announced plans to begin observation flights over Kosovo this weekend 
to make sure Milosevic is sticking by the agreement. The Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe also hopes that most of the 
2,000 people which it will send to the province to verify the agreement 
will be in Kosovo in the next few weeks. That should enable most of 
the thousands of refugees still camped in the hills to return home 
and avoid the humanitarian disaster which had been widely predicted 
before the Milosevic-Holbrooke deal. Also Wednesday, a senior U.S. 
humanitarian aid official said he believed international actions had 
prevented thousands of refugees from dying this winter because the 
agreement enabled organizations to rush in clothing, food and other 
supplies. Already, international organization are rushing more aid 
to the refugees now that fighting has stopped. ``The humanitarian 
disaster we all feared has been averted,'' Hugh Parmer, assistant 
administrator for the U.S. Agency for International Development, said 
in Pristina. ``I think we will see no deaths due to isolation or lack 
of food.'' A U.N. refugee agency spokesman said people were returning 
home in many areas, and he expected the numbers to increase. ``People 
can't wait to return because it is getting very cold,'' said the spokesman, 
Fernando del Mundo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>