<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981029.0526 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An Islamic militant rammed an explosives-laden car into an Israeli 
army jeep that was escorting a bus full of elementary school students 
Thursday. The powerful blast killed the attacker and a soldier. The 
anti-Israeli group Hamas claimed responsibility and Israel warned 
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat that he would have to take tough 
steps against the militants if he wanted the new land-for-security 
agreement to proceed as scheduled. Arafat spoke to Israeli Prime Minister 
Benjamin by phone, denounced the attack and promised to track down 
those responsible. The suicide attack also injured three Israelis 
and three Palestinan girls. The 40 Israeli children on the bus, ranging 
in age from six to 14, were unharmed. The 12-week West Bank troop 
pullback is to begin Monday, and Netanyahu is under intense pressure 
from Israeli hard-liners to call off the deal. The terror attack, 
the second this week, makes it increasingly difficult for Netanyahu 
to fend off hard-line criticism. Even before the bombing, Netanyahu 
had accused the Palestinians of not living up to security pledges, 
raising U.S. concerns that implementation of the deal could be delayed. 
Thursday's explosion went off at about 7:30 a.m. (0530 gmt) at the 
Gush Katif Junction in the southern Gaza Strip. At the time, the Israeli 
school bus convoy guarded by two jeeps was passing by. Nine-year-old 
Eran Ayoubi, who was on the bus, said he had just finished his daily 
traveler's prayer and said ``amen'' when he heard a loud boom and 
the windows around him were shattered. His 10-year-old sister Adar 
said she and many of the other children began to cry and were ordered 
by the driver to drop to the floor of the bus for cover. ``There was 
terrible smoke everywhere. I thought I was going to be burned,'' Adar 
said, sitting on her bicycle parked on a sidewalk outside her home 
in the Jewish settlement of Kfar Darom. The Israeli army commander 
in the Gaza Strip, Maj. Gen. Yom Tov Samia, said the officers in the 
lead jeep had noticed the Palestinian car trying to get close to the 
bus and blocked the vehicle, thus taking the brunt of the blast themselves. 
The bomb was so powerful that the jeep flipped over on its side. The 
jeep and the bomber's car, registered to a Palestinian in the nearby 
town of Khan Yunis, were scorched and mangled. Yigal Kirshenzach, 
a Gaza settler, said the jeep was still burning an hour after the 
blast. ``Parts (of bodies) are scattered all over. There is oil, gas, 
blood,'' Kirshenzach told Israel radio. Pieces of black debris were 
scattered over a 50-yard radius. A black, scorched shoe lay in the 
middle of the road. The roof of a nearby farm shack collapsed from 
the force of the explosion and three Palestinian girls were injured, 
their relatives said. Two girls were hospitalized and a third, an 
8-year-old, remained at home with cuts to the back and hand. After 
the attack, the Israeli children were taken to their school in in 
Gush Katif settlement bloc before returning home to Kfar Darom. In 
school, the children talked about their experience. The children spoke 
of the big boom and flames and many asked about their friends on a 
second bus, said Principal Yitzhak Amitai. In a call to Israel radio, 
a man who said he spoke for Hamas read a claim of responsibility. 
``It's a revolution until victory,'' the caller said, suggesting the 
attacks would continue. The spiritual leader of Hamas, Sheik Ahmed 
Yassin, was evasive when asked whether Hamas was responsible. Yassin 
said the group wanted to avoid Palestinian civil war and would not 
react violently to a possible crackdown by the Palestinian Authority. 
The army sealed to Gaza Strip for about five hours in response to 
the attack. Arafat insisted that despite the attack, Israel stick 
to its side of the peace agreement and withdraw from land and release 
Palestinian prisoners. He said the Palestinian Authority would track 
down those involved in plotting the attack and ``try them for deliberately 
harming the Palestinians' national interests.'' Samia, the Israeli 
commander, said the identity of the suicide bomber was known and that 
he was a resident of the nearby Palestinian town of Khan Yunis. Palestinian 
officials, however, said they only had the name of the car's owner, 
a man from Khan Yunis. The man was detained for questioning by Palestinian 
police. Israeli Defense Minister Yitzhak Mordechai said Israel would 
watch the Palestinian Authority's response closely. ``The basis for 
progress in the (peace) process depends first and foremost on intensive 
action against terrorism,'' Mordechai said. ``If this is done, we 
will make progress.'' Implementation of the new peace agreement is 
to begin Monday. Under the accord, Israel is to withdraw from 13 percent 
of the West Bank over 12 weeks in exchange for a Palestinian crackdown 
on Islamic militants. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>