<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981029.1240 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Heavy rains flooded low-lying areas Thursday across western Europe, 
including this historic spa town where elegant tree-lined boulevards 
once strolled by kings and queens were under water. Water was rising 
on the Main river, that empties into the Rhine near Mainz, about 40 
kilometers (25 miles) from Frankfurt. Barge traffic east of Frankfurt 
towards Aschaffenburg was stopped late Thursday with more flooding 
expected downstream. Low-lying streets in the Bavarian towns of Miltenberg 
and Cham were flooded and closed to traffic, police said. Police in 
Stuttgart said late Thursday that witnesses reported a boy fell in 
a swollen stream in Moeckmuehl near Heilbronn and when another jumped 
in to save him both were swept away. Neither of the boys was found 
and the search was called off after dark when no one reported children 
missing, a police spokesman said. ``We hope the witnesses were mistaken.'' 
In Baden-Baden flood alarms sounded just after midnight. By Thursday 
morning, German soldiers were sandbagging the swollen Oos River that 
runs through the center of the luxurious resort, located in the Black 
Forest near the southwest border with France. The train station also 
was flooded. ARD television, reported that 20 Roman Catholic nuns 
from a convent near Baden-Baden also joined in to help sandbag. Harsh 
storms that started late Tuesday killed at least three people _ one 
in Germany, one in the Czech Republic, and one in Switzerland. All 
were involved in vehicle accidents with trees uprooted by wind. Power 
cuts, traffic snarls, and highway closings were reported Thursday 
in Austria and the Netherlands as well as in Germany. A train derailed 
on the Memmingen-Munich route in Bavaria after hitting a herd of cows 
that had wandered onto the tracks. Eight cows were killed and the 
train engineer and a passenger were injured. The cows made their way 
onto the tracks after storms apparently knocked down an electric fence, 
a railway spokesman said. About 500 soldiers and engineers were deployed 
to the Dutch province of Groningnen and Drenthe to shore up dikes 
sodden by rain-swollen canals and rivers, Dutch army spokesman Hans 
Hardenbol said Thursday. The Linz area of upper Austria and some Vienna 
suburbs were flooded, and some Austrian towns were without electricity 
after gusts blew down power lines. In Switzerland, a 28-year-old man 
was killed in the northern Thurgau region when the car he was driving 
hit a tree that had fallen across the road. Boats on Lake Biel in 
the northwest were ripped from their moorings, and police were called 
out to recover them. In northern Germany, residents in the flooded 
town center of Bad Gandersheim fled their homes in rubber dinghies. 
About 1,000 police and firefighters from the nearby city of Braunschweig 
arrived during the night to pump out basements after the Leine River 
swiftly rose about a meter (three feet). Fifteen people were treated 
for hypothermia or shock. The Mosel River, which meets the Rhine in 
southwest Germany, was also rising, and smaller rivers _ the Glan, 
the Nahe and the Sieg _ had flooded into several small towns. Barge 
traffic on some stretches of the Mosel was shut down. Police also 
closed a section of the autobahn outside the town of Pforzheim, east 
of Baden-Baden. Mudslides in the town of Rastatt, destroyed three 
houses, according to the interior ministry in nearby Stuttgart. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>