<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981029.1600.0200 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It promises to be a busy flight for the "discovery" astronauts. Miles 
O'Brien looks at what the crew will be doing. On the brink of his 
fifth flight in orbit, "discovery" commander curt brown is a seasoned 
space traveler who likens rides in the shuttle to camping trips. You 
unpack and set up your camp, and you've found a good fishing hole 
and the fish are biting, and about that time you have to pack up and 
go home. And you're not able to take advantage of all the things that 
you've really got going for you. So much to do, so little time -- 
that's how the "discovery" seven views their mission. Spaniard Pedro 
duque is the Rookie of the group. He's been waiting six years for 
a flight. He will be the first person from his country in space. His 
crewmate chiaki mukai is the first Japanese woman in orbit. More than 
80 experiments will be staged on the decks of "discovery." They run 
the gamut from plant growth to oyster toadfish, to cockroaches in 
outer space. But the crew isn't worried. NASA assures us the roaches 
will float in, but they won't float out. And joining the menagerie, 
a very famous human Guinea pig. John Glenn will participate in studies 
looking at changes in how we sleep, how we balance and how the heart 
reacts to time spent without gravity. We learn some new things, which 
we're trying to do. And that's the purpose of the whole program, is 
to learn new things that benefit people right here. And if I, at this 
stage in my life can have an opportunity to do some of that, then 
I don't look at being a Guinea pig as being bad. I look at being a 
Guinea pig as being very, very good. The crew will also be doing some 
important work outside the shuttle. One of those jobs -- deploying 
the sun-gazing Spartan satellite. Even by NASA standards, this is 
a very busy shuttle mission. We think it's a very unique flight. Of 
course, any flight that you're on you think is the best flight ever 
invented. But we're very excited about this one because it's an integration 
of everything the shuttle was ever designed to do, or had ever been 
envisioned for the use of a space shuttle. No doubt it's the most 
scrutinized mission in a very long time. The crew of "discovery" knows 
no matter how it goes, the whole world will be watching. Miles O'Brien, 
CNN, at the Kennedy space center. Stay tuned to "CNN Headline News" 
for continued coverage of the space shuttle "discovery's" mission, 
and John Glenn's return to space. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>