<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981029.1600.1511 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Actress Sandra Bullock has had big successes at the box office including 
"While you were sleeping" and "speed." Her current film, "practical 
magic", is also off to a good start. But as Ron tank reports, her 
future plans will keep her off the big screen. Sandra Bullock is a 
witch in "practical magic." And true to her character, she's pulling 
a disappearing act from the big screen. I guess you found me out, 
huh? I love so many aspects of the entertainment business behind the 
camera. There's so many things that are rewarding to do, far more 
rewarding than acting to me right now. So, that's why I'm taking a 
year off and just concentrating on that. Bullock is producing two 
independent movies and recently finished writing and directing a short 
film in which she and Matthew McConaughey, her co-star in 1996's "A 
time to kill," play married owners of a sandwich shop. I don't aspire 
to be a writer or director, I did that merely as an education to myself. 
And that was the one story that I had from my whole life, which is 
sad. 30 minutes, that's it, that's all I got. Bullock's real life 
reads like a movie script. After years of small parts in small movies, 
she hit the big time in "Speed," jumped to a million-dollar salary 
in "while you were sleeping," got $6 million for "A time to kill" 
and more than $10 million for "in love and war." She was a star. I 
don't care where things put me. I'm exactly where I want to be. Even 
when, you know, things, you know, films really fail and everyone's, 
you know, I'm out of favor. It's the best thing for me. Are you out 
of -- when were you out of favor? Oh, the minute "speed 2" happened, 
people falling over it. "See, she hasn't had a successful film in 
a year and a half, and so she sucks." That's basically what critics 
said about the film, and it quickly sank at the box office. But the 
great thing about "speed 2" is that it bought "hope floats." Bullock 
only agreed to do the "speed" sequel in exchange for getting "hope 
floats" made. I would really like a job. She wore two hats on the 
film, star and executive producer. I could be in control of it. And 
if I was going to take the blame for something, I'd like to be a part 
of it from the beginning. She likes to keep her private life private. 
And while some reports had her romantically linked to McConaughey 
-- so, there's nobody there right now? no. aw. No, it's okay. Is that 
good. I like it, yeah. It's good. Gives you time? It gives me time. 
And also, it's also not time for it. You know, I've been really lucky 
in love, I've been really blessed in that department. And I wouldn't 
change anything for the world. And right now, you know, it's a different 
time. You know, and when I'm ready, it'll be there. In the meantime, 
there's "practical magic." It's already made more than $25 million 
in less than two weeks. Maybe it takes a witch's magic to make people 
forget about "speed 2." Ron tank, "CNN Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>