<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981029.2100.0983 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After 11 years, it's the president repeatedly gave "false and misleading" 
statements in his August grand jury testimony; lied under oath about 
whether he lied under oath in the Paula Jones testimony; lied before 
the grand jury about whether his contact with Monica Lewinsky were 
"sexual relations" as outlined at the Jones deposition. I believed 
I had to answer the questions truthfully. That is correct. Artcile 
II: obstruction of justice. The president obstructed justice by trying 
to influence testimony by his personal secretary, Betty Currie; obstructed 
justice by using his close friend Vernon Jordan to find a job for 
Monica Lewinsky; obstructed justice by lying to his aides about Monica 
Lewinsky and their relationship. I said things that were true. They 
may have been misleading, and if they were, I have to take responsibility 
for it, and I'm sorry. Judiciary committee sources tell CNN the managers 
will use charts the question is whether we should call him. That hasn't 
been resolved. Judiciary committee staff lawyers did contact attorneys 
for Monica Lewinsky seeking an interview. They were turned down. Two 
house managers met with Kathleen Willey and her attorney Monday. They 
discussed alleged efforts by the president's supporters to suppress 
her claim President Clinton fondled her in a room off the oval office. 
Even in their pretrial set of arguments the house managers made a 
last plea saying the various issues of the trial are quote best resolved 
by live testimony subject to cross-examination. Now as for the order 
of business today. It will begin as we just reported with Henry Hyde, 
the Judiciary committee chairman. He is going to set the stage. We're 
told. And followed by Jim Sensenbrenner the senior member of the committee 
under hyde. He will give an overview and defer to representative Ed 
Bryant of Tennessee who will start the arguments. The factual arguments 
on the articles of impeachment. Arguments take us through the remainder 
of the day. Bryant is followed by Asa Hutchinson a former U.S. attorney 
it continue to talk about the U.S. statutes and representative James 
Rogan will conclude the day about presentations of the case. The fact 
of the argument continue tomorrow before thereby other presentations 
from house managers about the applicable law here, and whether or 
not these really rise to the level of offenses that should remove 
the president of the United States from office. All of this will take 
us probably into Saturday. We'll be back. Bob Franken thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>