<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981029.2100.1348 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of the senators sitting in judgment of the president is related 
to Mr. clinton by marriage, her daughter is married to Hillary Rodham 
Clinton's brother: California democratic senator Barbara boxer joins 
us from Capitol Hill. Senator, thanks for spending a few moments with 
us. Sure. Let me ask first about the caucus and the whole issue that 
Pat Leahy was raising, the question about the republicans gathering 
and talking about witnesses. They say no way, not about anything that 
breaks this agreement. And it's nothing to be worried about? Well, 
you know beauty is in the eye of the beholder. We thought it was a 
beautiful thing when the republicans and democrats came together and 
said let's set aside our differences on witnesses and let's just move 
forward with this trial. After a certain number of hours at that point 
we'll take up the subject of witnesses and we find out indeed there 
are meetings going on with the house managers and republican senators 
on the subject of witnesses, we find out that, in fact, the house 
managers have been trying to contact Monica lewinsky, Kathleen Willey, 
others, even before we have had a chance to debate the issue, to dismiss 
this whole thing, or on the contrary, move forward with witnesses. 
So there's great sadness in the democratic caucus today. We -- we 
were so happy that we had reached that bipartisan consensus, and now 
we think that's all broken apart. Senator, with respect one may wonder 
whether you protesteth too much. For all the talk of bipartisanship 
we pointed out your relationship to the president by marriage and 
other ways. Very few people are going into this without their minds 
made up. That begs the question. The fact is my daughter is married 
to Hillary's brother. If she was married to Ken Starr's wife's brother 
I'd still be doing impartial justice. Asa Hutchinson's brother whose 
brother is going to be one of the house managers. We agreed to this 
plan. It was in writing. That we would not, in fact, get to the issue 
of witnesses until after the first three phase of this trial. That 
has been broken, it has nothing to do with who comes in liking the 
president. Who comes in disliking the president. It's an abrogation 
of agreement. And I'm very sad about it. Senator, I want to bring 
Jeff Greenfield, CNN senior analyst into this and welcome him to our 
special coverage. Frank. Hi senator. Let's pursue this not with the 
ties of marriage but others. Last fall months after the story broke 
after the Starr report was released the first family came to California 
more than once. You were on a platform they raised millions of dollars 
in successful reelection campaign. If you had thought there was a 
chance the president should be removed for high crimes and misdemeanors, 
I can't imagine you would be standing on platform. Doesn't it strain 
credulity that you folks go into this thing with anything like an 
open mind. Here's the point that you have to make, that I want to 
make. You can accept or reject. The founders decided the Senate should 
have the sole power to try and impeach him. They rejected the idea 
that this go to the Supreme Court, they wanted it to be political, 
after all, if we vote to remove this president, it is overturning 
an election. So although some would say we're jurors. If you read 
the 87-page handbook that describes the 26 rules of the Senate, they 
never refer to us as jurors. There isn't one person in the United 
States Senate that doesn't know this president, doesn't have an opinion 
of this president, many have gone out socially with this president. 
Gone out socially with Ken Starr. That is aside. When we do our work. 
So you are right. If this was a regular court of law, you wouldn't 
have any of us sitting in such a jury. It is not -- the founders made 
it essentially a political decision, and therefore, we will, in fact, 
look at evidence. We will, in fact, listen. It wouldn't matter to 
me who the president was. If that president used the power of his 
or her office against the people of the United States of America, 
I would vote to say that meets the level of high crimes and misdemeanors. 
That's what this trial is all about. Senator boxer we thank you for 
your time. We'll be listening right along with you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>