<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981029.2100.0044 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John Glenn is 350 miles high tonight, back in space after a beautiful 
launch, seeing the world in a way few people have. A sight he first 
took in as a much younger man. Tonight he is sending in these pictures 
from a so far successful mission in space. Good Thursday evening to 
you. There were a few glitches today. A few airplanes strayed too 
close to the launch pad. Like an old car with a lot of miles on it, 
a compartment door fell off this shuttle on takeoff, but nothing serious. 
Today there was nothing stopping John Glenn and his six fellow fliers 
O enroute to the familiar deep blue of the upper atmosphere. The liftoff 
lit up an already-brilliant Florida afternoon the shuttle discovery 
generated a smoke trail. At the top was John Glenn. Back in space 
tonight after a 36-year retirement. 6:28 A.M. the shuttle waits majestic 
in the first light of day. :36, the crew after a late call for brerving, 
seeing for the first time smiles all around. Glenn with the Japanese 
naust chiaki mukai. Next we 10:15 suiting up with thumbs two, astronaut 
up. A wave from Dr. makingis third flight today. Parysinzky, a me 
he S on the flifmente Glenn calls him Egor because he's in charge 
of drawing blood samples. The crew emerge us. A Van brings them to 
the launch pad, a helicopter following for security. 11:00 A.M., all 
aboard. Commanter Curt brown in place on the flight deck. John,stwo 
com check. The others. Radio checks, too. Welcome aboard, John dwhren. 
An emotional radio message from the astronaut who first wished Glenn 
well on the radio 36 years ago, Scott Carpenter. At this point in 
the count, it seems appropriate to say to the shuttle discovery crew, 
good luck, have a safe flight, and to say once again, "Godspeed, John 
Glenn". 1:57 P.M., final checks. Everything looks great. go. Boosters 
are go. The team is go. Your vehicle is ready. The weather is beautiful 
out there. On behalf of the entire launch team, you and the crew discovery 
have a Great mission. Then suddenly. We have unidentified aircraft. 
Private pilots jockeying for position to watch accidentally violates 
NASA's no-fly zone, countdown clock stopped. The commander is annoyed. 
Liftoff of scoferer discovery with a crew of six astronaut heroes 
and one american legend. Tonight hours after launch the shuttle sends 
back pictures, experiments opening in the bay, and stunning pictures 
of earth as John Glenn calls. Houston, this is ps-2. They let me out 
of the mid deck. We're going by Hawaii. That is Gorgeous. John has 
a smile on his face. We haven't been able to move it yet. Great news 
since the first part is supposed to be the most stressful. Tomorrow 
is workday experiments geared up what the flight is all about, but 
tonight John Glenn seems euphoric. Robert Hager, at cape Canaveral. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>