<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981029.2100.2248 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jeanne? Henry Hyde will open the house's case today as the Senate 
resumes the trial of the president. Here's a look at the Judiciary 
committee chairman and how this impeachment inquiry has impacted him. 
Henry Hyde, once a lanky guard on the Georgetown University basketball 
team -- That William Jefferson Clinton, president of the United States, 
is impeached -- Now the lumbering captain of the house managers' prosecution 
of President Clinton. He is an old-style republican conservative, 
someone not uncomfortable working with democrats, finding common cause 
with politicians who might make odd ideological bedfellows Now the 
consequences colonel north -- In 1987, during a congressional investigation, 
Hyde defended the Reagan administration's sale of weapons to Iran 
to finance the nicaraguan contras by quoting Thomas Jefferson. A strict 
observance of the written laws is a doubtless one of the high duties 
of a good citizen, but it is not the highest. Critics contrast Hyde's 
stance then with his stance now, towards Bill clinton. If the president 
breaks the law by perjury and obstructs justice by willfully corrupting 
the legal system, that president must be removed from office. We cannot 
have one law for the ruler and another law for the ruled. Hyde has 
also been skewered in some quarters for how he chaired the judiciary 
committee impeachment hearings. You are disrupting the continuity 
of this meeting with these adversarial motions. Disrupting a railroad 
it seems like, Mr. Chairman. He hasn't lived up to his own high standards, 
but I think he still is a man of high standards. You know, when you 
get into something like an impeachment, it is an awful crucible, and 
it can distort, and I think it has distorted him. In the midst of 
the investigation of the president's sexual misconduct, hyde was forced 
to admit an extramarital affair of his own when it was reported by 
"salon," an on-line magazine. But it did not shake his conviction 
that the president must answer the charges against him. I think he 
is simply looking to do what he believes is right and what a Majority 
of the House of Representatives is right. Hyde has sometimes used 
his trademark wit to talk about his part in this impeachment drama. 
It is terribly onerous duty. I would trade it for a Hershey bar any 
day of the week. But as he prepared his opening statement for Thursday's 
proceedings, Hyde struck a different Tone. I don't have any jitters. 
I'm anxious. One has to not be cavalier about such a solemn event. 
Henry Hyde will make that opening statement just about a half an hour 
from now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>