<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981029.2100.1605 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kansas senator Sam Brownback worries about impartiality but seen democrats 
and republicans come together as 100 senators are transformed into 
100 jurors. In list what we heard from senator boxer and Leahy it 
sounds like bipartisanship is disintegrating in the house managers 
over witnesses. I hope it isn't disintegrating. There have been concerned 
have the republican side that the republican senators meeting with 
the White House and plotting strategy there. Those are concerns back 
and forth but we simply have to rise above that and have a bipartisan 
trial, but everybody deems is fair. This has to come across and has 
to be fair, and I'm committed and I think everyone on our side. I 
think everyone in the Senate is committed to have this be fair, be 
nonpartisan if at all possible. Do you think it was appropriate for 
the republican senators to meet with the house managers? I question 
it just for the appearance sake. I question whether it's appropriate 
for democrat members to meet with the White House on impeachment issues 
at this point in time. I think we would all be better off to sequester 
ourselves at this point in time. And once the trial starts I think 
we'd be better off not to talk about the facts of the case. Henry 
Hyde raised the issue of President Clinton testifying. Do you think 
he should? I'm going to wait until we see the case presented by both 
the house and the White House. Let's see what comes forth at that 
point in time and whether or not it would be useful to have the president 
testify. It may be at that point in time. I want to have an open mind 
into that period of time. Let's hear what the house says, let's hear 
what the White House says. Let's look at the key facts in contention 
and determine whether or not we need witnesses and whether or not 
we need the president to testify. Senator, it's Jeff Greenfield. How 
are you doing? Good! Not in terms of how you feel about the evidence. 
In terms of standards, is it your notion that the only, the only way 
you could vote to remove the president is if the two specific articles 
were proved; that is if something else arose you became convinced 
the president jeopardized national security with this affair with 
someone he barely knew. That could tip a vote or simply on obstruction 
of justice? My personal view of this. These are points if they come 
up I'm going to do research myself. My personal view is the president 
is charged with these two counts, these two articles. The evidence 
will have to be presented based upon these two charges if it is extraneous 
something the president cannot prepare a defense for. Given time to. 
That people up. At this point in time the president as accused needs 
to know what he's accused of. That's one of his constitutional rights. 
Senator, I'm curious how you prepared for today's events. I said a 
prayer this morning, for the country and the president and wisdom 
and truth to come forward. I've been reading a lot, reading the president's 
filings, reading what's am caning from the house. I have not gotten 
everything read there is a voluminous amount of material. I hope through 
this trial we can get to a finality of this chapter and begin reconciliation 
of the American people, because our people are divided hopefully this 
trial can bring finality to the chapter and start reconciliation. 
Senator Sam Brownback from Kansas. Thank you for joining us from Capitol 
Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>