<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981029.2100.2601 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> MISCELLANEOUS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When we come back, W Every day, ten children are killed by gunfire. 
It's time we said enough is enough. Find out what you can do. Call 
1-800-we-prevent. Not one more lost life. Not one more grieving family. 
We're all different. We have one thing in common. The first time we 
were offered marijuana, we said what was on our mind. I'm a music 
major. It's tough. I mean, you go away from home, and I really wanted 
to do well. So what I really needed... was a big-screen notebook with 
dvd. But I couldn't find the right one. My roommate told me that I 
could get Dell on the Internet. Dell built a notebook just for me. 
I got right online and found answers... to a million questions at 
some pretty weird hours. They're making me look way too smart. Be 
direct. Dell. Dell computers use Intel Pentium II processors. captioning 
made possible by the u.s. department of education and cnn captioning 
Performed By media captioning services Carlsbad, California 25 minutes 
away from the beginning of the proceeding to Senate floor. Taste of 
things to come, excerpts reply to the president's memo from the republican, 
complete an impartial review of the evidence reveals the president 
did commit perjury before the grand jury, he obstructed justice, no 
apologies. Look at some of the issues involved with Greta Van Susteren 
and roger C A quick thank you to my guests, Dennis Shea, Marianne 
fogelson, Peter Fenn and Richard goodstein. Coming up next, "the big 
show with Keith olbermann." now, is decent political discourse alive 
or dead? And does anybody care? As soon as I have Sam and Helen's 
attention I'll make announcements. Yes, both kinds of politics, mud 
and slinging. On the local level in New York. Gentlemen, gentlemen, 
this is getting out of hand. On the local and national level in California. 
Liar, liar, pants on fire! Liar, liar, pants on fire! On the national 
level, Carville versus Starr. Spend $57 million on a nickel-and-dime 
sex investigation. Even on the journalistic level, "the Wall Street 
Journal" runs quotes from "the New York post" on ambrose Evans pritchard. 
What's it going to take to restore civility? Somebody will win the 
nobel prize as a result. I can't sit here and say I have never been 
interested in winning the nobel prize. At least he admits to it in 
his heart. We're next. keith: i'd like to apologize to everyone in 
the world for that last clip. Hello, good evening and welcome. Eight 
days to the elections. We are reminded why the second syllable of 
the word is campaign. First, Alfonse D'Amato in New York in front 
of Jewish leaders calling Chuck schumer a quote putzhead. Then Alfonse 
D'Amato denying he said it. Then the senator admitting to it saying 
it was a colloquialism, meaning nothing but foolish. Then the two 
on TV brawling to such a degree that the moderator, gabe pressman, 
had to intervene by saying, all right, all right, this is getting 
out of hand. Finally, in what describes the state of American politics 
at the moment, it was another reporter asking candidate Schumer if 
he had ever used the word putzhead. Against that background, here 
are the headlines on day 279 of the clinton-Dave lewallen investigations. 
We take you first to 1600 Pennsylvania avenue, a stately residents 
and lovely picture for its chief executive where President Clinton 
today -- For all intents and purposes has the day off. Which wasn't 
to say there wasn't official work going on, along with his security 
briefings, Mr. Clinton signed five bills that ranged from. The mahatma 
Gandhi memorial act to the H.R. 2886, the Granite watershed enhancement 
and protection act. I love that Granite watershed enhancement and 
protection act. They're great live. Anything else, Joe Lockhart. Given 
we're a week from election day, I expect him to be on the phone making 
some calls on that front. This after a successful weekend's fundraising 
trip to California which saw the president raise more than $2 million 
for democratic candidates such as Barbara boxer who is in a tough 
re-election fight with the rub rub Matt fong. In San Francisco, 100 
anti-Clinton pro fong demonstrators turned out to serenade the president 
with. Liar, liar, pants on fire! Liar, liar, pants on fire? Not exactly 
MA, MA, where's my pa? Then the political invective has declined since 
Cleveland's salad days. So has the impact of the Clinton-Lewinsky 
scandal. The paper's poll showing 45% of those most likely to vote 
there are democrats, compared to 38% who are republicans. An extraordinary 
turn around from a month ago. The same poll said 65% of the likely 
voters belong to the G.O.P. with all this good news, why is the president 
planning just a few campaign events this week and almost none of them 
in public a frayed of running into more demonstrators, Joe? As we 
said many times, we think the president has worked tirelessly for 
democrats who are out this season. He -- most important, is pursuing 
policies that we share as democrats and bng successful in pursuing 
those policies. An example of the best politics is good policy. a 
good example of what was, of that, rather was last Friday's signing 
of the latest peace accord between Israelis and Palestinians at the 
White House. After the signing, the president told a group of religious 
leaders his work on at cord served another purpose as part of his 
personal journey of atonement. Exactly what did he mean by that, Joe? 
The way these things connect up, in the aftermath of all this, he 
-- he decided that he would not lose the opportunity to make the extraordinary 
efforts, whether it be with his family or whether it be with his job. 
And that is -- that is what we meant by what he said. Does the president's 
work at the bargaining table mean he really is a successful leader 
as the White House has claimed for Lo these many months. New Jersey's 
governor, Christine Whitman would asked on meet the press, and answered? 
No, I think he has let the American people down. Something, he's had 
significant damage on the office of the presidency. The elections 
aren't going to be decided on this if that's what we're talking about. 
A arent leap they're not going to be decided by the work of the house 
Judiciary committee which will take up impeachment inquiry with a 
History of impeachment, does that satisfy White House demands for 
setting impeachment standards first? We can always be surprised. From 
what we know about the way it's structured it appears it may fall 
short of what we were hoping for and expecting. At least attack dog 
James Carville has met our expectations of him with the horse he rode 
in on, the people versus Kenneth Starr. On the "today show" Mr. Carville 
offered first lady Hillary Clinton, a Possible 51st birthday present. 
It is is her birthday today. These words for her husband's antagonist. 
I don't wish him any personal ill, but professional ill he can have. 
I think the man is bad for the country. I think he was out to get 
the president. Spent $57 million on a nickel-and-dime sex investigation. 
You may have paid a lot more than you should have for this muffler. 
It was $40 million. Political prices go up before the election. For 
the latest on the day's nondevelops. Let's go to the White House, 
NBC's David Bloom. What is this? The president took the day off is 
the place closed behind you? For all intents and purposes. The president 
is celebrating proudly tonight the 51st birthday of the first lady. 
Frankly, he's not doing a whole lot in the way of campaigning in the 
week leading up to the elections. He goes on Thursday down to Florida. 
Ostensibly for -- to watch John Glenn and the discovery astronauts 
lift off into space. But, also, importantly, to raise money on Thursday 
night in south Florida for long shot democratic gubernatorial candidate 
buddy Kay, then travels to New York to try to help Chuck Schumer beat 
out Alfonse D'Amato in the senate race up there. Why would he want, 
David, to tie himself in on that race which is the -- the mud is as 
high as the twin towers of the world trade center and rising. Why 
he getting involved in that of all of them? There are two obvious 
answers. Number one, there is no republican who this White House and 
democrat Ts at large would more like to knock off than Alfonse D'Amato. 
Number two, New York is, obviously, the most democratic of the large 
states. It voted 60% for Clinton in 1996. Only the state of Massachusetts, 
at 61%, had a higher Clinton vote. So if he was going to be involved 
in any race, that would be the one because it's one state where he 
retains a great deal of popularity. On the international front, David, 
the old line from the movie, it seems quiet, too quiet, perhaps. Is 
there White House reaction to the impending NATO deadline in Kosovo 
that, if the Serbs have not complied with the agreement by tomorrow, 
are we expecting some sort of action? No, we're not. The White House 
line today from Joe Lockhart, the state department line, obviously 
a coordinated line is there is a lot of dust in the air. It hasn't 
settled yet. They've won't know until tomorrow what NATO will do. 
The fact of the matter is NAto is not going to do anything in the 
short run barring some sort of massacre over there. Slovodan Milosevic 
has apparently done enough in the way of moving forces around, if 
not out of Kosovo to satisfy the diminished expectations on the part 
of the west. And at this juncture it appears that Milosevic is doing 
just enough to avoid military strikes, but perhaps not enough to solve 
the complicated human rights' situation over there. Clearly not enough 
with winter approaching and the literally hundreds of thousands of 
people who are still at risk. NBC's White House correspondent David 
Bloom joining us this evening. As always, sir, we thank you. We bid 
you good night. Take care, Keith. Up next, the New York senatorial 
race. One of the closest and most important, heats up if such a thing 
is possible, still. The thing that launched this weekend's debate, 
Alfonse D'Amato calling Mr. schumer a putzhead. Why are we talk about 
this rather than the issues? We'll ask that question of the former 
mayor of New York City, Mr. Ed Koch who joins us next. Joining me 
now, the man three times elected mayor of New York City and is the 
judge for the revised television edition of the people's court. Mr. 
Ed Koch. Welcome back to the program. Thank you. The state Senate 
race in New York is obviously hotly contested, obviously watched closely 
and many think there is a lot of national implications to it. There 
has been a Tone that was evidenced in Sunday's debate between Alfonse 
d'Amato and representative Schumer. Do we know anything about the 
outcome of the race based on the nature of the conversation? You have 
to understand that I am prejudiced here because I'm a supporter of 
alfonse D'Amato. The reason I'm crossing party lines, I'm a democrat, 
I have supported thousands of democrats and maybe half a dozen republicans, 
the reason I'm supporting Al Alfonse D'Amato is that he's the most 
effective senator that the city and state of New York has ever had 
in terms of protecting the city and the state. And I believe that 
while the race is close, that Chuck Schumer believes he's going to 
be defeated. So he's reaching and -- I was at this meeting where the 
senator referred to chuck Schumer as a putzhead. They have to understand 
that putz is a yiddish expression widely used by the Irish, Italians, 
blacks, Hispanics in New York City and other big cities, what it means 
is jerk, fool, dork. The quality that has been added to this, of course, 
is the media seizing on anything and trying to make it into an iue 
larger than the issues themselves. Let me play a minute from this 
debate yesterd 
</TEXT>
</DOC>