<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981029.1830.0058 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. John Glenn's idea of life support is to be wired into 
the space shuttle "Discovery" and rocket around the earth at thousands 
of miles an hour. And that's just where he is tonight, successfully 
in orbit, with six other astronauts, after a launch here today that 
had a couple of minor hitches, but nothing that should keep this from 
being a full mission. The liftoff was delayed for about 20 minutes, 
but then it lit up the sunny florida skies. One, booster ignition 
and liftoff of "discovery" with six astronaut heroes and one American 
legend. Glen, the oldest astronaut at 77, does travel tonight with 
an experienced crew. Scs 95 is commanded by colonel Kirk brown. "Discovery" 
is piloted by 38-year-old Steve Lindsey. Lindsey's flight engineer 
is Dr. Scott parazynski. He's also the chief doctor on board. The 
37-year-old will keep close watch on Glenn's health. Stephen Robinson, 
the payload commander, age 43. He will oversee all the mission's experiments. 
And two foreign-born astronauts -- from Japan, 46-year-old Dr. chiaki 
mukai, and from Spain, Pedro duque, 35. With President Clinton, fellow 
senators, his wife, annie, and family looking on, senator Glenn and 
the "discovery" crew rode into history. And NBC's Robert Hager was 
here for the takeoff. Tom, the shuttle is 350 miles up there now. 
John Glenn has sent back word that he is feeling fine and awed by 
the view. His commander reports that Glen has been smiling all the 
way. Here is the way it unfolded on this historic gay day. 6:28 A.M. 
-- the shuttle waits majestical in the mist and first light of day. 
:36 -- the crew, after a late call for breakfast, seen, for the first 
time, posing around the breakfast station, smiles all around. Glenn, 
with the Japanese astronaut, chiaki mukai. 10:15 -- suiting up. Thumbs 
up from the commander, Curt brown. A wave from Dr. Scott parazynski, 
medical officer on the flight. Glenn calls him "Igor" because he's 
in charge of drawing blood samples on the flight. At 10:45, the crew 
emerges. A Van brings them to the launch pad. Helicopter, following 
for security. 11:00 A.M. -- all aboard. Commander, Curt brown, in 
place on the flight deck now. John Glenn, preparing to join the others. 
Radio checks, too. Welcome aboard, John Glenn. And an emotional radio 
message from the astronaut who first wished Glenn well on the radio 
36 years ago, Scott Carpenter. At this point in the count, it seems 
appropriate to say to the shuttle "Discovery" crew -- good luck, have 
a safe flight, and to say once again, godspeed, John Glenn." 1:57 
P.M. -- closeout. Everything looks great. Boosters are go. it is go. 
The vehicle is ready. The weather is beautiful out there. On behalf 
of the entire launch team, you and the crew have a great mission. 
Then suddenly -- We have unidentified aircraft in the box. Private 
pilots jockeying for a position to watch, accidentally violating NASA's 
no-fly zone. Commander brown, annoyed at the delay. But then, the 
count resumes. Liftoff! Lift offof "discovery." Tonight, the shuttle 
sending back pictures and stunning pictures of earth as John Glenn 
calls. Hello, Houston, this is the shuttle calling. This that is absolutely 
Gorgeous. Commander brown. John has a smile on his face and it gros 
from one end to the other. Tomorrow is a workday. Experiments geared 
up. Tonight John Glenn seems euphoric and the rest of the crew as 
well. Thanks very much. Robert Hager at the Kennedy space center. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>