<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981029.1830.0973 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight -- John Glenn's launch into the history 
books, and the view of it all from his hometown of new Concord, Ohio. 
Ohio is, in fact, known as the birthplace of aviation. The Wright 
brothers were from there. Ohio has also produced more astronauts than 
any other state, 23, including senator Glenn and Neil Armstrong. Today, 
new Concord, right in the middle of the state, was in the middle of 
all the excitement. The world watching them as they watched their 
hometown hero fly skyward again. Our "in depth" report from NBC's 
Jim Avila. The quiet streets of new Concord, Ohio, erupt, as 1,000 
middle americans, many too young to remember John Glenn's first flight, 
watch their native son blast off. A hometown's thoughts on prayer 
and space. Three, two, one. One of the first lessons here -- American 
heroes. Mrs. McKendry's kindergarten class, homemade space suits on, 
action figures ready for launch. This is John Glenn in his suit. John 
Glenn in his own clothes. Glenn's tiny hometown, 75 miles east of 
Columbus, a college town, home of the fighting muskies. Glenn played 
here, went to school here, married here. And since his days as a combat 
pilot, revered here. Godspeed John Glenn. Pride? Do I have pride? 
You bet I do. At 94, Ellis duitsch, John Glenn's only surviving high 
school teacher. The science student he remembers was not a standout, 
but the most determined, ambitious boy ever to sit in his class -- 
a quality he says launched him into space twice. He's not doing that 
for glory. He has enough glory without doing that. John Glenn still 
owns his boyhood home, comes back once a year. His parents passed 
away. The house is rented now. But it was here, on friendship street 
-- named after Glenn's "Mercury" capsule -- that, as a grade schooler, 
he first though about flight. Lloyd white, boyhood friend and best 
man at the glenns' wedding, remembers making model airplanes, hundreds 
of them, in 8-year-old Johnny glenn's basement. We didn't even know 
what an astronaut was. But he did know that Glenn would end up doing 
something inspiring. His high school yearbook photo, a list of clubs 
and teams, longer than any of his classmates. John and annie Glenn 
grew up in a community that expected you to pull your weight, to do 
your job. Heroes often come from small towns. Charles Lindbergh, a 
farm in Minnesota. The Wright brothers from southern Ohio. Historian 
Stephen ambrose says Glenn has the small town spirit of breakout adventure. 
He dreamed big dreams, and he got out of that small town and he lived 
those big dreams. In fact, today, the only mystery in the home town 
that launched a National hero is, what will John Glenn dream next? 
Jim Avila, NBC news, new Concord, Ohio. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>