<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0492 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Edward J. Halloran, whose business empire collapsed after he was accused 
of working with the Mafia to fix concrete prices on multimillion-dollar 
projects in Manhattan, vanished two months ago while on a visit to 
the city, the authorities disclosed Thursday. Halloran's relatives 
and friends said they doubted that the disappearance was linked to 
his racketeering conviction in 1987 or to his former ties to mob leaders 
in the Genovese crime family. They said that he had not been heard 
from since late August, when he said he planned to drive from Manhattan 
to his current home in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. But state and federal 
investigators said they were looking into the possibility that the 
mystery of his whereabouts is related to organized crime. An investigator, 
who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said that city and federal 
agencies believe that Halloran, 57, may have quarreled with a reputed 
mobster in New York shortly before he dropped out of sight. ``It is 
an active investigation, and we are following up on several leads,'' 
said Lt. Sean Crowley, a spokesman for the New York City Police Department. 
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, as the owner of the Halloran House 
Hotel on Lexington Avenue and 49th Street and as the operator of Manhattan's 
only two concrete plants, Halloran was a rising star in New York's 
business world. Called Biff by his friends, he cut a dashing figure, 
and was celebrated as a party giver and as a lavish spender. ``Before 
his legal troubles exploded, Biff led an elegant lifestyle,'' said 
a lawyer who represented Halloran and spoke on the condition that 
he not be identified. ``In those days, the cream of cafe society was 
at his feet.'' Under a barrage of criminal indictments, his business 
ventures crumbled into bankruptcy in the mid-1980s. The state attorney 
general's office also filed an antitrust suit, charging that Halloran 
had organized a monopoly to inflate concrete prices through his two 
companies, the Certified Concrete Co. and the Transit Mix Co. Together, 
the companies generated more than $300 million a year in sales. In 
1986, Halloran was sentenced to six months in prison on Rikers Island 
on state charges involving a check-kiting scheme. A year later, along 
with two major figures in the Genovese crime family, Anthony Salerno 
and Matthew Ianniello, he was convicted on federal racketeering, bid-rigging 
and extortion accusations and sentenced to 13 years in prison. ``Biff 
Halloran, ladies and gentlemen, the government submits, was a full 
associate of the Genovese family,'' Mark Hellerer, a federal prosecutor 
said in his summation at Halloran's trial. After serving four years 
in prison, Halloran was released in 1991 during an appeal for a new 
trial. In a plea-bargaining deal, Halloran dropped his appeal, pleaded 
guilty to reduced racketeering charges and was sentenced to the time 
he had already served. Before his conviction, Halloran lived in Pelham 
Manor in Westchester County with his first wife, Carol, and their 
two children, Holly and Eric. After his release, he moved to Fort 
Lauderdale with his second wife, Michele. According to court records 
in Broward County, Fla., the Internal Revenue Service, since 1995, 
has filed tax liens totaling more than $14 million against Halloran 
for income tax arrears. Halloran's relatives declined to say what 
his business interests were in recent years. Halloran's brother, Richard 
Halloran, said in a telephone interview that he had reported the disappearance 
to the FBI and to the state police, who then alerted the city's Police 
Department. ``We were concerned that he might have been in an accident 
driving back to Florida,'' Richard Halloran, a construction company 
executive in Balacynwyd, Pa., near Philadelphia, said in a telephone 
interview. A friend of the Halloran family, who spoke on the condition 
of anonymity, said that Edward Halloran's daughter, Holly, who lives 
on the East Side of Manhattan, is believed to have been the last known 
person to speak to him or see him in late August. Ms. Halloran declined 
to be interviewed. ``Regardless of his problems, he is not the type 
to fall off the radar screen,'' the friend said of Halloran. ``It 
is totally uncharacteristic of him.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>