<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0480 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is just below the U.S. Senate race in its intensity, bursting with 
bitter invective and sharply contrasting political views, but the 
campaign to become New York state attorney general is being fought 
by two men almost unknown to the public. One of them, Dennis Vacco, 
a Republican, has been attorney general for the last four years, but 
a poll released this week by The New York Times showed that 73 percent 
of likely voters questioned had no opinion of him or his work. That 
is only slightly less than the 79 percent of voters with no opinion 
of his Democratic challenger, Eliot Spitzer, who has never held elective 
office, though the poll showed that Vacco was comfortably ahead of 
his rival. Given the public's indifference to the race, and its general 
lack of knowledge of the duties of the office, the two candidates 
have spent more time attacking each other than outlining a broad vision 
of the next four years. Both have seized on gaffes and misstatements 
made by the other, including accusations that Vacco made a racial 
slur against Hispanic people and that Spitzer has not been forthcoming 
about the source of his campaign funds. But, in fact, there are substantial 
differences in the outlooks of the two men, beginning with their definition 
of the attorney general's job. Four years ago, Vacco was swept into 
office on a tide of upstate support for Gov. George Pataki, having 
run on a platform of fighting crime more vigorously while cutting 
back prosecution of corporate fraud and pollution. It was an unusual 
approach, given that the office has traditionally handled non-criminal 
litigation for the state, leaving most criminal cases to district 
attorneys. Vacco, 46, spent his first two years in office increasing 
criminal prosecutions, championing the death penalty and hunting down 
sex offenders and Internet pedophiles. At the same time, he dismissed 
many experienced staff members who had enforced environmental, consumer 
and abortion-clinic laws, replacing them with political appointees 
and campaign workers. The widespread turnover produced several legal 
errors that drew reprimands from several judges who questioned the 
competence of the office. It is those non-criminal issues that lead 
the agenda of Spitzer, 39, a former state prosecutor in Manhattan 
who helped start a public-interest law firm in 1992. Two years later, 
he lost the Democratic primary for the right to challenge Vacco. Spitzer, 
who has admitted making misleading statements about how much of his 
father's fortune is paying for his campaign, has accused Vacco of 
eviscerating the traditional focus of the office in deference to corporate 
contributions, and has promised to return to a pro-consumer orientation 
championed by former Attorneys General Louis Lefkowitz and Robert 
Abrams. As if anticipating each other's campaign platforms, each candidate 
has moved closer to the other in the last year or so, setting aside 
party dogma in favor of middle-of-the-road positions intended to appeal 
to an increasingly moderate electorate. Vacco has taken on more consumer 
cases and large corporations like Microsoft, and his literature now 
says that under his leadership, ``the attorney general's office's 
traditional roles as a consumer and environmental protector have greatly 
expanded.'' At the same time, Spitzer is stressing his support for 
the death penalty and his work prosecuting white-collar criminals. 
But to the extent that voters have become aware of the campaign, it 
is through the candidates' attack advertisements, and those have centered 
on two issues: Whether Vacco has allowed patronage and cronyism to 
dictate his choice of staff members and legal targets, and whether 
Spitzer has been misleading in disclosing the source of his campaign 
funds. There appears to be some truth in each candidate's charges, 
but there remain many other issues that divide the two men, who come 
from very different backgrounds. Vacco grew up on a grape and vegetable 
farm in a small town south of Buffalo, where he worked the fields 
as early as age 11. He got his professional start as a prosecutor 
in 1978 with the Erie County district attorney's office after graduating 
from the University of Buffalo Law School, and went on to become the 
U.S. attorney for western New York at the relatively young age of 
36. He secured the job in large part through the intervention of his 
political patron, U.S. Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, who eventually engineered 
his candidacy for attorney general in 1994. Shortly after taking office 
in January 1995, Vacco was widely criticized for attempting to rescind 
a 15-year policy of protecting homosexuals from job discrimination 
in his agency, something he now says he regrets. That move came in 
the wake of a bitterly fought election campaign in which Vacco and 
his allies questioned the fitness for office of his opponent, Karen 
Burstein, because she was a lesbian. A more lasting criticism arose 
when Vacco was accused of compromising the office's long tradition 
of nonpartisan professionalism by firing dozens of experienced lawyers 
hired by his Democratic predecessors and replacing them with younger, 
inexperienced lawyers with ties to the Republican and Conservative 
Parties. Within a year of his taking office, 128 of the 450 lawyers 
on his staff had been dismissed, and 91 more had left voluntarily. 
Dozens of the positions were filled with new hires who were related 
to or had close ties to Republican leaders or campaign contributors. 
Vacco originally said his staff members were hired on their merits, 
but after a series of lawsuits produced evidence showing that many 
resumes were marked as friends of prominent Republicans or campaign 
workers, he acknowledged in 1996 that political considerations did 
play a role in many of his appointments. He said it was appropriate 
to hire people who agreed with his philosophy. ``It's performance, 
performance, their performance on the job, that's what counts,'' he 
said in a recent interview. ``A lot of people, including the press, 
have ignored the reality of what we've accomplished.'' Because of 
the high staff turnover, however, many of his office's cases were 
thrown into disarray, and several judges complained publicly about 
the competence of his staff. Vacco's judicial record, in fact, is 
filled with reprimands from federal and state judges about missed 
deadlines and frivolous motions; one federal judge in 1996 referred 
to ``a series of unending failures by the office of the attorney general 
in this case to comply either with court orders or with counsel's 
obligation as an officer of the court.'' Earlier this year, Vacco's 
highest-ranking aide, William Flynn, was shown in court papers to 
have failed the bar exam seven times in five years and practiced law 
before finally passing and receiving his law license in 1992. Vacco 
has earned a mixed reputation among prosecutors around New York state. 
Many district attorneys, especially those in small counties, say they 
are grateful for the help they get from his office. ``Dennis has been 
terrific here,'' said Michael Kavanagh, the longtime district attorney 
of Ulster County, citing the assistance he received from Vacco's office 
when he prosecuted the state's first death penalty case. ``We could 
not have done that prosecution without his help.'' But a number of 
prosecutors complained that Vacco exceeded his authority _ and usurped 
theirs _ when he started a criminal case on his own in 1995. He brought 
a criminal case against Israel Romero, a Honduran lawyer, accusing 
him of unauthorized practice of law. The New York State District Attorneys 
Association, which represents the state's 62 county prosecutors, filed 
a brief arguing that Vacco had no jurisdiction to bring that kind 
of criminal case, a position later upheld by the state's highest court. 
Although Vacco is personally opposed to abortion, his office has filed 
several court briefs supporting a buffer zone around abortion clinics 
to keep anti-abortion protesters from harassing patients and doctors. 
Spitzer, who supports abortion rights, has tried to blame Vacco's 
office for not doing enough to protect clinics, which he said made 
it easier last week for a sniper to kill a Buffalo doctor who performed 
abortions. But Lucinda Finley, a Buffalo lawyer who has represented 
several clinics seeking protection from anti-abortion protesters, 
said Vacco's office had been ``extraordinarily helpful'' in helping 
to win court protection, including submitting a brief to the U.S. 
Supreme Court that helped lead to a decision last year upholding a 
15-foot buffer zone. Vacco casts himself as a defender of consumers, 
a protector of the environment and a champion of women's issues, though 
his critics say he is doing little more than paying lip service to 
these issues. ``People view me in a one-dimensional, crime-fighting 
posture,'' he said. ``There's more to my office.'' Vacco has become 
a convert on the contentious issue of tobacco litigation. When he 
first took office, he refused to join a nationwide lawsuit that sought 
to recoup from tobacco makers the billions of dollars that states 
spent treating tobacco-related illnesses. He said that would be akin 
to suing dairy producers for cholesterol-related diseases. His position 
led critics to charge that he was soft on cigarette makers only because 
they were major contributors to the state Republican Party. He eventually 
joined in the lawsuits against the tobacco companies and became an 
outspoken critic of the industry, though his critics, including Spitzer, 
contend that his conversion was a political move. Spitzer grew up 
in Riverdale in the Bronx, the son of a wealthy New York City real-estate 
developer, Bernard Spitzer, who has lent millions to his son's campaign 
for office. The younger Spitzer attended Princeton University and 
Harvard Law School, where he was an editor of the law review, and 
later became head of the labor racketeering unit in the Manhattan 
district attorney's office. He was lead prosecutor in the 1992 case 
against Thomas and Joseph Gambino, reputed capos in the Gambino crime 
family, who dominated the trucking business in the garment industry. 
Vacco has criticized the plea bargain that ended the case, in which 
the Gambinos pleaded guilty but avoided jail by paying a $12 million 
fine and agreeing to get out of the garment industry. But Spitzer, 
echoing the comments of law enforcement officials at the time, said 
it was more important to clean up the industry than to put the two 
men in jail. After leaving the prosecutor's office in 1992, he co-founded 
the New York office of the Center for the Community Interest, a centrist 
and occasionally center-right public-interest law group that promotes 
quality-of-life issues, often in opposition to civil-liberties groups. 
The center, for example, has supported the attempt by New York City 
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani's administration to reduce the number of adult-entertainment 
businesses in the city, drafted ordinances to crack down on aggressive 
panhandling and helped community groups remove dangerous mentally 
ill people from the streets. Spitzer calls himself a ``pragmatic liberal,'' 
but his more centrist philosophy has kept this year's race from becoming 
the purely ideological contest that Ms. Burstein and Vacco waged four 
years ago. Instead, Spitzer has focused mostly on issues that he says 
Vacco has neglected, proposing an office of public integrity under 
the attorney general to monitor state government, new regulations 
on cable companies and the use of product liability laws to force 
gun manufacturers to install safety locks. ``It should be the greatest 
public-interest law firm that the state has ever seen,'' Spitzer said 
of the office. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>