<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0119 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Faculty members at Medgar Evers College in Brooklyn, N.Y., huddled 
one morning this semester in the education department's Africana Resource 
Center, a small conference room lined with stacks of multicultural 
books. The occasion was one of the college's ``teaching circles,'' 
meetings among faculty members from various departments _ on this 
day, chemistry, English and math _ aimed at finding ways to strengthen 
programs in the face of a looming crisis: Medgar Evers' teacher-education 
program, like many other colleges' throughout the state, faces decertification 
unless it improves. The dominant topic at the meeting was literacy. 
Everyone talked about getting students to ``write across the curriculum,'' 
a buzz phrase here and elsewhere that means giving students more reading 
and writing assignments in all classes, even science and math. Then 
the discussion turned, as it often does, to the future and to the 
hurdles the school must overcome to prepare tomorrow's teachers. ``Many 
students do not know how to do the simplest algebra, and that's true 
of science majors, too,'' said John Flowers, a professor of physical 
science and computer science. ``So many of my students come to us 
without having read a whole book,'' said Zala Chandler, an English 
literature professor. ``They are afraid of math; they are afraid of 
arithmetic; I'm not saying anything about geometry,'' said Tatyana 
Flesher, a math professor. ``If they carry this attitude to the classroom, 
you will maybe have kids who don't know geometry.'' Sharon Simmons, 
the chairman of the education department, is familiar with such laments, 
given the fact that many of the students throughout the college come 
from some of New York City's most academically inferior schools in 
some of its poorest neighborhoods. But despite the City University 
of New York's fabled and fading open-admissions policy, the education 
program is taking a tack being repeated on teacher-education campuses 
across the country: it is raising its admissions and curriculum standards 
_ even at the cost of turning away students, something the program 
has rarely done. ``We are interested in quality at this point,'' Dr. 
Simmons said. And for good reason. Like three other CUNY campuses 
_ York, Lehman and City College _ Medgar Evers is positioned to lose 
its right to train teachers if it does not meet new state standards. 
Among the new benchmarks it must reach is insuring that 80 percent 
or more of its graduates pass the state's licensing examinations, 
beginning in 1999; the schools get three years to shape up. But last 
year, just 41 percent at Medgar Evers passed the liberal arts exam 
_ the worst performance in the state after City College, at 40 percent, 
and Boricua College in Manhattan, at 28 percent. The anxiety at New 
York's teacher colleges is not unique, nor is the soul-searching about 
the teachers they are sending out and the students they are letting 
in. Schools across the nation are taking a hard look at their curriculums, 
with many shifting emphasis from a theoretical approach to practical 
experience, and state after state is introducing or toughening licensing 
examinations and mandating higher standards in what amounts to an 
all-out assault on education programs and budding teachers. _This 
summer Pennsylvania enacted reforms that include requiring prospective 
teachers to maintain a B average in liberal arts courses before they 
can be admitted to a training program and a B in the subject they 
wish to teach. (Some colleges had been admitting students with a C-minus 
average.) _Last spring Massachusetts introduced its first-ever certification 
exam; nearly 60 percent flunked, and educators and politicians have 
been fighting about the test and how to improve teacher education 
ever since. _This fall a Texas law went into effect requiring 70 percent 
of an institution's graduates _ and 70 percent of each racial and 
ethnic group _ to pass the state's certification exam or face probation. 
Of the state's 86 teacher colleges, 35 did not measure up, threatening 
their accreditation if they do not improve their rates within three 
years. _If the 80 percent requirement for New York's 113 teacher-education 
programs were in effect today, at least two dozen colleges would lose 
accreditation, including four campuses of CUNY, the main supplier 
of teachers for New York City public schools. Raising standards is 
a trend that will surely intensify another expected crisis: a growing 
shortage of teachers. Nationwide, some 200,000 new teachers will be 
needed within the next 10 years. In New York City alone, officials 
estimate that they will need to hire 30,000 within the next five years 
to fill gaps created by growing enrollments, retirements and people 
leaving the profession. ``If you raise the bar, fewer people will 
get over it,'' said David Imig, the executive director of the American 
Association of Colleges for Teacher Education, based in Washington. 
``The reality comes every Tuesday after Labor Day, when you've got 
vacancies in classrooms that have to be staffed.'' The debate on how 
to turn out quality teachers has long bedeviled educators. It arises 
periodically, usually after the nation goes into spasms over the quality 
of education as a whole. It happened after the Civil War, with the 
rise of industrialization and the shift in skills needed as American 
workers migrated from the farm to the factory. It happened after Sputnik, 
when the Soviet Union's launch of the first satellite was taken as 
a sign of the poor quality of American math and science education. 
And it is happening anew, with test results showing that American 
students are behind their peers in other industrialized nations on 
math and science, and lagging in literacy. The latest bout of concern 
is traced to the 1983 report ``A Nation at Risk,'' produced by the 
National Commission on Excellence in Education, which called poor 
teachers a significant obstacle to the preparation of elementary and 
secondary school students. Until the report, policy makers and educators 
had paid attention primarily to what children were doing in the classroom, 
not who was telling them how to do it. Teachers are now increasingly 
seen as the missing component in the drive to raise academic standards 
in elementary and secondary schools. ``There is a growing body of 
empirical evidence of how important teaching is, as opposed to everything 
else,'' said Charles Lenth, the director of higher education for the 
Education Commission of the States, a Denver-based nonprofit organization 
that studies state education issues. ``You can raise standards, but 
if you don't have good teachers, you won't make progress.'' The prospect 
of failing New York's three-part, eight-hour certification exams caused 
Sharon Johnson, a Medgar Evers student who hopes to teach special 
education, to stay up all night crying on the eve of the tests last 
semester. Among students, there is a renewed respect for the exams, 
which measure knowledge in the liberal arts and sciences, the subject 
to be taught and teaching skills. Many have tried to take the tests 
cold, without studying guides or sample questions, or taking preparation 
courses offered on campus. ``There is a technique to taking this test,'' 
said Ms. Johnson, who passed and is scheduled to graduate in January. 
``If you are used to book learning, you are not going to pass this 
test. You need a strategy like a person preparing for medical-board 
tests.'' Deborah Hoyle, 38, chose Medgar Evers after a year at City 
College, where she felt lost among the school's 2,500 education students. 
Like many of her fellow students, she is a mother _ she has two daughters, 
18 and 9 _ and has worked as a teacher's aide. Once so shy that she 
quit a speech class because it required an oral presentation to her 
classmates, Ms. Hoyle now laughs at the episode and chats freely, 
a change she credits partly to a close-knit, nurturing atmosphere 
at school. After graduating in June, she wants to work as an elementary 
school teacher. But she, too, felt that her dream was being frayed 
by the certification exams. She failed to prepare the first time she 
took them in February, figuring her class work would stand her in 
good stead. She failed the liberal arts and science test by three 
points, crushing her spirit. ``I was sick,'' she said. ``I could not 
believe I failed the exam. ``But it did show me my weakness,'' she 
added. ``At Medgar Evers we are taught to write essays a certain way, 
with an introduction, a thesis and three supporting details, but that's 
not what they wanted. It was more like summarize what you read and 
then give your opinion.'' Ms. Hoyle passed the exam on her second 
try. As elsewhere, students at Medgar Evers did far better on the 
portion that was focused on teaching method and subject area than 
on the part designed to measure knowledge of the liberal arts. And 
some CUNY institutions did relatively well on all the exams, including 
the liberal arts and sciences exam. For instance, at Queens College, 
whose students are drawn heavily from Queens and suburban Long Island, 
88 percent passed. There is no easy measure of whether teachers are 
actually less able, since many exams are new or have been radically 
changed. That the tests don't judge teaching ability so much as general 
knowledge was a criticism heard after recent poor showings at some 
schools in New York and Massachusetts. ``I can understand the public's 
need to sort of have a sense that teachers are qualified and knowledgeable 
in their fields,'' said Joseph Caruso, the chairman of the education 
department at Framingham State College in Massachusetts. But as a 
society we place too much emphasis on tests.'' For all the sweat over 
the exam, Ms. Hoyle does not regret her decision to enter teaching 
or Medgar Evers, founded in 1969 in the ferment of the civil rights 
movement and named after the slain Mississippi civil rights leader. 
The college has long been proud of its service to the African-American 
community, including sponsoring an annual conference of black writers. 
``It doesn't make sense to me to teach in Canarsie or Howard Beach 
and then come home and look at the kids in my community, where I live, 
who need me,'' she said. ``I want to graduate from Medgar Evers and 
say I went to a predominantly black college, and I want to work in 
my community.'' Some administrators doubt that the state would ever 
really close education programs, and indeed the state is considering 
changing the way it calculates which test-takers would count toward 
the 80 percent cutoff, which could inflate pass rates. Nonetheless, 
all the threatened colleges are seeking to raise admissions standards, 
and suffering the consequences _ a drop-off in the number of eligible 
students. This year, for instance, entering Medgar Evers students 
needed a minimum 2.5 overall grade point average _ and a 3.0 in English 
classes _ out of 4.0; previously, students with overall averages as 
low as 2.3 could get in. And in a departure from previous years, all 
students were required to pass CUNY's basic skills test before they 
were accepted. Officials have discussed raising the required GPA to 
2.7 but are reluctant, for fear of turning away even more students 
and departing from the college's open-door spirit. Although the college 
has not taken its census yet, Dr. Simmons says she is certain fewer 
students are entering the program, which had about 900 students last 
spring. Some courses had to be canceled this year because too few 
signed up. Mwalimu J. Shujaa, dean of the school of liberal arts and 
education, says losing the teaching program would set back efforts 
to diversify the teaching work force, which is overwhelmingly white 
in New York (66 percent) and the nation (87 percent). Educators believe 
that a diverse teaching force would better respond to the increasingly 
diverse student population. ``I'm sure you are aware of the national 
profile of teachers,'' Dr. Shujaa said. White, female, suburban.'' 
``If you need a lot of teachers but don't want to pay much, what do 
you do?'' said Richard Soder, a professor of education at the University 
of Washington in Seattle, who has studied teacher-training and hiring. 
``You go to women and make sure the training is not significant, because 
they might find grounding for areas where they make more money.'' 
Indeed, the public school teaching work force of 2.7 million nationwide 
is more than three-quarters female. And although some states are seeking 
to raise teacher pay, the average beginning salary remains well below 
that for fields like business and computers. It has always been a 
struggle to attract top-flight teaching candidates. Even within universities, 
support and respect for education programs go lacking. According to 
a 1997 National Center for Education Statistics report, based on 1992-93 
data, students in education programs tested into remedial college 
courses at higher rates _ 18 percent took remedial math, compared 
with 11 percent of majors in the humanities and social science, and 
13 percent took remedial English, compared with 7 percent of humanities 
and social science majors. Education students' entrance exam scores 
are also lower, with about half as many education majors in the top 
quartile as humanities and social science majors. John Silber, the 
chairman of the Massachusetts Board of Education, put it rather tartly 
during a summer meeting of education school deans smarting over the 
poor performance of students on that state's teacher certification 
exams. ``Education programs have a reputation as a place for dum-dums,'' 
he said, and are considered ``the laughing stock by serious scholars.'' 
He added, ``We ought to take that to heart.'' An additional problem 
is that universities do not tend to pour money into their educational 
programs, which are relatively inexpensive to run, requiring little 
in the way of equipment and other resources in comparison with, say, 
chemistry. ``These places are cash cows,'' said Linda Darling-Hammond, 
director of the National Commission on Teaching and America's Future, 
based at Teachers College at Columbia University. The National Center 
for Education Statistics reports that education professors are paid, 
on average, $11,000 less a year than their peers in other departments. 
And colleges spend about $100 less per student credit-hour on education 
programs than for engineering, though tuition is generally the same. 
Unlike medical or law schools, education programs are also not required 
to be certified or accredited by a professional board, although there 
is a move to change that. Of the 1,300 teacher-education institutions, 
about 500 have been accredited voluntarily by the National Council 
for the Accreditation of Teacher Education, a Washington-based professional 
organization that conducts rigorous review of their faculties, curriculums 
and student populations. Two states, North Carolina and Arkansas, 
require the council's accreditation, and several others, including 
New York, now strongly advise it, said Arthur Wise, the group's president. 
Only four institutions in New York State _ Fordham, Hofstra, and Niagara 
universities and the State University College at Buffalo _ are accredited 
by the council. For years, the major crop to sprout from the baked 
earth of far west Texas has been cotton, grown on great big farms 
that splash green and white on the otherwise brown and crimson moonscape. 
Now the folks ``up at the college'' _ the University of Texas at El 
Paso _ are trying to seed something else entirely, all in the name 
of better educating the farmers and working-class residents along 
the Mexican border. The university, recognized by the United States 
Department of Education in its ``Promising Practices'' report on teacher 
education in September, is growing a teaching hospital, but one that 
aims to turn out teachers rather than doctors. And, to carry the analogy 
further, the E.R.'s where the interns apply theory to practice are 
schools like H.D. Hilley Elementary, right in the middle of a cotton 
field in nearby Socorro. There, Maribel Alarcon, a student teacher, 
huddled on a recent day with a pack of sixth graders who measured 
and snipped and folded their multicolored construction paper into 
origami, all in the name of geometry. ``Do you see the triangles?'' 
she asked as they twisted and turned their frogs and whales to find 
the shapes. ``Is there a parallelogram in there?'' Taking a breather, 
Ms. Alarcon summed up the value of the classroom experience: ``On 
campus we got a lot of theory, but here we have hands-on practice 
with the kids. This gives us real approaches.'' It is such approaches 
that educators hail as the wave of the future for education schools, 
which have been looking inward to find ways to improve the way they 
themselves teach. Education students, like those with other majors, 
usually spend the first couple of years taking a college's core requirement 
of arts and sciences courses, like English and math, with the last 
two years devoted to education classes. In this latter period, they 
have traditionally done an 8-to-12-week ``student teaching'' experience 
at a school, and also taken courses that focus on theory, methods 
of instruction and, in many cases, multiculturalism. Most campuses 
devote considerable class time to teaching student-centered learning, 
a method of instruction that discourages teachers from standing in 
front of the classroom to lecture; instead, they are taught to engage 
youngsters in group discussions and activities that encourage the 
children to ask questions and find their own answers, with guidance 
rather than instruction from the teachers. ``Don't be a sage on the 
stage, be a guide on the side,'' is how Stephanie Hadley, an El Paso 
student, put it. ``The old way was teacher-directed, where they don't 
ask kids to do anything,'' said Carmen Rotchford, another student, 
as if recalling a bad memory. But they just lecture and stand up there 
in the front of the class.'' Or, as their science-education teacher, 
Sally Blake, explained: ``Do you want kids that can do rote memorization, 
or do you want ones that can think? You want ones that can think.'' 
In her class, it is not unusual to see students doing the very activities 
they would require of their pupils. One day last month, for instance, 
her students found themselves doing a minute's worth of jumping jacks, 
but not to limber up. They broke up into groups of three: one student 
did the jacks; another counted them; and a third recorded the time 
at intervals throughout the minute. The goal was to measure the changing 
rate over time, and prepare a bar graph showing the results. In most 
cases, the pace of the jacks slowed over the course of the minute. 
``It's something physical, as opposed to word problems,'' Professor 
Blake said. Other education courses typically involve classroom management 
and diversity. Downstairs from Professor Blake's class, Virginia Gonzalez 
teaches ``Critical Pedagogy,'' whose reading list includes titles 
like ``Pedagogy of the Oppressed,'' by Paulo Freire. In this class, 
she said, they learn to respect students' viewpoints and to become 
mindful of the displays of cultural diversity seen in a classroom, 
like Hispanic immigrants' reluctance to question authority figures, 
like teachers. ``As a critical theorist, you are constantly deconstructing,'' 
she tells her pupils. ``You are creating a learning space for your 
students. You are not defining them and saying, `You sit here and 
this is what you do.' '' Across the country, schools are reducing 
the number of such courses, which have drawn ridicule from conservative 
scholars like Silber, who would rather see education students spend 
more time learning English and math than learning what he calls overly 
soft, touchy-feely approaches. ``We are moving away from the Mickey 
Mouse courses that always focus on development and method and not 
enough on content,'' said Richard Kunkel, dean of the College of Education 
at Auburn University in Alabama and executive director of the Holmes 
Partnership, a consortium of 120 universities seeking ways to improve 
teacher education. ``Good training has a balance of content and practice.'' 
Arturo Pacheco, the dean of El Paso's education school, defends the 
method courses as necessary to give teachers a grounding in how to 
approach their students and develop lessons. Nonetheless, the college 
in the last few years has scaled back on such on-campus classes in 
favor of a field-based approach. ``Teachers are now prepared more 
like doctors and nurses, and less like philosophers or historians,'' 
he said. Increasingly, medical schools are seen as models for teacher-preparation 
programs, which are driven more and more by the need to strike a better 
balance between teaching theories of learning and giving education 
students more practical, clinical experience in elementary and secondary 
classrooms. The National Commission on Teaching and America's Future 
recommended such an approach in a report last year, suggesting that 
field experience be increased to a full school year instead of the 
typical half year, but under close supervision from instructors or 
``mentor teachers.'' The report did not suggest abandoning theory 
and methodology courses, and to strong programs like El Paso's, striking 
a balance is key. Even El Paso, though, has not been immune to the 
drive to raise standards. The education program has raised its minimum 
grade point average for admission (and staying in) to 2.5 from 2.25, 
and is requiring its 1,500 students to take additional math and science 
classes. El Paso has met the new state requirement, posting a 78 percent 
overall success rate on the certification exam, and about 70 percent 
for each minority group, including Hispanics, the largest group on 
campus. The education program has restructured in the last few years, 
with the centerpiece the drive to increase preparation in the field. 
In keeping with the teaching-hospital model, seniors are called interns 
and spend about 600 to 700 hours in the field _ double what they used 
to _ at 25 ``partner'' schools. They are like Christine Dalby, one 
of 13 interns spending this semester at Ascarate Elementary School. 
``I could not imagine not having this experience,'' said Ms. Dalby, 
who found an answer to managing classroom discipline in Renee Reszel's 
sixth-grade room. ``At the beginning of the class, she didn't discuss 
rules or anything like that. Instead, she works on the point system, 
where they get points for good behavior. It's all positive reinforcement.'' 
But reality often clashes with the high ideals espoused in the lecture 
hall. Colleges can instill in their students the best theory, the 
latest in methodology, but the effect of the teacher reform movement 
boils down to what happens when schools send their new recruits out 
to face veteran teachers and administrators suspicious of different 
ways of thinking. Take Ms. Hadley, the enthusiastic intern determined 
not to be a ``sage on the stage.'' One day she was helping a veteran 
teacher at an elementary school with an exercise in which the pupils 
had to read a passage and then answer questions about it. Taking the 
initiative, Ms. Hadley saw an opportunity to make the lesson ``more 
connected to real-life experience,'' she said. The passage dealt with 
developing a ``world calendar,'' a reconfigured 364-day calendar in 
which numbered days of the month fall on the same weekday each year. 
So Ms. Hadley had the students design their own calendars. ``They 
thought it was neat,'' she said. ``Their birthdays fell the same day 
every year.'' But inevitably, theory bumps into practice. What feedback 
did she get from the more tradition-bound classroom teacher? ``She 
called me a twit.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>