<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0281 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's an overcast, dreary day at Van Cortlandt Park in the North Bronx, 
but I'm inspired by a sense of adventure and nostalgia as I prepare 
to tackle the running trails that I feared in my youth. As I limber 
up at the start of the 2.5-mile course used every fall by thousands 
of high school cross-country racers, I gaze at the woods in the distance. 
The trees hide the notorious hills that tore at my legs in the early 
'60s while my coach implored me to run faster with the command, ``C'mon, 
Bloom, blossom!'' Usually I wilted. But now, cresting 50, I'm not 
searching for fast times or such high-charged venues as Sunday's New 
York Marathon. Instead, I'm looking for soft footing and a change 
of scenery. Like most runners, I've collected too many miles in my 
legs on concrete roads, making me susceptible to muscle soreness and 
injury. And my familiar running paths have grown tedious. To give 
my training a spark, I've returned to my Van Cortlandt roots for what 
has become running's newest trend: trail running. Trail running is 
done on any lengthy path with a soft surface like dirt, grass or gravel. 
If the path is wooded, all the better. Even in an urban running landscape, 
trails abound, but you'll probably have to leave Manhattan. Prospect 
Park in Brooklyn and Forest Park in Woodhaven, Queens, have excellent 
wooded pathways, as do suburban sites like Bethpage State Park on 
Long Island, and Garret Mountain Reservation in West Paterson, N.J. 
Central Park? Sorry, it's all pavement, except for the crunchy cinder 
Reservoir loop and the bridle path, which you'll have to share with 
horses and what they leave behind. Recognizing the slippery nature 
of dirt trails, and the acquisitive nature of running baby boomers, 
shoe companies like Nike, Adidas and New Balance are promoting new 
lines of trail-running shoes this year. These heavy-duty models offer 
better traction than standard shoes and are, in some cases, water 
resistant. They tend to have the clunky feel of cross-trainers. This 
day, I'm sticking with my regular training shoes, which have good 
treads, and wearing a windbreaker to guard against rain. So far, everything 
has gone my way. I made the 65-mile drive from central New Jersey, 
over the George Washington Bridge, up the Henry Hudson Parkway and 
to the foot of the park in a snappy 75 minutes. And I got a choice 
parking spot on upper Broadway, which borders the park just past 242nd 
Street, the end of the subway line that we took from Sheepshead Bay 
High School in Brooklyn. The park's 1,146 acres, bought in the late 
1600s by the Van Cortlandts, a wealthy Dutch family, are a magnet 
for runners of all levels and inclinations. They range from casual 
joggers to marathoners to the high school teams that come from all 
parts of the Northeast and as faraway as California to compete. Years 
before he won three New York City marathons, Alberto Salazar came 
down from the Boston area to run high-school events at Van Cortlandt. 
On a fall Saturday, school buses clog Broadway, and you may have to 
trek up near the Fieldston School or Manhattan College to find a parking 
spot. For on-site guidance and camaraderie, one may speak with the 
Van Cortlandt Park Track Club, which celebrated its 20th anniversary 
last year. The club, 100 strong, holds weekly group runs. Nonmembers 
are welcome, and all paces are accommodated. None of the park's hubbub 
is evident as I click my runner's watch, leave the start line and 
set out across the opening flats toward the hilly trails. Barely a 
soul is around; just a guy hitting golf balls. I treasure the simple 
beauty of Van Cortlandt and its history as a running mecca. To me, 
the course is steeped in antiquity, a running museum preserving tradition. 
And then, reaching the Cowpath into the hills, I see it, the new and 
controversial symbol of the modern age: a coating of gravel mixed 
in with the dirt, completed last year by the Parks Department. The 
path is now smoother and safer. Rocks and boulders have been removed. 
Runners won't trip or sprain or break an ankle. While the trail is 
no less authentic, purists bark that their turf has been gentrified. 
I prefer the more secure surface, which still gives under foot. And 
the hills are still there. I pass the left-hand turnoff to the infamous, 
searing Cemetery Hill, where the Van Cortlandts are buried. Unless 
you're feeling cocky, don't take this turn; it's part of the five-mile 
course used by college runners. I proceed straight on the high-school 
route, hitting the first hill, a short but steep incline about a mile 
out. I can recall, at this juncture, bunches of teammates cheering, 
but I'm alone, except for evidence of four-footed runners. In the 
1970s, a territorial dispute flared between horseback riders from 
the Van Cortlandt stables and the runners. They made a tenuous peace, 
but in certain spots I still have to watch where I plant my feet. 
I make a sharp right across a bridge to the secluded Back Woods. I'm 
humming along, as if the lead had been taken out of my legs. The path 
is six to eight feet wide, with periodic wooden planks set like railroad 
ties for added traction. A birdwatcher passes by, then a young runner 
going much faster than I, then a pair of walkers. I feel safe, but 
I would advise women to run in groups. The hills don't seem as torturous 
as they once did. Everything about the course seems smaller, more 
manageable. Maybe it's my slow pace. I'm having a ball running through 
the woods. I notice the familiar graffiti cheers painted on trees 
to urge on the runners. You can't stray from the prescribed route. 
Arrows mark the course, as do new tortoise-and-hare symbols. One handwritten 
tree sign reads, ``I can.'' You bet. I reach the narrow crossroad 
marking the end of the uphills and start of the downhills. As a youth, 
I would envision this juncture, pleading for it to come. I steady 
myself on the sharp descents, taking stutter steps to maintain balance. 
Soon, I hit Roller Derby Turn, a sweeping half-mooner now fortified 
with a stronger, protective fence to catch the reckless. My pace picks 
up, and I'm clear of the woods and onto a brief concrete stretch, 
where in competition you can hear the chorus of spiked shoes clicking 
against the ground. I remember an aching slowness to the beat as drained 
runners fought fatigue with the race almost over. I head back over 
the bridge and down a final descent to the homestretch. Be careful 
of the fork in the road. Bear right for the college course as well 
as the 5-kilometer (3.1-mile) finish. Go left for the 2.5-mile high 
school windup. I swing left, into the light of the broad expanse of 
fields, covered on weekends with a tapestry of soccer, football and 
rugby games. Once, rugby players, not known for their diplomacy, prevented 
a college championship race from getting under way by refusing to 
halt their game. A running official in a three-piece suit negotiated 
a peaceful settlement with the mud-encrusted men, and the race went 
on. The homestretch is about a quarter-mile, but in the throes of 
a race could seem endless. Teammates on the sidelines would scream 
for me to push, push, push. I would try; but with my fight gone, I'd 
just pray for that finish line to appear. Now it's a lark. I stride 
the final yards to the end in a blissful sweat. I check my watch: 
just over 22 minutes. I wonder: If I'd gone all out, could I have 
beaten my best high school time of 17 and change? Maybe some other 
time. I jog a cool down, past the same guy swatting golf balls, to 
make the run an even half-hour. I stop at my car to get a water bottle 
and an orange and walk over to a tortoise-and-hare statue, part of 
the site refurbishment. An inscription on the statue reads, ``Slow 
and steady wins the race.'' Devouring the orange, just as I did after 
high-school races, I realize how much I've missed these wonderful 
old trails, and I feel that my running, after all these years, is 
ready to blossom. HEADING FOR THE HILLS AND OTHER TRAILS Here is a 
sampling of trail running sites in the New York metropolitan region: 
THE BRONX: Van Cortlandt Park, just past 242nd Street and Broadway. 
Take West Side Highway to Henry Hudson Parkway (232nd Street exit). 
Hilly 2.5-mile, 5-kilometer (3.1-mile) and 5-mile trails. Van Cortlandt 
Park Track Club stages weekly runs. No parking within park. Nonmembers 
welcome. Information: (718) 796-0736. BROOKLYN: Prospect Park. Take 
Manhattan Bridge to Flatbush Avenue. Dirt path, roughly three miles, 
on inside of roadway circling park grounds, along with other isolated 
trails. For parking on weekends, use Lincoln Avenue entrance. Prospect 
Park Track Club has Sunday-morning runs at 8. Meet at Park Circle, 
Railroad Avenue and Prospect Park South West. Nonmembers welcome. 
Information: (718) 595 2049. QUEENS: Forest Park, Woodhaven Boulevard. 
Take Long Island Expressway (Woodhaven Boulevard exit). Random wooded 
dirt trails; pick up behind Victory Stadium track. Forest Park Runners 
hold Saturday and Sunday runs at 8 a.m. Information: (718) 224-5814. 
Alley Pond Park, Union Turnpike, Bayside. Take Long Island Expressway 
to Cross Island Parkway (south) to Union Turnpike. Various hilly, 
wooded trails of up to four miles. Alley Pond Striders meet on Saturdays 
at 9 a.m. and Sundays at 8:30 a.m. for runs, at the park entrance, 
Winchester Boulevard and Union Turnpike. Nonmembers welcome. Information: 
(718) 343-4608. LONG ISLAND: Bethpage State Park, Bethpage. Take Northern 
State Parkway. Best trails in Nassau County. Pick up hilly dirt paths 
anywhere in park. Information: (516) 420-7963. NEW JERSEY: Garret 
Mountain Reservation, West Paterson. Hilly 5-kilometer (3.1-mile) 
trails marked ``X-C Course.'' No water fountains. Take Route 80 to 
Exit 56B, or Route 3 to 46 to Notch Road Exit. Information: (973) 
881-4994. WESTCHESTER: Rockefeller State Park Preserve, Pocantico 
Hills, North Tarrytown. Take Major Deegan Expressway to New York State 
Thruway (exit 9), to Route 117. Endless carriage trails for any distance. 
Rolling hills. Course maps at ranger station. Westchester Puma Track 
Club holds Saturday and Sunday runs at 8 a.m., meeting at Sleepy Hollow 
High School. Information: (914) 682-0637. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>