<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0407 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In its eighth day, the Microsoft antitrust trial shifted into a slower 
gear as a senior executive of America Online was led through a painstaking 
cross-examination in which he was asked to define technical acronyms 
and parse the fine print of contract terms. By the end of the day, 
Microsoft Corp.'s defense team had made a few points and scored one 
clear victory _ it had dragged the cross-examination out so long that 
the government did not have time to show videotaped testimony from 
the company's chairman, Bill Gates. Though not scheduled to appear 
in person, Gates is the absent star of the trial. In the opening session 
last week, the government used a few minutes of the lengthy taped 
deposition, showing an apparently uncomfortable Gates saying he was 
not involved in planning moves that Microsoft made in the Internet 
software market which the Justice Department asserts were illegal. 
The Justice Department contends that when set alongside contradictory 
internal e-mail that Gates himself wrote about those moves, the taped 
deposition is incriminating. ``We think the videotape offers a pretty 
fair opportunity to judge Gates' credibility,'' said David Boies, 
the Justice Department's trial lawyer. Microsoft replies that the 
videotaped deposition shows that Gates is telling the truth, but is 
understandably not being too cooperative as the target of a government 
prosecution. ``What you will see is a witness that doesn't let the 
government put words in his mouth, and a witness who repeatedly defends 
Microsoft's right to innovate,'' said Mark Murray, a company spokesman. 
But the taped testimony will not be seen until sometime next week, 
at the earliest, thanks to the methodical questioning style of Microsoft's 
lead lawyer, John Warden. The Justice Department and 20 states suing 
Microsoft have vowed to show five or six hours of the 20 hours of 
the pretrial deposition of Gates, taken in August. Yet they want to 
do it between the scheduled appearances of witnesses at the trial. 
Court sessions are not held on Friday, and the next government witness, 
Avadis Tevanian, a senior vice president of Apple Computer is scheduled 
to take the stand on Monday morning. In court on Thursday, Warden 
used his second day of cross-examining David Colburn, a senior vice 
president of America Online, to try to portray Microsoft's dealings 
with its business partners and competitors as standard practice in 
the computer industry. The government says that Microsoft used its 
monopoly power in personal-computer operating systems to persuade 
America Online, the United States' largest online service, to agree 
to an exclusionary deal that stifled competition in the market for 
software used to browse the World Wide Web. Microsoft's main rival 
in the browser market is Netscape Communications Corp. In March 1996, 
America Online says it agreed to make Microsoft's Internet Explorer 
its main browser in exchange for a choice spot on the Windows desktop 
_ the prime real estate in computing, since 90 percent of new personal 
computers are shipped with Microsoft's Windows operating systems. 
Microsoft replies that there is nothing exclusionary or illegal about 
its contract with America Online. To further his ``everybody does 
it'' defense, Warden focused on America Online's contract with Netscape 
for a so-called instant messaging feature within its online service. 
Instant messaging allows two computer users who are online at the 
same time to exchange typed messages with each other immediately _ 
the equivalent of a typed version of a telephone conversation. The 
language of the September 1997 contract between Netscape and America 
Online does prohibit America Online from promoting software from Netscape's 
major rivals on its instant-messaging screens. ``Why,'' Warden asked, 
``are these prohibitive provisions in the agreement?'' Colburn replied 
that as part of the deal, Netscape wanted to make sure competitors' 
products were not promoted _ precisely the kind of conduct Microsoft 
is accused of doing illegally. When he got his turn with the witness, 
Boies sought to point out that things that are legal for most companies 
often are not legal for a company with monopoly power, which the government 
alleges Microsoft possesses. Besides, Boies asked Colburn whether 
its instant messaging feature was a method for distributing browser 
software. Not ordinarily, Colburn replied. Typically, he said, ``a 
user who comes to the instant messaging area already has a browser.'' 
Warden finished by asking Colburn whether it was true that although 
Microsoft's Internet Explorer is the default browser shipped with 
the online service's software, ``America Online subscribers have the 
free and unfettered opportunity to use Netscape's browser if they 
so choose?'' ``Yes,'' Colburn replied, ``if they can figure out how 
to get it. It's not easy.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>