<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0336 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It being Halloween, let us salute Winnie Judd, trunk murderess. She 
died the other day in Phoenix, age 93. The Times obituary laid her 
out in grand style, with a full account of her 15 minutes of grisly 
fame back in long-ago 1931. Arriving in Los Angeles by train from 
Phoenix, she had two trunks unloaded, one of which, an observant porter 
told the law, seemed to be bleeding. Examination disclosed one trunk 
packed with the complete body of a 32-year-old woman; the other, with 
the body of a 24-year-old woman ``neatly cut into three pieces,'' 
the Times obituary explained, ``to make it easier to pack.'' You can 
tell this was back in the Stone Age. Americans not only traveled by 
train, they also carried heavy luggage with them. Nowadays Mrs. Judd 
would ship everything by UPS. The details of the trial are humdrum. 
Winnie, as the tabloids called her, claimed self-defense; the prosecution 
called it a cold-blooded act of murderous jealousy. Convicted, she 
was sentenced to be hanged, then excused from the gallows on grounds 
of insanity. After seven escapes from mental institutions, she was 
set free in 1971. Nobody during her trial seems to have been terribly 
curious about who had performed the dismembering work, though it was 
said to be of professional quality beyond Mrs. Judd's skills. Crime 
has declined since Mrs. Judd's day. The murders that fascinated the 
tabloids, and much of the nation, during the 1930s and '40s had a 
more amateurish, homespun quality than we are now accustomed to. Murder 
nowadays seems like an industrial production as savage as a corporate 
downsizing. Killers for international drug cartels wipe out entire 
families _ men, women, children _ on orders from above. Organized 
mobs use professional hit men who dispose of the results of their 
skills by having them ground up in industrial machinery and used for 
highway paving. Modern murders rarely rate more than two days in the 
news before being shrugged off by the public. We are stuffed by a 
steady diet of murder as both news and entertainment. Compared with 
our industrial-style murderers, killers of the Prohibition and Depression 
years were mom-and-pop operators. The small-scale human messes they 
made kept the public fascinated. Their murders were rich with the 
human-interest angles that are catnip for the press. The Lindbergh 
kidnap-murder case of the 1930s may have been the century's most absorbing 
crime story. The country was absorbed in it from the moment Americans 
learned that Lindbergh's son had been stolen to the night Bruno Richard 
Hauptmann went to the electric chair. Hauptmann was the quintessential 
mom-and-pop criminal, a working stiff desperate for money. He still 
has defenders who argue that he was unfairly convicted. Histories 
of the age between the world wars are full of bungled mom-and-pop 
murders that made it a golden age for the tabloids. One of the juicier 
was the Hall-Mills case of the 1920s. The dead were a society clergyman 
and a lady of the choir. The trial featured a female farmer whose 
work among barnyard animals led the tabloids to christen her ``the 
pig woman.'' The papers kept the story alive for five years, but no 
one was ever convicted. Despite Prohibition violence, industrial-scale 
murder was so rare that the entire country was shocked in 1929 when 
Al Capone's thugs killed seven of ``Bugs'' Moran's men in a Chicago 
garage. It was considered such a prodigiously monstrous act that it 
became famous across the country as ``the St. Valentine's Day Massacre.'' 
Seven wouldn't be a very impressive score for today's drug-industry 
killers. Winnie Judd's attempt to pull off a double murder seems ridiculously 
amateurish today. Americans have no patience with amateurs anymore. 
The day when a weekend athlete put on a cheap pair of U.S. Keds sneakers 
and some old corduroy pants to play tennis with a Sears Roebuck racket 
are as gone as train travel with trunks. Nowadays, the sorriest weekend 
athlete in the land would rather die than be less correctly dressed, 
less expensively equipped with sport gear than Tiger Woods or Pete 
Sampras. Winnie, using her silly trunks instead of state-of-the-art 
road-paving machinery, now seems an amateurish embarrassment to American 
murder. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>