<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0509 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John Glenn, an astronaut again at 77, returned to orbit Thursday in 
the space shuttle Discovery for a rendezvous with the memory of a 
time when exploits of early astronauts held the world in thrall and 
for a long-awaited encore, this time as the oldest traveler in outer 
space. At 2:19 p.m., after two suspenseful delays, the shuttle's two 
rockets and three engines ignited in flames and billowing vapors and 
lifted the seven-member crew _ including Glenn, the retiring Democratic 
Senator from Ohio and the first American to circle the planet _ into 
an orbit some 345 miles above Earth. ``Liftoff of Discovery with a 
crew of six astronaut heroes and one American legend,'' intoned Lisa 
Malone, the countdown commentator, at the moment the shuttle rose 
into a cloudless blue sky. Although Glenn's flight had been criticized 
in many quarters as a publicity stunt and political payoff with little 
scientific value, an estimated 250,000 visitors to the Kennedy Space 
Center and surrounding communities, one of the biggest crowds to see 
a shuttle departure, followed Discovery's ascent, watching until it 
was no more than a vanishing point of light more than five minutes 
after liftoff. President Clinton, watching with Mrs. Clinton from 
the roof of the Launch Control Center, was the first sitting president 
to see a space launching here since Richard Nixon watched the takeoff 
of Apollo 12 in 1969. In an interview on CNN before the liftoff, Clinton 
pointed out that Thursday's flight _ the last mission before NASA 
begins launching the International Space Station in December _ was 
the end of an era. ``So John Glenn began this first phase of our space 
program, and he's ending it just before we start on the space station,'' 
Clinton said. A few hours after Discovery reached orbit, Lt. Col. 
Curtis Brown, the commander, looked over at Glenn. ``Let the record 
show, John has a smile on his face and it goes from ear to ear,'' 
Brown told Mission Control. ``We haven't been able to remove it yet.'' 
In his first radio communication with Mission Control, Glenn was ebullient. 
``A trite old statement: Zero-G and I feel fine,'' he said, paraphrasing 
his first reaction to zero gravity, in 1962. Looking down on the Hawaiian 
islands, Glenn said: ``Today is beautiful and great. I just can't 
even describe it.'' More than 36 years ago, on Feb. 20, 1962, Glenn, 
then 40, rocketed aloft from here to become the first American to 
orbit the planet. Alone, squeezed into a tiny Mercury capsule, he 
made all of three orbits of Earth on a flight that lasted five hours. 
Thursday, aboard the relatively commodious Discovery, with 70 times 
the room of the Mercury capsule, Glenn began a mission planned to 
last nine days. Two younger astronauts, Brown and Lt. Col. Steven 
Lindsey, both of the Air Force, were at the controls of Discovery. 
From his passenger seat in the compartment below the flight deck, 
Glenn felt the bump at liftoff and the increasing vibration and noise 
of the first two minutes of surging rocket power, 20 times the thrust 
of the Atlas rocket that first put him in orbit. When Discovery's 
two solid-rocket boosters were jettisoned after a little more than 
two minutes, Glenn felt a sharper jolt and might have caught sight 
of a flash of light in the tiny compartment window. In many ways, 
it was a more comfortable ascent this time. At most, the rocket power 
exerted on Glenn's body pressures about three times the normal force 
of gravity at sea level. The pressure was certainly nothing like the 
G-forces from the Atlas, which reached eight times normal levels. 
As the shuttle's three hydrogen engines burned, Glenn could begin 
to relax to the steady whirring of turbines and fans. Eight and a 
half minutes after ignition, he and the other Discovery astronauts 
had reached orbit and, unbuckling the straps that secured them during 
liftoff, experienced the floating sensation of weightlessness. On 
his Friendship 7 flight in 1962, Glenn never got the chance to unbuckle 
and had no place to stretch out. For the rest of the day the crew 
moved slowly about Discovery, opening the cargo-bay doors and activating 
the systems and scientific instruments in the pressurized Spacehab 
module in the cargo bay where astronauts are to conduct many of their 
experiments. Generally overlooked in the avid attention on Glenn is 
the multinational crew, including a Japanese and a Spanish astronaut. 
The crew is to get busy on Friday with dozens of astronomy observations, 
tests of hardware for the Hubble Space Telescope, and experiments 
concerning the effects of a low-gravity environment on living organisms 
and human physiology. Much of the scientific work will be handled 
by Dr. Stephen Robinson, an engineer; Pedro Duque, an aeronautical 
engineer who is representing the European Space Agency, and Dr. Chiaki 
Mukai, a Japanese physician and medical researcher. Glenn's primary 
duty will be to act as a test subject for investigations of physiological 
changes from space flight that appear to parallel similar changes 
in aging humans. His attending physician for many tests will be Dr. 
Scott Parazynski. Such studies point up one of the sharpest contrasts 
between this flight and Glenn's first. ``Back then, the issue was 
not successful experiments but survival,'' Glenn said in a recent 
magazine interview. ``Doctors weren't sure whether humans could take 
eight G's going up and coming down. As test pilots, our job was to 
find out what we could do and couldn't do. Did our eyeballs change 
shape? Would inner-ear fluid move differently? Could we even swallow?'' 
Officials said the Discovery was operating normally, but engineers 
said they were investigating the apparent loss of a small, insulated 
aluminum panel near the tail. A videotape of the launching showed 
the panel dropping off two seconds after main-engine ignition. The 
panel appeared to be the cover over a stowed parachute, which is deployed 
at landing to slow the shuttle on the runway. At a news conference, 
Donald McMonagle, a shuttle official at the Kennedy center, said the 
incident was not expected to pose any additional risk or cause any 
change in mission plans. The shuttle could land without the ``drogue 
chute,'' which was added to the shuttles for extra braking force only 
after more than 50 safe landings without chutes. And the problem presented 
``no hazard to operations of the vehicle in orbit,'' the official 
said. A more detailed analysis of the problem is expected to be made 
on Friday, McMonagle said. The day of Glenn's second launching broke 
warm and clear, with no signs of technical trouble on Discovery at 
Pad 39-B. Before his first mission, Glenn had to wait out 10 weather 
or mechanical postponements between December and Feb. 20 before he 
finally lifted off. The countdown on Thursday proceeded smoothly toward 
a scheduled 2 p.m. liftoff. At a pause at T-minus-9 minutes, Scott 
Carpenter, the astronaut who was Glenn's backup pilot in 1962, had 
some parting words echoing his famous farewell to the Mercury flight, 
which was ``Godspeed, John Glenn.'' Speaking to the crew, Carpenter 
said, ``At this point in the count, it seems appropriate to say to 
the crew, good luck, have a safe flight, and to say once again, ``Godspeed, 
John Glenn.'' But Discovery was not going anywhere yet. Some alarms 
sounded in the cockpit and were recorded at Mission Control in Houston. 
The countdown was halted while engineers considered possible problems 
with pressures in the crew module, and soon established that there 
was nothing to fear. Then at T-minus-5 minutes, the count was interrupted 
again as one private airplane and then another were spotted flying 
into restricted airspace near the Kennedy launching area. The liftoff 
seemed trouble-free, until the examination of video recordings revealed 
the piece of metal that seemed to break loose and hit the nozzle of 
the shuttle's center engine. Investigators were trying to find out 
if it was indeed the parachute panel that fell off. It is a piece 
of waffle-shaped aluminum 18 inches wide, 22 inches long and 1.7 inches 
thick. One of the most important maneuvers of the mission is to come 
on the fourth day. The Discovery astronauts plan to release a small 
satellite called Spartan for two days of observations of the sun's 
corona, or outer atmosphere, and its effects on the space environment 
throughout the solar system. The satellite is to be retrieved before 
the shuttle returns to Earth. The landing is scheduled for Nov. 7 
here at the Kennedy center. The mission is the 92nd by a shuttle since 
the reusable craft were introduced in 1981. And it is the 121st American 
flight of astronauts since John Glenn made history with his first 
flight. Shortly after 7 p. m., Glenn passed his old space flight record 
of five minutes under five hours, and he had eight days ahead of him 
on the return flight he had longed to take ever since February 1962. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>