<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0448 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With five days left before New York's U.S. Senate election, Sen. Alfonse 
D'Amato steered his campaign in a new direction Thursday, releasing 
a television advertisement that invokes a 1980 investigation of Rep. 
Charles Schumer in an effort to portray the Democratic challenger 
as dishonest. The advertisement began running heavily in markets across 
the state Thursday night and previewed what D'Amato's aides said would 
be a central part of their campaign-ending strategy: an attack on 
Schumer's integrity, based on a 1980 investigation into whether he 
illegally used state workers on his first congressional campaign. 
D'Amato's change in strategy follows a month in which his entire focus 
has been on portraying Schumer as an absentee legislator who missed 
votes in Washington to campaign for higher office. A federal grand 
jury spent more than a year investigating allegations that Schumer, 
as a member of the state Assembly, used state employees on his congressional 
campaign. The U.S. attorney in Brooklyn recommended that Schumer be 
indicted, but the Justice Department in Washington rejected the recommendation, 
saying it lacked jurisdiction. New York state prosecutors also declined 
to press the case, and Schumer was never charged with any wrongdoing. 
D'Amato's advisers said the senator would continue to attack Schumer's 
attendance record, notwithstanding D'Amato's acknowledgment earlier 
this week that he, too, missed hundreds of vntes, in his case when 
he was a Nassau County official running for the Senate in 1980. D'Amato 
reiterated those attacks while campaigning Thursday, but his aides 
said the main thrust of the television advertisements over the next 
24 hours _ which are directed at the remaining undecided voters in 
the race _ would be the 1980 investigation of Schumer. The introduction 
of a new theme so late into the campaign is unusual, and came as some 
of D'Amato's strongest Republican supporters expressed concern about 
the state of the senator's campaign as he headed into the final weekend 
of the campaign. It is, many Democrats and Republicans agreed, a potentially 
risky strategy, because in raising an 18-year-old investigation into 
Schumer's ethics, D'Amato could invite attention to investigations 
of his own public life, which until now have not been a major topic 
in this campaign. The Senate Ethics Committee investigated D'Amato 
for supposedly providing favors to campaign contributors, but found 
no credible evidence of wrongdoing. But the committee faulted him 
in 1991 for allowing his brother Armand to use his office on behalf 
of a law client. D'Amato introduced this new issue after 10 difficult 
days for his campaign, during which the focus of attention has turned 
from Schumer's attendance record and to D'Amato's record and behavior. 
It began when D'Amato used a Yiddish vulgarism to describe Schumer 
last week and then denied making the remark until his own supporters 
confirmed it. A number of public and private polls have suggested 
that Schumer picked up support during this period. Schumer moved Thursday 
to exploit D'Amato's latest problem, the release of records that showed 
that, as a member of the Nassau County Board of Supervisors, he missed 
hundreds of votes to campaign for the Senate. What might normally 
have been a minor moment in D'Amato's political evolution became a 
potential problem because D'Amato has based his own campaign on belittling 
Schumer for skipping votes to run for the Senate. In numerous film 
clips from debates and news conferences, D'Amato is seen lecturing 
Schumer on the importance of putting the obligations of government 
ahead of one's own political career. Schumer's advisers picked one 
and turned it into an advertisement that went on the air Thursday 
night. In it, D'Amato, portrayed in the gray and grainy images that 
have become the hallmark of both men's television campaign, proclaims 
that ``the people expect us to be there, fighting, making a difference 
voting.'' As he speaks, the screen shows newspaper headlines about 
his acknowledgment, and examples of missed votes. D'Amato on Wednesday 
had indicated that he was going to raise the issue of the 1980 investigation 
against Schumer, when he read a brief statement to reporters as he 
sought to turn attention away from questions about his own attendance 
record. The senator never mentioned the topic in his public speeches 
as he campaigned across New York state Thursday with Gov. George Pataki 
_ his aides said they would let the television advertisements carry 
the weight of these attacks _ but he told reporters aboard his campaign 
plane that he considered the attacks appropriate. ``It wasn't me who 
brought up the question of 18 years ago,'' D'Amato said during a flight 
from Syracuse to Rome, N.Y. ``Mr. Schumer brought up the issue of 
18 years ago. So let him explain it.'' D'Amato's latest advertisement 
looks almost identical to the one released Thursday by Schumer, aside 
from some obvious differences. The senator builds his advertisement 
around a clip of Schumer from a debate. ``The issue to New Yorkers 
is trust,'' Schumer says as the screen shows clippings recounting 
the investigation. The advertisement does not note that Schumer was 
never prosecuted. D'Amato said Thursday that the introduction of this 
new advertisement did not mean that he was abandoning the attack on 
Schumer's attendance record. ``Look, he'd like to have it over,'' 
D'Amato said. ``He'd like to attempt to say, to make an excuse for 
missing more votes in the Congress of the United States than any other 
congressman from New York.'' Nonetheless, this change in course comes 
at a time when no public polls have shown any evidence that this attack 
is working. And the senator's advisers hammered away Thursday at the 
issue of the 1980 investigation with the same intensity with which 
they had discussed the issue of Schumer's missed votes just a few 
days ago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>