<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0386 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Brazil is the bailout of the month, and Stanley Fischer, the closest 
thing the world economy has to a battlefield medic, is a blur of cell-phone 
calls and urgent e-mails. From the hushed executive floor of the International 
Monetary Fund, where he reigns as the No. 2 official, from his car 
and from the airplanes he is always rushing to catch, Fischer has 
been engaged in a constant negotiation with Brazilian Finance Minister 
Pedro Malan. They have tangled over just how to cut the Brazilian 
budget, raise taxes and deal with an overvalued currency even as they 
are united in their determination that Brazil's unpredictable and 
sometimes recalcitrant Congress buy the deal the government made public 
this week. All the while, Fischer has been involved in an equally 
complex byplay with U.S. Deputy Treasury Secretary Lawrence Summers, 
who is trying to persuade the IMF to contribute more to Brazil's cause 
_ to have a better shot at stabilizing the country and to assurethat 
the United States will have to put up less money of its own. The IMF 
will contribute at least $15 billion and the United States is expected 
to throw in between $3 and $5 billion. As Fischer, a 55-year-old former 
professor of economics from MIT, performs this political and economic 
highwire act, he is, typically, keeping his own counsel. But hovering 
over his every calculation is the knowledge that the IMF cannot afford 
another failure. Another Russia or another Indonesia would be a disaster, 
not just for the IMF but for the world economy, too. If what he delicately 
calls the ``Brazil stabilization plan'' fails to stabilize Brazil, 
once again the institution that was designed to bring order to the 
world economy will be accused of fueling the disorder. ``Look, I know 
we've become everyone's favorite whipping boy,'' Fischer, whose formal 
title is first deputy managing director of the IMF, mused one summer 
afternoon, when Moscow's troubles dominated the day and Brazil's were 
still germinating. ``But remember that in most cases governments call 
us in only after they discover they are in a mess, usually because 
they didn't do things they needed to do long ago. If the problems 
were easy to solve, they'd do it themselves. And it's our job to convince 
people to do things that we believe, and they probably know, are good 
for them. Even if those things are politically unpopular _ and they 
usually are.'' But while Fischer coaxes along crisis-wracked politicians 
from Brasilia to Moscow to Seoul, he is also fighting a rearguard 
action against the traditions of the IMF, and against the institution's 
legions of critics. He is trying to reinvigorate a tradition-bound, 
often narrow-minded bureaucracy that has never quite adjusted to a 
world of 24-hour markets and has proven astoundingly ill-prepared 
for the challenge of designing economic plans that will fit the political 
realities of the countries where the IMF is sent in as the lender 
of last resort. But while he tries to change the fund from the inside 
he is also defending it against outsiders _ other economists, members 
of Congress, even ostensible colleagues across the street at the IMF's 
sister institution, the World Bank. Few of the critics agree with 
each other about what the fund should have done differently. But each 
is certain that it has been wrongheaded, insensitive, beholden to 
big bankers and prone to make its patients sicker. Fischer is lucky: 
Most of the public heat for the IMF's prescriptions are directed at 
his boss, managing director Michel Camdessus, who spends much of his 
time dealing with presidents and prime ministers. But when it comes 
to the hard bargaining, negotiating the programs countries promise 
to carry out in return for the IMF's help, it is Fischer who signs 
off on the details. He cuts the deals over how much countries must 
rein in their spending, how they will arrange to collect extra taxes, 
what kind of pet projects they must kill, and how they should attack 
crony capitalism and corruption. Just how much power he holds is a 
matter of debate. Finance ministers around the world claim that Fischer 
is the first button on their speed-dialers. This summer, as the IMF 
team was working out the final details of what turned out to be a 
doomed-from-the-start deal with Russia, Fischer conducted the final 
talks from a cell phone as he stood atop a sand dune on Martha's Vineyard, 
Mass., where he was on vacation. ``It looked like a bad scene out 
of `Lawrence of Arabia,''' he said. The IMF's critics insist that 
Fischer's power is overstated. To them, he seems to mostly do the 
bidding of the United States. He was put in his job four years ago, 
chiefly because of U.S. influence, suggested for the job by Summers, 
who clearly sought a like-minded economist for the post. But as the 
United States, the largest power in the fund, intercedes in the biggest 
bailouts, there is also some tension in the relationship. ``It's fair 
to say,'' one senior U.S. official noted this summer, as tempers rose 
over how to deal with the financial collapse of Russia, ``that Stan 
is getting a little tired of us.'' Others say that Fischer struggles 
to work within the confines of Camdessus' IMF. ``A complete French 
bureaucracy,'' one official at the neighboring World Bank calls it. 
Fischer has tried to invigorate that bureaucracy, pushing its staff, 
long accustomed to leisurely reviews of the state of national economies, 
to stay more on top of developments. They drew the line, though, at 
wearing beepers. He has tried to convince the IMF to monitor markets 
and political developments around the clock _ much as the U.S. Treasury 
does _ rather than simply lock all the doors of its headquarters at 
nights and on weekends. According to IMF lore, at least one desperate 
Asian finance minister, in the midst of a currency crisis, found himself 
explaining his problems to a security guard, who was the only person 
at the IMF to answer the phone at night. Fischer has also directly 
taken on the IMF's critics, most recently in an unusual essay in The 
Economist, explaining the rationale behind the fund's more controversial 
bailouts. In speeches he has even admitted to occasional self-doubts 
about whether the fund's approach was always right, sentiments rarely 
heard from Camdessus. ``The only way I know how to do this job is 
to read the criticisms, many of them by my former colleagues, and 
then ask the question `Are these guys right?''' Fischer said recently. 
``If the answer is yes, you adjust.'' The adjustments have been particularly 
visible in Indonesia, where, stung by the criticism that it was punishing 
100 million desperately poor people to pay for the sins of a handful 
of extraordinarily rich bankers, the fund is now relaxing the austerity 
measures to allow the government to spend more on food subsidies and 
dropping its demands that the food distribution monopoly be broken 
up. Even some of the harshest critics of the IMF's approach give credit 
to Fischer for changing course _ at least a few degrees _ once he 
recognized that the fund's traditional remedies were failing. ``He 
can't escape blame for some of the fund's blunders,'' says a longtime 
friend, Allen Sinai, the chief economist of Primark Decision Economics. 
``But he is more flexible, more balanced, more able to walk a delicate 
line between the IMF's principles and what will actually work politically 
than anyone I've ever seen over there.'' Fischer is the first to defend 
the IMF's orthodoxy over the last 16 months of turmoil. The best way 
to get a country back on its feet, he says, is to put a stop to wild 
government overspending and to pump up interest rates to prevent currency 
devaluations. Fischer says that the passage of time is proving that 
his formulas can work. ``When we were called into Korea they were 
essentially out of resources,'' he said. ``Now, in Korea and Thailand, 
stabilization of the currencies has clearly succeeded. We expected 
that if the currencies stabilized, interest rates would come back 
down. And that's exactly what has happened. ``Why did we focus so 
much on stabilizing the currencies?'' he asked rhetorically. ``Because 
if you do not, you get a takeoff of inflation.'' Within the IMF pantheon, 
Thailand and South Korea are emerging as success stories. Even there, 
however, Fischer cannot escape the critics who argue that those same 
high interest rates choked off growth and fostered unnecessarily severe 
recessions. This week, Jeffrey Sachs, the Harvard professor and a 
strong critic of the IMF, contended that the fund was about to make 
the same mistake again in Brazil. ``The budget cuts and those high 
interest rates are going to send Brazil into a very deep recession,'' 
he said. Sachs advocates letting the Brazilian currency float, a path 
Fischer has rejected as too likely to encourage a price spiral. Fischer's 
closest friend in economics, Rudiger Dornbusch, who wrote a textbook 
with him, has offered an alternative. Brazil should adopt a currency 
board, which would require the country to keep huge foreign reserves 
on hand to fix the real, the Brazilian currency, against the dollar. 
It is no surprise that Fischer is attuned first and foremost to the 
dangers of hyperinflation. He made his name in academia, and his debut 
as a global economic player, fighting it. But it was a circuitous 
path that began in Northern Rhodesia _ now Zambia _ where his father, 
a merchant, was an immigrant from Latvia and his mother an immigrant 
from Lithuania. A British education in Rhodesia led him to the London 
School of Economics, then the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
where he earned his Ph.D., before going on to the University of Chicago 
at the end of Milton Friedman's era. ``At MIT you did the mathematical 
work,'' he said, ``and at Chicago you asked the question of how this 
applies to the real world.'' Summers dates his first encounters with 
Fischer as a student of his at MIT. ``I think I was auditing, so he 
didn't have to grade me,'' Summers said, recalling that ``he was a 
first-rate macroeconomic theorist who stayed first rate as his interests 
became more applied and policy-oriented.'' Fischer was pushed into 
that transition by George Schultz, the secretary of state during most 
of the Reagan administration. In the mid-1980s, Schultz was trying 
to figure out how to halt hyperinflation in Israel. With the analytical 
help of Fischer and Herbert Stein, a former chairman of the President's 
Council of Economic Advisers, Schultz did to Israel what the IMF does 
to many countries today: He presented a painful plan for straightening 
out the economy, with the promise that aid could follow. ``Stan did 
a remarkable job with it,'' Schultz remembered a few months ago. That 
dip into public policy hooked Fischer forever. He went to the World 
Bank as chief economist and, after returning to MIT for several years, 
moved to the IMF But today even Schultz has parted ways with Fischer 
by leading a drive to abolish the IMF. (He stopped short of repeating 
that call a few weeks ago, however, when he was on a panel with Fischer.) 
Meanwhile, the current occupant of Fischer's old job at the World 
Bank, Joseph Stiglitz, has been among the IMF's fiercest critics. 
Stiglitz complains that the fund has ignored the social impact of 
its austerity programs and has pushed countries to open their markets 
too quickly. Far more gently _ at least in public _ World Bank president 
James Wolfensohn has joined in the carping. ``It's unfortunate that 
this conflict has surfaced, and at times it has made things difficult,'' 
Fischer said. ``But the fact is that we have adjusted as the situation 
has changed, and as the crisis got worse than we expected.'' The justification 
for the coming Brazil package _ more than $30 billion in all _ is 
finally to get a step ahead of the crisis, to inject money and reforms 
before the country's reserves are depleted and its last investors 
have fled. Fischer, though, is seared by the experience in Russia, 
and wants to gauge how sincere the Brazilians are about carrying through 
on their belt-tightening before he sends money. ``What Stan learned 
in Russia,'' one of his colleagues said, ``is that you can look pretty 
foolish if you mail the check and then the legislature rejects the 
reforms.'' But Fischer seems to hint in his speeches these days that 
the IMF may have little choice: If it can't stop the global economic 
contagion soon, it is unclear where or when it will stop. ``We now 
have to deal with a crisis in Latin America,'' he said a week ago, 
``and most of all, in Brazil. It is a difficult time, but not impossible 
by any means.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>