<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0494 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
George Jessel, a name not likely to ring many Gen-X bells, was an 
old-time vaudevillian who performed at so many banquets and fund-raisers 
that he became known as ``toastmaster general of the United States.'' 
He enjoyed a special niche with older, conservative Jews. In 1980, 
a year before he died at 83, he agreed to tour Jewish precincts of 
Williamsburg, Brooklyn, with a conservative candidate named Alfonse 
D'Amato, soon to become famous as ``Senator Pothole'' but at the time 
not a household name west of Great Neck. After their joint appearance, 
D'Amato quickly forgot who was doing a favor for whom. While Jessel 
sat alone in the back of a car, the candidate stood outside and rasped 
to an aide: ``We can't carry George around all day. How do we get 
him out of here?'' You could tell he was going to be a class act. 
He has since rarely disappointed. By now, the D'Amato encyclopedia 
of embarrassments is as thick as a pillar: his ``Old MacDonald'' routine 
on the Senate floor, his crude mocking of Judge Lance Ito, his recent 
use of a Yiddish vulgarism, his coarse reference to an overweight 
congressman. On and on. Most intriguing of all was his choked-up response 
to being called a fascist in the 1992 campaign. D'Amato had reason 
to be offended. But a free lesson at the Stella Adler Conservatory 
of Acting is offered here to anyone who took the senator's weepy performance 
at face value. The quivering lower lip was a particularly nice touch. 
It gave him a secure place in the pantheon of the Politics of Blubbering, 
a school of campaigning that has had a healthy revival in this election 
season, which ends, mercifully, in four days. Just about everybody 
seems to have found reason to take offense over one remark or another, 
from D'Amato's epithet in somewhat mangled Yiddish to Attorney General 
Dennis Vacco's reported jabbering about bandidos outside bodegas. 
Each gaffe, naturally, produced cries over how the insult was intolerable 
to this or that ethnic group, which had already suffered so much for 
so long. Only in a New York political campaign does an argument over 
a Yiddish crudity somehow wind up in the same sentence as the Holocaust. 
Even the macho mayor, Rudolph Giuliani, has been unable to resist 
a little blubbering. Witness how he carried on after Eliot Spitzer, 
the Democratic candidate for attorney general, referred in the same 
breath to the Giuliani City Hall and Girolamo Savonarola, the uncompromising 
ascetic friar of 15th-century Florence. An outrageous anti-Italian 
insult, the mayor fumed. What anti-Italian? There was no Italy until 
the 1860s (a unification of fractious states that prompted the statesman 
Massimo D'Azeglio to observe, ``We have made Italy; now we must make 
Italians''). At worst, maybe you can say Spitzer revealed an anti-Florentine 
streak. But who needs one more news conference for a denial of bigotry? 
Now what? Does calling an opponent Machiavellian also make you anti-Italian? 
Labeling someone a quisling proves you don't like Norwegians? How 
about Luddite? Uh-uh. Anti-English. If you think this is becoming 
faintly Kafkaesque, prepare to apologize to the Czechs. Getting back 
to D'Amato, his loose lips and forays into the Politics of Blubbering 
have led many commentators to pine over the last 18 years for a senator 
with more class. New Yorkers, one often hears, deserve better. You 
would think this state were filled only with gentle souls who spend 
dawn to dusk pondering civic virtue. Those people exist, of course. 
And one could argue that they have their philosopher-Solon in Sen. 
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a politician who likes to act as if he were 
above it all. But New York, when last examined, is the state that 
also produced those national symbols of high purpose and grace John 
McEnroe and Joey Buttafuoco. This is a city where people endlessly 
shout obscenities on the street, clip fingernails on buses and drip 
greasy sandwiches on those next to them on the subway. Don't those 
people deserve a senator, too? Can they do better than ``Senator E-I-E-I-O,'' 
with his flair for eye-popping crudeness? Besides, D'Amato can also 
claim, and often does, that he is a crackerjack at bringing home the 
bacon. On second thought, that is one boast he may want to reconsider. 
It sounds awfully close to a slur against Jews and Muslims. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>