<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0296 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A jeep carrying Israeli soldiers intercepted a Palestinian suicide 
bomber as he was about to ram a car packed with explosives into a 
school bus carrying children from this Jewish settlement Thursday. 
The jeep absorbed the explosion, which killed one soldier and wounded 
three others; the bomber also died. In the politically charged aftermath 
of the peace accord signing last week, the attack was seen as the 
first real test of both Israeli and Palestinian resolve to abide by 
the agreement, which exchanges land in the West Bank for promises 
of a Palestinian crackdown on terrorism. Palestinian leader Yasser 
Arafat issued a quick and unusually fierce condemnation of the attack 
and then placed under house arrest Sheik Ahmed Yassin, the spiritual 
leader of the Islamic fundamentalist group Hamas. In Gaza City, Palestinian 
officers also began rounding up other leaders of Hamas, which is believed 
to have been responsible for the attack, and by midnight they had 
arrested more than 100 people. In Jerusalem, Israeli Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu faced heightened pressure to scuttle the deal from 
its right-wing opponents, but gave no public indication that the attack 
would alter his commitment. Israeli television, however, reported 
that Netanyahu, in a private conversation with Arafat, warned the 
Palestinian leader that continued terrorist acts would jeopardize 
the accord, which is to take effect Monday. Netanyahu has delayed 
presenting the peace agreement to his Cabinet for ratification, awaiting 
a security work plan from the Palestinians. Thursday, a senior Palestinian 
official, Hassan Asfour, said the Palestinians would submit the blueprint 
to the United States on Monday, but he asserted that ``it is impossible 
to put a complete end to such operations.'' In the Palestinian-controlled 
Gaza Strip, Jewish settlers live defiantly amid the sand dunes in 
isolated compounds. Their red brick sidewalks, green lawns and rainbow-hued 
playgrounds resemble Phoenix condominium complexes, but for the anti-tank 
walls that surround them and the donkeys that amble outside the walls. 
Since the withdrawal of Israeli troops from most of Gaza several years 
ago, the settlement children travel to and from school in armored 
convoys, with Israeli army jeeps leading and following their bulletproof 
buses. As 40 elementary school children journeyed to class Thursday 
morning, an Opel approached them from a dirt road in the bush surrounding 
a Palestinian refugee camp. The car, entering the opposite lane, headed 
directly for the school bus. The lead escort jeep moved to block the 
bus, colliding with the Opel and bearing the major impact of the explosion. 
``I was on a typical trip, behind the jeep, and then, a boom, fire, 
smoke and flames,'' said Yehuda Shaltriel, the bus driver. ``First 
thing I did was to stop the bus because the jeep had overturned. I 
opened the front door to let the smoke out. The kids were shouting, 
crying, `Mommy! Daddy!' Sure, they were shook up.'' Behind the gates 
of the Kfar Darom settlement, windows rattled with the force of the 
explosion, and parents who had just placed their children on the bus 
later said they knew precisely what had happened. One frantic father 
ran almost a mile to the scene. ``People here are very shocked,'' 
said Shella Shorshan, whose two children had missed the bus because 
she overslept. ``If the attack had been successful, our lives would 
have been shattered. It was a miracle what happened to our kids, although 
clearly we have mixed feelings because a soldier had to give his life.'' 
The soldier, Sgt. Alexei Nikov, was a 19-year-old immigrant from the 
former Soviet Union who was riding in the rear of the jeep. He came 
to Israel two years ago on his own as part of a program that inducts 
immigrants directly into the army. His family followed last year, 
and lives in Haifa. His funeral is scheduled for Friday. One of the 
three wounded soldiers was listed in serious condition at Soroka Hospital 
in Beersheba on Thursday night, and another was recovering from leg 
fractures in the orthopedic ward there. The third had been released. 
Israeli security officials have traced the Opel, which was packed 
with an estimated 150 pounds of explosives, to a Palestinian who lives 
in the Han Yunis refugee camp. They said the mastermind of the attack 
was Mohammed Dief, a Hamas terrorist who tops the Israelis' list of 
wanted fugitives. In the aftermath of the explosion, Israeli and Palestinian 
troops worked side by side in the dunes of the southern Gaza Strip, 
evacuating the schoolchildren, rushing the soldiers to hospitals and 
collecting evidence from the sand-swept road. Top Israeli and Palestinian 
military officials visited the grisly scene _ a charred, mangled wreck 
of a car, an overturned, blackened shell of a jeep and the remains 
of the bomber, which were scattered and covered by blankets. It is 
an area that is under joint security control, and it was a picture 
of collaboration under the palm trees. There was even hugging between 
Israeli and Palestinian officers. Maj. Gen. Yom Tov Samia, an Israeli, 
pronounced the cooperating forces to be ``in a good mood working together,'' 
and Gen. Abdelrazak Mujaida, a Palestinian, echoed the sentiment. 
In a counterpoint to the cooperation, other Israeli and Palestinian 
forces not far away engaged in a shootout that stemmed from the Israeli 
hunt for accomplices of the bomber. One of the Palestinian suspects 
was shot and wounded. The Israeli army chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Shaul 
Mofaz, attributed the suicide bombing to Hamas, and the Israeli radio 
reported that Hamas had claimed responsibility in an anonymous call. 
``It is my assessment that the Hamas is making an effort to carry 
out terror attacks in the stage between the signing of the agreement 
and its implementation,'' Mofaz said. ``Today we stopped a harsh disaster 
and paid a price. I hope that, in the future, the Palestinian Authority 
will do what it's responsible for under the agreement, so that such 
attacks don't come out of its territory.'' In an interview on the 
Israeli radio, Yassin denied knowledge of the attack but also asserted 
defensively: ``Today's action was aimed at soldiers, not kids. How 
do we know the aim was to hurt kids?'' When Yassin, who uses a wheelchair 
and wears a long white robe, was put under house arrest, Palestinian 
officials said it was for ``speaking out against Palestinian national 
interests.'' Late Thursday night the officials also cut Yassin's telephone 
lines after he gave an interview critical of the Palestinian Authority 
to an Arabic satellite television program based in Qatar, his son 
said. Israeli intelligence experts predicted that Palestinians would 
take to the streets in Gaza to protest the arrest of the sheik, who 
has been a nettlesome voice of opposition to Arafat since his release 
from an Israeli prison in 1997. ``Arafat has a clear interest to demonstrate 
toward Hamas determination in his war against terror, and he can't 
give them a stronger signal than to place Ahmed Yassin under house 
arrest,'' said Carmi Gilon, former head of the Israeli General Security 
Services. ``But Palestinian public opinion will not let this go by 
in silence.'' After the explosion, the children continued on to school 
in their bus. The settlers sent psychologists to draw them out of 
their shock. Later, one 10-year-old girl complained to her mother 
that the psychologists were trying too hard to reassure them that 
everything was fine. ``Everything is not fine,'' she said tearfully. 
``Mom, we saw the bus, how it burned. Gabi, his whole face was covered 
with blood.'' Gabi was the first name of one of their security escorts. 
When the stretch bus returned to the compound after school, parents 
ran to greet their children, who tumbled off the bus into their arms. 
One man led the children in song and dance, celebrating ``the miracle.'' 
Many mothers pressed their children to their hearts and cried. ``We 
got our kids back as a gift,'' said Yamima Ayubi, mother of five. 
In the mid-1970s, the Labor Party placed Jewish settlements in Gaza 
as a strategic measure, to guard against invasion from Sinai. After 
the peace treaty with Egypt, the strategic importance of the settlements 
was considered by many to have vanished, and some Israelis favored 
evacuating the settlers as part of the peace accord with the Palestinians. 
Netanyahu's policy, however, has been to reinforce the settlements' 
existence. Relieved but infuriated Thursday, the Kfar Darom settlers, 
45 families who operate a produce-packing plant, said they would react 
by digging in deeper, literally. One woman pointed to water pipes 
and said that they would soon be installed, and that new houses would 
be built, despite the growing threat from their Palestinian neighbors 
and what they perceive to be the Israeli Army's unwillingness to protect 
them aggressively. ``In my opinion, there's going to be a war,'' said 
Yigal Kirshenzaft, chairman of the Gaza settlers' association. ``It's 
just a matter of time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>