<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0171 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A thought occurred to me while I was standing before the earliest 
drip paintings in the Jackson Pollock show that opens Sunday at the 
Museum of Modern Art: they are now closer in time to the reign of 
Queen Victoria or to the production of the Model T than to us. The 
prudent response to the first full-blown Pollock retrospective in 
30 years is probably skepticism, Pollock having provoked, pro and 
con, too much silly verbiage, more than any other American artist, 
probably more than all other American artists combined. I should therefore 
begin by ritually deflating the Pollock balloon: pointing out how 
bad his early works are; mulling over their tortured symbolism and 
clotted surfaces; stressing how brief the breakthrough period was, 
and recapitulating how he burned out and died drunk in a car wreck 
in 1956, at 44. But what can I say? The retrospective, a landmark, 
is nearly perfect. Restraint is pointless. If you care about art you 
live for exhibitions like this, in which an artist, against the heavy 
odds of his own skewed talent and unhinged personality, pursued something 
so wild, untested and mysterious that its full meaning was unclear 
even to him, yet who briefly wrung from his peculiar system of painting 
one variation after another. This is perhaps the biggest accomplishment 
of the retrospective that Kirk Varnedoe has organized with Pepe Karmel: 
bringing together so many different pictures from Pollock's glory 
years, they prove how little the drip paintings conform to any single 
description (starting with the word drip) and how much they demand 
to be regarded closely, anew, one by one _ which is what exhibitions 
are for. It's funny how an old-fashioned formalist re-examination 
of the art can seem like a fresh approach after all the psychobabble 
and Cold War conspiracy theorizing and pop social analysis that has 
dominated Pollock studies for years. It's as if the open-ended, free-floating 
nature of Pollock's art, which for many people has been a block to 
seeing it and a sign of emptiness, has seemed like an opportunity 
to fill a void for writers from Clement Greenberg on. Varnedoe in 
the show's catalog neatly disassembles Greenberg's arguments about 
Pollock, pointing out among other things how rarely Greenberg, the 
formalist, actually described the work in formal terms. One reason 
he rarely did was no doubt that describing them is very difficult. 
I jotted down the following list while walking through the show: Pollock's 
paint is slathered, splashed, flicked, smudged, scrawled, poured, 
marbled, applied with a brush, with a stick, through a pinhole in 
a can, wet on wet or wet on dry. Contrary to legend, a lot of the 
paint is carefully, slowly put down. Karmel has pointed out, for instance, 
an X shape with a hook in a corner of ``Autumn Rhythm,'' which looks 
serendipitous but was done painstakingly over time. Pollock developed 
gestures, like handwriting marks _ elbow-shapes, X's, commas _ which 
may derive partly from the Surreal figures he drew and painted in 
the 1940s, although it's a fool's game to try to attribute specific 
meanings to them. What's important is that they allowed him a certain 
freedom: working on the floor, it wasn't easy for him to see what 
he was doing, but he knew from experience what these particular shapes 
would look like when he moved the canvas to the wall. Hence, repetition 
bred diversity. Pollock built on these established forms or gestures, 
varying everything else. The surfaces, for example, could be powdery 
(``Lavender Mist'') or crusted like tar (``Lucifer''), smooth like 
hardened stone, thick and tacky or thin and transparent. Lines could 
hang like moss on a tree (``Cathedral''); they could resemble a bramble 
or a nest (``No. 5, 1948''), or they might camouflage an image (``Galaxy''). 
They may also suggest the looping calligraphy of Chinese script (``Enchanted 
Forest'') or simply be spun-sugar lines floating against a lighter 
surface. Often, of course, they are impossibly entangled, black and 
white with other colored marks, so you can't distinguish what's on 
top from what's underneath. One of the most delicate, elegant works 
in the exhibition is a drawing (``No. 14, 1948''), which recalls Islamic 
filigree. To paint it, Pollock seems to have dripped black enamel 
into wet gesso so that the thicker lines, like sperm-shaped swirls, 
bleed at their edges into gray shadows, while thin lines nearly evaporate. 
The above descriptions are intended to prove, first of all, that none 
of the pat definitions suffice with Pollock. He was always trying 
to stretch the parameters of the narrow agenda he set for himself, 
and if he sometimes botched the results, which he did, this was intrinsic 
to a process that consciously flirted with incoherence: accidents, 
upon which the art depended, had to be held in tension with acts of 
control. The exhibition is instructive because you see some of the 
failures, which clarify his successes by contrast. His biggest triumphs 
are, of course, the classic paintings from 1950: ``Autumn Rhythm,'' 
``No. 32'' and ``One.'' They are hung together here so you can scan 
them by swiveling your head 180 degrees. It's an amazing sight. Standing 
a few feet away from them, I had the odd and slightly dizzying feeling 
of staring up into the sky. I don't mean that the works resembled 
constellations, an old metaphor for Pollock's art. I mean that they 
provoked a disorienting sensation. The art has no center, no point 
of focus. Most Pollocks, contrary to the myth of permanent epic scale, 
are easel size, but these, which are very large, compel you to be 
at a distance from them to take in a whole image while at the same 
time you want to nose up to their details. Pollock is simultaneously 
a big painter and a very fine one, and the way we are forced to move 
back and forth in front of his works recapitulates the ballet he performed 
while painting them. He was a dancer in notoriously confined quarters. 
Varnedoe has included a full-size reproduction of Pollock's Long Island 
studio in the show, which some people will think is hokey but should 
be instructive for those who have never been there: it shows that 
the studio was barely large enough to hold the big paintings. The 
famous Hans Namuth photographs of Pollock at work illustrate how cramped 
it was, too, although the real point is that Pollock's pictures always 
appear to be gigantic, even when they aren't, because they somehow 
seem to expand in space. Nothing in art since then, not Pop or Minimalism 
or anything else, is as radical and audacious. It doesn't matter that 
other artists dripped paint before Pollock; they didn't make of it 
what he did. To play C-E-G on a piano is not to compose a Mozart sonata. 
Pollock's paintings remain the central story of modern art in the 
second half of the century, above all because they gave permission 
to all other artists to break the rules. And Pollock's first great 
painting, ``Mural,'' is shocking if you haven't seen it before (it 
almost never leaves the University of Iowa Museum of Art, which owns 
it) because it's so vivid. At 19 feet long, it's an enormous panorama 
of soft pink, yellow and turquoise mixed with black, almost a Caribbean 
palette, which makes the swarm of compressed whorling shapes (like 
dancing stick figures in a swirl of tall grass) seem to shimmer. The 
colors project light and warmth. Likewise the last great work in the 
show, ``Blue Poles,'' which curiously is almost a reprise of ``Mural,'' 
with a similar friezelike layout, is a thicket of the most delicate 
spidery webs strung like nets across a gummy, impastoed underlayer 
encrusted by Pollock with bits of junk like broken glass. Totemic 
shapes, the blue poles, more or less regularize the image, the way 
yard markers do a football field. The colors are so bright they're 
garish. Pollock was, I think, purposely vulgar at times. In life and 
art, he seems to have swung between vulgarity and prissiness. In ``Blue 
Poles,'' he combined them. The picture turned me off initially, then 
I came around to it. Good art threatens established taste but, by 
persuasion, gradually changes it. I began to see the work through 
the prism of Rauschenberg and Jim Dine and Frank Stella, for whom 
Pollock set the stage. In the same way, Pollock's early art can be 
located and explained, up to a point, in terms of his many predecessors: 
Picasso, Klee, Ernst, Miro, Orozco, Siqueiros, Benton, Ryder and so 
on. But we should be careful about making too much of these connections. 
Almost from the start, Pollock had powerful advocates who saw in his 
early work not a hodgepodge of Surrealist tics and sub-Picasso figuration 
but a new and distinctly American sensibility. Mondrian, no less, 
admired ``Stenographic Figure,'' which looks to us merely derivative. 
Pollock was recognized as America's most original painter even before 
he became America's most original painter. I stress this fact because 
Pollock's originality was not like, say, de Kooning's. De Kooning, 
whose art remained rooted in European tradition, spawned imitators, 
but Pollock elaborated a way of painting so particular to him that 
it was impossible to copy without seeming to fake a Pollock. Artists 
learned from him about things like gravity and spillage. They got 
the idea of working on the floor, using industrial materials and becoming, 
in a way, performers. His legacy in fact was much broader and more 
significant than de Kooning's. But it was less direct. And this helps 
explain why 50 years after the fact, it's still hard for many people 
to see what's original in Pollock. They continue to see him as Jack 
the Dripper, American art's first media celebrity, a bald James Dean 
in black denim, a glorified doodler. It's remarkable that at the end 
of the 20th century, pure abstract painting, which he brought to a 
peak, remains the most difficult art for many people to grasp because 
content is still commonly mistaken for subject matter, as if a picture 
with no recognizable images in it can't be about anything. Yet what 
is a Pollock about? The question troubled even him. In the early 1950s, 
he gave up pouring paint and returned to doing something like what 
he had done in the '40s: painting abstracted figures and other tangible 
forms. The results aren't all bad, but they have the odor of desperation 
and are painfully miscellaneous: the last room in the exhibition looks 
like a group show, the works are so dissimilar. Richard Tuttle, the 
artist, once described the best of Pollock as archetypally American 
because the work appeared to have arisen, as it were, from scratch, 
out of its own internal energy. American art, the best of it, anyway, 
seemed somehow self-generated. It was about invention. European art, 
Tuttle said, was concerned with what had already been done. I know 
what he means. Pollock didn't come out of nowhere, but he was a quintessential 
American because of his aspiration to make something from what seemed 
like nothing. Having said more than he knew with his drip paintings, 
he clearly didn't know what else to say at the end of his life. In 
retrospect, he had already, of course, said more than enough. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>