<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0404 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the Boston auto show on Friday, the Saturn Corp. pulled the wraps 
off a new model. And while such an introduction is routine for most 
auto manufacturers, it is a rare occurrence for Saturn. Thirteen years 
after General Motors Corp. established Saturn as a grand $5 billion 
experiment, and eight years after customers began to take delivery 
of the small cars built in Spring Hill, Tenn., Saturn has been a success 
in several ways. It consistently ranks near the top in customer satisfaction 
and buyer loyalty surveys. It has successfully established itself 
as a youthful, customer-oriented brand capable of taking on the imports, 
and it has brought in the kind of buyers _ including relatively young, 
well-educated women _ that other GM divisions have had trouble seducing. 
And some of Saturn's experimental processes have worked so well they 
have spread to other parts of GM _ one of the original reasons the 
subsidiary was set up. Yet while Saturn has plenty of fans, it doesn't 
have a lot of new products. Aside from the EV1 electric car that is 
leased (in very low volume) through Saturn dealers in California and 
Arizona, the three-door coupe unveiled in Boston is Saturn's first 
real change in its model lineup since its cars went on sale in 1990. 
Even then, Saturn's cars were almost a sideshow to the rest of the 
experiment. The basic lineup _ compact coupes, sedans and station 
wagons built on one platform _ was developed in the mid-1980s, and 
the cars were by no means on the cutting edge when they finally reached 
the market. To be sure, the styling and interior designs have been 
freshened since then, but the mechanical systems have been tweaked 
only slightly. Meanwhile, primary competitors like the Honda Civic 
and Toyota Corolla have gone through two thorough redesigns that have 
made them feel far more up to date. Saturn's dated cars are also competing 
in the coldest part of the market. Small-car sales have plunged 20 
percent in the last two years as customers have shifted to midsize 
sedans and sport utility vehicles. Saturn sales fell 10 percent in 
1997 and are expected to be off another 8 percent this year. Sales 
of the Civic have risen. With industry-wide sales incentives at their 
highest level in several years, Saturn is saddled with an official 
no-haggling policy, presenting prospective customers with a take-it-or-leave-it 
price. And while competitors offer cash rebates and cut-rate leases, 
Saturn does not. Rather than permit dealers to discount, Saturn has 
reduced prices on some models or added equipment. Already growing 
old, the compact Saturns are not scheduled for a major redesign until 
the 2003 model year, by which time they will reach the geriatric age 
of 12. At that time, the small car line shifts to a platform derived 
from the Opel Astra that will be shared with other GM cars. A small 
Saturn sport utility is to arrive as a 2002 model, more than a decade 
after the boom in sport utilities began. By then, Toyota and Honda 
will be offering second generations of their RAV4 and CR-V, and other 
new entries will crowd the market. In the interim, Saturn's hope is 
a midsize car due next spring as a 2000 model. The LS _ for ``large 
Saturn'' _ uses a platform derived from that of the Opel Vectra, a 
German-built car that was introduced in 1996. Modifications include 
replacing steel body panels with plastic. (Current owners say plastic 
panels are part of what makes a Saturn a Saturn.) The LS sedan and 
station wagon will be powered by a new four-cylinder engine exclusive 
to Saturn and, for the first time in the division's history, a V6, 
which is a variant of the Opel engine used in the Cadillac Catera 
and the Saab 9-5. While a midsize car will be a welcome addition to 
the Saturn line, its success is not assured. The LS will enter one 
of the most competitive parts of the market, taking on a group of 
very competent cars including America's best-sellers, the Toyota Camry, 
Honda Accord and Ford Taurus. There is also the question of whether 
consumers will view the LS as a true Saturn. ``The LS absolutely is 
a Saturn,'' Joe Kennedy, Saturn vice president of sales, service and 
marketing, said in a recent interview. Kennedy contends that consumers 
will recognize the LS as quintessentially Saturn, due to its styling, 
interior ambiance and attributes like the plastic body panels. The 
Saturn LS will be built at a GM plant in Wilmington, Del., that had 
been slated to close, using workers covered by the UAW's national 
labor agreement. In contrast, Saturns are now built at a Tennessee 
plant designed specifically to produce them. The workers were selected 
from GM employees nationwide and are covered by a special contract 
that rewards them for meeting quality, sales and profit objectives. 
What makes a Saturn a Saturn includes the way it is built and developed, 
insisted Mike Bennett, manufacturing adviser and chairman of the bargaining 
committee for UAW Local 1853, which represents Saturn workers in Tennessee. 
He said that on the new LS, it was Opel _ not Saturn or the workers 
_ that determined the design and specified the parts. More broadly, 
the union senses that the independence and distinctiveness of Saturn 
are eroding as it has been folded into GM's small car group and has 
undergone a series of management changes. There has been no cheerleader 
for Saturn at the top of the company, as there was with Roger B. Smith, 
the GM chairman when Saturn was born. Still, Saturn remains optimistic 
about the LS. While executives won't confirm sales projections, dealers 
are being told to plan for sales practically to double; the plant 
can turn out 200,000 cars a year. The 390 current dealerships are 
being encouraged to expand, remodel showrooms and add outlets. Last 
week, Saturn said it would encourage dealers to invest $100,000 each 
to install fireplaces, aquariums, cappuccino machines and libraries 
in their showrooms, to give them a homey feel. Some dealers, however, 
are reluctant to pump more investment into dealerships that cost them, 
on average, $5 million to build and, due to slumping sales, aren't 
nearly as profitable as they once were. Analysts, likewise, are skeptical 
about Saturn's plan to double sales. They think the midsize LS is 
likely to cannibalize sales of the compact line. ``One plus one doesn't 
equal two in this case, but maybe one and a half,'' said Maryann Keller, 
the auto-industry analyst for ING Baring in New York. Saturn is counting 
on midsize car buyers yearning for the Saturn's pleasing sales and 
ownership experience. ``There are a lot of midsize buyers who would 
love the shopping, buying, owning experience that is the cornerstone 
of Saturn and that has not been available to them,'' Kennedy said. 
The long delay in offering new products has some analysts wondering 
whether the effort will be too little, too late. ``One would have 
thought that G.M. management would have figured out long ago that 
no car company can stay afloat on one product without substantial 
change,'' said Ms. Keller, who is pessimistic about Saturn's long-term 
well-being. ``Saturn's product disaster _ and it is a disaster _ lays 
absolutely at the feet of GM management.'' John Casesa, an analyst 
for Schroder &AMP; Co., said Saturn was now in the unenviable position 
of playing defense rather than offense. ``Saturn has to try to regain 
its momentum because GM waited a long time to give it another product,'' 
he said. Kennedy, the Saturn executive, defends GM's stewardship, 
noting that decisions on future Saturn products would have had to 
be made in the early 1990s when the parent company was in a deep financial 
crisis, its board had ousted its top managers and Saturn had not yet 
proved itself. Saturn faces other, formidable challenges beyond its 
shortage of new products. Its pampering of customers is being copied 
by competitors who can offer a broader range of cars and trunks. Its 
original goals included a mandate to beat the Japanese at their own 
game on their home turf. Saturn established its Japanese beachhead 
in April 1997, just before a deep recession. Import sales are off 
sharply in Japan, and Saturn has had to scale back its ambitious plans 
there. And labor relations in Spring Hill, once held up as a model 
for the industry, have grown strained. Local 1853 voted last summer 
to authorize its leaders to call a strike, partly because members 
said that the unusual Saturn-UAW partnership was being undercut by 
GM's moves toward common platforms and parts. Since then, the union 
local has received assurances that the Saturn partnership will be 
continued. And so in many ways the broader question raised by the 
Saturn experiment falls to GM management: Will Saturn remain a different 
kind of car company, as it advertises, or will it be just another 
GM division? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>