<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0298 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thirteen days ago they thrilled to the news that Gen. Augusto Pinochet 
had been arrested in London on a Spanish warrant accusing him of committing 
genocide during his 17-year rule of Chile. On Wednesday they reverted 
to despair on hearing that the British High Court had ruled that Pinochet 
had diplomatic immunity and that he could be released to return to 
Chile unpunished. ``If someone could just manage to make Pinochet 
confess, maybe I could find my brother's resting place,'' said Miriam 
Tamayo, 43, as a single tear rolled down her cheek. ``I just want 
to put a flower by his grave.'' Ms. Tamayo's brother was one of 94 
Chileans named in the Spanish warrant who disappeared from neighboring 
countries, where they had fled after Pinochet seized power. Even now, 
Ms. Tamayo and other relatives of the disappeared meet every Tuesday 
afternoon, sharing their pictures, the scraps of information they 
have meticulously assembled, and their rage. Juan Humberto Campos, 
48, was stripped of his command as a captain in the Chilean army after 
the disappearance of his brother Jose in 1981. ``I will feel content 
only when Pinochet finally faces justice,'' he said. Their hopes were 
raised when Pinochet, 82, who ruled Chile as a dictator from 1973 
to 1990, was arrested on a warrant issued by Judge Baltasar Garzon 
Real, the Spanish judge who has accused him of coordinating a plan 
to find and eliminate scores of Chilean, Argentine and Spanish citizens 
who had fled from Chile to neighboring countries after the 1973 military 
coup. Garzon's investigation is the most thorough look so far at that 
plan, called Operation Condor, one of the most closely held secrets 
of the Pinochet regime. Operation Condor has already been disclosed 
by a Chilean commission that in 1991 documented the disappearances 
of more than 3,000 Chileans but did not name the officers responsible. 
Garzon is focusing on a relatively small number of victims listed 
in the Chilean commission's report _ those who lost their lives in 
what he describes as a shadowy international criminal conspiracy in 
which the security forces of Argentina, Bolivia and perhaps Paraguay 
also took part. ``It's a mystery that breaks the heart,'' said Ana 
Maria Saguate, who has wondered why anyone would have gone to so much 
trouble to hunt down her father in Buenos Aires. ``We don't know what 
he was charged with. He deserved a lawyer, a judge and his family 
to help him just like Pinochet does in London.'' The Case of Jorge 
Saguate Herrera The case of Jorge Saguate Herrera is perhaps the most 
mystifying of those included in Garzon's warrant. At 51, he had recently 
retired as a bookkeeper in the Chilean Air Force's traffic control 
office and was living in Argentina, when he was shoved into the trunk 
of an unmarked car by Argentine security agents and never seen again. 
Maybe Saguate was targeted because he never tried to hide his disgust 
with the Pinochet coup as he continued to work a couple of years for 
the air force. Maybe he was targeted because he had hidden two leftist 
Spanish nuns in his house from the police before he finally retired 
and left Chile with his family in May 1975. Or maybe it was because, 
as a refugee in Buenos Aires, he lent money and gave other help to 
Chilean exiles. As Saguate's widow, Hilda, 73, told the story, Saguate 
was house-sitting for a Chilean friend, Jose Luis Nell, who was living 
in Buenos Aires but had taken a trip to Paraguay. Nell was arrested 
in Paraguay. A few days later, Argentine security forces raided his 
house in Buenos Aires, where they found Saguate. They also found a 
list of Chilean political prisoners in one of Saguate's jackets. The 
police then seized him, and he was never heard from again. What little 
his family does know comes from a witness of the raid who fled the 
house and told the Saguates what he had seen. No one knows why the 
Argentine security forces would have let the witness go, and Saguate's 
family believes he may have worked for Chilean intelligence. As soon 
as her husband disappeared and the family left Argentina for Norway, 
their Chilean lawyer used his power of attorney to sell their house 
in Santiago and pocketed the money. With jobs hard to come by in Chile, 
especially for former political exiles, three of Hilda's five children 
have remained in Norway. ``More than 20 years,'' Hilda said, crying, 
``that's a long time to live with this. For all I know, my husband 
is still alive.'' Over the last few days, Hilda and two of her daughters 
have been waiting to see what will happen to Pinochet in London. ``It 
was really painful for us,'' said Patricia Saguate, 40, when the family 
heard that the British court agreed with the Chilean government that 
General Pinochet had diplomatic immunity. ``It means that future dictators 
who commit genocides that will kill many more like our father will 
go unpunished.'' The Case of Luis Enrique Elgueta Diaz Laura Elgueta 
Diaz, 40, was taken completely by surprise. Sitting at her desk in 
a press office of the Chilean foreign ministry and scanning news about 
the Pinochet case on the Internet the other day, she read that Garzon's 
warrant included the case of her brother Luis Enrique Elgueta Diaz. 
She immediately called her mother, Ruth, a 69-year-old nutritionist, 
and they shared tears of joy. Luis was a guitarist who sang in a folk 
band that accompanied President Salvador Allende Gossens when he toured 
the country before the coup that toppled the Socialist government 
in 1973. His family described him as a gentle idealist, who immediately 
took responsibility for getting a woman pregnant by marrying her. 
Luis fled the country after the coup, but returned in June 1975 thinking 
that the military would soon return to the barracks. He took up music 
studies at the University of Chile while working clandestinely for 
the Movement of the Revolutionary Left, or MIR, a Marxist group that 
espoused the tactics of Che Guevara. Luis' family members say they 
still wonder what he did for the MIR and whether he ever broke the 
law _ questions they hope might be answered if Pinochet is ever tried. 
They said he was expelled from the university for his activism. And 
after several of his MIR comrades disappeared, he decided to leave 
for Argentina. But before he left, they said, Luis gave a friend named 
Sergio the phone number where he could be found in Buenos Aires. A 
year later, Sergio was picked up by the Chilean secret police, according 
to Garzon's warrant. Four weeks after that, Luis disappeared from 
his apartment in Buenos Aires. Members of Luis' family, who also lived 
for a time in Argentina in exile, have investigated the case and added 
many details to Garzon's warrant. They said that witnesses living 
in Luis' building reported that a group of 15 to 20 men, some in Argentine 
military uniforms, broke into Luis' apartment at 2 a.m. on July 27, 
1976. Luis was seen resisting the Argentine soldiers, kicking and 
screaming as they tossed him and a friend into a blue Ford Falcon. 
The Garzon summons said Luis was handed over to the Chilean secret 
police in Buenos Aires, and never seen again. For the next two years, 
Luis' mother said, she knocked on the doors of Argentine police and 
military offices in a vain attempt to find answers. But the family 
eventually moved to Mexico after Laura was picked up for several hours 
by Argentine security agents, nearly raped, and warned by a man she 
said had a strong Chilean accent to give up her search for her brother. 
Ruth said she went on believing that her son was still alive for 10 
years, until some friends in Mexico took her to see a fortune teller. 
``He told me `You have a problem, a family member who disappeared 
_ I don't see him now because he is below a lot of water,''' she recalled, 
nearly losing her composure in a flush of tears. ``I then figured, 
considering how tortured people suffer, it was better that he be dead.'' 
But now the family must endure another crisis. When Laura heard about 
the British court decision yesterday, she said, ``I called my parents 
and they were crying. I was so disgusted I left work and went home 
depressed. Perhaps we expected too much.'' The Case of Luis Gonzalo 
Munoz Velasquez Time feels frozen in the little house where Edith 
Munoz Velasquez, a 54-year-old kindergarten teacher, lives on the 
outskirts of Santiago. A photograph of Allende, the Socialist president 
overthrown by Pinochet in 1973, hangs on the wall among memorabilia 
of the Socialist struggle. And then, of course, hang pictures of her 
younger brother, Luis, along with two other men who disappeared with 
him 22 years ago in the Argentine city of Mendoza. Trained as an accountant, 
Luis was an avid soccer player. He had been a prominent leader of 
the Chilean Socialist Party's youth organization, and was beginning 
to campaign as a candidate for the City Council of the town of San 
Bernardo. Luis remained in Chile after the coup, collecting food to 
take to jails holding political prisoners. After several family members, 
all Socialist Party activists, were arrested for questioning, he left 
Argentina in September 1975 for Mendoza. There he did various jobs, 
but concentrated his efforts on helping resettle Chilean political 
refugees, according to family members. As Edith told the story, Luis 
and his two Chilean friends in Mendoza felt threatened by early 1976 
after they noticed they were being followed by men they did not know. 
On April 2, they visited the office of a local human rights group 
asking for shelter. They were told to go back the next day. When they 
did, the three were kidnapped only a block away from the human rights 
office, leading Edith to believe someone in the organization had tipped 
off Chilean intelligence. The Garzon warrant said that they were picked 
up by ``joint forces of the Argentine Federal Police and Chilean secret 
police agents,'' then taken overland across the Chilean border a few 
weeks later. Edith says her brother Alex happened to be standing a 
block away from Luis when he was picked up, witnessed the kidnapping, 
and told her Argentine sailors took part in the operation. Luis' parents, 
Maria and Federico, a retired military officer, spent the last years 
of their lives in exile in Winnipeg, Canada, dedicated to finding 
their missing son. Federico flew back to Chile with a local Canadian 
politician to seek answers. Maria went to the Winnipeg airport repeatedly, 
a picture of Luis in hand, to ask incoming Chilean refugees and tourists 
if they had seen him. And she always said that when she died she would 
haunt Pinochet. Maria would put her grandchildren on her lap to tell 
them stories about their uncle, and how they should dedicate their 
lives to his ideals. Today, several belong to the Socialist Party 
youth organization and joined in demonstrations against Pinochet when 
he entered the Senate as an unelected member seven months ago. Edith 
and her brother Hernan said they know Luis must be dead, but they 
want to find his remains and give him a proper burial. ``Before they 
died, our parents said that one day they wanted to lie in peace next 
to Luis,'' Edith said. ``I never lose hope that Pinochet will someday 
face justice. God sometimes takes his time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>