<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0216 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This city is too nearly infinite to have a center, too hot-and-cold 
to locate its putative heart. But if one place can claim a measure 
of overall symbolism for the metropolis, it is City Hall and its adjoining 
park. City Hall itself is both grace note and anomaly, surrounded 
by Park Row, which once housed the legendary newspapers of James Gordon 
Bennett, Horace Greeley, Joseph Pulitzer and William Randolph Hearst, 
and now plays host to hipper media like J&AMP;R Music/Computer World; 
by that majestic cathedral-skyscraper, the Woolworth Building, with 
its beige and taupe terra cotta cladding; by the muscular Municipal 
Building, a McKim, Mead &AMP; White wedding cake of Stalinist-architecture 
bulk, abutting the on-ramp to the Brooklyn Bridge; by Ellen's Coffee 
Shop, a New York institution run by an ex-Miss Subways, its walls 
covered with other Miss Subways winners; and by the masses of civil 
service workers on lunch break, shoppers frequenting bargain-discount 
outlets and former inmates just bailed out of the nearby jail, all 
strolling up Chambers Street. An 18th-century petit-palais built at 
the inception of the 19th-century (1803-1812), City Hall stubbornly 
offers up its neoclassical charms, looking nobly trim, without an 
ounce of imperial pomposity, its scale suggesting the perfect administrative 
headquarters for a city of, say, 200,000. There is something comic 
about the fact that this toylike structure, this doll house set amid 
skyscrapers, still serves as the command post for the mayor and City 
Council of contemporary New York. I remember the first time I saw 
City Hall. I was being honored there, along with other sixth graders, 
for my composition on fire prevention. At 12, what did I care about 
fire prevention? I was a hack, like most early achievers, turning 
out facile prose to meet my masters' needs. The call would come down 
from the Board of Education for an essay competition on some civics 
topic _ brotherhood, the Four Freedoms _ and I would oblige, usually 
to no avail. This time I got lucky. On a hot June day I sat on a folding 
chair with the other district winners, all goody-goodies, and listened 
to the fire commissioner's speech, and went up the City Hall steps 
to receive my ``Little Hot Spot'' silver medal. Then (I like to imagine) 
I looked up at the graceful relic and my heart swelled with pride. 
But I know better. You step back today and think, ``My God, it's stood 
up well!'' However, this, you discover later, is not the original 
facade: age, weather and chemical pollution had weakened the surface 
to such an extent that, in the early 1950s, every stone, column, capital 
and carving had to be duplicated in sturdier materials. An amazing 
labor of love, testifying to the irreplaceable nature of this building 
in New York's mythos. The interior is less restored, closer to its 
earlier character. And it is the interior that is really the dazzling 
part, with its flying marble staircases drawing the eye upward to 
the building's cupola. Inside, all is curved, sinuous, coquettish, 
in contrast to the exterior's bluff rectangularity, so that the effect 
is of achieving the impossible: placing a round peg in a square hole. 
One tends to forget that New York is not so young; it is older than 
Russia's St. Petersburg. But most of 17th- and 18th-century Manhattan 
has been destroyed, by fire or the cost of real estate, leaving City 
Hall as perhaps the island's oldest structure still functioning as 
originally intended (i.e., not retired to museum status). City Hall 
was supposed to anchor the northernmost point of New York's development, 
which is why the building faces south. Today, it seems to be perversely 
ignoring the majority of its constituents as it eyes the narrow bunion 
of land, the original Dutch colony of New Amsterdam, from which the 
city grew. Washington Irving, in his parodic ``History of New York'' 
(1809), related that the city's streets sprang willy-nilly from the 
meanderings of grazing cows. Curiously, Irving wrote this at the same 
time the new City Hall was being built. Its French style, its symmetry 
and siting, marked the beginning of a more formal vision of town planning, 
and augured the abandonment of the ``cow-path'' approach for the geometric 
grid structure that New York would ultimately follow. Earlier, around 
1790, New York had lost its status as the young nation's capital to 
Washington. In return, freed from the stodgy atmosphere of national 
politics and bureaucracies, it would develop a more intensely focused 
sense of identity: mercantile and cultural, polyglot and speedy. The 
city fathers' choice of such a sophisticated architectural contest 
entry (by Joseph Mangin, a French architect, in association with the 
Scotsman John McComb Jr.) for their City Hall already shows a certain 
awareness of, and confidence in, the destiny ahead. A century later, 
Henry James marveled in ``The American Scene'' (1907) that a citizen 
could still go anywhere inside this City Hall, with an American confidence 
that ``the civic building is his very own.'' He compared such ``penetration'' 
with the ``romantic thrill'' of ``some assault of the dim seraglio, 
with the guards bribed, the eunuchs drugged and one's life carried 
in one's hand.'' These days one's approach to City Hall's interior 
mysteries seems barred by the burly guard at the door and the threatening 
metal detector, suggesting some erosions of democracy since James' 
day. Yet the curious may still enter. A sign greets your eyes: ``Mayor 
Rudolph W. Giuliani Congratulates the New York Yankees 1996 World 
Series Champions. Please Sign In Here.'' The trophies for 1996 and 
1998 are both on display. This is tacky on several counts: the mayor 
is trying to take credit for the success of one local baseball team, 
which offends the delicate sensibilities of rival Mets fans (like 
myself) and which introduces a gratuitous billboard ugliness into 
a historical landmark of surpassing elegance. I refuse to sign in 
(my big rebellion), I pay my respects to the Governor's Room portrait 
gallery and leave. The 12 steps in front of City Hall retain their 
function as the place where mayors are sworn in, ceremonial speeches 
made, distinguished visitors receive the key to the city, heroes of 
the fire and police departments are awarded medals and baseball heroes, 
like the mayor's Yankees, are honored. In the past, political protests, 
uniformed union picketers, garbage strikers, school decentralization 
battles, all came to rest here. Although professed concern over terrorism 
has currently made the steps off limits to such phenomena, City Hall 
Park remains a flashpoint for such social struggles as last week's 
march against police brutality _ or at least a symbolic stage from 
which to launch appeals to the media. The mayor holds his news conferences 
at City Hall; the City Council, with its beautiful gallery for spectators, 
convenes here as well, often putting forward a position at odds with 
the mayor's. One cannot help thinking, however, in our age of global 
interdependency, that some of this political posturing has become 
a dumb show, since, in fact, no one is governing New York City, or 
can. In spite _ or because? _ of my skepticism that the mayors of 
New York are still in charge, I find these men ruling the city's imagination 
like Shakespearean monarchs or buffoons. Just as I divide my private 
adult life into eras ruled by this or that woman, so I categorize 
the public arena of the last 40 years not by the terms of U.S. presidents 
(they are too remote, too abstract) but New York mayors: Vincent R. 
Impelliteri, Robert F. Wagner, John V. Lindsay, Abraham D. Beame, 
Edward I. Koch. David N. Dinkins, Rudolph W. Giuliani. These names 
have an indescribable savor; these are my madeleines. Today I loiter 
on the City Hall steps and watch the lawyers in gray suits and yellow 
ties, holding attache cases, conversing with female colleagues in 
brown or black suits while their underlings carry expandable folders 
crammed with affidavits, legal papers, etc. Anyone climbing to the 
top step and imagining himself orating to the citizenry would quickly 
have his fantasy undercut by noticing, just beyond a shallow strip 
of pavement big enough for a modest crowd, a parking lot for official 
cars. In other words, the space in front of City Hall, once allotted 
for civic congregation, has been chopped up and ceded to the powers 
that be. It is only after you get beyond this offensively private 
car lot, which bisects City Hall Park, that the feeling of public 
space takes over again and you experience something like the original 
``commons'' that was intended for the park. It is a pleasure to see 
how amicably the park is used by so many different types: office workers, 
vagrants, tourists, mothers with strollers. The formula seems so simple: 
if you want people to sit in a public space, all you need do, as urbanist 
William H. Whyte sagely observed, is provide seats. City Hall Park 
has a plenitude of benches. The trees help immensely in creating a 
comfortable atmosphere. For public space to function as naturally 
and successfully as City Hall Park, it takes a historical ``walking'' 
city, a tolerable climate and a habit of malingering. Chinese families 
cut through the park on their way to East Broadway; a troop of black 
youngsters on a field trip pause in their march and spread over several 
benches, Hasidic Jews hurry to their destinations. Some Puerto Rican 
children are splashing ecstatically at the fountain's edge. A middle-aged, 
overweight man sits reading a tourist guide to the Greek Islands. 
On the next bench, a drunk lies sprawled, sleeping it off. The flower 
beds have been nicely planted. Still, there is a ragged, scruffy quality 
about this park. It is never immaculate; the grass always has its 
share of wrappers, cellophane, coffee cup lids _ a small price to 
pay for popularity. With the sounds of sirens, car alarms, Broadway 
and Brooklyn Bridge traffic swirling around, you can't call the park 
an ``oasis of tranquillity.'' It's something else again: a feast of 
urbanism, without apology. I would be derelict in my duty as cicerone 
of City Hall Park if I did not mention another, more notorious building 
in the park, not far from the beloved landmark. This is the Old New 
York County Courthouse, a handsome Victorian structure that took 20 
years (1858-1878) to build, and became the opportunity for enormous 
graft, kickbacks and pocketing of public funds. The Tweed Ring, a 
political machine under the aegis of Boss Tweed, was said to have 
made off with $10 million of the $14 million construction cost. The 
building is currently under scaffolding restoration. Tweed himself 
is undergoing something of a rehabilitation by revisionist historians 
who argue that the patronage system he presided over, however nepotistic 
and corrupt, at least gave the working class and new immigrants a 
leg up. So ``this imperfect triangle of City Hall Park'' (WPA Guide 
to New York City, 1939) can be read as an allegory, embodying the 
metropolis' three basic types of democratic expression: a formally 
elected, representative democracy, as exemplified by the dignified 
self-containment of City Hall itself; a more corrupt arrangement (and 
what is more typically New York than corruption?) but more approachable, 
direct access to power, in the symbolic presence of Tweed's courthouse; 
and finally, the Whitmanesque democratic spirit, characterized by 
pedestrian flow and the erotics of eye contact in the expanse of City 
Hall Park where the people exercise their sovereign prerogatives of 
leisure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>