<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0390 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The government's $23.5 billion austerity package intended to reduce 
the budget deficit next year, crucial for securing International Monetary 
Fund credit and restoring Brazil's fiscal credibility, moved to Congress 
here Thursday, where reaction foreshadowed bitter political wrangling 
to come. While most legislators embraced the need for the savings, 
they contested the formula that the government announced Wednesday, 
which relies on tax increases and pension payments from workers to 
meet more than half the promised amount. The program also does not 
include a currency devaluation, which could stimulate growth and tax 
receipts but also increase inflation and force smaller Latin American 
countries to devalue as well. For four hours Thursday, Finance Minister 
Pedro Malan and Central Bank president Gustavo Franco fielded questions 
and criticism from senators, many belonging to President Fernando 
Henrique Cardoso's party or to allied parties in the governing coalition. 
Investors appeared wary of government promises, and Brazil's benchmark 
stock index closed down 4.2 percent on a day on which most other Latin 
American markets rose. Paulo Mallman, an economist with Bic Banco 
in Sao Paulo, predicted that the government would deliver its promised 
savings, but added that negotiations toward reaching that would be 
``slower and more tortured'' than initially thought. Daniel Gleizer, 
chief of emerging markets research for Latin America at CSFB-Garantia 
Bank in Sao Paulo, agreed. ``The market is extremely nervous,'' he 
said. The austerity plan represents Brazil's long-awaited answer to 
the battering its finances have taken on world markets since Russia 
defaulted on some debts in August, arousing fear that a Brazilian 
collapse could cripple other Latin American economies and hurt the 
United States, which depends on Latin America to buy more than 20 
percent of its exports. The IMF has been working out a standby loan 
for Brazil, which is expected to combine at least $30 billion from 
the fund and other lending agencies, as well as a direct contribution 
from the United States and other big industrial nations. Brazil's 
spending cuts are essential to convince the IMF that the government 
is serious about austerity, while another element of the plan _ a 
timetable for confronting structural economic changes _ is meant to 
show that Brazil will use the help to find permanent solutions to 
bring public spending in line with revenue. Because the IMF and Brazil 
have a history of confrontation and disappointment in the 1980s, Malan 
and other officials are playing down the IMF's importance domestically. 
Instead, officials are selling the austerity plan as the only route 
to restore Brazil's standing in world markets, and so bring down interest 
rates that are choking business. As a team of Brazilian officials 
prepared to visit IMF headquarters in Washington, Malan told Congress, 
``Why should the rest of the world have faith in us if we don't demonstrate 
faith in our own ability to identify problems and not only announce 
solutions, but carry them out?'' A year ago, Brazil reacted to the 
financial collapse in Thailand by announcing a series of 51 measures 
to raise $18 billion. Though Congress passed the measures in record 
time, the government adopted only tax increases, and abandoned spending 
cuts, worsening Brazil's position when crisis set in again this year. 
Sen. Jeferson Peres, of Cardoso's Brazilian Social Democracy Party, 
assailed the administration Thursday, asking, ``Were there grave mistakes 
in our economic policy that we made?'' He said the country's future 
appeared now to hinge on an IMF endorsement. The cornerstones of the 
current austerity package include the near-doubling of a tax on all 
checks and financial transactions, to 0.38 percent from 0.20 percent, 
and the impounding by the national government of 40 percent of taxes 
earmarked for states and municipalities until 2006. The program also 
cuts into the interests of Brazil's highly protected civil service, 
increasing employees' pension contributions and calling on retired 
workers collecting more than $1,000 a month to pay as much as 20 percent 
of their benefits back into the system. The measures that promised 
to draw the most resistance appeared to be the pension changes, and 
by day's end, many Brazilian politicians suggested that one of the 
taxes on financial transactions was likely to rise less than requested. 
Opposition governors gathered at a private club here to chart their 
strategy to defeat the extension of the impounding of local tax revenue, 
which was to have expired in 1999, and another proposal that would 
force states to limit payments to active and retired civil servants 
to 60 percent of the budget. Vicente Paulo da Silva, leader of the 
biggest union, the Central Labor Union, called the measures recessionary 
and said they would ``deepen the country's crisis.'' He pledged that 
workers would protest from Nov. 3 to Dec. 10, roughly when Congress 
is expected to debate the pension changes. Sen. Jader Barbalho, of 
the government-allied Brazilian Democratic Movement Party, said that 
``in a democracy, nobody has the monopoly on truth,'' adding that 
his party would be open to alternative suggestions for savings, whether 
they came from the governing coalition or the opposition. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>