<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0408 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Southwest Airlines, the granddaddy of no-frills, discount carriers, 
has made its name flying short hops between secondary airports. But 
on Thanksgiving Day, the airline plans to offer its first nonstop, 
transcontinental service _ for $99 one way. Southwest is known for 
lowering fares where it flies, so its potential entry into the lucrative 
transcontinental market will be closely watched by the rest of the 
hypercompetitive airline industry. Perhaps for that reason, the airline 
is playing down the significance of the inaugural flight from Oakland 
to Baltimore and back, calling it a one-time test. ``It is an opportunity 
to generate some revenue on a relatively slow travel day because it 
is a holiday,'' said Linda Rutherford, a Southwest spokeswoman. ``It 
is using a plane that would otherwise sit idle.'' But few people who 
have watched Southwest grow from a Texas commuter carrier in the 1970s 
into one of the nation's larger airlines think that it is testing 
for nothing. ``This is the best news for consumers in a long, long 
time,'' said Terry Trippler, editor and publisher of the Airfare Report, 
an industry newsletter. Other industry specialists say Southwest faces 
some serious challenges if it tries to become a long-haul carrier. 
The airline's success has been based on frequent daily flights between 
destinations. By getting its flights in and out of airport gates in 
20 minutes, it has been able to use its planes and staff more productively 
than other carriers. ``Southwest's cost advantage is most notable 
on short-haul flights,'' said Brian D. Harris, an airline analyst 
with Salomon Smith Barney. ``I don't think their margins will be as 
good and their competitive advantage will be as good if they are flying 
transcontinental.'' Southwest is also known for bare-bones service. 
Its planes have no first-class cabins and no assigned seating. On 
most flights, the only food is peanuts, and the in-flight entertainment 
is supplied by wisecracking flight attendants. Regular transcontinental 
passengers are used to first-class upgrades and movies. But Southwest 
is wildly popular and has had success adding longer routes. It now 
offers coast-to-coast service using a change of planes in Nashville. 
It also has a direct flight from Providence, R.I., to Los Angeles 
that stops in Kansas City, Mo., but passengers do not have to change 
planes. Southwest has a strong incentive to lengthen its flights because 
of a new federal law that will eventually charge $3 a passenger each 
time a plane takes off and lands. Airlines used to be charged an excise 
tax on each ticket, but in a deliberate swipe at Southwest and other 
low-fare competitors, the large carriers pressed to have the tax reduced 
in exchange for takeoff and landing charges. Southwest faces other 
problems. After expanding from Texas into California, Florida and 
more recently into the Northeast in Baltimore, Providence and Manchester, 
N.H., it is facing stiffer competition. ``Their growth markets are 
not as robust as they were a few years ago,'' Harris said. But he 
added that Southwest, which has grown faster and has been more profitable 
than most larger competitors, is still a growth airline. While concern 
about a weakening economy has other carriers talking about scaling 
back plans to expand next year, Southwest intends to grow by 13 percent 
and is hungry for more. By the end of this year, it expects to have 
taken delivery of 20 new Boeing 737 jets with 29 more arriving in 
1999. These planes, which fly farther and burn less fuel than previous 
models, also allow Southwest more flexibility to fly coast to coast. 
Transcontinental service is certainly where the money is. United says 
the number of nonstop, coast-to-coast flights by all airlines has 
doubled since 1990. United has increased its transcontinental routes 
12 percent this year compared with growth of 3 percent to 4 percent 
on its full network. And Southwest cheers consumers. The unrestricted, 
last-minute transcontinental fares often paid by business travelers 
can rise above $900 one way in cities where Southwest has no presence. 
But from Providence to Los Angeles, United and others have matched 
Southwest's one-way unrestricted fare of $302. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>