<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0412 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While television viewers in Atlanta were learning on Wednesday afternoon 
that Michael Coles, the Democratic Senate candidate in Georgia, ``doesn't 
deserve a single vote,'' those in Los Angeles were told that Matt 
Fong, the Republican Senate candidate in California, ``is wrong on 
the issues that matter.'' Those watching in New York were informed 
that Rep. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., is devoted to ``raising taxes to 
spend on his pet programs,'' while Bostonians heard that Acting Gov. 
A. Paul Cellucci, a Republican, ``went back on his word'' after promising 
to hire new teachers. In Chicago, Sen. Carol Moseley-Braun, a Democrat, 
was being criticized for ``six years of scandal and controversy,'' 
while in Seattle, former Rep. Jay Inslee, a Democrat, was chastised 
for missing ``more than 60 percent of his committee meetings.'' Those 
often hyperbolic messages, all of them broadcast from 5 p.m. to 6 
p.m. ET, typify the Jerry Springer-style vitriol that prevails in 
the final days of the 1998 campaign. The enduring impression left 
by three hours of television viewing in six cities on Wednesday was 
one of overarching negativism, even at a point when campaigns typically 
abandon their attacks to finish with upbeat images. The level of negativity 
in this year's campaign is nothing new, according to media consultants 
and authorities on political advertising. But its volume and intensity 
is nonetheless striking, particularly in a week when Republicans opened 
a nationwide television advertising blitz that uses President Clinton's 
sex scandal as a theme. Armed with a channel changer, it was possible 
in Atlanta on Wednesday to skip from attack ad to attack ad while 
hardly ever landing on actual programming, as if the commercials were 
stepping stones in a stream. Of the 35 political advertisements viewed 
on four channels from 5 p.m. to 6 p.m., only a third failed to highlight 
an opponent's perceived shortcomings. During one three-minute station 
break on WAGA-TV, Atlanta's Fox affiliate, five different political 
ads aired back-to-back, with only one of them positive. At times, 
the candidates seemed to be debating through their advertisements. 
Immediately after an advertisement for Guy Millner, Georgia's Republican 
candidate for governor, accused Roy Barnes, the Democratic candidate, 
of supporting ``racial quotas and preferences,'' a Barnes commercial 
rebutted it by accusing Millner of being ``so desperate he's resorted 
to 1950s hate tactics.'' In a study of more than 500 advertisements 
in 30 states, Kathleen Hall Jamieson, dean of the Annenberg School 
for Communication at the University of Pennsylvania, found that campaign 
advertising is being dominated by commercials that attack opponents 
or contrast positions, and that the tone has become more negative 
as Election Day nears. In the week ended last Thursday, Dr. Jamieson 
found that 33 percent of all ads attacked, compared to 23 percent 
in the previous week; 38 percent of the ads contrasted positions, 
compared to 37 percent the previous week, and only 29 percent of the 
ads purely advocated for their candidates, compared to about 40 percent 
a week earlier. Some media consultants said the cumulative impact 
of such saturation negative advertising is an increasingly distrustful 
public, which then forces candidates to find ever more compelling 
ways to grab attention. This year's techniques have included the growing 
use of humor in advertisements and a reliance on victims, like those 
who have been denied coverage by health maintenance organizations, 
to tug the voters' heartstrings. ``The most notable thing to me is 
how difficult it is this year to penetrate the public mind, how cynical 
they are and how they are skeptical of anything anybody says,'' said 
Raymond Strother, a Democratic consultant working for candidates for 
governor in Georgia and New Mexico and for a Senate candidate in Arkansas. 
``Negative advertising still works, but it works less well than it 
once did,'' Strother said. ``It's just the abundance of it. People 
have built up an immunity or resistance to it.'' That does not mean 
that Republican candidates are no longer characterizing their Democratic 
opponents as liberal taxers and spenders or that Democrats have stopped 
painting the Republicans as threats to Social Security, the environment 
and public schools. But it does mean that those core messages are 
often supplemented by testimonials from citizens who turn personal 
tragedy into political protest. In an advertisement in Georgia for 
Coles, who is challenging Sen. Paul Coverdell, a somber Jodi Garrison 
says she lost a baby during delivery after her HMO rejected her doctor's 
recommendation that she have a Caesarean section. ``It was the worst 
day of my life,'' she says. ``The only time my husband and I got to 
hold our daughter was after she died.'' The text in the commercial 
then says that ``Paul Coverdell voted against the right to sue HMOs 
for these terrible tragedies.'' While victims are being used to make 
attack ads vividly personal, humor has been employed to soften the 
edges of a genre better known for its use of sinister voices and grainy 
black-and-white photographs. In Florida, the Republican candidate 
for governor, Jeb Bush, has scored with a series of advertisements 
that play off the nickname of his Democratic opponent, Kenneth (Buddy) 
MacKay. After an announcer declares that MacKay has supported a number 
of tax increases, various characters retort: ``He's not my buddy.'' 
And in South Carolina, a part-time actor, Kerry Maher, has become 
something of a folk hero by appearing in Democratic Party advertisements 
as ``Bubba,'' a store clerk from Georgia who sells lottery tickets 
and appreciates Gov. David Beasley, a Republican, for keeping a competing 
lottery out of neighboring South Carolina. The state Republican Party 
then created the anti-Bubba, a New Jersey thug named Vinny who suggests, 
in heavy dialect, that the lottery will lead to casino gambling. ``Everything 
we got here in Atlantic City youse gonna get right dere in South Carolina,'' 
Vinny says. Here in Georgia, where increasing partisanship has been 
accompanied by a corresponding rise in nastiness, television viewers 
have found plenty of reason for cynicism. Millner, the Republican 
candidate for governor, recently put out an advertisement that noted 
his promises to cut taxes and then said that his opponent, Barnes, 
``will increase property tax exemptions.'' That accusation could not 
be more true, but it seems to assume that voters will not realize 
that increased property tax exemptions _ as opposed to increased property 
taxes _ are desirable for homeowners. That ad came on the heels of 
one by Mitch Skandalakis, the Republican candidate for lieutenant 
governor, suggesting that his opponent, Mark Taylor, has a cocaine 
habit that Taylor says ended 15 years ago. As the ad depicts a Taylor 
look-alike padding down the hallway of a rehab clinic, a narrator 
says: ``Taylor, of course, has admitted he had problems years ago. 
And we all wish those problems had been cured.'' Skandalakis has failed 
to produce any evidence supporting his suggestion of continued drug 
use, and Taylor has sued him for slander. In state after state, candidates 
are running negative ads attacking their opponents for running negative 
ads, with many featuring women as the scolds. In Colorado, for example, 
Diane Greenlee, whose husband, Bob, is a Republican candidate for 
Congress, says in a commercial that ``my deepest fear was that Mark 
Udall would disregard the facts and just make up lies about Bob.'' 
And from Georgia to Washington state, gray-haired women have been 
employed by candidates to chastise their opponents for distorting 
their records. ``Patty Murray is fibbing about Linda Smith,'' says 
an elderly woman in an ad for Ms. Smith, the Republican senatorial 
candidate in Washington. ``Shame on you, Patty.'' Until the National 
Republican Congressional Committee began running advertisements this 
week that encourage voters not to reward Clinton by sending Democrats 
to Washington, the White House sex scandal had played a direct role 
in only a few commercials. But a number of candidates have used their 
ads to play up issues like character and trust, and some have broadcast 
endorsements intended to emphasize their devotion to family. ``I don't 
think anyone has provided more courageous leadership or worked harder 
to improve people's lives than Buddy MacKay,'' says an ad for the 
Florida Democrat. The speaker is Anne MacKay, the candidate's wife 
of 39 years. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>