<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0403 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Defending herself against charges of stealing more than $150,000 from 
the conductor Zubin Mehta, Susan McDougal testified Thursday that 
she had made credit card purchases and cashed checks with the knowledge 
of Mehta and his wife, Nancy. In testimony that began on Wednesday, 
Mrs. McDougal has described the Mehtas as living extravagant lives 
that included excursions to department stores that ended with bags 
of new clothes being handed to a household worker for pressing, and 
food, flowers and potted plants being continually bought to spruce 
up houses that Mrs. Mehta owned and rented out. Mrs. McDougal testified 
that at Mrs. Mehta's urging, she made personal purchases during those 
shopping trips and that it was not always easy to keep receipts. ``None 
of us were great about it because we were shopping every day, and 
going through stores like tornadoes,'' Mrs. McDougal testified. State 
prosecutors say Mrs. McDougal, while working for the Mehtas as a personal 
assistant and later a bookkeeper from 1989 to 1992, claimed about 
$65,000 in false expenses, forged Mrs. Mehta's name on a credit card 
application and fraudulently charged more than $90,000 in purchases, 
including airline tickets, hotel rooms and expensive clothes. In testimony 
that began on Sept. 9, prosecutors presented 20 witnesses, including 
Mrs. Mehta, who testified that she had never authorized Mrs. McDougal 
to apply for the credit card in her name or to make most of the purchases. 
But Mrs. McDougal has maintained that Mrs. Mehta, whom she portrayed 
as a constant and at times overbearing companion, authorized her to 
order and make personal use of the credit card, and said that many 
purchases, including $192 for panty hose at Saks Fifth Avenue and 
$106 for bedding at Bullock's were made for Mrs. Mehta at her request. 
Mrs. McDougal, who acknowledged that she could not get a credit card 
of her own when she move here from Arkansas because her credit had 
been ``ruined,'' said Mrs. Mehta gave her many of her credit cards 
to make purchases on her behalf, sometimes to pay for purchases while 
Mrs. Mehta moved on to another department in the store. Many of Mrs. 
McDougal's relatives and supporters have attended the trial. Some 
of them approach reporters and lawyers during breaks and, when asked, 
say the trial is an effort by the independent counsel Kenneth Starr 
to punish Mrs. McDougal because she refused to testify in his inquiry 
into the Whitewater land deal, in which she and her husband were partners 
with Bill Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton when he was governor 
of Arkansas. Mrs. McDougal was held in jail for 18 months on a contempt 
citation for refusing to testify about Clinton's financial dealings 
before the Whitewater grand jury. That came before she was to start 
serving a sentence for her conviction in 1996, in a case brought by 
Starr on charges of taking part in a fraudulent scheme to obtain a 
$300,000 small business loan for her company, Master Marketing, but 
using the money to pay off debts of the Whitewater Development Co. 
Mrs. McDougal's lawyer, Mark Geragos, has tried to link the Mehta 
case to Whitewater, but Judge Leslie Light has barred Geragos from 
making that argument in court. So Whitewater has not been mentioned 
by name, though it has popped up, as when Mrs. McDougal's fiance, 
Pat Harris, made a remark later stricken from the record that he was 
``extremely proud of her for refusing to lie,'' without saying what 
Mrs. McDougal refused to lie about. Mrs. McDougal's lengthy exchanges 
with Geragos have at times led to complaints from prosecutors and 
rebukes from Judge Light, who has repeatedly admonished Mrs. McDougal 
to restrict her answers to the question before her, at one point telling 
her to ``let the attorney argue this case, please.'' The judge's displeasure 
has extended to Mrs. McDougal's sister, Paula Cochrane, whom he chastised 
this morning for giving Mrs. McDougal a thumbs-up sign at the end 
of Mrs. McDougal's testimony on Wednesday while the jury was still 
in the room, and earlier in the trial when Ms. Cochrane stormed out 
of the courtroom and slammed the door earlier in the trial. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>