<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0396 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the midterm elections just five days away, Republicans are tamping 
down expectations that they can expand their majority to 60 seats 
in the Senate. Some experts say that Republicans could still harvest 
a net gain of up to four Senate seats but that the party will fall 
shy of five. Five is the magic number that would vault Republicans 
to 60 seats and into the rarefied realm of a filibuster-proof majority 
in which they could cut off debate by the Democrats and control the 
legislative agenda. Five democratic senators are perceived to be in 
varying degrees of trouble: Carol Moseley-Braun in Illinois, Harry 
Reid in Nevada, Russell Feingold in Wisconsin, Barbara Boxer in California 
and Ernest Hollings in South Carolina. At least one previously endangered 
Democrat, Patty Murray in Washington, has moved into the comfortable 
column, and there are some indications that Mrs. Boxer and Hollings 
have been doing better. And two Republican incumbents, Alfonse D'Amato 
in New York and Lauch Faircloth in North Carolina, are engaged in 
fierce struggles to keep their seats. Also, an expected takeover of 
an open seat in Kentucky by Rep. Jim Bunning, a Republican, has become 
a toss-up. Mike Russell, a spokesman for the National Republican Senatorial 
Committee, said it was predicting a pickup of one to three seats. 
To win five, Russell said, ``we'd have to recover every fumble and 
intercept every pass, and that's just not the way the game goes.'' 
``We've seen some movement both ways,'' he said of these final days 
but added, ``There is no trend one way or the other.'' Like others, 
he emphasized that the results would depend on which party was able 
to motivate more voters to the polls on Tuesday. Ed Goeas, a Republican 
pollster, appeared somewhat more optimistic. Goeas said he expected 
the party to pick up three to five seats. He counted Republican victories 
in Illinois, Wisconsin and Kentucky, ``then we move to question marks,'' 
he said, citing Nevada, South Carolina and California. ``And the big 
question marks are New York and North Carolina,'' he said, where polls 
show the races dead even. President Clinton, who along with his wife 
has raised millions of dollars for Rep. Charles Schumer against D'Amato 
in New York and for Boxer against Matt Fong in California, declined 
Thursday to predict Tuesday's outcome. But he noted that there were 
``an unusually large number of apparently close elections,'' and suggested 
that this could bode well for Democrats because Republicans had spent 
so much more money. Reaching 60 seats would be important because Republicans 
could squelch Democratic-led debates, control virtually every piece 
of legislation and be somewhat more in synch ideologically with the 
more conservative House. And if impeachment of Clinton ever reached 
the Senate, 60 votes would be that much closer to the 67 needed for 
conviction. But a gain of three seats could still make a decisive 
difference on legislation that has stalled for lack of a clear-cut 
conservative advantage. The prime example is anti-abortion legislation. 
For two years in a row, the Senate has fallen three votes short of 
being able to override a Clinton veto on banning a controversial late-term 
procedure that opponents call partial-birth abortion. All of the Republicans 
who could take Democratic seats on Tuesday would bolster the conservatives' 
edge and provide reliable anti-abortion votes. Sixty has been the 
magic number for cutting off debate in the Senate only in the last 
two decades. Since 1975, only the Democrats have had more than 60 
seats, and that was for just one session, in 1977. Only a month ago, 
some poll-takers and political analysts predicted that 60 seats might 
be achievable for Republicans because Clinton's troubles had so demoralized 
Democrats. Now they say that with impeachment appearing more remote 
and a more confident president on the campaign trail, Democratic spirits 
have somewhat revived. ``Democrats decided, `Don't get depressed, 
get even,' '' said Celinda Lake, a democratic pollster who had predicted 
``disastrous'' results for Senate Democrats. Ms. Lake said core democratic 
voters, like African-Americans, could make a difference in statewide 
elections. ``We've pulled back,'' said Charles Cook Jr., editor of 
the Cook Political Report, a nonpartisan election monitor. One month 
ago, Cook said a five-seat Republican gain was within reach. ``There's 
been some movement away from Republicans,'' he said now, ``and we're 
down to one, two or three'' gains for Republicans. Similarly, Stuart 
Rothenberg, editor of the Rothenberg Political Report, said, ``The 
odds favor a Republican net gain of two or three seats.'' Rothenberg 
said that they could gain only one or as many as four, but that five 
seemed unlikely. Goeas, the Republican pollster, agreed that Democrats 
appeared more motivated now. But, he said: ``It's very spotty. You 
see it in the Northeast and the Northwest, but not in the Midwest, 
the Plains States or the South.'' He also said that while black voters 
universally supported Clinton, they would probably not vote in substantial 
numbers. Of the 34 Senate seats on the ballot, 18 are held by Democrats 
and 16 by Republicans. Three Democrats and two Republicans are retiring. 
These open seats are usually the easiest for the other party to take 
over. One retiring Democrat is Dale Bumpers in Arkansas. Recent polls 
put the democratic candidate, Rep. Blanche Lambert Lincoln, ahead 
of the Republican, State Sen. Fay Boozman. Abortion has become an 
issue there since Boozman said women who had been raped were unlikely 
to need abortions because they were so frightened, they released a 
hormone, which he called ``God's little protective shield,'' to prevent 
pregnancy. In the Kentucky seat being vacated by Wendell H. Ford, 
a Democrat, Bunning had a strong lead over Rep. Scotty Baesler, a 
Democrat. Polls show Bunning's lead less solid now. The highlight 
of the race has been a Bunning commercial featuring Richard Wagner's 
``Ride of the Valkyries'' as background to images of a hyperactive 
Baesler yelling and pounding the podium. Because Wagner was Hitler's 
favorite composer, the Democrats in Kentucky have branded the commercial 
``Naziesque.'' The third seat being vacated by a Democrat is John 
Glenn's in Ohio. He is expected to be replaced by a Republican, Gov. 
George Voinovich. The two Republicans retiring are Daniel Coats in 
Indiana, whose seat is expected to go to Evan Bayh, a Democrat, and 
Idaho, where Dirk Kempthorne is likely to be replaced by a Republican, 
Rep. Michael Crapo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>