<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0273 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ted Hughes, Britain's poet laureate, who was known as much for his 
doomed marriage to the American poet Sylvia Plath as for his powerful, 
evocative poetry, replete with symbolism and bursting with dark images 
of the Devon countryside in which he lived, died at home on Wednesday, 
his British publisher said. He was 68. Hughes had been suffering from 
cancer for about 18 months but had told only his closest friends and 
had never discussed details of his illness, said Matthew Evans, the 
chairman of Faber and Faber, Hughes' publisher. ``He felt that being 
ill was, for him, very private,'' Evans said. It was his illness, 
and his sense that time was running out, that persuaded Hughes to 
publish his last work, ``Birthday Letters,'' a collection of poems 
about his tempestuous, fragile relationship with Plath, who committed 
suicide soon after the two separated in 1963. After a silence of 35 
years, in which Hughes had steadfastly refused to discuss Plath publicly 
or to respond to charges _ leveled in her own work and by her legions 
of admirers _ that his callousness had led to her death, Hughes' decision 
to finally speak out was extraordinary. The book became an international 
bestseller, rare for a book of poetry, and was a personal turning 
point for Hughes. ``It was a piece of work he wanted to get out before 
he died,'' Evans said in an interview. ``He regarded it as being of 
personal importance. It was the nearest thing to an autobiography.'' 
The book, which drew a sometimes loving picture of a brilliant but 
emotionally unstable woman with a passion for suicide that seemed 
hard-wired into her very being, was widely praised, particularly in 
Britain. Friends of Hughes saw it as a complete vindication of a man 
who had lived for decades in the shadow of his far more famous wife, 
taking on a guilt that should not have been his. But the book did 
not end the discussion over the strange, terrible time surrounding 
Plath's death, already described by her in her own remarkable poems 
and journals, jagged cries of pain that seemed to lay the blame for 
her troubles squarely on Hughes' shoulders. Many Plath scholars said 
that Hughes had asked too much of his American wife: forcing her to 
live, without emotional support, in a cold and dark country even as 
her mind began to unravel, and abandoning her and their two small 
children at a time when she was clearly crying out for help. Whatever 
the truth, Hughes, by then ill with the disease that would kill him, 
got the last word in the 35-year discussion. Although he never talked 
about the poems publicly, saying that he wanted his work to speak 
for itself, friends said he felt satisfied with what ``Birthday Letters'' 
had accomplished. ``The publication was a very important moment for 
him,'' Evans told the Press Association here. ``He was putting another 
side, and there was a great deal of understanding after that book 
was published.'' Ted Hughes was born on Aug. 17, 1930, in Mytholmyrod, 
a small mill town in West Yorkshire. When he was 7, his family moved 
to Mexborough, a coal mining town to the south, and his father gave 
up his old profession of making portable wooden buildings and bought 
a newspaper store. After attending the local elementary school, Hughes 
served for two years in the Royal Air Force and then went to Pembroke 
College, Cambridge. He was a great success, celebrated as a clever, 
handsome student with great personal magnetism and an aura of brooding 
mystery that made him particularly attractive to women. Hughes took 
a number of jobs to support his writing, including working as a film 
script reader for Rank, and later as a teacher. He met Plath, an American 
studying at Cambridge, at a party there in 1956. The attraction was 
instantaneous. Plath wrote in her journal: ``That big, dark, hunky 
boy, the only one there huge enough for me, who had been hunching 
around over women, and whose name I had asked the minute I came into 
the room, but no one told me, came over and was looking hard into 
my eyes and it was Ted Hughes.'' The two got married just four months 
later, and the next year, Hughes published his first volume of poems, 
``Hawk in the Rain,'' a sometimes savage and violent dissection of 
the natural world, to great critical acclaim. Though Plath found herself 
living in the shadow of her increasingly well-known husband, the two 
made up a celebrated literary couple, traveling often and living briefly 
in the United States. Their life together in England was less successful. 
Plath found the Devon countryside, which her husband loved, cold, 
bleak and uninviting. When they moved back to an unheated, uncomfortable 
flat before one of Britain's bitterest winters in half a century, 
she fared no better. Plath became distraught, irrational and suicidal, 
and in 1963, soon after Hughes left her for his married lover, a fellow 
poet named Assia Wevill, Plath put her head in the oven and gassed 
herself. Plath's suicide had far-reaching and unexpected consequences. 
It drew a blaze of attention to her work, much of which had been written 
in a burst of despairing, frenzied creativity in the last months of 
her life. She became a feminist icon, celebrated as a passionately 
creative woman stifled by the confines of motherhood and by a husband 
who betrayed her. It also put terrible pressure on Hughes, who was 
vilified by many for what they saw as his complicity in Plath's death. 
(It didn't help that, five years later, Assia Wevill killed herself 
and the two-year-old daughter she had had with Hughes, using gas, 
as Plath had.) And, as executor of his late wife's estate, Hughes 
found himself caught in a thicket of conflicting interests. With each 
new volume by Plath that he published _ her journals, her ``Collected 
Poems,'' which won a posthumous Pulitzer Prize in 1982, and various 
volumes of poetry _ he was accused of artfully omitting parts he found 
awkward, of acting more like a censor than an executor. And when he 
admitted that he destroyed the last volume of Plath's journals, saying 
that he didn't want the couple's children to see them, he unleashed 
a barrage of criticism that never abated. To make matters worse, Plath's 
posthumous fame threatened to completely overshadow Hughes' own career, 
particularly in the United States. Stymied by how fiercely he protected 
Plath's work _ he often refused to allow the use of quotations from 
her letters and poems _ Plath's biographers invariably cast him as 
the villain in her life story. When he tried to read his own poetry 
in public, his readings were disrupted by pro-Plath protesters who 
accused him of murder. Plath's gravestone, which bore her married 
name, was repeatedly defaced, the ``Hughes'' chipped off. But Hughes, 
who married his second wife, Carol, 29 years ago, threw himself into 
his own writing, even as he became increasingly wary of intrusions 
into his private life. He produced dozens of books of poetry and prose, 
writing for both adults and children. His poetry has an earthy, lyrical, 
often violent quality about it, and often means more than meets the 
eye. Hughes' poetry, the critic Tom Paulin once wrote, is to be allowed 
``insights into the secret imaginative life of the nation,'' insights 
which ``get obscured by the prying attention that is given to his 
relationship with Sylvia Plath.'' Speaking to the Press Association 
here on Thursday, the poet Andrew Motion, a longtime friend of Hughes, 
said he presented ``a vision of England which managed to bring the 
whole of the history and traditional past into play with a present 
that his recognizably modern.'' Motion continued: ``On the face of 
it, his poems are about animals, nature and wildlife, but careful 
reading allows us to see them as a metaphorical or allegorical way 
of reconciling past and present.'' The poems in ``Birthday Letters,'' 
Hughes' often heartbreaking account of his relationship with Plath, 
were written much more simplistically, as straightforward narratives 
that act almost like prose. When the book was published, the poet's 
legion of friends, who knew him as a loyal and generous friend who 
was almost bigger than life, with his imposing physical presence, 
his strong, eagle-like face, his enormous, bushy eyebrows and his 
thatch of thick unruly hair, said that he had finally succeeded in 
exorcising the ghosts of the past. In 1984, Hughes was made Britain's 
Poet Laureate, a prestigious but rather strange job that pays 70 pounds 
and a case of wine a year, and requires the incumbent to write stately 
poems on solemn occasions like the Queen Mother's 90th birthday and 
the death of the Princess of Wales. He was awarded an Order of the 
British Empire in 1977. He won numerous awards for his work over the 
years, most recently winning the Whitbread Book of the Year prize 
in 1997 for ``Tales From Ovid.'' Earlier this month, Hughes became 
just one of the 24 holders of an Order of Merit in Britain (new ones 
are awarded only when holders of the title die). His acceptance of 
the honor, in Buckingham Palace two weeks ago, was his last public 
appearance. He is survived by his wife and by his two children with 
Plath, Frieda and Nicholas. In an interview in 1993, five years before 
``Birthday Letters'' was published, Hughes mused about using writing 
to understand the past, in language that turned out to be startling 
prescient. ``It means the world becomes yours,'' he said. ``If you 
don't do it, it drifts away and takes a whole piece of yourself with 
it, like an amputation. To attack it and attack it and get it under 
control _ it's like taking possession of your life, isn't it?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>