<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0288 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Mick Buffum dozed off behind the wheel at about 2:30 a.m. on 
April 4, his 1994 Chevrolet Cavalier drifted off the right side of 
the road, ran up a cable used to brace a utility pole and flipped 
onto its right side. Buffum, stunned and confused, unbuckled his seat 
belt and promptly fell down into the passenger side of the car. He 
could not figure out how to get out. He was alone on a quiet country 
road outside Marilla, N.Y., near Buffalo. But suddenly, an Erie County 
emergency dispatcher was talking to him over the car's cell phone, 
even though Buffum had not even thought to place the call. ``I go, 
`The car's on its side,' and he goes, `I know,' '' Buffum said, recalling 
the conversation. ``I said, `I can't get the door open,' and he said, 
`Can you roll the window down?' '' Buffum, who followed the unseen 
dispatcher's advice and escaped from his wrecked car, had just provided 
a real-world crash test of an experimental system that advocates say 
could save lives in rural areas like his, on the outskirts of Buffalo, 
where drivers whose cars leave the road sometimes die of injuries 
or exposure before anyone finds them. In a federally sponsored experiment, 
Buffum's car was one of about 600 equipped with a cellular phone and 
a receiver for the global positioning system. Such receivers are now 
common in car navigation systems. The phone and the GPS receiver _ 
which fixes its location to within a few yards by receiving signals 
from a network of satellites _ along with three crash sensors, had 
been wired together by Calspan Operations, a transportation technology 
company based in Buffalo. The system was set up to dial 911 in case 
of an accident; thus the dispatcher knew where the car was and at 
what angle it had come to rest. The dispatcher sent emergency vehicles, 
knowing from the conversation with Buffum that there was only one 
victim and that he was not severely hurt; in other circumstances, 
the dispatcher might have sent out several ambulances. Buffum, of 
South Wales, N.Y., who works in a machine shop at a plant that makes 
aerospace parts, was impressed. He sent Calspan a letter thanking 
the company and apologizing ``for any swear words'' that the cell 
phone might have captured. Government officials are impressed, too. 
``It shows what intelligent transportation systems can do for you,'' 
said Mortimer Downey, the deputy secretary of transportation. But 
it is too early to say what final form such systems might take, he 
said. Buffum would have survived without the Automated Collision Notification 
system, but others could have been saved by it, experts say. ``How 
many times have you read about somebody who went off the road, and 
hopefully two days later they wake up?'' Downey said, adding that 
if they did not wake up, they might not be found. Erie County Sheriff 
Patrick Gallivan described the system as being ``like Dick Tracy with 
the telephone on his wrist.'' He said that almost every winter, someone 
skidded off a road and disappeared into a snowbank or down a hill 
and died before the car was discovered. And often if someone with 
a cell phone discovers an accident on a rural road, the person calls 
for help from the scene, but does not know precisely where the scene 
is. ``It's just a matter of time,'' he said, before equipment like 
the kind that helped Buffum is standard on new cars. The experiment 
is operated by the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration, 
along with Cellular One, the phone company; Datumtech Corp., a supplier 
of automotive electronic equipment, three Erie County agencies and 
Calspan, a unit of Veridian Corp. The experiment parallels a commercial 
offering by General Motors called Onstar. That system, now in place 
in about 30,000 vehicles, costs about $1,300 to install, plus a charge 
of $12.50 a month on most GM models. If the air bag deploys, the system 
calls a central number in the Detroit area, and a dispatcher there 
will come on the phone and ask if help is required. If the dispatcher 
cannot get an answer from the occupants of the car, the dispatcher 
calls the local police. While Onstar is marketed as a safety device, 
it is also available in nonemergencies, for help with road directions, 
or for finding the nearest service station or restaurant. The Calspan 
system could eventually be expanded, experts say, to integrate it 
with car registration data. The dispatcher might then know who the 
owner of the car was, and possibly even who the driver was, even if 
he or she was unconscious. The Calspan system has another feature, 
a crash recorder a little like the ``black boxes'' that keep track 
of events leading up to an airplane crash. It notes how hard the car 
had accelerated up or down, left or right and forward or back. Dr. 
Dietrich Jehle, director of emergency services at the Erie County 
Medical Center, said the system would be used to match crash types 
with injury types, and find out what kinds of crashes were most likely 
to cause serious injury or death. That could help dispatchers send 
the right level of help in an emergency, he said, and eventually be 
fed back to automobile companies to design safer cars. Another researcher, 
Anthony Billetteri, co-director of transportation injury research 
at the University of Buffalo, said the plan was to develop data on 
``the signature of a crash that is likely to produce those kinds of 
injuries that require dramatic and immediate assistance.'' ``Some 
very serious crashes, people walk away from,'' he said. ``Some very 
minor crashes kill people. There's not a lot of correlation between 
crash severity and injury severity.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>