<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0466 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
National Basketball Association owners and players took a respite 
from negotiations Thursday after some narrowing of their positions 
on revenue distribution in a late-night bargaining session. Attorneys 
from the NBA and the union spoke on the telephone Thursday, but another 
round of bargaining was not likely to take place until the weekend 
at the earliest. With nearly 100 players and ownership representatives 
from all 29 teams scattering throughout the country after a marathon 
day in New York on Wednesday, the momentum that created a sense of 
optimism over the league's labor impasse might have left with them. 
But during an 8-and-a-half hour negotiation at a midtown law firm 
that concluded at 1 a.m. Thursday, progress was made on the key economic 
issue in a dispute that has brought the cancellation of 194 games 
in November. According to officials on both sides, the players reduced 
their requested share of total revenues from 63 to 60 percent, and 
the owners, who have maintained that they want the players to make 
no more than 48 percent of revenue by 2002, raised that number to 
50 percent. The players last year earned 57.1 percent of all basketball-related 
income, a figure that enabled the owners to reopen the old collective-bargaining 
agreement and declare a lockout this past summer. Total revenue share 
and a limitation on individual salaries are the biggest stumbling 
blocks in the negotiations. The players have moved off their luxury 
tax proposal that would place a 50 percent tax on all salaries over 
$18 million, indicating they will lower the annual salary figure. 
The owners, meanwhile, are still wedded to absolute limits on upper-echelon 
salaries. The parties have also discussed arrangements for rookies. 
The NBA and the union have said they would agree to a system that 
would prevent young players from moving to another team until the 
fourth year of their contracts. But the league is pushing for the 
right of first refusal by the player's current team, a restricted 
form of free agency. The two sides have also closed ground on limiting 
annual raises of players. Those discussions involve both free agents 
who re-sign with their teams under the so-called Larry Bird exception 
and players who are looking for deals with new clubs. ``Obviously, 
the parties are apart on variety of issues,'' Commissioner David Stern 
said. ``We have to see where the next place might be to make some 
progress. There might be a framework, but there are so many issues 
on the table _ and they are not trivial. We're going to continue losing 
time.'' Asked if the lockout might be resolved in the next week, Stern 
shook his head and said: ``I just don't know. I just don't know.'' 
After nearly 20 players, a group of owners and lawyers for both sides 
met Wednesday, Stern and his deputy commissioner, Russ Granik, negotiated 
between about midnight and 12:30 a.m. directly with Michael Jordan, 
union president Patrick Ewing and union executive director Billy Hunter. 
Ewing asked Jordan to attend the negotiation even though Jordan is 
not on the union's executive committee. His presence in the talks 
was welcomed by both sides. After drawing the ire of Abe Pollin, the 
Washington Wizards' owner, during an afternoon question-and-answer 
session, he verbally sparred with Stern until 1 a.m. ``A lot of these 
guys aren't in a position to talk back to these guys, but Jordan is,'' 
said a union official, speaking on condition of anonymity. ``He is 
a tremendous deal-maker, someone who knows how to negotiate. He understands 
leverage, strength and how to play the game.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>