<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0462 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As John Glenn enjoys his second rendezvous with the cosmos, the country 
is awash with nostalgia about the great space race with the Soviet 
Union, one of the most memorable competitions of the Cold War. If 
only the actual rivalry more closely resembled the myths about it. 
The truth is that by the time Glenn roared into orbit for the first 
time, on Feb. 20, 1962, long after a Russian had circled the earth, 
the United States was already winning a hidden and much larger race 
with the Soviet Union over the military uses of space. Though the 
public did not realize it then and has only a limited conception now, 
the military competition cost more than the manned space program, 
was far more important in influencing the course of the Cold War and 
in many ways provided the technology used in the Mercury and Apollo 
programs. The secret space race could not claim the shimmering goal 
of sending a man to the moon. It lacked the life-and-death consequences 
of every manned flight, and sported no human face to make it accessible 
and inspirational to citizens. But even more than the effort to reach 
the moon, it involved a mobilization of scientific, industrial and 
military resources that has not been attempted since. The purpose 
from the outset in the early 1950s was to match Soviet advances in 
the development of ballistic missiles and to produce technology to 
gather information about Soviet military forces, especially nuclear 
weapons and the bombers and missiles that carried them. The hope was 
to avoid another surprise attack like Pearl Harbor and to keep ahead 
of Soviet armaments. Moscow successfully tested a hydrogen bomb in 
August 1953, less than a year after the United States. The Soviet 
Union was soon building a new fleet of long-range bombers and designing 
and testing missiles that could deliver ever more compact and powerful 
nuclear weapons to Western Europe and the United States. President 
Eisenhower, believing that space might become a critical frontier 
for spying and warfare, quietly approved a series of classified projects 
that eventually revolutionized U.S. military technology and provided 
much of the means for Glenn's flight. The primary objectives were 
to build missiles that could deliver nuclear warheads to targets in 
the Soviet Union and to develop planes and satellites to survey and 
photograph Soviet airfields and missile bases first from high altitude 
and later from space. The Soviet Union, of course, placed the first 
satellite into orbit in October 1957. But Sputnik, though an enduring, 
humiliating symbol of Russian superiority in space, was not a spy 
satellite. It was secretly eclipsed in August 1960 by the first U.S. 
photo-reconnaissance satellite. Moscow did not get a similar satellite 
into operation until July 1962. The U.S. satellite project, code-named 
Corona, was directed not by the Pentagon but by the Central Intelligence 
Agency. It involved both the placement in orbit of a sophisticated 
camera system and the return to earth of the film in a special capsule 
designed to withstand the searing heat produced during re-entry through 
the atmosphere. This space achievement came eight months before Yuri 
Gagarin became the first man in space, and 18 months before Glenn's 
mission. Much of the technology developed for the Corona program was 
adapted for manned flights. The public space race made for riveting 
scientific drama and great individual and national accomplishment. 
But long before the United States exceeded Soviet successes in manned 
flight, it had pulled ahead in developing reliable missiles and sophisticated 
military spacecraft. In some ways, the space race was over before 
Glenn blasted off. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>