<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0259 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When tycoons step out of their Rolls-Royces here these days, they 
are often quickly surrounded by a phalanx of compact but fierce-looking 
bodyguards. These are Gurkhas, and while they come from the uplands 
of Nepal, they are deeply embedded in Hong Kong's history. For half 
a century, Gurkha soldiers served in the British army here, gaining 
fame for their skill as fighters. But when Britain handed Hong Kong 
over to China last year, the Gurkhas suddenly found themselves relieved 
of duty _ colonial relics as superannuated as the governor's ostrich-plumed 
hat. Now, after two spectacular kidnappings of local tycoons, the 
Gurkhas have reinvented themselves as the protectors of choice for 
Hong Kong's frightened rich. Fearing a wave of copycat abductions, 
business people are hiring Gurkhas by the dozens to protect themselves 
and their families. ``We're in a situation where highly trained men 
with military backgrounds are taking children to and from school every 
day,'' said Stephen Vickers, a former commander of the Criminal Intelligence 
Bureau of the Hong Kong Police. He has handled 28 kidnappings in nearly 
two decades on the force. Like so much else in Hong Kong, personal 
security has turned into a status-driven business, with a well-defined 
hierarchy of products and services. In the world of surveillance cameras, 
bulletproof limousines, and big guys with padded jackets, having your 
own Gurkha is the ultimate status symbol. ``It's part of the Hong 
Kong thing about showing off your wealth,'' said Nigel Collett, a 
retired British army officer who commanded a Gurkha garrison in Brunei 
and now runs a company that places Gurkhas as bodyguards. Collett 
is quick to add that the demand for Gurkhas has grown in the last 
two years for serious reasons: With a more porous border between Hong 
Kong and the rest of China, gangsters who operate on both sides of 
the fence have become increasingly brazen in their targeting of wealthy 
people here. The vulnerability of the tycoons has been dramatized 
by the case of Cheung Tze-keung, 44, a Hong Kong man who is being 
tried in the nearby Chinese city of Guangzhou for allegedly abducting 
members of two powerful Hong Kong families and extorting more than 
$200 million in ransom. Cheung goes by the nickname Big Spender, and 
his testimony at the trial over the last two weeks has only burnished 
his extravagant reputation. After kidnapping Victor Li, the eldest 
son of the tycoon Li Ka-shing, Cheung said he negotiated a $133 million 
ransom with the father _ camping out at the Li family home as the 
elder Li cobbled together the cash. In the case of his other kidnapping 
victim, the billionaire property developer Walter Kwok, the negotiation 
took longer because Kwok's brothers haggled over the terms of the 
ransom, getting it down to $77 million. Cheung and 35 members of his 
gang were eventually arrested by the police in Guangdong province. 
Because the families did not report the crimes to the Hong Kong Police, 
the Chinese asserted jurisdiction over the case. Testimony in trial 
ended Thursday, and a verdict could come within a week. Cheung faces 
the death penalty. Although Li and Kwok were released unharmed, the 
kidnappings have spooked other wealthy Hong Kong business people. 
Neither man was traveling with a bodyguard at the time he was kidnapped, 
and Cheung boasted that he was able to track their movements with 
uncanny precision. ``This could put ideas in bad people's minds,'' 
said Paul Yung, a former bodyguard for Hong Kong's last colonial governor, 
Christopher Patten. Yung now handles security for a prominent local 
financier, Dickson Poon. ``It is so easy,'' he added. ``There is so 
much money to be made. It's worth taking a risk.'' Security experts 
said wealthy Hong Kongers practice bad habits that make them easy 
prey _ frequenting the same clubs, restaurants and race tracks. ``Hong 
Kong is really a goldfish bowl,'' Vickers said. ``Everybody knows 
everybody else's business, and they all go to the same places.'' This 
is where the Gurkhas come in. Known for their loyalty and discretion, 
they are unlikely to gossip about habits or whereabouts of their employers. 
Although many Gurkhas speak English, almost none speak Cantonese. 
And Yung said they were less susceptible to bribery than Chinese bodyguards. 
Indeed, the Nepalese guards who protect Poon declined to discuss their 
lives or work, even in the most general terms. Gurkhas are not a perfect 
deterrent to the security threat. Yung noted that their background 
and military training were better suited to jungle warfare than urban 
terrorism. Gurkhas trace their roots as British soldiers to the British-Nepalese 
war of 1812, when they impressed Britain by holding off a British 
invasion. The Gurkhas later served alongside British troops in India 
and Malaysia. Gurkhas also do not come cheap. A seasoned bodyguard 
with military training earns nearly $40,000 a year. This may not seem 
like much, except that fretful tycoons typically hire three guards 
for each member of the family. For a family of four, that adds up 
to $480,000 _ not counting the armor-plated BMW. Not every rich Hong 
Kong family employs Gurkhas. While Victor Li and his father now use 
them, the Kwok family has hired Chinese bodyguards, who are supervised 
by a retired Hong Kong police commander. Still, for many of Hong Kong's 
elite, Gurkhas are the gold standard. Poon, a flamboyant merchant 
best known in the United States for trying to buy Barney's department 
store, employs a contingent of a dozen Gurkhas _ a security detail 
that befits a head of state more than a retailer. At a recent society 
wedding here, Collett recalled, so many tycoons arrived with their 
distinctive sturdy guards that a local newspaper joked that the Gurkhas 
outnumbered the guests. ``They were all showing off their Gurkhas,'' 
he said, shaking his head. ``A Hong Kong person could probably do 
the job just as well.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>