<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0170 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It did not take long for Maxwell L. Anderson, the new director of 
the Whitney Museum of American Art, to start making his mark. After 
less than 60 days on the job, Anderson has announced changes in the 
museum's curatorial and management organizations that will add more 
rigor to programming decisions, decentralize decision-making and require 
hiring two curators and three senior administrators. At a meeting 
Thursday morning with employees, Anderson also promised that the Whitney 
would by spring be open six days a week instead of five, that it would 
soon devote two floors instead of one to the display of the permanent 
collection and that it would aggressively expand its educational publishing 
and merchandising activities. ``There are two ways to manage a museum,'' 
Anderson said in telephone interview. ``There's the caped crusader 
method and there's the '90s method, in which managers have to have 
more responsibility and more accountability. I'm choosing the '90s 
method.'' Under the new organization, curators have specific portfolios, 
such as pre-World War II art, instead of operating free form, without 
specialties. To oversee the museum's permanent collection, Anderson 
appointed Eugenie Tsai as senior curator, replacing Adam Weinberg, 
who is leaving to become director of the Addison Gallery of American 
Art in Andover, Mass. The moves, which are intended to address the 
Whitney's reputation for being trendy and somewhat chaotic managerially, 
were approved by trustees at a board retreat last weekend. ``This 
certainly made sense to the trustees,'' said Joel S. Ehrenkrantz, 
the board's president. ``Max's vision is for the Whitney to be the 
internationally acknowledged leader in 20th- and 21st-century American 
art, and the second floor is really important to that. He said how 
can you be, without having the permanent collection on display? And 
he said it was important to be open six days like the other museums 
in the city.'' Soon after arriving at the Whitney from his post as 
director of the Art Gallery of Ontario in Toronto, Anderson called 
in David Bradford, a Stanford University management professor who 
is also an instructor at the Getty Institute for Museum Management, 
and began holding discussions with employees. ``The staff raised a 
series of issues such as how clear management was, who was responsible 
for what and an overall lack of clarity here,'' Anderson said. On 
the curatorial side, for example, Anderson said that the free-form 
setup was hampering the museum's ambitions for its permanent collection. 
``If you asked me whom to call to donate a painting, I couldn't answer,'' 
Anderson said. ``Externally, people did not know. We're trying to 
be more transparent, more lucid.'' ``The changes are meant to consolidate 
our efforts on the permanent collection, both in acquisitions and 
in our shows,'' he added. In addition to announcing Ms. Tsai's new 
post, Anderson appointed Barbara Haskell as curator of prewar art; 
Lisa Phillips, curator, contemporary art; Chrissie Iles, curator, 
film and video; Janie C. Lee, curator, drawings; David Kiehl, curator, 
prints. The Whitney will hire curators for postwar art (defined as 
that between 1951 and 1988) and for photography. Anderson said he 
wanted to continue the Whitney's traditional interdisciplinary approach 
in programming, but that planning would be more rigorous. When Anderson 
was hired, the board signaled that it wanted a more scholarly approach 
to the Whitney's much-criticized programming, and he has added a new 
vetting layer to exhibition planning. Curators will now propose and 
discuss shows among themselves, as they have in the past, but they 
will then recommend a slate of exhibitions to a rotating committee 
of curators, headed by Anderson, who will make the decisions. ``We 
will sharpen the proposals and move into scheduling,'' he said. The 
new plan for the Whitney's second floor may also assuage some of its 
critics. Until last March, when the museum inaugurated its first permanent 
collection galleries on the fifth floor, which are filled with pre-World 
War II pieces, visitors never knew if art from the permanent collection 
would be on display. Now, after the museum's millennial exhibition, 
``The American Century,'' comes down in 2000, the second floor will 
be given over to an installation of postwar and contemporary pieces 
from the permanent collection. On the operations side, Anderson will 
soon hire senior managers to oversee operations, development and external 
affairs, and he is creating committees of department heads to make 
operational decisions. Before the Whitney moves to its six-day schedule, 
for example, a committee _ not he _ will do research and decide whether 
the new day should be Monday or Tuesday. And the external affairs 
manager, along with the head of merchandising, will decide how to 
expand sales. ``I want it to grow significantly,'' Anderson said, 
and he expects more product licensing and sales at the wholesale level 
as well electronically. The Whitney's bookstore and museum shop, now 
two separate operations, will be consolidated in the museum's lobby. 
There will also be new publishing and research partnerships with scholars 
and universities. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>