<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0328 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the new Congress convenes early next year, one of the major issues 
it will tackle _ after it tears itself away from Bill and Monica _ 
will be Social Security. We may end up wishing that it had stuck with 
Bill and Monica. So-called reform of the Social Security system is 
looking more and more like a solution in search of a problem. Politicians 
talk crisis and issue dire warnings about the graying of America and 
the threat of generational warfare. Journalists toss off phrases like 
``looming insolvency.'' There is little wonder that a survey this 
year showed that 68 percent of Americans think that ``fixing'' Social 
Security is very important. But even under the most gloomy economic 
growth forecast, the system is rock-solid for the next 30 years or 
so _ and, with some minimal changes, for 40 years after that. Even 
if economic growth over the next 75 years slows to half the annual 
average of 3.5 percent over the past 75 years, the Social Security 
system will do just fine, in the view of Mark Weisbrot, research director 
of the Preamble Center, a nonpartisan Washington policy institute. 
``The most important thing we could do to protect Social Security 
right now is to leave it alone,'' said Weisbrot, co-author of ``Social 
Security: The Phony Crisis,'' scheduled to be published next year 
by the University of Chicago Press. So why all the fuss? Think hidden 
agendas. On all sides. Wall Street would love to get its hands on 
at least some of the billions of dollars in the Social Security trust 
fund. And many ultra-conservative Republicans want to privatize the 
system fully. But knowing that the idea won't fly politically, they 
are pushing for partial privatization, in which individuals would 
invest a portion of their contributions in the stock market, all in 
the name of rescuing the system. The concept has picked up support 
across the political spectrum. Several variations are under consideration, 
including one modeled after individual retirement accounts; it would 
give Americans broad discretion over how they invested their money. 
The stock market, however, has been reminding people lately that it 
can go down as well as up. And Weisbrot pointed out that the declines 
can be long-term: between 1968 and 1978, for example, the market lost 
45 percent of its value. In any case, the next Congress is almost 
certain to consider partial privatization. But when it does, it should 
also consider safeguards to protect novice investors from dangers 
like account churning by commission-driven brokers. President Clinton 
has been exhorting Congress to use the budget surplus to ``save'' 
Social Security. He has thus scored political points for the Democrats 
as the great protectors of Social Security. But Republicans aren't 
about to cry foul and say the system doesn't need saving. If they 
do, there goes their argument for privatization. ``There's a kind 
of gentlemen's agreement here in Washington, I'm afraid, not to point 
out the basic fact that we don't really need to be talking about Social 
Security,'' Weisbrot said. One of the biggest smoke screens in the 
debate is the idea that the Social Security ``crisis'' will cause 
generational conflicts. The argument conjures up images of old people 
with canes and walkers, barricaded in retirement villages, fighting 
off hordes of Generation-X'ers. But as Knight A. Kiplinger writes 
in ``World Boom Ahead'' (Kiplinger Books), the graying of America 
will be very gradual. It may be true that by 2020, about 53 million 
people, or 16 percent of the population, will be over 65, compared 
with the current 35 million, or 13 percent. But Kiplinger says that 
isn't the whole picture. Because of general population growth, the 
number of young people will be growing, too, and the the nation's 
median age in 2020 will be equal to the median age of Florida's population 
today: 38. The current national median is 35. Moreover, Generation-X'ers 
didn't spring full-grown from the mind of Tommy Hilfiger. They have 
parents and grandparents, too, and they want them to have a secure 
retirement. And Generation X will eventually retire. A poll of 18- 
to 34-year-olds last summer by the 2030 Center, which studies economic 
issues affecting young people, showed broad support for the future 
of Social Security. So here's a modest proposal. Since whatever problems 
Social Security may have are a very long way off, let's have a 10-year 
test of privatization _ with congressional pensions. Let Congress 
pass a law linking representatives' and senators' pensions to the 
Standard &AMP; Poor's 500-stock index. And maybe when Congress debates 
health care, it should force its members into HMOs. Both moves would, 
to borrow from Dr. Samuel Johnson, an 18th century literary figure, 
focus their minds wonderfully. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>