<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0369 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John Glenn's private campaign to fly into space again became a public 
celebration Thursday, generating cheers of joy and relief at Kennedy 
Space Center, mobbed viewing areas and raucous beach barbecues. As 
Glenn and his six crewmates roared into space aboard the shuttle Discovery, 
about the only things remaining private were their thoughts. Every 
movement, every word and every nuance related to the mission was reported 
to a public ready for good news in a time of scandal and economic 
uncertainty. Days before the launching, a party atmosphere was building 
as guests and visitors filtered into the area. All week, at receptions, 
barbecues and restaurant dinner parties, former astronauts and old 
friends of Glenn have been holding court with tales of the old days. 
``John's return to space has been a marvelous thing for the country 
and a marvelous thing for NASA,'' declared Scott Carpenter, who with 
Glenn was one of the original seven Mercury astronauts. Speaking at 
the same reception at the Astronaut Hall of Fame here Wednesday, Gordon 
Cooper, another Mercury astronaut, noted that Glenn was in space for 
only five hours on his first fight. ``Now he will have time to enjoy 
it,'' he said. The news media, represented by thousands of reporters, 
cameramen, producers, editors and technicians, brought the liftoff 
to hundreds of millions around the world. And hundreds of thousands, 
who wanted to see for themselves, crowded nearby shorelines and beaches, 
jockeying for the best points from which to see the flaming rocket 
rise to their applause and cheers. The tourism department for Brevard 
County, which includes the space center and nearby communities such 
as Cocoa Beach and Merritt Island, estimated beforehand that more 
than 300,000 people would flood into the area for the flight. Judging 
from local traffic congestion and mobbed viewing areas, it appeared 
they all came. Businesses welcomed the attention and the influx of 
millions of dollars after a disappointing summer, when wildfires in 
the region kept tourists away. Many promoted a carnival atmosphere, 
scheduling outdoor concerts and other events and hanging American 
flags along coastal Route A1A, the main artery through Cocoa Beach. 
Ron Jon's, a giant, pink emporium offering surfer gear and beachwear 
that is a landmark on the strip, celebrated the flight Wednesday night 
with a half-hour fireworks display. The fireworks had originally been 
scheduled for July 4, but were canceled because of the fires and dry 
conditions. Some visitors in campers and recreational vehicles arrived 
days early to stake out prime viewing spots along area causeways and 
beaches. At dawn Thursday morning, many more began filling in the 
remaining spots, some sporting homemade signs hawking souvenirs ranging 
from commemorative T-shirts to model rockets. Also appearing in great 
numbers were celebrities like Leonardo DiCaprio, business leaders 
and politicians, led by President Clinton and Hillary Clinton, and 
several Cabinet members. Congressmen came by the score to cheer a 
colleague, including fellow Sens. Edward Kennedy, D-Mass.; Ted Stevens, 
R-Alaska; John Warner, R-Va.; Patrick Leahy, D-Vt.; Bill Frist, R-Tenn.; 
Michael Dewine, R-Ohio; Bob Graham, D-Fla., and Rod Grams, R-Minn. 
NASA had so many invited guests, and many others who invited themselves, 
that it had to expand its normal VIP area to several sites. The news 
media not only reported the story, but also were part of it. Walter 
Cronkite came out of retirement to do commentary for Cable News Network, 
and snagged an exclusive interview with Clinton to show that he still 
could. When not doing interviews, Cronkite was giving them, reminiscing 
for a new generation on how he covered the space program from Mercury 
to Apollo. NASA received 4,000 applications for press credentials 
for this mission, numbers not seen since the days of Apollo or the 
beginnings of the space shuttle programs. For average shuttle missions, 
about 700 usually ask for accreditation and between 300 and 350 show 
up, said NASA spokesman Bruce Buckingham. This time, there were few 
no-shows. The Kennedy Center press site was so cluttered with satellite 
transmitter trucks, trailers, vans and recreation vehicles that NASA 
had to ask some reporters to leave their cars at remote lots and be 
bused to the center, something that hasn't happened in years. After 
the successful launching of Discovery, the celebration started again 
at local hotels and homes, in crowded restaurants, and in the clubs 
and bars lining Cocoa Beach. Thirty-six years later, John Glenn had 
made it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>