<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0330 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The government approved use of the drug tamoxifen Thursday to help 
prevent or delay the development of breast cancer in healthy women 
who have a very high risk of getting the disease. The manufacturer, 
Zeneca Pharmaceuticals, said it would distribute computer disks, developed 
with the National Cancer Institute, to doctors to help them assign 
precise scores on a risk table to individual women. The scores would 
then be used to help a doctor and patient decide whether to prescribe 
the drug. Zeneca said it would immediately start promoting the drug 
among doctors and then conduct a large advertising campaign aimed 
directly at women early next year. The company said it would run advertisements 
in widely circulated magazines and newspapers and might run commercials 
on television and radio as well. The computer disk includes a series 
of questions to assess a woman's risk of developing breast cancer. 
Older women, women with a family history of breast cancer, women first 
menstruated before the age of 12 and women who first became pregnant 
after the age of 30 are at increased risk, researchers say. For women 
with one or more of these factors, doctors may conclude that the benefits 
of tamoxifen outweigh the possible side effects, which include blood 
clots in the lungs or major veins and cancer of the lining of the 
uterus, officials said. The medication has been used for more than 
20 years to treat breast cancer. But Thursday the Food and Drug Administration 
approved a new use, to reduce the incidence of breast cancer. Federal 
officials said it was apparently the first anti-cancer drug to be 
approved for people who do not have the disease. Studies by the National 
Cancer Institute found that for women at high risk of getting breast 
cancer tamoxifen reduced the chances of getting it by 44 percent, 
though it does not eliminate the risk, and the long-term effects of 
taking the drug are not yet known. Dr. Michael Friedman, the acting 
commissioner of food and drugs, said, ``FDA strongly advises women 
and their doctors to carefully weigh the benefits and risks of tamoxifen 
before patients use the drug.'' Zeneca declined to estimate the size 
of the prospective new market for tamoxifen. But Mary Lynn Carver, 
a spokeswoman for the company, said that ``29 million women are at 
increased risk for breast cancer and should discuss their risk with 
their doctors and determine if tamoxifen therapy is appropriate.'' 
The drug costs $80 to $100 a month, Ms. Carver said. The recommended 
course of therapy lasts five years, but the protective effects appear 
to last five years after a woman stops taking the drug, she added. 
Zeneca sells tamoxifen under the name Nolvadex. The company, based 
in Wilmington, Del., is a subsidiary of Zeneca Group PLC, an $8.6 
billion bioscience company based in London. A business analyst who 
follows the pharmaceutical industry said he estimates that sales will 
increase 20 to 30 percent. ``The safety profile is not perfect for 
a product that would be used on a large patient base or for a long 
time,'' said the analyst, Sergio Traversa, of Mehta Partners. Ms. 
Carver, the Zeneca spokeswoman, said that sales of tamoxifen in the 
United States totaled $320 million last year. Eli Lilly &AMP; Co. 
is also aiming at the breast-cancer prevention market and Traversa 
noted that the company is studying the anti-cancer properties of its 
drug Evista, which seems to have fewer side effects. The computer 
disk Zeneca will distribute to doctors calculates a score for each 
patient, based on the woman's answers to various questions. Zeneca 
says a woman with a score of 1.67 or greater should talk to her doctor 
about her breast-cancer risk and the use of tamoxifen. Ms. Carver 
gave these hypothetical examples of how the risk-assessment system 
works: _ A 45-year-old Hispanic woman, who had her first menstrual 
period at the age of 12 and and her first child at the age of 38. 
Her mother died of breast cancer, and her sister is being treated 
for the disease. The woman has a risk score of 2.4 and should therefore 
consider taking the drug. _ A 40-year-old white woman, who had her 
first menstrual period at the age of 12 and has not had any children. 
Her mother and sister have had breast cancer, and a breast biopsy 
found that the woman had abnormal non-cancerous cells. The woman has 
a risk score of 5.9 and should therefore discuss the possibility of 
taking tamoxifen with her doctor. _ A 35-year-old black woman, who 
was 15 when she had her first menstrual period and was 20 when she 
had her first child. No close relatives have had breast cancer. She 
herself has had two breast biopsies that found abnormal non-cancerous 
cells. Her score is 1.1, so she is not a candidate to use the drug. 
Cynthia Pearson, executive director of the National Women's Health 
Network, a women's health advocacy group, said healthy women should 
be cautious about using the drug approved Thursday. ``This is a premature 
approval,'' she asserted. ``There's no way to know yet whether tamoxifen 
can truly prevent breast cancer or merely delay it.'' In addition, 
Ms. Pearson said she worried that heavy advertising could lead to 
overuse of the drug. Women, she said, may underestimate the danger 
of ``serious, even fatal complications.'' Scientists do not know exactly 
how tamoxifen works, but they have a good idea of one possible mechanism. 
Estrogen, a hormone, is believed to stimulate the growth of cancer 
cells, and tamoxifen is believed to block the action of natural estrogens 
in breast tissue, thus inhibiting the growth of breast cancer cells. 
Federal officials and Zeneca executives sounded a similar note in 
describing the significance of Thursday's decision. Health and Human 
Services Secretary Donna Shalala said, ``Today's action provides an 
important new option for some women at heightened risk of breast cancer,'' 
the second leading cause of cancer death among American women. Zeneca 
Pharmaceuticals president Robert Black said: ``For the millions of 
women who are at high risk of developing breast cancer, there is now 
something they can do to reduce the risk of developing the disease. 
It's a new option, a choice, that many women will have available to 
them as they discuss their health with their doctors.'' Clinical trials 
of tamoxifen were halted 14 months early, in March of this year, after 
scientists found that the drug sharply reduced the incidence of breast 
cancer. Friedman of the FDA said that the risk of uterine cancer for 
women taking tamoxifen was about three times the risk for women in 
the general population not taking it. Zeneca said that such cancer 
occurred in 20 to 30 women among every 10,000 treated with tamoxifen 
in a year. By contrast, it said, current data indicate that there 
are 7 cases of such cancer each year for every 10,000 healthy women 
in the general population. The large-scale test of tamoxifen involved 
13,388 women at high-risk of breast cancer. Half took the drug and 
85 of them developed breast cancer; half took a placebo and 154 of 
them developed breast cancer. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>