<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0458 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With only four days to go until Election Day, pollsters are everywhere, 
taking the United States' political pulse one last time. Here are 
the latest readings on six of the most important fall races, three 
for the Senate and three for governor. Senate: In California, Sen. 
Barbara Boxer, the Democratic incumbent, has pulled ahead of state 
Treasurer Matt Fong, the Republican challenger, by 51 percent to 42 
percent after months of being on the defensive, according to a Field 
Poll. Conducted Oct. 22 through 27 after the senator loosed a $300,000-a-day 
barrage of negative television advertising, the survey covered 678 
likely voters and has a margin of error of plus or minus four percentage 
points. A month ago, Fong led 48 percent to 44 percent. In Illinois, 
state Sen. Peter Fitzgerald, the Republican challenger, still leads 
the Democratic incumbent, Sen. Carol Moseley-Braun, according to a 
Mason-Dixon Poll. But with the help of outside money and campaigners, 
Moseley-Braun has gained four points since the last poll about two 
weeks ago, and Fitzgerald now leads by only eight points, 49 percent 
to 41 percent. The poll was conducted Oct. 24 through 26, covered 
813 likely voters and has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.5 percentage 
points. In Washington state, Sen. Patty Murray, a Democrat, still 
leads the Republican challenger, Rep. Linda Smith, according to a 
Mason-Dixon Poll. But with the help of a badly needed, if belated, 
cash infusion from her party, Ms. Smith has gained five points since 
the last poll early this month and Sen. Murray now leads by only eight 
points, 49 percent to 41 percent. The poll was conducted Oct. 26 and 
27, covered 801 likely voters and has a margin of error of plus or 
minus 3.5 percentage points. Governorships: In Alabama, according 
to a new Mason-Dixon Poll, Lt. Gov. Don Siegleman, the Democratic 
challenger, still leads Gov. Fob James, the Republican incumbent, 
in a contest that has left both candidates black and blue and has 
seen no significant gain or loss by either over the past two weeks. 
The poll has Siegleman ahead 49 percent to 43 percent, compared with 
a lead of 48 percent to 43 percent in a Mason-Dixon Poll taken about 
two weeks ago. The new poll was taken Oct. 24 through 26, covered 
808 likely voters and has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.5 percentage 
points. In Georgia, where the testy issue of race has recently become 
an element in the governor's contest, Guy Millner, the unsuccessful 
Republican candidate for governor four years ago, still leads state 
Rep. Roy Barnes, this year's Democratic candidate, according to a 
University of Georgia poll. But the figures for this poll _ 39 percent 
for Millner and 32 percent for Barnes, with 27 percent undecided _ 
are considerably different from a poll taken less than two weeks earlier 
by Mason-Dixon. It had Miller leading by only three percentage points 
and only 11 percent of voters still undecided. The new poll was conducted 
on Oct. 11 through 18, covered 500 likely voters and has a margin 
of error of plus or minus 4.3 percentage points. In Massachusetts, 
where a raucous debate and a lot of campaign dollars are keeping things 
hot in the governor's race, two new polls by The Boston Herald and 
The Boston Globe show Acting Gov. Paul Cellucci, the Republican incumbent, 
still with a significant lead over his Democratic challenger, Attorney 
General Scott Harshbarger. But not a clear enough lead to count Harshbarger 
out, not yet. The Boston Herald poll has Cellucci leading Harshbarger 
by 47 percent to 38 percent, with 15 percent undecided, while the 
Globe poll has Cellucci ahead 46 percent to 41 percent, with 9 percent 
undecided. Both polls were conducted Oct. 27 and 28, covered 400 likely 
voters and have a margin of error of plus or minus five percentage 
points. Aiming the Big Guns at Drug Initiatives With polls indicating 
that ballot initiatives to legalize marijuana for medical use might 
pass next Tuesday in some states, Barry McCaffrey, the retired Army 
general who is White House director of drug-control policy, figured 
it was time to throw more troops into the fight. So he enlisted three 
former presidents _ George Bush, Jimmy Carter and Gerald Ford _ and 
asked them to write a ``Dear Fellow Citizen'' letter that would point 
out why the initiatives should be defeated. The letter arrived on 
Wednesday and is being distributed to news outlets and anti-marijuana 
forces in Alaska, Oregon and Washington, where polls show most voters 
support the initiatives. It also has been sent to Nevada and the District 
of Columbia, where passage is more in doubt. The thrust of the letter 
is that until government researchers can determine whether marijuana 
is medically effective, it should not be approved for medical use 
_ or, as one paragraph pointedly puts it, for ``alleged medical purposes.'' 
``These initiatives are not based on the best available science,'' 
the letter argues. ``Compassionate medicine must be based on science, 
not political appeals. Prejudging research through a political process 
would be irresponsible and is not in our national interest.'' The 
three former presidents then encourage voters in Arizona to pass a 
ballot initiative that would require the Food and Drug Administration 
to approve medical use of marijuana before Arizona doctors could prescribe 
it. In distributing the letter, McCaffrey said: ``These great former 
elected national leaders, who we all respect so much, know that we 
cannot use the ballot box to determine what is safe and effective 
medicine. Nor should we send a terribly mixed message to our children.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>