<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0207 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Time flies. Remember you must die. It's a long way from being told 
to have a nice day, but those words are carved in stone, a few steps 
from busy Tremont Street. The phrases are actually in Latin (``Fugit 
hora, memento mori''), but their meaning is vividly clear by what 
appears beneath them, a carving of Father Time with an hourglass and 
a skeleton with an arrow, both reaching to snuff out a candle. The 
scene turns up a few times on the gravestones in King's Chapel Burying 
Ground, Boston's oldest graveyard, which I recently visited on a tour 
of historic graveyards in and around Boston. That may seem a spooky 
way to pass the time. But one can just as easily argue that such places 
offer as rich an opportunity to connect with the past as do famous 
houses or battlefields. As the scene at King's Chapel indicates, old 
graveyards can be remarkable artistically, full of the cultural symbolism 
of an earlier era, like the winged skulls on so many colonial headstones 
or the delicately etched urns and weeping willows popular in the early 
19th century. Gravestones have been the subject of academic treatises 
and even guidebooks. Many years ago, on a whim, I picked up a small 
paperback, ``New England Cemeteries,'' by Andrew Kull, which lists 
scores of older graveyards. ``I think that if people take the time 
to look, they'll be amazed what they can discover in a burying ground,'' 
said Laurel K. Gabel, research coordinator for the Association for 
Gravestone Studies, a nonprofit, membership organization that publishes 
a scholarly journal on gravestones. She compared old burying grounds 
to outdoor museums, repositories of folk art and sculpture, genealogical 
information, even evidence of the language of earlier eras. ``They 
tell us a lot about our ancestors and the world they lived in,'' Ms. 
Gabel said in a telephone interview. There is also an intimacy that 
comes from reading epitaphs of early Americans, which can be ennobling, 
poignant or chilling. At Concord's Old Hill Burying Ground, there 
is inspiration in the sturdy slate that marks the grave of Col. John 
Buttrick, who led the colonial militiamen who engaged the British 
at the town's North Bridge on April 19, 1775. Not only did he survive 
the Revolution, but, the stone declares, ``Having laid down the sword 
with honor, he resumed the plough with industry; by the latter to 
maintain what the former had won.'' Or one can be haunted by the memorial 
to the Rev. Charles T. Torrey in Cambridge's Mount Auburn Cemetery. 
A Yale graduate, he was arrested in Baltimore for helping slaves to 
freedom and died of tuberculosis in the penitentiary in 1846. Engraved 
on a white obelisk are some of his last words: ``It is better to die 
in prison with the peace of God in our breasts than to live in freedom 
with a polluted conscience.'' I began my tour in Boston, where three 
old burying grounds lie an easy walk from one another. On Tremont 
Street, near Boston Common, is the site of both King's Chapel Burying 
Ground and the Old Granary Burying Ground, which hummed with tourists 
the day I visited. They were enticed most likely by its central location 
and the all-star roster of patriots _ Paul Revere, John Hancock, Samuel 
Adams _ interred there. Modern plaques lie among the gravestones, 
explaining how the carvers first sketched the slates with chalk or 
ink, then cut them with an awl or chisel. One plaque provides the 
name of a carver, Henry Christian Geyer, who came from a family of 
fishermen and also made plaster of Paris models of dogs, cats and 
royalty. (About 300 gravestone carvers who worked before the year 
1800 have been identified, said Ms. Gabel, co-author of two books 
on the subject.) Historical information can also be found down the 
street in King's Chapel Burying Ground, resting place of John Winthrop, 
first governor of Massachusetts Bay Colony; Mary Chilton, the first 
woman to step off the Mayflower, and William Dawes, who rode to warn 
people of the British march to Concord on the same night as Revere. 
King's Chapel itself is a gray, stone building with Doric columns. 
Begun as an Anglican church in 1717, it houses a Unitarian-Universalist 
congregation. A sign inside says 30,000 sermons have been preached 
from its pulpit. Although I grew up in Boston's suburbs, there are 
parts of the city I feel uncomfortable navigating without a map, such 
is the configuration of the streets. I took one along to find Copp's 
Hill Burying Ground in the North End, near Christ Church, more famously 
known as Old North. At Copp's Hill, I had the good fortune to encounter 
a highly knowledgeable guide, dressed in period costume, meticulously 
acting the part of a late-18th-century Bostonian. She gave her name 
as Mistress Elizabeth de la Rue, spoke in detail about the burying 
ground and guided a few of us among its more notable graves, including 
that of the Rev. Cotton Mather, the Puritan minister and scholar. 
Mistress Elizabeth never broke character, so it was only later that 
I learned that although the name belonged to a real Bostonian of that 
era, she is largely the creation of Donna La Rue, a doctoral student 
at Boston University, who has been giving tours of local burial grounds 
since 1991 (between July 4 and Labor Day only), sponsored by the city's 
Parks and Recreation Department. Ms. La Rue said she had done research 
on burying grounds in Boston, Cambridge and Salem, and values the 
older gravestones for their combination of iconography and text. ``Especially 
the colonial ones are very confrontative and speak to us about people's 
lives'' in a way that modern tombstones rarely do, she said. ``They 
read like a book.'' Afterward, I caught the subway to Cambridge. From 
Harvard Square, it's a half-hour's walk to the Egyptian Revival gate 
of Mount Auburn Cemetery, established in 1831, listed on the National 
Register of Historic Places and fully prepared to welcome visitors 
on foot or by car. ``Discover Mount Auburn,'' urged a pamphlet I picked 
up from a rack inside the gate, along with a map that identified gravesites 
and monuments, and through which I discovered the Torrey monument. 
With its lushly planted grounds and small ponds, Mount Auburn is the 
nation's first ``garden cemetery'' and a favorite among bird watchers. 
I saw plenty of people who just seemed to be taking a walk, including 
two women pushing strollers. ``The word cemetery derives from the 
Greek and means sleeping place.'' the pamphlet said. ``Its use in 
this country began with Mount Auburn's founding.'' In that sense, 
it replaced the more prosaic term burying ground. In place of the 
winged skulls in the older burying grounds, there are at Mount Auburn 
obelisks, stone urns, broken columns and Celtic crosses. Another difference 
is that a number of the older graveyards are often linked to the Revolution, 
its veterans buried therein, while Mount Auburn carries associations 
with the Civil War. Julia Ward Howe, author of ``The Battle Hymn of 
the Republic,'' is buried there. And one can also find a monument 
of a brown stone framing a piece of carved white marble, erected by 
Robert Gould Shaw, a Boston merchant whose grandson (of the same name) 
commanded the 54th Massachusetts infantry, the African-American regiment 
pictured in the 1989 movie ``Glory.'' Nearby a large stone sphinx 
commemorates the North's victory, with the inscription ``American 
Union Preserved, African Slavery Destroyed.'' Another imposing structure, 
devoid of martial claims, sits above a pond called Halcyon Lake in 
the cemetery's southwestern corner. A circle of eight Corinthian columns 
on an elevated base mark the tomb of Mary Baker Eddy, founder of Christian 
Science and one of the most influential female figures in American 
religious history. A great concentration of the 19th-century's literary 
genius lies about 20 miles away in Concord's Sleepy Hollow Cemetery, 
a rambling spread near the town's center. On a rising ground called 
Authors' Ridge are the graves of Henry David Thoreau, Nathaniel Hawthorne 
and Louisa May Alcott, as well as a rough chunk of granite over the 
resting place of Ralph Waldo Emerson. Emerson is flanked by his wife, 
Lidian; their son Waldo, who died at age 5, and their daughter Ellen, 
whose epitaph notes that although ``of a fine mind, she cared more 
for persons than for books.'' Personal statements of an earlier time 
can be found at the Old Hill graveyard, overlooking Concord's center. 
On some 18th-century headstones are carvings of tiny, impassive-faced 
figures standing in arched doorways. Those, Ms. Gabel said, were the 
work of a local carver and adorn the stones of women and children. 
One of those stones marks the resting place of Elizabeth Blood, dead 
in 1775 at age 34. Whoever carved it came from the same tradition 
as the person who put the Latin phrases on the gravestones at King's 
Chapel. The epitaph states, in part: ``All you that passeth by, as 
you are now, so once was I, as I am now, so must you be, prepare for 
death and follow me.'' Those words, Ms. La Rue said, are ``the most 
common couplet found on stones'' of that period. And not easily forgotten, 
I might add. Here is information on the graveyards mentioned in the 
article about Boston area burial grounds, as well as general information 
about visiting the area. Unless noted, graveyard hours are daily, 
dawn to dusk. The Graveyards COPP'S HILL BURYING GROUND, Hull Street, 
the North End, Boston. KING'S CHAPEL BURYING GROUND, Tremont Street, 
Boston. OLD GRANARY BURYING GROUND, Tremont Street, Boston. MOUNT 
AUBURN CEMETERY, 580 Mount Auburn Street, Cambridge, Mass. Open daily, 
8 a.m. to 5 p.m., or until sunset. OLD HILL BURYING GROUND, Lexington 
Road and Bedford Street, Concord, Mass. SLEEPY HOLLOW CEMETERY, Bedford 
Street, Concord. Where to Stay THE CHARLES HOTEL, Harvard Square, 
Cambridge, (617) 864-1200. Daily room rate, $389, for single or double 
occupancy. Where to Eat THE COLONIAL INN, 48 Monument Square, Concord, 
(978) 369-2373. HENRIETTA'S TABLE, the Charles Hotel. LEGAL SEA FOODS, 
Kendall Square, 5 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, (617) 864-3400. SABRA 
GRILL, 20 Eliot Street, Cambridge, (617) 868-5777. A Middle Eastern 
take-out. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>