<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0410 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This has been the best year of Vijay Singh's career, and Thursday 
he played one of the best rounds of his life. Shooting a brilliant 
seven-under-par 63 on a challenging East Lake Golf Club course where 
only nine players broke par, Singh soared to a three-stroke lead over 
Billy Mayfair after the first round of the Tour Championship. It was 
a machine-like display of ball-striking by Singh, this year's PGA 
Champion, who only missed one fairway and putted with precision on 
lightning-fast greens that invited mistakes. Singh's round was the 
best competitive round in East Lake's history, and it also matched 
the lowest round in Tour Championship history, equaled by Wayne Levi 
in 1989 and Jim Gallagher Jr. in 1993. Tommy Barnes holds the course 
record (62) at East Lake, but the legendary Bobby Jones, who learned 
to play golf at East Lake, never shot better than a 63 on his home 
course. Regardless of what club Singh held in his hands Thursday, 
he felt confident of hitting a good shot. Singh made it look easy. 
But it wasn't. ``Unbelievable,'' said Singh, whose round included 
eight birdies and one bogey as he avoided the treacherous Bermuda 
rough. ``I hit the ball probably the best I did all year. I drove 
the ball really long and straight. The longest iron I hit today was 
a 6-iron. ``Today was an exceptional round for anybody to shoot 63 
around here. I think the longest putt I had was 18 feet. It's one 
of the best rounds I've had ever from tee to green.'' Nobody could 
keep pace with Singh Thursday, but with three rounds remaining on 
a course this difficult, most players in the elite 30-man field remained 
within striking distance. Mayfair's 66 left him alone in second place, 
while Tom Lehman and Jim Furyk (67) were tied for third place. Meanwhile, 
the competition for the money title and PGA Tour Player of the Year 
honors could get interesting before the weekend ends. David Duval 
can clinch the money title simply by finishing alone in 24th place 
or better. But Duval struggled to a 75, leaving him tied for 28th 
place with Tiger Woods. If Duval finishes lower than 24th, and if 
Furyk wins the tournament, Furyk can snatch the money title from Duval. 
And Duval is battling Mark O'Meara for Player of the Year honors, 
but O'Meara did not have a sparkling round either, shooting a one-over-par 
71. The scores of Duval and Woods, neither of whom had a birdie, showed 
how difficult East Lake is, but Singh was almost too good to notice. 
He shot a five-under-par 30 on the front nine, using his accuracy 
to set up makeable birdie putts. At No. 1, Singh hit a 9-iron approach 
shot to within six feet of the cup. At No. 3, he hit a sand wedge 
to within a foot. At No. 5, he hit another 9-iron to eight feet. At 
No. 8, he hit a pitching wedge to a foot. Singh made all of those 
ensuing short putts for birdie, then at No. 9, he made an 18-foot 
birdie putt, just in case anyone felt that he could not make a long 
one. The only blemish on Singh's card came at the par 3, No. 18, when 
he bogeyed by three-putting from 40 feet. But it did not spoil his 
day, or his year. Despite all the talk about Duval and O'Meara, Singh 
is third on the money list, and he has won two tournaments (PGA Championship 
and Sprint International). If Singh were to take home the $720,000 
first-place check, he would finish No. 2 on the money list, and he 
would have more victories on tour this year than anyone except Duval 
(four). Singh entered this week somewhat overshadowed, but he was 
not after Thursday. Most of Singh's gallery came to see Woods, Singh's 
playing partner. But while people may have arrived talking about Woods, 
they left talking about Singh. ``My whole game is getting better,'' 
said Singh, a 35-year-old native of Fiji, who lives in Ponte Vedra 
Beach, Fla. ``But I was never expecting to shoot anything like that. 
I just said, `Make sure you play solid, shoot a good number, don't 
shoot yourself out.' It turned out really good for me.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>