<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0406 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of the first clues next Tuesday night about the trend in this 
year's elections will be the early returns from the congressional 
race here in southeastern Indiana. Rep. Lee Hamilton, a Democrat, 
is retiring after 34 years in Congress. The race to succeed him, which 
by all accounts is extremely close, matches two aggressive, well-financed 
candidates who take positions that vary not a whit from the dogma 
of their respective national parties. The polls in Indiana close by 
7 p.m., and the results are usually among the first to be announced. 
The outcome of the contest, in the Ninth District, may be a harbinger 
for results in swing seats everywhere, especially in the 32 other 
districts where incumbents are not seeking re-election. ``This could 
be a barometer for the country,'' said Amy Walter, who tracks House 
races for the Cook Political Report, a nonpartisan newsletter in Washington. 
``It may say something about turnout and about what's happening in 
other places where good democratic candidates are running in rural, 
conservative-leaning districts.'' This is the third time the Republican, 
Jean Leising, a former state senator, has run for the seat. She lost 
a close race to Hamilton in 1994, the year of the Republican sweep 
nationally, and was badly beaten in 1996. Because of these two races, 
Ms. Leising, 49, began this campaign well known throughout the sprawling 
district, which has 21 counties and no town large enough to support 
its own television station. Republicans in Washington see the race 
as a prime opportunity to pick up a seat that has been democratic 
for a generation. Speaker Newt Gingrich and the 1996 presidential 
and vice presidential nominees, Bob Dole and Jack Kemp, have been 
here to campaign for Ms. Leising (pronounced LYE-sing). Her democratic 
opponent, Baron Hill, 45, started out without the same degree of name 
recognition. Hill served in the state legislature in the 1980s and 
ran unsuccessfully in 1990 against Sen. Daniel Coats. But Hill, a 
retirement planner at Merrill Lynch, has been out of the public eye 
for most of this decade. He tried to overcome this by raising more 
than $800,000 and beginning television advertisements much sooner 
than his opponent. But it is extraordinarily expensive to reach all 
the voters with television advertisements. People in the district 
get their television from five cities: Indianapolis; Louisville, Ky.; 
Cincinnati and Dayton, Ohio, and Evansville, Ind. As a result, both 
candidates spend their days crisscrossing the district from one town 
to another, giving their standard speeches and then hopping back into 
their cars to rush to the next rally. On Tuesday, Hill, accompanied 
in a van by Hamilton and Gov. Frank L. O'Bannon, hit seven towns. 
Ms. Leising wound up her day after 9 p.m. at a Farm Bureau meeting 
in Madison, on the Ohio River about half-way between Louisville and 
Cincinnati. She was an hour late, and the meeting was over by the 
time she arrived. But she gathered the 20 stragglers who were downing 
the last of the cookies and cider and gave her speech anyway. The 
issues that divide Ms. Leising and Hill are the ones that separate 
Republicans from Democrats from coast to coast. Ms. Leising emphasizes 
lower taxes and smaller government. Hill stresses the importance of 
government programs like Social Security, Medicare and aid to education. 
Hill favors gun control; Ms. Leising opposes it. He supports abortion 
rights; she would outlaw abortion in almost all cases. Ms. Leising 
would allow Social Security money to be invested in the stock market; 
Hill would not. She wants to give parents vouchers to pay for tuition 
at private schools; he talks about reducing class sizes in public 
schools. The scandal in Washington almost never comes up. Ms. Leising 
has called for President Clinton's resignation, but she never raises 
the issue. Hill says he will not make up his mind until the impeachment 
investigation is concluded. Hill says he is following in the footsteps 
of Hamilton, a studious, mild-mannered democratic stalwart who is 
popular at home and who, when his party was in the majority, was chairman 
at various times of the foreign affairs, intelligence and joint economic 
committees, as well as the panel that investigated the Iran-Contra 
matter. Speaking on Hill's behalf at a rally in this suburb of Louisville, 
Hamilton said: ``He's a centrist, a moderate, fiscally conservative. 
He's a Hoosier to the core.'' Ms. Leising takes issue with that. In 
an interview, she said of Hill: ``He is much more liberal than this 
district. The people here are fiscally and socially conservative, 
and they're pro-business.'' She is right about the conservative nature 
of the district. The people here have Southern accents and small-town 
views. The population is less than 2 percent black. But President 
Clinton carried the district, by about 500 votes in 1992 and about 
1,500 in 1996. O'Bannon, whose hometown, Corydon, is in the district, 
carried it handily in 1996. Ms. Leising says she is confident she 
will win. Hill says the race is a toss-up. O'Bannon said that Ms. 
Leising had probably been ahead but that Hill had drawn even. The 
answer will come on Tuesday night, well before most of the other close 
races in the country are decided. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>