<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0150 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two weeks before the launching, John Glenn settled into a chair for 
an interview, one of many in the buildup to his return to space. He 
had been in training for the Discovery flight long enough to adopt 
the coloration of a new-old astronaut, forsaking senatorial togs for 
gray slacks and a polo shirt with the crew insignia. Here was a man, 
77 years old, eager to get back into space. A national hero as the 
first American to orbit Earth, he had once made apprehensive Americans 
feel good again about themselves in those trying times of the Cold 
War. Now he was getting a chance to relive some of the glory of the 
day that defined the rest of his life. Glenn, the retiring Democratic 
senator from Ohio, had yearned for a second flight ever since the 
first one. He sought to fly in the Gemini project, which followed 
the pioneering Mercury flights of the first astronauts. But President 
John F. Kennedy thought he was too valuable as a hero to risk losing 
him in an accident. Glenn had hopes of a place on one of the Apollo 
missions to the Moon, but was given no encouragement. ``Yeah, I would 
have liked very much to go to the Moon,'' he said. ``But I went on 
to other things, and that was a decision I lived with.'' With no second 
flight in sight, Glenn resigned from the astronaut corps in 1964. 
He worked several years as an executive in private industry and entered 
politics in his home state, going on to serve four terms in the United 
States Senate that will come to an end in January. In 1984, he failed 
in an attempt to win the Democratic presidential nomination. In the 
interview, Glenn readily answered questions he has heard countless 
times, but one seemed to stop him: If he had not become an astronaut 
and famous as the first orbiting American, what would the rest of 
his life been like? ``I don't know what I would have done,'' he replied, 
after a long pause. ``I was a test pilot and I liked that. I suppose 
I would probably have finished out may long career in the Marine Corps. 
Beyond that, I don't have any idea. I might have studied medicine. 
I always had an interest in medicine, but I doubt that at that stage 
I would have gone to medical school.'' Once a hero, it seemed even 
to Glenn, it was hard to imagine what life might have been otherwise. 
But he was reluctant to talk about himself as a hero. ``I figure I'm 
the same person who grew up in New Concord, Ohio, and went off through 
the years to participate in a lot of events of importance,'' he said. 
``What got a lot of attention, I think, was the tenuous times we thought 
we were living in back in the Cold War. I don't think it was about 
me. All this would have happened to anyone who happened to be selected 
for that flight.'' John Herschel Glenn Jr. was born on July 18, 1921, 
in Cambridge, Ohio, and grew up in New Concord, a small town in southeastern 
Ohio. Like everyone else there, the Glenns lived through hard times 
in the Depression, but somehow managed. They instilled in young John 
a rigid moral code based on their own example of Presbyterian rectitude 
and saw him through an apple-pie boyhood. He played trumpet, sang 
in the church choir and washed cars for pocket money. In high school 
(now named for him), he was an honor student and lettered in football, 
basketball and tennis. He still had time to court his high school 
sweetheart, Anna Margaret Castor, the doctor's daughter. It did not 
matter that she stammered; she was his girl and he loved her. They 
were married in April 1943 and have a son and a daughter and two grandsons. 
Years later, Mrs. Glenn underwent intensive therapy that virtually 
cured her stammer. When the United States entered World War II, Glenn 
dropped out of college to become a Marine Corps fighter pilot, flying 
59 combat missions in the Pacific and winning two Distinguished Flying 
Crosses. In the Korean War, he won more medals for his 90 combat missions. 
After that, he became a military test pilot. In 1957, months before 
the first Soviet Sputnik, he made the first transcontinental supersonic 
flight. He piloted an F8U-1 Crusader from Los Angeles to New York 
in the record time of 3 hours, 23 minutes, 8.4 seconds. It was this 
experience with high risk and new machines that won Lt. Col. John 
Glenn a place as one of the original seven American astronauts, selected 
in 1959. Millions of people watched and listened and prayed that morning 
in 1962. Two Russians, Yuri Gagarin and Gherman Titov, had already 
orbited Earth in the year before. Two Americans, Alan Shepard and 
Virgil (Gus) Grissom, had been launched, but only to the fringes of 
space, not into orbit. Glenn's launching had been postponed 10 times 
since December, for mechanical trouble or bad weather. Finally, Glenn 
squeezed into the tiny Mercury capsule he called Friendship 7 and 
the Atlas booster blasted off. It was a short flight, three orbits 
over five hours. But when he was safely back in the afternoon, Glenn's 
wide grin engendered tearful relief and a widespread feeling that 
the country could indeed hold its own in the space age and might someday, 
perhaps, prevail. No flier since Charles Lindbergh had received such 
a cheering welcome, with parades up Broadway and across the land. 
Encouraged by the Kennedys, Glenn plunged into politics. His first 
two Senate campaigns ended badly. A serious head injury suffered in 
a bathroom fall forced him to withdraw from a 1964 race. In 1970, 
he lost to Howard Metzenbaum in the Democratic primary. With the same 
determination that served him well in aviation and space, Glenn tried 
again and beat Metzenbaum in the 1974 primary and then easily won 
the general election. Over the years, Glenn earned the respect of 
his Senate colleagues as an upright and candid man. He worked diligently 
on the frustrating issue of nuclear proliferation and developed an 
expertise in military affairs and technological subjects. He generally 
took moderate positions on most issues, though in recent years his 
voting record became more liberal and he has been an enthusiastic 
supporter of President Clinton. In the one blemish on his squeaky 
clean political reputation. Glenn was one of five senators present 
at a meeting with federal regulators in 1987 concerning accusations 
of savings-and-loan bank fraud against Charles Keating, a former Ohian. 
The meeting smacked of impropriety and political pressure. Since Glenn 
had no further contact with Keating, who eventually was sent to prison, 
the Senate decided that he did nothing deserving discipline. Glenn's 
celebrity continued to draw audiences wherever he went, but his wooden 
speaking style and lack of a cogent campaign message were blamed for 
his poor showing in the 1984 presidential primaries. He eventually 
dropped out of the race, which was won by Walter Mondale. As a member 
of the Senate's special committee on aging, Glenn developed the medical 
rationale in arguing his case for a return to space. He offered himself 
as a human guinea pig in tests of the physiological effects of space 
weightlessness, like bone-mass loss and cardiovascular and immunity 
system changes, and how they seem to be comparable to the usual effects 
of aging on the ground. After the mission and his retirement from 
the Senate, John and Annie Glenn plan to live in Washington and Columbus, 
Ohio, where he is establishing the John Glenn Institute for Public 
Service and Public Policy at Ohio State University. This will also 
be the repository of papers of the man who made history by orbiting 
Earth three times and, 36 years later, reawakened those memories as 
the oldest space traveller. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>