<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0364 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As Republicans and Democrats compete for advantage in the dash toward 
Election Day, Americans view Republicans as more ethical but say Democrats 
can better tackle the pivotal issues of education, health care and 
the future of Medicare and Social Security, the latest New York Times/CBS 
News Poll shows. And nearly seven out of 10 said that the drama that 
has dominated the news throughout the year _ the White House sex scandal 
_ would not affect how they voted in congressional races. The survey 
also found that the outcome of Tuesday's congressional elections could 
shift significantly, depending on which party can best get _ maybe 
even goad _ its supporters to the polls. If turnout is average for 
a midterm election, for example, neither side has a particular edge 
in the popular vote. But the poll showed that Republicans' prospects 
would surge if, as some analysts predict, turnout is unusually low. 
The poll helps explain why House Republicans decided unexpectedly 
late this week to inject the scandal into the closing debate with 
a multimillion-dollar advertising blitz. It also explains why Democrats 
fired back with a commercial of their own that emphasizes issues _ 
and the need to move beyond the scandal. At the close of a seemingly 
mercurial election season, featuring a stormy and late session of 
Congress, Democrats and Republicans are playing to their strengths: 
The poll found that one issue on which Republicans have a decided 
advantage over Democrats _ 41 percent to 24 percent _ is the question 
of who has higher moral standards. By contrast, people expressed far 
greater confidence in Democrats on a host of consequential issues. 
Fifty-one percent voiced confidence that Democrats could improve education; 
only 30 percent said that of Republicans. And 57 percent said Democrats 
were more likely to improve the health-care system; only 24 percent 
said that of Republicans. Perhaps most striking, in what may be a 
sign of peril for Republicans well beyond next week's election, the 
survey found that the party has lost its edge on the issue of tax 
cuts, long a centerpiece of Republican campaigns. While many candidates 
are still hammering away about taxes this year, the poll found that 
the public no longer associates Republicans, any more than Democrats, 
with reducing taxes. Also encouraging for Democrats, the survey found 
a wide public view that President Clinton is doing a good job _ a 
belief that has prevailed despite the reverberations since January 
about his affair with Monica Lewinsky. Sixty-five percent of Americans 
give Clinton a high job-approval rating; the same proportion approve 
of his handling of foreign policy. And 74 percent approve of how he 
is handling the economy. The nationwide telephone poll of 1,118 adults 
was conducted Monday through Wednesday. It has a margin of sampling 
error of three percentage points in either direction. Unlike presidential 
campaigns, when the public's interest escalates closer to Election 
Day, the poll found no such movement this year. That may be because, 
as is often the case in midterm campaigns, there do not seem to be 
any galvanizing issues. In fact, despite the broad perceptions of 
the parties, many House, Senate and gubernatorial contests will turn 
on local issues, strengths and weaknesses of individual candidates, 
and the potency and force of local advertising. ``Voters are all over 
the map,'' said Fred Yang, a Democratic pollster. ``There's no roiling 
issues. And there aren't any roiling themes.'' Tony Fabrizio, a Republican 
pollster, said, ``Neither side has really had a rallying cry.'' It 
is a far different, and certainly calmer, environment from what prevailed 
at this point four years ago, when voters were furious about the doomed 
Clinton health-care plan and uncertain about the economic picture. 
At that time, barely half of Americans rated the national economy 
as good; now the figure is more than 80 percent. Then, more than 70 
percent disapproved of the way Congress handled its job; that figure 
is now 49 percent. In the subsequent elections of 1994, voters ousted 
Democrats from control of the House for the first time in 40 years. 
But this year, incumbents in both parties can take solace in the fact 
that the public is far less restless than in past elections. Half 
the respondents said that their own representative deserved re-election. 
And 65 percent disagreed with the notion that government would work 
better if all new people were elected this year. In November 1994, 
54 percent disagreed with that idea; in June 1992, 49 percent disagreed. 
While no national poll can anticipate what will happen in specific 
states and congressional districts on Election Day, the survey found 
that neither Democrats nor Republicans are enjoying any significant 
advantage. More than anything else, the outcome may be tied to turnout. 
If turnout remains relatively steady for a midterm election _ at about 
39 percent of the voting-age population _ the poll shows a vote of 
48 percent for Republicans and 43 percent for Democrats. But that 
difference is within the margin of error of plus or minus five percentage 
points. If turnout is unusually high, about 47 percent, the vote would 
be 45 percent for Republicans and 44 percent for Democrats. But Republicans 
would have their biggest advantage if the fewest people go to the 
polls. If turnout is only 31 percent, 51 percent of voters say they 
would support Republican candidates while 41 percent would back Democrats. 
The poll also underscored why even some Republicans fear that the 
commercials capitalizing on Clinton's troubles could backfire. The 
public continues to view the impeachment inquiry in Congress as having 
more to do with attempts at political gain by Republicans than a sincere 
investigation of serious crimes. A majority of Americans view the 
House Judiciary Committee's handling of the matter negatively; most 
expressed little faith that the hearings would be conducted fairly. 
The public is three times more likely to blame Republicans than Democrats 
for that partisanship. More than two-thirds of the public said Clinton's 
actions were not consequential enough to warrant his being impeached 
and removed from office. A plurality want the matter dropped entirely. 
Nearly three-quarters of Americans say it would be better for the 
country if Clinton finished his term rather than resigned, a seven-point 
increase from a poll conducted two weeks ago. Though a plurality chose 
Republicans over Democrats on the question of who has higher moral 
standards, neither party is viewed as putting forward candidates who 
are more honest. But 47 percent say Republicans are seen as better 
able to uphold traditional family values, compared with 31 percent 
for Democrats. But Democrats are viewed as more likely to understand 
the needs and problems of American families by a margin of 50 percent 
to 28 percent. On issue after issue, Democrats have an advantage over 
Republicans. For instance, 53 percent of those polled said Democrats 
were more likely to make the right decisions about Medicare; only 
28 percent said that of Republicans. Fifty-two percent said Democrats 
would make the right decisions about Social Security; for Republicans 
the figure was 29 percent. People also said, by a margin of 44 percent 
to 33 percent, that the Democratic Party had better ideas than the 
Republican Party for leading the country into the 21st century. Upholding 
a pattern that has persisted for years, even though people are relatively 
satisfied with their own representatives, voters registered harsher 
evaluations of Congress as a whole. Nearly two-thirds said that most 
members of Congress had not done a good enough job to deserve re-election. 
In particular, most Americans give low marks to the current session 
of Congress. A majority said Congress accomplished less in 1997 and 
1998 than lawmakers do in a typical two-year period. Asked whether 
their own representative cared more about their needs or those of 
special interest groups, 45 percent said their needs and 39 percent 
cited interest groups. But asked about Congress in general, 64 percent 
said most representatives were more interested in doing the work of 
special interest groups than in addressing the concerns of voters. 
``They're sitting on their thumb, twirling in circles,'' one poll 
respondent, Emmajean Dry, 59, of Dallas, said in a follow-up interview. 
Lambasting the Republican-controlled Congress, Ms. Dry, who plans 
to vote for Democrats next week, added, ``Congress has done nothing 
except try to get rid of Clinton _ and ruin the Democrats.'' William 
Selby, 32, a Republican respondent to the poll who installs garage 
doors in Maryland, said he was not dissatisfied with Congress. ``Congress 
is doing well, doing what they were elected to do,'' he said. ``Impeachment 
hearings is what they should be doing by law.'' But, he said of the 
scandal, ``They could probably be doing more if they didn't have the 
presidential issue.'' The public was divided over whether the country 
needs a Republican Congress to keep a check on a Democratic president. 
The survey also found that Speaker Newt Gingrich's already low favorability 
rating has dipped to its lowest levels since January 1997, when he 
was embroiled in an ethics case. His favorability rating now stands 
at 18 percent; his unfavorability rating is 43 percent. Rep. Henry 
Hyde, R-Ill., chairman of the Judiciary Committee, is still unknown 
to most Americans even though he is presiding over the impeachment 
inquiry. Sixty-two percent of Americans said they do not know enough 
about him to register an opinion. In a year when as many as two-thirds 
of Americans are expected to stay clear of the polls on Election Day, 
the survey found that those people stand out in several ways from 
those who do vote. For instance, the nonvoters are younger and less 
educated, have lower incomes, and tend to prefer Democratic candidates. 
Sixty-three percent of the nonvoters have not attended college, while 
only 43 percent of expected voters have not attended college. Forty 
percent of nonvoters have family incomes of under $30,000 a year, 
compared with 24 percent of expected voters. And 32 percent of nonvoters 
are under the age of 30, compared with 13 percent of the voters. When 
it comes to whom they prefer for Congress, 49 percent of the nonvoters 
said Democrats and 27 percent said Republicans. Those who were expected 
to vote were evenly divided. Even people who say they plan to vote 
expressed dismay with the state of American politics. ``I disagree 
with all the negativism,'' said Mathew Feldman, 65, a Democrat from 
Maryland. ``It has turned me off to a degree. I wish it focused on 
what individuals can and will do, not just knocking down the other 
person. There is a lot of money being wasted on all campaigns.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>