<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0445 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During the weeklong media drumbeat leading to John Glenn's voyage 
into space, the former astronaut Scott Carpenter described one benefit 
of the flight. As he told MSNBC, ``The nation gets to revisit a time 
of imagination and hope and magic.'' That sounds more like a description 
of a Disney film than rocket science, yet it succinctly captures the 
gilded tone of the television coverage up to and including Thursday's 
high-profile launching. The networks and all-news channels quickly 
found their common theme: the return of an American hero. And after 
10 months of wallowing in the Lewinsky sex scandal, you could almost 
feel their relief as they leaped on this wholesome story. In the last 
decade television news has virtually ignored space unless a satellite 
seemed about to tumble from the sky. But all week the network newscasts 
have been sounding the puffy theme of heroism, interviewing Glenn 
and doing features on his historic flight in 1962. And while Tom Brokaw, 
Dan Rather and Peter Jennings were all there for the launching Thursday, 
the story was shaped by other voices, from the past. A medium devoted 
to youth suddenly had an amazing amount of gray hair on display, as 
former astronauts turned television commentators. There was Carpenter 
on NBC, Wally Shirra on ABC and James Lovell on the Fox News Channel. 
It says a lot about how we have come to perceive the space program 
that Lovell may be best identified as the guy Tom Hanks played in 
``Apollo 13.'' Most nostalgic of all, covering the flight for CNN 
was Walter Cronkite, who at 82 is five years older than Glenn and 
a far more beloved icon. There is conspicuous irony, even wrongheadedness, 
in the way a future-oriented endeavor like space travel has been cloaked 
in this nostalgic glow. The hoopla over the Glenn flight says a great 
deal about the media and this social moment. The last year has seen 
several attempts at media-manufactured heros. The popularity of Steven 
Spielberg's World War II movie ``Saving Private Ryan'' was depicted 
as a longing for old-time heros. So was Mark McGwire's race to break 
Roger Maris' home-run record. The cover of this week's TV Guide pictures 
Glenn and Cronkite with a headline that reflects the television coverage: 
``A Time for Heroes.'' How much this feeds a genuine public thirst, 
and how much comes from the media trying desperately to counterbalance 
its Lewinsky coverage, may be an unanswerable question. But there 
are many hints of media desperation. Glenn has always inspired greater 
respect for his place in history than the warmth and affection that 
the most popular heros evoke. And as the week went on, it became impossible 
to ignore the skeptics' questions: Was Glenn part of a valid scientific 
study? Or was his trip about politics and public relations? To the 
reporters' credit, those questions were not ignored. But they could 
never become dominant; television was invested in enticing viewers 
to watch a genuine hero. Subtly, the questions shifted. Even if the 
science is makework, Brian Williams asked on MSNBC, ``Does John Glenn 
deserve his victory lap?'' Rather simply added public relations to 
the equation, and signed off CBS' coverage by calling it ``a history-making, 
publicity-making, sentimental science trip to space.'' Oddly, the 
weeklong television buildup didn't create excitement so much as it 
made the smooth countdown and launching seem perfunctory. We are accustomed 
to seeing space televised in more dramatic terms, whether in Hank's 
popular miniseries, ``From the Earth to the Moon,'' with its glittering 
views of the Earth as seen from space, or NASA's own astonishing live 
television pictures from Mars last year. Listening to anchors and 
astronauts explaining the details of the flight Thursday seemed anticlimactic. 
Yet if you're going to throw a nostalgia-fest, you might as well have 
a loved figure like Cronkite around. His very presence, in his own 
well-earned victory lap, seemed more notable than anything he or any 
other reporter had to say, and captured the nostalgic essence of the 
day. Viewers expecting Cronkite to take charge of the coverage were 
bound to be disappointed, though. The hard truth is that he spoke 
a bit more slowly and seemed less energetic than he used to. And CNN's 
anchor, Miles O'Brien, seemed slightly uncomfortable through the day, 
sitting between Cronkite and other gray-haired guests. In his most 
substantial contribution, Cronkite interviewed President Clinton, 
who said politics played no role in the selection of Glenn for this 
flight and that he would ask Congress for additional money to keep 
the planned international space station in business if the collapse 
of the Russian economy calls for it. And it was strangely satisfying 
to see Cronkite compete with himself. At one odd moment, the taped 
Cronkite was on CBS, being interviewed by his successor, Rather. Meanwhile, 
the live Cronkite was interviewing the legendary test pilot, Chuck 
Yaeger, on CNN. Both interviews, of course, were about the past. For 
all the backward looks at 1962, the coverage glossed over the public 
relations and politics that shaped that Cold War era. The need to 
beat the Russians drove the space race, and the pride in Glenn's orbiting 
the Earth came with constant fear that the evil Russians would blow 
the Earth to bits. So much for hope and magic. Yet after all the fuss, 
Thursday's launching did look magical. ``However you felt about John 
Glenn and his mission,'' Brokaw astutely observed in his sign-off 
on NBC, ``I am confident that it must have changed when those big 
solid rocket boosters lit up and he left for space at the age of 77.'' 
It was a sight spectacular beyond hype. For that brief time, the ``Hero 
Aboard'' slogans fell away and the wondrous accomplishment of space 
travel blazed through. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>