<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981029.0295 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At this spot, John Glenn was first airborne, on a crazy, wooden bridge 
over the Baltimore &AMP; Ohio Railroad tracks. It is a blind, one-lane 
bridge, so steeply arched that a driver cannot see if a car is coming 
from the other direction. The Lindbergh-obsessed young man known as 
Bud Glenn loved to drive fast over the bridge in the 1930s, whistling 
as he drove. The old bridge is still here, as is most everything else 
in the hometown of whistling John Herschel Glenn Jr. The oil fields 
and strip mines are mostly gone from the surrounding hills of southeastern 
Ohio, but the town of 2,200 has not changed much in the 36 years since 
his last flight. A cup of coffee with breakfast at Johnson's restaurant, 
across from his father's old plumbing shop, is just 35 cents. But 
quietly something has changed, or has been lost, said teen-agers and 
adults who exulted as they watched the Discovery launching at John 
Glenn High School and his alma mater, Muskingum College. They wondered 
whether New Concord, or any American town, is still a good place to 
launch John Glenn's brand of heroism: a mixture of Scotch-Irish Presbyterian 
decency, a daredevil's courage, and Depression-era Midwestern gumption. 
``The 1930s generation developed resourcefulness,'' said Dr. Lorle 
Porter, a retired professor of history at Muskingum. ``John Glenn 
tells a story with a catch in his throat _ and I've heard that catch 
only a few times _ of hearing his parents in the next room saying 
that they might lose the house that month. You work harder the next 
day.'' As Tom Wolfe wrote in ``The Right Stuff,'' sitting on top of 
an enormous Roman candle requires courage. ``Heroism involves self-sacrifice,'' 
Porter said just before the launching. ``The selfish can't sacrifice. 
In a depression, if you don't sacrifice for your family, you can't 
survive.'' John Glenn's father, known as Herschel, was mostly deaf 
from injuries in World War I. To help out at home, young Glenn sold 
rhubarb all over town from the family garden. The Glenn family's white-shingled 
bungalow sat next to the National Road, where an earlier generation 
of pioneers passed in Conestoga wagons. Bud was a lifeguard. And he 
washed autos, taking out a plucky classified ad: ``Kars Kleaned Kwickly 
and Kompletely, 50 cents.'' The history books record the young John 
Glenn as a praying Presbyterian with his mother's Sunday school values, 
piously trying to talk his fellow Mercury astronauts out of drinking 
and carousing. People in New Concord knew him first as a freckle-faced, 
red-haired hellion. His only surviving high school teacher, Ellis 
Duitch, 95, tells of the time Bud let the skunk loose in the church 
basement, so a girls' choir group would let out early. Glenn's first 
love was flight. Growing up 132 miles east of the Wright brothers' 
old bicycle shop in Dayton, he glued together model airplanes. On 
Thursday he carried with him into space a piece of fabric from a 1903 
Wright plane. When the chance came for civilian flying lessons, Glenn 
and four of his college buddies jumped at it. They drove two hours 
each way, in a Ford woody station wagon over a bad road, to a tiny 
airfield at New Philadelphia, Ohio. His flight instructor, Wally Spotts, 
now 83, loves to tease Glenn about his first orbital flight: ``I asked 
him what was wrong that it took him three times around the field to 
get that thing down.'' Glenn's other love was Annie Castor, whom he 
met in a playpen. He might have left New Concord earlier, but she 
was a year older and had enrolled at Muskingum. In their youth, two 
of the college's buildings stood half-finished, robbed of construction 
money when the banks collapsed in 1929. John and Annie would have 
seen those skeletons every time they walked to the lake on campus. 
New Concord celebrated the time when the ambitious Marine Corps aviator 
shot down three MiGs in the last week of the Korean War, and when 
he carried off his idea of a record-setting jet flight from Los Angeles 
to New York. Church bells tolled when he lifted off on Friendship 
7, and the postflight parade brought 50,000 people to town. Before 
Thursday's launching, the town was a bit giddy, but also on edge. 
The deadly Challenger was the only space shuttle launching that most 
residents had seen. An all-night prayer vigil was well-attended. ``I 
have a disaster plan on my desk if it doesn't make it,'' said Gary 
Lucas, principal of the high school. He was ready to bring in counselors 
for the high school students, who were preschoolers when Christa McAuliffe, 
a teacher, and six others died in the Challenger disaster, in 1986. 
The students marveled at Glenn's grit. With times easier today, and 
families more distended, the students said it might be harder for 
a young John Glenn to make it into space. ``I was brought up to believe 
that you can do anything you put your mind to,'' said Elizabeth Hirschfeld 
of Bellevue, Ohio, a Muskingum freshman. ``Not as many people are 
brought up that way today.'' ``And not as many parents are as involved 
with their children as before,'' added another freshman, Megan Carr, 
from Norwalk, Ohio. Grit will be the theme of a planned John Glenn 
Museum. Its home in perhaps five years could be the Glenn family bungalow, 
which would be moved again to Main Street. Not only space trinkets 
and political memorabilia would be on display, but also reminders 
of striving in the Depression. ``This may seem silly, but I'd like 
to see a boy's bedroom full of model airplanes,'' said Porter. ``We'll 
sell rhubarb jam.'' Just around the corner is the old wooden bridge, 
with a posted limit of 5 mph. It is tempting to go at least 8. And 
to whistle. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>