<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981029.2000.0727 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And also in Johannesburg, "The World's" Caroline Dimster. Carolyn, 
how have the different parties responded, following today's symbolic 
moment when the document produced by South Africa's Truth in Reconciliation 
Commission was finally handed over the President Nelson Mandela? Well, 
predictably, the political parties have reacted rather badly to the 
Truth Commission's final report. Deputy President Tabo Inbeke who 
is also president of the African National Congress, the ruling party, 
was quoted as saying they're wrong, wrong and misguided. Clearly, 
he was upset that the ANC's last-minute legal bid to stop the report 
from being published failed and so he clearly was upset. The Encarta 
Freedom Party spokesman said that there was nothing surprising in 
the Truth Commission final report, but they had been opposed to it 
from the beginning, that it was really a handmaiden to the African 
National Congress, rather than independent commission. While the white 
right-wing Freedom Front party and the National party both boycotted 
the handover of the report to President Mandela, so no surprises there. 
Given the kind of acrimony that we're hearing about him, what's been 
transpiring over the past couple of days, how widespread is the view 
that the Truth in Reconciliation Commission has really achieved any 
kind of reconciliation at this point? Well, I think the views of ordinary 
South Africans, sums up the general mood at the moment. They were 
fairly outraged by the last-minute legal wrangling that went on before 
the publication of the report. A lot of South Africans feel that some 
of the truth has been told, that the past two and a half years of 
very painful public hearings has brought out a lot of what went on 
in the dark apartheid past, but only partially. And it's certainly 
reconciliation is only just beginning now. I wonder what the after-life 
of this report is. What is the practical use for better or worse, 
in the Truth in Reconciliation report? For instance, do you expect 
it to be much of an issue in -- in, the -- the elections that are 
to be held next year? There have been recommendations made that certain 
other victims of apartheid-era abuses should receive financial compensation. 
The commission has made a very interesting finding in regard to big 
business, which it said was a beneficiary of apartheid-era legislation. 
And it's recommended that a wealth tax be imposed on corporate business. 
So clearly, that's going to have an impact in the lead to the elections 
and especially in the current economic climate. Finally, Carolyn, 
despite this kind of tension that we're about over the past few days 
and really the sort of acrimony that followed the whole life of this 
commission, I -- is there any sense that -- that what has been accomplished 
by this is really remarkable? I mean -- I mean, do South Africans 
take stock, at least, in being able to accomplish this? I think that 
certainly many South Africans feel that this has been a unique process 
and it's been a process that has benefited thousands, tens of thousands 
of victims of apartheid- era abuses. They've had a chance to come 
forward and tell their story. It's been a very cathartic process for 
them and I think that, although there's been a lot of short-term criticism, 
in the long term, this is going to be vital for South Africa's history 
for setting it into a context for helping South Africans come to terms, 
both with their history, their past and with each other, laying the 
foundation for a moral future. I think it provides a moral charter 
for South Africa's future leaders and says this is what you shouldn't 
do, if one is to govern the country and base it on a human rights 
foundation. "The World's" Carolyn Dimster speaking to us from Johannesburg. 
Thank you very much, Carolyn. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>