<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981029.2000.0446 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
"The World's" Carolyn Dimster will have details of the truth missions 
report in just a few minutes. But first, his background from correspondent 
Greg Barrow in Johannesburg. It started with a hymn. Around 1,000 
people gather in April 1996 to attend the inaugural session of the 
Truth in Reconciliation Commission. In the chair was Archbishop Desmond 
Tutu. We are charged to unearth the truth about our dark past to lay 
the ghost of that past so that they will not return to haunt us and 
that we will thereby contribute to the healing of a traumatized and 
wounded people. This heartfelt appeal for reconciliation was heated 
by many. But when the dust settles, history will remember that senior 
military figures, police officers and cabinet ministers chose to ignore 
the call for reconciliation. Among those who snubbed the commission 
was the former apartheid president P.W. Botha. This country is badly 
governed. This country is in confusion and they want to destroy my 
image and, through me, to humiliate my people. It was P.W. Botha who 
rallied the South African troops to crush what he called the total 
onslaught of black communist forces during the 1980s. He ran a quasar 
in military regime, headed by a state security council of trusted 
ministers. Many of them suffered a sudden selective amnesia about 
the crimes of the apartheid regime. The former foreign minister picked 
Botha as one of the few who found courage to admit the wrongs of the 
past. The decisive question is not whether we, as a cabinet, approve 
the killing of a specific political opponent. We did not do that. 
The question is whether we should have done more to ensure that it 
did not happen. I deeply regret dissolution. May God forgive me. Political 
crimes in human rights abuse were not the monopoly of the apartheid 
government alone. It was members of the Mandela United Football Club 
who brought shame to a name which represented everything that the 
black liberation movement stood for. Under the leadership of Winnie 
Madikizela Mandela, they stood accused of kidnap and murder. When 
the Truth Commission called Mrs. Mandela to testify at a special hearing, 
the event led to one of the great moments of theater, when Archbishop 
Tutu made a heartfelt appeal to his former comrad in arms. I beg you, 
please -- you are a great person and you don't know how your greatness 
will be enhanced if you were to say "sorry." I beg you. Then came 
the reply. For that price, of those painful years when things went 
horribly wrong and we were away, for that I am deeply sorry. The Truth 
Commission's public hearing saw many moments of human drama. Many 
people did find it within themselves to forgive. But there's much 
greater ambivalence over the commission's ability to grant amnesty 
to the killers of some of the black liberation movement's greatest 
heroes. Most notably, one Stephen Bantu Beko. Did you or did you not 
assault the late Mr. Beko? I did not assault him, your honor. The 
cross-examination of those who killed Steve Beko only serve to reopen 
old wounds. Surviving members of his family felt no need for reconciliation, 
when faced with a policeman who murdered this leading figure in the 
struggle against apartheid. Such grief and anger has cast a cloud 
over the work of the commission. But despite this, the outgoing chairman, 
Archbishop Tutu, remains hopeful that his mission will be judged a 
success. This is an extraordinary effort and it seems to have come 
off. For "The World," this is Greg Barrow in Johannesburg. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>