<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981029.2000.1185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "The World." I'm Lisa Mullens. An extraordinary sequence of 
events occurred in the Gaza Strip today. The impact on last week's 
Middle East peace agreement could be dramatic. The day began with 
a suicide bombing of an Israeli Army jeep that was escorting a school 
bus and ended with a house arrest of a leader of the Islamic militant 
group Hamas. "The World's" Richard Myron is in Jerusalem. A Palestinian 
security official said that Sheik Yassein had been confined to house 
arrest because recent statements he made were against the Palestinian 
national interest. The sheik has been a constant irritant to the Palestinian 
authority. He's criticized the peace process, mocked Yassir Arafat's 
intention to declare a Palestinian state next May and, most recently, 
he described the Wye Plantation deal, signed just over a week ago 
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority as worthless. Today's 
house arrest is the first time that the Palestinian authority has 
acted against the sheik, although it has in the past arrested members 
of his organization. Palestinian authority police also detained four 
senior members of Hamas, along with a number of Hamas activists in 
Gaza. The move against the sheik is bound to increase tension between 
Hamas, which has considerable support in Gaza and the Palestinian 
authority, especially during the Wye Plantation agreement which hasn't 
been greeted with much enthusiasm by most Palestinians. The Israeli 
government has meanwhile expressed satisfaction of the Palestinian 
authority's actions. During a visit to the wounded from today's bomb 
attack, the Israeli Prime Minister, Benyamin Netanyahu said that the 
hand-over for the 13 percent of the West Bank depends on the systematic 
actions against what he called the terrorist infrastructure. For "The 
World," this is Richard Myron reporting from Jerusalem. We turn now 
to Mustafa Bigutti, who directs the Palestinian Institute in Rahmallah. 
Mr. Bigutti, what can you tell us about the crackdown under way today? 
Is this a show of force by Yassir Arafat to aggressively confront 
Hamas in to show his strength internally or do you think it's more 
to show Palestinian compliance with the peace agreement which calls 
for him to crack down internally on security? Well, I think it could 
have the -- probably, but I'm sure that the Palestinian side is extremely 
concerned about the implementation of the agreement of the moment, 
because it's --. And also, it depends on what this agreement -- by 
most Palestinians as less than expected that it would, at least, be 
implemented. My feeling is that they are extremely worried about whether 
this will be implemented or not, and they would want to try to show 
that there is a compliance by the Palestinian side. So what do you 
make of the house arrest of Ahmed Yassein? This is certainly unprecedented. 
He's not been touched, pretty much, until now, to avoid an open showdown 
with Hamas. What do you think that the strategy is at work here and 
is this confrontation something that could provoke retaliation? This 
is an escalation and I don't know what will be the response to that 
but, you know, there are very strong concerns that the heavy weight 
of the security preconditions, the -- on the Palestinian side, that 
this might lead to a lot of acts that could be perceived as violations, 
also, of human rights and so on. Do you understand any kind of CIA 
role at work here, in terms of investigating this latest attack? As 
a result of the peace talks here in the United States, does the agency 
seem to be more directly involved in what's happening there, in terms 
of maintaining security? It's hard to judge because there are parts 
of the agreement that remain secret and we haven't been able to see 
them. But there is a clear feeling that there is a very strong enrollment, 
at least in their instability by their --. And -- the strong and -- 
worry on the side of the Palestinian communities that this agreement 
is mainly a security agreement and that little attention was paid 
to other aspects of the peace process, like their redeployment, economic 
development, all the life's conditions that are very difficult due 
to their continuation of Israeli occupation. But these incidents and 
this escalation could actually bring them the impression that this 
agreement is mostly about security. Well, let me ask you a little 
bit more about that. I mean, if there is a concern that security issues 
are usurping all other issues on the agenda, do you think that we 
might be seeing the beginning of a new Palestinian bombing campaign, 
perhaps, led by the extremist group Hamas against the peace agreement 
that was signed in Washington? Well, it is clear that there are people 
who are against the peace process and they will do whatever they can 
to stop this from going on on both sides, on Palestinian and Israeli 
side. On the Israeli side, you are seeing a witness -- all witness 
is a growing brink of the extremist, but an improvement in the occupied 
territories. And it is becoming an important political factor in Israel 
and this is also worrying. But you see, the most important -- is how 
could you have complete and fully security. The demand that the Palestinian 
could provide to the Israelis is -- complete security before implementing 
peace accords is, I think, something that makes an impossible mission. 
And when you condition the Israeli implementation of the agreement 
with Palestinians providing this full security, it comes like a vicious 
circle. Mustafa Bigutti directs the Palestinian Institute in Rahmallah. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>