<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981029.2000.2431 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Turkey turns 75 today with a display of pomp, theater and military 
might. Of course, Turkey has its problems. Chief among them, a faltering 
economy, Muslim dissatisfaction with a secular government, and armed 
Kurdish separatism. But for most residents of this Southeast European 
nation, today was a day to put aside those difficulties and celebrate, 
as we hear in this report from "The World's" Chris Morris in Anchora. 
School children are singing patriotic songs, practice for today's 
parade in Anchora, which marked Turkey's 75 th anniversary. Patriotic 
fervor has been drummed up everywhere. Last Sunday, hundreds of thousands 
of people attended rallies all over the country to support the secular 
republic created by Turkey's founding father, Mustafa Kendall Atitau. 
The foreign minister -- says this is not just a show put on by the 
authorities. Ordinary Turks are in the mood for celebration. People 
are proud and content with what was achieved in 75 years, which was 
the turning point in our centuries-old history. Though we have problems, 
though we have difficulties, I believe all and all, we are quite satisfied 
with ourselves. At this small frank factory in the capital of the 
sewing machines have been working 24 hours a day for more than a month. 
They've made more than 50,000 Turkish flags here in the last few weeks. 
It's the emblem of a sometimes stubbornly proud country which yearns 
to greater recognition in the world. But social commentator Nordo 
-- disputes suggestions that, as a nation, Turkey still lacks self-confidence 
about its future. The military definitely is confident of its power, 
of its intelligence, of its training. The business sector is definitely 
confident. And, as far as the people are concerned, they have every 
reason to be confident. I think Turkey has come a long way in 75 years. 
Human pride will triumph over torture, chant these human rights activists. 
A reminder, if one were needed, that this is not a celebration for 
everyone. Kurds, Islamists and others have fallen fowl of an often 
imperfect democracy. Nusvie Guer is the general secretary of the Human 
Rights Association. There are many improvements in 75 years in Turkey. 
Economic improvements and some social improvements. But if you were 
asking about human rights and democratization, there are more -- improvement. 
But if ever, Turks feel bad about themselves, they usually fall back 
on the words of Kendall Atitalk. Scratchy recordings of speeches like 
this are brought out of the archive at every opportunity. The founding 
father who created modern Turkey from the ruins of the -- empire still 
holds an extraordinary place in this country. Professor Ningle Nionalpan, 
a member of Antiturk Thought society says his revolution has never 
ended. It is still continuing. That's why the people are considering 
that Atiturk is still alive today. I don't say boldly, but I say mentally, 
Atiturks is still alive, but, because what he wanted to achieve still 
continue; it did not end. A passionate crowd in Istanbul last month 
and the vision of what all Atiturks' followers fear. These are supporters 
of the Mayor of Istanbuhl, Rejet Tipe Urduon, a leading political 
Islamist who's been sentenced to jail for reading a controversial 
poem. He was found guilty of inciting religious hatred against the 
state. Turkey's seculal ellite sees Tipe Urduon and his followers 
as the vanguard of an Islamic counter-revolution in the making. Mr. 
Oduon's political career seems to have been ended by his prison sentence. 
But he's vowed to return. MAN #5:. Frank and beans. Give Molotov.... 
This song is not over. It's not over because the race we are running 
is a marathon and I'm tell you all, whatever God decides is what will 
eventually happen. (PLAYNG The -- Institution is standing squarely 
against the Islamists, just the Turkish Military. NATO's second-largest 
army is also its most politicized. The generals have a self-imposed 
constitutional responsibility to protect secularism and Attack's legacy. 
75 years on, Turkey wants to play a greater role in its own region 
and in the world, but it still struggles to live comfortably, with 
its own complicated self. For "The World," this is Chris Morris in 
anchor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>