<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981029.2000.2905 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "The World." I'm Lisa Mullens. DNA contains, in chemically 
coated form, all the information needed to build, control and maintain 
a living organism. It also contains information needed to catch bad 
guys. Though DNA profiling, a person's DNA, usually in the form of 
saliva, is analyzed and recorded. When a crime is committed investigators 
can compare a suspect's biological traces with the DNA samples on 
file. A match can provide strong evidence when a case goes to trial. 
Britain pioneered the use of such techniques and three years ago, 
set up the world's first national criminal intelligence DNA database. 
In London, "The World's Steven Beard is on the case. A steady stream 
of police officers enters the DNA database headquarters everyday. 
The officers carry sealed packages containing biological specimens 
collected from the scene of a crime. A blood stain, a fleck of dandruff, 
a strand of hair. The DNA is extracted, analyzed and compared with 
the DNA data of some 400,000 known criminals which are kept on file. 
Every week, says the database manager, David Warrett, he and his colleagues 
help solve dozens of crimes. Last week, we reported out two murders, 
one attempted murder, one suspicious death, three rapes, three other 
sexual offenses, plus a whole host of burglaries of both premises 
and individuals --. Anyone charged, cautioned or convicted of any 
offense that carries a jail sentence is required to have his or her 
DNA recorded. A small swab of saliva is taken and analyzed in one 
of a handful of laboratories like this one in London. The characteristics 
of the DNA are then filed in the database. The chances of two people 
having the same DNA profile have been put at one in 50 million. In 
a recent celebrated case, says data manager, David Warrett, DNA analysis 
led to the arrest and conviction of the murderer of an English school 
girl. The man who committed the offense bit her. And we were able 
to swab saliva from the bite mark and get a DNA profile from that. 
That DNA profile was then compared against a number of possible suspects 
and we obtained a match and the man was subsequently convicted in 
court. Without that DNA profile match, I don't believe that man that, 
a, would have been apprehended and, b, would not be convicted. Since 
it was set up in 1995, the DNA database has helped find suspects in 
more than 25,000 crimes. Although there are no precise statistics, 
the police say many of these matches resulted in successful prosecutions. 
The DNA evidence on its own is generally regarded as insufficient 
to secure a conviction. But Police Chief Superintendent Des Parkinson 
says that's not a problem. Because once you arrested somebody and 
you interview them and you find out their evidence, and then they 
-- they fail to give their alibis or they lie about where they've 
been and so on and then a whole lot of other evidence becomes available 
in any case. The British police say the DNA database is a valuable 
tool, saving police time, removing dangerous people from circulation 
more swiftly and even eliminating the innocent from police inquiries. 
But civil libertarians are wary. John Wadham of the civil rights group, 
Liberty, has come to distrust the use of supposedly infallible scientific 
techniques in court. We've seen miscarriages of justice cases, based 
on forensic evidence in this country, which demonstrate that claims 
made by scientists aren't always as valid as they sometimes suggest. 
Some of the most notorious wrongful convictions in Britain involving 
Irish defendants accused of terrorism were based on scientific evidence. 
John Wadham says juries should view DNA profiling more skeptically 
and the courts should restrict its use in investigations. He's unhappy 
that suspects can be compelled to provide DNA samples. The law allows 
the police to hold someone down, forcibly open their mouth and forcibly 
take a sample, even though that sample will be of no use whatsoever 
in the investigation of that particular crime. But in Britain, civil 
liberties seem less a priority than in the United States. There's 
been little public opposition here to the growth of the DNA database. 
However, there are limits to what the British public will accept. 
Earlier this year, a senior police officer suggested expanding the 
database to include the DNA of everybody in Britain. The suggestion 
caused outrage. One prominent academic said we want to fight crime, 
but not at the cost of turning Britain into a police state. For "The 
World," this is Steven Beard in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>