<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981029.2000.0928 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You were slim and lithe and small as a fish, wrote Ted Hughes. You 
were a new world, my new world. So this is America, I marveled, beautiful, 
beautiful America. Ted Hughes was writing not about the United States, 
but about a fellow poet with whom he would also be associated in the 
public mind. Ted Hughes died yesterday at a London hospital after 
an 18-month battle with cancer. He was 68 years old. "The World's" 
Mary Louise Kelly remembers the man some consider one of the 20th 
century's great poets. His dozens of volumes of poetry established 
Ted Hughes as one of his generation's leading writers. Yet, his doomed 
relationship with his first wife, American poet Sylvia Plathe made 
him a household name. When Hughes left her for another woman in 1963, 
she committed suicide. Hughes refused in the ensuing years to speak 
about his relationship with Plathe, until this year's publication 
of "Birthday Letters," a collection of poems addressed to his late 
wife. As read by BBC editor, John Pickford, St. Butoff describes Hughes' 
initial glimpse of Sylvia Plathe. First sight. First snapshot, isolated, 
unalterable. Stilled in the camera's glare, taller than everywhere 
again, swaying so slender, it seemed your long, perfect American legs 
simply went on up. That flaring hand, those long balletic monkey-elegant 
fingers and the face, a tight ball of joy. I see you there, clearer, 
more real than in any other years in its shadow. As if I saw you that 
once, then never again. "Birthday Letters" shot to the top of the 
best-seller list, selling 90,000 copies -- unheard of for a volume 
of poetry. Critics compared Ted Hughes to English poets William Blake 
and John Keats. Malcolm Bradbury, professor emeritus at the University 
of East Anglia says Hughes always stood apart from the mainstream. 
In a time when we were all being very rational and reasonable and 
poetry was going through a classical revival, Ted was, at heart, a 
romantic and his preoccupation was with myth and powerful forces, 
strange forces, took us backwards, in a way. I -- I think, valuably 
so, but it made him controversial. Hughes' first major collection 
of poems, "The Hawk in the Rain," was published in 1957 and used harsh 
physical imagery to describe animals in the natural world. Later came 
several children's books, plays and translations of classical literature. 
In 1984, he became Britain's poet Laureate. Andrew Moshon, the poet 
and literary critic, says Hughes' influence was enormous. When I started 
writing my -- my own poems and I'm sure many people of my generation 
would say this, he was the great example. I mean, he was the man who 
had the shining light that showed the way forward and I've met very 
few people with the integrity and dignity and greatness that he had. 
Nobody ever came away from meeting him without feeling that they'd 
met somebody really quite exceptional. Hughes continued writing almost 
to the end. And his recently published "Tales from Ovid " won huge 
literary acclaim. British Prime Minister Tony Blair spoke for the 
nation today when he called Ted Hughes a towering figure in 20th century 
literature, who, even in his last years, was producing great works. 
For "The World," I'm Mary Louise Kelly in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>