<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981029.2000.2009 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We have a go for engine starts. Five, four, three, two, one. Booster 
ignition and lift off of Discovery with a crew of six astronaut heroes 
and one American legend. And with that, 77-year-old John Glenn rocketed 
back into space today, 36 years after becoming the first American 
to orbit the Earth. The lunch went off with hardly a hitch, apart 
from a few errant aircraft in the vicinity of Cape Canaveral that 
delayed the launch of the T-5 minute mark. President Clinton was there 
today, along with thousands of other Americans to witness Glenn's 
historic flight in person. Hundreds of thousands watched on TV in 
the United States and elsewhere. That's Russian radio reporting Discovery's 
blast off and reiterating a popular refrain in the Russian news media 
these days that Glenn's launch into space is mainly a NASA public 
relations ploy with little scientific value. Jonathan Pike, director 
of the Space Policy Project at the Federation of American Scientists 
in Washington wouldn't go that far. But he admits, NASA is getting 
a lot of mileage out of this mission in more ways than one. This is 
certainly one of the most visible shuttle flights that we've had in 
several years. Unfortunately, the goal of the shuttle program was 
to make access to space routine and in the process, in providing routine 
access to space too frequently, they made it boring as well. There've 
been some exciting shuttle flights, but this has got to be the most 
interesting one we've seen in some time. Interesting for a lot of 
reasons. John Glenn's age certainly isn't the only major difference 
this time around. I wonder if you can take us back to what was happening 
in the early 60s when the Cold War was going on and the Cold War space 
race, as well and Uri Gigaran has just put Russia in the lead the 
year before John Glenn took off and a lot things are different this 
time? Well, the United States was definitely running in second place 
in the space race, back in the late `50s and early 1960s. Both countries 
regarded the space race as being a safer alternative to the arms race 
which, nonetheless, we were also running fairly vigorously. John Glenn 
basically put the United States back into the running in the space 
race, which eventually we won by a -- sending the first humans to 
the moon. And during the Cold War, astronauts and cosmonauts were 
basically about that competition. With the end of the Cold War, the 
focus has been on cooperation of America, Russia and other countries 
are getting ready to build the first international space station. 
And the very next shuttle mission will mark the first American launch 
of the elements of that very ambitious program. And what are the other 
countries that are involved, aside from the U.S. and Russia? Well, 
the United States and Russia make up about 80 percent of the international 
partnership to build the station. The dozen or so nations of the European 
space agency, Canada, Japan, are all also partners and there's talk 
about bringing in some other countries, as well. One of the interesting 
things, too, that seems to be happening at this point, John Pike, 
is that -- it -- it seems as though the government monopoly in space 
may be coming to an end. We know now that there are private companies 
that are trying to get involved. There's an outfit, as you probably 
know, called, Space Dove that will next year begin putting together 
a space craft for an unmanned flight. So it sounds as though NASA's 
got some competition, even outside the old competition from Russia. 
Well, actually, the private sector contractors have always accounted 
for the overwhelming bulk of the space program, even back during Apollo, 
90 percent of the people who are working on the moon-landing mission 
were, of course, working on the contractors who are actually doing 
the work. Today, of the three sectors of the American space program, 
the military, the civil NASA and the commercial. By some accounts, 
the commercial sector is already the largest and, unlike the other 
two, which are shrinking slightly, the commercial sector has been 
growing at about 10 percent a year for a couple of decades now. So 
I think over the next decade or so, the commercial -- sector is clearly 
going to come to dominate American space activities. And that raises 
an interesting issue, in terms of the outer space of the future. I 
mean, we used to think of perhaps U.S. or Russian flags flying on 
Mars, for instance. Now, could it one day be a company seal? Well, 
we're already seeing a lot of company seals on the people who are 
launching the shuttle. Unavoidably, there's going to have to be national 
sovereignty there because it's going to be the states that are going 
to provide the legal rights and legal protections to any company that's 
operating in outer space. We have a lot of commercial communication 
satellites have been operating in space for some, but they're all 
registered to a specific country. So I wouldn't write off Old Glory 
just yet. One other thing I wanted to talk about, we've seen a trend, 
of late, toward a smaller unmanned robotic mission, such as the Mars 
Pathfinder, do you think that the days of manned space flight are 
numbered? Well, I think that it's always been the case that whether 
you use a piloted spacecraft or whether you use a robot, really depends 
on what you're trying to do. If you're simply trying to get scientific 
data or international communications or weather photos, you're going 
to use a robotic spacecraft. If you're trying primarily to send a 
political message to demonstrate international leadership or your 
place in the international pecking order, there's simply no substitute 
for piloted space flight, as an instrument of foreign policy. We did 
both of those during the Cold War, when the space race was on. We're 
still doing them. I think we're going to continue to do both for some 
time to come. John Pike, Director of the Space Policy Project at the 
Federation of American Scientists in Washington, D.C. Nice to speak 
with you. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>