<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981029.1600.2156 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On August 17th, Russia defaulted on its ruble denominated debt and 
stopped propping up its currency. The ruble collapsed and Russia's 
economy descended into meltdown. The Asian financial crisis had become 
a global crisis and the world shuttered at its potential effects. 
In today's part four of a five part series on the Asian crisis, Dateline 
looks at how the financial troubles spread to Russia. Here's Linda 
Kashdan. Russia is one of the world's largest oil and steel producers 
and when economic activity drew to a standstill in Asia as a result 
of the financial crisis, steel and oil use there halted. Global supplies 
began rising causing global oil and steel prices to tumble, depriving 
Russia of much needed foreign exchange earnings. In truth, however, 
although the Asian crisis did have an adverse impact on Russia, economists 
generally agree it merely compounded economic problems that already 
existed. Russia's economic disaster, said Andes Ousling of Washington's 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, had a broad range of other 
causes, including pervasive corruption. Why did this happen? Because 
there was too little reform. Because we have nothing corrupt groups. 
It's a new and the old directors who adjusted to corruption. The leader 
of the governments that are more corrupt than anything I've ever seen 
and on top of this where you can buy a majority with substantial amounts 
of money. Did capitalism fail Russia or did Russia fail at capitalism? 
In fact, Brookings Institution Economist Robert Liton says, although 
Russia's move from communism to a free market economy has gotten a 
lot of publicity over the last ten years, it never really happened. 
All that happened in Russia is that they turned over their state owned 
enterprises to the people who were already running them and they became 
the new owners. In many cases, they continued to be monopolies. They 
continued to engage in barter. They didn't use the banking system 
in Russia because banks were used to collect taxes in Russia so any 
sensible enterprise wanted to keep money out of banks because they 
didn't want to be taxed. And so the barter system continued and that's 
pretty much the way Russia ran before the Wall came down. Without 
taxes for income, Mr. Liton says, the Russian government financed 
itself by going deeper and deeper into debt until finally Russia was 
unable to service its debt and had to default. True, says Harvard 
University Economist Marshall Goldman, but that explanation leaves 
out the role that many U.S. investment banks played in Russia's rise 
and fall. Mr. Goldman says Wall Street deserves some of the blame 
for feeding Russia's seemingly insatiable appetite for borrowed money. 
It is indeed the case that I say they went out to some of the provinces 
in particular and encouraged them to float securities, to borrow money 
in effect because all governments in the former Soviet Union were 
having difficulty raising taxes. There were some critics who were 
saying, remember, you have to pay that money back. I think everyone 
would agree that Russia has enormous potential and the thought is, 
well, if we could just carry them over this crisis, it'll be okay. 
But the banks certainly did do that. They profited. But of course, 
in the process, it's not only that these provincial areas or the government 
itself has had to default but also the bankers, I think, have paid 
a very heavy price for it because they not only sold their services, 
they also invested. They bought those securities. Many people have 
compared this to the investment experience to China where there was 
an equal euphoria about the potential of China but investors were 
more careful. Why was there a difference in attitude? There were two 
different types of investment. There's on kind of investment that 
was particularly attractive in Russia where you would buy securities 
and investors that were in the market. What happened instead in China 
is that there was about $180 billion worth of investment industry, 
direct foreign investment. In Russia, it was almost the opposite. 
There was -- some estimate as much as $100 billion going into different 
forms of paper, but only about $8 billion going into a direct foreign 
investment. And, if you put your money in paper, it's much more mobile. 
It's must more likely to leave and that's what happened primarily 
in Russia when people got nervous. They took their money out. It was 
a feeding frenzy by which I mean, everybody seemed to be investing. 
They were making very high returns. If you invested in the Russian 
stock market, for example, in December '96, by October '97, less than 
12 months, you could have made threefold on your money. Did enterprises 
have less attraction or was it just that you could make faster money, 
hotter money the other way? Greed, I think, and that's the right word, 
got the better of them. It's also, the Russians were reluctant to 
let too much investment occur of the sort that took place in China. 
For example, I've worked with a lot of American energy companies and 
they are very eager to develop Russia's resources. But the Russians 
don't want to do that. There's a form of xenophobia there. Harvard 
University Economist Marshall Goldman. In Russia, the crisis continues. 
VOA correspondent Andre Deneshner reports from Moscow that Russian 
Prime Minister Yvgeny Primikov's government has yet to come up with 
a plan to help the country out of its economic turmoil. Most Russian 
analysts say the government has so far provided few concrete measures 
to help the country out of its crisis. Mr. Primikov said his priorities 
include restructuring the banking system, revamping the tax collecting 
mechanism and repaying overdue wages to millions of workers. But analysts 
say Mr. Primikov has yet to explain how he will tackle those problems. 
The Director of Moscow's Political Science Foundation, Andre Katinov 
believes the Primikov government is shying away from making what he 
calls painful decisions in other important areas. For example, the 
defense reform, it's going nowhere as far as I can see from the outside. 
Or, if you take the reform, again, this is crucial. We need to have 
reform, however, little is being done here in the field. Another challenge 
that Primikov is going to face and I don't know how he's going to 
confront it is the issue of next year's budget. Because after all, 
priorities of any government are reflected in the budget and here 
you cannot just keep talking to defined that he will provide for both 
economic growth and social stability. You have to make certain changes 
and certain decisions. Those changes and decisions, says Mr. Katinov 
are not yet forthcoming. By all accounts, the life of the average 
Russian is not getting any better. Soaring prices, rising unemployment, 
unpaid wages, lower living standards, uncertainty about the future, 
the list goes one. But Mr. Katinov points out that when the communist 
party and trade unions called on Russians earlier this month to come 
out in force and demonstrate against their lot in life, relatively 
few did. Mr. Katinov says there are various explanations why so few 
people turned out in countrywide demonstrations, October 7th. One 
of them is that people have become tired of politics and it is therefore 
difficult to mobilize a meaningful opposition. An explanation is that 
everyone basically, or almost everyone, was able to cut his or her 
own small deal with life. They are somehow coping without difficulties. 
Another explanation is that if you take the last crisis, it really 
hit Moscow harder, their provinces and there was even a sense of maybe 
section outside of Moscow that you guys are so affluent and we are 
starving right now. It's time to get it straight. In the months ahead, 
Mr. Katinov foresees more rough times, especially in those regions 
facing problems with food and energy supplies. He believes inflation 
will increase and the ruble will continue its downward spiral. But 
he also says in the next six months, despite increasing hardships, 
the government will still be run by Prime Minister Yvgeny Primikov. 
VOA correspondent Andre Deneshner reporting from Moscow. Russia and 
the Asian crisis was the subject of today's Dateline. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>