<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981029.1600.3007 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thanks, Breck. Well analysts say strategies are changing for doing 
business in Asia these days. Chris Simpkins reports. Since the Asian 
financial crisis began, many investors have been on the retreat. They're 
putting on hold expansion and new investment out of fear the risks 
are still too high. But more than a year into the economic downturn, 
some business leaders are hopeful that it is near bottom. Roger Enrico, 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of the American soft drink and 
consumer products giant Pepsico, is convinced it's possible to build 
business times. I would say that the opportunities in this part of 
the world are no less and probably greater than they were before the 
crisis. And what it takes is the fortitude to see your way though 
it and I -- certainly in our case, that's the way we view all of the 
-- virtually all of the countries in Asia as very long term great 
opportunities. We ought to put the capital in as the business needs 
it and not worry about the kinds of ups and downs on the economy. 
Mr. Enrico says despite the Asian financial crisis, Pepsi Cola generated 
$2 billion in business in Asia last year. He says the company is now 
concentrating on investing more money in China which has the fifth 
largest soft drink market in the world. But for other executives, 
Asia remains an extremely sensitive environment. The regional economic 
crisis has made it especially difficult for smaller firms to get loans 
from banks for business expansion. Wai Jen Shan, managing director 
of Newbridge Capital Asia in Hong Kong says because of the economic 
uncertainties, business executives, especially those with smaller 
firms, need to change strategies and adopt long term views on doing 
business in Asia. If you're a short term investor, I would say that 
the market probably has not bottomed out and it may be worthwhile 
for to wait a little bit longer. But we are the long term investor 
and, in fact, we think this is the best possible market to buy into 
this region because the has come down substantially and now we can 
buy businesses much more cheaply than ever before and buying controlling 
interests and that as well. So, this is probably the best opportunity 
to buy because we fundamentally believe that the market will come 
back. It may take a while, a couple of years, two to three years, 
but eventually the Asian market is going to come back. Mr. Shan says 
whether big or small, companies that remain in Asia for the long haul 
will have to consolidate operations and scale back some projects. 
But he believes these companies are more likely to survive a prolonged 
economic downturn and emerge stronger from the current regional financial 
crisis. Chris Simpkins, VOA News, Hong Kong. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>