<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981029.0500.2384 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The threat of mad cow disease is alarming Europeans once again. VOA's 
Ron Pemstein in Brussels reports the European Commission has proposed 
a ban on the export of beef from Portugal. Portugal is the second 
country to experience a ban on its beef products, after British beef 
was banned from the continent in 1996. The action against Britain 
was taken after experts linked mad cow disease to a fatal brain disease 
in humans. The European Commission says 67 cases of mad cow disease 
have been identified in Portugal this year, including two cases of 
animals born after changes were made in the way the cows were fed. 
The use of animal brain and spinal cords in the feed appear to spread 
mad cow disease. The European Commission is proposing to ban exports 
of Portuguese beef for nine months and exports of live cattle for 
18 months. European Union spokesman Jerry Keely says the ban will 
be lifted after Portuguese authorities make the required changes. 
The Portuguese government, the Portuguese authority for the primary 
responsibility to protect the health of the Portuguese consumers. 
If all of the measures they have told us they are going to put in 
place are put in place, and some of them are already in place, if 
those are applied effectively, then Portuguese meat is safe. But don't 
ask me to say whether or not Portuguese beef is safe because I won't 
answer that question because I can't answer the question. The Portuguese 
government has reacted with anger at the European Union ban. Agriculture 
Minister Luis Capuo Santos tells reporters in Lisbon the proposed 
ban is unfair, excessive and inappropriate. The Minister insists it 
is just as safe to eat meat in Portugal as any other country in the 
European Union. He contends failings discovered in animal feed in 
Portugal can be found in 13 of the Union's 15 states. Portugal's beef 
exports are worth a little short of $10 million and are mostly are 
sent to Spain. Britain is still trying to get the European Union to 
lift the ban on its beef exports. A second case in Portugal may make 
it more difficult for British beef producers to get relief. Mr. Keely 
says the trend in Portugal makes a ban necessary for nine months. 
At the time we did the mission in May, I think there might have been 
30 cases or something. By the time the actual report was written up 
in June, there were almost 60 cases. I think the figure now is something 
of the order of 67 cases. We tend to figure it on the nose at 67 cases 
to date which, if you extrapolate that on, you're looking at 100 cases 
this year. So the incidents -- the trend in the incidents is bad. 
Portugal's Azores Islands are excluded from the ban but the European 
Commission says if the ban is approved on Friday, Portugal will have 
to treat the Azores as if it were another member state of the European 
Union when it comes to beef and cattle. Ron Pemstein, VOA News, Brussels. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>