<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981029.0500.0828 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
According to the latest United Nations figures, the world population 
currently totals 5.9 billion people and is growing at a rate of 78 
million people a year. The dramatic rise in the number of older people, 
a result of higher life expectancy levels, will help boost the world 
population to six billion by this time next year with a further 50 
percent increase over the next half century. Max Rustin reports. According 
to the latest United Nations figures, the world population currently 
totals 5.9 billion persons and is growing at a rate of 78 million 
people each year. A dramatic rise in the number of older people, a 
result of higher life expectancy levels, will help boost the world 
population to six billion by this time next year with a further 50 
percent increase over the next half century. But those figures are 
lower than some predictions. The Director of the UN Population Division, 
Joseph Schumy, says declining fertility levels is holding down population 
growth around the world. And he says, in Africa, the mortality toll 
from AIDS is having a devastating impact. The AIDS effect in Africa 
will be substantial. There will be many more deaths than earlier anticipated. 
The life expectancy will drop substantially. An example is Botswana. 
We see a substantial drop in its life expectancy of at least 20 years. 
Botswana is estimated to have one out of four problems rate of HIV. 
In the 29 African nations hardest hit by AIDS, he says the average 
life expectancy at birth, now 47 years, is seven years less than it 
would have been in the absence of the disease. The countries in Sahara 
and Africa, worst hit by AIDS, include Benin, Liberia, Nigeria, Rwanda, 
South Africa, Zambia and Zimbabwe. In Asia, Cambodia, India and Thailand 
stand out for their high rates of AIDS prevalence. In Latin America, 
Brazil and Haiti have the highest rates. Mr. Schumy says another important 
trend is that the population of the world is becoming older. He says 
this is because of a combination of lower fertility rates, particularly 
in developed nations and higher life expectancy levels. In a growing 
number of countries, the fertility level has fallen below the 2.1 
children per woman needed for the replacement of generations. Meanwhile, 
the population of people over 80 years old is expected to increase 
six-fold over the next 50 years. During that same period, the number 
of centenarians, people over 100 years old, is projected to increase 
16-fold to more than two million. UN officials say the consequences 
of these trends will have an impact on every facet of life, from medical 
technology to consumer goods and pension plans as people respond to 
these major shifts in the world's population. Max Rustin, VOA News, 
United Nations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>