<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981029.1600.3179 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A cybernovelist chronicles an e-mail courtship. Book, if not ticket 
sales, are soaring for "Lolita." And a growing number of political 
insiders are writing literary satires. VOA's Nancy Beardsley has Book 
Briefs. There's a new twist on those old fashioned epistolary novels 
that tell a story through letters. Nan McCarthy has written a trilogy 
called "Chat Connect and Crash" that consists entirely of imaginary 
e-mail exchanges. She's a former computer journalist who turned to 
fiction after realizing that the computer had more than just practical 
uses. I had a friend who had just gotten on America Online and he 
was so excited about logging onto the chat room and meeting people 
from all around the world and I started to see e-mail through his 
eyes, the exciting possibilities for relationships and we started 
talking about wouldn't it be fun to write a book that tells a story 
of two strangers and who meet online and what they talk about. The 
main characters in "Chat, Connect and Crash" are a book editor and 
an advertising copywriter who flirt, fall in love, break up and get 
back together through e-mail. Nan McCarthy researched her story by 
interviewing people who'd had online courtships, some even ending 
in marriage. She also spent time making e-mail friends herself, although 
she stopped short at romance. Her experience convinced her e-mail 
helps people reveal their true personalities. I think that's one advantage 
of online communications is that you can really get to know a person 
based on their thoughts and their dreams which you often don't do 
at social situations or say on a first date. Online relationships 
can also pose dangers, including the potential for dishonesty. But 
all that adds to the drama of an e-mail novel. And now an update on 
what's happening in movie theaters and bookstores famous story, "Lolita." 
Release of the new film version of the novel has been delayed for 
months because of what's been seen as its taboo subject matter, a 
middle aged man's passion for a young girl. But while the movie only 
recently made its debut on American cable TV and in a few theaters 
around the U.S., the novel has been enjoying a fresh wave of popularity 
for the past year. Vintage Books published a new edition of "Lolita" 
to coincide with the expected release of the film and says it's selling 
ten times better than the average for earlier editions. The novel 
has even made local best seller lists in some areas. While the story's 
notorious reputation may attract some readers, many are discovering 
a complicated work that's been long acclaimed for its artistic merit. 
And finally, in 1996, the writer known as anonymous, later revealed 
to be journalist Joe Kline, published "Primary Colors," a fictionalized 
satire of the first Clinton presidential campaign. Now other political 
insiders are penning their own tales of ambition, scandal and intrigue. 
Tom Lowe, a veteran campaign worker in California State politics has 
written a novel called "Spin" which has been described as a Republican 
Primary Colors. On the opposite side of the ideological fence, Ev 
Ehrlich, a former Undersecretary of Commerce in the Clinton Administration 
has just published "Big Government," chronicling the uproar caused 
by a president's sudden resignation. While he says personal experience 
helped give an authentic tone to his book, he had no intention of 
trying to portray actual events. When you're writing satire, you can't 
compete with reality because reality is going to beat you hands down. 
There are thousands of people who get up every morning in Washington, 
trying to make reality strange. Reality is going to come up with something 
more bizarre than anything you can imagine and what's going on in 
Washington is a perfectly good example of that. Ev Ehrlich isn't sure 
whether the current political situation is good or bad for aspiring 
satirists like himself. On the one hand, he says people may be too 
tired of hearing about Washington's real troubles to be interested 
in fictional stories. On the other hand, they could be in need of 
some comic relief. That's all from Book Briefs. I'm Nancy Beardsley. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>