<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981029.0500.1351 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iron Chef is a television show produced in Japan by Fuji TV that is 
part game show, part cooking class and part sports event. It's shown 
in the United States on some local cable stations. Well, it's been 
on the air in San Francisco since 1995 and Jan Sleuzer tells us now, 
it has a huge following that continues to grow. Many people in the 
San Francisco Bay area aren't going out anymore on Saturday nights. 
Like these friends in Berkeley, California, they get together to eat 
dinner and watch Iron Chef. It's like American gladiators in the kitchen. 
It's like one of those old Kung-Fu movies where, you know, there's 
Bruce Lee and his school and his disciples and then there's like the 
bad guys who come to raid their turfs and so they stage a battle to 
prove who's better. It's about the battle between schools of thought 
as we saw tonight -- the master of salt versus someone who thought 
that salt was not important, and we've seen different styles competing 
and that's what people like, some sort of symbolism beyond just two 
people but what do they represent? In every episode, a challenger 
is introduced and then he chooses his opponent from one of four Iron 
Chefs who each specialize in a different type of cuisine, French, 
Chinese, Japanese or Italian. Once the competitors are in place, the 
flamboyantly dressed host, Kaga Takeshi introduces the surprise theme 
ingredient. The chefs must use that ingredient in all the dishes they 
prepare. Past theme ingredients have included mushrooms, deer meat, 
strawberries and chestnuts. Tonight, it's shrimp. Avid fan Jeff Davis 
says the chefs have time to plan in advance. They're actually presented 
with four possible options, I guess during the week before the show 
is aired, so they have four different ingredients which they know 
might come up in their challenge. Kaga Takeshi gets each week's challenge 
started by taking a dramatic bite of a yellow pepper. Trays of cooking 
ingredients then descend from the ceiling through a smoky haze of 
dry ice. Over the next hour, each competitor prepares three to five 
dishes. A reporter describes the cooking action in the kitchen arena 
as the chefs frenetically slice and chop, bark instructions at their 
assistants and boil and saute. Iron Chef fans can't get enough. Well, 
I always like learning something new about how to cook. There's always 
some inventive, new technique that I had never thought of before, 
some new device or some new way of combining ingredients that I would 
never have thought of. It's the competitive martial spirit that I 
like. I love the melodramatic tone of the setup and I also love the 
frenetic pace, just the chaos of the whole thing. It's just fun. It's 
a serious event for them, but it's just, you know, packaged in such 
a, you know, a campy way that it makes really good watching. The completed 
dishes are presented to four judges who taste the creations and make 
comments. The panel is polite but not always kind. The two chefs stand 
there and nod, even when being humiliated. The dishes are ranked numerically 
and as in other television game shows, the competitor with the highest 
total wins. But Iron Chef fans like Ben Backus and Russell McDonald 
say, there's no comparison between these culinary duels and the game 
shows most Americans are used to. In an American game show, you're 
trying to win something from the house. In this show, you're just 
trying to avoid losing. This show is about honor. You've got to save 
face. The last thing you want to do is lose before the whole crew. 
So that is different from the American game show where you're playing 
for money. Recently, to the shock of faithful viewers, the producer 
stopped including English subtitles. Since then, Fuji TV in San Francisco 
has been deluged with e-mail, phone calls, letters and faxes from 
irate fans like Mark Ferrari and Jackie Aphel Without the subtitles 
you can't understand what's going on. There are people running around 
doing frenzied things and it makes no sense. We don't know what the 
ingredients are. We don't know why the judges are making their decisions. 
We don't know the speculations that the guys on the floor are making. 
Without the subtitles, you miss the commentary and that's where half 
the humor is. Iron Chef's colt-like status is surviving the subtitle 
crisis. Videotapes of episodes continue to be passed among viewers. 
Iron Chef websites have sprung up on the Internet and new advertisers 
have signed on. The wacky show has proven it has the most important 
ingredient of all, a dedicated and growing audience. For VOA News 
Now, this is Jan Sleuzer in Berkeley, California. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>