<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981029.1600.2695 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Later this week, children across this country celebrate Halloween, 
a commemoration of ghosts and goblins. What about things that glow 
mysteriously in the dark high up in the sky, however? As Brian Sislack 
tells us, ghostly glimmerings are attracting the interests of mainstream 
weather scientists. We humans continually have been fascinated and 
frightened by things we cannot understand, especially those ethereal 
visions that might strike us as other worldly. Many millennia ago, 
as our early human ancestors were out gathering berries, they may 
have seen, up in the sky in advance of a distant storm, a ghostly 
apparition. When you see one of these things or see a photograph, 
these are bizarre shapes. They're shapes you've never seen before. 
And, just as quickly as you see them, they're gone. Earl Williams, 
a research scientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
has spent the last several years studying these glimmering ephemeral 
storm related objects called red sprites. Sprites look like big red 
jellyfish with tentacles descending down from very high altitude. 
These things are up about 70 to 80 kilometers so they're, you know, 
six to eight times higher than the height of a thunderstorm. And they 
don't occur over ordinary thunderstorms. In ordinary thunderstorms, 
the clouds and their lightening are negatively charged. But in about 
ten percent of the cases, the cloud to ground strikes are positively 
charged. These include strikes that cause forest fires and are associated 
with hailstorms and other destructive weather phenomena. But other 
storms bring not just positive lightening but an ethereal light show 
of awesome though short lived proportions. They occur over a very 
large area called a mezascale convective system. Those are the storms 
that make the sprites. They make the positive ground flashes and they 
make the sprites and the spider lightenings which wander along cloud 
base and extend for hundreds of kilometers sometimes. In other words, 
you need enough charge transfer in these big lightenings to put enough 
electric field up at very high altitude to cause a sort of glow discharge 
and that is a sprite. It was anecdotal reports from pilots that first 
sparked the interest of scientists in these ephemeral pink jellyfish 
apparitions in and around storms. Pioneering atmospheric researchers 
Bernard Vonnegut and Otha Vaughn published a call in a pilot magazine 
asking if anyone had seen something called upper lightening. They 
were inundated with responses, a number of which they published in 
a research article. But as Earl Williams explains, you don't have 
to be flying high above the ground to see these phenomena. If you 
have dark conditions on the ground, you're away from city lights, 
and you're looking at a distance, you can still see them from a distance. 
Scientists study red sprites because they may affect global climate 
by altering concentrations of nitrogen in the upper atmosphere. It's 
also possible though not proven that they might pose a hazard to commercial 
airliners or spacecraft. But mostly researchers study them because 
their form and shape are fascinating. I mean, that's one of the big 
scientific mysteries is why they take on the shapes they do. It's 
like lightening. Lightening takes on such a wide variety of shapes 
and is apparently very unpredictable in its shape, but sprites is 
in another class. It's in a class by itself in terms of really saying 
something about shape. Earl Williams of MIT on the ethereal mysteries 
of red sprites. I'm Brian Sislack 
</TEXT>
</DOC>