<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981029.0500.2706 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A new birth control method is available to U.S. women. Last year the 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration determined that morning after pills, 
oral contraceptives prescribed in certain high dose combinations, 
could safely and effectively prevent pregnancy in an emergency. But 
emergency contraceptives must be taken within 72 hours of unprotected 
sex and health care providers say that can pose difficulty for women 
seeking treatment. In the northwestern state of Washington, however, 
they've developed a unique project to improve access to these ECPs 
and Faith Lapides says they are helping to prevent unintended pregnancy. 
Vicky Woods doesn't have children and doesn't want to have any, anytime 
soon. But one morning recently, the Seattle area resident made a frightening 
discovery. My boyfriend and I were in bed and we realized that the 
condom had ripped. I did not want to be pregnant. I really didn't. 
And I knew that that was the time of month I could get pregnant. Instead 
of panicking, Vicky Woods got on the Internet to search for information 
on morning after pills. These pills work, first and foremost, by preventing 
ovulation, so there's no egg to be fertilized. If a woman has already 
ovulated, the pills will prevent fertilization. In addition to details 
about ECPs, Vicky Woods found a local pharmacist who could prescribe 
them for her as part of Washington State's Emergency Contraception 
Pharmacist pilot project. Women can go directly to a pharmacy and 
be screened by the pharmacist and be prescribed emergency contraceptive 
pills. Jane Hutchings is the director of the two year long demonstration 
project. She says, specially trained pharmacists ensure that patients 
meet certain criteria and understand the pros and cons of the treatment 
before they write a prescription for ECPs. This is a safe and effective 
contraceptive option and its vastly underused. To make it easier for 
women to get, I think is an important step forward for reducing unintended 
pregnancy. We know that in the United States, about 2.65 million pregnancies 
are unintended. Half of those pregnancies end in abortion. Supporters 
of emergency contraception say those numbers would drop if all pharmacists 
could prescribe morning after pills. Since the Washington State project 
began in February, nearly 5,000 prescriptions have been written and 
filled at the 120 participating pharmacies. Assuming that only 10 
percent of the women taking the pills would actually have become pregnant 
without them, project officials estimate that they've prevented 500 
unintended pregnancies. Twenty-two year old Karen Mareno has taken 
ECPs twice and says she would take them again in another emergency 
situation. If you have a headache, you take aspirin. If you can swallow 
those pills, then that's all you have to worry about. It's very easy. 
But critics argue, it's too easy. They warn that even though the Washington 
pharmacists must ask a series of screening questions, a young girl 
could get morning after pills without parental consent, possibly encouraging 
promiscuity. Critics like Teresa Wagner of the Family Research Council 
also say that emergency contraceptive pills are a form of abortion 
and complained that they are marketed in a misleading and dishonest 
way. This pill can operate as an early abortion and should be labeled 
as such and to tell people that this is just a contraception is disinformation, 
is false. But for many women, the truth about emergency contraceptive 
pills is in the results, avoiding what would be, in their opinion, 
personal disaster, an unwanted pregnancy. Public Health officials 
around the country are studying Washington's project and have expressed 
interest in starting similar programs in their states. For VOA News 
Now, I'm Faith Lapides 
</TEXT>
</DOC>