<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981029.0500.2026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Britain's high court says former Chilean dictator, Augusto Pinochet, 
is immune from prosecution and dismissed an arrest warrant against 
him. The State Prosecutor's Office says it plans to appeal that ruling. 
British authorities had arrested the former head of state, acting 
on an extradition request from a judge in Spain. The judge wants General 
Pinochet to stand trial for genocide and the torture of Spanish citizens 
of Chile during his 17 year rule. Douglas Kassel is a professor of 
International Law at Northwestern University near Chicago. He tells 
VOA's Neil Currie he disagrees with the British court's ruling. Professor 
Kassel does see cause for the House of Lords to overrule the decision 
that General Pinochet is protected by a head of state immunity. As 
a matter of international law, in my judgment, there is no question 
that Britain could override the former head of state immunity in a 
case like this involving crimes against humanity. Ever since the Nuremberg 
Charter, which is also known as the London Charter, the principle 
has been established in international law that for crimes against 
humanity, no one is above the law and the official status of a person 
does not provide any immunity. This would be like saying that if Adolph 
Hitler had survived World War II, that because he was the former head 
of state of Nazi Germany, he could not be prosecuted for the holocaust. 
And such a statement would run completely at odds with the whole thrust 
of international law in the last half century. Chile's Deputy Foreign 
Minister Mariano Hernandez says he wants to see his government's decisions 
respected by other governments, including the decision to grant General 
Pinochet immunity from prosecution. Now, is that not a reasonable 
position for Mr. Hernandez' viewpoint? It's a reasonable position 
with respect to amnesties that Chile that might grant for violations 
of Chilean law. It's not a reasonable position for an attempt by a 
single country to unilaterally grant an amnesty against a violation 
of international law. What General Pinochet is alleged to have done 
in Chile was not just a crime against the Chilean people. It is, under 
international law, a crime against humanity and no one nation has 
the authority to grant immunity or an amnesty for a crime against 
humanity. Professor Kassel, can you refresh my memory? After the fall 
of the Berlin Wall, the former leader of East Germany, Erik Honager 
fled to South America and he was not brought back. Was that under 
this same principle or a different one? That was under a different 
one, one that might also possibly apply to General Pinochet. Namely, 
it was decided that he was so old and feeble that he was not fit, 
medically, to stand trial and so it was on humanitarian grounds that 
he was let off the hook. Northwestern University Law Professor Douglas 
Kassel talked to VOA's Neil Currie. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>