<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981029.0500.1829 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The militant Palestinian group Hamas has claimed the responsibility 
for a suicide car bombing that killed an Israeli soldier and a Jeep 
escorting two school buses Thursday morning. Three Israeli schoolchildren 
on one of the buses were slightly injured as was one adult on the 
bus. Two other Israeli soldiers were injured, one of them seriously. 
We get a wrap up on all this from VOA's Al Pessin in our Jerusalem 
bureau. The small convoy of two school buses with a Jeep in front 
and another behind had just left an Israeli settlement in Gaza and 
passed through an intersection where Israeli and Palestinian traffic 
cross each other. The buses were specially reinforced to be bullet 
proof. The lead Jeep bore the brunt of the explosion which the Army 
says was caused by several dozen kilograms of explosive material packed 
in a car. The Jeep and the car were severely damaged and burned and 
the attacker was killed. The bus driver reported by mobile phone all 
of the children were safe. They were taken to their school in another 
settlement several kilometers away where psychologists conducted counseling 
sessions. A spokesman for Hamas phoned Israel Radio. The caller said 
Hamas had carried out what he called a great operation to teach the 
settlers a lesson and he vowed that what he called the revolution 
will continue until victory. After the attack, Israel imposed a closure 
on the Gaza Strip. Most of the Strip is under the control of the Palestinian 
Autonomy Authority, but there are several Israeli settlement areas 
under Israeli control. Settler leaders immediately blamed the attack 
on the Wye River agreement which the Israeli government signed with 
the Palestinian Authority last Friday. The accord calls on the Palestinian 
Authority to increase its efforts to crackdown on militant groups 
which carry out such attacks in return for gaining control over more 
territory. At the signing ceremony, President Clinton said both the 
Israeli and Palestinian leaders knew there would be efforts to scuttle 
the accord and he called on them to persevere. Visiting the site of 
Thursday's attack, Israeli Defense Minister Yitzhak Mordechai said 
it could have been a much bigger disaster. Still, he said, if the 
Palestinian Authority fulfills its promise to intensively fight terrorist 
organizations, Israel will fulfill its obligations under the accord. 
Palestinian official Suphian Abuzide has said the Autonomy Authority 
is already making what he called more than a 100 percent effort, but 
he said it cannot prevent every attack. A senior Palestinian police 
commander on the scene vowed harsh measures to prevent a repeat of 
what he called this terrorist attack. Al Pessin, VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>