<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981029.0500.0356 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The decision by NATO not to bomb Yugoslav targets is sparking some 
criticism in the mountains of Kosovo and here in Washington. NATO 
leaders Tuesday decided not to use air strikes after Yugoslav President 
Slobodan Milosevic appeared to be meeting most of his promises to 
withdraw troops from Kosovo Province. Yugoslavia is also required 
to allow international officials into Kosovo to monitor compliance 
with UN resolutions demanding an end to violence and the return of 
ethnic Albanian refugees. Critics say the failure to use force after 
making threats will only make Mr. Milosevic bolder and stronger in 
the future. VOA's Jim Randle reports from the Pentagon. Clinton Administration 
spokesmen, including those at the Pentagon, say NATO's policy on Kosovo 
succeeded this week. Captain Mike Doubleday tells reporters the news 
out of Kosovo is very good at this point. That there's very substantial 
evidence of compliance. We point to road blocks that have been taken 
down, heavy weapons which have been moved into containment areas, 
troops that have either moved out of Kosovo or have moved back into 
their garrison areas. U.S. Defense officials say well over 90 percent 
of Yugoslav troops sent into Kosovo Province since the beginning of 
the Yugoslav offensive are gone and most of the forces based in the 
province are back in their barracks. U.S. officials also say many 
of Kosovo's ethnic Albanians displaced by the fighting are returning 
home. Last February, Serb dominated Yugoslav forces moved against 
ethnic Albanian separatists who were demanding independence for Kosovo. 
The providence is 90 percent ethnic Albanian, but the government and 
security forces are run by Serbs. Even with the crisis easing, the 
international community is watching the situation closely with spy 
planes and a growing force of unarmed observers on the ground. More 
than 400 NATO warplanes remain available to enforce the agreement 
if it is violated. But the NATO decision to shelve military action 
is sparking some criticism. Former U.S. Defense Secretary Casper Weinberger 
tells VOA, NATO should have waged a major bombing campaign against 
President Milosevic's forces years ago. Mr. Milosevic has been blamed 
for much of the violence in the Balkans this decade. Mr. Weinberger 
says Tuesday's decision not to launch air strikes after making a series 
of threats is a terrible mistake. By making repeated threats, by making 
all kinds of strong statements about grave consequences will be faced 
by him, etcetera, etcetera, then nothing ever happens is the very 
worst way to go about dealing with aggression and terrorism. The more 
you encourage it, the more you know -- let the people involved know 
that it's not going to be punished, the more you are going to have 
of it as time goes on. Mr. Weinberger supervised the Defense Department 
for Republican President Ronald Reagan. He says the Democratic Clinton 
Administration is inept at military matters and is incapable of leading 
the NATO alliance. Foreign policy analyst John Bolton of the Center 
Right American Enterprise Institute says Washington could lead NATO 
better if it had a more consistent long term policy. What it indicates 
is that when American policy is irresolute and indecisive as it is 
now in the case of Kosovo, that NATO is not able to take effective 
action. Former Republican presidential candidate Bob Dole, who lost 
the race for president to Bill Clinton and has since served as a special 
presidential envoy to the region, he too has been critical of U.S. 
policy, saying the agreement between Clinton Administration envoy 
Richard Holbrooke and Yugoslav President Milosevic leaves thousands 
of Mr. Milosevic's troops and police in Kosovo and the ethnic Albanian 
population vulnerable. NATO officials say the agreement will work 
because 2,000 unarmed foreign observers are arriving in Kosovo to 
monitor Yugoslav compliance. But former Senator Dole says that too 
is a mistake because if Mr. Milosevic reneges on his agreement, NATO 
won't launch air strikes that might endanger the foreign observers. 
Meanwhile, a top commander of ethnic Albanian guerrillas fighting 
for Kosovo's independence calls the Yugoslav troop movements a masquerade, 
not a real withdrawal. Chaban Chala and some other ethnic Albanians 
say they're disappointed by NATO's decision not to bomb Yugoslav targets. 
Administration spokesmen and NATO officials insist the Holbrooke agreement 
is a step toward a political settlement between the Yugoslav government 
and the ethnic Albanians, a solution they call far better than dropping 
bombs and raising the level of violence in the troubled province. 
Jim Randle, VOA News at the Pentagon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>