<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981029.1600.1296 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More and more churches throughout the United States are sharing space 
with Korean, Chinese, Hispanic and Vietnamese congregations. Sharing 
generally means renting space in the building or allowing the immigrant 
congregations to hold services in their own languages at separate 
times. The St. Patrick's Episcopal Church in Falls Church, Virginia, 
is going a step further. VOA's Susan Loeb has a report. Like all Episcopal 
churches, the Eucharist service at St. Patrick's is taken from the 
book of common prayer. The Lord be with you and also if you lift up 
your heart you'll -- But at St. Patrick's, the service is done in 
both English and Vietnamese. Twice a month we have our Eucharist celebrated 
in both languages. That doesn't mean the Vietnamese repeat English, 
but my colleague, Father Jim Popio, he read one paragraph in English 
and I read one paragraph in Vietnamese and we continue to the end 
of the service. When Reverend Ting Wing came to St. Patrick's as a 
seminarian, it was a church with an aging congregation and was looking 
for a way to increase its membership. So when he was ordained as a 
priest four years ago they asked him to stay on as Associate Vicar 
and to help them build an Anglo/Vietnamese congregation. At first 
there was some resistance to change among the American folks who have 
been here for a long time and there was a reluctance from the Vietnamese 
people, wondering if they would be fully accepted and you know, they 
are new in the country, new in the church. But, you know, people come 
to love each other through understanding and we do things together. 
Cathy Oliver has been a member of St. Patrick's Episcopal Church for 
about eight years and remembers the transition. She says it's been 
good for the church. We learn about each other's backgrounds and cultures 
and we join together for Bible study and we're much more open and 
welcoming and feel like we're really doing God's work as well as coming 
to worship God on Sunday morning. While worship services and social 
events are attended by both English and Vietnamese speaking parishioners, 
there are also activities at St. Patrick's which are designed to meet 
the special needs of the Vietnamese, not only those 14 families who 
are members of the church, but Reverend Ting says, others who live 
in the surrounding community. They come to know that St. Patrick's 
is a place where they can find the support in building up the community. 
ESL, or English as second language classes, are held every Thursday 
at our church here. The group has been together steadily with a very 
enthusiastic member of St. Patrick's who started about three years 
ago. The enthusiastic church member who leads the ESL class is Sheila 
Henderson. She joined St. Patrick's in 1994. Because of the friendliness 
of the Vietnamese, I transferred my membership down here. It's -- 
this is -- my whole life has changed. Thursday morning, we spend two 
hours with the class. It varies in number. They're not all members 
of this church. Some of them are Buddhists. But it's just friendly 
and everybody getting together no matter what church they belong to. 
To me, that's what Jesus would want. St. Patrick's assists Vietnamese 
immigrants in other ways as well, helping them find jobs and places 
to live. But that's only part of the church's mission. Associate Vicar 
Ting Wing says there are also King Fu classes and classes in the Vietnamese 
language. This is to help the Vietnamese children to keep in touch 
with their roots, to learn the language and to learn the culture. 
And interestingly, there is an American boy in the class learning 
Vietnamese. At one time, some of the English speaking adults in the 
congregation tried to learn Vietnamese as well, Cathy Oliver says, 
but they soon abandoned the lessons as too difficult. While communicating 
is not always easy, the parishioners of St. Patrick's Episcopal Church 
have managed to become one congregation, an uplifting example of the 
Christian teaching to love one's neighbor. I'm Susan Loeb 
</TEXT>
</DOC>