<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981029.0500.0657 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The former Chilean head of state, General Augusto Pinochet, is called 
a dictator but British courts say that he still should be granted 
diplomatic immunity. The court overturned the arrest of the former 
strongman two weeks ago. But now British authorities say they will 
appeal that ruling. Meanwhile, in Chile, supporters of General Pinochet 
are celebrating the British court's decision. Jonathan Franklin has 
a report from Santiago. Chile's government reacted with relief to 
the news that General Pinochet is one step closer to being freed. 
In a brief statement from the Interior Ministry, the government expressed 
hope that the British court's ruling will be upheld by what it called 
the relevant institution and will lead to the release of General Pinochet. 
Meanwhile, the former president of the Chilean senate, Gabrielle Valdez, 
described the decision as a good precedent. "We are interested in 
seeing General Pinochet return to Chile as soon as possible," he said. 
Senator Valdez also called for national immunity, saying it is a time 
to return to, as he put it, guiding our democracy. "It is not a time," 
he said, "for exuberant or infantile protests." However, a top official 
of Chile's communist party, Gladys Marin, played down the impact of 
the British court's ruling. She told reporters that no matter what 
the outcome of the case, the great triumph is that General Pinochet 
was arrested. Socialist Congressman Juan Pablo Latelier says the Pinochet 
controversy may prod Chileans to investigate human rights abuses committed 
during the Pinochet dictatorship. Mr. Latelier, whose father, Orlando 
Latelier, was murdered in Washington, D.C. on orders from Chile's 
secret police suggests, these unsolved human rights crimes continue 
to stall Chile's transition to democracy. The 12 day detention of 
General Pinochet has severely strained Chile's fragile democratic 
institution. In an effort to calm the situation, President Edwardo 
Fray has initiated a flurry of legislative and economic meetings designed 
to move the spotlight away from General Pinochet. Such efforts are 
widely supported by many Chileans but are unlikely to quell the political 
firestorms still surrounding the detention of the former dictator. 
In Santiago, this is Jonathan Franklin for Voice of America. And scores 
of protesters rallied in downtown Washington to demand that Mr. Pinochet 
be extradited to Spain from Britain. The demonstrators chanted, waved 
flags Wednesday in the protest. The rally was held near the site of 
the 1976 assassination of former Chilean Ambassador Orlando Letalier, 
a prominent Pinochet foe.. His murder was orchestrated by the Chilean 
secret police. The Associated Press says the demonstrators called 
on President Clinton to endure setting case against the former Chilean 
dictator. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>