<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981029.1600.0360 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We have a go for engine start -- five, four, three, two, one, booster 
ignition and liftoff of Discovery with a crew of six astronaut heroes 
and one American legend. U.S. space shuttle discovery lifting off 
from Cape Canaveral, Florida just a short while ago returning Senator 
John Glenn to space, 36 years after he was the first American to orbit 
earth. A few minutes later, Mission Control confirmed a successful 
launch. And this is Mission Control, Houston. Eleven minutes and sixteen 
seconds into the flight, the crew of Discovery is in orbit, following 
a liftoff at 1:20 p.m. Central time following two brief delays, one 
to clear aircraft out of the area of the launch site, another to work 
a minor technical issue. But the crew now on orbit and they will begin 
very shortly to climb out of their seats and prepare for nine very 
busy days on orbit, an uneventful climb to orbit today for the seven 
member crew of Discovery. President Clinton was on hand for the historic 
launch in Florida and afterwards spoke to the ground crews. We had 
confidence in you and pride in America and a conviction that our space 
program is good for the United States and good for the world. And 
I want to thank you today because you made all of us terribly proud. 
Let me also say that because of the intense interest in this, in the 
media and among ordinary citizens, the American people have had a 
unique opportunity today to see what you do, not just at the moment 
of launch, but in the weeks and months and years that preceded all 
the hard work and all the preparation. And now they will learn over 
the next few days all the things that are being done in space that 
advance not only our mission in space but the quality of our life 
here on earth. President Clinton says the start of Discovery's mission 
is a great day for the nation and for senior citizens. Our own Michael 
Bowman was on hand for today's launch. He joins us now live from the 
Cape. And Michael, what are the astronauts up to at this moment? Tom, 
hello. The major part of the rest of their day, according to NASA 
officials, is going to be spent activating and getting ready some 
80 experiments that are to be conducted during the shuttle mission 
which is primarily devoted to scientific endeavors. Some of those 
experiments involve test animals. I am told they include cockroaches 
but many of them involve a prime -- a prime subject here, Senator 
John Glenn. And there is a great deal of interest in the effect of 
space on an elderly person. Scientists hope to learn more about physical 
ailments that commonly affect the elderly because many of those ailments 
are also experienced by astronauts in space. Hi, Mike. This is Susan 
Yackee. As you mentioned, Mr. Glenn is one of our senior citizens. 
He is 77 years old. What are some of the tests he had to go through 
before being approved to go on this flight? Well, he went through 
a rigorous examination period -- I would assume a strenuous physical, 
and that was the main hurdle to overcome initially, was whether he 
was simply physically fit for the rigors of a space mission. But then 
came months and months of training for possible emergency situations 
and for the day-to-day routine activities of a shuttle flight. Michael, 
it appeared for a little while that this flight might not get off 
close to on time because there was a little bit of interference, a 
plane in the area. Yes. One can never be sure that a space flight 
is going to leave at the predetermined hour. In this case, there was 
first a delay when a shuttle sensor indicated a pressure problem on 
the spacecraft. And then later it was discovered that a civilian aircraft 
had strayed into the restricted airspace around Cape Canaveral and 
the radar screen -- the radar screens at Mission Control simply lit 
up and they had to put the mission on hold until it could be determined 
where the aircraft was and make sure that it was out -- safely out 
of the area. Mike, we hear so much about Senator Glenn. Could you 
quickly tell us a little bit about some of the other astronauts onboard? 
Indeed. One would hardly know that there were any other crew members. 
One would almost think that Senator Glenn was flying this space shuttle 
by himself. But indeed, there are six other crew members, several 
of note. There are several non-Americans, including Mission Specialist 
of Pedro Duque of Spain. He is making his first space flight and he 
is the first Spaniard on a shuttle flight. Pedro Duque was selected 
first to join the astronaut core of the European Space Agency in 1992. 
There is also a Payload Specialist -- there are several among them. 
Making her second space flight is Chiaki Mukai who is representing 
the National Space Development Agency of Japan and she is a cardiovascular 
surgeon and clearly could be of use in terms of studying the effects 
of space on the elderly. Okay. Well, thank you very much, Michael. 
Enjoy that Florida sun. This is VOA Michael Bowman reporting live 
from Cape Canaveral, Florida. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>