<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981014.0566 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Amartya Sen, a scholar from India whose work produced a new understanding 
of the catastrophes that plague society's poorest people, won the 
Nobel Economics Prize on Wednesday. Sen was awarded the prestigious 
prize for his contributions to welfare economics, which help explain 
the economic mechanisms underlying famines and poverty, the Royal 
Swedish Academy of Sciences said. ``You cannot evaluate what's happening 
in an economy or a society without looking at people who are on the 
down side and not just those who are doing well and prospering,'' 
Sen said on CNBC television. Sen ``has restored an ethical dimension 
to the discussion of vital economic problems,'' the Nobel citation 
said. The 64-year-old economist joined Britain's Trinity College in 
Cambridge this year after teaching at Harvard University, among other 
institutions. He has studied the Bangladesh famine of 1974 and other 
catastrophes in India, Bangladesh and the countries of the Sahara. 
The award comes just a month after the image of last year's winners, 
Americans Robert Merton and Myron Scholes, was tarnished by the near-collapse 
of a giant hedge fund in which they were partners. Merton and Scholes 
were honored for their work on valuing risky ``derivatives'' investments 
such as stock options. Sen works in development economics, the study 
of the welfare of the world's poorest people. His best-known work, 
detailed in his 1981 book ``Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement 
and Deprivation,'' challenges the common view that the shortage of 
food is the most important explanation of famine. Sen told the Press 
Trust of India news agency there were many economists who had worked 
on this subject and ``it is a tragedy we can't all share the award.'' 
Looking at several catastrophes, Sen has shown that ``famines have 
occurred even when the supply of food was not significantly lower 
than during previous years'' without famines, the citation said. Part 
of his explanation of the 1974 Bangladesh famine is that flooding 
throughout the country significantly raised food prices, while work 
opportunities for agricultural workers declined. Due to these factors, 
the real incomes of agricultural workers declined so much that they 
were disproportionately stricken by starvation. His work undertakes 
hard economic analysis and broader questions about the best ways to 
determine whether poverty is increasing or decreasing. ``Sen's research 
has practical use in every collective decision-making process,'' said 
Robert Eriksson, professor of sociology at the University of Stockholm. 
``He cares about the poorest in society.'' Rakesh Mohan, director-general 
of India's National Council for Applied Economic Research, praised 
Sen as ``an unusual economist who has combined deep concern for human 
development with the very fine work in technical economics.'' Sen's 
award highlights an underappreciated area of study, said Scott Brown, 
chief economist at Raymond James and Associates, an investment firm 
in St. Petersburg, Florida. ``Developmental economics has never really 
gotten a whole lot of attention in the academic world, and certainly 
the magnitude of the problem and type of issues it deals with is obviously 
very significant,'' Brown said. The 7.6 million kronor prize was worth 
about dlrs 963,000 at Wednesday's exchange rate. It is the second 
year in a row that the prize has gone to work with a clear connection 
to day-to-day lives, rather than to highly theoretical work. Long-Term 
Capital Management, the fund in which Merton and Scholes were partners, 
needed a dlrs 3.6 billion bailout from banks after nearly failing. 
But despite the tarnish on their reputations, Merton's and Scholes' 
award-winning theories were not faulty, said Torsten Persson, a professor 
at the Stockholm School of Economics. ``They lost money, but this 
has nothing to do with the prize,'' Persson said. This honor is the 
only Nobel not established in the will of Swedish industrialist Alfred 
Nobel, who invented dynamite. It was created in 1968 to mark the tercentenary 
of Sweden's central bank. On Tuesday, Robert B. Laughlin of Stanford 
University, Horst L. Stormer of Columbia University and Daniel C. 
Tsui of Princeton University won the Nobel physics prize for discovering 
how electrons can change behavior and act more like fluid than particles. 
The chemistry prize went to Walter Kohn of the University of California 
at Santa Barbara and John A. Pople of Northwestern University for 
developing ways of analyzing molecules in chemical reactions. On Monday, 
the medicine prize was given to three Americans _ Robert Furchgott, 
Louis Ignarro and Ferid Murad _ for their work on discovering properties 
of nitric oxide, a common air pollutant but also a life-saver because 
of its capacity to dilate blood vessels. The literature prize was 
awarded last week to Portuguese novelist Jose Saramago. The peace 
prize, the last in this year's series, is to be announced Friday. 
The prizes are presented on Dec. 10, the anniversary of the death 
of Nobel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>