<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981014.0516 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
China's farmers need higher incomes and the backward agricultural 
sector must be strengthened to keep the national economy growing, 
top members of the Communist Party agreed Wednesday at the end of 
a closed three-day meeting. The Central Committee, made up of 333 
of the most influential members of the ruling Communist Party, said 
China must improve agricultural technology, improve water works to 
avoid a repeat of the summer's catastrophic floods, and reverse environmental 
degradation, the state-run Xinhua News Agency reported. The evening 
television news showed Central Committee members seated at rows of 
desks facing a red curtain hung with the Communist Party's hammer 
and cycle emblem. The report only alluded to discussion of other topics, 
such as a reassessment of embattled industrial, financial and housing 
reforms that have been slowed by pressure from local officials and 
fears of discontent. The Central Committee declared this a crucial 
time for China's overall reforms and urged all party members, especially 
high-ranking ones, to unite to carry out the policies to promote economic 
growth and stimulate domestic demand for China's products. This country 
of 1.2 billion people, the world's most populous country, depends 
heavily on its own huge domestic market for stimulating overall economic 
growth. Higher incomes for farmers would give them more spending power 
at a time when exports are threatened by the Asian financial crisis. 
But incomes are lagging for the 80 percent of the population that 
depends on farming. The state grain system is collapsing under billions 
of dollars of debt as market prices fall below government-set purchasing 
prices. The growth rate has fallen from 8.8 percent last year to 7 
percent in the first half of this year. The government is aiming to 
meet an 8 percent target for 1998. In addition to calling for a ``stable 
increase'' in farm income, the Central Committee also spelled out 
the need to protect social stability in the countryside, Xinhua said. 
China's leaders worry that any rural unrest might undermine their 
legitimacy as heirs to the 1949 peasant-based Communist revolution. 
None of the current generation of leaders took part in the revolution, 
but by focusing the Central Committee meeting on agriculture they 
highlighted their links to the party's past and its rural roots. The 
Central Committee praised the party's achievements over the past 20 
years of reform and stressed it would stick to economic policies already 
in place, Xinhua reported. Last month, party Chairman and President 
Jiang Zemin visited the much-heralded village in Anhui province that 
first broke up the communes of Mao Tse-tung's era and allowed households 
to farm their own plots, a reform that soon spread nationwide. In 
a recent speech about agriculture, Jiang reassured farmers the original 
15-year household land contracts were to be reissued for 30 years, 
a process that has been under way for four or more years. He also 
called for more money to be spent on irrigation and disseminating 
agricultural technology. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>