<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981014.2100.2854 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The widely beloved American talk show host Oprah Winfrey has spent 
a decade trying to bring her good friend and author author author's 
novel book -- "beloved" to the big screen. She talked to Katie couric. 
It's just I hope you'll pardon my house. My house? I like the sound 
of that. When I first read that book 10 years ago in my imagination 
I was saying those words and Danny Glover was answering. So the first 
day I did it it felt like an out of body experience. Now closer to 
the release date it feels a little out of body, like is it really 
happening? Let's explain a little bit more about the plot and sethe 
so people will get an idea what we're talking about. ok. "Beloved" 
is based really on a true story of a woman who in the late 1800's 
was freed from a plantation. She ran away from the plantation, freed 
herself, because of the fugitive slave law, in 28 days the slave owner 
came back for her, a school teacher, came back to get her and her 
children. When she sees them coming she does the unspeakable act to 
protect herself and her children from having to go back and she is 
forever haunted by that. And the haunting takes the form of her baby 
daughter whom she had killed. She comes back as a ghost, and that 
ghost is beloved. Please don't let mom know who you are. You hear 
me? Don't tell me what to do. But I'm on your side. She's the one. 
She's the one I need. You can go. Shee the one -- she's the one I 
have to have. The day that the actress actually showed up on the set, 
there as an electrical surge in the room. Every time you perform with 
Tandy as beloved there's an electrical thing going on. It's really 
lectry fiing. What took you so long to turn it into a movie? Well, 
having synergy, the right combination of a script, drorks having a 
director who would at least let me try to play her. For years I would 
go to directors and -- and I can understand it, because I have been 
every size, and I'm saying I really think I can do it, lose the weight, 
but I met with Jonathan demme last year and said I really believe 
I could, same thing I've said to every director, and if I can't, I 
will give it up. It's more important for me to have the story told 
than play her. But demme was receptive? He was, but he was worried 
about the fact I'm on TV every day. As I'm sure you were. Actually, 
I wasn't. You weren't afraid people would come into the theartd and 
say, there's Oprah, she's doing this now, look at Oprah? Oprah's looking 
thin. I wasn't afraid because you strive as an actress to have yourself 
inhab iitied by that -- inhabited by that character. What worried 
me was would I be able to do it? You've done some acting but not a 
tremendous amount. This is my second feature film. And what worried 
me was would I be able to do justice to sethe. Let me ask you something 
about demme, did you ever think it might be nice to have an African-American 
or a woman do this? yes. I went through my woman phase, African-American 
phase, foreign phase, I originally thought it needs a foreign sensitivity, 
then a female sense tivel, then I thought I just need somebody who 
sees what I see and has the skill and story-telling ability to get 
it on screen. Because I now think it's absolutely wrong. I as an African-American 
woman who all my life have said judge me by what I can do, not the 
color of my skin, it's really wrong to go around with that as your 
first criteria. I would never do that again. What are you hoping audiences 
take away from in? That thin love ain't no love at all and that your 
heart really is the prize. The final words on the screen. And that 
you are your best thing. Let's talk about the commercial viaability 
of this movie. Three hours long? Two hours, 45 minutes. So sorry. 
Two hours, 45 minutes long. It has some very disturbing scenes. Do 
you think it's going to reach a broad audience? yes, i do. I really 
do because I believe that people connect to feelings and this is a 
deeply feeling emotional story and I think America's ready. Might 
not have been ready 10 years ago. Everything happens in Divine order 
and time. I am finding even as a lot of people who are not of my culture 
see this film they come away with, gosh, I didn't know. I'm like didn't 
know what? A mother could love her children that way? A guy said to 
me the other day in darblingse you know, I watched this film, I thought 
when Lincoln freed the slaves everybody went home and it was fine. 
So the fact that people are even having those thoughts about the humanity 
is took to survive in that time is a good thing. You know, I didn't 
do this movie by myself. I really feel a deeper connection to my ancestry 
and I felt that -- Did you really channel your ancestors before this 
movie? Yeah, I think I did but when you talk about that people think 
she's really gone. You didn't light candles and say -- Yeah, I did. 
You did? And you sort of tried to get in touch with them? I didn't 
do a ouija board thing but I had a moment of meditation in my trailer 
before doing the scenes, where you, you know, at least acknowledge 
that there's something else going on bigger than yourself for this 
big movie about the life of a woman who used to be a slave, and I 
am a descendant of slaves. I said to demme, I can't imagine that this 
is happening. Many days it felt like I can't believe this is happening. 
So you couldn't help but feel closer to those who have come before 
you? Yeah. And you were paying respects to them? And Inn a way this 
movie say huge paying of respects. That's why I'm not worried because 
they're all applauding somewhere. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>