<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981014.2100.2068 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the campaign air wars now heating up, a lot of analysts say it's 
almost all but certain the republicans will gain seats in the house 
and Senate when it's all over and voters go to the polls November 
3. will the November election be a rer end um of some sort on the 
entire Lewinsky scandal? Here with us tonight to handicap the 1998 
Con teaeastreses, Thomas Mann, director of governmental studies at 
Brookings institution. Is there a central theme that you have been 
able to identify? Actually not. What's amazing is how little the Lewinsky-Clinton 
scandal has penetrated the campaigns for Senate, house, governorship 
around the country. It shows up very little. So one of the ironies 
will be I think that while the elections themselves will not be a 
referendum on impeachment, they will be interpreted as a referendum 
and therefore the results will be critically important in determining 
how far this impeachment process goes forward. We were told the last 
big Senate race was the year of the woman. Now we've got names lake 
brawn and boxer and mur Rey in big trouble. Especially Carol Mosley-Braun 
in Illinois. We're going to have a special segment later on that on 
this broadcast this week. Any common thread? At least one challenger 
there is a woman. It has nothing to do with their being women. Carol 
Mosley-Braun put herself in weak condition days after her initial 
election. She comported herself in a way that basically turned off 
many Illinois voters and she's never not able to recover. Barbara 
boxer is a very good campaigner but she still is perceived far left 
of center and now she's running against a moderate Asian American 
republican. Patty Murray is in the best shape, running against a populist 
social conservative. Let mep walk you through the names. Give us your 
brief five-second version of the handicap. New York, the big Senate 
race. Al Al D'Amato versus Charles Schumer. Al baby Al D'Amato has 
pulled out every single race he's been in but the barest of margins. 
For the first time he's up against a formidable democrat not weakened 
in the primary, with enough money and toughness to make it a real 
race. Schumer has a good chance of a surprise victory. Barbara boxer 
in California versus Matt fong, we touched briefly on. Let's go to 
South Carolina. Inglis versus Hollings. South Carolina is one of the 
most republican states in the country. By all rights, Fritz Hollings 
ought to be on his political deathbed but he has run a very aggressive 
campaign. He's been very critical of President Clinton. Bob Inglis, 
a member of the republican class of 1994 in the house has not yet 
got traction. Right now it looks as if Hollings is going to hold on. 
A victory there could keep the republicans from reaching the magic 
60, their clear goal this election year. Interesting, there is another 
member of the Judiciary committee. I want to jump ahead to yet another 
member of the Judiciary committee, in Ohio, chabot versus quals. That's 
right. -- Qualls. That's right. Ohio has a couple of bellwether districts. 
Right on the margarine here. Could swing either way. In fact the results 
of the chabot and Strickland race in Ohio will tell us whether republicans 
are going to barely hold their own, pick up five or it's going to 
be more like 15 or 20. Right now, a tossup. I heard David Broder say 
without question, biggest race in the country, California governor. 
I think that's important because republicans have controlled the governorship 
in California 16 years. We're coming up on reapportionment, redistricting. 
The governor gets to sign that redistricting Bill. If democrats can 
save that -- win that race they help stave off the republican surge 
that's occurred around the country. Probably the highest stakes individual 
race in the country. And people thought this wouldn't be an exciting 
year. Thomas Mann, if you find yourself with a free week night between 
now and election night, will you come see us again? Be happy to. Thank 
you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>