<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981014.2100.0663 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This Congress has been roundly accused of doing too little in every 
area except that of impeachment proceedings. With us tonight, Ohio 
republican congressman John boehner, who holds the fourth ranking 
post in the house leadership. He's with us from the hill. Congressman, 
as you know, it worked for Harry S truman so this president has been 
trotting out the do-nothing Congress name. What do folks say in Ohio? 
If you look at what this Congress has done, you'll see we've had the 
first balanced budget in a generation, and our success in moving people 
from welfare to work. Today we've got almost a 40% drop of welfare 
caseloads across the country. The American people sent us here to 
represent their values and principles and that's exactly what we're 
doing. Devil's advocate here, they say you're also doing an investigation 
that is about sex, has crippled the presidency and all of official 
Washington, it's not going to be over any time soon, Christmas is 
going going to come and go. There's that. Well, we received a report 
from Ken Starr and under the constitution we have a responsibility 
to investigate this and to come to some resolution of it. We didn't 
ask for it but it's our job and we don't have a choice under the constitution 
as to which of the parts of the constitution we want to deal with 
and which ones we don't. We all swore when we were sworn into Congress 
that we would uphold and defend the constitution and we're going to 
do that but that's taking a very small part of the work that's been 
done this year. The Judiciary committee has been occupied with it 
but the members of Congress have been here doing the people's work. 
And as much as we're poud of the accomplishments we've been Ai believe 
to put into law, we're just as proud of some of the things we didn't 
allow to happen. We didn't allow the president to increase intending 
over 150 billion like I asked for, and we didn't agree to raise taxes 
$135 billion over the next five years that the president also asked 
for. Is he paralyzed in Congress? I think when the president spends 
57 days this year doing 7 fundraisers for the democratic party and 
has come to Capitol Hill not one time to talk about education, he's 
let the American people down. And regardless of what happens out of 
this impeachment inquiry, I think it's clear that the president and 
his ability to lead, he's given it away and whether he stays or whether 
he goes, this presidency is over. How much does the leadership get 
informed about the thinking and workings of Henry Hyde? For example 
you all woke up and read "The Washington Post" this morning that he 
had been thinking about narrowing the scope of this investigation. 
Do you think that's wise, prudent, do you want to keep your options 
open? Does Ken Starr have something more? Brian, we promised early 
on that the Judiciary committee and chairman Hyde would have a full, 
fair, and independent review of all of these allegations and come 
to some resolution. I was as surprised as everyone this morning when 
I opened the paper and read what you read, but we've given it to the 
committee and we have an awful lot of confidence in Henry Hyde, John 
Conyers, members from both sides of the aisle to handle this in a 
judicious manner. If Henry Hyde believes this can be narrower, I have 
confidence in him that he can make it work. A lot of folks on the 
hill working late tonight. John boehner thanks for coming to talk 
to us. Thanks, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>