<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981014.2100.0244 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Earlier this evening we spoke to senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, 
beginning with the long budget negotiations, finally leading to an 
apparent deal this evening. And why the republicans would want to 
strike a deal with this White House. I think the most important thing 
is we're on a republican clock now. The Congress is controlled by 
the republicans. It's their responsibility to deliver a budget, to 
deliver the appropriations, to avoid shutting the government down, 
and this does those things and I think we came to an agreement that 
will allow both sides to declare some success even though I feel our 
democratic side came out pretty well. You've been more vocal in support 
of this president. Do you think he's gining friends and supporters 
on the hill? I think he's always had friends and supporters. Early 
given his position on the issues, his strength in the country, I think 
it's made it even easier for people to work more closely with him 
and we've done that in the last few days. What else do you think he 
gets out of Congress, say, next year, the calendar year? Or is he 
as others have speculated all about stalled? No, in fact just the 
contrary, I think, Brian. We've got a tremendous agenda. You're going 
to see a real effort next year to continue to build on his economic 
reform we've seen so much of the last six years. We've GT to continue 
this economic progress. Beyond that, of course, the patients' Bill 
of rights and a number of issues having to do with families, especially 
in education. You're going to see a very full agenda again next year. 
When you go home to talk to the constituents, and it's popular and 
fashionable, you know more than most, to bash the Senate and its pace 
and its schedule -- when people say what do you feel you accomplished 
this past time out, what do you tell them? Well, I think it's very 
difficult to point to a whole lot. We named a new airport and beyond 
that it's been very difficult. We forced them to agree on education. 
We're going to be committing to 100,000 now teachers. We're going 
to have a major farm disaster package and for my part of the country, 
especially South Dakota, that's very, very important. So in the end 
I think in part we've been able to save this session be Congress by 
last-minute negotiations that have produced some real results but 
by and large this Congress has not done much at all. Would say that 
you've done anything at all is because democrats have forced republicans' 
feet to the fire? No question. They would not have agreed to the 100,000 
teachers, the disaster package for agriculture, an array of commitments 
we have in this budget. We're quite pleased with it. And what if one 
or two articles of impeachment emerge from the house and come your 
way? We have led to bleave in this morning's "Washington Post," there's 
a matter of some debate around this, this Mr. Hyde has decided on 
some rules of the game. Where do you see this going and how soon? 
I wish I knew how soon. That really does depend on the republicans 
and as you mentioned, Brian Brian, there are a lot of changes in the 
works. I think the republicans are getting more concerned about the 
political implications of all this. It appears that maybe they now 
want to curtail the investigation some S. narrow the scope. Certainly 
good news for the country and for our purposes in getting our work 
done here in Congress but I really can't project. In large measure 
this is a moving target. The announcement today makes it even more 
of a moving target and it would be kind of fruitless to come to any 
prognosis or projection as to how it's going to play out. Can you 
project whether the republicans have the votes in the Senate? I can't 
until we know the circumstances. Senator Tom Daschle, thank you very 
much for joining us. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>