<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981014.1830.0772 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight -- coping with the UPS and Downs on Wall 
Street. Today, the Dow Jones industrial average closed up almost 31 
points. The NASDAQ, also up, nearly 32 points. But uncertainty seems 
to be rattling the nerves of those who fueled this bull market, 66 
million individuals now own shares in mutual funds. Back in 1980 only 
6% of households invested in mutual funds. Last year, that figure 
hit 37%. So what do you do now? CNBC's Ron Insana went right to the 
top tonight for some advice, and he begins our "in depth" reporting. 
They're looking at their latest investment statements. A 57-year-old 
in Los Angeles, planning for retirement. A 75-year-old in Dallas, 
trying to preserve his lifestyle and they're nervous. So is this man, 
Arthur Levitt, chairman of the securities and exchange commission, 
who oversees Wall Street and who spent much of his life as a successful 
investor. Are you worried that the individual investor, after he or 
she looks at the third quarter statement, might panic? I have enough 
confidence in America's investors to not consider the word "panic" 
as part of the process. But I am concerned that they've never seen 
this before. They've never experienced a downturn of this magnitude. 
a downturn with the average stock fund dropping about 15% in the last 
three months. And in August alone, worried investors pulled $11 billion 
out of these funds, the biggest withdrawal in eight years. Rita berens 
manages her family's finances and her husband's cardiology practice. 
Her big profits that peaked in July. This is what Pfizer closed at 
today. Now all but wiped out. I have no idea where this market's going, 
but I hope it's not going down very much further, because a lot of 
people will go down with it. Even Tommy Turner, a longtime investor, 
feels the pinch. Up until just recently, it's been fun, everything's 
been going up every day. But right now, you know, we've taken some 
pretty big hits on some of these things. So what should investors 
do? With wild swings in the markets expected to continue, financial 
experts believe this is a good time to re-examine your financial plan 
and your tolerance for risk. Investors need to recognize market swings 
are a fact of life. If that makes you nervous, invest in something 
more conservative, like bonds. Review your goals. Make sure money 
needed now isn't in the market today. And most of all, investors should 
be realistic. Markets by definition go up and down. Staining the obvious 
maybe, but important to remember after seven years of growing brak 
tis. The most important factor is not to fall in love or become disenchanted 
with securities. They're pieces of paper. They have to be looked at 
on a regular basis and evaluated in terms of other investment alternatives. 
Not easy, with the numbers on the statements getting smaller and smaller. 
Ron Insana, NBC news, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>