<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0027 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An Upper East Side veterinarian was arrested Tuesday and charged with 
helping a friend and former receptionist commit suicide last year 
as she lay in the hospital gravely ill with breast cancer. The veterinarian, 
Dr. Marco Zancope, 43, was led away in handcuffs from the Animal Clinic 
of New York on First Avenue as investigators charged him with second-degree 
manslaughter in the death of Cara Beigel. Detective Joseph Pentangelo, 
a police spokesman, said Zancope was accused of injecting Ms. Beigel 
with a deadly dose of a barbiturate last year. The authorities said 
that a group of her family and friends looked on as Zancope gave Ms. 
Beigel, 33, the drug through an intravenous tube at her bedside at 
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center on Aug. 28, 1997. Ms. Beigel 
was nearing the end of a protracted 13-month battle with breast cancer, 
one she was about to lose, family members said. She was scheduled 
to enter a hospice for the terminally ill, according to her father, 
Phillip Beigel, who said in an interview Tuesday night that he had 
not been informed by either the police or the hospital that Zancope 
had been arrested. Beigel, speaking with a shaken and strained voice 
from his Connecticut home, said he did not believe that Zancope acted 
rashly or criminally. ``If Cara could have, I think she might have 
done it herself,'' Beigel said. ``She was not of the mind to hang 
into the bitter end because she was in tremendous pain and agony. 
``She said, `I don't want to carry on like that. It's over, it's over.'' 
In another highly publicized case in Manhattan in 1995, a writer and 
editor on the Upper West Side served four months in jail for helping 
his wife commit suicide. But in that case, family members of the dead 
woman assailed her husband's actions, suggesting that he had coerced 
her into taking her own life. Beigel said his daughter had undergone 
a mastectomy, had spent months under heavy medication and had decided 
that if her condition worsened she wanted to die. An investigator 
who spoke on condition of anonymity did not dispute that account Tuesday 
night. ``She had articulated that she wanted this done,'' the investigator 
said. ``If she had gotten worse, she wanted someone to end her misery.'' 
Ms. Beigel grew up in Rockland and Westchester counties. She loved 
animals as a girl and competed in horse shows at Madison Square Garden, 
said her father, a retired television producer and businessman. She 
attended Wellesley College and studied art history. But animals remained 
a passion, he said, and so she took a job working for Zancope. An 
autopsy was done on Ms. Beigel's body, but officials said the toxicology 
reports did not come back from the lab for five months, and it was 
not until last week that the Office of the Medical Examiner declared 
Ms. Beigel's death a homicide. It was not clear what led to the delays. 
Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the medical examiner, said her office 
would have no official comment until the records of the case could 
be reviewed. When contacted at home, Manhattan District Attorney Robert 
Morgenthau said he was not familiar with the case. Beigel's death 
was reported to the authorities because the hospital suspected foul 
play, officials at Memorial Sloan-Kettering said Tuesday night. ``We 
as a hospital are required by law to report all deaths that can be 
attributed to something other than natural causes,'' said hospital 
spokeswoman Avice Meehan. ``There were some things in this case that 
led hospital officials to refer the death to the Office of the Medical 
Examiner.'' Another official at the hospital, speaking on condition 
of anonymity, said Ms. Beigel's death was not imminent. The official 
said that a small gathering of friends and family had stood by Ms. 
Beigel's bedside that summer morning, and in just a matter of hours, 
she was dead. ``She was very ill,'' he said, ``but she was not expected 
to die right away.'' When told of the hospital's opinion that she 
was not expected to die right away, Beigel said: ``Of course she was 
expected to die. They knew it, they told her that. She was terminal.'' 
Investigators were able to track the drug back to Zancope, because 
it is a substance commonly used in the treatment of animals, Pentangelo 
said. People who lived in the doctor's building on East 84th Street 
expressed surprise at his arrest. Veronica Marocco, 51, a pet groomer 
and neighbor, described herself as a friend of 15 years. ``I don't 
believe he would have done this,'' she said. ``He was devastated after 
she died. If he did it, he didn't let on.'' Much of the national debate 
over assisted suicide has involved the role of doctors in prescribing 
potentially lethal medications for patients who want to end their 
lives. But in the 1995 case in Manhattan, George Delury, a writer 
and editor, helped his ailing wife commit suicide in their apartment. 
He later disclosed in a book that he suffocated her with plastic bags 
because he did not believe the drug she had taken would kill her fast 
enough. Delury, 64, said he helped his wife, Myrna Lebov, who was 
suffering from multiple sclerosis, drink a mix of honey and Elavil, 
an antidepressant, but never told prosecutors about suffocating her 
because he did not want to be charged with murder. The Delury case 
was closely followed by supporters and opponents of euthanasia, mostly 
because of Delury's public outspokenness. He kept a diary of his wife's 
illness that closely documented the months leading up to the decision 
to commit suicide. He also criticized the statute that outlaws assisted 
suicide in New York. Delury was initially charged with second-degree 
manslaughter. In a deal with prosecutors, he pleaded guilty to attempted 
manslaughter. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>