<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0007 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Republicans on the House Judiciary Committee are considering folding 
most of the 15 counts outlined as impeachable offenses against President 
Clinton into two broader accusations: lying under oath and obstruction 
of justice, a Republican official said Tuesday night. Facing a year-end 
deadline imposed by the committee chairman, Rep. Henry Hyde, R-Ill., 
members of the committee's staff have been meeting to try to make 
the investigation into Clinton's conduct with Monica Lewinsky more 
manageable. In meetings Tuesday, the staff talked about consolidating 
many of the charges to increase the likelihood of reaching a conclusion 
on some of the facts, said a Republican official who spoke on the 
condition of anonymity. For example, Republicans said that a charge 
of conspiracy _ accusing Clinton of knowingly permitting Ms. Lewinsky 
to lie about their affair when she filed a false affidavit in the 
Paula Jones case _ would involve a lengthy fact-finding mission on 
the committee's part and would delay movement on other charges. A 
week ago, the Republicans' investigative counsel, David Schippers, 
outlined 15 possible impeachable offenses _ including a new charge 
of conspiracy _ to the committee. He dropped a few of the 11 counts, 
including abuse of power, that independent counsel Kenneth Starr had 
proposed in his referral to Congress. Schippers was out of town Tuesday 
night and could not be reached for comment. Reps. Bob Barr of Georgia 
and Charles Canady of Florida, both Republicans, have endorsed a scaling 
back on the charges so that congressmen can concentrate on the most 
important counts. ``I think we should focus it on the two or three 
most serious charges,'' Barr said on Monday. Hyde, in an interview 
with The Washington Post in its early editions on Wednesday, said 
he was considering consolidating or dropping some of the charges. 
But the Post also indicated that Hyde softened his remarks later in 
the day, and told the Post that he had made no decision to drop any 
charges. The Republican official said committee members want to limit 
the inquiry mainly to the Lewinsky scandal. It is still possible that 
later this year Starr would send to Congress other matters, possibly 
sexual harassment accusations made against the president by a former 
White House volunteer, Kathleen Willey. Staff members also continued 
to push ahead Tuesday with Republican plans to seek agreement with 
the White House for stipulating some of the factual background outlined 
in the Starr report. If an agreement is reached, the committee would 
not have to duplicate investigative efforts or call the same witnesses, 
but would be able to use that evidence as part of its inquiry. The 
Republican official said he hoped that Clinton would compromise and 
acknowledge making misleading statements under oath. In Starr's referral 
to Congress, the president was accused of lying under oath in his 
deposition given last January in the Paula Jones sexual misconduct 
lawsuit and of lying to the grand jury on Aug. 17. In both instances, 
Clinton said he had not had ``sexual relations'' with Ms. Lewinsky. 
Over the next several weeks, committee staff will be mapping out a 
strategy for conducting the inquiry. Hyde has said he hopes to begin 
holding hearings in mid-November, after the elections. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>