<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After the Little Bighorn, according to the writer Evan S. Connell, 
``one Cheyenne pulled a flat, round object out of a trooper's pocket.'' 
``This thing was made of white metal and glass, with black marks under 
the glass,'' he went on, ``and was thought to be alive because of 
the noise it made. The Cheyennes decided this must be the soldiers' 
medicine, so the warrior kept it. But the next day it died. He threw 
it away _ as far as possible.'' I know just how the Cheyenne must 
have felt. I don't throw away my broken gadgets, but then the Plains 
Indians didn't have sock drawers. There are socks, of course, in my 
sock drawer; there are even a red bandanna and a box of 12-gauge shotgun 
shells (Extra-Lite Target Load). Sadly, this is all veneer, the sham 
of normality. The sock drawer, a traditional repository of male essentials, 
is awash in AA and AAA batteries. There's a Sharp Wizard (electronic 
organizer 0Z 7000) with a thesaurus card installed; a Psion Seina 
(16-bit, multitasking, infrared) with a full meg of RAM; a Freestyle 
digital pedometer; a chrome key chain with a built-in flashlight, 
which is supposed to find itself when I clap; a Franklin Bookman (with 
the entire King James version of the Bible inside), plus a Casio stopwatch 
with a compass. You could have synchronized the landing at Omaha Beach 
with the Casio watches I've purchased and then abandoned. I run, so 
I always have an excuse to own one stopwatch, but one stopwatch, like 
one martini, is not enough. For years I had a parrot, a macaw named 
Ned, who was chiefly prized for the fact that when I put him on my 
shoulder, he would climb down to my wrist and break my newest watch. 
In those years, the early '90s, Casio always introduced several more 
desirable models before I could get the battery to run out on the 
one I owned. I adored that bird. I'm of Yankee stock: Use it up, make 
do, or do without. But what did my forebears know of gadgets? They 
had something, I believe, for crushing apples. In a museum in Newburyport, 
Mass., I saw an ugly piece of black metal designed to help ladies 
with their high-button shoes and a hoe-like tool for keeping sharks 
away from the whale blubber. Where's the fun in that? Whereas who 
can resist a shiny new stopwatch with a pulse meter built right in? 
I've also had one with a light inside, which could be set to flash 
when the alarm went off. I coveted, though never purchased, a model 
supposed to chart my biorhythms. I've not yet owned an altimeter or 
barometer either, although as recently as this morning, I ogled the 
catalog copy for the Casio Pathfinder, Triple Sensor, which has both 
and also a compass, which I couldn't master in its stand-alone manifestation. 
I'm not certain if Casio manufactured the unit with the databank, 
but that watch did add thrills to car rides because I often removed 
hands from the wheel and eyes from the road to enter names and phone 
numbers. That was done through a complicated process in which I had 
to select each letter and number individually, moving up or down the 
alphabet, by working tiny buttons on the body of the instrument. You 
could see the time and also the data, which were suspended by magic 
in the glass of the watch face. This gem I loved not wisely, but too 
well. In a yearlong ecstasy of erratic driving, I entered so many 
names and numbers that I exhausted the battery, at which point the 
little darling forgot everything, even the time. I've never had a 
talking watch, or one that woke me soundlessly with vibrations, but 
I did buy a talking alarm for my eldest son. (When you can't justify 
purchasing the newest gadget for yourself, you can give it away, which 
is almost as gratifying.) This clock could be programmed to make the 
sound of a rooster in agony. John played with it for a week or two, 
then let the clock settle into the detritus of soiled laundry, stuffed 
animals, cartoon collections and discarded CDs with which he has furnished 
his room and stocked his closet. Presumably responding to some inner 
prompting, it used to go off sometimes on a quiet afternoon, sounding 
for all the world like a billionaire rooster being audited and sending 
the father of its owner on a fevered search through toy bins and under 
the bed. Unless swimming or sleeping, I always have a Walkman on my 
belt or attached with a plastic flange to my right front pocket. When 
not actually conversing with another live human being _ this rarely 
happens _ I'm listening to a recorded book. The new, electronically 
enhanced Ben not only peeps twice on the hour but also fills the chambers 
of his inferior consciousness with the words of Gilbert K. Chesterton 
or William Makepeace Thackery. The creature's wires lead from ears 
to belt and catch often on opened drawers or door handles, yanking 
the stoppers from its ears and hurling the little instrument to the 
ground. Not wishing to alarm my wife with the spectacle of my profligacy, 
I buy the replacement in a similar style and color. I've had Day Runners 
and Franklin Planners but now carry the record of my life and loves 
in a personal digital assistant (PDA), a Psion Series 3c. (The Siena 
is for backup.) The Psion has the immense advantage of being easy 
to use. I hope you haven't made the mistake of concluding that my 
passion for electronic baubles means that I'm at all good at using 
them. If I buy a device with seven functions, I'm lucky to master 
three. The Psion has 10 functions; I can handle 8. I feel naked without 
it. When I'm in the city, one of my favorite recreations is to stop 
_ while listening to a book, with my watch humming and my Psion 3c 
holding a thousand names and phone numbers _ and peer into the windows 
of an electronics store, gaping at the miniature cameras and competitive 
PDAs. I feel almost as if I have my ear to the great microprocessing 
heart of the world. Is this love, or only cupidity? Why do I adore 
gadgets? Some simply look and sound the part. The Psion, for instance, 
is handsome, as were the early G-Shock Casios. I share with the magpie 
the desire to possess foreign objects. A stranger to clothing of any 
sort, the bird is drawn to shiny buttons, while the man who flunked 
calculus is fascinated by the products of high engineering. The intricacy 
of even the simplest device is so far beyond my comprehension as to 
be entirely miraculous. Then there's always the hope that the gadget 
will be of use. No task is so mundane or so ethereal as to rule out 
the possibility of an assist from a little gizmo with a battery on 
board. For instance, take nasal hair and nirvana. Nasal hair: I've 
had two electronic clippers, both of which made marvelous sounds, 
but neither of which could cut the barbed wire that pours out of my 
old nose and ears. The Sharper Image is now marketing a more expensive 
version with a light in it. I might be tempted, but in this case I 
really don't want to see what I'm doing. Nirvana: I've read a good 
deal about meditation. Who could grow up in the '60s and fail to do 
so? I'm bitterly disappointed, both in my ability to control involuntary 
muscles _ which any decent yogi can do _ and in my slow passage toward 
satori. It could be that I haven't worked hard enough at meditation, 
but maybe not. Perhaps I simply lack the proper equipment. The gadget 
I settled on was a piece of plastic, shaped much like a computer mouse, 
with a metal strip and rudimentary earplug. You hold the instrument 
so the metal strip can measure the tension on the skin of your fingers. 
The findings are translated into a buzzing sound heard through the 
plug. When I lay on the bed, dreaming of a Caribbean vacation, I could 
change the buzzing from a weee, weee, to a waaaa, waaaa, and eventually 
to a whoooooa. As soon as the phone rang, I was back to wee, wee, 
wee again. Finally, the signal faded altogether. I changed the battery, 
but the instrument was dead. I was sad, of course, as I'm sure that 
Cheyenne warrior was when the watch proved short-lived. But I still 
adore gadgets. Even with a dead one, I can always recall the moment, 
full of hope, when I first tear it from its wrapper, grasp it in my 
hands and stuff the plug in the wall or my ear. ``It works,'' I always 
think. ``It lives!'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>