<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0190 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just inside the entrance of the public library here hangs a photograph 
of the building's namesake, John Henry Faulk, a radio performer and 
humorist famous for his uncompromising defense of free speech. Faulk, 
who was blacklisted in the McCarthy era but sued his blacklisters 
and won, died in 1990. Were he alive today, Faulk would no doubt shake 
his head at the tangle over free speech in which the Faulk Central 
Library and the Austin Public Library branches now find themselves. 
The Austin Public Library is one of hundreds of public libraries around 
the country grappling with the question of whether to keep objectionable 
material on the Internet from reaching computers intended for public 
use, and, for those libraries that have decided on blocking, how much 
blocking to do. After much soul-searching, the Austin library installed 
filtering software on most of its computers, a decision that divided 
the community, as it has many others. In Loudoun County, Va., a group 
of library patrons who object to the county library's filtering software 
on its computers, along with the American Civil Liberties Union and 
Web publishers, have filed a court case challenging the constitutionality 
of the practice. On the opposite side of the continent _ and the debate 
_ in Livermore, Calif., a parent is suing the public library, accusing 
it of failing to restrict minors' access to pornographic Net content. 
Similar conflicts are taking place across the country. The First Amendment 
issues raised by Internet filtering may seem clear enough when public 
debate is at full tilt. But people's positions are less clear in private 
as they struggle with their commitment to free speech and their desire 
to protect children. Austin's two-year struggle, which is still unresolved 
even though filtering software is on most Austin library computers, 
reflects the national debate in all its complexity. At every step 
of the way, librarians around the nation have watched Austin in search 
of guidance, confirmation or any hook on which to hang a policy of 
their own. Like her counterparts across the nation, Brenda Branch, 
the energetic, high-spirited director of the Austin library, has been 
at the center of the discussion. Like many other librarians, she has 
always considered the defense of free speech to be part of her job 
description. For most of the 23 years she has been at the Austin library, 
that stand has presented her with no personal conflict. Ms. Branch's 
problems began in the summer of 1996, when computers with unrestricted 
access to the Internet were placed in the main library and its 19 
branches. ``Upholding freedom of speech becomes so second nature to 
librarians that unrestricted access was our natural fallback position,'' 
Ms. Branch said. ``We almost didn't question it.'' When staff members 
saw children looking at questionable sites, they resorted to an ad 
hoc method of control _ cajoling them to move elsewhere. They suddenly 
felt thrust into the role of parents. But things remained relatively 
quiet until a branch librarian happened to walk past the library's 
printer one day and saw a graphic depiction of child pornography emerging. 
``One look at this and you knew it was illegal stuff,'' Ms. Branch 
said. As the librarian was pulling the offending document out of the 
printer, whoever had sent the print command disappeared. Coincidentally, 
a few days later, another library employee shot off an angry letter 
to the local newspaper, the mayor, the City Council and the city manager, 
charging the library with making pornography available, in violation 
of the state's ``harmful to minors'' statute. Texas is one of several 
states with a law prohibiting an adult from knowingly displaying material 
considered harmful to anyone younger than 18. ``All of a sudden, it 
was like the dam broke,'' Ms. Branch said. She met with her staff 
members, she said, and many of them broke down and told her how uncomfortable 
they felt with unfettered Internet access. Ms. Branch's employees, 
it turned out, were worried that they could be arrested if they were 
thought to be exposing children to pornography, however inadvertently. 
Lawyers for the city reinforced those fears. One option, which the 
library swiftly rejected, was to remove Internet access from the libraries 
altogether, Ms. Branch said. The lawyers then recommended strongly 
that the library install software to filter objectionable material. 
Within two weeks, the library had installed Cyber Patrol, a filtering 
program popular among parents but much maligned among civil libertarians, 
on the 52 public computers with Internet access. In its haste, the 
library installed the software at full throttle. The product was set 
up at its most restrictive so it blocked Web sites promoting ``intolerance,'' 
``alcohol and tobacco'' and ``illegal gambling.'' Filtering products 
often work by searching Web sites for strings of what appear to be 
unseemly text. Such a method can cause the words ``Essex County,'' 
for example, to be blocked, or ``chicken breast.'' Cyber Patrol looks 
for keywords, not text strings. The company also maintains a proprietary 
list of site addresses that it chooses to block, and it updates the 
list regularly. Within a week, a stack of written complaints two inches 
thick had arrived on Ms. Branch's desk. Many library patrons objected 
to being subject to any censorship. Others complained about the software's 
hamhanded blocking, which censored harmless sites while giving ready 
access to others filled with obscene language and images. One library 
user conducted an Internet search for ``toys.'' At the top of the 
search results was ``Toys 4 Lovers.'' At the same time, patrons trying 
to retrieve Web sites dedicated to Georgia O'Keeffe and Vincent Van 
Gogh were confronted by a computer screen flashing a yellow Cyber 
Patrol police badge. An HIV Information Center was also found to be 
off limits. People even complained that sites containing the names 
John Henry Faulk were banned, presumably because of the proximity 
to one another of the letter F, U and K. ``It's operating like the 
KGB!'' one person complained. Another wrote, ``Incensed that you would 
tell me as a parent what my child should see and what they should 
not see.'' But Cyber Patrol says its software would not exclude those 
kinds of sites. Ms. Branch's office in the Faulk Central Library in 
downtown Austin is playfully decorated with stuffed animals and dishes 
of candy. On her door frame is a magnet that reads: ``Don't rush me. 
I'm making mistakes as fast as I can.'' Inspired more by Gidget than 
gravitas, Ms. Branch's office betrays no trace of the somber situations 
in which the librarian has found herself. Ms. Branch, 51, was named 
director of the Austin public library system in 1991. She said the 
only previous experience that foreshadowed the current debate occurred 
in 1992, when Madonna's graphic book ``Sex'' sparked an outcry from 
some parents and church groups on the the religious right. During 
the Madonna incident, as Ms. Branch refers to it, she was in frequent 
touch with the American Library Association. ``The ALA was an incredible 
source of support,'' she said. ``I really depended on them for information 
and legal advice.'' When the issue of filtering Internet content arose, 
however, the ALA left Ms. Branch trapped squarely between library 
science and the politics of her community. In late 1996, a few months 
after the library introduced Internet access, Ms. Branch sought guidance 
from the ALA about whether to install filters. She was surprised to 
get a sharp letter in reply, in which the ALA endorsed the idea of 
unrestricted Internet access for adults and minors alike. In July 
1997, the ALA issued a formal resolution condemning the use of filtering 
software that blocks access to constitutionally protected speech and 
recommended parental discretion. According to the ALA's Office for 
Information Technology Policy, 11,600 of the nation's nearly 16,000 
libraries offer Internet access, and some 15 percent of those have 
installed filtering software. Most libraries, including many with 
filters, have an ``acceptable use'' policy in place, which urges patrons 
to use the Internet responsibly. ``Our policies are very carefully 
considered,'' said Richard Matthews, deputy director of the Office 
for Intellectual Freedom at the ALA. ``We certainly have addressed 
the First Amendment implications of our stance against filtering, 
and to take any position accepting something less than that ideal 
stance would be unacceptable.'' Ms. Branch said she found the ALA's 
policy frustrating because it fails to take into account the practical 
considerations of exposing children to what she calls ``some of the 
horrifying stuff out there.'' That horrifying stuff is precisely what 
has given rise to the pro-filtering position among a number of Austinites. 
``If we live in a society that requires one to be 21 to drink, 18 
to smoke, and last I understood, 18 to purchase porno magazines, why 
is it free and acceptable to view porno on the Internet at a public 
library?'' one Austin parent wrote to Ms. Branch. ``My biggest dilemma,'' 
Ms. Branch said, ``is how to balance the rights of adults with the 
need to protect youth.'' Shortly after Austin installed filters, the 
ACLU condemned the new practice. ACLU lawyers investigated the possibility 
of filing a lawsuit to challenge the constitutionality of the library's 
action. Austin has long been known as a city more liberal than the 
rest of the state. For nearly eight years, the city has been home 
to Electronic Frontiers-Texas, a small but active group of civil libertarians 
who focus on the rights of those who travel in cyberspace. When members 
of EF-Texas heard about the library's filters, they joined forces 
with the ACLU and complained to the City Council, which controls the 
financing for the library. Invoking an analogy often used when discussing 
library filtering, Jon Lebkowsky, an EF-Texas member, said, ``It came 
down to a fundamental question: Are you taking books off the shelves, 
or are you exercising the library's prerogative to select some books 
and not others?'' In March 1997, city officials convened a community 
roundtable, with Ms. Branch and other librarians, EF-Texas, the ACLU, 
the city, and Jennifer Padden, a representative of the local PTA. 
After several weeks of debate, the library disabled the keyword blocking 
and reduced the number of categories being filtered out to four: ``gross 
depictions,'' ``sexual acts,'' ``partial nudity'' and ``full nudity.'' 
Now there are four unfiltered computers scattered around the library 
system, with plans to have one unfiltered computer at each branch 
by this time next year. The screens for the unfiltered machines are 
in specially built recessed tables that keep the computer screens 
well out of public view. Only patrons 18 and older may use an unfiltered 
machine, and they must present proof of age. Minors cannot use the 
machines even if they have parental permission slips or are accompanied 
by parents. Now that fewer categories of Web sites are blocked and 
unfiltered computers are available to adults, Ms. Branch said, complaints 
about the filtering have diminished sharply. A library customer who 
objects to the blocking of a certain site can complain to the library 
staff, who can ask Cyber Patrol to stop blocking the site. Everyone 
agrees that the current setup in Austin is a fragile compromise. From 
the point of view of EF-Texas and the ACLU, which calls filtering 
``censorship in a box,'' it is an unacceptable one. ``The least filtering 
we're likely to get is still more filtering than any of us want,'' 
said Jim Robinson, an EF-Texas member who opposes filters. But EF-Texas 
members aren't completely in unison. While Robinson is unwavering 
in his stance against any and all filtering, others, like Lebkowsky, 
are less so. ``There's the potential for libraries to become like 
adult arcades if access to hard-core porn isn't somehow restricted,'' 
said Lebkowsky. He said ``minimal filtering'' might be the solution. 
Ms. Padden, of the PTA spoke out passionately at the community roundtable 
in favor of filtering, yet the computer she has at home is unfiltered. 
When her children go on line, she goes with them. ``I'd like to think 
I've raised my kids with my values, and they respect them,'' she said. 
``But there are probably 10 times more kids whose parents don't have 
the time or the computer capability to understand what their kids 
are looking at or doing at the library.'' Some version of mandatory-filtering 
legislation for public libraries and schools may become law as part 
of the appropriations bill being considered this week in Congress. 
Librarians in Austin and elsewhere are also watching the Loudoun County 
case. Ann Beeson, an ACLU lawyer who spends much of her time on Web 
cases, said: ``We hope the decision coming out of Loudoun will heavily 
influence how other jurisdictions proceed. If we get a strong decision 
in our favor, we'll feel even more confident in challenging other 
jurisdictions trying to impose mandatory filtering.'' Eugene Volokh, 
a law professor at the University of California at Los Angeles, speculated 
that a court might be more likely to accept Internet filtering that, 
like Austin's, would affect only children. ``Then again,'' he added, 
``it's conceivable that a court will say the library has a completely 
free hand, that blocking the Internet is more like not buying the 
book in the first place.'' Ms. Beeson, who is monitoring cases or 
controversies in several cities several cities simultaneously, said 
the ACLU continued to watch Austin closely. ``It's still not off the 
radar screen,'' she said. ``We've just been eminently patient with 
Austin.'' Ms. Beeson said she approved of the plan to place an unfiltered 
machine in every library branch, but she objects to the library's 
uncompromising restrictions on minors, particularly older teen-agers. 
But Ms. Beeson said she also sympathized with Ms. Branch. ``Like many 
librarians, she's been caught between a rock and a hard place,'' Ms. 
Beeson said. ``Her instincts are in all the right places, but she's 
in a very awkward position.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>