<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0022 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In terms of background, culture and appearance, Beatrice Uria-Monzon 
has what it takes to be an exceptional Carmen. Though her family roots 
are partly Spanish, she is French-born and French-trained. What better 
mix to play the iconic Spanish Gypsy of Bizet's great French opera? 
Moreover, Ms. Uria-Monzon, making her Metropolitan Opera debut in 
the first ``Carmen'' of the season, is an exceptionally beautiful 
woman who gave us a lithe, small-framed and unabashedly seductive 
Carmen. That said, Carmen is also an operatic role for a mezzo-soprano, 
and the strictly vocal component of her performance was not consistently 
satisfying. She has a dusky, rich voice that can be quite sizable 
when she unleashes a climactic high note. Curiously for a mezzo-soprano, 
her low range is weak and breathy. At least, it sounded so on this 
occasion, which no doubt was one of high pressure. Some of her phrasing 
was halting and inelegant. This was a steamy interpretation and made 
an impact. But it was the vocal equivalent of Method acting, where 
embodying the character was more important than singing the music, 
and Bizet's arching vocal lines often fell flat. With one exception, 
this was not a night for memorable singing. The American tenor Franco 
Farina was a vocally beefy Don Jose, who summoned considerable power 
for angry outbursts and sporadic top notes, but did not even attempt 
to ascend to the high B-flat in the most mellifluous phrase of the 
lovely aria known as the ``Flower Song'' the way Bizet requests: pianissimo. 
The New York-born baritone Gino Quilico is an attractive actor with 
a robust voice, but as the toreador Escamillo he sounded vocally worn 
on this occasion. The exception was the Korean lyric soprano Hei-Kyung 
Hong, who brought shimmering clear sound, lovely phrasing and affecting 
directness to the role of Micaela. The conducting of David Robertson 
was curious: vigorous and solid in places, tentative and mannered 
in others. Balances seemed not quite right, with inner lines for brass 
instruments often protruding. And for all Robertson's visible attentiveness 
to what was happening onstage, there were noticeable glitches in ensemble 
between the singers and orchestra. The production by Franco Zeffirelli, 
introduced in 1996, remains a chaotic jumble without one insightful 
idea in it. The stage director this time out, David Kneuss, gave more 
helpful attention to the individual performances than Zeffirelli did 
with his cast at the time, which included Waltraud Meier and Placido 
Domingo in the leading roles. But it is still a production dominated 
by a menagerie of animals. So many horses, donkeys and dogs (the latter, 
incongruously, on leashes) crisscross the stage, you feel cheated 
not to see Escamillo fight a real bull. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>