<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0196 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
WASHINGTON _ WHD-TV, the broadcast industry's experimental high-definition 
television station, doesn't have many regular viewers. In fact, the 
actual number is one. Two years ago, it first went on the air here 
in Washington to give broadcasters and equipment manufacturers a signal 
they could use to test their newly designed equipment as they got 
ready for digital broadcasting, which begins Nov. 1. In recent months, 
television manufacturers have been making clandestine trips into town 
with their prototype HDTV receivers, to see how they worked with a 
real, live broadcast signal. But until Oct. 1, no one in the Washington 
area actually had a digital, high-definition television receiver in 
his home. None have yet gone on sale. But at the start of October, 
Panasonic Corp., lent me an advanced prototype of their receiver, 
a set-top box that will reach the stores in a few weeks, along with 
a production model of the company's high-definition monitor, already 
on sale nationwide. With that, in short order, I became WHD-TV's first 
and only regular viewer, ``the only civilian in the nation'' with 
an HDTV, Panasonic informed me. And I learned what thousands of Americans 
will soon discover: Having an HDTV in your home is an experience both 
mesmerizing and frustrating. If you can overcome the sticker shock 
(the Panasonic equipment sells for $7,700) the first problem is getting 
an HDTV into your house. Every manufacturer but one is making rear-projection 
sets, and they are big. The Panasonic monitor, with a 56-inch screen, 
is more than four feet tall, four feet wide and two feet deep. It 
weighs 251 pounds. And this is hardly the biggest of them. (The largest 
Mitsubishi model is more than 6 feet tall and 5 feet wide.) As a two-man 
delivery team struggled to get the Panasonic set off the truck, Preston 
Padden's description of these first-generation HDTV's came to mind. 
When he was president of the ABC Television network early this year, 
he remarked: ``You're going to need a crane to get them into your 
living room. Why, one of them I saw was eight feet wide and five feet 
deep. You'll have to lay a foundation slab for it and build your house 
around it.'' In this case, it turned out that the delivery squad couldn't 
get the monitor down the steps to the basement, into the room specially 
designed for this purpose. (As the TV sat in the yard, there WAS a 
brief discussion of using a crane.) Instead, puffing and groaning, 
they heaved it into the ground-floor living room. And as soon as the 
set was rolled into place, the room's center of gravity seemed to 
shift. This set, like every HDTV to be sold in the next year, is also 
able to receive and display conventional TV broadcasts. That turns 
out to be both a blessing and a drawback. The problem is that high-definition 
programming is generally broadcast in a new, wide-screen format. As 
a result, the Panasonic monitor is shaped more like a movie screen 
than a convention TV screen. That's fine for wide-screen programming, 
but what about all of the square-framed shows filmed and taped over 
the last 50 years? They are shown in a vertical space at the center 
of the screen, with broad gray bands on the left and right, in what 
the industry calls ``letterbox.'' Well, television manufacturers are 
convinced that most Americans don't like letterboxes; they want their 
TV shows to fill up all of the expensive real estate on the screen. 
So Panasonic has included a re-sizing feature that allows viewers 
to stretch the picture so it fills the screen. It worked well enough 
but seemed vaguely dissatisfying, though the exact reason was not 
clear until a movie came on featuring Julia Roberts. Walking down 
a hallway on this stretched screen, she looked like she needed a few 
weeks on a thigh master. Switching back to letterbox immediately solved 
her weight problem. (This is not a criticism of Panasonic's resizing 
technology, particularly. Almost every wide-screen set will offer 
a similar feature with the same benefits and liabilities.) Of course, 
this issue isn't the real point. This set was not for watching conventional 
television. This is a digital, HIGH-DEFINITION TV. Hooking up the 
prototype digital tuner box was simple enough. It is about the size 
of a laptop computer and sat comfortably atop the set, with acres 
of space to spare. Connected to jacks in the back of the television 
and invoked from a remote control, it took over control of the set 
and began looking for digital-television signals. For the foreseeable 
future, viewers will be able to receive high-definition programming 
only over the air. Cable TV stations are not interested in carrying 
it. And while some direct-broadcast satellite services will offer 
a few high-definition channels, viewers will have to buy new dishes 
and set-top boxes, and those won't go on sale until next year. So 
to get 21st-century TV, it is necessary to use mid-20th-century technology 
_ a rooftop TV antenna, preferably with a rotor. The antenna company 
that had installed one on the roof a few weeks earlier had carefully 
labeled the rotor box with little stickers showing which way to point 
the antenna for best reception of the various TV stations in the Washington 
area. The tower and antenna for WHD-TV, channel 30, are right beside 
the tower for WRC-TV, channel 4, the NBC station here. So with the 
antenna carefully aimed at WRC, and the digital tuner box turned to 
channel 30, the first digital, high-definition television set in a 
consumer's home showed _ nothing. Panasonic offered the services, 
by telephone, of several engineers on the tuner-box design team, who 
said they had faced the same problem on a recent trip to Washington. 
``Digital signals are funny,'' one of them explained. You have to 
turn the antenna away from the station by 20 or 30 degrees to get 
a signal. Presumably, most buyers of this box won't be able to call 
up the engineers who designed it. Still, Panasonic says it has advised 
its sales force not to sell customers the huge high-definition monitor 
before determining whether they can pick up a digital signal. But 
in this case, sure enough, with the antenna turned about 20 degrees 
away from straight on, the TV did pick up a signal, of sorts. WHD 
was airing a high-definition tape of a recent Duke-North Carolina 
State football game, recorded by cameramen from WRAL-HD, another model 
station in Raleigh, N.C. But on the monitor, the Duke quarterback 
was caught frozen in the middle of throwing a pass, his arm jerking 
spasmodically back and forth like a battery-operated toy quarterback 
with a stuck joint. Yes, just as the Panasonic engineer said, digital-television 
signals ``are funny.'' On the edge of a clear-reception area, the 
signal doesn't simply grow fuzzier and fuzzier with every passing 
mile, a phenomenon known in the industry as ``graceful degradation.'' 
Instead, digital signals seize up and freeze, as the Duke quarterback 
had done. Finally, with careful adjustment of the antenna rotor _ 
a degree east, two degrees south _ the picture unfroze, and the game 
played on. Even with the difficulties of receiving a signal from what 
is still, admittedly, an experimental station, the advantages of digital 
HDTV are immediately obvious. It doesn't simply offer a clearer, sharper 
picture. Color rendition is vastly improved. So the players' jerseys, 
the grass and the sky seemed to sparkle. Of course the clarity was 
startling, too. For the first time watching a football game on TV, 
it was possible to pick out the faces of individual fans sitting in 
the distant stands. And players tangled on the turf after a violent 
tackle were not just a blurred lump of bodies. They were individuals 
with easily distinguishable arms, fingers, feet _ and anguished looks 
on their faces. But as glorious as the picture looked, it was also 
clear that this television, like almost every high-definition set 
going on sale in the coming weeks, is not capable of displaying full-resolution 
HDTV. Panasonic and other manufacturers had to make several compromises 
to keep the price just below the ionosphere. At several points along 
the signal path inside the set _ from the red, green and blue cathode 
ray tubes that create the picture; through the lenses, past the mirror 
that redirects the signal and through the screen, which acts as a 
filter _ rear projection sets hold a host of resolution-reducing mechanisms. 
It turned out that, over several days, WHD replayed the football game 
repeatedly. In between, the station aired various promotional tapes 
that television stations around the country have made so they can 
demonstrate HDTV to their viewers. In this, the pre-dawn of the digital 
age, there isn't much high-definition material available. None of 
this programming proved terribly interesting after awhile, so as WHD's 
only regular viewer, I called Bruce Miller, the station manager, and 
asked if he would mind putting on a movie, hoping for something like 
video-on-demand from my TV station. ``Sure,'' he said. ``It'll be 
kind of fun; kind of like operating a real broadcast station.'' And 
then he listed the five high-definition films he happened to have 
on hand. I selected ``Lawrence of Arabia,'' for the historical symmetry. 
It was the first movie ever broadcast in digital high definition, 
back in 1986. But it turned out that, at three and one-half hours, 
the film was too long. The station shuts down each day at 6 p.m., 
so the staff would have had to stay late to turn everything off. Instead, 
Miller played ``Sleepless in Seattle.'' And it looked splendid _ bright 
and crystal clear. But about halfway through the movie, the screen 
went blank. The signal was gone. Had the prototype tuner shorted out? 
Had the rooftop antenna slipped out of place by a degree or two? Or 
was there yet another ``funny'' digital dilemma? After a couple of 
minutes, the movie came back. Later, Miller explained. WHD had only 
one video player in house. As a result, midway through the movie, 
one of the station's technicians had to change over to the second 
reel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>