<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0192 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We must have been the only high-tech sightseers within miles. ``Driving 
down the Central Expressway now, and soon we're going to see, uh, 
Applied Materials and National Semiconductor,'' said Ed Pansullo on 
a Thursday morning in Silicon Valley. Pansullo is the only tour guide 
here specializing in technology tours for the public. ``Mitsubishi 
will come up on the left-hand side, and on the right is the new headquarters 
of Yahoo.'' He valiantly tried to sound excited, but through a smoggy 
haze, we stared at darkish office buildings and motionless parking 
lots. In a slapstick effort to stay awake, Pansullo, 49, slapped his 
face with his tie. It isn't easy being a tour guide, or a tourist, 
in Silicon Valley, the 50-mile strip between San Francisco and San 
Jose, Calif. Here is the geographic epicenter of high technology, 
where the computer revolution blossomed, a place that defines American 
innovation and business free-spiritedness. There really isn't a lot 
for your average tourist to see. Still, they come, if not in droves 
at least in twos and threes. They will be turned away from every high-tech 
building (except one), and there are no famous-sites maps or any tour 
guides (except Pansullo), but some techno-tourists will drive aimlessly 
for hours, searching for something, anything, and usually finding 
nothing. ``Tourism reflects recreation, but this is a town about work,'' 
said Jan English-Lueck, an anthropology professor at San Jose State 
University. ``Going to see work is not very much fun. It is not like 
going to a distillery where at the end of the tour you have a sip 
of Scotch. This place is grim. Plus, companies don't want dirty people 
shedding dust particles onto their machines.'' That viewpoint upset 
two German tourists, Dirk Lebert and Dietmar Konermann. They were 
checking out the Intel Museum and were two of the three people in 
it, not counting Pasullo and his one client. They were sweaty and 
mad, having been trying to master the maze of freeways while finding 
something to see. Konermann, a customer service representative for 
Hewlett-Packard, said: ``We drive all day and all we see are highways 
and offices. Ugly. Three days in the Bay Area. One day we dedicate 
to Silicon Valley. Very confusing. And this is what is here? This, 
this . . . museum. Ha! Very, how do you say, ground level. Disappointing.'' 
``Ja, disappointing,'' added Lebert, a systems programmer for a German 
insurance company, who always dreamed of seeing Silicon Valley. And 
the Intel Corporation wants to accommodate him, since it is the only 
company that allows the public past its front door. In 1992 it opened 
the Intel Museum, a 3,500-square-foot shrine to the company in its 
Robert Noyce Building here. Visitors take a self-guided tour, staring 
at Intel memorabilia and reading about the workings of a microprocessor. 
Lebert and Konermann wiped their brows, cursed in German and stormed 
out of the building. Pansullo wants to help people like the apoplectic 
German tourists. ``It's challenging,'' said Pansullo, a graduate of 
the International Tour Management Institute who is trying to build 
a business of guiding tourists around Nerdsville. Pansullo looks like 
a cop straight out of central casting, and he actually is a cop out 
of central casting, having played police officers in ``Repo Man,'' 
``Beverly Hills Cop II'' and ``Sid and Nancy.'' Business isn't great, 
so Pansullo also has his own travel agency, called Seven Seas Travel, 
and still acts. He said there was an explosion of interest in traveling 
to Silicon Valley. He started giving a few tours a year 10 years ago; 
now he gives two tours a month, mostly to techies attending the numerous 
conventions here. They go on a tour, he said, because they get goosebumps 
looking at high-tech historical sites and company headquarters, or 
they want to get a better feel for Silicon Valley, or they're looking 
to kill a few hours. Pansullo charges $150 per tour, which lasts two 
hours. He usually starts at the Intel Museum and ends in downtown 
San Jose at the Tech Museum. The hour and a half in between is the 
tricky part. After we left Intel, Pansullo went over his script, tugging 
on his yellowish mustache. We neared the NASA Ames Research Center. 
``Up the road from there is the Shoreline Amphitheater,'' he said, 
adding that it was a favorite hangout of Steve Wozniak, a co-founder 
of Apple Computer. ``He is often seen at concerts, in his box, with 
his head down like this, staring into his hands.'' Pansullo stared 
at his hands, fluttering his fingers. ``The Woz is carrying on a weekly 
Tetris tournament with his buddies,'' he said, referring to a popular 
video game. ``People see him there, and they say, `I saw you, but 
you didn't seem to be paying attention.' He says: `No, I listen to 
the music. Some people have a poker night; that's my Tetris night.''' 
``People are generally more interested in learning about people rather 
than buildings,'' Pansullo continued, going into a description of 
how Steve Jobs started Apple, was thrown out and is now reviving it. 
But those stories soon run out. ``So here's another portion of Intel's 
campus and a small portion of Hewlett-Packard's campus. Most of H-P's 
research and development and disk drive manufacturing is in south 
San Jose.'' Pansullo looked weary. San Jose had 760,000 visitors last 
year who stayed at hotels, according to the San Jose Convention and 
Visitors Bureau, compared with 500,000 in 1992. Most of those people 
were here on business, but the hospitality industry would like to 
make Silicon Valley more of a destination site. Part of the Visitors 
Bureau's plan focuses on encouraging companies to crack open their 
doors to tourists. ``We're focusing our efforts toward high-tech tourism,'' 
said Leonard Hoops, a spokesman for the Visitors Bureau. Apple Computer 
and Silicon Graphics have obliged, opening company stores where they 
sell merchandise with company logos: T-shirts, umbrellas, golf balls, 
teddy bears. But for outsiders, there's really not much to see. Sometimes 
on a tour Pansullo will get a roustabout who wants to go into an actual 
office building to look around. But that's laughable. In Silicon Valley, 
where the most popular phrase is ``only the paranoid survive,'' forget 
about trying to actually see anything. Unlike companies like Coors 
Brewing Co. and General Motors, businesses in the valley do not give 
public plant tours. ``We have security issues, such as high-tech theft,'' 
said Anne Little, a spokeswoman for Sun Microsystems, echoing the 
most commonly cited reason for dening access to the public. The second 
reason is lack of interest. As hard as Pansullo tries, there is not 
really a big demand. ``I've been a concierge since 1973 and no one 
has ever asked for a tour of Silicon Valley,'' said Tom Wolfe, chief 
concierge at the Fairmont Hotel in San Francisco. Winding down after 
two hours of driving and seeing little except office parks, traffic 
and more office parks, we drove around downtown San Jose looking at 
the outside of the convention center, the arena and some newish hotels. 
Pansullo ended his tour at the new home of the Tech Museum of Innovation, 
a mango-colored building that is to open Oct. 31. ``We hope to inspire 
the innovator in everyone and be the focal point for visitors,'' said 
Peter Giles, chief executive of the $96 million museum. ``We're trying 
to get people excited about technology.'' He expects 700,000 visitors 
in the museum's first year. In one exhibit visitors can go into a 
``clean room'' that looks just like a real working fabrication plant 
_ or take a simulated bobsled ride. Driving away from San Jose, Pansullo 
was optimistic. He said he believed that his business would only increase 
as tourists got to know how really fascinating Silicon Valley could 
be. ``I don't know why it's taken this long,'' he said, ``but San 
Jose has long been the poor stepsister of San Francisco. For some 
reason, it's just not recognized as a tourist destination.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>