<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0186 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Deliriously happy but a bit overwhelmed? Jumping for joy and compulsively 
biting your nails? You must be a bride-to-be. Planning a wedding can 
be a trying experience. In the five months since our engagement, my 
fiance and I have made it a priority to keep a positive attitude. 
But even the most determined couple can fall victim to the pressures 
and oddities involved with putting a wedding together. Already our 
apartment has become crowded with engagement paraphernalia. What do 
we do with the cards, the pattern catalogs and the catering menus? 
How should I organize the guest lists, transportation requirements 
and hotel reservations? I realized I would need some help the day 
my fiance and I stood staring blankly at seemingly indistinguishable 
forks as we tried to choose our flatware pattern. A fork is a fork 
is a fork until you consider eating with it for the rest of your lives. 
It was then that we decided to seek a higher authority. I first tried 
some wedding planner books that I received as gifts. If you take this 
route, there are some wonderful possibilities: books that offer advice 
on every aspect of your wedding and specially designed albums and 
journals to document your event planning. There are even a few that 
offer a combination of organizational tools and etiquette and planning 
advice. These books have areas for writing information and ideas and 
keeping lists. A hard-copy album is great as a memory of the event, 
but it did not accommodate the constant need to edit the written information. 
I then turned to my trusty computer and compiled lists and notes in 
my word-processing and spreadsheet programs. Although that was an 
improvement, I was still searching for a better way. There are a lot 
of different types of software available to help plan a wedding. While 
some are little more than spruced up or preformatted spreadsheets, 
others provide guidance and ideas for planning. I searched for a combination 
that would help me plan the event and avoid etiquette missteps and 
would prevent me from forgetting anything important. All the programs 
reviewed here helped with the guest lists and budgeting, and all three 
helped me accomplish more than I could have done on my own.I looked 
for programs that would take some of the worry out of the planning, 
would help keep track of all the details I was sure I would forget 
and would be fun to use. Above all, I looked for programs that would 
keep the happiness and romance in the planning. That's a lot to ask 
of any piece of software. The Experts On Elegance EMILY POST'S COMPLETE 
GUIDE TO WEDDINGS (Multimedia 2000; $19.95; Windows 3.1 and later.) 
This software is the answer for the traditional yet technologically 
adept bride. It balances planning tools and worksheets with helpful 
and reliable etiquette lessons. Within a week of my engagement, I 
had received a copy of the book ``Emily Post on Weddings.'' The book 
provided more than enough information about how to proceed with plans 
but lacked the organizational details of the CD-ROM to help me with 
the actual planning. The guide is set up as a visit to a professional 
wedding consultant. The opening screen has a video welcome from Elizabeth 
and Peggy Post, relatives of Emily and etiquette experts in their 
own right. In the Planning Center, at the top of the screen is a section 
for personal wedding information and links to different worksheets 
and note cards, which change in each section of the program. On the 
left of the screen is a list of topics on which video or written advice 
is offered. At the top of the list is always advice from Elizabeth 
Post. Most of the other information is presented by Peggy Post. The 
bottom of the screen offers a basic utilities list that remains constant 
throughout the program. There is a planning calendar and notepad, 
and buttons leading to file management, printing, help and exit. The 
most important button on the utilities bar is marked Places to Go. 
That navigational tool links to the program's 12 main sections, which 
include such topics as the budget, guest list, photography and music. 
The true gems of the program are the sections on style. For the botanically 
ignorant, the flower section provides pictures and descriptions of 
many popular flowers as well as advice on purchasing, decorating and 
choosing a bouquet style. The music area has audio clips of traditional 
music for the ceremony. There are also worksheets for both the ceremony 
and the reception. Creating your invitation is a breeze with the Posts' 
help. There is guidance on grammar, timing, paper and font choice 
and invaluable detail about how to handle nontraditional couples. 
Throughout the program, there is concise advice on etiquette. If a 
bride is in the military or from a split family, or if the groom's 
family is serving as host of the wedding, the Post women have the 
answers. There are some cosmetic downsides to this program. The Places 
to Go menu appears on top of the screen and blocks the list of options 
behind it. While the user can close the menu easily, it becomes tedious 
when jumping from screen to screen. The spreadsheet and information 
storage areas of the program are elegantly laid out but a bit difficult 
to get used to. I also found that some of the spreadsheets did not 
cross-reference each other as easily as I would have liked. The strengths 
of the Emily Post program easily outweigh the downsides, and the program 
is beautifully designed and fun to use. It maintains an air of elegance 
and excitement through such stressful topics as whom to invite and 
how to budget. But grooms should take heed: while the information 
in this software is valuable to both of you, the language and tone 
is directed toward your future wife. Keeping Track of Every Detail 
THE ESSENTIAL WEDDING PLANNER (The Learning Co; $14.95, discontinued 
by manufacturer; Windows 3.1 and later.) Are you tied to your Franklin 
Planner or glued to your Week-at-a-Glance? Then this program should 
feel like home. The Essential Wedding Planner is designed to look 
like a six-ring organizer. This organizer, however, has spreadsheets 
and worksheets that go far beyond what can easily be achieved with 
paper and pen. The first section, with a pink tab, is a yearlong checklist 
of what a couple should accomplish by certain dates. The to-do dates 
can be altered by hand if a couple wishes to set their own schedule. 
The checklist breaks up the tasks into 12 manageable steps. The software 
provides an additional page, preformatted as a checklist, for adding 
items specific to your wedding. The announcements section, marked 
with a blue tab, gives you the option of either writing an original 
announcement of your forthcoming marriage or filling in the blanks 
on a preformatted announcement. The yellow-tabbed event schedule acts 
as a calendar, with spaces to enter the dates of wedding-related events 
like showers and engagement parties. The next four tabbed sections 
offer an area for guest information and the tracking of invitations, 
RSVP's, gifts and travel needs. These well-designed pages have fields 
for all the necessary information and display just one guest (or party) 
per page. The invitation-tracking links to the guest information and 
allows you to record which events the guest will or will not attend. 
It does not, however, keep a running total. The gift area takes a 
step beyond many of the available programs and provides a place to 
record up to four gifts per guest (for shower, engagement and wedding 
gifts and one other gift). It also provides a check box for gifts 
that need to be returned and an area to record when you sent a thank-you 
note. All four of these sections cross-reference the guest information, 
so you need to enter data only once. The final two sections, table 
assignments and expenses, are thoughtfully designed and comprehensive. 
While the table assignments area does not take the pain out of deciding 
whom to seat next to that dreadful great-aunt, it provides a useful 
tracking tool. The program graphically shows an area for each table, 
allowing you to better envision your seating decisions. The expense 
area provides a page for each expense, including fields to enter vendor 
names and phone numbers as well as cost. There is a section for writing 
notes about each expense, which is valuable when you are trying to 
lower the cost of some items. A spreadsheet links to this page and 
can be called up at any time to view the overall budget. While the 
simplicity of this program is its greatest strength, it is at times 
also a weakness. The program fails to provide consistent, adequate 
detail. I found that it was easy to draft and print out an announcement, 
but difficult to go back and edit it. The guest section allows you 
to view one guest per page but not the entire list at once. One more 
caveat: the Learning Company recently discontinued this title, but 
it may still be available through many vendors. A Sense Of Romance 
WEDDING WORKSHOP (Micro Precision; $29.99, Macinotsh and Windows 3.1 
and later.) Wedding Workshop is a wonderful combination of planning 
tools and helpful, entertaining advice. It is also graphically appealing 
and extremely thorough. It covered all the topics, concerns and areas 
of potential stress that a couple are likely to encounter while planning 
their special event. The main screen, the Planning Center, offers 
a traditional menu bar along the top. It is here that the user enters 
most financial information. The pop-up menus have areas for estimates 
and expenses for everything from jewelry to the wedding cake and the 
honeymoon. Included on this menu bar are links for guest information, 
a help menu and to-do lists. Unlike the to-do list in other programs, 
these are created by the couple themselves _ a helpul organizational 
lesson in itself. While the manual states that the program provides 
an initial list of tasks, my list was empty. The to-do lists include 
fields for entering each project, the person in charge, the timing 
and the date completed. The menu bar also includes individual reports 
on the many occasions leading to a wedding. The status of guests, 
gifts received, expenses and projects to be completed can be printed 
from this menu bar as well. While I would have liked to have been 
able to have viewed these reports on the screen, the printed reports 
came in handy for times when I was away from the computer and for 
permanent records. The Planning Center screen is filled with 10 buttons, 
each leading to a different section, either organizational or informational. 
There is a utilitarian button for the guest list and for attendant 
worksheets and the overall budget. The attention to detail is impressive. 
Every linked screen offers all the information relevant to the topic. 
There is no need to flip from section to section to find information 
on budgeting, head counts or contacts because the program cross-references 
all details for the wedding couple. For example, the guest list window 
shows a list of all invited guests and a count of how many invitations 
have been sent and how many RSVP's received. Any name can be highlighted 
from the list and details retrieved about that specific guest. There 
is space to list the children invited, and the wording for both the 
inner and outer envelopes, accommodations and the guest's special 
needs. Gift information is available with the click of a mouse, providing 
fields to record gifts for engagement, shower, wedding and other gifts. 
There are check boxes for thank-you's sent and gift descriptions. 
Details about every guest can be found without backtracking to the 
main menu. Another outstanding feature of this program is the availability 
of reference materials on the central screen. While clicking on the 
user's menu was helpful, I was more impressed by the Tips and Etiquette 
and Romantic Ideas buttons. The Tips and Etiquette section consists 
of a 79-page book, which is read using Adobe Acrobat Reader, that 
offers advice on how to plan a wedding and a lot of wonderful tips 
on how to survive the whole experience gracefully. The tips range 
from how to buy a diamond to how to estimate how many guests will 
actually attend. The Romantic Ideas button leads to a copy (Acrobat 
reader again) of Gregory J.P. Godek's book ``1001 Ways to Be Romantic.'' 
It is refreshing that Wedding Workshop remembers why people marry 
in the first place. Here are some Web sites devoted to wedding planning. 
While I would not recommend these as your only planning tools, they 
provide useful contacts and often invaluable supplementary advice. 
THE KNOT: www.theknot.com _ If you decide not to use planning software, 
this comprehensive and extensive site is the best substitute. The 
Knot has many useful, high-quality components, including fashion information, 
a searchable bridal gown database, a gift registry, beauty and etiquette 
tips, and planning and budgeting tools. The planning area is personalized, 
and the budgeting pages keep track of expenses and help you understand 
what factors into each cost. Features include cost information for 
the average American wedding, 56 Ways to Save and a Groom's Section. 
The articles for men are interesting, but the site is not aimed at 
the couple planning their wedding together. WEDDING CHANNEL: www.weddingchannel.com 
_ This provides a wealth of information and links to pages where you 
can make many of your wedding purchases and purchasing decisions. 
You can browse your way through fashion, gifts, accessories and many 
other wedding products and services. The site includes an online registry, 
a virtual store and even a travel agency for honeymoon arrangements. 
The impressive vendor list and business directory are useful both 
for large urban areas and rural areas. The Groom's Section is a nice 
idea but unimpressive. WEDDING BELLS: www.weddingbells.com _ This 
has a simple, easy-to-follow layout and offers links to topics like 
fashion, etiquette, planning, wedding services and travel ideas. The 
Strange but True section provides interesting historical trivia. The 
Trends and Traditions section contains personal anecdotes and traditions 
and trends from around the world. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>