<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0188 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Dan Gosnell, a fire management planner in California for the U.S. 
Forest Service, wishes he had had his service's new technology two 
years ago. It was nearly Thanksgiving when a wildfire flared in Waterman 
Canyon, in the San Bernardino National Forest. Flames jumped the crest 
of the canyon and ripped down the foothills, fueled by 30-mph Santa 
Ana winds. The fire stalked to within a mile of the campus of California 
State University at San Bernardino. During such wildfires, the forest 
service has to worry about more than buildings, however. As they try 
to stop the flames, officials are also concerned with what they may 
accidentally destroy _ say, archaeological deposits _ with their fire-control 
techniques. In this case, the staff archaeologist could not be reached 
for a midnight consultation, so the commander ordered a bulldozer 
to make a break in the 6-foot chaparral to stop the spread of the 
fire. Only later did the firefighters learn that the area was rich 
in Indian artifacts _ a fact they could have found at their fingertips 
using the computerized maps that are now being loaded into commanders' 
trucks. ``If we had known it was full of archaeological sites, we 
wouldn't have called that dozer,'' Gosnell said. The maps are part 
of a system that combines satellite communication, a global positioning 
device to show the vehicle's location and computer mapping software 
that reads the positioning information and shows the locations of 
Forest Service vehicles on digital maps. The computerized maps also 
show the features of the land, including topography, archaeological 
sites and the presence of endangered species. The system was designed 
to help fight the wildfires that rage every year through the mountains 
and deserts of Southern California. Incident commanders, when they 
face these fires, must make a mind-boggling array of decisions. The 
chief question a commander will ask is: Should he risk the wrath of 
the public and allow the fire to burn, to avoid future risks in the 
area, or should he put the fire out? The answer depends on many variables. 
How have fires burned in the area in the past? Is the fire headed 
toward homes? Is it moving into the habitat of an endangered species 
like the bald eagle? Will it threaten endangered plants? Is the area 
full of dry grasses or greener, less flammable chaparral? Based on 
the area's burn history, can the fire be fought by ground crews, or 
must aircraft be called in to drop retardant? The data attached to 
the digital maps can answer all of these questions _ including when 
the last fire burned there and how it behaved. The system helps in 
planning the attack, and if a commander decides to let the fire burn, 
the electronic facts at his fingertips can support the decision. Historically, 
these decisions were made by veteran commanders in the fire service 
who carry much of the information about terrain, vegetation and burn 
history in their heads. But when they retire, they take the riches 
of information with them. The computerized system has drawn praise 
from high-ranking federal officials. Last year, the project was awarded 
a $625,000 grant from Vice President Al Gore's Information Technology 
Innovation Fund. ``I was impressed,'' said Gayle Gordon, chief information 
officer for the Bureau of Land Management and a member of the grant 
committee. ``It was an application that pulled together a lot of technology 
that would make a lot of difference to people on the ground.'' The 
system is now used in the San Bernardino forest, which is an hour 
east of Los Angeles and one of the most-used forests in the nation. 
Filled with lakes, ski resorts and mountains that reach 11,000 feet, 
it is a favorite spot for vacation homes. The 30,000 full-time residents 
occupy fewer than half the houses built in the forest. The Forest 
Service system is also being adapted for other federal agencies that 
control land in the Mojave Desert: the Bureau of Land Management, 
the National Park Service and the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Along 
with the Forest Service, these agencies hold 32 million acres of land 
that runs more than 200 miles south from Death Valley to the Mexican 
border. The number of fire and police incidents handled by these agencies 
increased from 3,400 in 1988 to more than 11,000 in 1996. As part 
of the technology project, Keith rigged a Humvee in Death Valley with 
the system. The hardware requirements for the Humvee, which is used 
for law enforcement, illustrate why a laptop wouldn't do: to keep 
the system working under extreme conditions, the monitor, keyboard 
and other components have been ``ruggedized'' to withstand heat, smoke, 
dust and hard mountain driving. The 4-gigabyte hard drive is bolted 
to the vehicle's floor in a case-hardened ``data brick.'' The equipment 
in Death Valley must withstand temperatures that reach 140 degrees 
in the cab. This special equipment goes into all the vehicles, at 
a cost of $7,000 per system. While few firefighters dispute the system's 
value, some question why so much is being spent for technology tailored 
in-house while the staff is being cut. Elliott Graham, district ranger 
for the Front Country District of the San Bernardino forest, said 
he was afraid the day would come when tourists go to the ranger stations 
and find only computer screens that say: ``There are no more employees 
here. Please push this button.'' ``The Forest Service is downsized 
so bad, we don't have anybody left in the field,'' Graham said. ``We 
need to be high-tech, but it's very expensive.'' Others see environmental 
savings from the system as a result of better firefighting decisions. 
The development of the technology project grew from Keith's regular 
duties, which include building and maintaining radio networks in hard-to-cover 
mountain areas. Because of rapid advances in technology, he must replace 
the entire radio network every 10 years at a present cost of $1.5 
million. Building a satellite communication system, he said, would 
not only insure communications in remote areas for the long term, 
but would also limit the building of ugly mountaintop transmission 
towers that annoy the public. ``We think it's eventually going to 
be cheaper than paying for all our mountaintop signals,'' Keith said. 
The system he designed has been installed in just a handful of vehicles 
so far, but it will go into all command trucks in the San Bernardino 
National Forest this fall; then will gradually be installed in command 
vehicles for all the Federal firefighting agencies in Southern California. 
Also, Keith's plans are well under way for creating advanced features. 
He wants to add a feature in which incident commanders can draw the 
boundaries of a fire, e-mail the map to the dispatch center and automatically 
transmit the map to the Internet. That way, the public could check 
the map on line, and dispatchers would not be bogged down by calls 
from people in Los Angeles asking about the safety of their vacation 
homes. Keith wants to take the system a step further, so that it can 
actually help predict fires. The Forest Service already receives constantly 
updated maps that show lightning strikes. Merge the lightning maps 
with maps of high-risk areas, then, when the lightning starts to strike, 
send aircraft to scout for telltale smoke. ``We know we're going to 
have fires in this forest,'' Keith said. ``We know where they're going 
to be and how they're going to act. Instead of waiting for fires to 
start, and being in emergency mode, why don't we predict where they're 
going to happen? We are trying to build a system that doesn't wait.'' 
So far, the system has proven to be an asset not only in firefighting 
decisions, but in the other emergencies to which Forest Service personnel 
respond. In one case, on a foggy Sunday morning last December, Jim 
Higgins was the first official to reach the scene of a plane crash 
in the San Bernardino Mountains that killed a father and son. As investigators 
headed for the scene, Higgins, a law enforcement officer for the Forest 
Service, consulted his computer. He opened a satellite link from his 
pickup truck. With the help of the truck's Global Positioning Satellite 
device, he pinpointed the location of the crash on a digital map. 
Within one minute of his arrival, he reported the latitude and longitude 
of the crash to the Federal Aviation Administration. Then, as the 
investigators approached, Higgins guided them by radio through every 
turn of the rugged roads to the crash site. Soon, reporters started 
to arrive. When the search and rescue team, the deputy coroner and 
the accident investigators got there, they witnessed an unusual scene: 
a group of reporters flocking around Higgins' truck, gawking at the 
computer screen, leaving the plane crash all but forgotten. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>