<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0194 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Olga Tereshko became an online entrepreneur because of a fussy baby. 
Before Ms. Tereshko's son, Sasha, was born in 1995, she had planned 
to resume her Ph.D. studies in genetics at the University of Pittsburgh. 
Then Sasha arrived, changing everything. ``I realized I couldn't do 
it as soon as he was born,'' she said. ``He was fussy and had to be 
held. I knew he needed me to be in the home. I needed to do something 
that was more flexible.'' But as a mother who was breast-feeding and 
using cloth diapers, she found that many items she wanted to buy were 
not readily available. With Sasha in tow, she would drive 30 minutes 
to a mall to buy nursing bras. She could not find cotton diapers of 
the quality she wanted. She started exploring catalogs, then decided 
that she wanted to make it easier for other mothers to find the supplies 
they needed. Ms. Tereshko was soon on her way to joining the ranks 
of cybermerchants. About eight months after Sasha was born, she made 
up a brochure using Adobe Pagemaker software and began local sales 
of the mother and baby products she liked, including nursing bras 
and several brands of breast pumps. She picked up about 100 customers 
through local hospitals and parent organizations. Both Ms. Tereshko 
and her husband, Dr. David Servan-Schreiber, a psychiatrist, say they 
saw the business as a way to support other parents who shared their 
philosophy about breast-feeding and ``attachment parenting,'' a child-rearing 
approach that encourages breast-feeding and letting a baby's needs 
dictate the schedule for being held or fed. That approach is advocated 
by the authors Dr. William Sears and Martha Sears. ``Most of the business 
was based on this philosophy,'' Ms. Tereshko said. While Ms. Tereshko 
was deciding whether to widen her audience and put her business on 
the Web, she took a class in online information design at Carnegie 
Mellon. She opened Little Koala (www.littlekoala.com) in April 1996. 
The name, she said, came from her habit of holding her son all the 
time, as a mother koala holds its cub. As proof, she displays photographs 
in which she's sitting with her laptop and holding Sasha, who is asleep, 
across her chest. She advertised her catalog and Web site in Mothering 
magazine and a journal from La Leche League, a nonprofit group that 
promotes breast-feeding. While it is certainly true that not every 
business in cyberspace makes money, Ms. Tereshko has found herself 
with a growing business. In the last two months, she has rented office 
space for her inventory and hired two employees (including her mother); 
she estimates that she has 8,000 to 9,000 customers. Her orders are 
increasing at about 10 percent a month, she said. About half her orders 
come through telephone calls and about half come from the Web. ``The 
online business is growing each month,'' Ms. Tereshko said. ``More 
people are getting used to computers and going on line. The Web increases 
your visibility, and business grows faster.'' While no one has exact 
numbers on how many businesses use the Web, experts agree that e-commerce 
is growing. Web businesses can have lower start-up costs because they 
often don't require office space and staff early on or a lot of expensive 
printed material. ``They are coming on line in huge numbers,'' said 
Cheryl Regan, a spokeswoman for Network Solutions (www.networksolutions.com) 
of Herndon, Va., which registers .com addresses on the Internet. In 
a survey of 1,000 small businesses, Network Solutions found that 61 
percent did not have a presence on the Web. But more than half of 
the businesses that had Internet access but no Web page said they 
at least planned to get a Web address in the next year. Ms. Regan 
said a small business paid $119 for a domain name for two years. ``Our 
whole marketing effort is the small business market,'' Ms. Regan said. 
``It's really starting to take off.'' Studies show that about 2.5 
million of the nation's 7 million small businesses have some access 
to the Internet, she said, but not necessarily Web sites. There ``are 
very few brands that have been built solely on the Web,'' said Jeff 
Levy, chief executive of Relevant Knowledge, a company he started 
two years ago in Atlanta that tracks Web usage. ``You can market solely 
on the Web if you are only trying to reach people on line.'' The Web 
reaches about 25 percent of the people in this country. Web users 
tend to be wealthier, younger, more literate and better educated than 
the population of the nation as a whole. But those demographics are 
changing: the average Web user is starting to look more and more like 
the average American. Levy said that in the last year, the number 
of people using the Web had risen to 53.4 million from 44 million. 
``Starting a business is a very difficult thing on the Web or in the 
bricks-and-mortar world,'' Levy said. ``At the end of the day, if 
you want to sell something, you need to create demand. The challenge 
is creating awareness and building your brand. One advantage of the 
Web is you have international reach.'' While Ms. Tereshko, who is 
30, started using the Web in her early 20s for school research and 
word processing, she was never a regular Web surfer. But in business, 
she banked on the notion that other parents were looking for the same 
kinds of products that she had sought. She figured that those who 
were in other parts of the United States or other countries might 
find her on the Web. Ms. Tereshko has found clients in Europe, Japan 
and throughout the United States, she said. Quality breast-feeding 
equipment, like pumps, she said, and good books about breast-feeding 
are not always easy for new mothers to find. ``A customer in Idaho 
tells me she can't find anything there,'' she said. Ms. Tereshko first 
went on line with about 15 products, an e-mail address and a toll-free 
phone number. Adobe Pagemaker and Photoshop software allowed her to 
build her catalog on line. She did not accept credit cards at first, 
but she did offer a payment plan for parents who could not afford 
to pay in one lump sum. She also offered a choice of free books promoting 
attachment parenting and breast-feeding to anyone who ordered at least 
$150 worth of products. About four months ago, she added a feature 
that lets a shopper put items in a ``shopping basket,'' or take things 
out, while browsing, then order all the desired items at once. ``I 
didn't do everything at once,'' Ms. Tereshko said. ``I spaced things 
out. I started with a black-and-white catalog and added the color 
later.'' Printing catalogs costs more than $1 apiece, while the software 
to put together a cybercatalog means a onetime cost of about $1,000. 
The online catalog has another advantage: it can be continually updated 
and edited. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>