<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0018 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Finally imitating themselves instead of a weak-hitting team struggling 
for runs, the Yankees forged ahead to the World Series on Tuesday 
night in a game that was filled with plays that could only be described 
as inexplicable. The Yankees' conquest of the Cleveland Indians in 
the American League Championship Series, secured with a 9-5 victory 
in Game 6 at Yankee Stadium, was completely understandable. The Yankees 
won 114 games during the season; the Indians 89. The Yankees outscored 
their opponents by 309 runs; the Indians outscored theirs by 71. But 
before the teams parted ways for the winter, they tiptoed through 
a maze of plays that left many in the crowd of 57,142 scratching their 
heads when they weren't roaring for the Yankees or jeering the Indians. 
Ted Hendry, the second base umpire, was involved in two of the head-scratching 
plays that turned out to have major impacts on the game. Hendry was 
the home plate umpire in Game 2 when he made a call that had the greatest 
impact on the outcome of any game in the series: He ruled no interference 
on Travis Fryman as he ran inside the line to first. Unlike the verbal 
eruption of the Yankees' owner after that game, not a word was heard 
Tuesday night from George Steinbrenner about Hendry's intrusion on 
the outcome. The pivotal play of the game came in the third inning. 
With Bernie Williams at first, Chili Davis rapped a grounder between 
first and second. Enrique Wilson fielded the ball and bounced a throw 
to second, where Omar Vizquel appeared to force Williams. But Hendry 
ruled that Vizquel came off the base before he caught the ball, meaning 
Williams was safe. Television replays clearly showed that Vizquel's 
foot remained on the base as he caught the ball, but that electronic 
image did not help the Indians. Charles Nagy retired the next two 
batters, meaning the Indians should have been out of the inning. But 
with only two out, Scott Brosius was able to bat, and he slugged Nagy's 
first pitch over the center field fence for a three-run home run that 
doubled the Yankees' lead to 6-0. On that play at second, Hendry used 
his hands to make his call. In the fifth inning, another part of his 
body came into play. With Cleveland runners at first and third and 
no one out, Vizquel lashed a line drive that was headed for single 
territory in right center field. But Hendry was in the ball's path, 
and it struck him smack on the rear end. Hendry thus became the second 
member of the six-man umpiring crew to be hit by a ball in this series. 
In Game 4, Jim McKean, also umpiring at second base, was in the way 
of a throw by Sandy Alomar Jr. when Derek Jeter was trying to steal 
second. The ball hit McKean and caromed into right field, enabling 
Jeter to continue to third. Under the rule governing Vizquel's batted 
ball, Wilson had to remain at third on what was credited as a single 
instead of scoring the Indians' first run. But at least he wound up 
scoring on an ensuing bases-loaded walk to David Justice, and later 
in the inning, Jim Thome hit a grand slam, slashing the Yankees' lead 
to 6-5. The Yankees, however, increased their lead with the aid of 
an unusual play and another weird one. When Brosius led off the sixth 
inning with a grounder to short, Vizquel fired the ball high past 
first for an error. The slick-fielding shortstop had not made an error 
in his previous 17 league series games _ tying the record _ and in 
46 post-season games. A walk and an out then set the stage for the 
weird play. Jeter started it by crushing a Dave Burba pitch to the 
right field fence. Manny Ramirez, one of the most adventuresome outfielders 
in the game, raced to the fence and leaped against it, but he did 
not look back to see where the ball was. Maybe he thought the ball 
would bounce off his head and Kenny Lofton, the trailing center fielder, 
could catch it on the rebound. The ball, however, missed Ramirez's 
head, hit the base of the wall and became a two-run triple. Jeter 
then scored on a single by Bernie Williams. Eyewitnesses to this baseball 
version of ``The Twilight Zone'' should have known they were in for 
a weird one from the very first play of the game. Lofton bunted along 
the third base line, and the ball rolled on the chalk line itself 
and appeared to be veering foul. Instead of letting it go foul, Brosius 
picked up the ball and threw it wildly past first. Vizquel, the next 
batter, immediately added to the bizarre proceedings. He went to bat 
with 8 hits in his previous 11 at-bats and 10 hits in 20 at-bats altogether 
in the series, but he bunted with two strikes and fouled off the pitch 
for a strikeout. But he would not be alone in executing that play. 
Chuck Knoblauch did the exact same thing in the sixth inning before 
Jeter's triple. Alomar chipped in with yet another bizarre bunt attempt. 
His came in the second inning with runners at first and third and 
one out. The Indians, losing 2-1 at the time, needed a hit there, 
not a bunt. Alomar fouled off the bunt, then struck out. Of all of 
the participants who were involved in inexplicable plays, Alomar might 
have had the best excuse. He had missed the previous game and a half 
with a lower back ailment, had received a cortisone shot so he could 
play and walked and bent over like a man with a bad back. Now Alomar 
will have four months to rest his back. The Yankees don't have any 
time to rest. But then, they're grateful they don't. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>