<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981014.0021 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is a time for loyalty and convention in baseball. It is called 
the regular season. When they start hanging the bunting from the facades, 
a baseball manager must sometimes be blatantly expedient. Joe Torre, 
known for his loyalty to the troops, stayed with David Cone for one 
batter too long Tuesday night. It cost the Yankees a grand slam by 
Jim Thome and frightened most Stadium fans into catatonia, if you 
can imagine that, but the Yankees held on for a 9-5 victory over the 
Cleveland Indians to win the American League pennant, and everybody 
found their voices again. This team won 114 games during the regular 
season and swept Texas three straight in the division series, almost 
awesomely, and was being measured against the best teams in history 
_ Murderers' Row of 1927, the 1961 Yankees of Mantle and Maris and 
Ford, the Big Red Machine of Cincinnati in the '70s. Now the Yankees 
can wait for the National League to wrap up its affairs down in Atlanta, 
and then they will try to join the great teams that won from April 
all the way through October, as long as there were games to be played. 
When the reek of Champagne is purged from the catacombs of Yankee 
Stadium in a day or two, Torre will need a pitching rotation for the 
World Series. Orlando Hernandez, the Cuban exile who rescued the Yankees 
in their darkest hour in Game 4 against the Indians, seems the obvious 
third horse right now, which is the only time frame that matters. 
Immediacy was the reason Bruce Bochy went with his ace, Kevin Brown, 
when San Diego had a chance to scuttle the Braves in Mission Bay on 
Monday night. Brown had been dominating the postseason, an angular 
athlete, larger than life, hitting and running and pitching with a 
glow to him like some nobleman in an El Greco painting. The move did 
not work, but Bochy had the right idea. Torre was supportive of Bochy's 
move, noting that Brown was well rested. The Yankee manager also has 
an affinity for his veterans, which is admirable, but has its drawbacks. 
Last year Cone convinced the Yankees that he was healthy, and he has 
regretted his optimism ever since his arm wore down, and the Yanks 
lost to the Indians. Tuesday night, Torre visited the pitching mound 
twice in the fifth inning, once with a trainer when Cone seemed to 
have a physical problem, but the pitcher said he was fine. Thome wound 
up hitting one into the upper deck, which would have awed David Wells, 
who admires the moon shots he delivers, but Cone seemed merely sick 
about it. The Yankees survived the stunning barrage, but now Torre 
faces another conflict. Early in the World Series, he will need a 
third pitcher, either Hernandez or Andy Pettitte, who has won 55 games 
in the past three years but lost his edge late this season. After 
the three-game sweep of Texas, Torre said Hernandez had assumed he 
would automatically start the first game in the league series, and 
that Torre had to explain that Wells and Cone and Pettitte were still 
1-2-3. Asked about this on Monday, Hernandez said in Spanish that 
he had not been surprised by the rotation, that ``it doesn't matter 
if I'm the 10th pitcher on this team.'' When the Yanks were down, 
two games to one, Hernandez had not pitched in 15 days. During his 
enforced vacation, Hernandez waited around, enjoying the amenities 
of a major league clubhouse, all the tastes and luxuries that were 
impossible when he was the best pitcher in an impoverished island 
fortress. Suddenly, they were on the eve of destruction until El Duque 
_ what? swaggered? sauntered? strolled? _ out to the mound, breaking 
the two-game losing streak and guaranteeing the Yankees a return trip 
to Yankee Stadium, where nature took its course. ``He brought us back 
to life,'' Wells said Monday. ``That was the key,'' Chili Davis said 
Monday. ``Nobody wanted to be down, 3-1, in Cleveland.'' El Duque 
refused to say that it was the biggest game in his life. There were 
games against Nicaragua or Australia, Italy or Mexico, that mattered 
very much to Fidel Castro and the fans in Cuba. Last December, Hernandez 
survived a voyage on the open sea, and George Steinbrenner spent a 
chunk of his cable television swag for the Cuban pitcher who won 12 
games and lost 4, with an earned run average of 3.13. With all due 
respect for loyalty, El Duque is the one player who saved this series, 
and put the Yankees in position to achieve that superlative season 
for all seasons. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>