<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981014.2000.2998 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
No matter how you slice it, onions are bringing tears to the eyes 
of the people of India these days and to some of their politicians. 
Because of bad summer weather, India's onion crop was not as good 
as usual. The result, onions that normally cost ten cents a pound 
are now getting up to seventy cents a pound and the onions aren't 
that good. The shortage has provoked street protests, rioting and 
at least one political resignation. The World's Tinku Rey is in Calcutta. 
Tinku, how did onions of all things get to be such a political bellwether 
in India? Basically, here in India, people take the onion for granted. 
It's from the poorest of the poor for whom a daily meal consists of 
say rice and aroggi and a raw onion. So as you can see, if the price 
of onions rises beyond the means of the average person, I mean, the 
housewife feels that, you know, her fundamental rights have been violated. 
Indeed, and has led to enormous anger. I mean, it's probably hard 
to imagine how expensive seventy cents a pound is to an Indian. But 
how have people been reacting to the rise in the cost? There have 
been holding of onions. There have been sort of mobs attacking truckloads 
of onions that have been coming into the capital especially, because 
of course, Delhi being a nonproducing area has to rely on its neighboring 
states for its produce and therefore, the reaction has been quite 
phenomenal. It's not just anger, I suppose, but the fear as well, 
considering what an absolute basic this is of the Indian diet. What 
has the ruling party, the Hindu Nationalist Party, the B-J-P, done 
to help ease the problem? Well, the B-J-P led government have been 
very slow to react which is quite surprising considering the political 
significance of the onion because if we think back to the early '80s 
when Indira Ghandi was trying to get back into power, the onion, the 
rising price of onions was the issue which she actually rode back 
to power on. And at that time, the present prime minister, A. B. Vajpayee 
and his right-hand man, the home minister, L. K. Advanti were both 
ministers in that noncongress led government. So it's really surprising 
that the B-J-P government has actually forgotten its onions, so to 
speak, because it's sort of like a combination of apathy and incompetence 
really. How deep does this problem go? It began as a result of bad 
weather. Onions obviously aren't the only crop that grows in India 
that's going to be affected by that. Are there larger economic problems 
affecting just vegetables in general there? Yes, there is. I mean, 
it's not just the onion. It's been vegetables across the market, all 
vegetables, all staple diet vegetables like potatoes and others as 
well as wheat and rice. So the problem is great here and people, of 
course -- I mean, the B-J-P government was riding high. There was 
a national swell of pride after the nuclear tests in May, but now 
they're really coming back to earth with a real bump because it's 
not the mushroom cloud that the people want but it's the basic onion 
which they're clamoring for. The World's Tinku Rey speaking to us 
from Calcutta. Thank you, Tinku. You're welcome, Tony. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>