<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981014.2000.0645 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Joseph Nye is an East Asian political expert and dean of the Kennedy 
School of Government at Harvard University. He says China and Taiwan 
should take the long term view during their talks this week. Taiwan 
needs to think about its long term political future and if it moves 
in the direction of independence, it risks alienating the United States 
when President Clinton just recently said in China, when he was in 
Shanghai, that we would not recognize independence for Taiwan and 
Taiwan needs to then think about ways in which they can get concessions, 
more international living space as they put it, from China, short 
of independence. And on the other hand, China, realizing the Americans 
have said that they will not allow this to be resolved by the use 
of force, that they need to start moving forward with Taiwan if they're 
going to make progress on some eventual reconciliation. How do the 
Taiwanese in general feel about the fact that the United States is 
no longer the sponsor of their own independence that it used to be, 
that in one way or other, it is pushing harder and harder for Taiwan 
and China ultimately to become China? The American policy of essentially 
one China goes back to the Nixon Administration. So in that sense, 
it's more than a quarter of a century now that we've had this policy. 
They may be used to it, in other words, but do they like it? I don't 
think they like it. I mean, they'd love to have the Americans give 
them a blank check which they would fill in for independence and then 
have the Americans protest them. That's not what our Taiwan Relations 
Act says. Our Taiwan Relations Act passed by the Congress in '79 when 
we switched recognition from Taipei to Beijing, says that we will 
help Taiwan to defend itself and our statements have been that we 
do not want this resolved by force. Then the feeling is somehow that 
Taiwan really doesn't need any further political protection against 
the possibility of a political takeover by China? Well, I don't think 
China is capable of invading Taiwan at this point and the United States 
has reiterated the point a number of times that it does not want to 
see this resolved by force and we did send two carriers off the coast 
of Taiwan in '96 when the Chinese were sending missiles into the waters 
just off the Taiwan coast. So I think the United States has made clear 
a number of times that it does not want to see this resolved by force. 
But, I think the prospects for having essentially what Clinton called 
the three no's which was no independence for Taiwan is an easy summary 
of them but adding a fourth no which is no use of force. I think that 
is a reasonably stable interim solution while Taiwan and China develop 
the ties between them which might eventually resolve the problem. 
What are the U.S. interests in forging this closer and closer link 
between Taiwan and China, even possibly at the expense of what might 
be the Taiwanese political and economic system? Well the United States 
has an interest in maintaining political freedom, democracy and a 
free market in Taiwan. We also have an interest in maintaining good 
relations with China, of avoiding a war with China and hoping that 
China will evolve in the direction of more democracy and more free 
market relationships. So essentially, the American position is telling 
both sides, don't rock the boat. Let political and social change and 
economic change evolve and we'll find a situation in the future where 
this won't be such a problem as it is today. Joseph Nye is dean of 
the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>