<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981014.2000.1578 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Western nations risked throwing poorer people to the wolves in their 
attempts to rescue the global economy. So says this year's winner 
of the Nobel Prize for economics. I'm Richard Griffiths at the Business 
desk in New York and I've been speaking today to the man himself. 
An Indian economist based at Cambridge University in England, Amartya 
Sen has won the prize for his work on the causes of famine and poverty, 
his subject matters in stark contrast to that of last year's winners 
of the prize who were chosen for their work on financial derivatives 
in rich Western economies. They went on to become partners in that 
stricken hedge fund, long term capital management. Amartya's work, 
though, focuses upon the poorest members of society and he challenges 
the view that a shortage of food is the only explanation for famine. 
I asked him earlier here in New York to define his economic vision. 
I've had a kind of variety of interests but one of these, certainly 
of biding concerns, has been an interest in the downside of the economy. 
How much has your concern for the plight of the poor driven your theory 
on economics? I think everyone's concerned about those who do badly, 
actually. It's a question of how much prominence we give to their 
-- in their professional work to that. But poverty, of course, is 
not a characteristic, only one of development. I mean, it's also, 
you know, their degradations take many different forms. I mean, just 
to give an example, in the United States, 43 million people don't 
have medical insurance. Quite a lot of them have a real problem arising 
from that. What's your view on the economic crisis that's affecting 
particularly the emerging markets of the word? One has to view the 
problem with great seriousness, I believe. I think we are close to 
are recessionary situation. Having said that also, these are remedial 
problems. We need institutional reform. We need particular attention 
being paid to the things that cause this problem and at the same time, 
particular attention being paid to the underdogs of society who get 
thrown out. I mean, it's not the main thing about, the main news about 
the economy is not -- that the average income has fallen but that 
some people have been thrown to the wolves. And it's that that you 
have to concentrate on at this time in dealing with -- in forming 
a kind of reasoned approach, reasoned and humane approach to these 
economic difficulties we are seeing around the world now. The views 
of Amartya Sen, this year's winner of the Nobel prize for economics. 
That's our look at global business this Wednesday. For The World, 
I'm Richard Griffiths in New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>