<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981014.2000.2389 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Susan Rice is Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs. She's 
in Washington. What lessons can a person in your position not only 
learn from Rwanda but apply? Well, I think one of the sad lessons 
of the Rwandan genocide is that the international community and the 
countries of Africa do not yet have in place rapid response capabilities 
so that they are able to respond with troops or other forms of intervention 
that could stop such a horror in the future. That's why the United 
States, following the Rwandan genocide, began investing in something 
called the African Crisis Response Initiative which is designed to 
help train and provide nonlethal equipment to African militaries so 
that it could potentially respond to a situation like a recurrent 
genocide whether it might happen in Rwanda or in the Congo or in Berindia 
or in any other part of Africa or in fact the world. Well let's take 
a look at Congo. You did mention it and that's something that's very 
much on people's minds. In a sense you could say that Rwanda was yesterday 
but Congo could be tomorrow. What do you do? How do you disentangle 
a situation like that with the kind of capacity, capability you're 
talking about? Well, this is truly a difficult and complex problem 
and this is not a situation that kind be solved simply by the insertion 
of peacekeeping troops. There has to be a comprehensive diplomatic 
solution that gets to the fact that the Congolese have never enjoyed 
the benefit of a democratic inclusive government where the rights 
of all of its citizens are respected. The hopes had been raised when 
President Kabila came to power. Unfortunately, they haven't been fulfilled. 
But there's also an external dimension to the problem. Congo has been 
a safe haven and a launching pad for insurgent organizations that 
are attempting to destabilize Congo's neighbors which we have made 
plain we in no way condone. We have tried to stress the importance 
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Congo and the 
fact that cross border military activity is not acceptable under any 
circumstances. That would mean officially that the U.S. is lending 
its support to the president of the Republic of Congo. We are not 
lending our support to any side in this conflict. It would be a mistake 
to talk in terms of support for the government of Congo. What we do 
support are the people of the Congo who have, I think, suffered far 
too long under repressive leadership. Their aspiration has long been 
for democracy and we will continue to work with the government of 
Congo and the people of the Congo to help them realize that ambition. 
Some people would say, though, that there is no such thing as a single, 
the people of the Congo, that in a way, depending on how far back 
you want to take the problem, it began with internal dissensions within 
the Congo. How then do you know who the Congolese people are? I think 
that's a dangerous misperception. If you spend some time in the Congo, 
I think you will discern a remarkable sense of national identity that's 
endured, in spite of many efforts to see that country fragment. I'm 
sure you'd agree, Assistant Secretary Rice, that anybody listening 
to a discussion of this kind who didn't know the area would have their 
heads spinning at this point and that in a sense, there's a problem 
of education in this country about what Africa is and what its problems 
are. Well, I think there's still a great deal of misunderstanding 
and lack of information about Africa. But increasingly, I think it's 
important that the American people recognize that we have long term 
political and economic interests in Africa. It's a large emerging 
market and as we saw, most unfortunately following the bombings of 
our embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, that we need strong partners 
in Africa to combat common threats to our national security. Susan 
Rice is Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs in Washington, 
D.C. Thanks again. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>