<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981014.2000.0404 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
but today's top story comes from Shanghai where China and Taiwan held 
their highest level meeting in five years. These are not formal talks. 
They're billed as an informal get together and the goal is modest, 
to improve the atmosphere between the East Asian rivals. They've been 
enemies since 1949 when Mao Tse-Tung's communist forced Shanghai Czechs 
nationalists off the mainland. Three years ago, tensions rose dangerously 
high when Beijing launched missiles and war games near the island. 
After today's meeting, aides to the negotiators said the first day's 
talks occurred in a peaceful atmosphere. The BBC's Duncan Hewitt examines 
the atmosphere over China and Taiwan more closely in this report from 
the Chinese capital. In a Beijing theatre, a young Taiwanese drama 
group performs a show of mime and dance. The theme, life in the next 
century. Such cultural exchanges seem to bridge the gulf left by decades 
of separation. Yet in this case, there's some doubt amongst the audience 
whether it succeeded. I don't understand the drama. Yeah, it's -- 
I think it's very difficult to understand but I like the music. Their 
style is a bit abstract. It's not easy for mainland people to accept 
this kind of thing because our thinking and our background are different. 
This is very abstract. For the company's Taiwanese director, Weiying 
Jin there's a sense of distance too. Of course we can learn from each 
other, but there's a kind of difficulty in understanding each other. 
To tell the truth, it's hard to know what kind of place China is. 
Personally, it feels like coming to a different country to perform. 
Yet for one section of Taiwan's population, the mainland has become 
anything but alien. In a factory in the suburbs of Beijing, packets 
of processed meat are being loaded up for delivery. The company Zono, 
Wooton Cin is one of thousands of Taiwanese businessmen with investments 
in the Chinese capital. He says the appeal of the mainland is growing 
all the time. China's done well in the Asian crisis and the investment 
environment is better than other countries now. Of course, there's 
the big market, the shared language and culture. So Taiwanese investors 
like to invest here and I think the distance between the two sides 
is shrinking all the time. For Taiwanese business people, dialogue 
is an important confidence booster with the hope of new investment 
protection guarantees. Yet the gulf between the politicians remains. 
China demands political negotiations leading to reunification. Taiwan 
says Beijing must first abandon its right to use force against the 
island and become a democracy. Pungh Mingh, head of a private think 
tank in Beijing, says China should lure Taiwan with a looser alliance, 
a confederation in which both sides would retain their separate structures 
and Taiwan would have greater control of its foreign policy. Mr. Pungh 
argues that there's no time to waste. Because Taiwan's own culture 
is very developed, a lot of Taiwanese people don't recognize they're 
Chinese. They think they're Taiwanese and this feeling is getting 
stronger. It will be even stronger in the next generation. So if we 
don't solve this problem now, it'll be even harder. If we propose 
the idea of confederation now, people might agree. But if we wait 
longer, they won't even accept that. Chinese officials have rejected 
the idea of confederation, saying the suggestions currently on the 
table will provide Taiwan with all the guarantees it needs. Yet despite 
the restart of dialogue, many observers believe new ideas are likely 
to be required if the two sides are to be brought closer together 
after so many years. The BBC's Duncan Hewitt reporting from Beijing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>