<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981014.1700.3195 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's time for our weekly look at the most popular films at North American 
theaters. Alan Silverman has a look at the top five films starting 
with the weeks lone new entry at number 5. Jeff Goldblum and Eddie 
Murphy co-star in "Holy Man", with Murphy as the title character-an 
enigmatic spiritual guide who gets his message out on a home shopping 
television channel. It's a romantic comedy and the movie is about 
the presishness of time. How much time people waste doing mindless 
things, you know. How it's important to spend your time doing things 
that are meaningful. That's what the movie's saying in a nutshell. 
And I didn't think that was preachy, heavy thing that would weigh 
people down. Like wow, I do need to get organized. It was saying something 
that was light, you know, that everybody can relate to. Murphy hit 
big earlier this year with "Dr. Dolittle". But, "Holy Man" didn't 
have a prayer at the box office with scathing negative reviews from 
most critics. It's one of the comic actor's most disappointing debuts 
in terms of ticket sales. "Holy Man" makes it debut at number five. 
A TV inspired comedy is held over in fourth place. Based on a sketch 
from the popular TV comedy show "Saturday Night Live", "A Night At 
The Roxbury" stars SNL alumni Will Farrell and Chris Catan as hopeless 
squares desperate to be swingers. "A Night At The Roxbury" swings 
on at number four. One man's personal heaven is revealed in a most 
remarkable way in "What Dreams May Come", starring Robin Williams 
as the departed soul who can't find peace until he's reunited with 
the love of his life. Co-starring Cuba Gooding, JR and Annabelle Schiora, 
"What Dreams May Come" slips a spot to third place. Moving back up 
to number two, "Rush Hour", the action comedy match-up of Asian action 
star Jackie Chan and American Comic Chris Tucker. They play police 
officers from opposites sides of the Pacific together in Los Angeles 
to crack a high profile kidnap case. "Rush Hour" remains a solid audience 
favorite and hangs on in second place. But, once again, the top spot 
goes to animated insect antics. "Antz", that's spelled ANTZ, features 
Woody Allen as the voice of Z, a worker ant who dreams of a better 
life. The a-list voice talent in "Antz" also includes Sharon Stone 
as the princess who will someday be queen of the anthill. It's incredibly 
fun. It's more work than you think and there's no money in it, so 
you have to really love the project. You have to be willing to do 
that. What they did to make it wonderful for me and part of it is 
because they did a lot of the animation in San Francisco is I could 
be at home. And they could call me and say, "Can you come in for two 
hours or one hour, or four hours". And it was really simple. I could 
throw on my sandals and go over there and sit in a dark room and be 
creative without the whole three-ring circus of hair and make-up and 
lights and the thing and deal, which, of course, is the circus I love, 
but it was nice to be able to that and be at home. With a witty script 
and ingenious computer animation, "Antz" wins first place again for 
the second week in a row, the most popular movie at North American 
theaters. Alan Silverman for the Voice of America in Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>