<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981014.1700.1365 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, for 30 years, Artist Robert Cottingham has been creating images 
that reflect America's urban landscape. His prints and paintings aren't 
of city skylines, but of commercial store fronts and neon signs that 
remind us of an earlier era. An exhibition of Mr. Cottingham's prints 
is now on display at the National Museum of American Art here in Washington 
where VOA's Susan Loge spoke with artist about his work. Robert Cottingham 
knew when he saw his first painting by realist Edward Hopper that 
he wanted to be an artist. He was 12-years old. He went on to become 
an art director of a major advertising firm. And while that experience 
may have had an impact on his art, it is not the reason he choose 
commercial signs as his subject matter. The imagery itself, I think, 
came back from when I was visiting Manhattan with my father when I 
was a kid. We lived in Brooklyn and he would take me over to see Times 
Square which was the place to go in those days. And the excitement, 
just the thrills of seeing these signs, coming out of the subway at 
Time Square and looking up and seeing these spectacular signs all 
around. There was an excitement and vitality to this that I hadn't 
seen even in Brooklyn. The first gallery of the exhibit at the National 
Museum of American Art echoes Robert Cottimngham's childhood memories. 
One is surrounded by images of signs skewed at dramatic angles and 
viewed from below. Only many of these signs are shown not in their 
entirety, but in close up cropped images: Orph from Orpheum on a theater 
marquee, Hot from a hotel sign. Robert Cottingham says he gets his 
inspiration for what he calls his Facade Series from actual signs. 
He uses a camera like a sketchbook and keeps the slides he takes on 
file. On one trip, funded by the National Endowment For The Arts, 
he traveled to the Northeastern US and took 2000 slides. I did the 
whole Northeast. I did 27 cities in the Northeast, all by bus, the 
Greyhound bus. And the bus always took me right down town, right where 
the action was, that's where the terminals were. So, I would shot 
up several rolls, however many I could in that afternoon or that morning. 
Jump on the bus and go to the next city. It gave me thousands of slides 
which I still use today. It's been one of the most beneficial things 
I've ever done. When Robert Cottingham finds a sign that interest 
him, he may make some adaptations especially in the wording before 
creating a painting or print. I'm especially intrigued by words that 
I think of as very American. If I think of words that I haven't seen 
as signs, I'll put them in a diary. I will sometimes find that a sign 
has a terrific structure. It has the texture and the materials that 
I think would make an interesting painting, but the word is wrong. 
This is one. It was a drug store and it just said Drugs. If I had 
painted this as saying Drugs, it would have had a different meaning, 
the paint is flaking off the sign. It would have been an image about 
deterioration and I was looking for something a little more uplifting 
than that. So, blues happened to be one of the words that I'd already 
written in my diary. And I felt that if there's anything American 
it's blues. So, here was a chance to do that and use the word also 
to signify what the painting was about. There are various of shades 
and colors and hues of blues here. It's important to Robert Cottingham 
that his images convey a sense of the United States. He considers 
himself an American artist. And even though he spent four years living 
in Britain, he says he continued to paint strictly American subject 
matter. The four years we lived in London, I made several trips back 
to the States. Even though they had signs and they had very interesting 
signs, which we collect. We have a house full of English advertising. 
But, that's a collection. That's not subject matter. For me, it had 
to be American and what I could relate to in the most fundamental 
way. This is what I grew up with. But, Mr. Cottingham says the commercial 
signs he grew up with are beginning to vanish from US cities. And 
while he never intended to document them, that has definitely been 
a byproduct of his work as an artist. It in advertantly is exactly 
what I've been doing. I have thousands of slides. They're not necessarily 
great slides either, but they give me the information I need for what 
I'm going to do with them. And yes, I think-these icons that are sort 
of disappearing from the American scene. It's hard to avoid that. 
I think that is part of it. But what I'm really trying to get at this 
sort of tone or the vitality or the electricity that these things 
had in terms of texturing the whole city or a downtown area. This 
is what our downtown's are about in mid-20th century. Robert Cottingham 
admits he's a romantic. While he's begun to explore other imagery 
in addition to his Facade Series, they too are icons from America's 
past; railroads and manual typewriters. An exhibition of more than 
70 images by the artist is currently on view at the National Museum 
of American Art. I'm Susan Loge. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>