<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981014.0600.0355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tough talk and the threat of military action have produced a commitment 
from Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to comply with U.N. demands 
to withdraw surge forces from Kosovo and start negotiations with ethnic 
Albanians there. U.S. Envoy, Richard Holbrooke brokered the agreement 
while NATO kept up pressure with threats of an air strike. VOA's Laurie 
Kasmen looks up the effectiveness of the so called big stick approach 
to diplomacy. U.S. Envoy, Richard Holbrooke spent more than forty 
hours in often heated discussions to convince Yugoslav President Milosevic, 
the only way to avoid a NATO air strike would to be comply with U.N. 
demands. In the end, Mr. Milosevic is agreement coincided with NATO's 
approval of military action. Analyst sworn, however, that threats 
are dangerous if they are empty. But Britian's Foreign Secretary, 
Robin Cook, says the credible mix of force and diplomacy works. This 
has the vindication for our strategy of diplomacy backed by credible 
threat of force. But this is not an ending. This is and only be a 
beginning. If this agreement is to work then the international community 
must put all pressure on President Milosevic to make sure that he 
sticks to this agreement. Western Allies do not trust the Yugoslov 
leader to fulfill his promises. So, NATO has not cancelled the air 
strikes but only put them on hold. Military Analyst Ken Petri of the 
Institute of Strategic Studies in London agrees that NATO must keep 
up the pressure. That cost in the region and Milosevic doesn't behave 
doesn't do what he said he would do, and breaks the agreement, then 
of course, he is still got, uh, the big stick of, uh, an ad campaign 
against him. So, you can use that as a useful tool. Mr. Petri says 
air and ground monitoring of the Serb military pull-out is essential. 
But, he adds the international monitors must also be ready to act 
if Serb police tried to frustrate the return of Kosovo refugees. Western 
allies now may be relieved that military action has been averted. 
But the forceful diplomacy has also fueled anger among national Serbs 
who see their country as a victim of foreign aggression. Lisa Gagalovich 
helped organize a demonstration by Serb nationalist near the prime 
minister's office in London. It is the maximum form of blackmail in 
order to threaten at people and a nation with destruction and effectively 
with that. The agreements, if that is what we call it, is not an agreement. 
It is an imposition of blackmail on a nation and on a people. The 
Serb nationalist argues that the threats of military intervention 
violate international law regarding Yugoslavia's Sovereignty. Western 
diplomats say the threat of force is the only language that the stubborn 
Yugoslav's leader understands. Analyst say the threat of force has 
to be credible. But the diplomacy it supports also needs clear political 
aims. Diplomat say the threat of intervention in Kosovo was clearly 
aimed at stopping Serb aggression and averting a humanitarian disaster 
there. Laurie Kasmen, VOA News, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>