<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981014.0600.1826 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Yugoslav government of President Slobodan Milosevic has announced 
it will hold local elections in Kosovo next year as part of an agreement 
to avoid NATO military action. A statement issued late Tuesday outlines 
a plan to set up a separate parliament for the 90 percent ethnic Albanian 
majority in the Serbian province. It says elections will be held within 
9 months and foreign observers will be invited. The statement also 
promises that a local police force reflecting the ethnic make up of 
the population will be set up under the control of autonomist government. 
The announcement of these and other measures is seen as an attempt 
by President Milosevic to demonstrate that he intends to carry out 
the agreement reached with Special U.S. Envoy Richard Holbrooke. The 
agreement calling for full compliance with UN demands and withdrawal 
of Serbian forces from Kosovo. Belgrde's compliance will be verified 
in Kosovo by a team of 2,000 observers from the Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in Europe and by non-combat NATO claims. It will take 
some time for the international observers to take their places in 
Kosovo leaving initial monitoring to the NATO alliance. VOA's Ron 
Pestine in Brussels reports. NATO Secretary General Javier Solana 
and the Supreme Commander of NATO Forces in Europe, General Wesley 
Clark are expected to go to Belgrade this week. Their trip will be 
to sign an agreement allowing NATO reconnaissance planes to fly without 
restriction over Kosovo. This will be to make sure that Yugoslavia 
is carrying out it's promise to withdrawal Serb paramilitary forces 
from the province. Ironically, Mr. Solana and General Clark are the 
same people who can declare that Yugoslavia is not complying with 
the agreement. The 16 NATO allies decided the best way to keep pressure 
on President Milosevic would be to take the last procedural step before 
launching an air strike. They authorized General Clark to take control 
of all NATO aircraft to use against Yugoslavia. NATO's ambassadors 
decided, however, not to launch these air strikes before Saturday 
morning, to give peace a chance. Still, the strike order will stay 
in place, as Secretary General Solana despite the diplomatic agreement 
in Belgrade. I do hope very much that the report that, uh, gave us 
last night will come true. In that the diplomatic channel will continue 
working so that a diplomatic solution to the whole crisis will be 
possible. We do not want to use force. We are not interested in using 
force. But, uh, force may be needed. If, uh, the implementation on 
the ground and is not working properly. If NATO decides to use it's 
threatened big stick, it would mark a first for the alliance. When 
NATO attacked Bosnian Serbs in 1995, it was with the invitation of 
the government of Bosnia and the authorization of the UN Security 
Council. This time Serbia rejected NATO's threat of air strikes. And 
Russia promised a veto in the Security Council Resolution calling 
for the use of force. The NATO allies, even the present caretaker 
governments in Germany and Italy, accept the argument that Yugoslavia's 
actions in Kosovo constitute a threat to peace. Britain's Foreign 
Secretary, Robin Cook, visited NATO headquarters on Tuesday to discuss 
the diplomatic agreement. He believes there are significant concessions 
by the Yogoslav President. This is a big President Milosevic. He has 
agreed for the first time to contemplate a self-governing Kosovo and 
he has signed up to elections for Kosovo assembly which will be supervised 
by an international body through the OSCE. Certainly he has also agreed 
to verification mechanisms which will make sure that he cannot go 
back on the undertakings that he has made. The organization for security 
incorporation in Europe, the OSCE, will contribute 2,000 people to 
monitor the situation on the ground. Yugoslavia has held responsible 
for guaranteeing their free movement and safety in Kosovo. Ron Pestine, 
VOA News, Brussels. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>