<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981014.0600.2685 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A very popular component of the internet is the World Wide Web. The 
web is the place where people go to be entertained, to get news, to 
be educated and to conduct business. As Dan Noble reports this important 
place in cyberspace is being made accessible to people with a variety 
of disabilities. The World Wide Web consortium the W3C is it called, 
is an international group jointly run by the MIT laboratory for computer 
sciences in the United States. The National Institute for Research 
and Computer Science in France and Keyo University in Japan. The group 
which includes more than 275 organizations helps to develop standard 
industry specifications and serves as a suppository of information 
about the Web. Not long ago, the consortium started what it calls 
the Web Accessibility Initiative for people with disabilities. The 
Web Accessible Initiative is something that's been hosted at the W3C 
for over a year now and it's a very interesting project. This is Accessibility 
Initiative Director, Judy Brewer. They elected to host this project 
internally as a but to do it in a especially a multi-stake holder 
way so that it would involve industry and government and representation 
from the disability community and from accessibility research organizations 
based universities and stuff all working together to try to come up 
with common solutions that everyone could use. Judy Brewer says that 
one of the more obvious things about the Web that it is very visual 
medium. There are images and icons that can make it easy to get information. 
That's not easy if you're visually impaired. Now, you can imagine 
if the images don't have some kind of alternative text that someone 
who can't see that image doesn't know where they're going. You think 
about somebody who has a hearing disability. And, if you put an audio 
file on the Web, then someone with a hearing disability doesn't have 
access to that unless it's captioned in some way. At the same time, 
you think of somebody with a physical disability or a cognitive disability 
and there are different ways that you can design a website or web-based 
application so they're either easier to use for somebody with a physical 
or cognitive disability or harder to use. And, we're obviously trying 
to figure out the things that would make it easier. Many high-tech 
companies are already working to make their products accessible to 
as many people as possible. Among them is Microsoft which has an Office 
of Disabilities headed by Greg Laning. We unfortunately have to do 
a little bit of education for most of the people who have never even 
thought about this idea. But, it's not that hard when you point out 
the number of people who have disabilities. Really, the latest statistics 
shows almost 1 person in 5. And even 1 out of 8 persons working on 
the internet today. And we all want to be able to keep using the computers 
and keep taking advantage of all the benefits that bring us. Among 
the projects Microsoft is working on is one involving in what Greg 
Laning calls Closed Captioning and Audio Description. That means you 
can take anybody and take a piece of multi-media content that might 
be a video or even a audio file. And add closed captioning for a person 
who's deaf or hard of hearing. An audio description for a person who's 
blind. And at the same time, it allows a person who's so-called disabilities 
that they don't speak the right language to access that information. 
Because the captioning and the other descriptions can be in multiple 
languages at the same time. And every piece of audio or video on the 
World Wide Web can have captioning in a whole host of languages. The 
World Wide Web is becoming an important part of the way we are entertained, 
the way we learn, and the way we conduct business. Making it accessible 
to everyone is a goal high-tech experts say is well within the realm 
of possibility. I'm Dan Noble. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>