<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981014.1700.2157 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Oil from the land-lock sea strategically located between Russia and 
the Middle East may one day rival the amount of oil found in Alaska 
and the North Sea. Later this month, oil companies from the US and 
seven other countries are expected to choose which pipeline is best 
for delivering Caspian oil to the international market. It's petro-politics 
on today's Dateline and here's Pamela Taylor. The decision involves 
the governments of Russia, Kyzervyshan, Georgia, Kysakstan, Turk Manistan, 
Iran, Turkey, and because of American oil company interests, the United 
States. The high stakes rivalry not only offers oil companies the 
prospect of great wealth, but it will define the corridors of trade 
and political power for the next century. There are four potential 
routes being examined. Two to the Black Sea, one to the Mediterranean, 
and one south to the Persian Gulf. The northern pipeline connecting 
the oil fields of Izerbishan to the Russian Black Sea port of Noverslasik 
already exist but has a limited capacity. Another one leading to Supsa, 
Georgia's port on the Black Sea is under construction and expended 
to be completed by the end of the year. US oil companies favor laying 
a larger pipeline from Baku, the capital of Izerbishan, through Georgia 
to the Turkish Mediterranean port of Jihan. And Iran has proposed 
a route from Baku to the Persian Gulf. An idea stymied mainly because 
of US sanctions against Iran. Another existing pipeline through Russia 
is small and not capable of handling current production from the Tengas 
oil fields of Kysakstan. A senior executive of the consortium favoring 
the Baku/Jihan line is Robert Branigan. He says the Kysakstan situation 
must be avoided in the future. The situation you want to avoid with 
construction of a pipeline, you want to keep your infrastructure development 
coming on at the same pace that your production is coming on. You 
don't want to get yourself into a position like Kysakstan where the 
oil is ready to go and it's being able to be produce and yet the infrastructure 
in terms of pipelines is not there and so a lot of the oil can't flow. 
Mr. Branigan says his consortium favors the larger pipeline concept 
for transporting the high yields expected from the Caspian basin. 
What we're looking at is the potential in the future. There's been 
forecast that this Caspian Basin could be as large as the North Sea. 
Now, if it's as large as the North Sea, that's 6 million barrels a 
day and that's a lot of oil to get out of the Caspian area. So, as 
such you're going to need one, two, maybe even three pipelines by 
that time to get that sort of volume out. Robert Branigan's consortium 
of twelve oil companies has the only project currently producing oil 
in Ixerbajan. It includes British Petroleum, Amoco, Unocal, Azare 
Socar, Russia's Luk Oil, Exxon, and smaller companies. Their proposed 
pipeline would be the longest and therefore the most expensive to 
build and for this reason many analyst expect it will not be chosen. 
Many western oil experts say unless oil prices start to rise again, 
larger pipelines will not be commercially viable. They recommend upgrading 
smaller, existing lines using rail and sea transport and allowing 
companies to swap oil with Iran. Julian Enana, director of the Washington-based 
energy consulting firm Petroleum Finance, says a swap with Iran is 
a good idea because it would lessen the potential for Russia to control 
oil export routes. If Russia is given a little bit of competition 
with swaps to Iran to start with, I think you can see perhaps more 
rational decisions emanating out of Russia itself because there's 
competition. Competition is very healthy. In the end, if Iran, if 
the pressure is on by the US, which it still is too prevent swaps, 
I think that ultimately these export avenues will remain in Russia's 
hands and I think you could see more delays, more problems. Ms. Enana 
adds that US sanctions against he Tehran government stand in the way 
of any deal to swap oil with Iran. Regional politics play Caspian 
oil deals as do geo-politics. Countries inside and outside the Caucasuses 
are maneuvering for control of the black gold and the pipelines which 
will transport in it. As we hear in this report for VOA's Ed Warner. 
They know that oil is everything. Oil is strategy, power. Who controls 
the oil of the Caspian and Central Asia controls the next century. 
That is how an ambitious Izeria general views the future in a recently 
published novel "The Devil's Garden". He is one of many desperate 
characters plotting to grab the oil riches of Izerbashan, but all 
are doomed to failure in the ever-turbulent Caucasuses. In real life, 
the novel's author remains optimistic about the Caucasuses. A former 
US Army analyst who was assigned to the region, Ralph Peters says 
oil can be its salvation. I believe that properly supported, properly 
managed, the oil wealth of the greater Caspian basin, while we shouldn't 
exaggerate it, can make all the difference between independence and 
dependence for these newly independent states. The oil companies were 
there before our diplomats. And the oil companies see the problem 
more clearly than our diplomats. And I would say this is case when 
the flag should follow trade. Not so fast cautions Paul Gobal who 
used to monitor and analyze the different nationalities of the former 
Soviet Union for the US State Department. He recalls the time he was 
invited to meet with a group of oil company executives in Texas and 
suggested they should be a little more skeptical about Caspian oil. 
Gentleman, you have all seen the movie "Field of Dreams" one to many 
times. And you have begun chatting, "if we drill it, we can get it 
out". The problem is that drilling it is one thing, getting it out 
is quite another thing. So far we have had each more expensive and 
more complicated than the other, reflecting a very dangerous political 
world, reflecting the difficulties of geography. Mr. Gobal says every 
planned pipeline has political consequences. Wherever it is built, 
some nations stand to gain, others to lose which is why they are competing 
so fiercely for the route. Most oil companies would like to take the 
shortest route through Iran to the Persian Gulf, but the United States 
continues to block any dealings with that Islamic state. Because of 
this, says Mr. Gobal, Russia gains influence in Iran while the United 
States forfeits it. The US government wants to build a pipeline through 
Turkey to the Mediterranean with the aim of strengthening the countries 
between Russia and Iran. But US companies say the route would be to 
long and costly. They prefer going through Georgia to the Black Sea. 
Paul Gobal says any pipeline is vulnerable to sabotage. He notes the 
route favored by US companies passes through a section of Georgia 
under the control of Armenians who do not stand to benefit from the 
pipeline. They have also fought a war with Izerbyshan and are supported 
by Russia. I would expect to see terrorist actions, state sponsored 
terrorism directed against that pipeline. The current prime minister 
of the Russian federation has made it very clear that he is not interested 
in seeing that pipeline take place and he is in a position, as weak 
as Russia now is, to do something about it just as Russia was in a 
position to support the terrorist attack on President Edward Shebranas 
of Georgia earlier this year. Drawing on his experience in the Caucasuses, 
Novelist Ralph Peters says Russia is responsible for much of the trouble 
in the region; such as the conflict between Izerbyshan and Armenia 
over the unclaimed Novor Karabak. He believes Moscow deeply resents 
the lost of the Caucasuses when the Soviet Union collapsed and dreams 
one day of regaining it. At a minimum, Moscow wants to limit the influence 
of other nations in the region; in particular the United States which 
is challenging Russia in many areas. VOA Correspondent Ed Warner. 
The compromise most analyst expect later this month is some kind of 
agreement to beef up existing pipelines while promising to fund a 
larger pipeline sometime in the future. Petro-politics was the subject 
of today's Dateline. I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>