<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981014.0600.0727 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now, in US News, the murder of University of Wyoming student, Matthew 
Shepherd apparently impart because he was homosexual has prompted 
a national debate over whether to expand federal and state laws aimed 
at preventing hate crimes. But what exactly are hate crimes, anyway? 
And do existing laws designed to punish hate crime offenders really 
work? National Correspondent, Jim Malone has more. Federal hate crimes 
are defined as efforts to intimidate or injure people based on their 
race, ethnic origin, or religion. Legislation now pending in the US 
Congress would expand victims of hate crimes to include people targeted 
because of their sex, their sexual orientation or because they're 
disabled. In addition to the federal government, forty states have 
passed hate-crime laws. But of those forty, nineteen states have laws 
which do not cover sexual orientation. Ten states, including Wyoming 
where Matthew Shepherd was killed, have no hate-crime laws at all. 
The Shepherd killing has galvanized homosexual rights groups around 
the country to press for the expansion of hate-crime laws to cover 
cases where a victim is targeted because of his or her sexual orientation. 
Elizabeth Berch is with the Human Rights Campaign, a national organization 
of gay and lesbian activists. She was interviewed on NBC's Today Program. 
Hate crimes are unique because it is not just Matthew Shepherd that 
is the victim here. Uh, when a hate-crime occurs, they're designed, 
they are meant to send a message of kind of domestic terrorism to 
an entire community. Police in Wyoming say that the two men accused 
of killing Matthew Shepherd initially wanted to rob him. But, authority 
say the two men posed as homosexuals to win Mr. Shepherd's confidence. 
And that one of the men may have become enraged when the victim, who 
was openly gay, allegedly made a sexual pass at him. While it remains 
unclear whether Matthew Shepherd was murdered simply because of his 
homosexuality, supporters of expanding hate-crime laws in Congress 
are wasting little time in seizing on the tragedy as a call to legislative 
action. Arizona Republican, Congressman Jim Colby is one of two openly 
gay members of Congress. Rep. JIM COLBY, ARIZONA: A loving God has 
gathered Matthew Shepherd to his bosom. He will never face hate again. 
That same God may grant his mercy and forgiveness to those who killed 
him. But a harsher justice awaits them in this life. But critics of 
hate-crime statutes say existing laws are sufficient to punish to 
those who murder or harm others. And, they also say that motivation 
for the crime should make little difference in the punishment. Critics, 
like Republican Congressman Bob Barr of Georgia, say the two men charged 
in the Shepherd killing already face the death penalty if convicted 
despite the fact the Wyoming has rejected three attempts to pass hate-crime 
legislation. Rep. BOB BARR : Wyoming is trying to do it's job. Let 
us here in the Congress let Wyoming do it's job. In fact, many conservative 
groups see little benefit to passing hate-crime legislation, arguing 
that virtually all violent crimes are spurred by hate in one way or 
in another. Christy Hamrick is with the Conservative Family Research 
Council. She was interviewed on the CBS This Morning program. We know 
that all murders all crimes of which life is taken are hate crimes 
because they all devalue and debase and demean people. And, in fact, 
if we look at, uh, at murder, one of the things that we're concerned 
about is hate crime legislation attempts to demonize a kind of thinking. 
And, it attempts to say because of the way you think your murder somehow 
is worst or different. Federal Bureau of Investigation crime statistics 
indicate hate crimes are on the rise. Local law enforcement officials 
reported an 8 percent jump in hate crimes from 1995 to 1996. The FBI 
says 62 percent of those crimes were attributed to racial bias while 
12 percent were apparently motivated by bias against a persons sexual 
orientation. Critics say that this information shows hate crime laws 
do little to deter offenders. But, supporters of expanding hate-crime 
legislation say it's too early to tell since the laws have only been 
on the books a short time. Jim Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>