<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981014.1700.0683 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And another would be traveler in the news. A Nobel Prize winning author 
from Nigeria Walesh Trienka may be putting the admonition of American 
Author Thomas Wolfe to the test. It was Wolfe who said, "you can't 
go home again". But, Walesh Trienka has gone home again for the first 
time in four years from his exile here in the United States. Here's 
West Africa Correspondent John Pittman. Walesh Tienka returned to 
a hero's welcome Wednesday night. Reports from the airport in Lagos 
say the 64-year old writer was met by hundreds of well wishers. Emerging 
from the airport, he briefly thanked the crowd. Then, was driven into 
the city where he reportedly planned to visit the home of the late 
opposition leader Mashu Avuala. Mr. Avuala was the presumed winner 
of Nigeria's last president election in 1993. International observers 
said that vote was one of the freest in Nigerian history. But, the 
vote was annulled by the military government and Mr. Avuala was later 
jailed by the military for challenging the decree. He died in detention 
in July of this year apparently of a heart attack. A spokeswoman for 
Emery University in Atlanta, Georgia, where Mr. Trienka has been teaching 
while in exile, says the author will remain in Nigeria for about a 
week. During this visit, he is expected to deliver a public lecture 
titled "Rebuilding A Nation". Walesh Trienka won the Nobel Prize for 
Literature in 1986. Mr. Trienka is best known for his biting political 
criticism. In novels, plays, and essays, the writer has dissected 
Nigerian society, culture, and politics. In the 1970's, he was jailed 
for two years for visiting the breakaway State of Beafront during 
Nigeria's civil war. Following his release from prison, he wrote a 
memoir of his experience called "The Man Died: Prison Notes". The 
worked was banned in Nigeria, but earned global recognition and was 
among the works cited by the Nobel committee in 1986 when Mr. Trienka 
won the literature prize. Mr. Trienk continued to criticize the military 
government, which ruled Nigeria virtually continuously through the 
1980's and 1990's. Following the annulment of the 1993 election and 
the detention of its presumed winner Mashu Avuala, the military government 
confiscated Mr. Trienka's passport. In 1994, fearing arrest, Mr. Treinka 
slipped out of Nigeria secretly. In the United States he taught and 
lectured, but continued his political activism. During the rule of 
the late General Sone Abacha, Mr. Trienka advocated armed resistance 
against the military. His tone changed only recently following General 
Abacha's sudden death in June and his meeting with the new military 
leader General Abdu Salame Abubacher. It remains unclear whether Mr. 
Trienka plans to play an active role in Nigeria's current political 
transition or if plans to return to the country permanently. For is 
part, General Abbacher has encouraged Nigerian exiles like Mr. Trienka 
to return home to help insure a successful transition. General Abubacher 
has promised to hand over power to a civilian government next May. 
Presidential elections are scheduled for February. John Pittman, VOA 
News, West Africa bureau. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>