<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981221.1830.0063 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. So if you've been impeached on Saturday, what do you 
do on Monday? For President Clinton, the political landscape is vastly 
different than it was a few days ago. A trial in the Senate awaits, 
which means his career still hangs in the balance. Certainly the polls 
offer some comfort. After all that tension this weekend, his job approval 
rating has risen to 67%. And whether you judge it sympathy or anger 
at the house republicans, 56% in our poll say Mr. Clinton should stand 
up to a trial rather than resign. That's 14 points higher than last 
week. This is some underlying trouble to be seen. Barely one-third 
of Americans say they would be angry if the Senate decided to remove 
him. So on the Monday after you've been impeached, what does a president 
do? Here's ABC's John Cochran. This holiday ritual might seem irrelevant 
to the president's fate, stopping off at a soup kitchen, but it is 
very relevant. Clinton's aides want him out in public, at events that 
reflect his compassion -- one way to keep his approval ratings high. 
When asked if he had a message for the Senate, he said only -- I hope 
that they and the country will take the time to think about other 
people and to do it in the spirit of the season like this. Today, 
two former presidents, Jimmy Carter and Gerald Ford, offered a compromise. 
The president would accept "A resolution of censure" and admit "that 
he did not tell the truth under oath." The Senate would guarantee 
his admission would not be used in any future criminal trial when 
he leaves office. The White House has said the president will never 
admit lying under oath. Today, spokesman Joe Lockhart welcomed efforts 
to reach a compromise, but as for the specifics of the offer -- I'm 
not saying anything. a number of prominent democrats warned the White 
House today that before there can be any deal, the constitution must 
be honored, by starting a trial and presenting charges and at least 
some evidence. Those same democrats also warned the president against 
any legal delays, illegal maneuvering null and void the impeachment 
passed by a Lame duck house. Those delays said those democrats would 
only anger the Senate and the public. Although the White House is 
looking for a compromise, there are still hard feelings here, that 
were evident when spokesman Lockhart was asked about "Time" magazine 
cover. Showing Clinton and Ken Starr. They told me I couldn't say 
this, but I'm going to say it anyway. I thought it was the perfect 
bipartisan cover -- the leader of the democrat and the republican 
party. The Clinton White House, like the president himself, is undergoing 
mood swings. The president, we are told, goes through periods of great 
sadness. And yet, he was beaming over the weekend when he told some 
old friends, this will all be over in 30 days. John Cochran, ABC News, 
the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>