<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981221.1830.1280 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to take "A closer look" at fertility drugs tonight. For 
many people, they do conjure up precisely the multiple births that 
have taken place for Mrs. chukwu in Dallas, and before that for Mrs. 
McCaughey who had seven babies a year ago in Iowa. By one estimate, 
more than 10% of American couples experience infertility. And fertility 
drugs are increasingly popular. ABC's John McKenzie tonight on the 
rewards and the risks. For couples experiencing infertility, modern 
medicine has not only increased the odds of having a baby, it's increased 
the odds of having more than one. In the past 25 years, the number 
of multiple births of triplets or more has soared 328% to more than 
152 of every 100,000 births in this country. It's an unfortunate side 
effect of the package, but you have to look at the bigger picture, 
which is the thousands of couples every year who can now have their 
own children. Today, the vast majority of multiple births are the 
result not of in vitro fertilization, where technicians join egg and 
sperm in a lab dish, but of something much simpler. The procedure 
is called "ovulation induction." A woman receives a daily injection 
of a powerful drug that puts her ovaries into overdrive. The result, 
not just one egg, but a batch of eggs in the uterus, waiting to be 
fertilized. That was the approach used on the octuplet mother in Houston. 
Ovulation induction has helped more patients get pregnant than just 
about any other technology we have. Unfortunately, we don't have quite 
the control. And that is a problem. The more babies a woman carries, 
the more likely she is to miscarry. And if they are born, they're 
more likely to be born prematurely, dramatically increasing the risk 
of complications to virtually every organ. So, many couples decide 
to reduce the number of fetuses. The numbers show very clearly that 
we can improve the take-home healthy baby rate for couples with multiple 
pregnancies by reducing the number down to a manageable number, usually 
twins, by the end of the first trimester. But doctors say there are 
ways to prevent some cases from ever getting that far. Using blood 
tests to monitor hormone levels and ultrasound to see the developing 
eggs, doctors can determine whether a woman has produced too many 
eggs, well before they are ever fertilized. Then I will stop the cycle 
in the middle. I will wait for the next month, give a lower dosage 
of the medication, and ensure she's going to get pregnant with a safer 
number. Infertility treatments have pushed the frontiers of medicine 
to produce children for couples who otherwise could not conceive. 
But now, considering the risks, most doctors want to ensure they don't 
produce too many. John McKenzie, ABC News, New York. We'll be back 
in just a moment. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>