<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981221.0433 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
British tycoon Richard Branson and his balloon crew skirted the Himalayas 
on Monday and headed for China _ with no place to land and no permission 
to cross the border in their attempt to circle the globe. With the 
ICO Global balloon traveling at a steady 50 mph (80 kph), the British 
government and former Prime Minister Edward Heath were seeking to 
persuade Chinese authorities to grant permission to cross Chinese 
territory farther north than planned. China had permitted a crossing 
farther south, but the balloon was on a more northerly course after 
being forced to manuever around both Iraq and a storm, project director 
Mike Kendrick said. Because of the rugged Himalayan terrain, the balloon 
had no place to land before reaching China, Kendrick said. He added 
that Branson, Chicago millionaire Steve Fossett and teammate Per Lindstrand 
of Sweden were steering the balloon as much to the south as possible. 
``The Chinese are very friendly. I've apologized to them,'' Kendrick 
said. ``It is their airspace. They are entitled to keep us out. I 
have no argument with that at all, but we are appealing to them.'' 
The British government said its ambassador in China was consulting 
with Chinese authorities and that the Foreign Office was speaking 
to the Chinese Embassy in London. The venture had a similar problem 
crossing Libya, when permission was unexpectedly revoked. That problem 
was resolved on Saturday just before the balloon entered Libyan airspace. 
The 270-foot (82-meter) balloon reached the Himalayas after a quiet 
day Sunday crossing Turkmenistan in Central Asia and flying over Afghanistan. 
Over the weekend, the team had faced fierce thunderstorms and was 
forced to pass through a narrow corridor in the Caucasus to avoid 
flying over Iraq, Iran and Russia, which had denied permission to 
use their airspace. Branson and Lindstrand have already beaten their 
personal best of 48 hours in a hot air balloon during a 1991 crossing 
of the Pacific. Fossett has made four tries to ring the globe. On 
the last, he was lucky to survive when his balloon tore in a thundersstorm, 
after traveling 15,000 miles (24,000 kms). Branson has tried, and 
failed, four times to become the first to circle the world non-stop 
in a balloon. Improved technology has been used to make the balloon, 
including a canopy of Kevlar of the kind used for bulletproof vests. 
The crew members estimate the trip could last from eight days to nearly 
three weeks. They hope to touch down somewhere in western Europe at 
the end of a 24,000-mile (62,000 kms) flight, which will take them 
over India, the South China sea, the Pacific and the United States. 
The plan is to cross San Francisco on Christmas Day, with a goal of 
reaching Europe by New Year's. The team secured permission from 97 
countries for overflights and initially had only four refusals _ Iran, 
Iraq, Russia and North Korea. At least three other crews have been 
waiting for favorable weather to launch balloons _ from Albuquerque, 
New Mexico, Loves Park, Illinois, and the Swiss Alps. Yet another 
team plans to take off next month from Alice Springs, Australia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>