<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981221.0721 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
BAGHDAD, Iraq (AP) _ U.S. and British airstrikes demolished Iraq's 
two main factories for producing parts for short-range missiles that 
are permitted by the United Nations, officials said Monday. The attacks 
on the factories, which are near Baghdad, appear to be part of a strategy 
to destroy installations that could be used to produce weapons of 
mass destruction or long-range missiles. Besides the missile facilities, 
nearly all of Iraq's military factories were attacked and many sustained 
heavy damage, Iraqi officials said, speaking on customary condition 
of anonymity. Authorities, however, have not allowed foreign reporters 
to visit any of the sites attacked during the four-night assault that 
ended Saturday. No final casualty toll has been released, but previous 
reports indicated that at least 42 Iraqis were killed and 96 wounded 
in the strikes. Iraq's ambassador to the United Nations said thousands 
of people have been killed or injured, but did not substantiate that 
claim. Iraq called the confrontation a victory for its people, In 
his first public comments since the attacks ended late Saturday, President 
Saddam Hussein said in a speech on Sunday that Iraq defeated ``enemies 
of God.'' In the televised address, Saddam his people: ``God will 
repay well and crown your heart with clear victory.'' Iraq has also 
vowed to end all dealings with U.N. weapons inspectors who are responsible 
for dismantling Iraq's weapons of mass destruction _ chemical, biological 
or nuclear weapons and missiles with ranges in excess of 150 kilometers 
(90 miles). U.N. weapons monitors also routinely inspect Iraqi short-range 
missiles to ensure that they have not been tampered with to increase 
their ranges beyond 150 kilometers (90 miles). Iraqi officials said 
that among the sites attacked were the al-Nasser factory in Taji, 
60 kilometers (40 miles) north of Baghdad and the al-Nida factory, 
south of the capital, Iraqi officials said. The al-Nasser factory 
produces parts for the Ababeel, or ``fire bird,'' missiles, which 
has a range of 50 kilometers (30 miles). The al-Nida factory produces 
components for the al-Samoud or ``steadfastness'' missile which has 
a slightly longer range. The officials said the attacks have virtually 
halted Iraqi efforts to produce short-range missiles. Al-Nasser was 
heavily bombed during the 1991 Gulf War but workers had dismantled 
most of its high-tech lathes and removed them before the attacks. 
Iraqi officials said that the speed of the attacks this time took 
them by surprise and workers did not have enough time to remove crucial 
equipment from either factory. The United States and Britain mounted 
their airstrikes less than 24 hours after chief U.N. weapons inspector 
Richard Butler submitted a report accusing Baghdad of failing to fully 
cooperate with his weapons inspectors. The arms monitors had 12 remote-control 
monitoring cameras at al-Nasser to ensure that the lathes were not 
used to produce parts for long-range missiles. The United States fired 
two dozen Tomahawk missiles at al-Nida in January 1993 after Iraq 
blocked weapons inspections. The al-Nida factory reportedly has the 
most sophisticated metal working equipment in the country. The 1993 
attack had leveled scores of buildings but all of the important machinery 
had reportedly been removed days before the strike. The Iraqis swiftly 
rebuilt the collapsed buildings and the factory was fully operational 
within five months. The recent strikes have also disrupted the distribution 
of supplies under the U.N.-approved oil-for-food program, Hans von 
Sponeck, the U.N. humanitarian coordinator in Iraq said Monday. ``Our 
program has been severely curtailed,'' he told Associated Press Television 
News. The program allows Iraq to get around U.N. economic sanctions 
by selling limited quantities of oil to buy food and other humanitarian 
goods. Meanwhile, extremist Islamic groups have threatened retaliation 
for the airstrikes. Al-Gamaa al-Islamiya, or the Islamic Group, called 
for a ``holy war'' against the United States and a boycott of American 
and British products. The group made the call in a statement sent 
to the Cairo office of the Al-Hayat newspaper. In London, the office 
of British Prime Minister Tony Blair said the airstrikes targeted 
100 sites and left the Iraqi air defense system ``in ruins.'' ``We 
believe the damage that has been inflicted in the last few days has 
left Saddam very weak and vulnerable,'' Blair's spokesman said. He 
spoke on customary condition of anonymity. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>