<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981221.0461 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A storm of opposition from both foes and friends of the new peace 
accord brought Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's government 
to the brink of collapse Monday. Netanyahu, backed into a political 
corner, was expected later Monday to agree to dissolve his government 
and call early elections to seek a public mandate for his policies. 
The fate of the government seemed sealed when Netanyahu's Likud party 
announced it would call the early balloting, making it a virtual certainty. 
The move came shortly before Israel's parliament was set to take up 
a welter of measures, all aimed at driving Netanyahu from power and 
bringing about elections more than a year ahead of schedule. The Likud 
move signalled an about-face by Netanyahu. Previously, the prime minister 
had concentrated on trying to hold his fractious coalition together. 
The measures the Knesset had been poised to take up in were seen as 
a broad referendum on Netanyahu's handling of the peace process _ 
which has drawn fire from all sides in the two months since the signing 
of the U.S.-brokered Wye River land-for-security accords. The Israeli 
left accuses Netanyahu of bad faith and foot-dragging, saying the 
prime minister never intended to live up to promises made under the 
landmark Oslo accords signed by slain Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin 
and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. Since Netanyahu took office 
in May 1996, the peace proces has been largely stalled. The signing 
of the Wye accords on Oct. 23 in Washington represented a dramatic 
break in what had been a 19-month deadlock. The accord's right-wing 
opponents, among them Jewish settlers, have expressed fury at Netanyahu 
for agreeing to hand over more West Bank land to the Palestinians 
in exchange for security steps. Previously, he had promised to fight 
any such concessions. Setting the stage for a showdown, Netanyahu's 
Cabinet on Sunday approved a tough set of conditions for resuming 
Israel's compliance with the Wye accords. Netanyahu said he would 
hold a vote to check lawmakers' views of that move. Netanyahu says 
the conditions _ including a demand that Arafat renounce his intentions 
to declare independence by the end of May are justified because the 
Palestinians have not met obligations under the agreement. The Palestinians 
say they have, and denounce the delays as unfair and inflammatory. 
``If Wye is not carried forward, the situation in the coming few weeks 
will be negative,'' said Marwan Bargouti, leader of Yasser Arafat's 
Fatah faction. He said violent clashes could result. The timetable 
on early elections will be important because of constraints faced 
by a prime potential opponent, Lt. Gen. Amnon Lipkin-Shahak. Shahak, 
who has been on leave since stepping down as army chief of staff in 
July, was to announce his retirement from the military once elections 
were called. Under law, Shahak would be banned from participating 
in politics for 100 days after his departure from the armed forces. 
But with a presidential dispensation, that could be shortened to 50 
days. Little is known of Shahak's policies. As a soldier, he is prohibited 
from expressing an opinion, but his deep involvement in the peace 
talks suggests he is a moderate who favors territorial concessions. 
Polls have suggested that a centrist bid by Shahak would likely push 
Labor Party leader Ehud Barak out of the race in the first round of 
voting and lead to a run-off between Netanyahu and Shahak. Barak, 
whose party began the Israel-Palestinian peace process in 1993, told 
Israel TV a Shahak bid would be an ``unnecessary division of strengths.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>