<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981221.1061 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israel's parliament gave its preliminary approval to early elections 
on Monday, after rejecting Benjamin Netanyahu's peace policies. The 
vote _ which Netanyahu says he will not attempt to block in two subsequent 
readings mandated by law _ came after a fruitless last-minute appeal 
for a national unity government from the Israeli prime minister. Slumped 
in his seat at the Knesset head table, Netanyahu cast a vote for the 
elections bill moved by the opposition Labor Party. He had likely 
played the final card in his two-month struggle to keep his government 
afloat after he returned from Wye River, Maryland, with a new peace 
agreement with the Palestinians, brokered by U.S. President Bill Clinton. 
Immediately after Wye, Netanyahu's coalition started shedding hard-liners 
opposed to further concessions. He sought _ and received _ tacit support 
from the Labor Party in order to sustain the agreement. But he lost 
Labor when he froze Wye last month, accusing the Palestinians of sabotaging 
the accords. Opposition leader Ehud Barak said the paralysis of the 
Netanyahu government was endangering the country. ``This government 
divided Israel and gave into the extremists _ at the expense of education, 
of employment, of true security for all,'' he said. Netanyahu's conditions 
for resuming the talks included: a renouncement of Palestinian intentions 
to declare a state by May; a renouncement of Palestinian demands for 
the release of jailed killers; a gathering up of illegal arms; and 
an end to anti-Israel attacks by Palestinians. ``The way to reach 
true peace is to maintain demands that Palestinians carry out their 
obligations, that way we will protect peace, security and Jerusalem,'' 
Netanyahu said. The Knesset rejected his peace policies 56 to 48, 
with two abstentions. Some straggling legislators returned to the 
chamber, and the vote on elections was approved 81 to 30, with four 
abstentions. Netanyahu had said earlier he would negotiate an elections 
date with the opposition. Media reports said they could come any time 
between the end of March and the beginning of June. Just before the 
vote on peace policies, Netanyahu approached the Knesset podium and 
launched into an appeal for a national unity government. Netanyahu, 
who until Monday had counted out all antional unity appeals from members 
in his coalition. He suggested a time-out of 72 hours to negotiate 
national unity. ``We will investigate possiblity to come together 
... if we dont succeed at least we tried at this critical moment for 
Israel,'' he said. Barak refused. ``It's a little too late,'' Barak 
said, adding that he doubted the sincerity of the offer. The Knesset's 
spectators' gallery was packed with dignitaries as the political drama 
got under way. A sticker posted in the parliament's halls read, ``Come 
on, Sara, let's go home'' _ referring to Netanyahu's wife. The hours 
before the session's start were filled with with last-minute political 
dealmaking. Confused Knesset members wandered in and out of the wood-and-stone 
plenum chamber, asking journalists if they knew what agenda had been 
settled on. Netanyahu's handling of the peace process has drawn fire 
from all sides in the two months since the signing of Wye. The Israeli 
left accuses Netanyahu of bad faith and foot-dragging, saying the 
prime minister never intended to live up to promises made under the 
landmark Oslo accords signed by slain Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin 
and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. Since Netanyahu took office 
in May 1996, the peace process has been largely stalled. The signing 
of the Wye accords on Oct. 23 in Washington represented a dramatic 
break in what had been a 19-month deadlock. The accord's right-wing 
opponents, among them Jewish settlers, have expressed fury at Netanyahu 
for agreeing to hand over more West Bank land to the Palestinians 
in exchange for security steps. Previously, he had promised to fight 
any such concessions. The Palestinians rejected Netanyahu's new demands 
and denounced the delays as unfair and potentially dangerous. ``If 
Wye is not carried forward, the situation in the coming few weeks 
will be negative,'' said Marwan Bargouti, leader of Yasser Arafat's 
Fatah faction. He said violent clashes could result. One prime potential 
opponent is Lt. Gen. Amnon Lipkin-Shahak, who has been on leave since 
stepping down as army chief of staff in July. He is now expected to 
announce his retirement from the military. Little is known of Shahak's 
policies. As a soldier, he is prohibited from expressing an opinion, 
but his deep involvement in the peace talks suggests he is a moderate 
who favors territorial concessions. Polls have suggested that a centrist 
bid by Shahak would likely push Barak out of the race in the first 
round of voting and lead to a run-off between Netanyahu and Shahak. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>