<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981221.0741 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Serbian police swept down on a Kosovo Albanian stronghold Monday in 
retaliation for the killing of one of their officers, despite NATO 
threats to intervene in the troubled province. The death of the Serbian 
policeman in Podujevo, 40 kilometers (25 miles) north of Pristina, 
and the Serb response, ratchets up the chances of a return to all-out 
war in the troubled Serbian province. NATO's top commander in Europe, 
Gen. Wesley Clark, held brief talks Monday in Belgrade with the Serb-led 
Yugoslav army chiefs, the U.S. Embassy in Belgrade said. Clark's visit 
comes amid escalating violence in Kosovo where majority ethnic Albanians 
have been fighting for secession. Sources close to the talks said 
that Clark repeated earlier NATO warnings that the alliance might 
intervene if the fighting between Serbian security forces and ethnic 
Albanian rebels didn't stop. The sources spoke on condition of anonymity. 
Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic signed a U.S.-sponsored deal 
last October, promising an end to the Kosovo military campaign and 
agreeing permit deployment of up to 2,000 international verifiers 
to monitor the truce. The government-run Media Center reported a 52-year-old 
policeman, Milic Jovic, was mortally wounded by unknown assailants 
in Podujevo early Monday. A woman accompanying Jovic was wounded in 
the leg, the center said. Podujevo is an overwhelmingly ethnic Albanian 
town near central Serbia. Tensions there have risen in past weeks, 
as local Serbs complained of a growing guerrilla presence and demanded 
the government protect them. Ethnic Albanian sources in Podujevo, 
speaking on condition of anonymity, said a police sweep followed the 
morning shooting. The Kosovo Information Center, close to the Albanian 
leadership, said the town was sealed off while Serb police brought 
in reinforcements. Sporadic shooting could be heard from an area northeast 
of the town, the center said. Hysen Fazliu, a spokesman for the main 
ethnic Albanian party in Podujevo, said that the Serbian forces clashed 
with rebel Kosovo Liberation Army and that an unspecified number of 
ethnic Albanians have been arrested. The KLA spokesman in the Podujevo 
region, Luizim Oraca, claimed that the clash lasted two hours and 
that the ``enemy was forced to withdraw, and one of their tanks was 
destroyed.'' The report could not be independently confirmed. Jovic's 
killing is the latest in a series of setbacks for Kosovo's fragile 
de-facto truce. It is certain to enrage the Serbs, already furious 
over last week's killings of six Serb youths in a Kosovo bar and a 
prominent Serb official. The Monday incident came a day after the 
KLA buried 33 fighters killed last week in a border clash with the 
Yugoslav army. The attack on Jovic also heightens fears that violence 
in Kosovo is moving from the rugged countryside to the towns. Several 
hundred Serbs staged a rally Monday in Kosovo Polje, a few kilometers 
(miles) west of Pristina, demanding protection against what they say 
is increasing danger from the ethnic Albanians. The angry crowd booed 
and jeered as Serbia's interior minister, Vlajko Stojiljkovic, declared 
``terrorism has been defeated'' and ``only gangs of criminals are 
left out in the field.'' Stojiljkovic also vowed ``a resolute fight 
for the final destruction of the terrorists and the protection of 
(Serbia's) sovereignty and territorial integrity.'' The previous Serb 
crackdown against Kosovo Albanian separatists launched last February 
claimed over 1,000 lives and forced some 300,000 people from their 
homes. The campaign also brought threats of NATO airstrikes until 
Milosevic and U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke reached an agreement to 
defuse the crisis. But attempts to follow that up with a detailed 
plan for the province's long-term future have failed so far because 
the two sides are so far apart. Ethnic Albanians, who make up 90 percent 
of the population, want independence while Serbia refuses to give 
up control over its southern province. Serbia is the main republic 
of Yugoslavia. In neighboring Albania, the government called Monday 
on all Kosovo Albanian factions to unite and offered to host talks 
between the KLA and followers of moderate ethnic Albanian leader Ibrahim 
Rugova. There was no immediate response from the two camps. Albania's 
interior ministry also said Serb border guards opened fire early Saturday 
on Albanian troops along the tense border. International observers 
reported similar incidents. Kosovo Albanian rebels operate from sanctuaries 
in Albania. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, 
toured Kosovo Monday together with the U.S. head of the verification 
mission, William Walker. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>