<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981221.0251 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
British tycoon Richard Branson and his crew skirted the Himalayas 
on Monday, but encountered a new obstacle in their quest to circle 
the globe in a balloon when China abruptly denied them permission 
to fly over its territory. It was the second time politics threatened 
to derail the voyage. Libya also unexpectedly denied permission, but 
backed down at the last moment Saturday. Branson and the ground crew 
of ICO Global, a mobile telephone company that is supporting the trip, 
were scrambling to persuade the Chinese to reverse the decision. The 
Virgin boss, Chicago millionaire Steve Fossett and teammate Per Lind 
were flying along the Himalaya mountain range Monday morning on their 
way toward China. The team reached the towering mountain range shortly 
after dawn and were expected to fly over the top of the Himalayas, 
catching sight of Everest and K2 on the way. Weather conditions can 
deteriorate rapidly in the Himalayas, however, and gusts of warm air 
from below can prove a formidable challenge to balloonists. The 270-foot 
(82-meter) balloon reached the Himalayas after a quiet day Sunday 
crossing Turkmenistan in Central Asia and flying over Afghanistan. 
Over the weekend, the team had faced fierce thunderstorms and was 
forced to pass through a narrow corridor in the Caucasus to avoid 
flying over Iraq, Iran and Russia, which had denied the crew the right 
to use their airspace. Branson and Lindstrand both broke their personal 
duration records of 48 hours in a hot air balloon during a 1991 crossing 
of the Pacific. Fossett has made four tries to ring the globe. Branson 
has tried, and failed, four times to become the first person to circle 
the world in a balloon. Improved technology has been used to make 
the balloon, including a canopy of Kevlar of the kind used for bulletproof 
vests that covers the canopy over the crew's pressurized capsule. 
The crew members, all of whom are wearing silver jumpsuits, estimate 
the trip could last from eight days to nearly three weeks. They hope 
to touch down somewhere in western Europe at the end of a 24,000-mile 
(62,000 kms) flight, which will take them over India, the South China 
sea, the Pacific and the United States. The plan is to cross San Francisco 
on Christmas Day, with a goal of reaching Europe by New Year's. The 
team secured permission from 97 countries for overflights and initially 
had only four refusals _ Iran, Iraq, Russia and North Korea. At least 
three other crews have been waiting for favorable weather to launch 
balloons _ from Albuquerque, New Mexico, Loves Park, Illinois, and 
the Swiss Alps. Yet another team plans to take off next month from 
Alice Springs, Australia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>