<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981221.0210 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two human rights workers were arrested by Cambodian police Monday 
as a frenzy continued over the dumping of suspected toxic waste from 
Taiwan. A day after a deputy governor's home and vehicle were wrecked 
by a mob, about 60 demonstrators marched on the administrative offices 
of the district where 3,000 tons of waste was quietly deposited about 
two weeks ago without public warning. Police said the march ended 
peacefully, but two employees involved with it from the human rights 
group Licadho were detained for allegedly inciting protesters Sunday 
``to enter private property.'' A Licadho official in Phnom Penh, the 
capital, said the two had been monitoring the protests but emphatically 
denied their involvement. ``They certainly were not participating, 
nor were they leaders or organizers of the riots,'' Eva Galabru said. 
``It's probably the fruit of a misunderstanding.'' Since the dump 
was found by Environment Ministry investigators a week ago about 10 
kilometers (6 miles) from seaport town of Sihanoukville, tensions 
have steadily risen amid speculation the waste may be toxic. A boiling 
point was reached after the mysterious death of a port worker, who 
was said to have cleaned the hold of the ship that brought the waste 
from Taiwan. Although doctors have not established a clear link between 
the waste and his death, protesters took to the streets Saturday and 
threw rocks at a goods-inspection office at the port. Violence continued 
Sunday as demonstrators ransacked a hotel they believed was owned 
by the inspection company. Police later fired assault rifles over 
the heads of the mob and dispersed it after the home and an off-road 
vehicle of Deputy Governor Khim Bo were trashed. In interviews with 
Cambodian media, Environment Minister Mok Mareth has blamed an unnamed 
government official and port authorities for allowing the waste to 
enter the country illegally. The Taiwanese company that sent the waste 
has said it obtained permits from Taiwanese and Cambodian authorities 
to export it. The company, Formosa Plastics Corp., has denied the 
material is toxic but admitted it does contain trace amounts of mercury, 
which is highly poisonous in large doses. Residents living near the 
dump have complained that they have suffered from exhaustion and diarrhea 
after rummaging through the waste. Several port officials have been 
suspended from work while a government investigation continues into 
the incident. Prime Minister Hun Sen has vowed to punish anyone found 
responsible. Hun Sen has also insisted that the waste be returned 
to Taiwan, which has so far refused to take it back. Bulldozers pushed 
mounds of earth around the dump site Sunday. Environment officials 
said they would cover the waste with plastic tarpaulins to contain 
any toxic substances until the material can be removed. Mok Mareth 
said Monday that protective suits are being purchased abroad for workers 
who will eventually shovel the waste into oil drums and load them 
into shipping containers at the port. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>