<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981221.0255 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Serb policeman was reported killed and a woman wounded Monday in 
a tense northern Kosovo town, ushering in another week of bloodshed 
that threatens to plunge the Serb province back into all-out war. 
The Serb-run Media Center reported 52-year-old Milic Jovic was shot 
and wounded by unknown assailants using automatic weapons in Podujevo 
early Monday. He died en route to the hospital. A woman accompanying 
Jovic was wounded in the leg, the center said. The information distributed 
by the Media Center cannot be independently confirmed, but has proven 
reliable in the past. Podujevo is overwhelmingly ethnic Albanian town 
some 40 kilometers (25 miles) north of Pristina, close to central 
Serbia. Tensions there have grown in past weeks, as local Serbs complained 
of a growing guerrilla presence and demanded a state action against 
them. Jovic's killing is the latest in a series of setbacks for Kosovo's 
fragile truce between Serb security forces and the ethnic Albanian 
separatist rebels. It is certain to enrage the Serbs, already furious 
over last week's killings of six Serb youths and a prominent Serb 
official. The killing also came a day after the KLA buried 33 fighters 
who were killed last week in a border clash with the Yugoslav army. 
Some 5,000 Kosovo Albanians attended the funeral, pledging to continue 
their battle against the Serb state. The attack on Jovic also heightens 
fears that violence in Kosovo is moving from the rugged countryside 
to the towns. The six youths were killed in a bar in the western town 
of Pec and the official found dead last week was deputy major Kosovo 
Polje, a Serb stronghold outside Pristina. The KLA has denied responsibility 
for the killings, but Serbian officials and media blame the KLA. The 
minority Serbs are to stage another rally in Kosovo Polje Monday demanding 
protection against what they say is increasing danger from the Albanians. 
Serbia's interior minister is expected to address the rally. The surge 
in tensions and incidents in Kosovo could disrupt a shaky cease fire 
agreed to in October, and lead to resumption of large-scale fighting. 
The previous Serb crackdown launched last February claimed more than 
1,000 lives and forced some 300,000 people from their homes. Attempts 
at finding a peaceful solution for Kosovo have failed so far with 
the two sides' positions still very much apart. Ethnic Albanians, 
who make up 90 percent of the population, want independence while 
Serbia refuses to give up control over its southern province. The 
KLA funeral Sunday was also aimed at presenting the rebels as a formidable 
force. A special, elite KLA unit, dressed in black uniforms, fired 
volleys of semi-automatic fire into the air in a final salute as the 
simple wooden caskets were lowered into the frozen ground on a ridge 
renamed ``Heroes' Graves'' about 30 kilometers (20 miles) west of 
Kosovo's capital Pristina. ``We all together took the oath for the 
same cause,'' a KLA commander, Saban Shala, said in a eulogy. ``And 
we promise you that we will continue our fighting for freedom.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>