<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981221.0774 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mark Taylor's Aussie record-tying 334 and his refusal to chase Brian 
Lara's world record amazed cricket fans in 1998. Muttiah Muralitharan's 
match-winning nine for 59 and 16 total wickets for Sri Lanka against 
England was the bowling performance of the year. But the biggest headlines 
were for Shane Warne's 5,000 and Mark Waugh's 6,000. Not runs or wickets, 
but the Australian dollars they received from an Indian bookmaker 
in one of the biggest scandals to hit cricket in the long history 
of the sport. The gentlemanly game of cricket was dragged through 
the mud in the final month of an eventful year when Australian stars 
Warne and Waugh admitted that they accepted cash from an illegal bookmaker. 
The cash was for giving him inside information on weather and playing 
conditions during matches in Pakistan in 1994. They were each fined 
in '95 by the Australian Cricket Board but the fact that the scandal 
was kept secret, even by the sport's world governing body, the International 
Cricket Council, added to the shame, which was eventually exposed 
by an Australian newspaper. It also overshadowed some great performances, 
especially by Taylor and Muralitharan. The 34-year-old Australian 
captain was dismissed by the media and many of the Australian fans 
18 months ago. But he kept his job and became a hero when he tied 
Don Bradman's highest ever score by an Australian, 334, playing against 
Pakistan at Peshawar in October. The dogged left-hander was not out 
overnight and, instead of chasing the 42 runs to beat Lara's world 
record 375, he declared. Taylor said that matching the legendary Bradman 
was achievement enough. But he still led Australia to a 1-0 series 
victory over Pakistan and ended the year making sure Australia held 
on to the Ashes for a record-tying sixth consecutive time. A thunderstorm 
denied Australia a first-test victory over England at Brisbane but 
Taylor's team outplayed Alec Stewart's men at Perth and Adelaide to 
open up a 2-0 lead with two matches to go. Muralitharan chose the 
one-off test against England at the Oval to produce the fifth best 
bowling performance in the history of cricket. The off-spinner, who 
was once accused by an umpire of having an illegal throwing action 
but was cleared by the ICC, took seven wickets for 155 runs in England's 
first innings of 445 and then single-handedly destroyed the home team 
in the second. He came up with nine for 59 as England was bowled out 
for 181, giving Sri Lanka an unexpected victory by 37 runs. The only 
other wicket to fall in the second innings was the run out of England 
captain Stewart. Although Australia remained cricket's strongest team, 
it suffered a 2-1 series loss in India, where the home team won the 
first two matches by 179 runs and an innings within four days. The 
West Indies made their first ever visit to South Africa and only got 
there after four days of negotiations at London's Heathrow airport 
after threatening to strike in a row over match fees. Sadly for captain 
Brian Lara, one of the players at the center of the row with the West 
Indian federation, his team lost the first two of the five tests. 
South Africa had a mixed season, squandering a 1-0 lead to lose the 
series against England 2-1. But it created some cricket history by 
winning the first Commonwealth Games tournament, beating the favored 
Australians in the final of the one-day competition in Kuala Lumpur. 
Zimbabwe gained a first test victory in Pakistan, and, with fog and 
fading light ruining play in the second test, was guaranteed at least 
a share of the three-match series. In domestic competitions, Leicestershire 
won the English county championship for the third time after Surrey's 
big lead evaporated in the last few weeks while Western Australia 
beat Tasmania by seven wickets in the Sheffield Shield final after 
two successive failures in previous finals. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>