<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981221.2100.2340 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was the kind of Sunday the Sunday political talk shows were created 
for, basically. Panelists full of fire, brimstone, and predictions 
about where this impeachment process iseaded. "This week." "Face the 
nation." "Fox news Sunday." This is "meet the press." Will there be 
a Senate trial of impeachment against William Jefferson clinton? I 
do think that the leadership has to do a hard count and determine 
whether or not there are 34 or more who would not vote under the surnt 
circumstances and the knowledge that we have today for impeachment 
under any circumstances. We have a constitutional obligation to deal 
with this issue now that it's been sent to us by the house. There's 
no absolute requirement that we go through a trial. The constitution 
requires that the Senate now address this issue. There's nothing in 
the rules that requires that all the witnesses be heard in open session. 
If we actually end up having to hear from some of the more infamous 
witnesses, we're now all too familiar with, there's no prohibition 
under the Senate rules from hearing those witnesses in closed sessions. 
This will not be a spectacle. It will not demean 2 Senate. We are 
going forward to prepare for trial. We're getting ready the legal 
arguments. We're getting readily the motions practice. We've getting 
ready to present evidence. One thing we should remember is the Burden 
is on the managers from the house to establish a factual and evidentiary 
basis for the articles of impeachment. I think they're going to have 
a very difficult time doing that. I actually believe today therare 
more republicans who would vote against removing the president from 
office than democrats who would vote to remove him. Indeed I do not 
know of any democrats at the moment who would vote to remove the esident 
from office. From the very start when Bob for I Shelly and I talked 
about this issue last March. I said at that time and continue to believe 
that a censure is not worth a Tinker's damn. Larry Flynt said he is 
the James Carville of publishing. Isn't that rich. Merry Christmas. 
This is a full page add Flynt took out offering $1 million to anyone 
who say they had an affair with a member of Congress. The republican 
Congress has made larrylynt one of the most powerful people in Washington. 
He is so powerful that he ought to show up at Sally Quinn new year's 
eve party between Colin Powell and Alan Greenspan. What happened here? 
Bob Livingston stepped down, was that a good thing? Shld he have resigd? 
Well, Sam I wish he would T have. I unrstood why he did it. But I 
wish he wouldn't have done it. I think we are getting on a very slippery 
slope. Do you want President Clinton to resign? It's not a matter 
of what I want. I do think it would be honorable for the president 
to resign. I think from the things that he has admitted doing, he 
has degraded the office of the presidency. I think if the president 
were to resign under these circumstances, it would weaken the presidency, 
it would weaken the constitution, it would undermine i think the process 
that the founding fathers put place. It would be a bad thing for America. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>