<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981221.2100.2549 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Back in August, house democrats hired abbe Lowell to fight their case 
before the Judiciary committee. He's their chief investigative counsel 
officially and a veteran Washington attorney. He is with us tonight 
from Washington. Abbe, I want to quote to you two passage from "the 
Wall Street Journal" to start things off here. Much talk of a deal 
that would involve a fine. First of all,ouse republicans dismissing 
censure as constitutionally problematic, threatening the separation 
of powers between the White House and th legislative branch. I have 
a lot of regrets habit what the house did. I don't think I have any 
more regrets than the rhetoric of the republicans so desperate to 
win this than to do the right thing would trash something as the Senate's 
ability to set a censure deal. They said it's not in the constition. 
You and I could both list 25 things not in the constitution, like 
sending troops to the percent gran gulf without a declaration of war. 
And abortion rights. We could go on and on. Ofll the friv lous argument 
that was so disturbing. Quoting from the journal, they reject a fine 
as an unconstitutional Bill of attaineder in which Congress would 
be acting officially to penalize just one person. That would be the 
case actually if Congress passed a law that create and fine for one 
person called Bill Clinton, yes. But if Bill Clinton is part of a 
deal, as part of his admission of doing something wrong, said you 
censure me and I'll offset the cost of the investigation, that would 
be just fine in terms of reimbursement, not in terms of a fine. Brian, 
I hope Americans were able to see through all of the bad rhetoric 
because there was some truth told on the days of debate but there 
was an awful lot of misinformation. Abbe, this has been called the 
era where nothing truly matters. Nothing breaks through. It all ends 
up sounding the same. Yeah. And when a certain congressman from Florida 
said during the debate saturday, have you no sense of decency, sir, 
using the same quote as what ended in a lot of people's minds, the 
McCarthy era it didn't get through because it wasn't heard because 
at the same volume as everything else. The phrase "God bless America" 
really comes to bear now. The polls or the feedback on the air really 
tells me that the Americans understand mething. The notion that the 
radical right republicans would now demand the president's resignation 
is tantamount to a lot of things. Americans recognize that the Judiciary 
committee proceedings were partisan and unfair. They also saw the 
votes for impeachment were all republican and no democrat. A republican 
Congress throwing out a democratic vice president -- president or 
vice versa. Here the beauty and the wisdom of the entire scene. They 
now understand -- let me put it to you this way. Republicans asking 
President Clinton to resign is tantamount to a Lynch mob, drags a 
man out of jail to Hang him but then giving him a gun and saying shoot 
yourself. Abbe Lowell joining us from Washington tonight. We hope 
to have your counterpart Mr. schippers on the broadcast. Abbe, thank 
you very much. You're welcome, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>