<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981221.1830.0074 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. It must be maddening to the president's sharpest critics 
on Capitol Hill and in other places, but his approval rating only 
gets better after they take a whack at him. He is only the second 
president in history to be impeached by the house, and he now faces 
a trial in the Senate. But in our NBC news poll conducted after the 
impeachment vote, the president scores a 72% approval rating, 25% 
disapproval. And fully 62% think he should stay in office. 34% say 
he should resign. We're following this story from Capitol Hill with 
NBC's Lisa Myers, and at the White House with NBC's David Bloom. Lisa, 
let's begin with you. Key members of both parties say a trial is now 
all but inevitable, that in 18 days, William Jefferson Clinton is 
likely to become the second president ever to go on trial in the Senate. 
Tonight, White House hopes of a quick deal to head off a trial appear 
dim. A powerful democrat, senator Robert Byrd, essentially told the 
president's men to stay out of it, saying -- and moderate republicans 
oppose short-circuiting the process. You believe that at least the 
Senate should begin a trial? i do. i do. i do. It's a very heavy weather 
out there for the president right now. a trial could begin as early 
as January 8th, with Supreme Court chief justice William rehnquist 
swearing in all 100 senators as jurors. Senators claim they will be 
less partisan and more dignified than the house. Most hope to keep 
Monica Lewinsky from appearing at all. This won't be a sideshow or 
a circus kind of thing. Do you think having Monica Lewinsky on the 
Senate floor would be a sideshow? I don't think it would add to the 
deliberative process at all. So far, Senate republicans don't seem 
to have the same zeal as those in the house to remove this president 
from office. Already, some are talking of censure. Many democrats 
say they're disgusted with the president, but not enough to help provide 
the 67 votes required to remove him from office. At some point, this 
trial, after it commences, will be adjourned. And the Senate will 
agree on a censure resolution. Still, to save his job, even democrats 
say the president will have to pay a price. Some want him to admit 
guilt and acknowledge the seriousness of his offenses. What bothers 
a lot of people is that it doesn't seem to come through to him the 
enormity of the situation in which he finds himself. Tonight, some 
of the smartest people in Washington believe the president will survive. 
But this story has been wildly unpredictable. One Senate democrat 
says, "anything can happen. Anything." So far, almost anything has 
happened, Lisa. Thank you very much. NBC's David Bloom joins us from 
the White House. David? Tom, if anyone expected a contrite President 
Clinton to be on bended knee today, they'd be wrong. Two days after 
being impeached, the president's job approval numbers are at a record 
high, and White House aides say that if Mr. Clinton must admit to 
perjury, then there will be a trial. As the president manned a soup 
kitchen in downtown Washington today, the first lady conspicuously 
at his side, the shouted questions from reporters about impeachment 
went unanswered. His only message to the senators now considering 
his fate -- merry christmas. I hope everyone in the country will take 
some time to think about other people and do something in the spirit 
of the season, like this. In that spirit two former presidents suggest 
that the Senate censure the president. But they think he should admit 
some wrong doing. But his aides say he's adamant. His political team 
believe republicans will flinch at the prospect of removing a popular 
president from office. And today's spokesman said that if Mr. Clinton 
was impeach not because of his wrong doing, but because of a political 
vendetta. A majority party impeached the president because they could 
do it. The bottom line is this, in this volcanic political year, both 
democrats and republicans agree that there won't be the 67 votes to 
convict the president. One aide says, if it comes to a trial, we will 
win. But, Tom, they've been wrong before. They certainly have. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>