<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0364 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yugoslav forces and ethnic Albanian rebels seem to be goading each 
other into a major new round of fighting, with the people of Kosovo 
and the Western countries able to do little more than watch. Military 
and police units have been on the move in the last few days. Long 
convoys, including tanks and armored personnel carriers, are leaving 
bases where the government had promised their forces would remain 
and are putting men in new positions or taking territory from the 
rebels. The rebels, who moved into many areas vacated by the Serbs 
in October, are stepping up the recruiting and training of fighters 
and are obtaining large amounts of military gear, according to diplomats. 
In the last week eight Serbs have been slain. Serbs are convinced 
that the rebels are responsible, and many are threatening to take 
their revenge against ethnic Albanian civilians. NATO's top commander 
in Europe, Gen. Wesley Clark, and senior U.S. diplomats went to Belgrade 
on Monday to tell top Yugoslav officials to rein in their forces. 
But many Western diplomats in Yugoslavia say they doubt that they 
can stop renewed combat on a large scale, even though it had been 
held that the harsh Balkan winter would prevent any new conflict. 
The chief Western diplomat in Kosovo, William Walker, an American, 
is more optimistic than others. Still, he said there was not much 
the West could do except try to persuade the rebels and the government 
to act peacefully. ``I hope no one is overestimating the tools at 
our disposal,'' Walker said. ``We don't have many.'' In a month or 
so, as many as 2,000 international observers are scheduled to be on 
the ground in Kosovo, monitoring each side and trying to ease tensions. 
Now, however, there is a question whether war will erupt before most 
monitors are in place. A senior Western diplomat, referring to the 
rebel-run Kosovo Liberation Army, said: ``The government's decided 
enough is enough; the KLA is out of control. If the government responds 
the way it seems to be getting ready to do, then the monitors will 
have to get out because there'll be war everywhere.'' Monday in this 
village, six tanks were involved in combat with rebel forces that 
recently moved into the area. The tanks left their base over the weekend 
for what the government called a training exercise. New rebel trenches 
have been set up on the hills around the fighting and near the main 
road to the provincial capital, Pristina. The fighting here, along 
with the appearance Monday of heavily armed Serbian paramilitary policemen 
on the roads nearby, comes after a police official was shot to death 
as he walked to work Monday morning in a neighboring town. None of 
this was supposed to happen after Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic, 
under threat of NATO air strikes, agreed to stop offensive operations 
and withdraw many of his forces from Kosovo in October. Diplomats, 
led by Americans, thought that if the government halted their attacks, 
the rebels would honor a cease-fire, allowing negotiations. But negotiations 
have made little progress. Most ethnic Albanians, who make up more 
than 90 percent of Kosovo's population, want independence. The government 
is offering limited autonomy, and there are deep divisions among ethnic 
Albanian political leaders over what level of autonomy would be acceptable. 
Rebel leaders generally feel that they can win independence through 
war. On Saturday, as the body of the deputy mayor of Kosovo Polje, 
a few miles west of Pristina, was found by the roadside shot to death, 
Mirolslav Mijailovic, one of the 1,000 or so residents of the village 
of Velika Hoca, was welcoming guests to his home. It was his family's 
annual ceremony in homage to its patron, St. Nicholas. Dishes of potatoes, 
sweet peppers, cabbage rolls, fish and cookies nearly overflowed the 
long table as people tried to find solace in talk of religion and 
tradition. But it did not work, because they said they could feel 
Kosovo sliding quickly into war. ``The people are not to blame for 
what is coming, not the Serb people or the Albanian,'' Mijailovic 
said. ``Everyone wants what we had before, peace. But there are leaders 
on both sides who are setting a fire.'' Historically, Serbs and ethnic 
Albanians have been very close in the area of western Kosovo around 
Velika Hoca. But now, the guests said, they are terrified by the rebel 
fighters they see on the hills around the village. The two peoples 
were so close that one guest, the Serbian mayor of the city of Orahovac, 
three miles away, said one of his best friends was the man who is 
now the rebel commander for the area. ``When he started his chicken 
farm, he came to me for the money to buy the first load of chicken 
feed,'' said the mayor, Andjelko Kolasinac ``We are at the limits 
of our patience,'' Kolasinac said. ``The West must put enough pressure 
on the KLA that they stop what they are doing. Otherwise what I see 
coming will not be stopped.'' When the government has taken action 
against the rebels in the past, it has usually been so brutal that 
it has only increased the conviction among ethnic Albanians that they 
must create their own country. A large military offensive over the 
summer forced as many as 300,000 ethnic Albanians to flee their homes. 
Government forces then looted and burned an estimated 20,000 houses. 
It was the prospect of mass starvation and deaths caused by exposure 
in the Balkan winter that prompted Western countries to intercede 
so that refugees could feel safe enough to move back to their villages. 
But even now, in response to the rebel actions, government forces 
often brutalize ethnic Albanians. After the funerals last Wednesday 
of six young Serbs shot in a coffee shop in the city of Pec, the police 
went on a rampage for several days, arresting and severely beating 
dozens of ethnic Albanian men. Many victims said they had not even 
been questioned about the killings, only beaten. At the same time, 
government forces retook a nearby village, causing hundreds of ethnic 
Albanian civilians to flee the area. As his children packed clothes, 
blankets and bags of flour and a red kerosene lantern into a wagon 
behind the family tractor in the village of Glodanje, Nysret Maloku 
echoed the appeal Serbs are making to Western countries. ``You must 
stop these attacks on us,'' he said. ``We want peace, but we want 
to survive.'' And just as Serbs are insisting that government forces 
be unleashed against the rebels, Maloku said he wanted the Kosovo 
Liberation Army to strike back at the government. ``They have to protect 
us from the regime,'' he said. ``Any army is supposed to protect its 
people.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>