<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0295 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Japanese government's proposed national budget aims to lift the 
economy out of recession, but its vast size underscores the pressing 
worry that a big spending spree now will break the official coffers 
later. Bolstering the economy was clearly a theme throughout the process 
of drawing up the budget, whose details were disclosed Monday, but 
the ballooning costs of financing that revival raise the specter of 
paying for it and suggest that the government has only a small window 
to spur growth before it gets stuck on a collision course with a looming 
debt burden. The proposed budget amounts to a record 81.86 trillion 
yen, or $708 billion, for its next fiscal year, which ends on March 
31, 2000. The budget, which is expected to be approved by the Cabinet 
on Friday before it goes before the Parliament next month, includes 
a significant increase in spending for the construction of roads, 
bridges, dams and other public works intended to revive the sinking 
economy. Just a few years ago, the world was singing the praises of 
Japan's prudent fiscal balances, and the government embarked on a 
disciplined fiscal austerity to further trim its budget deficit. But 
now, mired in the worst recession since the end of World War II, the 
government has been forced to abandon that fiscal austerity, and its 
domestic finances are in sorry shape. At a projected 9.8 percent for 
this fiscal year, Japan's budget deficit is already the highest as 
a percentage of national economic output, or gross domestic product, 
among industrial countries. Moreover, its total national debt is projected 
to rise to about 110 percent of the national economy for the fiscal 
year ended in March 2000. That is second only to the national debt 
level of Italy, which is bringing that burden down just as Japan's 
level is rising. By the end of March 2000, the amount of outstanding 
government bonds, which will finance much of the deficit, is expected 
to rise to 327 trillion yen, or $2.8 trillion. As tax revenues plummet 
with the recessionary economy, the government must rely on issuing 
more bonds to cover the larger budget shortfalls. In the next fiscal 
year, the government plans to issue a record 71.13 trillion yen in 
bonds, including 31 trillion yen, or $269 billion, in new bonds to 
meet a deficit shortfall of 40 percent, the first time in nearly two 
decades that the gap will be that large. ``This is like a time bomb,'' 
a senior finance ministry budgetary official said. The government 
also proposed raising spending by 5.7 percent, to nearly 53 trillion 
yen, or $459 billion, under a special program, called ``zaito.'' This 
program is often referred to as the ``shadow budget'' because the 
government taps extra money from the postal savings and insurance 
system and spends the money on special loans to small businesses and 
other projects aimed at stimulating the economy. Financing growth 
with debt could not be cheaper because interest rates are just a sliver 
above zero. But the rising debt burden makes the government much more 
sensitive to increases in interest rates, which could rise if growth 
picks up substantially. For now, however, the concern lies with the 
current economic contraction. Even with the government's big splurge, 
and even with long-term tax cuts that are lowering the effective individual 
and corporate income tax rates for next year, consumers may still 
be wary of stepping up spending. Many are concerned that tax cuts 
now will be paid for with tax increases later. Consumers are also 
worried that retooling the economy will mean that more companies will 
nudge more workers off the payrolls. Taichi Sakaiya, head of the Economic 
Planning Agency, told reporters Monday that the unemployment figure, 
now at a record 4.3 percent, ``might rise for a while'' before it 
slipped back in the second half of next year. The risks of failing 
to revive the economy became apparent over the weekend as the government 
raised its projection for economic contraction for the current fiscal 
year. It said that growth in gross domestic product would contract 
by 2.2 percent, compared with an earlier projected contraction of 
1.8 percent. Meanwhile, the government projected economic growth of 
five-tenths of a percent in the next fiscal year, a rosier outlook 
than forecasts made by private economists. The International Monetary 
Fund said Monday that it projected that the Japanese economy would 
contract 2.8 percent this year and shrink five-tenths of 1 percent 
in 1999. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>