<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0431 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Of all the Internet stocks out there right now, Network Solutions 
Inc. would seem least likely to be hot. Everyone knows, after all, 
that sometime next year this Herndon, Va., company will lose its exclusive 
government contract for registering the popular Internet domains of 
.com, .net and .org _ the monopoly that accounts for virtually all 
its revenue. And yet, in the last two weeks, Network Solutions' shares 
have joined the A-list of Internet stocks already in the stratosphere. 
On Friday, it closed at $121, up from $59 two weeks earlier. And the 
ride continued Monday, as its shares reached $164.72 by the close 
of Nasdaq trading. The jump comes on the heels of several strategic 
alliances announced recently by Network Solutions, including marketing 
agreements with Netscape Communications Corp. and Yahoo that will 
give it broader name recognition with both consumers and businesses 
looking to register a domain name on the Internet. Those deals are 
part of the company's plans to diversify as the government moves forward 
with plans to hand over administration of the Internet addressing 
system to a nonprofit corporation. That group's first charge is to 
open Network Solutions' lucrative domain-name registration monopoly 
to competitors. Keith Benjamin, an Internet analyst for BancBoston 
Robertson Stephens in San Francisco, cited three reasons for the market's 
enthusiasm: the wild increases of Internet stocks in general; the 
recent alliances announced by the company; and a better understanding 
within the market of how the introduction of competition will affect 
Network Solutions. ``I think that there has been a perception change, 
from regulatory confusion to fears of competitive challenges, that 
is evaporating quickly,'' Benjamin said. ``Two things have happened: 
First, they have basically been given permission to continue to run 
the database'' that tells computers on the Internet the actual numeric 
addresses for every domain name a user enters. ``Second, the political 
machine has been moving at a painfully slow speed, which is good for 
Network Solutions.'' Indeed, the nonprofit group chosen by the Department 
of Commerce to introduce competition into the domain-name registration 
business, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, 
or ICANN, is nearly a month behind its deadline for picking a panel 
of technical experts. The delay has fueled speculation that it will 
also miss the deadline for opening the system to competition by the 
end of March. With its unique position as the exclusive global registrar 
for top-level domain names, Network Solutions has benefited from the 
blossoming of the Internet for personal and commercial use. The company 
has registered some 3 million domain names. Its income for the first 
nine months of the year grew threefold, to $7.5 million, or 45 cents 
a share, compared with $2.5 million, or 20 cents a share, for the 
first nine months of 1997. The longer the transition to competition 
takes, the longer Network Solutions will maintain its exclusive right 
to dispense _ at $70 a pop _ the 10,000 new addresses being added 
to the Internet each day. It also gives the company more time to continue 
its efforts to diversify its services and to enter agreements with 
Internet service providers and portals that will give it a strategic 
advantage over the numerous upstarts waiting for an opportunity to 
compete. Benjamin said the partnerships with Netscape and Yahoo effectively 
made Network Solutions the exclusive registrar for those companies' 
customers, ``suggesting that the competitive threat may not materialize'' 
from some of the bigger Internet players. And he predicted a similar 
agreement between Network Solutions and America Online, which recently 
announced that it was acquiring Netscape. Robert Korzeniewski, Network 
Solutions' chief financial officer and acting chief operating officer, 
said the recent announcements had sealed the market's perception of 
the company as both a retail stock and a top player like Amazon.com, 
eBay and American Online. ``We were on CNBC twice in the last few 
weeks,'' he said. ``Our stock was not a retail stock at all two weeks 
ago. But now what we've seen is continued strong support from our 
initial shareholders, as well as a new market that didn't even know 
we existed.'' Future competition remains a big question, however. 
The company is also in a leadership transition. Gabe Battista unexpectedly 
resigned as chief executive last month to run an upstart telephone 
company, Tel-Save Holdings of Hope, Pa. He had been with Network Solutions 
just two years, but under his direction, profits paid for an expansion 
of Network Solutions' international presence and a diversification 
of its products. A key focus has been in moving into offering broader 
Internet services for small companies that want to build an online 
presence. As Internet stocks continue to rally, Benjamin said, the 
biggest prizes will go to those companies with a big market, ``and 
it's easy to believe that domain space is a big market.'' ``Network 
Solutions has proven leadership,'' he added. ``We know the market 
is big. We just haven't known until recently how the competitive landscape 
would play out. It appears to have played out more favorably than 
some have expected.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>