<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0460 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Tuesday, Dec. 22: Battered 
by the resignations under fire of House Speaker Newt Gingrich and 
Speaker-to-be Robert Livingston in just two months, House Republicans 
have picked a little-known, untested Midwesterner to serve as their 
next speaker. Dennis Hastert, a former high school wrestling coach, 
has a reputation as a conciliator and technocrat who can work with 
members of both parties. Such qualities could do much to help the 
next Congress rise above the partisan rancor of the last year _ but 
only if Hastert shows his independence from the mean-spirited tactics 
of his chief backers, especially Tom DeLay, the Republican whip. In 
his 12 years in Congress, Hastert has been a shrewd and popular backbencher 
with strong positions on only a handful of issues. Few say he has 
a clear philosophy like that of Gingrich or knowledge of government 
like that of Livingston, who served as chairman of the House Appropriations 
Committee before his designation as speaker a month ago. As chairman 
of an oversight committee on national security, Hastert devoted himself 
almost exclusively to combating drugs. In the last budget, he unapologetically 
won a $250,000 subsidy for the maker of a caffeine-laden chewing gum 
in his district. He has also championed some patient rights in health 
care reform. It is rare for the country to have someone with such 
a limited background vaulted into the position of third in line of 
succession to the presidency. Even so, Hastert's potential as a successful 
speaker should not be dismissed. He is getting this chance because 
House Republicans were rocked by public reaction to their insistence 
on impeaching Clinton instead of censuring him. The Republicans are 
at least showing some sensitivity by reaching beyond the Southern 
hard-liners for this leadership position. The trouble with Hastert's 
sudden emergence is that his most recent service has been as deputy 
whip under DeLay, whose scorched-earth tactics forced Livingston to 
abandon an initial promise to let the House vote on the censure option. 
If Hastert hopes for reconciliation, he needs to renounce such partisan 
tactics, especially since Republicans have only a six-vote majority 
in the next Congress. The other challenge facing Hastert is to restore 
a measure of maturity and stability to his party. He can set an example 
for his House and the White House in avoiding what Dick Gephardt, 
the Democratic leader, called the politics of personal destruction. 
The important business of the next Congress, including rescue of Social 
Security and steps to insulate the United States from the global recession, 
cannot succeed without bipartisan support. There will be no room for 
partisan solutions rammed through the House, accompanied by demands 
for party loyalty. Hastert is known as ``the coach'' to his colleagues. 
He should remember that his team will include all House members, not 
just the few who plucked him from obscurity to serve as speaker. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>