<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0101 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sometimes past is prologue. As Iraqi officials in 1995 led U.N. arms 
inspectors to a large cache of documents hidden on a chicken farm 
near Baghdad, a red photograph album stood out. At first glance, the 
album, like the half million pages of other papers in the shed, seemed 
to cast light on Iraq's secret drive to obtain germ, chemical and 
nuclear arms and missiles. But closer scrutiny revealed huge gaps. 
The album's dozens of pages, for instance, offered some insights into 
Iraq's germ efforts. Photo after captioned photo showed not only flasks 
of deadly agents like anthrax but animal test subjects small and large, 
including sheep. Yet the inspectors found that the album covered germ 
work only through 1989 _ before Baghdad embarked on a crash program 
to turn experimentation into weapons for the 1991 gulf war, in which 
it deployed germ bombs and warheads at four sites, but did not use 
them. Moreover, something else was missing. The numbered pages were 
interrupted where photos had been removed from the three-ring binder. 
``We don't know what was taken,'' one inspector said. ``My guess? 
Pictures showing people'' central to building the arsenal. Today, 
seven years after President Saddam Hussein promised to come clean 
about his weapons of mass destruction, the book on Iraqi arms is still 
full of holes. Military experts in Washington and at the United Nations 
say the unanswered questions are serious and legion. Still unaccounted 
for are hundreds of chemical arms, tons of nerve gas, more than 100 
germ weapons and parts for up to four nuclear warheads, which are 
said to lack only the uranium to fuel them. ``There are vast areas 
of activity that are still unknown to us,'' said Gary Milhollin, director 
of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control in Washington and 
an expert on Iraq's arsenal. ``The uncertainties are so great that, 
as far as we know, Saddam Hussein today could have both chemical and 
germ warfare agents in warheads, ready to go.'' Milhollin and his 
staff have prepared a list of some of the main riddles about Iraq's 
unconventional weapons. Their chart, below, is lengthy. Yet Milhollin 
and U.N. experts note that no such list can be exhaustive. Given Iraq's 
evasiveness and defiance, its stonewalling and lies, such listings 
can only suggest the depth of the remaining questions. ``This is not 
definitive,'' one inspector said of the chart, adding that the goal 
was out of reach even of the U.N. and U.S. intelligence agencies. 
Prospects for greater illumination are bleak, analysts say, because 
of both the unknown consequences of the bombing that began Wednesday 
and Baghdad's obstinacy. What evidence might have been destroyed in 
the bombing was unknowable, but the inspection process, most analysts 
agree, had all but collapsed. Richard Butler, chairman of the U.N. 
Special Commission in charge of arms inspectors in Iraq, is more diplomatic. 
``It must regrettably be recorded again,'' he told the Security Council 
on Tuesday, ``that the commission is not able to conduct the substantive 
disarmament work mandated to it.'' The stakes are potentially huge. 
Iraq has already confessed to having made enough deadly microbes to 
kill all the people on Earth several times over. And Saddam Hussein 
has used weapons of mass destruction before. After losing the 1991 
gulf war, Saddam, as a condition of surrender, agreed to declare within 
15 days all his nuclear, chemical and biological arms and the missiles 
for delivering them, and then to destroy them. The United Nations 
set up a group to insure that he kept his word. Until it verified 
destruction of the weapons, Iraq was barred from selling oil. Later, 
the United Nations relented a bit and allowed some oil exports to 
pay for food, medicine and war reparations. To date, those sanctions 
have cost Iraq more than $120 billion. Eager to escape them, Baghdad 
over the years has offered at least five different ``full, final and 
complete'' disclosures, but the U.N. officials have dismissed these 
as woefully incomplete. An example of Iraq's pale cooperation is demonstrated 
in the 1995 chicken-farm haul, which was one of the special commission's 
greatest finds. While the documents were valuable, they had been carefully 
culled and included nothing from the headquarters of the Military 
Industrialization Corp. or the relevant archives of the Ministry of 
Defense. Among the ugliest outstanding questions is whether Iraq tested 
its germ weapons on people. Rumors and even some suggestive photographs 
have come to light. But so far, there is neither proof not admissions. 
Recently, the battle for truth about Iraq's armaments has been crippled 
by diminishing returns. The latest round of inspections aimed at testing 
Iraq's compliance with U.N. resolutions was an abject failure. In 
interviews, inspectors told of astonishing Iraqi feints and what one 
non-American inspector called a saga of ``lies and deception.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>