<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0419 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hoping to make a career in the military more enticing, the Pentagon 
on Monday proposed raises as large as 9.9 percent for mid-career officers 
and noncommissioned officers as part of a sweeping package that calls 
for the largest increases in military pay and pensions since 1982. 
President Clinton has already announced his intention to increase 
military salaries by 4.4 percent for all 1.4 million soldiers, sailors, 
airmen and marines, starting in January 2000. But the Pentagon's proposal 
would earmark additional raises for those officers and enlisted personnel 
whose experience and training have made them highly sought after in 
the civilian marketplace and who the Pentagon says have been quitting 
the armed services in droves. The largest increases will go to majors, 
lieutenant colonels and colonels in the Army, Air Force and Marines 
_ the equivalent of lieutenant commanders, commanders and captains 
in the Navy _ who have served six to 14 years. The Pentagon estimated 
that more than 1 million troops would receive anywhere from half a 
percent to 5.5 percent above the base increase. Secretary of Defense 
William Cohen and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. 
Henry H. Shelton, announced the increases as part of a package that 
also included an increase in retirement benefits. They described the 
increases as vital to recruiting qualified officers and enlisted personnel 
_ and keeping them in the armed services at a time when the economy 
is churning along. ``We want the best that we can attract, and we 
are working in an environment in which it's very hard to compete against 
a robust economy,'' Cohen said. The White House immediately released 
a statement from Clinton endorsing the proposed changes. Congress 
still must approve any of the changes, but that is considered likely 
because there is broad bipartisan support when it comes to pay and 
troops. Last year, for example, the Clinton administration proposed 
a 3.1 percent increase, and Congress raised it to 3.9 percent. Taken 
together, the raises are the largest since a newly elected President 
Reagan approved increases of 14.3 percent for officers and 10 to 17 
percent for enlisted personnel. The raises and changes in retirement 
will cost $30 billion over six years. That is more than a quarter 
of the $112 billion increase the Pentagon has asked Clinton to approve 
in his next budget, including $10 billion above the Defense Department's 
projected $258 billion budget for the fiscal year that begins next 
October. Although he has supported the raises, Clinton and his budget 
aides have objected to a $10 billion real increase. Instead, officials 
said, the Defense Department will receive between $3 billion and $5 
billion, significantly less but still the first real increase in defense 
spending, adjusted for inflation, since 1991 when spending spiked 
for the Gulf War. Cohen declined to discuss the overall budget, which 
the White House is expected to finish this week and unveil early next 
year. But he said he had received ``a satisfactory solution'' to the 
wrangling between Pentagon officials and Clinton's budget aides. The 
Pentagon has tried for years to rewrite the pay table that sets pay 
by rank and years of service, which has become skewed by incremental 
changes since it was created after World War II. For example, officers 
receive their single largest pay raises not for any promotion up the 
ranks but rather for reaching their third year of service _ a legacy 
of the Vietnam era, when the Pentagon was trying to persuade officers 
not to quit after completing their three-year commissions. But previous 
proposals never advanced, largely because they required some ranks 
to take pay cuts for others to receive raises. The new proposal would 
insure that no one receives a cut, although some will receive bigger 
raises than others. Raises will also more closely mirror both years 
of service and promotions. For example, a major with two years experience 
will receive a 4.4 percent increase next year, but a major with six 
years will receive 5.5 percent more. For the major with six years 
of experience _ just at the point when he or she is deciding whether 
to make a career of military service _ pay will rise to $3,798.60 
a month, $342.30 more than today. ``This is going to enable us to 
do a better in rewarding performance, compensating people for their 
skills, their education, their experience, and also to encourage them 
to continue their military service,'' Cohen said. The proposed changes 
in pensions would allow those with 20 years of service to retire once 
again with 50 percent of their salary. Those who joined since 1986, 
when the military pension system was last rewritten, have faced the 
prospect of retiring with only 40 percent. At the time, the decrease 
had been intended to persuade people to serve longer in order to retire 
with higher pensions, but it had the opposite effect, convincing people 
to get out long before retirement. Staff Sgt. Daniel DeMilio, a 13-year-veteran 
of the Marine Corps who repairs helicopter radio and navigation equipment, 
said the increases would ``bring things more in line with civilian 
pay.'' ``After doing a little math, I found that I'll be able to help 
out with my daughter's college fund,'' he said. Then, he added a fundamental 
fact about a career in the military: ``You're never going to be a 
millionaire.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>