<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0319 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A novel form of cancer treatment has neared the end of its preliminary 
trials with promising results at the same time as new research has 
cast doubt on its original rationale. The doubts, not yet resolved, 
may mean that the treatment is less harmless to normal cells than 
thought. But it is also possible that the treatment may be applicable 
to a much wider range of cancers than previously believed. The agent 
of treatment is a genetically altered adenovirus, one of the viruses 
that cause the common cold. Called Onyx-015 by its developer, Onyx 
Pharmaceuticals of Richmond, Calif., the virus is injected directly 
into tumors. Enormous doses can be used without apparent harm to the 
patient because the virus is designed to kill certain types of tumor 
cells but not healthy cells. The treatment is based on recent insights 
into the basic genetics of tumor cells, and in particular the protective 
genes that are subverted when a cell becomes cancerous. The virus 
is designed for specific attacks on the many types of tumor cells 
that have knocked out a critical gene called p53. Onyx-015 is being 
tested in patients with several types of cancer but the trials with 
head and neck cancers are furthest along. Onyx Pharmaceuticals reported 
last month that in 16 out of 26 patients with head and neck cancer, 
or 62 percent, the tumors had shrunk by more than half, and that in 
six of those patients the tumors had entirely disappeared. In all 
cases, the patients received a standard chemotherapeutic drug as well 
as the virus, because earlier tests had shown the two agents in combination 
were more effective than either alone. The results are impressive 
because the patients were at an advanced stage, all of them having 
failed to benefit from conventional treatments. But because the test 
is a Phase 2 trial, designed to explore the most effective dose with 
only a small number of patients, the results cannot be regarded as 
conclusive. The company now hopes, with Food and Drug Administration 
approval, to move to a Phase 3 trial, with enough patients to arrive 
at a statistically significant outcome. Dr. James Arseneau, a doctor 
at the Albany (N.Y.) Medical Center, is one of those testing the virus. 
Of the eight patients with head and neck cancer whom he has treated 
so far, ``three have had really superb results,'' he said. ``With 
one guy, the tumor all went away,'' he said. ``In another, there's 
just an area of thickness but the initial mass has gone. The others 
had more minor responses. But given the situation these people are 
in, with far advanced disease, I think it is really remarkable they 
have done as well as they have.'' Meanwhile, on another track, several 
researchers experimenting with the Onyx-015 virus in the laboratory 
say they find it behaves rather differently than Onyx had proposed 
on the basis of its own laboratory tests. The question of exactly 
how the virus works bears both on its safety and on the range of tumor 
types it may be able to kill. Normal cells have an intricate circuitry 
of interacting genes and proteins that control their proliferation. 
The circuitry is designed to make sure the cells divide when the body 
requires them to, but to halt or even kill the cell if it attempts 
an unauthorized division that might lead to cancer, such as after 
invasion by a virus or damage to the chromosomes. Division is tightly 
controlled by a system centered on a protein known as Rb. The cell-arrest 
and cell-suicide programs are under the direction of another protein, 
p53. For a cell to become tumorous, it must subvert the division-control 
circuitry. Many tumor cells have sabotaged the Rb gene and in about 
60 percent the p53 gene is also mutated. Biologists have recently 
come to recognize that viruses, like incipient tumor cells, must defeat 
the division-control circuitry and that in the course of evolution, 
several viruses have targeted the products of the very same genes 
that are mutated in tumor cells. Adenovirus has at least three genes 
for this purpose. Its E1A gene makes a substance that disrupts the 
Rb protein, while E1B-55K blocks the division-arrest function of p53, 
and E1B-19K jams p53's cell-suicide program. In 1992, Onyx's chief 
scientific officer at the time, Frank McCormick, realized that the 
frequent mutation of the p53 gene in tumor cells created a critical 
difference between them and the healthy cells that could be exploited 
by a defective form of adenovirus. An adenovirus lacking the E1B-55K 
gene that thwarts the division-arrest mechanism of p53 would be unable 
to replicate in normal cells, because their p53 system would block 
the division process. But the defective virus could replicate in tumor 
cells that had disabled their own p53, and go on to attack other tumor 
cells. ``The concept is a very powerful one,'' said Dr. Scott Lowe, 
a molecular biologist at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in Long 
Island, N.Y. ``Once he told us, everyone said, `Why didn't I think 
of that before?''' Onyx-015 is an adenovirus that lacks the E1B-55K 
anti-division-arrest gene. In preclinical studies, the company reported 
that the defective virus killed laboratory cultures of p53-deficient 
tumor cells but was harmless to normal cells. But in the last few 
months other researchers have come up with contradictory results that 
``question the reliability of Onyx's original preclinical studies,'' 
said Dr. Steven Linke, a molecular biologist at the National Cancer 
Institute. ``McCormick has an excellent idea and I hope it will work,'' 
Linke said. ``But in the new studies, the Onyx virus in some cases 
is unable to kill tumor cells that lack p53 function. The conclusion 
would have to be that the killing mechanism is independent of p53, 
although if the clinical trials are successful, it may not matter 
too much how the virus works.'' McCormick, who is now director of 
the cancer center at the University of California at San Francisco, 
agrees it is now clear that Onyx-015 can replicate in cancer cells 
with an intact p53 gene, ``which is not consistent with the original 
hypothesis at all.'' But he believes a new discovery about the genetics 
of tumor cells goes far toward explaining the apparently contradictory 
results. Even in tumor cells where the p53 gene itself is intact, 
other things may go wrong in the pathways through which p53 operates 
or is activated. Biologists have recently discovered the genetic relay 
through which Rb signals to p53 that an improper division is in progress. 
This gene, known as p14-arf, turns out to be mutated in many tumor 
cells. McCormick says that all tumor cells may have mutations in either 
the p53 gene or the p14-arf gene, so that either directly or indirectly 
their p53 system is inactivated. This would explain why Onyx-015 can 
replicate in tumor cells with normal p53 genes, he said. As for the 
reports that Onyx-015 can infect normal cells in laboratory culture, 
McCormick said it appears that the process of culturing cells to make 
them grow outside the body can inactivate p14-arf, again creating 
the conditions for Onyx-015 to flourish. He noted there was no sign 
that Onyx-015 attacked normal cells in the living body. ``Viruses 
are highly conserved and everything they do is for a clear purpose,'' 
McCormick said. ``If you accept that the virus makes E1B-55K to neutralize 
p53, then our original hypothesis has to be true.'' Other experts 
say the suggestion that all tumor cells have knocked out either p53 
or p14-arf is plausible but has yet to be fully demonstrated. They 
said that regardless of exactly how Onyx-015 works, the general idea 
of using viruses to target the Achilles' heels of tumor cells is highly 
promising. ``Despite these bumps in the road, I still think it is 
a very exciting strategy,'' Lowe said. ``If this virus doesn't work, 
probably some other virus will.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>