<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0463 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a new music video, a black editor of a hip-hop magazine tears through 
a dusty animal range, stalked by Ice Cube, a titan of gangsta rap. 
The rapper, wearing a scowl, eventually slays the journalist, then 
mounts his taxidermic head on a wall with that of so-called playa 
hataz (player haters), people who begrudge the success of others. 
The video, of course, is pure fiction. But black journalists who cover 
hip-hop culture say the theme, though certainly exaggerated, is chillingly 
real. They say threats and assaults by rappers and others in the industry 
are becoming increasingly common, leaving some journalists operating 
in an atmosphere of intimidation and self-censorship. In a recent 
case, the editor in chief of Blaze, a new spinoff of Vibe, says he 
was stomped in the face and struck with chairs by four men, two of 
whom he recognized as rap producers. The police say the assault, which 
took place last month in a conference room in the magazine's Manhattan 
office, left the 29-year-old editor, Jesse Washington, with cuts in 
the head and facial fractures. Washington, who said the beating was 
over a photograph of one artist/producer, has pressed charges against 
two of the men, who have denied beating Washington. ``When four guys 
have you on the ground kicking you in the head, it's for real,'' said 
Washington, who is considering plastic surgery. ``My face got pretty 
wrecked. The fact that I didn't want my mom to see me for a while 
tells you how serious it was.'' Writers and editors say other rappers 
have lashed out because they didn't make the cover of publications, 
didn't like what was printed about them or didn't like the photos 
that appeared in magazines. As a result, some journalists say they 
are careful not to be acerbic _ or to do anything that would set off 
an artist _ when they profile rappers or critique new CDs. Some journalists, 
speaking on the condition of anonymity, say rappers are sometimes 
allowed to see stories and layouts before they go to press. VIBE/SPIN 
Ventures, the owner of Vibe, Spin and Blaze magazines, is hiring security 
guards and putting in place a system that lets employees call for 
help in case of emergency. Ray Scott, a former member of the disbanded 
Almighty RSO, said the ire between the news media and hip-hop artists 
has its roots in envy. ``Some journalists try to decimate the character 
of rappers,'' Scott explained. ``We're pretty much all young black 
guys getting money, and they're jealous, so they try to embarrass 
us. As young black guys, why should we get trampled on by our own? 
They can criticize us without disrespecting us.'' Rap has long been 
denounced for its violent lyrics _ lyrics that rappers say reflect 
the raw energy of the streets from which they emerge. Some of the 
violence has crossed over into real fatalities, like the shooting 
deaths of the rappers Tupac Shakur and the Notorious B.I.G. Less apparent, 
though, is the atmosphere of violence that is creeping into the hip-hop 
magazine world, which has grown over the last three years with the 
expanding industry. Black reporters and editors see their close relationship 
with artists as part of the problem, saying that performers and producers 
see black journalists as their peers. ``We go to the same clubs, concerts 
and live in the same neighborhoods,'' said Kierna Mayo, a former editor 
of The Source, a hip-hop glossy. So when someone writes a less than 
flattering profile of a performer or pans a CD, the artist feels a 
sense of betrayal. Reginald Dennis, former music editor of The Source 
and former editor in chief of XXL, a hip-hop magazine, sees other 
reasons. ``It's black pathology at its worst,'' Dennis said. ``As 
a journalist, you think twice about asking hard and probing questions. 
You have to run your office like it's an armed camp. I maintain that 
a writer is going to get killed.'' Several black journalists said 
that artists assume they can get away with assaulting black writers 
but not white ones. ``These guys would never attack a white journalist,'' 
said Cheo Hodari Coker, a freelance writer who says he was assaulted 
a few years back by a member of the Wu-Tang Clan. ``Rappers are many 
things. They're ignorant but they're not stupid. They know they would 
go to jail, straight to jail.'' Sheena Lester, the editor in chief 
of XXL, agreed. ``They don't respond to us the same way they do to 
mainstream media,'' she said. ``They would never do what they did 
to Jesse to Joe Levy, the music editor at Rolling Stone. What happened 
with Jesse was so horrifying, I couldn't sleep. I mean, beat up in 
his office!'' Washington said Deric ``D-Dot'' Angelettie, a producer 
who works with the rap impresario Sean ``Puff Daddy'' Combs, attacked 
him because he had unmasked Angelettie in the current issue of Blaze 
as the Madd Rapper, a comical performer whose identity, Washington 
insists, was already known among many rap followers. Ian Niles, a 
lawyer for Angelettie and Anthony Hubbard, the other man named by 
Washington as an assailant, said his clients were not guilty. This 
is not the first time Washington says he has had a run-in with someone 
involved in hip-hop. In August, he said Wyclef Jean, a musician with 
the chart-topping Fugees, brandished a gun as he tried to stop Washington 
from publishing a bad review of a CD he had produced. Washington did 
not file charges, and Jean told an MTV interviewer that the incident 
never happened, labeling the accusation a publicity stunt. Jean would 
not comment for this article. While cases like Washington's have been 
publicized, many of the threats are not even reported to the police. 
``There's a dilemma,'' Dennis said. ``If you're black and go to the 
police, you've violated the code of the street.'' Some say journalists 
have retaliated by banning the artists from their publications. White 
critics and editors say such incidents are extremely rare in rock 
music. Recently, however, a white rocker, Marilyn Manson, watched 
as his bodyguards assaulted Craig Marks, the white executive editor 
of Spin, a sister publication of Blaze and Vibe, because Manson didn't 
make the cover of the January issue of the magazine, Marks said. He 
has filed charges against Manson and the bodyguards. Paul Cambria, 
a lawyer for Manson, said, ``I can tell you that Manson vehemently, 
categorically denies that there was ever an assault on this man.'' 
A few years ago, Coker, a writer on assignment for Mouth 2 Mouth, 
a defunct Time Inc. publication, traveled to Staten Island to interview 
the Wu-Tang Clan, a gangsta group he had written about before. He 
said he was socked in his left eye by Masta Killa, one of the group's 
members, who didn't like a caricature of Wu-Tang that had accompanied 
Coker's earlier profile of the group in Rap Pages. In Masta Killa's 
obscenity-laced diatribe, ``He said, `We're not cartoon characters,' 
'' Coker recalled. Another Wu-Tang member asked him why they didn't 
get on the cover of the magazine. ``I told them I had nothing to do 
with the cartoon or the cover,'' Coker said. ``I thought, `I just 
got punched in the eye for nothing.' I didn't press charges then, 
but today the first call I'd make is to the law offices of Johnnie 
Cochran.'' A spokeswoman for Masta Killa said the rapper had no comment. 
Dennis said he was threatened dozens of times when he was music editor 
at The Source. ``Every time I was threatened I wrote about it just 
in case I turned up missing somewhere,'' he said. ``It should not 
be open season on writers.'' While at The Source, Dennis and another 
editor were involved in a brawl with the four members of the Almighty 
RSO, who were dissatisfied with its coverage and threatened to bring 
them ``out in body bags,'' Dennis recalled. ``They had been threatening 
to do bodily harm to the editors, so we presented them with a writ 
of mediation in which a court-appointed officer would mediate,'' Dennis 
said. ``We went to the police, and in hip-hop that's not the thing 
you want to do. So when we presented them with the writ, they decided 
they wanted to fight, so we fought.'' Scott, then a member of the 
Almighty RSO, denied that anyone was told he would be killed, but 
admitted there was a fracas. Ms. Lester said she was threatened by 
Tupac Shakur when she was editor of Rap Pages because he didn't like 
an article about him. ``We said Tupac had a revolutionary spirit, 
and if he wasn't careful, he would end up like real revolutionaries: 
in jail,'' Ms. Lester recalled. Shakur, she said, left an obscene 
message on an answering machine threatening her. ``He said, `I have 
a big crew,' '' she recalled. `` `Keep your head up.' It was a terrifying 
feeling. He was this respected creative talent with friends and fans 
willing to do whatever.'' Ms. Lester said her fears were allayed somewhat 
when another rapper, the late Notorious B.I.G., then a friend of Shakur, 
told her not to worry. She never reported the threat to the police. 
Instead she banned Shakur from the magazine until he was killed in 
1996. One editor, Selwyn Seyfu Hinds, says he thinks that a lack of 
sophistication in dealing with volatile situations is the problem. 
Hinds, the editor of The Source, says there have been no incidents 
of violence at the magazine since he took the helm two years ago. 
``I've dealt with situations that were very tense,'' he said. ``But 
in our case, diplomacy, conversation and mediation have always prevailed.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>