<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0092 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Imagine you could save the Social Security system from bankruptcy 
by raising every American's retirement check _ without increasing 
taxes. Such is the radical cure proposed by Martin Feldstein, a chief 
economic adviser to President Ronald Reagan and a professor of economics 
at Harvard University, who made his case earlier this month at a conference 
sponsored by the White House. Everyone agrees that the system needs 
to be fixed quickly, because otherwise it will begin to run out of 
money early in the next century as the baby-boom generation reaches 
retirement age. But the obvious solutions _ reducing benefits, raising 
taxes and postponing retirement _ are unappealing. Another option 
is privatization, which calls for part of the current payroll tax 
to be steered into private retirement accounts that would be invested 
in potentially high-yield stocks and bonds. The income from these 
accounts could then ease the burden on the existing Social Security 
system. But most privatization plans scare politicians because they 
would expose retirees to the vagaries of the stock market. Enter Feldstein, 
who proposes privatization with a clever twist. His plan calls for 
keeping the existing Social Security system intact. But he would also 
create private investment accounts for all workers, equal to 2 percent 
of their Social Security earnings, paid for with general government 
revenues. At retirement, workers would hand over the accumulated balance 
in their accounts to an investment or insurance company in exchange 
for a lifetime annuity: a guaranteed annual income until death. Feldstein 
would pay for these private accounts by tapping about a trillion dollars 
in projected federal surpluses over the next decade. Also, workers 
would keep only 25 percent of the annual income from their annuity. 
The balance would be returned to the Treasury. The plan's major selling 
point is that workers come out ahead no matter how poorly their investments 
fare. They will begin receiving checks at retirement equal to the 
amount paid by the current system plus 25 percent of the income from 
their retirement annuity. The plan would thus sidestep the criticism 
of other privatization plans, most of which rely on cutting benefits, 
raising taxes or subjecting retirees to the risk that their checks 
will sink below current levels. ``The plan reflects the magic of compound 
interest,'' said Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas. (Gramm has proposed a similar 
idea.) Henry Aaron and Robert Reischauer of the Brookings Institution 
have called the plan ``imprudent,'' pointing to the large financial 
risks and even larger political risks. Many of the House and Senate 
onlookers at the session came away thinking more about magic than 
imprudence, putting Feldstein's idea at the forefront of the privatization 
debate. But do the numbers add up? According to the nonpartisan actuaries 
at the Social Security Administration, the answer is sort of, kind 
of, maybe. In an analysis completed this month, they concluded that 
the plan would erase nearly all of the projected deficit using Feldstein's 
optimistic assumptions about the profit that workers would earn on 
their investment accounts and about the fees they would pay to investment 
funds for administering their accounts. But when the actuaries adopted 
more conservative assumptions _ estimates more in line with those 
of independent analysts _ the Feldstein plan closes about two-thirds 
of the projected deficit. Congress would need to close the remaining 
gap with tax hikes and spending cuts. The actuarial report appears 
kind to Feldstein, but their analysis also exposes the proposal's 
hidden pitfalls. The plan would siphon trillions of dollars from the 
federal Treasury, money that could otherwise have been used to pay 
off the federal debt. A larger federal debt, in turn, requires the 
government to spend more on interest payments. But Feldstein argues 
``that there is no chance that Congress would use those trillions 
to pay down the debt.'' In addition, Aaron and Reischauer point out, 
the money spent to create private accounts is money that Congress 
can no longer spend on other pressing needs _ including Medicare, 
whose financial predicament is far more alarming. Critics also warn 
that if the projected surpluses disappear, then the government would 
have made reckless promises to pay pensions that it could no longer 
afford. Then there is the issue of fairness. Feldstein maintains, 
correctly, that virtually every retiree's income would rise under 
his plan. But the increases would raise benefits more for high-wage 
workers than for low-wage workers. Critics like Aaron and Reischauer 
see no reason for Congress to risk increasing the deficit decades 
into the future in the service of a plan that primarily rewards the 
rich. For many critics, the most ominous threats are political. Consider 
a middle-income worker 10 years after the plan takes hold. He notes 
that 12 percent of his earnings are dedicated to a public system that 
produces only a trickle at retirement. But the 2 percent of his earnings 
that go into his private investment account grow at a gaudy 7 percent 
or more a year. The public account looks like a poor deal because, 
unlike the private accounts, it is saddled with paying off the debt 
from the early years of Social Security, when the system paid far 
more in benefits than it collected from workers in taxes. But economists 
note that if the private accounts paid their share of this debt burden, 
they too would look like lousy investments. However misguided, many 
people will demand that more of their payroll taxes go into the high-flying 
private accounts. But that would whittle away at the public system 
_ the part of program that makes disproportionately large payments 
to low-wage workers. Ultimately, the decision about revamping Social 
Security depends as much on politics as on economics. The country 
must decide how much of its income it wants to transfer to retirees. 
Feldstein says the elderly ought to collect more. Critics like Reischauer 
and Aaron think that as the number of workers shrinks relative to 
the number of retirees, as predicted, the work force can ill afford 
to spend more. Once that question is resolved, the rest is financial 
engineering. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>