<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0274 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From the very first hours of the AIDS crisis _ especially the confusing 
interval between 1981, when the first cases were reported, and 1982, 
when the mysterious blight was given a name _ there have been wild 
conspiracy theories. One theory fingered the CIA for a failed biological 
war against Cuba that inadvertently backfired (scuba-diving operatives 
were said to have fumbled a lethal vial and broken it against a rock 
in Haiti). Another theory held that this was no new virus at all, 
but African swine fever, a deadly danger being hushed up by the pork 
industry. Still another theory was that the virus had been engineered 
by government scientists. Over the years, much of this early suspicion 
fell away. Or so it seemed. In fact, conspiracy peddlers still abound, 
especially among blacks. ``There's a whole host of African-American 
people who believe that HIV is not the cause of AIDS,'' said Mario 
Cooper, founder of Leading for Life, an initiative to draft black 
and Hispanic leaders into the AIDS battle. Leading for Life is a project 
of the Harvard AIDS Institute. That fact was vividly demonstrated 
on Saturday at the Harlem AIDS Forum sponsored by the Rev. Al Sharpton 
and his National Action Network. Throughout the afternoon, to thunderous 
applause and heartfelt approbation, speakers presented a score of 
assaults on AIDS orthodoxy. Of the dozen or so speakers, only one 
subscribed to the theory that HIV was what was making people sick 
_ and he argued that it was being transmitted intentionally to blacks 
through World Health Organization vaccine programs, part of what he 
described as a genocidal project. ``Our goal was to allow people to 
hear the disparate perspectives, and do their own follow-up research,'' 
said Curtis Cost, who organized the event, attended by more than 150 
people drawn mostly from Harlem. ``These are things that the public 
needs to hear, and you can't hear them on television and read them 
in the papers.'' While health care experts are frustrated by such 
entrenched fears, they acknowledge that African Americans have a unique 
reason for distrusting health care providers. The notorious Tuskegee 
experiment, in which poor blacks were denied treatment for syphilis 
and then monitored by federal researchers, was the most egregious 
example, but many older American blacks can recall segregated doctors' 
offices and hospitals, or have experienced substandard medical treatment 
they attribute to discrimination in the years since. In a survey of 
African Americans conducted last year by the Institute of Minority 
Health Research at Emory University's Rollins School of Public Health, 
74 percent of blacks believed they were very likely or somewhat likely 
to be used by doctors as guinea pigs without their consent. In the 
survey, 18 percent said they believed HIV was an engineered microbe, 
and nearly 1 in 10 said AIDS was part of a plot to kill blacks. ``It's 
almost a gut reaction,'' said Dr. Alvin F. Poussaint, a professor 
of psychiatry at the Harvard Medical School who writes widely on African 
Americans and the health care system. ``When people don't know science, 
and most people don't, it's not hard to convince them that something 
unsavory may be going on. And this becomes a conspiracy to get black 
people. That's how much they believe that doctors in the system want 
to kill them.'' The AIDS epidemic has been especially cruel to blacks. 
Although they make up only 13 percent of the nation's population, 
blacks accounted for 57 percent of all new infections last year, according 
to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The annual AIDS 
case rate among African-American women is 16 times that of white women, 
while one out of 50 of the nation's black men is believed to be infected 
with HIV. There has also been good news. In the past two years, infections 
that occur as complications of HIV have sharply fallen, thanks to 
powerful new AIDS drugs. But overall, fewer blacks than whites with 
HIV are taking these drugs, which are expensive and require complicated 
schedules. Since 1995, AIDS death rates for whites have dropped by 
almost 70 percent. By contrast, black death rates have fallen 58 percent. 
Dr. Wafaa El-Sadr, director of AIDS programs at Harlem Hospital, said 
blacks with HIV were more likely to demand evidence that a drug worked 
before taking it. ``Building trust takes time,'' she said. Cooper 
said AIDS was just now coming to the top of the community's political 
agenda, and said the Harlem AIDS Forum was part of a productive ``catharsis.'' 
Dennis DeLeon, director of the Latino Task Force on AIDS, agreed _ 
though he and Cooper both steered clear of the forum. ``I think it's 
a community trying to come to grips with the fact that this is an 
African-American epidemic,'' DeLeon said. Poussaint was less forgiving. 
``This is destructive, very destructive,'' he said. ``If it gets people 
to stop getting tested, and engaging in safe sex, it's just very sad. 
Because this is a crisis situation in our community.'' Among the theories 
advanced throughout the afternoon, the only common thread was that 
AIDS was a hoax. Keidi Obi Awadu, a speaker on public health issues 
who also goes by the name ``The Conscious Rasta,'' advanced a fantastical 
scenario in which everything about AIDS was in question. It is not 
caused by HIV, he asserted. Indeed, it is no epidemic at all, only 
a series of unrelated health concerns that must be treated individually, 
he said. And the condoms that are supposed to safeguard instead cause 
illness, he said. ``Guess what,'' he told the rapt crowd, ``latex 
causes allergies. Latex causes antibodies. The more condoms you're 
exposed to, the more likely you are to test HIV positive.'' Other 
speakers suggested that blacks in Harlem and Africa were being used 
as guinea pigs in some mysterious experimentation, or that the ultimate 
goal was depopulation of Africa in order to get to the deposits of 
precious metals there. The CDC took most of the heat, having been 
renamed by one speaker ``the Centers for Control by Diseases.'' Cost 
held the federal agency partly responsible for perpetrating what he 
called a great myth: that viruses exist at all. ``Nobody can see them 
except for a handful of scientists with their microscopes, so we have 
to take their word for it,'' Cost said. When Cost asked for a showing 
of hands from people who thought HIV caused AIDS, not one hand rose. 
Then he asked people to raise their hands if they believed AIDS was 
transmitted through sex. Nobody did. At times, the thrust of the six-hour 
gathering seemed to be an emotional plea to anyone with HIV to stop 
taking their medication. Lynn Gannett, who identified herself as a 
data processor on an early research trial of the AIDS drug AZT, spoke 
in a quavering voice as she beseeched the audience. ``Please,'' she 
said, ``if you are on these pills or if your baby is taking them, 
stop. I beg you. The drugs can kill you.'' One of those at the forum, 
Bill McDougald, 49, a chauffeur, sought to make sense of it all. ``The 
Harlem community collectively feels that the information coming in 
is suspect,'' he said. Sharpton, summing it up, said: ``I don't agree 
with everything they may say, but I think people should hear it. There 
are in my community a disproportionate amount of victims.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>