<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0423 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two small studies have shown that over the course of just a few weeks, 
one dose of experimental drugs injected directly into the heart can 
greatly relieve, or even eliminate, the chest pain of coronary artery 
disease by encouraging the growth of new blood vessels to bypass clogged 
arteries, according to researchers in the United States and Germany. 
The research is at a preliminary stage, and the drugs have yet to 
be tested in large groups of people. Even if the results hold up, 
it may be years before any therapy is available for patients who suffer 
from such chest pain, or angina. One of the treatments under study 
is gene therapy to produce a protein called vegF, for vascular endothelial 
growth factor. The other entails injection of a protein called FGF-1, 
for fibroblast growth factor. Each drug is given in a single injection, 
through a surgical incision in the chest. In effect, both treatments 
aim to allow patients to grow their own heart bypasses by sprouting 
thin ``collateral'' blood vessels, in a strategy called therapeutic 
angiogenesis. The same gene therapy involved in one of these treatments 
has been shown to be effective in building new blood vessels in the 
legs, but these reports are the first to assert that gene therapy 
has produced new vessels in the heart. The coronary gene therapy research, 
led by Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Brighton, 
Mass., and Tufts University, is reported in Tuesday's issue of Circulation, 
a journal published by the American Heart Association. The protein 
therapy is being developed by Dr. Thomas-Joseph Stegmann of Fulda, 
Germany, a leading figure in the field, who discussed his work in 
interviews. So far, tests of both therapies are in the first stage, 
where research determines whether the treatment is safe to patients. 
Ordinarily researchers do not make claims for effectiveness until 
later stages, involving testing on larger groups of people, are completed. 
But the researchers said in interviews that they were struck by the 
improvements reported by more than 20 participants in these early 
trials, even patients whose pain could not be controlled by other 
drug therapy or bypass surgery. And the editor of the journal decided 
that Isner's results, though preliminary, were significant enough 
to warrant publication. Nearly all the participants reported substantial 
pain relief, and some who were virtually homebound before receiving 
the injection have painlessly resumed swimming, working out on exercise 
bicycles and pursuing other physical activities. Pain relief usually 
began about three weeks after the procedure, which, on average, took 
about an hour in an operating room, with the patient under general 
anesthesia. The hospital stay was about four days. Pain relief, even 
elimination of pain, has persisted in all participants who showed 
improvement, the researchers said. ``How long that will remain effective 
is anybody's guess,'' said Isner, the first of whose patients received 
the injection only 10 months ago. St. Elizabeth's Hospital, with which 
Isner is affiliated, has formed a company to test his therapy in larger 
trials. As for Stegmann, he is a co-founder of Cardio-Vascular Genetic 
Engineering Inc. of Irvine, Calif., which aims to develop angiogenesis 
treatment for coronary artery disease. Dr. Valentin Fuster, head of 
cardiology at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York City, said, ``It's 
exciting, but you should be cautious about what will be the impact 
of all of this.'' Fuster, president of the American Heart Association, 
said he doubted that it would ``become a panacea for everyone'' with 
angina and coronary heart disease. He was among experts interviewed 
who said much more extensive research, taking years, would be needed 
before these or similar therapies found their way into standard medical 
practice, if they ever did. One important concern was that the two 
studies involved a small number of patients. Another was that none 
could receive a placebo, or dummy substance, as scientific controls 
to allow more rigorous comparisons. For ethical reasons, the Food 
and Drug Administration and hospital committees whose function is 
to protect volunteers from harmful research declined to allow researchers 
to subject a control group to the rigors of sham surgery that offered 
them no benefit. Yet another concern was uncertainty about the long-term 
benefits. Many doctors remember a number of drug and surgical therapies 
for angina and other conditions that appeared spectacular initially 
but that failed in the longer run. Nevertheless Isner's report ``is 
very compelling,'' said Dr. Jonathan Marmur, a cardiologist at Mount 
Sinai. ``The benefit reported is pretty convincing,'' Marmur said, 
``and requires confirmation with control studies.'' Marmur and some 
other experts expressed optimism that these or similar treatments 
might one day be administered through less invasive procedures than 
chest surgery. For example, they might be administered through a tube 
inserted into a leg or an arm and threaded to the heart, a procedure 
known as cardiac catheterization. Such approaches are now being tested 
in small numbers of patients in trials at major medical centers in 
the United States. Additional studies are on the drawing boards, with 
the ultimate aim of giving the therapies intravenously in the arm. 
Although she expressed caution about Isner's report, Dr. Judith Swain, 
who heads the department of medicine at Stanford University, said 
she believed that the idea of using angiogenesis treatments for coronary 
artery disease was ``an absolute winner.'' ``The biotechnology and 
device companies,'' Dr. Swain said, ``are all salivating'' over the 
potential of these therapies. VegF, the protein produced in Isner's 
therapy, is thought to be the body's signal to grow new blood vessels, 
and the therapy is the same as the one with which Isner's team has 
reported success in treating blocked arteries in the legs of 75 patients 
since 1994. In part because the newly grown blood vessels are much 
narrower than coronary arteries, there was no guarantee that the therapy 
that worked in the leg would do so in the heart. So the FDA was cautious 
when, earlier this year, it allowed Isner's team to begin injections 
into the heart. It authorized testing on only 30 patients, at a rate 
of only about one a week, and with initially tiny doses. In the report 
being published Tuesday, Isner's team described dramatic success with 
each of the first five patients treated with vegF in its study. In 
an interview, Isner described similar benefits in 15 additional patients, 
who were treated after the report had been written. Isner said his 
team was administering the injections as fast as the FDA would allow 
and hoped to complete the initial safety trials in 1999. One sign 
of success was that patients reported using substantially fewer nitroglycerine 
pills to relieve angina: 9.8 tablets per patient per week, from a 
previous average of 53.9. Special approval from the FDA would be needed 
if a patient required a second injection because pain relief had waned. 
But such a case has not arisen, Isner said. The doctors also reported 
objective scientific evidence of improvement from tests like heart 
scans, electrocardiograms and special X-rays known as coronary angiograms. 
The tests were performed shortly before the therapy and were repeated 
60 days thereafter. Doctors not involved in the study scored the tests, 
without knowing when and on whom they had been performed. The doctors 
said that the angiograms showed evidence of new collateral blood vessels 
and that no patient had evidence of a new heart attack. The German 
study grew out of one that Stegmann's team reported earlier this year, 
also in Circulation. In the earlier study, which began nearly six 
years ago, Stegmann injected FGF-1 into the hearts of one group of 
patients undergoing coronary bypass surgery. Another group had bypass 
surgery without the FGF-1 injection. Stegmann's report that the group 
treated with FGF-1 could sprout new blood vessels sent waves of enthusiasm 
through the world of cardiology. Follow-up tests showed that the improvement 
in the FGF-1-treated patients had persisted, Stegmann said, and that 
``FGF-1 injections did not create uncontrolled growth of blood vessels, 
as some had feared.'' Because both therapies were given at the same 
time, however, Stegmann's team could not be certain about the relative 
contributions of the FGF-1 and the bypass surgery to the improvement 
that the participants reported. The next step was to give FGF-1 alone. 
Last month Stegmann's team began injecting FGF-1 into the first of 
20 patients, in a study due to end by spring. In the month following 
the injection, angina pain was abolished in two of the first four 
patients who received FGF-1, and pain was greatly relieved in the 
other two, Stegmann said in providing details of the unpublished findings. 
All experts agree that extensive further research is needed to determine 
which therapy is the safest and most powerful, in what amounts it 
should be administered, how often the injections have to be given, 
and whether there are less invasive ways of providing the treatment. 
Isner's gene therapy entails injecting naked DNA, so called because 
it is not inserted into a virus or some other material. If naked DNA 
is injected directly into a vein, rather than into the heart muscle 
as Isner administered it, enzymes that are designed to attack any 
foreign substance will destroy it. Other researchers are testing vegF 
coated with membranes, or inside a virus that has been crippled so 
it will not cause illness. The studies will also test the safety of 
such coatings. In one trial, involving some 100 participants at about 
a dozen medical centers, researchers are testing whether FGF-4, a 
chemical cousin of FGF-1, and vegF protein will be effective if injected 
in a cardiac catheterization. Marmur, of Mount Sinai, is conducting 
a study testing two forms of therapy. One is a version of vegF made 
by Genentech Inc., a subsidiary of Roche Holding Ltd. The other is 
FGF-4 that has been inserted into an adenovirus, a cold virus; it 
is made by Berlex Laboratories of Wayne, N.J. The study, which includes 
participants who will receive a placebo as a control, is also being 
conducted at William Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak, Mich.; Duke University 
in Durham, N.C.; Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore; the Mayo Clinic 
in Rochester, Minn.; the University of Michigan; the University of 
Minnesota in Minneapolis; the Minnesota Heart Clinic in Edina, Minn.; 
the University of Pittsburgh; the University of Vermont in Burlington; 
Washington Hospital Center in the District of Columbia; the University 
of Washington in Seattle, and the Veterans Affairs Hospital in San 
Diego. Stegmann said his team expected to do a similar catheter study 
to inject FGF-1 next year. Isner said his team hoped to gain approval 
next year to inject naked DNA vegF in cardiac catheterizations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>