<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0334 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Beneath the soaring porch of St. Peter's Basilica, toward the right, 
is the towering bronze Holy Door, surmounted by inscriptions in Latin 
and Greek. Striking the door three times with a ceremonial hammer 
next Christmas Eve, Pope John Paul II, clad in white and gold vestments, 
will usher in a millennial Holy Year that will last until early 2001. 
The Roman Catholic Church and the Italian government, each in its 
own way, are making that a special year for visiting Rome. Roman Catholics 
will need little inducement. Other visitors, of all faiths or none, 
will have a chance to witness the pageantry with which the church 
celebrates such occasions. And there is the promise of this magnificent 
yet tarnished city renewing its ancient splendor. At St. Peter's and 
the three other patriarchal basilicas _ St. John Lateran, St. Mary 
Major and St. Paul Without the Walls _ there will be special Masses, 
including some in the colorful rites of the Oriental churches, stressing 
the pope's role as leader of the universal Church. On Christmas Day 
1999, the pope or a cardinal designated by him will open a second 
Holy Door, at St. John Lateran, John Paul's cathedral as Bishop of 
Rome; on Jan. 18, 2000, a third Holy Door, at St. Paul Without the 
Walls, opens to begin a week of prayer for the unity of Christians. 
The Holy Year will end on the Feast of the Epiphany, Jan. 6, 2001, 
when the pope celebrates a solemn Mass and ceremonially closes the 
Holy Door at St. Peter's. But before that, grand events gathering 
hundreds of thousands in celebration and prayer will occur, with the 
high point in the summer of 2000, when a world youth day is expected 
to attract as many as two million. In celebrating the Holy Year, Pope 
John Paul sets forth a tradition begun in 1300, when Pope Boniface 
VIII adapted a Jewish ideal _ in which every 50th year all land is 
to be returned to rightful owners, slaves freed and debts forgiven 
_ to Christian use. The popes, by evoking the tradition, sought to 
cement Rome's image as the new Jerusalem, and Christians around the 
world were urged to pray and do penance and, if possible, visit Rome. 
But this is no ordinary jubilee, it is millennial stuff, and with 
the rise of modern tourism and air travel, it will mean crowds unlike 
any that Rome has seen in Holy Years before. Moreover, John Paul, 
who has been unusually sensitive to the opportunities the church calendar 
offers for symbolic gestures, is putting his imprint on the events. 
In addition to the day for Christian unity, there will be a day of 
asking forgiveness for the failures of Christianity, a theme John 
Paul has stressed in the past, and a day (March 3, 2000) dedicated 
to Christian dialogue with the Jews. The pope has often spoken of 
the emotion with which he looks forward to receiving pilgrims from 
around the world for the jubilee. On assuming the papacy in 1978, 
John Paul was told by his spiritual mentor, Stefan Cardinal Wyszynski, 
the Primate of Poland, that he would lead the church into the third 
millennium, and he has always looked upon those words as prophetic. 
Liturgical events will include Masses, processions, blessings, public 
praying of the rosary, and the public celebration of baptisms and 
the ordinations of priests. Angelo Scelzo, the spokesman for the Vatican's 
Jubilee Committee, said that few detailed plans had thus far been 
laid for many of the events. But he said they can be expected to be 
particularly splendid in their pageantry, and John Paul and other 
celebrants will, as has been the custom in previous Holy Years, don 
many of the Vatican's most treasured vestments. At the last Holy Year, 
in 1983, he often bore a 10th-century gold three-staved pastoral staff 
of a kind that popes had not used for centuries. Some ceremonies, 
like the ordination of new bishops on Jan. 6, 2000, will be in St. 
Peter's; basilicas nearly as grand will provide the stage for others. 
While most events will be in the rites of the Roman Catholic Church, 
some will be in the colorful and exotic ceremonials of Oriental churches 
that remain in communion with Rome, like the Coptic, Armenian, and 
Syrian churches. Events regularly celebrated by the pope in any year 
will gain added splendor. On March 8, 2000, Ash Wednesday, traffic 
in much of Rome will stop as the pope, clad in purple vestments signifying 
grief and accompanied by members of the College of Cardinals, walks 
in penitential procession the mile or so from the venerable Basilica 
of Santa Sabina on the Aventine Hill, one of the earliest Christian 
places of worship, to the Circus Maximus. First, he will have his 
forehead anointed with ashes by one of the cardinals, then proceed 
to the Circus for the ceremony of asking forgiveness. Throughout the 
year, days of Masses and prayers will be set aside for special groups. 
On Jan. 2, 2000, for example, there will be a Jubilee of the Children, 
to which thousands of families from around the world will be invited. 
The pope will celebrate a solemn Mass, during which hundreds of infants 
will be baptized. On Feb. 18, 2000, a Jubilee of Artists will take 
place, to which the pope will invite painters, sculptors, writers, 
musicians, actors, film directors and others. Preceding it will be 
performances and art exhibits. On Jan. 1, 2000, a Marathon of Peace 
will be sponsored by the Vatican and the city of Rome; 50,000 runners 
are expected. From June 18 to 25, 2000, the pope will preside over 
a World Eucharistic Congress, a gathering of prayer and discussion 
for invited religious and lay people, in St. John Lateran; on Aug. 
19 and 20, 2000, World Youth Day will take place at Tor Vergata, a 
campus of the University of Rome. It still remains unclear just where 
all the visitors will stay. Forecasts suggest a profile of visitors 
with less means than the typical tourist to Rome, including many pilgrims 
from the former Communist countries of Central Europe, like the pope's 
native Poland. In addition to Rome's hotels, many convents and monasteries 
will open their doors to pilgrims. There has been talk of erecting 
large tent cities, though no details have yet emerged, and for mass 
gatherings like World Youth Day, large numbers of young visitors may 
simply set up impromptu camping grounds under Rome's usually cloudless 
August skies. But Ciro dell'Acqua, a spokesman for the municipal agency 
helping to organize the jubilee, confessed that, `'we don't yet know 
exactly how the Vatican wants to put all these people up.' '' Rome's 
civil government looks on all this with delight, as a means to promote 
its tourist attractions, if indeed they needed such promotion. New 
museums have opened, like the Palazzo Altemps and the Palazzo Massimo, 
while others, including the Palazzo Barberini and the Capitoline Museums, 
are being refurbished. The opera and the philharmonic orchestra of 
Santa Cecilia will have special jubilee programs. Rome's hugely successful 
private museum, Palazzo delle Esposizioni, will feature the exhibit 
``Christian Rome From the Third to Sixth Century.'' In the former 
stables of the Quirinal Palace, once the papal residence and now home 
to the Italian president, the architect Gae Aulenti is designing a 
new museum for the jubilee. It will include an exhibit on the event 
whose occurrence 2,000 years ago provided the reason for all the festivity 
and prayer _ the Nativity of Christ. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>