<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0393 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Should Linda Tripp, Lucianne Goldberg and Kenneth Starr decide who 
is to be president of the United States? When you analyze the principal 
argument made for the impeachment of President Clinton, you are brought 
inevitably to that question. Perjury was the House Republican mantra, 
the argument pressed by the hard right to bring moderates to heel. 
In the debate, one Republican after another said he or she had to 
vote to impeach Bill Clinton because he lied under oath. But that 
proposition overlooks what the trio did. The president tried to keep 
his sexual improprieties secret. That was neither surprising nor ignoble. 
Henry Hyde and Robert Livingston did the same, and so men have done 
since the Creation. But Monica Lewinsky told Mrs. Tripp, a former 
White House employee who had been trying for years to harm Clinton. 
At the urging of Ms. Goldberg, a right-wing literary agent, Mrs. Tripp 
taped her telephone conversations with Ms. Lewinsky. She told Paula 
Jones' lawyers and Starr about the tapes. The resulting trap was sprung 
on the president at his deposition in the Jones case. That was the 
fount of his troubles. So it is vital to understand how his testimony 
has effectively been judged. Clinton denied, famously, having had 
``sexual relations'' with Ms. Lewinsky. The definition of that was 
so obscure that no jury was likely to convict him of perjury in his 
denial. And the House of Representatives evidently took the same view. 
It rejected the article of impeachment charging him with perjury in 
the deposition. Starr had another string for his bow. He called the 
president before a grand jury, where he was asked about his statements 
in the Jones deposition. Then Starr charged that Clinton's answers 
were false. Again, I doubt that a jury would have convicted Clinton 
of perjury. Millions of Americans saw the videotape of his grand jury 
appearance and most sympathized with him _ indeed, were outraged at 
what he was put through. But House Republicans said that the president's 
answers to the Starr prosecutors were perjurious. That is, answers 
that the House found were not perjurious at the original proceeding 
became high crimes when the same answers were given again. No other 
American would have had to undergo that second turn of the screw. 
Targets of prosecutors customarily invoke the Fifth Amendment; Justice 
Department rules discourage calling them before grand juries. But 
Starr, determined to get something on him after four years of fruitless 
investigation, guessed correctly that for political reasons the president 
would not refuse to testify. In truth, many House Republicans who 
cited perjury as their ground for impeachment had deeper reasons. 
They do not like this president. An unmistakable venom ran through 
the whole process. An astute foreign eye saw it clearly. Philip Stevens 
of The Financial Times wrote: ``This was not about the sacred Constitution 
of the United States. It wasn't even honest politics. The impeachment 
of Bill Clinton was personal. It was an act of vengeance.'' Conservatives 
have hated Bill Clinton since the day he took office. Some conservative 
commentators, broadcast and print, seem obsessed by the man. Robert 
Livingston, before he gave up the speaker's job, showed his distorting 
animus when he said: ``Richard Nixon's crime was covering up a crime 
he did not commit. Clinton is covering up a crime he did commit.'' 
There are reasons for politicians, Democratic and Republican, to distrust 
Bill Clinton. He has not played straight with many of them. And the 
public has reason to have been offended at his false assurance that 
he had not had sexual relations with that woman. But those are not 
grounds for impeachment, or resignation, unless we are going to make 
the impeachment process a vote of no confidence and move toward a 
parliamentary system of government. In the end, I do not believe that 
the Senate or the public will want to reward hatred. I do not believe 
they will want our political fate to be decided by Linda Tripp, Lucianne 
Goldberg and Kenneth Starr. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>