<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0481 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Federal prosecutors and lawyers for John A. Gotti, accused of being 
a Mafia leader, are engaged in intense negotiations over a plea bargain 
that could avert a racketeering trial scheduled for February and would 
mean a certain prison sentence for Gotti, according to law enforcement 
officials and lawyers. Lawyers said one of the stumbling blocks is 
a demand by prosecutors for a global settlement in which Gotti and 
seven other defendants agree to plead guilty to reduced charges in 
return for more lenient sentences. Law enforcement officials said 
prosecutors were reluctant to accept individual plea deals because 
the case against Gotti would be stronger if testimony and secretly 
recorded tapes concerning all of the defendants were presented at 
a mass trial. Officials and lawyers who spoke on the condition of 
anonymity said Gotti, 34, who they say is the acting boss of the Gambino 
crime family, and Salvatore Locascio, 39, who investigators say is 
the captain of a Gambino crew, are the main holdouts on the defense 
side. They appear willing to make deals, but on better terms than 
prosecutors are offering, the lawyers said. The federal government, 
investigators and lawyers said, has offered Gotti a sentence of about 
six years; he would also be required to forfeit about $1 million in 
assets. In January, a broad racketeering indictment accused Gotti 
of being the acting boss of the Gambino family on behalf of his father, 
John J. Gotti, 58, who is serving a life term in prison without parole. 
If Gotti, who is known as Junior, goes to trial and is convicted of 
the main charge _ being the head of a racketeering enterprise _ he 
could face about 20 years in prison and possible confiscation of more 
than $10 million in assets. As part of the deal sought by the defense 
team, none of the defendants would have to admit that they were members 
of the Gambino crime family, the nation's second most powerful Mafia 
faction. The elder Gotti, investigators say, has banned Gambino members 
from acknowledging as part of guilty pleas the existence of the Mafia 
group. Gotti's two main lawyers, Bruce Cutler and Gerald Shargel, 
denied Monday that their client was ready to plead guilty. ``My directives 
from my client are to get ready for trial,'' Cutler said. ``He wants 
to clear his name.'' If the government made an offer, Cutler said, 
the defense would consider it. ``But I'm not near that point,'' he 
added. A spokesman for U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White declined to comment. 
But other lawyers who are working for the defense team said they expected 
that agreements with Gotti and the other defendants could be completed 
soon. Another defense lawyer said most of the defendants reluctantly 
agreed to deals after reviewing the evidence implicating them, including 
7,000 court-authorized, electronically intercepted conversations. 
Prosecutors say the evidence against Gotti includes testimony by one 
Mafia defector and taped conversations in which his co-defendants 
talked about his alleged role in extorting more than $1 million from 
Scores, a topless club in Manhattan, and of turning over to him $50,000 
in protection payoffs from a construction company. Federal officials 
emphasized that prosecutors normally prefer a plea bargain over a 
trial as a cheaper and more effective way of resolving complicated 
charges. The prosecutors in Gotti's case are also concerned that one 
of their original principal witnesses, Michael Blutrich, a former 
owner of Scores, would be discredited because he has admitted to being 
involved in multimillion-dollar frauds and to obtaining pornographic 
materials on the Internet. Locascio, who is accused of running a gambling 
and loan-sharking ring, has been offered a lighter sentence than Gotti's 
but has balked at accepting it, lawyers said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>