<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0154 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
House Majority Whip Tom DeLay, R-Texas, began fomenting the current 
impeachment madness two years ago. His earlier target was the federal 
judiciary, later he elevated his sights _ to the presidency. DeLay 
is acknowledged to be the force behind lining up Republican votes 
to impeach President Clinton. He has cajoled, threatened and pulled 
in favors in order to fuel a radical revolution aimed at overturning 
democracy as we know it. In mid-March of 1997, DeLay proclaimed, ``As 
part of our conservative efforts against judicial activism, we are 
going after judges.'' DeLay took his script from James Dobson of Focus 
on the Family, Pat Buchanan, Gary Bauer of the Family Research Council, 
right-wing activist David Barton, Pat Robertson and the Christian 
Coalition. They all bemoaned what they called ``judicial tyranny'' 
and the ``imperial judiciary.'' In May 1997, DeLay targeted three 
federal judges for impeachment _ Harold Baer Jr. of the U.S. District 
Court of Manhattan, Fred Biery of the U.S. District Court in San Antonio 
and Chief Judge Thelton Henderson of the U.S. District Court in San 
Francisco _ because DeLay didn't like decisions they had handed down. 
He claimed that ``articles of impeachment are being written right 
now'' against Judge Biery. The conservative National Legal Foundation 
endorsed DeLay's call for impeaching federal judges. The NFL even 
urged Congress to impeach the six U.S. Supreme Court justices who 
had voted against Colorado's anti-gay amendment in 1996, ruling it 
was unconstitutional. DeLay promised more federal judges would be 
added to his hit list. ``We have a whole big file cabinet full. We 
are receiving nominations from all across the country of judges that 
could be prime candidates for the first impeachment.'' DeLay made 
this statement even before he had any evidence of impeachable crimes 
against these judges. And then Clinton fell into his lap. It should 
be no surprise that Bob Barr, R-Ga., is the other member of the U.S. 
House who caught the impeachment fever early. He, too, has been a 
major voice behind the scenes orchestrating the GOP impeachment of 
the president. Last year he was making speeches in favor of impeaching 
judges, claiming that just the threat of impeachment would keep the 
federal judiciary in line. We can expect these same voices to clamor 
for the heads of judges as soon as the presidential impeachment has 
been played out. The ramifications of this impeachment madness are 
likely to be profound. If Congress can impose its will upon the judiciary, 
the system of checks and balances among the three branches of government 
will crumble. An independent judiciary is the foundation of our constitutional 
form of government. The judiciary has the duty to guard the Constitution 
from legislative and executive encroachment. It has the duty to protect 
the civil liberties of every individual from the tyranny of the majority. 
The framers of the Constitution considered the independence of the 
federal judges so important to our system of government that judges 
hold office for life and their pay cannot be reduced as long as they 
serve in ``good behavior.'' Judges cannot be removed for rendering 
unpopular decisions. They cannot be legitimately removed for political 
reasons. The irony here is that one of the most conservative Chief 
Justices of the U.S. Supreme Court, William Rehnquist, stands firm 
against the right-wing radicals who would destroy the independence 
of the judiciary and the presidency. In a 1991 law review article, 
``The Impeachment Clause: A Wild Card in the Constitution,'' Rehnquist 
wrote: ``If one were to select the two major contributions to the 
art of government made by the Founding Fathers in Philadelphia in 
1778, I think one would have to select: first, the separation of the 
executive from the legislative power, and second, the creation of 
the independent judiciary with the power of judicial review. Article 
II of the Constitution establishes the President as the Chief Executive 
in his own right, without any dependency on Congress such as that 
of a Prime Minister in a parliamentary system. This article confers 
upon the President powers which Congress cannot take away.'' Rehnquist 
ends the article stating: ``The principle of separation of powers 
was not `home free' simply because it was embodied in the Constitution, 
so long as the Impeachment Clauses were also in that document. Battles 
were to be fought in the succeeding two hundred years to preserve 
the principle of separation of powers, and two of the most important 
of those battles were waged outside the courts: the trial of ((U.S. 
Supreme Court Justice)) Samuel Chase in the Senate in 1805, and the 
trial of ((President)) Andrew Johnson in 1868.'' Neither was convicted 
of any articles of impeachment. We see a Congress deeply divided and 
troubled. There is a partisan frenzy to impeach and impeach. Conservative 
GOP members of Congress have watched their agenda blunted by the federal 
courts or fragmented by the president. And now, in frustration, these 
short-sighted elected officials are willing to destroy the foundation 
of our system of government in order to get their way. Where are the 
statesmen who understand what is being done? The nation needs them 
desperately. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>