<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0267 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A variety of new procedures and products are becoming available for 
whitening teeth, many of them sold over the counter in pharmacies 
or by mail order for use in the home. But a controversy swirls around 
their safety and effectiveness, particularly the over-the-counter 
home products. Manufacturers insist that the products are both safe 
and effective. Whitening solutions with high concentrations of hydrogen 
peroxide _ 30 percent to 35 percent _ have been available in dentists' 
offices for years for teeth stained by food, coffee, tea, tobacco 
or other substances. Initially, they required meticulous preparation, 
and this, coupled with their unpredictability, limited their popularity. 
By the early 1990s new products were introduced that were easier to 
apply, and the process began to be used more often. In 1991, the Food 
and Drug Administration classified the whiteners as drugs, affecting 
bodily structures or tissues and requiring FDA approval. The manufacturers 
then argued that the products were cosmetics, and the FDA allowed 
them on the market pending another review. The agency says questions 
are still being raised, including recent reports of increasing levels 
of peroxide being added to home products, and the matter remains under 
investigation. The generally accepted method of whitening is done 
in the dentist's office with prepared bleach-and-gel solutions perhaps 
one to three times a year after a normal teeth cleaning. The dentist 
places a rubber dam or a gel on the gums to protect them, and then 
swabs the teeth, keeping the bleaching agent in place for 10 to 20 
minutes. The number of treatments depends on the severity of the staining. 
Another office procedure, approved two years ago but not yet subjected 
to long-term study, adds laser light to the bleaching to speed the 
process and lessen exposure. Dr. Clifford Whall Jr., director of product 
evaluation at the American Dental Association, said the in-office 
bleaches have a long record of safety, though it is too soon for long-term 
conclusions on laser or at-home procedures. Whall and others say that, 
as with many medical procedures that are beneficial if correctly followed 
and harmful if not, teeth whitening can kill gum tissue or damage 
the teeth if done improperly. And animal studies suggest that high 
concentrations of hydrogen peroxide can cause irreversible cell damage 
and may enhance carcinogens. Home bleaching devices, prescribed by 
a dentist or bought over the counter, use lower levels of peroxide 
but must be applied more often, generally several hours a night for 
up to six weeks. The bleaching agent _ acceptable mixtures contain 
10 percent carbamide peroxide, the equivalent of 3 percent hydrogen 
peroxide _ is poured into small, thin trays that are molded tightly 
around the teeth. Dr. Jinder Khurana, a periodontist and an official 
of the New York Dental Association, said ``people can be tempted to 
overuse them and this can eventually cause damage to both the exterior 
enamel and the inner nerve or the mouth itself.'' The ``all-in-one'' 
solution now advertised as a combination whitener and ordinary toothpaste, 
contains still less peroxide, but is recommended for twice a day, 
presumably for life. The effect of lifetime exposure to low-level 
hydrogen peroxide is unknown, the experts say. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>