<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0104 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mark Twain may well have said that history doesn't repeat itself; 
it rhymes. Or maybe someone else did. In any event, in early 1868, 
while awaiting publication of ``The Innocents Abroad,'' the 32-year-old 
writer found himself witness to a curious piece of history that proves 
the point _ the first impeachment of a president. Twain was working 
that winter as a journalist, filing dispatches from Washington to 
newspapers around the country, when Andrew Johnson's enemies in Congress 
finally found ammunition they thought would remove the president from 
office. A Tennessee Democrat, President Johnson had been Lincoln's 
running mate in 1864 on a ``National Union'' ticket but had run afoul 
of the radical Republicans since succeeding Lincoln. He fought them 
often over their efforts to harshly punish the South. Congress repeatedly 
sought to strip him of power and radical Republicans tried several 
times to impeach him. The climactic battle came when the president 
fired his secretary of war, Edwin M. Stanton, in the face of a law 
designed to give Congress control over Cabinet officers' tenure. Twain's 
opinion of politicians in general wasn't high. ``The political and 
commercial morals of the United States are not merely food for laughter, 
they are an entire banquet,'' he once wrote. Impeachment gave him 
a lot to dine out on. _ By MARC D. CHARNEY In the months before the 
Stanton crisis, the second attempt to impeach the president on charges 
of misusing his power fizzled. Twain responded with a mock obituary 
in a feature titled ``Mark Twain's Letter'' in The Chicago Republican 
of Feb. 19. He cast impeachment as a moribund patient and House Republicans, 
including the radical Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania and the more 
moderate John A. Bingham of Ohio, as nurses who had squabbled over 
whether to let the patient die. Final Defeat of the Impeachment Project 
in the House DIED In this city, Feb. 13, at his lodgings in the chamber 
of the House Reconstruction Committee, our beloved brother, IMPEACHMENT. 
The malady of deceased was general debility. A short time ago his 
health had improved so much that a bright hope cheered the land that 
he would soon walk forth healthful and strong; but alas! we know not 
what a day may bring forth. A great fear came upon his physicians 
in the crisis of his disease. The weariness of watching overpowered 
the nurses, so that they fell asleep and neglected him _ and lo! a 
relapse! ... And so, these six, that were with Mrs. Bingham, being 
stronger than they that were with Mrs. Stevens, called Thad, suffered 
not the medicine to pass the lips of him that lay sick. And in the 
self-same hour he died. So endeth the second farce. The ancient school-boy 
phrase best describes the position of the Congressional bodies in 
this matter: ``One's afraid and 't'other darsn't.'' On Feb. 21 President 
Johnson ignited the final impeachment crisis by dismissing Stanton. 
On March 1, ``Mark Twain's Letter'' treated the event as a resurrection: 
LAZARUS IMPEACHMENT, COME FORTH! Monday, Feb. 24 The past few days 
have been filled with startling interest. On Friday the nation was 
electrified by the President's last and boldest effort to dislodge 
Mr. Stanton. The wild excitement that pervaded the capital that night, 
has not had its parallel here since the murder of Mr. Lincoln. The 
air was thick with rumors of dreadful import. Every tranquil brain, 
thrown from its balance by the colossal surprise, magnified the creations 
of its crazed fancy into the phantoms of anarchy, rebellion, bloody 
revolution! ... And out of the midst of the political gloom, impeachment, 
that dead corpse, rose up and walked forth again! ... SCENE IN THE 
CAPITOL The next morning that one word, Impeachment, was upon every 
tongue. ... Before 9 o'clock in the morning a multitude was assembled 
in the Capitol grounds, and from all points of the compass the clans 
were still gathering. ... The multitude of strangers were waiting 
for impeachment. They did not know what impeachment was, exactly, 
but they had a general idea that it would come in the form of an avalanche, 
or a thunder clap, or that maybe the roof would fall in. Bye and bye 
a member rose up solemnly, and every soul prepared to stand from under. 
But it was a vain delusion _ he only had a speech to make about a 
degraded cooking stove patent. The people were justly incensed. ... 
All the faces were full of interest again in a moment. The emaciated 
old man stood up and addressed the speaker ... and when he finished, 
the profoundest stillness reigned in the House. Then the one man upon 
whom all interest centered, read the resolutions the multitude so 
longed to hear; and when he came to where it was resolved that ``The 
President of the United States be impeached for high crimes and misdemeanors,'' 
the prodigious words had something so solemn and so awe-inspiring 
about them that the people seemed inclined to think that the expected 
thunder-clap was about to crash above the pictured ceiling! The strong 
lights and shadows, ... the ghostly figure of the reader, the eager 
interest that marked the sea of faces, the impressive silence and 
the historic grandeur of the occasion, conspired to render the scene 
oe of the most striking and dramatic that has ever been witnessed 
in the Capitol. Tuesday, Feb. 25. All day yesterday, the place was 
densely thronged; the people wished to hear the all-important vote 
taken. ... They heard strong speeches from the Republicans, and angry 
protests from the Democrats _ but these latter were not confident 
in tone. The Democrats had said, themselves, that the President had 
made an ill-advised move and they felt that they were fighting for 
a lost cause. The ``aye'' votes, in nearly all cases, came in a clear 
voice, but many of the ``nays'' were inaudible in the reporters' gallery. 
THE HUNTED CHIEF IN HIS CASTLE Yesterday was reception night at the 
White House and several of us went there at 10 o'clock. I confess 
that I went out of a thoughtless curiosity to see how the Chief Magistrate 
bore himself under these untoward circumstances, but I did not enjoy 
the visit. ... He looked so like a plain, simple, goodnatured old 
farmer, that it was hard to conceive that this was the imperious ``tyrant'' 
whose deeds had been stirring the sluggish blood of thirty millions 
of people. He was uneasy and restless; the smile that came and went 
upon his face had distress in it; when he shook hands with a guest 
he looked wistfully into the person's face, as if he sought a friendly 
interest there, and yet hardly hoped to find it; he seemed humbled 
_ the expression of his countenance could be made to signify nothing 
else; when he ceased to smile for a moment, the shadow of a secret 
anxiety fell upon his features, and then, if ever a man looked weary 
and worn, and needful of rest and forgetfulness, it was this envied 
President of the United States. I never saw a man who seemed as friendless 
and forsaken, and I never felt for any man so much. But any sympathy 
Twain had for Johnson on the eve of impeachment did not last. A year 
later, after a Senate trial that ended in acquittal by one vote, the 
president left office in the accustomed way, upon the inauguration 
of his successor, Ulysses S. Grant. On this occasion Twain again parodied 
human mortality, offering The New York Tribune an account that cast 
the last meeting of the Johnson Cabinet as the funeral for an administration 
riddled by all the vices that Twain deplored in politicians. The article 
was set in type, but never ran. Andrew Johnson, that grand old second 
Washington, that resurrected Moses, rose &AMP; said: ``My children, 
when I came before the American people four years ago to deliver my 
inaugural, I was too full for utterance. (Emphatic assenting sobs 
from the Cabinet.) My emotions at this moment are no less profound 
... In quitting my high office, I am able to look back upon my administration 
of its duties without regret. By diligently violating my oath; by 
stultifying myself upon every occasion; by being stubborn in the wrong, 
&AMP; feeble &AMP; faithless toward the right; by obstructing the 
laws; by nursing anarchy &AMP; rebellion, &AMP; by deliberate treachery 
to the party that made me &AMP; trusted me, I have wiped away the 
contempt in which, because my obscure origin &AMP; humble occupation, 
my own loved section of the country did formerly hold me ... My great 
deeds speak for themselves. I vetoed the Reconstruction acts; I vetoed 
the Freedmen's Bureau; I vetoed civil liberty; I vetoed Stanton ... 
I hugged traitors to my bosom; I pardoned them by regiments &AMP; 
brigades ... I smiled upon the Ku-Klux ... I have made the name of 
office-holder equivalent to that of rogue; born &AMP; reared `poor 
white trash,' I have clung to my native instincts, &AMP; done every 
small mean thing my eager hands could find to do. ... My work is done; 
I die content.'' There was not a dry eye in the house; neither was 
there a sore heart. These inspiring words had driven all grief away. 
It was now after 12 o'clock. No time must be lost. Gideon produced 
a deck of cards, &AMP; we played seven-up for the furniture. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>