<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0389 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Food and Drug Administration on Monday approved the marketing 
of a vaccine against Lyme disease for the first time. But the federal 
agency was unusually cautious in recommending use of the vaccine, 
known as Lymerix, which is manufactured by SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals 
of Philadelphia. For one, Lymerix, which will be available in January, 
does not protect everyone who takes it against Lyme disease, a bacterial 
infection transmitted through tick bites. For maximum protection, 
three injections of the vaccine must be taken over a year. Studies 
have shown that taking three injections provides 78 percent protection 
against Lyme disease, while taking two injections provides only 50 
percent protection. Also, because the experimental trials did not 
involve children or those over 70, the FDA approved the vaccine only 
for people 15 to 70. It is intended primarily for those who live or 
work in grassy or wooded areas where infected ticks are present and 
for those who plan to travel to such areas. Getting vaccinated may 
prove tricky for travelers who do not plan their vacations far in 
advance, however. The recommendations call for an initial injection, 
a second shot a month later, and then a third injection 12 months 
after the first. Still, regular summer vacationers to tick-prone areas 
and people who make long-term plans should consider taking the vaccine. 
Because of the seasonal nature of Lyme disease, the drug agency cautioned 
that the time of year the vaccine was taken was important. The first 
two injections in the experimental trial were given between January 
and April, before the peak tick season in the northeast United States. 
The agency advised those vaccinated against Lyme to continue to take 
standard preventive measures against the infection. These include 
wearing protective clothing, using tick repellant and removing attached 
ticks. Lymerix is made from a genetically engineered protein known 
as OspA, located on the outer surface of the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi, 
which causes Lyme disease. The manufacturer said that protection seems 
to result from the vaccine's stimulation of the body's immune system 
to produce antibodies against the spiral bacteria. When a vaccinated 
person is bitten by an infected tick, the antibody is taken up into 
the tick's intestine where it kills the bacteria, preventing infection. 
In unanimously recommending approval of Lymerix in May, an advisory 
committee of the FDA expressed serious concerns about its safety and 
effectiveness. One concern is that scientists do not know how long 
protection lasts, and thus, whether booster doses will be needed. 
The percentage of people who gain protection from vaccines ranges 
widely. Vaccines against polio, hepatitis A and B, and some other 
infections offer protection 90 percent of the time or better. For 
chickenpox, the figure is about 80 percent; for pneumococcal vaccine, 
about 60 percent, and for influenza, the protection rate can be less. 
The FDA also said that no safety data existed for people with rheumatoid 
arthritis and certain heart conditions because they were not included 
in the experimental trials that SmithKline Beecham conducted. More 
than 16,000 cases of Lyme disease were reported from 45 states in 
1996, the last year for which federal officials have statistics. The 
disease is rarely fatal. It is often characterized by a bull's-eye 
rash and flulike symptoms including headache, fever and muscle and 
joint aches in its early stages. Occasionally it causes facial weakness 
and heart problems. In the late stages of Lyme disease, some people 
develop chronic arthritis and neurological problems. Because one attack 
of Lyme disease may not confer protection against another, people 
who have had the disease may benefit from Lymerix, the company said. 
Pasteur Merieux Connaught of Swiftwater, Pa., has tested another Lyme 
vaccine, in more than 5,000 people. A spokesman for the company said 
it planned to apply to the FDA for approval of its Lyme vaccine early 
next year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>