<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0329 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the pre-Christmas bustle of this teeming city, a ghost of the Philippine 
past has suddenly re-emerged. Imelda Marcos, the 69-year-old widow 
of the dictator Ferdinand E. Marcos, has announced that she plans 
to file a lawsuit to recover more than $12 billion in assets that 
she claims belonged to her husband. After insisting for years that 
her husband had not been a kleptocrat but a public servant who made 
other people rich, she declared in an interview with The Philippine 
Inquirer, ``We own practically everything in the country.'' It was 
a startling admission, even from a woman known for Norma Desmond-like 
theatricality. From people here, who have watched Mrs. Marcos laugh, 
weep, rant and burst into song for more than three decades, one could 
almost hear the collective reaction: ``She's b-a-a-a-ck.'' Of course, 
the former first lady has actually been back for a while. Since returning 
from exile in Hawaii in 1991, Mrs. Marcos has run for the House of 
Representatives and won, run for the presidency and lost, been convicted 
of graft by a Philippine court and been acquitted on appeal by the 
Supreme Court. These days, she lives in a plush apartment in central 
Manila, where she holds court with a dwindling retinue of friends 
and hangers-on. More marginalized than ever, Mrs. Marcos has become 
a virtual caricature of herself, a loquacious woman referred to by 
less generous people as the Madwoman of Manila. Now, though, Mrs. 
Marcos has caught everyone's attention again. Not only has she freely 
acknowledged that her husband had amassed vast business interests, 
but she is identifying the assets in question. She said that Marcos 
owned more than $12 billion worth of shares in dozens of companies, 
including institutions like Philippine Airlines and Philippine Long 
Distance Telephone. Mrs. Marcos said her husband had entrusted the 
shares to his close associates. Several of these friends went on to 
become the wealthiest business tycoons in the Philippines, and they 
came to epitomize the crony capitalism that took poisonous root here 
and in other Southeast Asian countries. Mrs. Marcos told The Inquirer 
that the cronies to whom Marcos had entrusted his money became ``so 
rich that they got too greedy.'' ``Now,'' she said, ``they refuse 
to turn over the top firms that the Marcoses rightfully owned.'' Mrs. 
Marcos' public comments have alarmed her daughter, Imee Marcos, who 
is a legislator from her father's old district. The younger Ms. Marcos 
said her family is still anxious to reach a compromise with the government 
over her father's wealth. Her mother, she said half-jokingly, is ``wild 
and crazy.'' But after the initial japes and raised eyebrows, people 
here said Mrs. Marcos' claims would resonate in a country that is 
still struggling to move out of the long shadow of Ferdinand Marcos. 
``Imelda's pronouncement have awoken people's consciousness about 
what was done under Marcos,'' said Bernardo Villegas, dean of the 
School of Economics at the University of Asia and the Pacific. ``That's 
why, in a way, critics of the government are watching this case very 
closely.'' Worries about cronyism have resurfaced under the new president, 
Joseph E. Estrada, a genial former movie star who has befriended some 
of the most notorious cronies of the Marcos era. Marcos, elected president 
in 1965, was ousted in a popular revolt in 1986. He denied any wrongdoing 
and died in exile in Hawaii three years later. Estrada recently interceded 
in some business deals in a way that has benefited his friends and 
campaign supporters. In one case, a Hong Kong company acquired control 
of Philippine Long Distance Telephone by buying $781 million worth 
of shares from the Cojuangco family, a business dynasty that was close 
to Marcos. After seeing an old-time crony earn such lucre, Mrs. Marcos 
swung into action. She said that the Cojuangco shares really belonged 
to Marcos, who gave them to Ramon Cojuangco in a trust. Cojuangco's 
son, Antonio Cojuangco, has challenged Mrs. Marcos to show proof. 
Given the dubious provenance of so many fortunes here, some experts 
said Mrs. Marcos may have a case. But Sergio Osmena, a senator who 
was jailed by Marcos in 1972, said she risked more litigation with 
her claims. If the Marcoses owned so many shares, he asked, ``why 
didn't they pay taxes on them?'' Few people take such a comment as 
a serious threat to the Marcos family. By one count, the government 
has filed 60 lawsuits against the Marcos family over the last 11 years, 
but has yet to win a conviction. And Estrada favors a compromise under 
which Mrs. Marcos would return some assets to the government. Several 
political analysts here said that Mrs. Marcos' disclosures were a 
sign of her self-confidence. ``Imelda has been acquitted by the Supreme 
Court, and she may feel more comfortable with the current administration,'' 
said Christian Monzad, a former chairman of the Philippine Election 
Commission. Mrs. Marcos has retained the law firm of Senator Juan 
Ponce Enrile, who was her husband's Defense Secretary but who turned 
on him when the ``People Power'' movement began to gather momentum 
against his boss. Whatever the reaction to her claims, Enrile is not 
taking any chances. After several days of incendiary quotes in The 
Philippine Inquirer, he imposed a gag order on her. ``She gets herself 
into trouble whenever she opens her mouth,'' said one of her advisers, 
passing along the news that, incredibly, Imelda Marcos did not want 
to talk. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>