<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0403 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
To keep President Clinton's impeachment trial from becoming an unseemly 
spectacle, some Senators want to have witnesses like Monica S. Lewinsky 
testify in closed session or to avoid witnesses altogether and simply 
accept the evidence presented by independent counsel Kenneth Starr. 
But that would break with precedent and require a change in Senate 
rules. As a practical matter, it probably could not happen unless 
all Senators agreed, and the idea of closed proceedings has already 
brought criticism. Senate rules require all testimony to be in public, 
and the Senate Historical Office says no impeachment trial has ever 
been held without public witnesses. Sen. Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., who 
will become chairman of the Rules Committee next year, argues that 
the trial could be abridged to spare senators the embarrassment of 
taking testimony on scurrilous matters in public. ``There's nothing 
in the rules that requires every piece of testimony to be taken in 
open session,'' McConnell said in an interview Monday. ``There are 
certain now infamous characters in this seamy episode from whom we've 
heard quite enough,'' he said. ``If it's deemed necessary to take 
testimony embarrassing to the children of this country, we can take 
it in private. The transcript could be subsequently released. We just 
wouldn't make it a television event.'' McConnell and other Republicans 
are presumably reading the opinion polls showing that most people 
opposed impeachment and now oppose a trial. But many authorities on 
impeachment rules, which were written for President Andrew Johnson's 
impeachment in 1868 and have not been significantly changed since, 
take issue with McConnell's interpretation. They cite Rule XX, which 
states: ``At all times while the Senate is sitting upon the trial 
of an impeachment, the doors of the Senate shall be kept open.'' The 
Senate can waive or rewrite its rules, but it requires a two-thirds 
vote if any senator objects to the change. As a practical matter, 
rules are almost never altered unless senators agree unanimously to 
do so. Unanimous consent might be difficult to come by in the current 
climate. For instance, Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., said that 
she would resist efforts to hear witnesses behind locked doors. ``I 
for one would have very strong opposition to any kind of star chamber 
proceeding that's held in private,'' Feinstein said Sunday in an interview 
on CNN. ``After all, this is now removal of the president from office.'' 
Some leading Republican senators, including Phil Gramm of Texas and 
Orrin Hatch of Utah, said in interviews that they thought the Senate 
could basically rely on the evidence gathered in Starr's investigation, 
the way the House Judiciary Committee had done. ``I see no reason 
to call Monica Lewinsky,'' Hatch said. ``Nothing she said has been 
rebutted.'' Michael Gerhardt, a law professor at the College of William 
and Mary who is an authority on impeachment, said he thought it was 
possible the senators might agree unanimously to hear certain witnesses 
like Ms. Lewinsky in private. ``I have a hard time believing anyone 
would feel comfortable about having her testify in public,'' Gerhardt 
said. It is hard to imagine that a Senate trial could occur without 
testimony from Ms. Lewinsky, beyond doubt the most important witness 
in the case other than the president himself. But it is also not clear 
whether the lawyers for the House or those for the president would 
be the ones to call her to the witness stand. Gerhardt said he doubted 
that the senators could accept Starr's evidence as fact the way the 
House Judiciary Committee did. ``They must get public support for 
what they're trying to do.'' Gerhardt said. ``For them to take shortcuts 
that don't inspire confidence in the outcome would be extraordinarily 
risky.'' Betty Koed, the assistant Senate historian, said in an interview 
that witnesses had testified publicly in all impeachment trials that 
had reached a verdict. There have been 11 such trials. Seven of them, 
all of federal judges, ended in convictions. Four officials, including 
Johnson, the only president to stand trial, were acquitted, and two 
officials who were impeached had their cases dismissed before their 
trial had run its course. Unless Clinton and the Senate reach an accommodation 
in the next two weeks to avoid a trial, the first stage will begin 
on Jan. 6 when the 106th Congress convenes. The House managers, the 
group of representatives from the Judiciary Committee selected to 
act as prosecutors in the trial, will walk across the Capitol that 
afternoon, be ushered into the Senate chamber and read the two articles 
of impeachment that the House approved on Saturday _ one charging 
the president with perjury before a federal grand jury and the other 
charging him with obstruction of justice. The Senate will then notify 
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist that it is beginning an impeachment 
trial. The founding fathers realized it would be a conflict of interest 
for the vice president to preside, so the Constitution provides for 
the chief justice to preside during the impeachment trial of a president. 
After being sworn in himself, the chief justice will swear in the 
100 senators to sit as jurors. The next step will be for the Senate 
to instruct its sergeant at arms send the articles of impeachment 
to the president and set a time for him to reply. Chances are the 
president will be given a month or more to submit his ``answer'' to 
the charges, and House managers will then be given 10 days or so to 
file their ``replication'' responding to the president's submission. 
The next stage will involve pretrial motions. Presumably, the president's 
lawyers will move for dismissal. Other motions may involve topics 
like what kind of evidence will be allowed and whether the standard 
for the burden of proof will be ``beyond reasonable doubt'' like a 
criminal trial, ``preponderance of evidence'' like a civil trial or 
something else completely different. The senators will debate all 
such motions in closed session and rule on them by majority vote. 
Any rulings by the chief justice can be overridden by a majority of 
the senators. The trial, once it begins, will take place in the Senate 
chamber and will resemble a courtroom trial in many respects. The 
lawyers will make opening arguments, examine and cross-examine witnesses, 
present documentary evidence and make closing arguments. All this 
time, the senators must sit silently. To question witnesses, they 
may pass notes to the chief justice, who will pose questions for them. 
The deliberations over motions and the final verdict will take place 
in closed sessions. Senate ethics rules prohibit senators from divulging 
what is said in these sessions. Of course, the senators could decide 
by unanimous consent to debate the verdict in open session. Short 
of this, the only time the senators will speak publicly during the 
entire trial is when they declare whether they find the president 
``guilty'' or ``not guilty.'' It requires a two-thirds vote of the 
Senate to convict the president, which would automatically remove 
him from office. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>