<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0478 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With thousands of their comrades bearing grim witness, two young New 
York City firefighters were eulogized and buried Monday, each hailed 
as a hero, each mourned by a grieving family only days before Christmas. 
The gray skies never lifted on a day that began in Queens, with the 
funeral of James F. Bohan, and ended in Brooklyn, with the funeral 
of Christopher M. Bopp. For the blue-coated firefighters who rode 
chartered buses from Queens in the morning to Brooklyn in the afternoon, 
there is one more funeral to come: Lt. Joseph P. Cavalieri is to be 
buried Tuesday in Malverne, N.Y. The three members of Ladder Company 
170 in Brooklyn died Friday, engulfed by a fireball as they tried 
to save a 67-year-old woman who had dropped a cigarette and sparked 
a three-alarm fire on the top floor of her Brooklyn apartment building. 
The deaths prompted a swift investigation after fire officials found 
that the sprinkler system in the building had been turned off and 
the fireproof door to the woman's apartment had been tampered with. 
But the investigation and its unanswered questions were muted as families 
and friends, grieving at the loss of men young enough to be called 
``kids'' by firehouse veterans, groped for different kinds of answers. 
John Bopp stood inside Our Lady Help of Christians Roman Catholic 
Church, his voice trembling, as he remembered his 27-year-old ``little 
brother'' as someone who had graduated from high school, then college, 
married his grade-school sweetheart and joined the Fire Department 
that he loved. Bopp told a congregation that included Mayor Rudolph 
W. Giuliani, Fire Commissioner Thomas Von Essen and other city officials 
how he and Christopher had discussed how they would eventually care 
for their parents as they grew older. Now, Bopp pledged to help care 
for his dead brother's unborn child; Christopher Bopp's widow, Cori, 
is expecting the couple's first child in July. ``I promise him today 
that I will,'' Bopp told the congregation as his tearful sister-in-law 
looked on from the first pew. Earlier in the day in Middle Village, 
firefighters converged by the thousands, stretching for nearly a mile 
in the middle-class Queens neighborhood for Bohan's funeral service 
at St. Margaret's Roman Catholic Church. Bohan, 25, was the youngest 
of the three men who died. He had lived with his parents, John and 
Margaret Bohan, who work as a telephone company technician and a school 
board secretary, respectively. He had started almost three years ago 
in Engine Company 262 in Queens, but had been temporarily assigned 
to Ladder Company 170 in Brooklyn when he was killed. By all accounts, 
Bohan, sunny and mellow, loved to go snowboarding upstate and watch 
New York Jets games and just talk with neighborhood friends he had 
known most of his life. The other firefighters called him Curly, because 
of his buzz haircut. Christopher Bopp a four-year veteran of the Fire 
Department and a former city police officer, never needed a nickname. 
Tony Lombardo, 37, laughed with tears in his eyes as he described 
how ``bop,'' coincidentally, is what veterans call rookie firefighters. 
Giuliani, calling the deaths a ``terrible loss for the city,'' beseeched 
the Bopp family to find some solace during the holidays in the brave 
actions of their son. ``There are people alive today because of Chris' 
courage and the other two brave firefighters who died,'' the mayor 
said. Then, as Bohan's was a few hours earlier, Bopp's coffin was 
carried out of the church on the shoulders of firefighters to the 
slow wail of bagpipes. The lines of firefighters snapped to attention, 
the bugler played taps and four helicopters, in formation, droned 
overhead. Then the fire truck carrying the coffin began the slow trip 
to the cemetery. A woman, walking by with a bag of groceries, said 
to no one in particular, ``It's the saddest thing I've ever seen.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>