<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0266 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You will probably not be all that surprised to learn that the Grimes 
family's outdoor Christmas lights are, once again, the joke of the 
neighborhood. All over my subdivision there are homes lit up like 
department stores. Yards and yards of icicle lights drip from the 
eaves. Trees and shrubs glow with enough wattage to satisfy the power 
needs of small city. Racer lights. Animatronic reindeer. Snowmen so 
bright they hurt the eyes. Then there's my house. It's easy to spot. 
It's the one that looks like it was decorated in five minutes by someone 
with a vision disorder and then a strong wind came up and blew most 
of the lights away. Understated is the word I like to use to describe 
the overall effect. Pathetic is the word my wife prefers. Of course, 
you need to understand that my wife is the kind of person who begins 
looking forward to Christmas in early July. She is not bothered in 
the slightest by stores that begin putting up their Christmas decorations 
right after Halloween. If it were up to her, the decorations would 
stay up all year. My wife is very unhappy this year because we have 
only three Christmas trees in our house, down from four in previous 
years. The 12-year-old, giving no thought to how he was breaking his 
mother's heart, said he did not want a tree in his room this year. 
Maybe he grew tired of having to crawl through his window to get into 
and out of his room, or maybe he finds it easier to sleep without 
the holiday equivalent of 10 searchlights scorching his retinas. I 
don't know. But even without the fourth tree, the interior of our 
house is plenty festive. I won't go into details other than to say 
that when it comes to holiday decorating, my wife makes Martha Stewart 
look like a slacker. And, even more annoying for a decorating-impaired 
person like myself, she's fast. She can festoon three trees, hang 
the garlands and make five or six wreaths from reeds she gathered 
down by the pond in less time than it takes me to untangle one string 
of lights. Of course, her lights are never tangled because when she 
takes them down, she coils them neatly in their original packaging, 
labeling each box carefully so that next year she knows which lights 
go in the living room, which go in the dining room, which go on the 
dog, etc. Do I find this the least bit irritating? Does Bill Clinton 
find Ken Starr the least bit irritating? You would think, with my 
wife's innate decorating skills, that she would volunteer to decorate 
the outside of the house, too, allowing me to take on the supporting 
role (i.e. drinking beer and watching college basketball on TV) with 
which I am so much more comfortable and better suited. Unfortunately, 
either due to a perverse nature or the legitimate fear that I would 
disappear into the TV room like a groundhog and not reappear until 
the last bowl game was over, she makes me do the outside decorating. 
She does this knowing full well that appointing me to hang Christmas 
lights is like hiring Mike Tyson to do plastic surgery on your ear. 
The results tend to be a little ... uneven. But that's OK. As with 
all great artists who are ahead of their time, I feel confidant that 
the day will come when my style of decorating, which basically consists 
of hurling tangled wads of lights at the bushes and gutters and hoping 
some stick, will become the standard rather than the exception. In 
the meantime, if you happen to drive by our house, I recommend that 
you ignore the outdoor lights (it won't be hard; there aren't that 
many) and focus instead on the expertly decorated trees glowing in 
the windows. The dog looks pretty cool, too. (David Grimes is a columnist 
for the Herald-Tribune in Sarasota, Fla.) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>