<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0301 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The night of Dec. 31, 1999, is still over a year away, but movers 
and shakers in the travel industry have been hard at work preparing 
for what many of them insist will be the biggest party the world has 
ever seen. The cruise industry, quicker than most to recognize the 
financial implications of the millennium, has dozens of millennium 
cruises scheduled. To whet interest in those cruises _ and to justify 
higher prices _ many of them are being touted as the first or last 
such cruise of the millennium. For example, Royal Caribbean's Vision 
of the Seas will be ``the first ship to enter the Panama Canal from 
the Caribbean in the new millennium,'' while Celebrity's Zenith will 
be ``the first ship to depart the canal in the new millennium.'' Royal 
Caribbean also says that its 142,000-ton Voyager of the Seas, which 
is to make its maiden voyage next Nov. 14 with a capacity of 3,114 
passengers, will be ``the largest cruise ship to enter the new millennium.'' 
Despite the variety of cruises, tours and ad hoc celebrations, not 
everyone in the travel industry is confident that millennium results 
will live up to the pre-millennium ballyhoo. One reason for that, 
travel agents say, is sticker shock. This has already caused people 
to cancel tours and cruises they had reserved well before prices were 
established and before deposits were due. While many resorts and tours 
required deposits at the time reservations were made, most cruise 
lines did not require them before last Nov. 1, by which time typically 
25 percent of the total price was due. Many who have booked since 
have had to put up 25 percent of the total price within seven days. 
A cancellation between Nov. 1 and March 31 (when half the total is 
due) will result in forfeiture of that deposit. Full payment is usually 
due by June 30, and there will be no refunds after Sept. 1. ``To me, 
one of the most amazing things about millennium fever is that people 
were willing to put down deposits without knowing the itinerary, the 
ship, the cabin or the cost,'' said Joe Galloway, the president of 
the American Society of Travel Agents. Another factor in the lag in 
bookings, travel agents say, is the recent erratic behavior of the 
stock market, which has reminded people that travel is a discretionary 
option. Even so, many people are still planning to welcome in 2000 
away from home. Some hotels and millennium events in such cities as 
New York, London, Paris, Tokyo, Rome, Venice and Vienna are either 
sold out or close to it. ``You'd be surprised how many people say 
to us, `I want to be somewhere different for the millennium, since 
I won't be around for the next one,''' said Galloway, who is also 
the owner of Trans-Continental Travel in Houston. Yet, a travel agency 
owner in a Rocky Mountain state, who would speak only anonymously, 
said, ``I personally think people should stay home or close to home, 
because the millennium has the potential to be the biggest rip-off 
time in the whole world.'' Whether or not crowds live up to expectations, 
industry officials acknowledge that many millennium travelers will 
probably be disappointed by the service they receive from overworked 
and probably inexperienced staff, and frustrated by hassles resulting 
from technological glitches. ``We're suggesting that people who can 
should postpone their celebration a week or two, because the level 
of service they expect will not likely be there at the millennium,'' 
said Doreen Farrugia Cody, a marketing specialist with Dayton's Travel 
in Minneapolis. Moreover, Ms. Cody said some some customers had already 
canceled reservations for fear of Y2K, the flaw that could cause problems 
with computers in the year 2000, creating chaos with airline and hotel 
reservations systems. What the airlines have not yet done, to the 
consternation of many travel agents and tour operators, is accept 
reservations for travel to millennium celebrations. ``We only accept 
bookings 11 months in advance,'' said Joe Hopkins, a United Airlines 
spokesman, a statement spokesmen for other big carriers echoed. Airline 
reservation systems are not programmed to accept reservations beyond 
about 330 days, and airline companies feel little urgency to extend 
that time period because, as one industry official put it, ``in the 
meantime, people change their mind, divorce or die.'' Because of that 
limitation on airline bookings, travel agents and operators have been 
unable to quote final prices for tours, except for the land portion. 
And because they are not yet accepting millennium bookings, airlines 
have no reliable way of knowing what the overall demand will be around 
that time. Absent such knowledge, they do not yet know whether or 
where to add seats. Since even the biggest airlines keep no more than 
a few spare planes for emergencies, additional seats are usually only 
available by swapping smaller aircraft used on heavily traveled routes 
for bigger aircraft used on less heavily traveled routes. But there 
are few, if any, lightly traveled routes during the Christmas-New 
Year holiday. Airlines are not alone in delaying reservations for 
the millennium. As of mid-December, Hyatt Hotels also was not taking 
them, but said it would soon do so, while many Marriott hotels have 
put together millennium packages but have not taken reservations because 
they have not yet settled on prices. Hotels that have been accepting 
millennium reservations usually require minimum stays of three to 
five nights _ at rates much higher than usual, but usually including 
numerous extra amenities. Almost all the 35 Ritz-Carlton hotels worldwide, 
for example are offering one lucky (and well-heeled) couple in each 
hotel the Millennium Experience, a three-night package for $100,000. 
The package at the Ritz-Carlton Bali includes his-and-her 18-carat 
Bulgari watches; a 24-hour private concierge, chef, housekeeper, masseur, 
butler and interpreter; use of a chauffeured Mercedes-Benz during 
the stay; and a commemorative photo album and engraved stationery. 
Leave it to New York, however, to come up with several of the more 
unusual hotel offerings. For $3 million one can rent the entire 627-room 
Millennium Broadway in Times Square and the hotel's staff from Dec. 
31, 1999, through Jan. 2, 2000, while the 155-room Fitzpatrick Grand 
Central Hotel and its staff are available those same three nights 
for a tidy $1.5 million. The 92-room Fitzpatrick Manhattan, on Lexington 
Avenue between 56th and 57th Streets, is available for $1 million. 
So far there have been no takers but enough nibbles to keep all three 
offers on the block, no doubt in the expectation that someone somewhere 
will regard the much-vaunted biggest party the world has ever seen 
as a miserable failure without a hotel of one's own. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>