<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0268 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
George Schaller, the director of science for the Wildlife Conservation 
Society, the group that runs the Bronx Zoo, has studied animals in 
the wild for more than 45 years, from the birds of Colville River, 
Alaska, to the mountain gorillas of Zaire and the giant pandas of 
China. He discussed biodiversity and his current field work _ trying 
to gauge the impact of an epidemic of bacterial hoof disease on the 
vast herds of gazelles on the Central Asian steppe _ in a telephone 
interview from a campsite near Choybalsan in eastern Mongolia. Q. 
(italics)And what brought you to Mongolia?(end italics) A. The Mongolian 
gazelle is one of the great wildlife spectacles left in Asia. You 
can see a herd of 50,000 gazelle. I've been working off and on for 
10 years with the Mongolian government to try to get a management 
plan going for these gazelles so they can be sustainably harvested 
rather than just poached and unsustainably hunted, because there's 
still one to two million of them. So it's one of the great wildlife 
populations in the world, and nobody's ever heard of it. Q. (italics)What's 
happening with them right now?(end italics) A. They've had this disease, 
a hoof rot. There were heavy rains last summer and many thousands 
have died, but Billy Karish from the Wildlife Conservation Society 
came with me. He's a veterinarian, and we are looking at what effect 
this has had on the gazelle, because this is an unusual event. But 
I come periodically to check on population composition and other information. 
And we're thinking of doing a larger project here. Q. (italics)What 
sort of impact do humans have on an elusive and out-of-the-way population 
like the gazelles?(end italics) A. The wonderful thing is the eastern 
steppes of Mongolia are the last really big undamaged grassland ecosystem 
left in the world, other than some areas in Tibet. And the gazelle 
is the major wild hoofed animal. People are very few, so it's a wonderful 
opportunity for Mongolia to manage the whole landscape on a sustainable 
basis both for the wildlife and for the people. But development is 
coming. There's oil exploration, there's talk of building a railroad 
and an oil pipeline and all these things. And by planning ahead now 
for conservation, you can have both the development and the gazelles 
and the beautiful grassland ecosystem, and that's what we're working 
toward. It's a natural habitat, one of the last. It's like the American 
prairies used to be. And in America we're fighting for these last 
little, tiny few acres here and there. Here you've got 100,000 square 
miles of wonderful grassland. Now is the time to plan for the future, 
not after it's been destroyed. Q. (italics)A lot of the public discussion 
about problems of biodiversity centers on tropical environments. You 
hear much less about cold places. Is a lot being overlooked because 
of the focus on the rain forest?(end italics) A. Actually, some of 
the more open woodlands, subtropical woodlands, are far more in danger 
of being destroyed as ecosystems than the rain forest. But all systems 
basically are under threat from development. And this is one of the 
basic issues today. You've got words like sustainable development, 
and that's being equated with conservation. Well, you use the word 
development, that's only to please consumers. It's not to protect 
biodiversity. And you can't manage things on a long-term basis, sustainably 
or otherwise, unless you have the basic information about the situation. 
And that's what is usually lacking in most conservation efforts. You 
need information, knowledge about the natural system. You can't just 
pop in and out for two or three years. You have to have a real commitment. 
Q. (italics)Are there lessons for the work of the Wildlife Conservation 
Society in the United States from your work in places like Mongolia?(end 
italics) A. Certainly one lesson has been learned overseas, which 
is only relatively recently applied in the states, is that you have 
to deal with local communities, that you can't have long-term conservation 
without approval and cooperation of the local people. All too often 
in the states, this has not been the case. And that's why you have 
a lot of backlash. Whereas if people feel that they are contributing, 
that their livelihood is not truly being negatively affected, in other 
words, education and communication, it has a major impact. For example, 
one of our North American programs is in Adirondacks Park, which has 
a lot of private in-holdings and so forth. And there's a real effort 
to bring the community together to discuss options of managing the 
region. And to keep the area beautiful and also, to some extent, wild 
without having too much of a negative impact on the people. Q. (italics)In 
your travels, what do you see as the most hopeful development as far 
as the environment and species preservation?(end italics) A. There 
is obviously in the last couple of decades a much greater awareness, 
which is a hopeful sign. Most governments are aware, most governments 
are actually proud of the natural areas they have. All too often these 
days in conservation you hear terms like use it or lose it. Well, 
most of the world, yes right now, seems to operate full blast on using 
up resources, using up wealth, creating temporary wealth, raising 
cash. But there are ethical, moral considerations, there's national 
pride in natural areas and natural heritage, which exists and which 
many governments have. And this is something one needs to build on. 
An organization like the Conservation Society has a narrow focus because 
we are small and our impact is greatest if we focus on a small issue. 
The science part is fun. The conservation part, which means politics, 
economics and everything, is not fun because you're dealing with basic 
social issues that cannot easily be resolved. What we can do and have 
done is to convince governments that this area is worth protecting 
and we find ways to manage the area and one feels one has gained a 
little ground in that respect. Q. (italics)Could you say a little 
about what you did today and any lessons you took from the work?(end 
italics) A. We've been looking at the gazelle herds to see what the 
survival of young was like after the disease outbreak. And the survival 
of young this year has been poor. They'll make up for it another year. 
Today we worked in the laboratory to check several gazelles that had 
been sick, how would they make it through the winter, what condition 
were they in. And it's bitter weather, it's below zero here. Snow 
on the ground, the steppes are dead yellow, covered with snow. A cold 
wind is blowing. But it's one of the most beautiful sights in the 
world when you see big gazelle herds running across the grasslands. 
So this is a limited goal, but one feels one is doing something useful 
for a country in which one works. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>