<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At one newsstand in downtown Baghdad, a magazine on display reports 
that the Prince of Wales has been seen with Lady Diana Spencer and 
speculates that a romance might be blossoming. At another the prize 
offering is a maintenance manual for the 1988 Oldsmobile. Iraq is 
a nation frozen in time, and the recent wave of American and British 
bombing seems to have done nothing that would hasten a thaw. The oddest 
thing about the bombing campaign, at least as viewed from Baghdad, 
is how little it changed anything. Monday life continued as if the 
explosions that were heard last week were nothing more than a fireworks 
show. Certainly there was an air of theater about the streaking antiaircraft 
fire that lit up the sky during the bombing raids. Most of the Iraqi 
fire, if not all of it, came from low-caliber weapons that had no 
more chance of shooting down a jet fighter than a popgun would have. 
Its only purpose was to give Iraqis a sense that they were in some 
way masters of their destiny and not simply mute subjects. That sense 
was probably inaccurate. Iraq may still be able to defy the West, 
but people here cannot affect the course of President Saddam Hussein's 
government. Out of necessity, if for no other reason, Iraqis seem 
to have accepted their fate. As they adjusted Monday to a new period 
of peace, they continued to live in a world that for nearly a decade 
has not progressed a bit and in fact has slowly deteriorated. Nowhere 
is this more visible than along the banks of the Tigris, which runs 
through the heart of Baghdad. For generations its landscaped banks 
were one of the most romantic places to stroll in the entire Middle 
East, lined with seafood restaurants that were packed until late at 
night. Now the once-magnificent parks are overgrown with weeds, and 
the ruins of the restaurants are home only to vermin. Monday afternoon, 
groups of unemployed men sat silently in chairs along the opposite 
sidewalk, gazing toward the river and perhaps recalling the city's 
lost glory. Baghdad's central bazaar resembles Cairo's or Istanbul's 
played in slow motion. There is a fair amount to buy, but nothing 
like what is available even in comparably tiny cities like Amman, 
Jordan, or Manama, Bahrain. The bursting commercial energy that throbs 
through the rest of the Middle East is absent here, as if someone 
had sprinkled the population with sleeping powder. Eight years after 
the United Nations imposed punishing economic sanctions on Iraq, people 
here have devised two distinct strategies for dealing with the country's 
steady decline. Ordinary people have simply reduced their expectations. 
They live on what can be produced inside the country and on rations 
distributed by the United Nations. For them the only affordable goods 
from abroad are cheap Chinese clothing, toothbrushes from Thailand 
and colognes with incongruous names like America, Top Gun and Route 
66. The elite have found ways to maintain the good life. There are 
villas along leafy avenues and new Toyota sedans, which under the 
right circumstances might someday be traded for the latest BMW or 
Mercedes models. In places like the Samsung dealership downtown, televisions, 
computers and microwave ovens are available at bargain prices, courtesy 
of sanctions-busting smugglers working from Persian Gulf countries. 
``About 30 percent of the people can afford what we sell,'' a Samsung 
salesman said as he tested a new computer game. ``There is still a 
market.'' From the Samsung showroom and the stores nearby that sell 
expensive items like imported marble floor tiles, the idea of rebelling 
against President Hussein, as the United States has been urging, seems 
far-fetched. He not only summarily executes everyone he suspects of 
plotting against him, but he offers privileges to his elite that make 
loyalty pay off. In the eyes of many Iraqis, the image of the United 
States is reflected not by dazzling consumer goods or terrifying weapons, 
but rather by the decaying United States Embassy, which sits forlornly 
on a Baghdad street corner, guarded by three friendly young soldiers. 
Inside the embassy, yellowing photos of San Diego, Houston and other 
cities line the main stairwell. The emblem of the Marine Corps decorates 
the door of one empty office, while a reproduction of Edward Hopper's 
``Nighthawks'' hangs in another. One shelf holds a set of American 
Heritage magazines, the latest dated June 1990, just before the Iraqi 
invasion of Kuwait and the resulting evacuation of American diplomats. 
A Polish diplomat now sits in the office that was used by the last 
United States Ambassador, April Glaspie. He represents American interests 
in Iraq, presumably no more ambiguously than Ms. Glaspie, who gave 
Saddam fateful signals that he apparently interpreted as a go-ahead 
for his invasion of Kuwait in August 1990. Along streets near the 
embassy, shopping malls lie quiet, shut long ago when sanctions began 
to bite. Storefronts that once housed travel agencies are still plastered 
with KLM and Air France decals, but with the airlines unable to fly 
here, no one has opened their doors for years. At Al Rashid Hotel, 
one of the few hotels still functioning, pictures of Santa Claus and 
cherubs hang from the walls. Monday an ersatz Christmas tree, fully 
decorated, was placed in the lobby. Everyone entering the hotel must 
walk across a large floor panel bearing a diabolical likeness of George 
Bush and the motto ``Bush Is Criminal.'' Employees said there was 
no plan to update it by adding President Clinton's image. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>