<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0397 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Planes absolutely, positively will not fall out of the sky because 
of the Year 2000 computer flaw, aviation experts insist. It is possible, 
though, that some will not leave the gate. And a lot of other computer-controlled 
systems, from hotel door locks to trains to ordinary traffic signals, 
could stop working. The Year 2000 problem, known to the digerati as 
Y2K, occurs when computers that store the year portion of a date as 
a two-digit number are confronted with the year after 1999 and conclude 
that 00 means 1900. In isolation, a computer that is confused about 
the date would be a minor annoyance, but computers that are linked 
together _ like those in the air traffic control system _ could stop 
talking to each other and freeze. Almost every industry faces problems, 
but travel and, specifically, aviation could be particularly vulnerable 
because of a huge number of linked systems. The Federal Aviation Administration, 
prompted by Y2K to make its first thorough inventory of hardware and 
software, counted 155 systems that are ``mission critical'' and must 
be repaired in the next year. But the agency said that it has found 
relatively few problems, and has nearly completed its search, having 
designed fixes for 153 of the 155 systems. It must still make those 
changes on computers in the field and test them. ``We've got a very 
short time to finish what's left,'' said Raymond Long, the head of 
the FAA's $191 million Y2K effort, but he said that the agency would 
be ready. It is now turning its focus to what others in the business, 
like airlines and airports, are doing about Y2K. Domestic airlines 
sound confident that they will avoid Y2K problems, but only after 
a huge effort. The Air Transport Association, the trade organization 
made up mainly of the big American airlines, allocated $15 million 
n 1998 and 1999 on Y2K, mostly on the gathering and dissemination 
of information; that is more than the group spent on all activities 
in 1997. But planes will not crash, said Thomas J. Browne, the director 
of the association's Y2K program. The only part of a plane that really 
needs to know the date, he said, is the flight management computer, 
which handles navigation and related chores. Shortly before the plane 
pushes back from the gate, that computer receives a data feed from 
a computer on the ground. If the on-board computer cannot handle the 
data it is given, it will display an error message like ``date out 
of range,'' Browne said. Unless that can be resolved quickly, he added, 
``The pilot will look at it and say, `I'm not taking off in this airplane.' 
'' Thus, he said, ``There's no safety-of-flight issue.'' ``I can imagine 
an FAA inspector walking in to an airline on Jan. 2 and saying, `All 
your flights are grounded because all your pilots' medical exams expired 
100 years ago,' '' Browne said. But the airlines all have written 
records, too, he said, if such confusions arise. Other computers calculate 
passenger and cargo loads and integrate weather data to determine 
how much fuel should be loaded. All that work can be done by hand, 
but not smoothly and promptly. Foreign carriers, and especially foreign 
air-traffic control systems, may lag behind their counterparts in 
the United States. The International Civil Aviation Organization, 
acting on a motion made by the head of the FAA, has agreed to require 
all member nations to publicly report by next July 31 their progress 
in preparing their air traffic control systems for the rollover. KLM 
Royal Dutch Airlines said that it might ground some flights, depending 
on how much progress is made at a destination. Other airlines have 
not made public statements but are watching carefully. Controllers 
can generally still handle traffic without computers, just much less 
of it, meaning that a Y2K crisis might make the system work the way 
it does when there is a computer crash or a big snowstorm. But for 
planes to fly, lots of other parts of airport systems have to work 
correctly, including jetways, fueling systems and even airport parking-lot 
cashier stations. Some airports are checking with the companies that 
manufacture fire trucks to make sure that the embedded computer chips 
in those trucks will not lock up; if an airport has no fire truck, 
it must shut down. Airports differ in their level of preparedness, 
said Christopher J. Tebo of the American Association of Airport Executives, 
and the responsibility for equipment, like baggage systems or fuel 
systems, differs from airport to airport. Airlines that see a problem 
can spend money immediately to solve it. But, Tebo said, some airports 
are public entities with cumbersome appropriations processes, and 
some did not foresee that they would need more resources. ``There's 
definitely going to be a level of inconvenience the traveling public 
is going to incur,'' Tebo said. ``I don't know whether it will be 
having to walk up escalators, or there won't be as many flights to 
certain destinations.'' If the system runs badly, he said, it could 
be like a day when a major blizzard disrupts air service _ repeated 
daily for a month or so. A few travel agencies are sounding cautious. 
Unicorn Holidays, an English company that specializes in travel to 
Spain, France and Portugal, does not plan to book any tours for New 
Year's weekend. The airplanes might work just fine, said Jim Southon, 
Unicorn's managing director, but any of a thousand things could go 
wrong and ruin a vacation. The computer that runs a municipal water 
purification plant could fail _ or one that runs a ski lift, a telephone 
system, a power system, an oil refinery that makes jet fuel, or the 
traffic lights on the way to the airport. ``The farther one goes from 
the states or Northern Europe, the more trouble there will be,'' he 
said. Or, of course, the outbound portion of the trip, in 1999, could 
go just fine, but the vacation could be extended involuntarily because 
something crucial stops working on Jan. 1, delaying the return. Of 
course, all of the problems that could strike on a trip could strike 
at home, too, perhaps even in St. Albans, north of London, where Unicorn 
is based. But, Southon said, ``If you stayed home and got into all 
types of problems, you wouldn't come back to me and say it's my fault.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>