<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0303 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The little town of Bethlehem is used to becoming a crowded small city 
every Christmas Eve, but the extravaganza planned for the year 2000 
will transform it into a millennial metropolis. Or so the town's Palestinian 
officials dearly hope. Nearly $100 million is being spent rebuilding 
Manger Square, Bethlehem's central plaza, installing dramatic new 
lighting along Nativity Street, the main thoroughfare, and refurbishing 
scores of neglected architectural treasures. There are new luxury 
hotels and conference centers and exhibition halls. There will be 
Eastern-star laser shows, caroling, a Finnish Christmas tree, Nobel 
Prize-winners discussing peace, a Santa Claus, and the Magi and their 
gifts. Planners envision 50,000 visitors thronging repaved streets 
outside the venerable Church of the Nativity during millennial Christmas 
Masses _ while tens of millions watch it all via satellite. ``If our 
dream comes true, there will be a lot of congestion here,'' said Munib 
Toukan, a multilingual Palestinian Muslim from Amman who is a chief 
organizer of the Bethlehem 2000 Project, financed by the World Bank 
and several European governments. That dream seemed suddenly attainable 
this month, when town leaders persauded President Clinton to attend 
a tree-lighting ceremony in Manger Square. Bethlehemites have a special 
claim on the year 2000, and they are trying to make the most of it. 
An unceasing procession of religious and secular events is planned 
from the Advent season in 1999 through Easter 2001, which fortuitously 
falls on the same day (April 15) that year in both the Gregorian and 
Orthodox calendars. On Dec. 4, the vicars of Jerusalem's 13 Christian 
churches will lead an ``ecumenical inauguration of the millennium'' 
_ the first time, it is asserted here, that the leaders of these often 
quarreling sects have joined ranks for anything. But the millennial 
high season really starts with the local Franciscans' globally televised 
Dec. 24 midnight Mass at the Church of the Nativity, the third service 
of an evening of Bethlehem Masses (after Lutheran and Anglican Masses). 
The Jan. 1 festivities are assigned to the Lutherans, after a New 
Year's World Party the night before with a promised ``10,000 torches'' 
and pop music stars. On Jan. 6, Christmas for the Eastern Rite churches 
that predominate here, there will be midnight Masses for Syrian and 
Greek Orthodox Christians, as well as Copts from Ethiopia and Egypt. 
Catholics from Latin America will commemorate the Epiphany with a 
Three Kings procession. And on Jan. 18, Armenian Orthodox bishops 
will celebrate the last of the midnight masses. Once an outlying village 
but now virtually a suburb of greater Jerusalem, barely 20 minutes 
by car from the city center, Bethlehem is still a cultural world removed 
from the Israeli capital. Visitors pass through the bored stares and 
cradled Galil assault rifles of an Israeli military checkpoint into 
a dusty, bustling Palestinian commercial center, with BMW's dodging 
goatherds, and souvenir shops peddling Holy Land handicrafts. But 
the old center is an unpolished gem, and when the bulldozers leave 
town late next year, it will have acquired an inviting sheen. At the 
center of the restoration zone is the Church of the Nativity, ground 
zero for most millennial pilgrims. Historians say the site is probably 
quite close to the humble dwelling where it is recorded that Mary 
and Joseph, natives of Bethlehem, celebrated the birth of their son. 
The squat but handsome temple is entered through what must be the 
smallest church door in Christendom. With its sixth-century core and 
evocative scars from successive saviors and conquerors, it anchors 
not just the plaza it faces, but the entire town. Within walking distance 
are other relics of Bethlehem's storied past, such as Rachel's Tomb. 
But Christmas Week 2000 may not be ideal for leisurely architectural 
inspections. The Palestinian National Authority, which governs Bethlehem, 
has seized on the year 2000 celebration to remind the Christian world 
that most sites associated with the life of Jesus, from Nazareth to 
the crest of the Mount of Olives, are in Palestinian towns and neighborhoods. 
Though Christians are a small minority here _ at most 5 percent of 
the nine million people in Israel and the Palestinian territories 
_ almost all of them are Arabs, and proud of their role as custodians 
of this heritage. They also wouldn't mind cashing in a bit. The millennium 
is seen as the business opportunity of the, well, millennium, by both 
the Palestinian and Israeli tourism boards, for whom the date has 
no other transcendental significance. The official forecast for 2000 
is four million visitors or more, triple the usual number. Most will 
stay in Israel, which has tourist amenities the Palestinian areas 
do not, plus old Jerusalem and many other biblical sites. The more 
apocalyptically minded visitors will head off to Meggido, famed from 
scripture as Har Megedon (the Mountain of Meggido, or Armageddon). 
Once an embattled crossroads of the ancient world, the tiny Israeli 
valley town southeast of Haifa has been basically quiet since the 
seventh century B.C. Jehosophat Valley, the mausoleum-pocked gulch 
beneath Jerusalem's walled-shut Golden Gate, is another expected gathering 
ground for the Final Days crowd. Swelling the tourist ranks, travel 
agencies and academics report, will be those whose literal reading 
of the Bible is that the end of the millennium may also mean the end 
of the world as we know it. But the Bethlehem 2000 planners are hoping 
for sunnier, more mainstream celebrants. Throughout 2000, they will 
offer classical music performances (like Bach's Mass in B Minor on 
Jan. 25, by the Orchestra of the XVIII Century, a Dutch period-music 
orchestra), multicultural art exhibitions (Palestinian textiles, a 
world-spanning collection of creches), outdoor rock concerts (no big 
names yet) and film festivals. Today, the typical tourist's routine 
is a bus trip from a West Jerusalem hotel interrupted by a hundred-yard 
dash to the Church of the Nativity. The average stay in Bethlehem, 
according to a survey by a dispirited local professional, is just 
45 minutes. The ambitious stated goal of Palestinian tourist authorities 
is to lengthen that to three days. But with barely 1,000 hotel rooms 
in the two-star class or better, even an overnight stay isn't an option 
for most. Come the millennium, though, things should improve. ``Realistically,'' 
Toukan said, ``if they stay for six hours, this will be good.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>