<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0111 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A week before Thanksgiving, while Americans were busy planning turkey 
feasts, people in Havana were already showing off their new plastic 
Christmas trees. ``Lights are twinkling everywhere,'' said a woman 
reached by phone in November as she peered from a window in her fifth-floor 
walkup in the Centro Habana neighborhood. It took the Cuban government 
two more weeks to announce the obvious: Christmas had returned to 
the island and Cubans were, once again, free to observe the holidays. 
Christmas is back in Cuba at least in part because technology has 
improved, the Cuban government says. A recent editorial in Granma, 
Cuba's Communist Party newspaper, explained that sophisticated machines 
are now capable of cutting sugar cane during December, the busiest 
agricultural season in the tropics, so workers can now be spared for 
a day off. And Christmas is back for good. Outside of Cuba, the re-emergence 
of Christmas has been viewed as yet another concession to the Roman 
Catholic Church and, in particular, to Pope John Paul II, who visited 
the island for the first time last January. But some Cuba watchers 
and dissidents on the island say changes had begun to occur even before 
the pope announced his decision to go a year ago. ``The pope's visit 
was a factor in a process, and we have yet to see where and how it 
will end,'' said Marifeli Perez-Stable, a professor of political sociology 
at the City University of New York who is writing a book about Cuba 
in the 1950s. ``The visit itself was possible because the government 
had already embarked on that process.'' The changes evident in Cuba 
this year are the result of a re-evaluation of priorities that began 
in the early 1990s, when the government, overwhelmed by world events 
and exhausted by its own economic crisis, finally recognized that 
it was time to switch tactics. At the same time, there has been a 
shift of power and attitude that has enabled European countries, through 
the European Union, to become more assertive about Cuba just when 
the United States had begun to lose interest. An intelligence report 
released by the Pentagon last May concluded that Cuba was no longer 
a threat to U.S. security. All these elements have been present for 
a while, but it took the Pope's visit to get the world's attention. 
In the last 11 months alone, the Spanish government named an ambassador 
to Havana, and the King and Queen of Spain announced they will visit 
next spring. Italian Foreign Minister Lamberto Dini and Canadian Prime 
Minister Jean Chretien visited the island. Guatemala and the Dominican 
Republic established full diplomatic relations with Cuba. And Cuban 
President Fidel Castro embarked on highly publicized tours of Portugal, 
Jamaica, Barbados, the Dominican Republic and Grenada. At the same 
time, President Clinton ordered a lifting of the ban on direct flights 
to Cuba and increased to $1,200 the amount of money Cubans here can 
send to relatives on the island each year. And the Human Rights Commission 
of the United Nations voted down a U.S.-sponsored resolution condemning 
Cuba's human rights practices. The Cuban government allowed the Associated 
Press to open a bureau in Havana and granted exit visas to the family 
of the baseball player Orlando (El Duque) Hernandez. About 100 political 
prisoners were released and, while other Cubans have been apprehended, 
the number of political prisoners is now far lower than it has been 
in a long time. Two years ago, there were about 1,000 political prisoners; 
today, there are anywhere between 300 and 400, according to Elizardo 
Sanchez Santa Cruz, one of the leading dissidents in Cuba. Dissidents, 
who have seen their work restricted inside and outside Cuba for years, 
now have some freedoms. While street demonstrations continue to be 
quashed, dissidents who are arrested are likely to be released quickly. 
Sanchez said he is now able to speak on the telephone to international 
human rights organizations without government officials interrupting 
the calls. He is also able to travel. In the past year, he said, he 
received six invitations to visit foreign countries. All were denied 
until last month, when the government honored a request from France. 
He is now in Spain and said he will soon travel to Miami and Washington 
before returning to Cuba. Excessive repression, as it was defined 
in the first 30 years of the Castro government, no longer seems necessary 
to keep tight control of Cuban society, Sanchez said. Most people 
are so busy struggling to put food on the table every day that they 
do not have the time or the inclination to protest or rebel. But the 
pope's visit was successful on two other fronts: It gave hope to the 
people of Cuba and it greatly improved the relationship between the 
Roman Catholic Church and the Cuban government. A cordial relationship 
is crucial because the church needs the approval of the government 
to fulfill its mission of helping the needy and ministering to the 
faithful. Mario Paredes, a top church official in New York who advises 
Cardinal John O'Connor on Cuban matters, said the benefits to the 
Catholic Church in Cuba have been numerous. For the first time in 
many years, groups of priests and nuns were allowed into the country. 
Also for the first time, the church has been able to distribute aid 
directly to the needy, without interference from the government. In 
addition, Cuba's cardinal, Jaime Ortega, was able to speak to the 
nation by radio and television in March _ no small feat in a country 
where the government controls all forms of communication. The government 
has begun to allow the repair of old churches; before, construction 
permits were routinely denied. Nuns and priests are allowed to visit 
the ailing in government hospitals, also a first. Last month, a delegation 
of Catholic doctors from New York flew to Cuba to assess how it could 
lend a hand in the country's medical crisis. Earlier, the minister 
of health had visited Catholic hospitals in New York. The Italian 
and French churches are pouring million of dollars into Cuban universities 
to conduct various types of research, and Catholic professionals are 
now free to attend conferences abroad. But in other ways, life remains 
the same in Cuba. The government shows no willingness to introduce 
democratic reforms and many people still go to bed hungry and disheartened. 
Just like everywhere else, those who have dollars live relatively 
well; those who do not must struggle every day. Now that Christmas 
decorations are a permanent fixture in the country, the differences 
are more noticeable than ever. With Christmas tree prices that range 
from $7 to $60, most Cubans cannot even afford a little holiday cheer. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>