<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0384 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Monday accepted the inevitability 
of his government's downfall, striking a deal with the political opposition 
to hold new elections sometime next spring. On Monday night, an overwhelming 
majority of the parliament, including Netanyahu, voted to dissolve 
his foundering government after an unexpected last-minute effort by 
the prime minister to establish a unity government failed. Early in 
the day, before a chaotic session of parliament even began, both sides 
agreed to withdraw a scheduled vote of no-confidence in the government, 
which, by law, would have propelled them into early elections in 60 
days _ too soon for anyone's taste. Instead, they switched procedural 
tactics to dissolve rather than to topple the government, entering 
furious negotiations on the election date, although none was set on 
Monday night. The Israelis immediately moved forward into what is 
bound to be a turbulent campaign, with battles for leadership on both 
the right and the center-left. As early as Tuesday, it is expected 
that members of Netanyahu's Likud Party will come forward to challenge 
him. It is also expected that a new center party, as yet unnamed and 
undeclared, possibly headed by the popular army former chief of staff, 
Amnon Lipkin-Shahak, will emerge to chip away at support for the two 
major parties, Likud and Labor. Almost certainly, the political fallout 
will extend to the American-brokered Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement, 
which President Clinton tried to salvage in a diplomatic mission here 
last week. To the fury of Palestinians, the Israelis are likely to 
maintain their freeze on compliance with the land-for-security peace 
plan until after elections are held, sometime between March and May. 
While the Palestinians issued a statement on Monday night imploring 
the Israelis to honor their commitments, some expressed hope at the 
prospect of a new Israeli leadership. ``The impression among Palestinians 
is that any change is better than the current situation,'' said Ziyad 
Abu Amr, a Palestinian legislator. ``There is a freeze anyway, and 
if this means that in a few months there could be a hope of implementation, 
then Palestinians can live with it, although the uncertainty will 
be hard.'' In a televised speech to parliament that came across as 
the opening salvo in his election campaign, Netanyahu chose to present 
his defeat as a failure of parliament rather than his own. As he was 
furiously heckled by left and right, he predicted that he would be 
re-elected prime minister because, he said, a majority of Israelis, 
if not the members of parliament, support his tough stance toward 
the Palestinians. ``Either you replace the people or you replace the 
parliament,'' he said. ``And I agree to replace the parliament.'' 
Under the Israeli system, the prime minister and the parliament are 
directly elected by popular vote. It was a raucous day in parliament, 
in which the political situation evolved and devolved by the hour. 
Several times, Dan Tichon, the speaker, threw up his hands and shouted, 
``Wait a minute. What's going on here?'' Moments after the parliament 
rejected Netanyahu's last-minute plea for a 72-hour delay in which 
to explore the possibility of a national unity government, 81 of 120 
members of parliament voted to bring down the government, two years 
before its term expires. Technically, the bill, sponsored by the Labor 
Party, requires a second and third reading, both expected next week. 
But the vote cast on Monday night, which ultimately came as no surprise, 
launched the election season, into which Netanyahu promised to gallop 
like ``a stallion racing to battle.'' Even before the vote was taken, 
posters went up across Israel on Monday carrying the Labor Party's 
campaign message, designed by American political strategists for its 
leader, Ehud Barak. ``One Israel,'' the billboards said, ``for the 
sake of everyone and not just the extremists.'' This message attempts 
to strike at a perception held by many Israelis that Netanyahu has 
often acceded to the will of the far right in order to keep his governing 
coalition together. After he signed a peace agreement with the Palestinians 
in October, Netanyahu's right-wing coalition fell apart. In the last 
few weeks, the prime minister was seen to have lurched rightward once 
more, seeking to regain support as he issued ultimatums to the Palestinians 
following an upsurge in violent unrest in the West Bank. Last week, 
citing what he said were a host of Palestinian violations of the most 
recent peace accord, Netanyahu chose to disregard the agreement's 
timetable, refusing to transfer a chunk of the West Bank to Palestinian 
control as the schedule demanded. His Cabinet endorsed the freeze 
on Sunday, setting a slate of conditions _ some of them unlikely ever 
to be accepted _ that the Palestinians must meet before the freeze 
is lifted. Sounding at times as if he were campaigning against the 
Palestinians themselves, Netanyahu told the parliament, ``Members 
of the Palestinian Authority are saying ``Peace,'' in English, but 
in Arabic they continue to say, ``Jihad,'' or Holy War. He added: 
``I promise you that Arafat is the first person who thinks any alternative 
is better than Netanyahu.'' Indeed, Netanyahu is believed to favor 
holding elections at the end of April, just days before May 4. That 
is the date when Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian leader, has threatened 
to make a unilateral declaration of Palestinian statehood, especially 
if Israeli compliance with the peace agreement remains stalled. Netanyahu 
is believed to think he can capitalize on Israeli fears of that declaration. 
(OPTIONAL TRIM CAN START HERE) Accepting the prime minister's premise 
that he is their only alternative, leaders of the Jewish settlers' 
movement, who oppose any territorial compromise, have returned to 
his camp in the last few days. ``I end up preferring Benjamin Netanyahu 
to Ehud Barak even though he made the decision to retreat from Judea 
and Samaria,'' Pinchas Wallerstein, a movement leader, said, using 
the Biblical term for the West Bank. ``It's not even a guess that 
Ehud Barak will turn over even more land, so what are we going to 
do?'' The same begrudging support came from the few members of parliament 
willing to express their support for the prime minister. ``Democracy 
does not give out many alternatives, and Bibi Netanyahu is the best 
we can do for this period,'' said Naomi Blumenthal, a member of the 
Likud, using Netanyahu's nickname. On the other hand, Benny Begin, 
a former minister under Netanyahu and a harsh critic within his own 
party, shouted out during his speech, ``I ask for the prime minister 
to tell the truth to the parliament.'' And Dalia Itzik, a member of 
Labor, cried out in retort, ``What kind of request is that? You've 
got to be kidding.'' (OPTIONAL TRIM CAN END HERE) Netanyahu is considered 
to a master campaigner, while Barak, a former army chief of staff, 
has been faulted for coming across as overly intellectual and wooden. 
The real wild card in the upcoming race, however, belongs to Lipkin-Shahak, 
another former chief of staff. He is likely to come forward as the 
candidate for a new center party that is being organized by Dan Meridor, 
the former finance minister, and Roni Milo, the former mayor of Tel 
Aviv. Lipkin-Shahak, who has beaten both Netanyahu and Barak in polls, 
has yet to be tested in political combat. He has not yet even resigned 
from the army, although that is expected to on Tuesday, after which 
he is required either to wait 100 days to enter politics or to win 
a special dispensation from the Israeli president to enter sooner. 
He draws part of his political appeal from the perception that he 
is above the fray, but that perception may stem in large measure from 
army regulations that have prevented him from stating his political 
views until he resigns. ``Shahak's advantage in public opinion polls 
is composed of three parts,'' wrote Nahum Barnea, a political columnist 
for the Yediot Ahronoth newspaper. ``He is far from the political 
mud; his opinions have not been revealed; and he instills calm and 
credibility against the backdrop of a loathsome and screaming political 
body.'' Barak, who has urged Lipkin-Shahak to join forces with him, 
is reportedly pushing for elections to be held in late March _ based 
partly on a calculation that, by then, the general's popularity will 
have dimmed somewhat after he has been forced to present and defend 
himself and his views. Sketching out his political platform for the 
first time on Monday night, Barak endorsed carrying out the peace 
agreement, which calls for Israeli withdrawal from about 40 percent 
of the West Bank. But he said his ultimate vision, reflecting what 
he said was a popular consensus, consisted of ``physical separation'' 
between the Israelis and the Palestinians _ ``us here, them there.'' 
``Only such a physical separation will bring peace and mutual respect,'' 
he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>