<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0394 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Andre de Wavrin, the ``Col. Passy'' who forged a Resistance intelligence 
network for de Gaulle during World War II, died at his home in Paris 
last Sunday, friends said. He was 87. Born in Paris in 1911 and a 
graduate of the Ecole Polytechnique, the leading French engineering 
school, de Wavrin was a 29-year-old captain teaching fortifications 
at the French military academy of St.-Cyr when war broke out. He first 
saw action in a British-French expedition to retake the northern Norwegian 
port of Narvik from the Germans in 1940. The expedition was recalled 
after France's defenses against the Germans collapsed, and de Wavrin 
ended up stranded with the other French officers near Manchester, 
England. Though his wife and family were still in France, de Wavrin 
decided to stay in Britain and, on July 1, 1940, found the headquarters 
that de Gaulle had set up in London, and volunteered for whatever 
duty the general might see fit to give him. He emerged from a brief 
meeting with the job of organizing the Free French operational and 
intelligence organizations. ``Nothing had prepared Passy for this 
unprecedented mission,'' de Gaulle wrote in his memoirs, ``but I preferred 
it that way.'' De Wavrin and three lieutenants picked their Resistance 
pseudonyms from a map of the Paris Metro. He chose Passy, the name 
of a station near his home in the 16th Arrondissement, and decided 
to concentrate on the intelligence part of the assignment de Gaulle 
had given him. Working out of a three-room suite at the Resistance's 
new London headquarters at 4 Carlton Gardens, de Wavrin and his men 
scoured military camps and hospitals in southern England to recruit 
volunteers for a service that had to be built from scratch. Slowly, 
with skeptical help from the British and despite fierce rivalries 
within de Gaulle's organization, de Wavrin's group began sending agents 
across the English Channel in boats. Tall, with piercing blue eyes 
whose constant scanning unnerved many who dealt with him, de Wavrin 
soon built up a roster of enemies almost as long as those of his agents. 
``His enemies accused him of operating a small-scale Gestapo office 
in London, complete with dungeons for the uncooperative,'' the American 
historian Gordon Wright later wrote, and de Wavrin was accused (falsely, 
he insisted) of having been associated with an extreme-right subversive 
organization, the Cagoule, before the war. One of his own agents, 
Gilbert Renault, known by the code name Remy, recalled that Col. Passy 
had initially received him ``with all the warmth accorded an unwelcome 
traveling salesman,'' as an American historian, Douglas Porch, put 
it. There were setbacks, notably the failure of a mission with de 
Gaulle to Dakar, Senegal, in 1940 to try to persuade the French garrison 
there to rally to the Resistance. There were also fiascos over de 
Wavrin's attempts to keep enemy agents from penetrating his group. 
Its relationship with the British was strained by rivalry and suspicion. 
``We had practically no means, while the English had everything,'' 
de Wavrin wrote, and that included the radios on which his organization 
depended for contact with agents in occupied France. To prevent the 
British from eavesdropping, de Wavrin established a separate French 
code. Annoyed, the British started delivering the messages to him 
only at midnight. He retaliated by summoning British secret service 
officials to his headquarters to receive inconsequential messages 
at odd hours of the night. ``Miraculously the telegrams began to arrive 
at more normal hours,'' he related later. But in 1942 and 1943 his 
Bureau Central de Renseignements et d'Action attracted people in France 
like Jean Moulin, who were disaffected with the Vichy occupation regime. 
Moulin, later a martyred hero, was part of a group that worked to 
unify all the various strands of the Resistance, under de Gaulle's 
leadership, and de Wavrin began planning for a new political organization 
in France. By D-Day, June 6, 1944, de Wavrin's network had mounted 
extensive sabotage operations and provided Eisenhower, the Allied 
commander, with so much information that he said the Resistance was 
worth six allied divisions. De Wavrin himself parachuted into Brittany 
in August 1944 and helped take charge of a force of 2,500 Resistance 
soldiers operating with advancing American units. The force captured 
2,000 prisoners. In 1945 de Wavrin became director general of the 
precursor of the present-day French foreign intelligence service, 
the Direction Generale de la Securite Exterieure. But three months 
after he resigned in February 1946, he was arrested and charged with 
setting up secret bank accounts in Britain and Paris with diverted 
intelligence money. He was imprisoned for three months in an affair 
judged later to have had mostly to do with communist desires to discredit 
de Gaulle. Decorated with the Grand Cross of the Legion of Honor in 
1981, de Wavrin was later a banker with the private Banque Worms and 
a director of several French companies. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>