<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0103 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mark Twain may well have said that history doesn't repeat itself; 
it rhymes. Or maybe someone else did. In any event, in early 1868, 
while awaiting publication of ``The Innocents Abroad,'' the 32-year-old 
writer found himself witness to a curious piece of history that proves 
the point _ the first impeachment of a president. Twain was working 
that winter as a journalist, filing dispatches from Washington to 
newspapers around the country, when Andrew Johnson's enemies in Congress 
finally found ammunition they thought would remove the president from 
office. A Tennessee Democrat, President Johnson had been Lincoln's 
running mate in 1864 on a ``National Union'' ticket but had run afoul 
of the radical Republicans since succeeding Lincoln. He fought them 
often over their efforts to harshly punish the South. Congress repeatedly 
sought to strip him of power and radical Republicans tried several 
times to impeach him. The climactic battle came when the president 
fired his secretary of war, Edwin M. Stanton, in the face of a law 
designed to give Congress control over Cabinet officers' tenure. Twain's 
opinion of politicians in general wasn't high. ``The political and 
commercial morals of the United States are not merely food for laughter, 
they are an entire banquet,'' he once wrote. Impeachment gave him 
a lot to dine out on. _ By MARC D. CHARNEY In the months before the 
Stanton crisis, the second attempt to impeach the president on charges 
of misusing his power fizzled. Twain responded with a mock obituary 
in a feature titled ``Mark Twain's Letter'' in The Chicago Republican 
of Feb. 19. He cast impeachment as a moribund patient and House Republicans, 
including the radical Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania and the more 
moderate John A. Bingham of Ohio, as nurses who had squabbled over 
whether to let the patient die. Final Defeat of the Impeachment Project 
in the House DIED In this city, Feb. 13, at his lodgings in the chamber 
of the House Reconstruction Committee, our beloved brother, IMPEACHMENT. 
The malady of deceased was general debility. A short time ago his 
health had improved so much that a bright hope cheered the land that 
he would soon walk forth healthful and strong; but alas! we know not 
what a day may bring forth. A great fear came upon his physicians 
in the crisis of his disease. The weariness of watching overpowered 
the nurses, so that they fell asleep and neglected him _ and lo! a 
relapse! ... And so, these six, that were with Mrs. Bingham, being 
stronger than they that were with Mrs. Stevens, called Thad, suffered 
not the medicine to pass the lips of him that lay sick. And in the 
self-same hour he died. So endeth the second farce. The ancient school-boy 
phrase best describes the position of the Congressional bodies in 
this matter: ``One's afraid and 't'other darsn't.'' On Feb. 21 President 
Johnson ignited the final impeachment crisis by dismissing Stanton. 
On March 1, ``Mark Twain's Letter'' treated the event as a resurrection: 
LAZARUS IMPEACHMENT, COME FORTH! Monday, Feb. 24 The past few days 
have been filled with startling interest. On Friday the nation was 
electrified by the President's last and boldest effort to dislodge 
Mr. Stanton. The wild excitement that pervaded the capital that night, 
has not had its parallel here since the murder of Mr. Lincoln. The 
air was thick with rumors of dreadful import. Every tranquil brain, 
thrown from its balance by the colossal surprise, magnified the creations 
of its crazed fancy into the phantoms of anarchy, rebellion, bloody 
revolution! ... And out of the midst of the political gloom, impeachment, 
that dead corpse, rose up and walked forth again! ... SCENE IN THE 
CAPITOL The next morning that one word, Impeachment, was upon every 
tongue. ... Before 9 o'clock in the morning a multitude was assembled 
in the Capitol grounds, and from all points of the compass the clans 
were still gathering. ... The multitude of strangers were waiting 
for impeachment. They did not know what impeachment was, exactly, 
but they had a general idea that it would come in the form of an avalanche, 
or a thunder clap, or that maybe the roof would fall in. Bye and bye 
a member rose up solemnly, and every soul prepared to stand from under. 
But it was a vain delusion _ he only had a speech to make about a 
degraded cooking stove patent. The people were justly incensed. ... 
</TEXT>
</DOC>