<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981221.0404 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even for a region accustomed to disasters, Hurricane Mitch was in 
a class by itself. Central America is struggling to recover from the 
storm, which last month left a death toll reported at 11,000, displaced 
a million residents and inflicted at least $3 billion in property 
damage. The recovery is not proving easy, and people thinking of traveling 
to the region need to anticipate the circumstances they will face. 
On the positive side: Most key tourist attractions, such as the Maya 
ruins at Copan in Honduras, are reported to be intact, and curfews 
imposed early in November to prevent looting of food and fuel in major 
cities have been lifted. Sanitation and basic infrastructure, however, 
are even more precarious than usual, leading the U.S. Department of 
State, in a Consular Information Sheet issued on Nov. 25, to warn 
of difficult conditions in the areas where Mitch did the most serious 
damage, such as Honduras. Of the four countries in the storm's path, 
Guatemala was the least damaged, and its main tourist areas, such 
as the Maya city of Tikal, were barely affected. By early December 
the Pan-American Highway west from the capital toward Mexico, as well 
as the main branches north to the popular market town of Chichicastenango 
and south to Lake Atitlan and its surrounding volcanos, were already 
back to their normal state of congestion. El Salvador, still largely 
off the tourist track, also got off relatively easily. Much of Honduras 
and parts of Nicaragua, however, were so severely battered that government 
officials say it will be years before the situation returns to normal. 
As a result of such pronouncements, hotels have been filled not with 
tourists but with relief workers and journalists. For the most part, 
major hotels in both countries, such as the Honduras Maya and Plaza 
San Martin in Tegucigalpa or the Grand Hotel Sula and the new Camino 
Real in San Pedro Sula are operating normally, as are airports. ``We 
are in good shape,'' Honduras Minister of Tourism Norman Garcia said 
in a recent interview. ``If we had the slightest doubt, we would not 
invite tourists to come, because the bad word of mouth would send 
us to the devil.'' Such assurances notwithstanding, damage to roads 
and communications, water and sewer systems means that the travel 
experience in Honduras and some parts of Nicaragua has been fundamentally 
altered. Even the region's lush tropical landscape, a lure to eco-tourists, 
has been affected, with the combination of winds and floods denuding 
or toppling trees in places like Guanaja, one of the Bay Islands of 
Honduras popular with divers. Before Mitch, a drive across the mountains 
from Tegucigalpa to San Pedro Sula, for instance, took as little as 
three hours. But with many bridges still out, the trip now takes up 
to six hours, thanks to the many detours drivers need to make across 
pontoons and fords. In addition, while long lines for gasoline have 
all but disappeared, authorities advise that diesel fuel is still 
scarce. Even in normal times, it is never advisable to drink tap water 
in Central America. But that is even more the case now, especially 
in Honduras. ``Potable water is in short supply in much of the country,'' 
the department of state warned. ``Normal water supplies to Tegucigalpa 
and many other cities and towns remain at least partially interrupted 
or polluted due to broken water and sewer mains.'' In addition, a 
few hotels in the Bay Islands, among them the Posada del Sol and the 
Anthony's Key Resort, were still closed for repairs as of mid-December. 
On the other hand, recent visitors say offshore diving areas, the 
main lure to the three islands, are closer to pristine than ever. 
``Because of the hurricane weather, the reefs are very clean,'' said 
Sidney Haylock, a member of the mayor's staff in Guanaja. ``We have 
a lot more sea life and the diving sites are improved.'' For Nicaragua, 
the bulk of the hurricane damage is concentrated in the far northwest, 
in the area around Chinandega. Road travel from Managua to Leon is 
back to normal, and conditions in Managua itself and points south 
were never an issue even at the peak of the storm. But once beyond 
Leon, delays and some inconveniences can still be expected. It is 
advisable to avoid the Honduras-Nicaragua border area and rural sections 
of some of Nicaragua's north-central provinces, suchas Matagalpa and 
Jinotega. During the Sandinista-Contra civil war of the 1980s, land 
mines were buried in many of those areas. Mitch's heavy rains exposed 
or washed away hundreds of the weapons, several of which have killed 
or crippled farmers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>