<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981221.2000.0660 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While the air strikes failed to change life on the streets in the 
shops of Baghdad, they have changed the way Washington will have to 
deal with the government in Baghdad. In halting the strikes Saturday, 
President Clinton said the assault had severely damaged Saddam Hussein's 
ability to build weapons of mass destruction. But as The World's Andrew 
North reports, Iraqi officials say that's not the case. Iraqi deputy 
prime minister Tariq Aziz today accused the American and British governments 
of exaggerating the impact of their air strikes against his country. 
Arab newspapers this morning agreed with Aziz, ridiculing the strikes 
and saying the only thing they'd achieved was to damage what little 
credibility Washington had left in the Middle East. One Lebanese newspaper 
said Operation Desert Fox had turned into Operation Desert Rabbit. 
But British prime minister Tony Blair insists the four days of attacks 
hurt the Iraqis. We certainly did an awful lot of damage to their 
essential infrastructure, and one of the reasons why we targeted the 
special Republican Guard is so that Saddam knows from now on that 
we aren't going to be targeting the Iraqi people. We're not going 
to target his conscript army. But if there are difficulties and we 
have to move again, then those people that are in the front line are 
those people that are propping up his regime. And former State Department 
adviser Harvey Sickeman says that judging from the behavior of the 
Iraqi government, it does appear that the strikes were effective. 
We are not being shown scenes of destruction because there aren't 
many civilian scenes. And the Iraqis clearly do not wish to show us 
the extent of the military harm. But even if Iraq's military capacity 
has been dented, it's hard to tell how badly. And for the moment at 
least, there's little sign that the strikes will force president Saddam 
Hussein's regime out of power. But the U.S. and British attacks may 
have forced out one key group of people for good -- the UNSCOM weapons 
inspectors. Today, the Iraqi government said it would not resume cooperation 
with them as a result of the strikes. Those inspections have been 
a fixture of international dealings with Iraq since the end of the 
1991 Gulf War. But U.S. national security adviser Sandy Berger promises 
that even without UNSCOM, the Iraqi leader will not get an easy ride. 
We have to continue to contain Saddam Hussein, which means if he tries 
to rebuild his weapons of mass destruction, if he threatens his neighbors, 
if he goes after the Kurds in the north or our airplanes, we have 
to prepare to use force again. And this time, he knows for sure that 
we will use force. In short, the new U.S. policy that is emerging 
is one of containment -- keeping the economic embargo on Baghdad and 
selectively bombing Iraq if it appears to be rebuilding its weapons 
of mass destruction. But analyst Harvey Sickeman says this less focused 
policy has a limited shelf live. We've seen how difficult it is to 
keep things up over the past number of years. Therefore, I would suggest 
that this policy will be of relatively short duration and will have 
to produce results fairly quickly. From a U.S. and British perspective, 
those results would be the overthrow of Saddam Hussein and his replacement 
by a new government in Baghdad. But Iraqi opposition leaders say Washington 
and London still don't get it. Saddam Hussein has been hurt. However, 
he's still there and the problem is not solved at all. Ahmed Chalabi, 
leader of one of the larger dissident groups, the Iraqi National Congress, 
says the Clinton administration should start spending the $97 million 
Congress approved for the Iraqi opposition earlier this year. The 
way to go forward is to implement the Iraq Liberation Act, to provide 
military assistance to the Iraqi opposition, democratic opposition 
and look for that opposition to go into Iraq and establish a provisional 
government which will undertake the liberation of the country. In 
fact, many are skeptical about whether giving these funds to the Iraqi 
opposition would work, not least because it is so divided. Another 
option which is being proposed by France and Germany is for a new 
kind of weapons inspection commission. Monitoring would be its primary 
role in contrast to the more proactive UNSCOM which has focused on 
finding and destroying Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. While a 
less aggressive inspection regime might appeal to the Iraqis, it's 
unlikely to find favor in Washington and London. But after the recent 
air strikes, it's clear that the United States and Britain are increasingly 
isolated in their hawkish position on Iraq. That means the longer 
Saddam Hussein can stay in power, the fewer options the two governments 
will have for dealing with him. For The World, I'm Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>