<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981221.2000.2463 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Exactly 10 years ago tonight, I was working a reporter shift at BBC 
radio in Scotland in Glasgow. The World's Eddie Mair, writing us from 
London. The office Christmas party was on that night, and if all was 
quiet, I was going to spend most of my evening there, rather than 
wait in the office for my shift to finish at midnight. Early in the 
evening, we got the report that a light plane had come down somewhere 
on the Scottish borders. Sadly, these things happen a lot, and we 
didn't pay too much attention to it. Then we heard that the light 
plane crashed into a gas station, causing a huge fire. Then we heard 
there might be casualties. At that point, my editor decided to send 
me and a colleague, who'd already started his Christmas partying, 
down to this small town called Lockerbie to see what was going on. 
We weren't wildly pleased. No Christmas party and a long drive of 
more than an hour to get to a town so far away, it was almost in England. 
No mobile phones to speak of then, so we turned on the car radio at 
to hear if the national news was mentioning this small plane crash. 
My colleague and I sat stunned as we heard the appalling first details 
of what we now call the Lockerbie disaster unfold. By now, I was driving 
at 90 miles an hour, trying to get to the scene -- frankly, in a panic 
about the scale of what I'd have to report. Just outside the town, 
the main road was blocked with traffic, as it turned out, because 
a mile ahead, the road no longer existed. For a moment, we sat, stranded. 
Then I pulled the car onto the grass median and followed the emergency 
vehicles as they took the only route open to them. We were all doing 
70 miles an hour on grass. We thought we'd be killed. A few moments 
later, we arrived in Lockerbie, two of only three or four reporters 
on the scene. At this stage, the scale of what happened still wasn't 
clear to me. I abandoned the car in what I thought was a field. But 
in fact, it was the main freeway between Scotland and England. It 
was strewn with mud and debris. My colleague and I went our separate 
ways. I climbed an embankment to a huge crater filled with flames. 
People were gathered round, staring into it. The heat was such we 
all had to keep our distance. I clambered through back gardens to 
get to one of the main housing areas. Total silence. Pretty cul-de-sacs, 
Christmas tree lights blinking in windows. And every front door open. 
The people having no doubt fled their houses when they heard the crash. 
In one front garden, a woman's body. And still, no one else around. 
A little farther in the main street, past some broken shop windows, 
one of the town's small hotels. I walked into the bar. It was just 
after p.m., just a couple of hours after the disaster, and people 
were crowded around a small television in the corner. It was surreal. 
They didn't even acknowledge the stranger with the microphone. They 
were watching the news tell them what was going on in their own town. 
Sketchy reports, a graphic showing the intended flight path of the 
Pan Am flight and a map showing where Lockerbie lie. No wonder the 
houses were empty. They'd crowded into this bar. I asked some of the 
men and women to tell me what had happened. I can't remember any of 
their responses, just their faces still distorted with shock. The 
only pay phone in the whole town that seemed to be working was a mile 
away. I filed my first report from there, detailing only what I'd 
seen, unable to make sense of the bigger picture. I have a terrible 
memory. I can forget programs I made only yesterday, be unable to 
recall the names of people I've been introduced to 10 minutes ago. 
But that first hour of my night in Lockerbie remains with me. I can 
feel the heat of the flames. I can hear the crunch of earth and debris 
underfoot. The dead woman in the garden just over there in my mind's 
eye, wearing white. And I know that at the same time I was trailing 
through the wreckage, in New York, anxious relatives were beginning 
their life-long hell. The people of Lockerbie were beginning their 
mourning. And someone, somewhere was quietly pleased that the bombing 
they'd so meticulously planned had been executed. I regret my initial 
selfishness a little earlier in the evening. Upset at not going to 
the Christmas party, resenting having to drive into the middle of 
nowhere. And every year at this time, still, I stop to check my selfishness, 
as the people of Lockerbie and many hundreds of people across America 
stop to remember again the night their loved ones died. Until next 
time, Merry Christmas, Eddie Mair. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>