<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981221.2000.1184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins. The details of the story are 
familiar. Air pollution causing health alerts, restrictions on the 
use of private cars and calls for older people and those with heart 
and respiratory diseases to take extra precautions. The setting of 
the story is what's surprising. This smog crisis is in Teheran, the 
capital of Iran. Jers Abozorgmir is the editor of the Iran News in 
Teheran. Jers Abozorgmir, can you tell us, first, how this has affected 
you on your own? With only half of the private cars allowed to take 
the road on any given day, depending on what your license says, I 
guess, were you allowed to drive in this morning? No. No, actually, 
I wasn't because the license plates of the cars, if they are odd, 
they can only drive on odd days of the week. If they are even, they 
can only drive on even days of the week. And it so happens that mine 
was an odd number, so I couldn't -- I had to walk most of the way 
to work. But it has, aside from the benefits for reducing pollution, 
it has reduced traffic congestion. Ordinarily, it would take me about 
45 minutes to get to work. Today, it took me only about seven or eight 
minutes. So it might be inconvenient, but at least it's a faster way 
to get to work and hopefully, in some ways, solving the pollution 
problem, which apparently is pretty serious at this point. Why has 
it increased so much? Well, it's so thick, you can cut it with a knife 
at the moment. But the reason mostly is the location of Teheran, which 
is surrounded by mountain ranges all around it. And if there is no 
strong breeze, the pollution just hangs over the city, and this is 
what's happening right now. In the past, and a couple of years ago, 
they even considered the drastic measure such as blowing holes into 
the mountain ranges to create a current of air to remove the pollution. 
They decided against that. Now they are working on impregnating the 
clouds with a certain method to get the clouds impregnated, and there 
will be more rain and wash away the pollution. Hmm. You said that 
the pollution is so bad you can cut it with a knife. What is it like, 
for instance, I'm not sure if you have a window in the office where 
you're talking with us now... I do, actually. So does it look any 
different than it has in the past? It does. It looks gray, and you 
can't really see the mountains, which you ordinarily -- you know, 
they just stare back at you. You can only see the snow-covered peaks 
of it, which are thousands of feet high, and the pollution doesn't 
reach that far. It is very hazy, and when you breathe it, you feel 
-- you feel that there are particles in the air. Oh, gosh. Does it 
have an odor to it? Sure, you can smell the fumes. Gosh, it sounds 
so... Because 70 percent of the pollution -- according to the government 
study, 70 percent of the pollution is caused by motor vehicles. And 
in Iran, cars are not really kept up that well. Tuning your engine 
is not really important to them, and more than half of the cars on 
the road are older than 20 years and not very well kept. So -- and 
also we use leaded gasoline, unlike most countries. Right. All of 
these factors, together with the geographical location, have created 
this huge problem. You know, it sounds as if it's a similar problem 
as to what's going on in Mexico City, which, as you know, is extremely 
polluted. And it seems as though part of that's been caused by the 
population -- by overpopulation. A lot of people have gravitated toward 
the city. Now it's become so overcrowded, it's become extremely polluted 
and some people are leaving. I wonder if the same is true of Teheran. 
Have people thought about moving out now because of this? People are 
not considering leaving, but the government is trying to discourage 
people from the other cities to immigrate to Teheran. Teheran was 
built for a population of about maybe a quarter of a million about 
150 years ago. And now, the population has exploded into at least 
10 million. Mm-hmm. So there is congestion, traffic congestion. There's 
heavy pollution and also some problems that go with overpopulation. 
So is it bad enough that you would ever consider leaving, do you think? 
I always consider leaving it, but where am I supposed to go? My work 
kind of condemns me to live in Teheran. Right. So the solution for 
now is don't breathe deeply. Exactly. You know, we're trying to keep 
the windows closed and not let so-called fresh air get in. But life 
has to go on. Jers Abozorgmir is the editor of the Iran News in Teheran. 
Thank you very much for talking with us. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>