<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981221.2000.2906 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins. The legal saga of Augusto Pinochet 
began two months ago, when the former Chilean strongman was arrested 
in London. A Spanish judge was seeking General Pinochet's extradition 
to try him on charges of murder and torture during the 1970s and '80s. 
At this point, Pinochet awaits a re-hearing of his claim that under 
British law, his status as a former foreign head of state gives him 
immunity from arrest. However, Pinochet's case is eventually resolved, 
his plight has been a source of discomfort to other former dictators. 
The World's Clark Boyd explains in this report. Hynkel Party takes 
charge. Hynkel the dictator ruled the nation with an iron fist. Liberty 
was banished. Free speech was suppressed, and only the voice of Hynkel 
was heard. Adenoid Hynkel, Charlie Chaplin's thinly veiled satire 
of Adolf Hitler in the 1940 movie "The Great Dictator," always raises 
a smile. But in the wake of the attempt to extradite General Pinochet, 
it also raises an interesting question. Just what is a dictator anyway? 
The answer might seem obvious. But Paul Williams, an international 
law professor at American University, says that tyrants come in all 
shapes and sizes. The first which comes to mind are the traditional 
totalitarians and dictators -- Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia-Montenegro, 
Saddam Hussein of Iraq. You then have the respectable totalitarians 
-- President Yeltsin and his responsibility for Chechnya. Some would 
argue Gorbachev, and many would argue Laurent Kabila of the Congo. 
And then, finally, you have a significant number of retired totalitarians. 
Baby Doc in southern France, Idi Amin in Saudi Arabia, Cedras in, 
I believe, Panama and a number of other ones who have sort of quietly 
faded from the scene over time. But fading from the scene might not 
be so easy now. General Pinochet's trip to London has turned into 
an international legal battle to hold him accountable for the murder 
of more than 3,000 Chileans during the 1970s and '80s. And if you 
think what Pinochet did in Chile was appalling, keep in mind that 
he was far from the worst. Pinochet's sins pale compared to Idi Amin's. 
Daniel Chirot is the author of "Modern Tyrants." He wrecked the Ugandan 
economy. He drove out foreign investors. He confiscated the property 
of the people. And as he ran short of money, he began a kind of a 
systematic plunder of his country, and there was more and more opposition, 
which was repressed more and more brutally with terrible tortures 
and large-scale killings and a really ghastly reign of terror. And 
in the end, the toll from his period of rule is thought to be about 
300,000 dead. Idi Amin fled Uganda in 1979 and has since been whiling 
away his days in Saudi Arabia under the protection of the Saudi government. 
The British newspaper The Guardian reports that Amin is living the 
good life and is eating 40 oranges a day in a bid to restore his sexual 
prowess. Author Daniel Chirot says Amin is probably not bothered by 
the Pinochet case. I don't think he is scared. First of all, there 
is no great ideological animus against him, people really pursuing 
him. The Ugandans were much more hurt by him than Chileans by Pinochet. 
But Idi Amin was a plunderer, not an ideological dictator. And so, 
he's semi-forgotten except to bring up from time to time as a series 
of horror stories. And as far as I know, there's no international 
effort to get him. I don't know if anyone would know what to do with 
him if they caught him. "If you're an assassin, get out of here. If 
you're a thief, you're in deep trouble." So sings the Haitian group 
Beaucman Experience. They could be sending a message to former Haitian 
strongman Raoul Cedras, who now makes his home in Panama City, or 
Baby Doc Duvalier, who was truly a chip off the old block. Baby Doc 
inherited a dictatorship from his rapacious father, Papa Doc. Robert 
Rotberg of Harvard University's JFK School of Government, says Baby 
Doc's regime in Haiti was at least as brutal as Pinochet's in Chile. 
Random violence, terror, killings of families and doing all the things 
that someone like Pinochet is accused of doing. It was still a dictatorship, 
and it continued to be until 1986, when Baby Doc was eased out with 
the help of the American government and given a wink and a nod so 
he could go to France and be in a kind of asylum. And there he has 
remained ever since. But not all has gone well for Baby Doc since 
his exit from the rough and tumble world of dictatorship. His wife 
took most of his money and left him, forcing him to downsize from 
a French Riviera villa to a small apartment. And now, there's word 
that a Paris-based victims rights group is preparing a case to try 
Duvalier in a French court. How wonderful. To Romania, a nation of 
blue-eyed blondes. We'll have a blond Europe, a blond Asia, a blond 
America. A blond world. And a brunette dictator. Dictator of the world. 
Why not? Dictator of the world. It's our destiny. In the end, not 
every great dictator's or even respectable totalitarian's dreams come 
true -- not even Adenoid Hynkel's. Former Mexican president Carlos 
Salinas is a virtual prisoner in Dublin. Argentina's Leopold Galtieri 
got to stay in the country he once ruled with an iron fist but has 
to earn his keep as a part-time janitor in a Buenos Aires apartment 
complex. And Mikhail Gorbachev, the man who gave the world perestroika 
and glasnost is less than loved in today's Russia. Here, he pops up 
as a kind of rapping Romeo. Which ever way the winds end up blowing 
General Pinochet, international law professor Paul Williams thinks 
that former and current dictators might now think twice about straying 
too far from home. You might see them traveling a lot less, having 
tea in London on a less frequent occasion. And they'll try more and 
more to slip out of sight. They'll be much, much more cautious. So 
I think you've already seen an immediate effect of the Pinochet case. 
The hate of men will pass, and dictators die. And the power they took 
from the people will return to the people. And so long as men die, 
liberty will never perish. Until Charlie Chaplin's words come true, 
you can rest more easily knowing that the Idi Amins and Baby Doc Duvaliers 
of the world are resting less easily, thanks to Pinochet's little 
excursion to London.' For The World, this is Clark Boyd. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>