<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981221.2000.0938 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Around the world, newspaper editorial writers are commenting on the 
impeachment drama in Washington. The World's William Troop reports. 
"Never in the history of the United States has a moral dilemma of 
such proportions arisen to trouble the conscience of the nation." 
That's the opening line in an editorial today from Hong Kong's South 
China Morning Post. It worries that the sexual McCarthyism sweeping 
Washington could end up spreading poison well beyond U.S. borders 
in the form of diminished U.S. involvement in foreign affairs. That 
thought is echoed by Yannick Kofute, Washington correspondent for 
Danish Broadcasting Radio. People in Denmark are worried about that 
the American leadership in the Western world is being weakened and 
damaged by this process because, of course, we look up to the United 
States. I mean, we are very thankful that the United States is willing 
to take a leading role in politics, I mean. And that's what people 
are frightened of, that this might be weakening the foreign policy 
of the United States. Already, France's Le Monde sees a fractured 
American leadership emerging from the Lewinsky affair, and the tabloid 
Francoiseur warns that if Monicagate goes on much longer, it could 
weaken the U.S. dollar and erode U.S. authority abroad. Fear that 
a Senate trial could paralyze President Clinton and U.S. foreign policy 
for months is sparking international calls for a quick resolution 
to the matter. Eric Biedermann is foreign editor at Der Spiegel magazine 
in Germany. The United States is a leading part of the Western alliance, 
and we have a substantial interest to get through with it very fast. 
And as I see it, I mean, the result is more or less certain already. 
So let the Democrats and the Republicans sit together and work out 
some kind of compromise because they can't get rid of him, and President 
Clinton definitely will not resign. So let them find some compromise 
as fast as possible. In Russia, President Clinton's impeachment is 
not causing much concern. Still, Pablo Felgenhauer, a columnist with 
the Moscow Daily Sevodnya, says Russians find U.S. political troubles 
oddly entertaining. I wouldn't say that any Russian paper took any 
serious sort of editorial position pro or against impeachment. They're 
just simply reporting it. And most Russians are just sort of a bit 
mostly amused with how the Americans are dealing with their matters 
and sort of shooting themselves in the foot. Felgenhauer says most 
Russians don't care if Clinton stays in office or not. But for the 
editorial writers at the Times of India, there's only one answer. 
Clinton, they say, should go at once. That's the same conclusion drawn 
by Cameron Forbes, Washington correspondent for The Australian. He 
says his paper had said so weeks ago and reiterated that view in an 
editorial today. Over the impeachment days, I talked to my -- the 
chief editorial writer who said, "We're once again calling for resignation. 
Is that how you still feel?" And I said, yes, unfortunately, it's 
still the feeling that -- that he is a crippled president, that his 
moral authority is gone, that both for America's sake with internal 
policy with the enormous problems America faces -- Social Security, 
et cetera -- but for the wider world, America need strong leadership. 
And the world needs strong leadership from America, and it can't get 
it from Clinton. But one thing at least Australians have in common 
with most Americans, according to journalist Cameron Forbes, he says 
everybody down under would be more than happy if they never heard 
another word about Monica Lewinsky again. For The World, this is William 
Troop. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>