<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981221.2000.2005 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, a co-production of the BBC World Service, PRI and 
WGBH in Boston. I'm Lisa Mullins. The U.S. Congress is not the only 
legislature consumed with a leadership crisis. Today, Israel's parliament, 
the Knesset, has voted for early elections signifying that Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu has failed to win support for his peace-making 
policy with the Palestinians. The vote wasn't even close -- 81-30. 
The World's Richard Myron reports from Jerusalem. The corridors and 
hallways were filled with anxious legislators, political aides and 
journalists. Rumor and counter-rumor created an air of hyperactive 
intrigue. Two weeks ago, a vote of no confidence in Benjamin Netanyahu 
was presented amid growing chaos in the government coalition. Then 
the vote was replaced with one calling for early elections for both 
the prime minister and the Knesset. Today, the Knesset passed the 
resolution with yes votes coming from members of Netanyahu's own Likud 
Party. Ruby Rivlin, a Likud member of Knesset, says an election has 
been inevitable since October, when Netanyahu signed the Wye peace 
accord in Washington. The prime minister went to Wye plantation, he 
knew very well that once he would sign the agreement, he will lose 
the support of the right wing of the political net of Israel. Maybe 
it's something which was courageous from his point of view, but without 
the support of the right wing, it's not the real success of the opposition. 
And now, the prime minister would like to go to the people of Israel 
to ask them to give him the opportunity to go ahead and to be the 
one that will have the negotiation between the state of Israel and 
the Palestinian people. Elections weren't due to take place until 
the year 2000. But with a slim majority and an increasingly fractious 
coalition, time ran out for Benjamin Netanyahu's coalition. Tension 
has been building with his traditional allies on the right. But the 
Wye agreement turned some of them into open rebels. Mickey Kleiner 
is a right-wing member of the Knesset. They said it's the government 
that we were working for, but it betrays its platform. And a democracy 
is not only about being elected, it must be also by a keeping a true 
to your platform, to your ideology and, most important, to the promises 
you made to your voters. Today's results in the Knesset was greeted 
with glee by opposition Labor Party legislators like Uzi Baram. We 
dreamed for years, I think since 1996, to get rid of Netanyahu, because 
Netanyahu is the worst prime minister that Israel has ever had. And 
I'm a member of the Knesset since 1977. And I passed Begin, Shamir, 
Rabin and Peres. And I think it's very, very difficult -- I mean, 
a very important date that Netanyahu is going to lose. The man at 
the center of today's political storm, Benjamin Netanyahu, today defended 
his policies, especially on the peace process. His words were greeted 
with jeers from members of his own party, as well as the opposition. 
But political analyst Hemi Shalev says it's too early to start writing 
the prime minister's political obituary. One thing that should always 
be said of Prime Minister Netanyahu, whenever and whatever is that 
he should never be underestimated. And I do not think it would be 
a good idea for anybody to write him off politically, nor to write 
off his chances for winning the next elections. He is Israel's comeback 
kid, and he's going to wage a big fight in order to try and get back 
to power. In the race for prime minister, Netanyahu will face Ehud 
Barak, the Labor Party candidate, as well as a third contender, Amnon 
Lipkin-Shahak, a former chief of staff of the army. With today's announcement, 
the battle has truly begun for what could be a long and vicious campaign. 
For The World, this is Richard Myron in Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>