<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981221.2000.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World. I'm Lisa Mullins. The ayes still have it in today's 
top stories -- Iraq and impeachment head our agenda. We'll report 
on both in the next few minutes. First, we go to Baghdad, where Saddam 
Hussein reportedly met with his command council today after declaring 
victory against the "enemies of God." The BBC's Ragi Omar is in the 
Iraqi capital. Ragi, after halting the strikes, President Clinton 
said that the assault had severely damaged Iraq's ability to build 
weapons of mass destruction. What are you seeing there? What kind 
of damage has been done? It's been extensive in terms of the number 
of military installations that have been hit -- barracks, command 
and control centers and things like that. I mean, after all, more 
Cruise missiles bombarded Iraq in the last five days or so than any 
other country in history. But whether a lot of weapons programs, prohibited 
weapons programs were targeted and hit is a completely different question 
because, after all, it was UN weapons inspectors who have been saying 
this last year that they couldn't find a lot of these things. They 
weren't being given the access. They weren't being given the information. 
They clearly said that they didn't know where all of this stuff was. 
And the other point is this crisis has been going on for a very long 
time. The Iraqis are not stupid. I'm sure that a lot of things have 
been moved away and moved around the country. And what you might have 
been left with is a lot of very damaged real estate, and that's it. 
How about in terms of civilian casualties or, in fact, military casualties? 
Are you hearing much in terms of those who were killed or wounded? 
In terms of conversations with some senior Iraqi officials here and 
also what we've been able to observe with some of our own eyes walking 
around the city, that it seems a lot of the regular troops of the 
Republican Guard may have just been dispersed and sent away, given 
leave to go home. I just don't think that when all of these barracks 
were hit, these huge barracks, thousands of these soldiers would have 
been told, "Oh, just carry on. Sleep in your bunk beds," fully knowing 
that a military attack was bound to be imminent. Civilian casualties, 
it's very, very hard at all to get an accurate, independent figure 
of the number of people killed. I've been to several hospitals and 
seen people who have been wounded from flying glass and things like 
that. One man I saw had to have his left leg amputated, but no real 
firm figures in terms of number of people who have died -- civilians 
who have died or have been wounded. And what are people on the ground 
there saying, Ragi Omar? Do they believe the government line that 
this was purely an operation to try and divert attention from the 
impeachment hearings or, as they've been calling it "Operation Monica," 
as opposed to Operation Desert Fox? What's the talk? One thing that 
is very detectable is a real sense of annoyance. Even those people 
who have no love for Saddam Hussein and who are, you know, free thinking 
and liberal-minded, and you do -- there are a lot of those people 
here in Iraq -- they're just saying, every time I hear Madeleine Albright 
stand up and say that her argument is not with the Iraqi people, that 
she has the interest of the Iraqi people at heart, you know, what 
friend is it that imposes the most stringent economic sanctions ever 
imposed in the UN's history and carries out bombardments that they 
know full well do nothing to hurt the Iraqi leadership and the elite 
and only, you know, end up with ordinary people paying the price. 
And so, do they not see Saddam Hussein as the provocateur? Do they 
-- does that frustration extend to his regime at all? Of course, I 
think it probably does. But the other thing that comes to the fore 
a lot more is that, you know -- you know, where are the American and 
British support for us? You know, a lot of people talk about the sense 
of frustration, and the other thing that angers them when they hear 
Western officials saying, you know, for people to rise up and that 
they will receive support. They say, well, we remember 1991 and the 
aftermath of the Gulf War when we were left completely high and dry 
at a very, very heavy price to us. So there's a lot of people who 
take what Western officials are saying with a large pinch of salt 
here. Hmm. Have you noticed any shifts in terms of people's attitudes 
at this point since the end of the air strikes? Saddam Hussein obviously 
is still in power. What is different from now versus before the bombings? 
That's a very good question, and it's one that really is very hard 
to answer. I've come here many, many times over the whole -- this 
last year. I can't see what's different. I mean, I haven't -- of course, 
there are a lot of, you know, buildings that have been hit and so 
forth. But in terms of ordinary life, going down the streets and markets 
that I've been going to previously, I can't recognize anything that's 
different. The shops are open. The markets are open. I mean, you'd 
expect even at a time of panic, the first indication that, you know, 
people are afraid is that normally one thing that happens is prices 
of essential food stuffs and fuel and diesel goes up through the roof. 
The price of a dollar goes through the roof. That hasn't happened 
at all. It really is life as normal. The dollar has remained completely 
stable even on the black markets. Well, thank you very much for giving 
us the update. Ragi Omar of the BBC, speaking to us from Baghdad. 
Thank you again. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>