<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981221.1600.0653 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Memorial services were held both in Britain and the United States 
today to mark the exact moment, ten years ago, when a New York bound 
US Airliner exploded and crashed over Lockerbie Scotland. A tragedy 
caused by a terrorist bomb. Two Libyans are suspected. US and British 
leaders warned Libya Monday, tighter sanctions will be sought unless 
the suspects are handed over by the end of February. In a speech at 
Arlington National Cemetery, President Clinton vowed to do everything 
possible to bring the suspects to trial in the Netherlands. VOA Correspondent 
Laurie Cassman has more on the story. Families and friends of victims 
of the airliner bombing, their heads bowed under a light Scottish 
rain, listened to a minister's words of remembrance during ceremonies 
in Lockerbie's Drysdale cemetery. Ten years ago, for you and for us, 
a bomb was ticking. Be assured of this. There is another bomb ticking, 
the irresistible bomb of justice and truth. Be certain that our today 
is not a symbolic gesture, it is a declaration that we will not rest 
until we have justice and truth, until all responsible for your deaths 
are held accountable. About 50 foreigners, including Americans, joined 
the people of Lockerbie for the 10th anniversary of one of the world's 
worst air disasters. 270 people lost their lives when a bomb exploded 
in the plane as it passed over the Scottish town. Prince Philip, Queen 
Elizabeth's husband attended the ceremony and lingered to chat with 
relatives of the victims. Ten years later the concern for most of 
the mourners is bringing the two Libyan suspects in the bombing case 
to trial. They may not have to wait much longer. Libya has been under 
UN sanctions since 1992 for refusing to hand over the two men. Last 
August the British and US governments dropped their demands for a 
child in one of their jurisdictions and agreed to Libya's original 
proposal to hold the trial in a third, neutral country. Britain's 
assistant Secretary of State for Mid-East Affairs, Derek Fatchet says 
the only obstacle now is Libya's objections to the suspects serving 
time in a Scottish prison, if convicted. It appears as if the only 
outstanding issue is if the two accused are found guilty, where they 
will serve their prison sentence. And we have said that there is no 
question that, that prison sentence will have to be in a Scottish 
prison, because the trial has taken place under Scottish law, under 
a Scottish judge, in a Scottish court, except the court, the judge 
are based in a third country. In an earlier interview with British 
radio, Foreign Secretary Robin Cook said there is no, but he did offer 
to open up Scottish prisons for Libya's inspection. UN Secretary General 
Kofi Anon met with Libya's Col. Muammar Qadhafi earlier this month 
to clarify certain points of concern. Last week the Libyan general 
People's Congress expressed its satisfaction with a trial in a third 
country. But it is up to Libya's leader to make the final decision. 
Laurie Cassman, VOA News, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>