<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981221.1600.2151 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The international community has been deeply divided on when, where 
and whether to intervene militarily in the internal affairs of a sovereign 
state. In October, Airstrikes were threatened against Serbia and Iraq, 
but not carried out. Then on December 16th President Clinton ordered 
a strong and sustained attack on Iraq. Next on Dateline, in a report 
broadcast earlier this year on, The Question of Sovereignty. Here's 
Pamela Taylor In a televised address to the nation immediately after 
US cruise missiles began bombing Iraqi targets, President Clinton 
defended the timing of the intervention. Many in the US Congress and 
elsewhere were asking, why now? The US had pulled back before in favor 
of increased diplomacy, and more importantly, they said, the decision 
to bomb came just as the US House of Representatives was preparing 
to vote Articles of Impeachment against the President. VOA White House 
Correspondent, Deborah Tate has more on what the President had to 
say. President Clinton says he decided to strike Iraq with support 
of British forces after Chief UN Weapons Inspector Richard Butler 
concluded, in a report to Secretary General Kofi Anon, that, Baghdad 
has failed to cooperate with the inspection process. I have ordered 
a strong, sustained series of Airstrikes against Iraq. They are designed 
to degrade Saddam's capacity to develop and deliver weapons of mass 
destruction, and to degrade his ability to threaten his neighbors. 
At the same time we are delivering a powerful message to Saddam, if 
you act recklessly you will pay a heavy price. Mr. Clinton says the 
conclusions of Mr. Butler's report to Mr. Anon are in his words, "Stark, 
sobering and profoundly disturbing." He offered examples of Iraq blocking 
inspectors from suspected weapons sites, and restricting their ability 
to obtain evidence. As he put it, instead of inspectors disarming 
Saddam, Saddam has disarmed the inspectors. But some Republican critics 
on Capitol Hill are questioning the time of the military strikes, 
coming on the eve of a scheduled House of Representatives impeachment 
vote against the President. Mr. Clinton sought to argue, the action 
was not linked to the vote, rather he said, the swift move against 
Iraq was done to maintain an element of surprise to give Saddam little 
time to disperse his forces and protect his weapons. He added he wanted 
to avoid military action during the upcoming Muslim holy month of 
Ramadan. Striking then, he said, would have offended Arabs and hurt 
progress made in the Middle East peace process. In a message to the 
Iraqi leader, Mr. Clinton says he remains focused on Iraqi actions 
and would not be distracted by impeachment proceedings in Congress. 
Saddam Hussein, and the other enemies of peace, may have thought that 
the serious debate currently before the House of Representatives would 
distract Americans or weaken our resolve to face them down. But once 
more, the United States has proven that although we are never eager 
to use force, when we must act in America's vital interests we will 
do so. Mr. Clinton warned, there will be unintended Iraqi casualties 
as a result of strikes on Iraq, but he says the cost of action must 
be weighed against the price of inaction which he said would be to 
rebuilding anew Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. He also warned 
Iraq that the United States would respond forcefully if it decides 
on retaliatory strikes against its neighbors. In the meantime, Mr. 
Clinton vowed Washington would work to maintain sanctions against 
Baghdad and strengthen ties with Iraqi opposition to try to effect 
a change in Iraqi leadership. VOA White House Correspondent, Deborah 
Tate. The decision to intervene militarily in other countries has 
usually been for reasons of retaliation or concerns about terrorism. 
The US strikes on Libya in 1986 followed a terrorist attack on American 
servicemen in Berlin. The US Airstrikes against Afghanistan and Sudan 
followed terrorist bomb attacks against US embassies in East Africa. 
The Gulf War Airstrikes were in retaliation of Iraq's violation of 
Kuwait's sovereignty. The decision on when to intervene often falls 
on the United States as the world's last super power. This is a heavy 
burden says Richard Haas of the Brookings Institution in Washington, 
one which has led Washington to hesitate more often than to act. When 
governments violate what you might call their obligations to their 
own citizens, that the international community then in turn has either 
the right to intervene, or if it gets bad enough, in the case say 
of genocide, has an obligation to intervene. So, increasingly sovereignty 
is seen not simply as something that governments benefit from, but 
it's also seen, in some ways, as something of a contract. And that 
when a government violates the contract in the way it treats its citizens, 
then the international community has the option of intervening. Well, 
that sounds like a good theory, but in practice why does the United 
States and why does NATO choose to intervene in certain cases and 
not in others? Why did we bomb in retaliatory action in Afghanistan 
and Sudan, and we're not taking similar measures - well we're threatening 
in Serbia but not many people believe we'll actually do it? Well the 
reason to do it is two-fold, one humanitarian and secondly strategic. 
But, in every case you've got to ask yourself, not simply about the 
potential benefits but the potential costs. And in lots of these situations, 
particularly when there is only humanitarian interests at stake, a 
lot of countries, including the United States are somewhat reluctant 
to intervene, particularly when they feel the cost would be high as 
they often are in situations that are essentially civil wars. Bosnia 
for several years, the United states was reluctant to intervene; in 
the case of Kosovo we have been reluctant to intervene. It's not clear 
to me, in retrospect that NATO was really prepared to intervene in 
Kosovo. But to the extent that people in NATO were prepared to intervene, 
I think it had mostly to do with the revelations of the atrocities. 
And the fact that cameras were capturing what had happened, and were 
increasingly embarrassing governments. OK, so we haven't quite yet 
dodged the issue of sovereignty have we in this case. And even if 
we had, this question still rises didn't we violate the sovereignty 
of Sudan, and if not Afghanistan? Well of course we violated the sovereignty 
of these countries. But under international law, if a government is 
either unable to stop terrorists from using its territory, or indeed 
decides to allow them, consciously to use its territory for those 
sorts of purposes, they therefore forfeit some of the normal advantages 
of sovereignty. Essentially by allowing your country to be used as 
a terrorist base, you have declared war on others. So, the United 
States or other members of the international community are liberated 
- to use another word - to use force against those governments. So, 
in the case say of Afghanistan, which has allowed its territory to 
be used as a terrorist training area, I would say that yes sovereignty 
has been violated but it's an understandable thing. But when does 
it require a UN resolution, and when doesn't it? Well, I would say, 
it never requires a UN resolution. The idea that somehow UN resolutions 
are necessary, is simply another way of saying that we give Russia 
or China or France or Britain, or for that matter the United States, 
a veto over what can be done in the world. And I for one would argue 
that that is simply wrong. I think it is better to act multi-laterally. 
It might be NATO, it might be a particular regional organization, 
or in some cases it might be a much less formal coalition, the sort 
of thing we saw during Operation Desert Shield and Desert Storm, which 
could have been done without any formal UN action. Richard Haas is 
Director of the Foreign Policy Studies Program at Washington's Brookings 
Institute. The question of sovereignty was the subject of today's 
Dateline. I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>