<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981221.1600.0853 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton's impeachment by the US House of Representatives 
now means he will face a trial in the Senate, beginning in early January, 
which could lead to his removal from office. The trial will be presided 
over by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court William Rehnquist. 
Under the Constitution the 100-members of the US Senate are to sit 
silently as jurors passing written questions to the Chief Justice 
who will decide whether the questions should be asked during the trial. 
For more background on the proceedings, VOA's Martin Seacrest spoke 
with Jeffrey Abrahmson, a Professor of Law at Brandeis University 
explains what could happen next. We neither know exactly what's going 
to happen next, or what the time-table will be, because the rules 
in existence are from 1868, and the Senate can change them if it wants 
to. Before there ever gets to be a trial however, we do know that 
there is a period of time in which there are pre-trial motions, there 
are pre-trial procedures to be followed which could take as much as 
three or four weeks. It's also unclear whether we will ever get to 
the stage of a trial because some Senators, at least, think that as 
the trial court they have the power to do what trial courts normally 
do, which is consider dismissing the charges before trial starts. 
When and if the trial does start, what will it look like, will it 
resemble a regular court case in the US? It will resemble a normal 
court case to this extent. The House appoints managers who do function 
as prosecutors. When it's a President being impeached, tried on impeachment 
charges, the Constitution says that the Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court presides. And there will be a "verdict" in which Senators like 
jurors decide whether to remove the President and convict him.. But 
it will not be like a normal jury trial in the sense that there will 
be no jury selection, there is no such thing as unanimous verdict 
requirement in impeachment trials, only takes two-thirds vote to remove 
a president or not to remove a president. And the Senators also would 
have the power to overrule the rulings of the Chief Justice about 
evidence or the law by a mere majority vote. Isn't it also possible 
that at any moment the Senate can move to simply adjourn this proceeding? 
That's an excellent question. The Constitution does say that when 
the House impeaches, the Senate shall try the impeachment. Some Senators 
I'm told, including perhaps the most knowledgeable of Senators, Robert 
Byrd of West Virginia, think that means that the Senate has to have 
some kind of trial. Others agree with I think the thrust of your question. 
Which is, like any court, they have the power to dismiss the charges. 
Jeffrey Abrahmson is a Professor of Law at Brandeis University, and 
he talked with VOA's Martin Secrest. Mr. Abrahmson also says the Senate 
may decide on a joint resolution of censure of President Clinton rather 
than try him on two Articles of Impeachment. A Censure Resolution 
would not force Mr. Clinton to step down as President. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>