<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981221.1600.1342 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Millions of Americans enjoy what is called hobbies, relaxing activities 
at home or elsewhere away from their places of work. Some collect 
stamps, or model trains, or celebrity autographs. Others play chess 
or work with wood, knit, or take part in sports, just for fun. And 
as VOA's Ted Lanfere found out on a trip to Texas, interest in unlikely 
things can turn into absolute passions. Unlikely things like sewing 
machines. If you have a question about sewing machines, Frank Smith 
has the answer. In fact, he says, two different wives divorced him 
because he was spending too much time with his machines. He's so devoted 
that he's collected sewing machines for 30 years, and has opened a 
museum of antique models in Arlington, Texas, a city next to Dallas 
and Fort Worth. At his museum on the ground floor of his home, there 
are more than 250 sewing machines: photos of women sewing, whole displays 
of needle and thread, a shelf of various kinds of oil for sewing machines. 
Frank Smith charges a small admission fee to see the machines. He 
makes most of his living repairing and appraising sewing machines. 
You may know this song, it's one of the Beatle's biggest hits, but 
Frank Smith will tell you, something you'll probably not remember, 
if you saw the Beatle's movie, "Help". At the very end, during the 
credits, a giant photo of a sewing machine comes up on the screen. 
And there's a note that says the movie was dedicated to Elias Howe, 
the inventor of the sewing machine. Elias Howe from Massachusetts, 
had a tough time getting his sewing machine patented. Why the Beatles 
found his story inspiring, not even Frank Smith knows, but it's the 
kind of information about sewing machines that Mr. Smith loves to 
tell you. As my guess, Elias Howe is his hero. Human hands can sew 
as many as 10 or 12 straight stitches a minute. And before Howe came 
along, in the 1840s machines had been invented that could lay in many 
more stitches than that. But there was a problem. The stitches would 
come loose and pull out. So Howe invented the bobbin. On the sewing 
machine a second thread comes in under the garment, crosses the top 
thread to form an interlocking stitch that won't come loose. Frank 
Smith says, Elias Howe's basic principle is still at work today in 
the most sophisticated of sewing machines. The needle still has to 
go down carrying the top thread, and a bobbin thread has to fly through 
the loop and pull up and around and into the material - the same basic 
principles that Howe did, 151 years ago. Why did Frank Smith get interested 
in sewing machines, and not baseball cards or beer bottles or tea 
cups? About 45 years ago he got a job selling sewing machines in Dallas. 
His father had been a tractor repair man, and his mother an avid seamstress. 
So, his interest soon turned to the mechanics of the sewing machine. 
People started trading in their old machines, and before long, Mr. 
Smith was collecting them. About 80 percent of people who go through 
the antique sewing machine museum are women who, in American homes, 
do most of the sewing. There's some men that stay out on the porch 
on won't even pay to go through. I've had women go out there and drag 
them in, saying, hey, you're going to see this. This is really unusual. 
If anyone would like to build the world's largest sewing machine, 
it would be Frank Smith. I wasn't going to be happy until I actually 
got her to sew. It took me over eight months to build the machine, 
piece by piece, put it together. And then about two more months to 
actually get the parts to move right to actually sew. And I was real 
proud, because it uses a needle that is 14 inches long, the thread 
is actually a small nylon rope. Frank Smith even sings about sewing 
machines. He found an old song from the 1920s. There is no sun, there 
is no moon. There is no May, there is no June, if you listen to the 
song of the sewing machine. Babbling brook, the summer time is just 
a lazy song of rhyme if you listen to the song of the sewing machine. 
So, visitors to the Dallas/Fort Worth area of Texas have a choice 
of theme parks with lots of rides, rodeos and sporting events, museums, 
the site of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. And on 
a quiet street in the city of Arlington, a museum put together by 
a man so passionate about ordinary everyday sewing machines that he'll 
even sing about them. I'm Ted Lanfere. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>