<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981221.1600.2692 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In an ironic twist of fate, a man who has pushed for the installation 
of defibrillators in office buildings and shopping malls is alive 
today because someone else saw the need for the cardiac equipment 
on airplanes. Jane Hughes has the story. Sixty-two year old Michael 
Tai was watching a film on board an American Airlines flight from 
Boston to Las Angeles late last month, when a cardiac arrest brought 
him close to death. His wife, Dolores, a trained nurse noticed he 
was unconscious. She called for help and began performing cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation. But her efforts failed to get her husbands heart going 
again. The lead flight attendant went into immediate action. With 
the help of some passengers, he laid Michael Tai in the aisle and 
placed a small box in his seat, following the machine's voiced instructions. 
He determined within four to five seconds the victims life was in 
danger. And again following the machine's prompts he prepared to send 
electric current through Michael's heart, in an effort to restore 
its normal rhythm. Apply pads to patients bare chest. Plug in pads 
connectors next to flashing light. That is the voice of The Forerunner, 
the defibrillator that American Airlines is putting on board all of 
its fleet. In fact the very machine that saved Michael Thai's life 
had only been installed three days before his flight. American Airlines 
Medical Director, Doctor David McKennes describes the compact 3 kilogram 
lifesaving machine. The Forerunner is about the size of a book, and 
it is what is known as an automatic external defibrillator. The Forerunner 
literally has the intelligence of about 100 doctors inside of that 
box, and it can very accurately detect heart rhythms and judge whether 
or not a heart rhythm needs a life-saving shock to bring the person 
back to life. Michael Thai's heart needed five jolts of electricity 
to get it started again. American's Dr. David McKennes says the airline 
was the first American carrier to install defibrillators. The Australian 
airline Quantas was the first in the world to do so. We took the lead 
on this. There was no law that forced us to do it. We simply looked 
at our statistics and were noting about 40 times a year where customers 
lives possibly could have been saved by using an automatic external 
defibrillator. And our management recognized there really was no cost 
return on this program but only that it was the right thing to do. 
And I'm just very proud of our management for making that decision. 
Dr. McKennes says, American Airlines not only has trained most of 
its 20,000 flight attendants in the use of the defibrillator, it has 
assured them that the corporation would be responsible for any lawsuits 
passengers families might file for death or injury resulting from 
the crew's use of the medical equipment. American expects to have 
defibrillators in place, and flight attendants trained on all its 
planes by February of 1999. Dr. McKennes says, if someone in sudden 
cardiac arrest gets help within two minutes, his odds of survival 
are 90 percent. With even a 15-minute delay, he says, the odds drop 
to two percent. And what about Michael Thai whose life was saved by 
the airlines decision to equip its fleet and train its personnel. 
I'm feeling well. I'm feeling alive and actually looking forward to 
a few healthy years. At Boston's Public Health Commission, where he 
works as Director of Community Relations, Michael Thai says, from 
now on his pitch for defibrillators in more public places will truly 
come from the heart. I'm Jane Hughes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>