<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981221.1600.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Members of the United Nations Security Council are meeting privately 
in New York to discuss Iraq. They are trying to repair divisions over 
military strikes against that country, and reach a consensus over 
what to do next concerning Iraq. VOA's United Nation's correspondent 
Max Ruston reports. Arriving at UN headquarters, Monday, Secretary 
General Kofi Anon said the fact that the Security Council is divided 
is not helpful. He hopes its members will find a way to work together 
in the weeks to come. The main division exists between the United 
States and Britain on one side and Russia, France and China on the 
other. Russia, France and China oppose military strikes against Iraq, 
and have called for a less aggressive strategy towards that country. 
A central part of that strategy is the UN Weapons Commission, UNSCOM, 
which was created by the Council to insure that Iraq no longer has 
any weapons of mass destruction. Washington and London say they support 
the current structure of UNSCOM, and its director, Australian diplomat, 
Richard Butler. But several other countries want to change the structure 
and possibly replace Mr. Butler. Secretary General Kofi Anon. You've 
had all the discussions going on, several governments saying that 
we need a new structure, we need a new inspection mechanism. I don't 
know what that means, I don't know what that entails, and I don't 
know what kind of structure they have in mind. But it will emerge 
after the discussions. France has been among the countries most vocal 
in calling for changes in UNSCOM. French officials say UNSCOM has 
sometimes served as an obstacle in efforts to work out political solutions 
to the Iraqi disarmament process. French Ambassador to the United 
Nations Allaine Dejamay. We need some senior which is really professional, 
and interested of course, in monitoring, yes, the disarmament and 
the fight no concession of weaponry, of mass destruction weaponry 
in Iraq. Despite the divisions over the structure of ONSCOM, and whether 
the United States and Britain were justified in carrying out military 
strikes against Iraq, council members do agree on one key issue. That 
is that Iraq must abide by the terms of resolutions approved after 
the Gulf War, removing its ability to acquire or develop weapons of 
mass destruction. The disagreement is over how to reach that common 
goal. Max Ruston, VOA News, United Nations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>