<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981221.1600.3200 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jong Zhe Minh as President of China will be leading the World's most 
populous country into the 21st century. A new biography of Mr. Jong 
describes him as an economic reformer, but not a political reformer. 
And as someone often mistakenly believed to have blundered his way 
to power. VOA's Stephanie Manns spoke to the author of this first 
western study of the Chinese leader, and has this report. Author Bruce 
Gilies says, well Jong Zhe Minh owes his appointment, in 1989, as 
Communist Party leader to the late patriarch Dung Zhou Ping, he made 
his own moves to consolidate power, and establish his authority as 
China's unrivaled leader. The book titled, "Tiger on the Brink. Jong 
Zhe Minh and China's New Elite" traces Mr. Jong's rise to power, and 
the policies he has pursued as Party General Secretary and President 
of China. Mr. Gillie says Mr. Jong at first did not have a military 
or political power base. But he worked to build that support. Jong 
has won over the military in a very, sort of material way. He has 
raised budgets, he has put an emphasis on better equipment and better 
technology. And you know military people love toys, and Jong is in 
a sense, playing to that desire. To strengthen his political support 
system, Mr. Gillie says, Mr. Jong did not follow the style of his 
predecessors, by trying to eliminate his opponents. Jong by contrast, 
rather smothers his enemies by bringing in more of his supporters 
and allowing the voices of his supporters to kind of drown out those 
of his enemies, or those who view policy issues different than himself. 
Bruce Gillie is a Canadian journalist who has worked in Hong Kong 
since 1992. He has made several trips into China and gathered information 
for this biography from primary documents and interviews as well as 
Chinese and international media sources. Mr. Gillie says Jung Zhe 
Minh has distinguished himself from his mentor Dung Shao Ping by creating 
his own doctrine. What Jung has done is not to negate anything that 
Dung did on the economic front, but rather to bring back into the 
spotlight other issues, such as morality, patriotism, fighting corruption 
in the party, raising educational levels of cadders. Regarding political 
reform, Mr. Gillie says, westerners should not think of Jung Zhe Minh 
as someone who is going to oversee the dismantling of China's communist 
dictatorship. However, he says, the Chinese President is willing to 
expand China's exchanges with the outside beyond the economic realm 
to include legal, military and educational issues. Mr. Gillie also 
says, outsiders should not expect Mr. Jung to try to change the verdict 
on the 1989 Tiennemen Square protest movement, which the Party declared 
a counter-revolutionary rebellion. However, he says, Mr. Jung may 
try to make a distinction between what was seen as the correct decision 
to end the protest, and the forceful method that the Army used. I 
think, Jung Zhe Minh stands on the side which believes that while 
the end that was pursued on the night of June 3rd, that is to say 
that the protest should be ended. And the government had to take decisive 
action to end the protest, believes that that decision was correct. 
However, I think he and several other leaders would beg to differ 
on the issue of the means that were used to achieve that. That the 
use of lethal force was wrong. Mr. Gillie says while Jung Zhe Minh 
may not be a great person, he is in power at a significant time for 
China. And he adds, Mr. Jung has been able to push China in a direction 
that Mr. Gillie believes offers good prospects for the country's future. 
"Tiger on the Brink, Jung Zhe Minh and China's New Elite" by Bruce 
Gillie is published by the University of California Press. Stephanie 
Mann, VOA News Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>