<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981106.0809 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Five ethnic Albanian guerrillas were killed Friday in a shoot-out 
with Serb police in Kosovo, Serb sources said. It was the highest 
reported death toll in any clash since an Oct. 12 agreement that established 
a de-facto cease-fire in the restive Serbian province. The details 
of the deaths could not be immediately confirmed, but previous statements 
about similar violence have accurately reported the number of casualties. 
According to the statement issued by the Serb Media Center, a mouthpiece 
for the Serb government, police killed the five rebels Friday morning 
after they attacked a police patrol in southern Kosovo. The statement 
said the attackers were dressed in uniforms of the rebel Kosovo Liberation 
Army and had automatic rifles and mortars. No policemen were injured, 
the statement said. Police reported that one ethnic Albanian guerrilla 
died in a shootout near Klina. Ethnic Albanians in the region said 
police attacked a vehicle, killing one ethnic Albanian and injuring 
another. The rebels were not formally part of the October agreement 
signed by Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic. He agreed to pulling 
back Yugoslav troops and Serb police from Kosovo, the mostly ethnic 
Albanian province in Serbia, Yugoslavia's dominant republic. Showing 
their dissatisfaction with the Kosovo peace process, ethnic Albanian 
rebels said Friday they intend to establish their own civilian rule 
in territory they control in the province. In a statement carried 
by local media, the KLA said its rebel command had decided to form 
local government institutions, disregarding both Serbian authorities 
and ethnic Albanian political leaders. ``The purpose is to ease our 
army of the burden of civilian administration in populated areas,'' 
the guerrillas' statement read, adding that such a move was needed 
in present conditions of war in Kosovo. The move signals defiance 
not only of the Serbs but also of Kosovo Albanian leader Ibrahim Rugova 
and international officials trying to broker self-rule for the secessionist 
province. Rugova has been elected Kosovo president in elections authorities 
consider invalid, and an ethnic Albanian assembly also exists, though 
it is rarely convened and also is not recognized by Serbian authorities. 
The KLA has accused Rugova and other ethnic Albanian leaders of trying 
to sell short their goal of independence. Rugova noted Friday that 
Kosovo refugees are slowly returning to the homes they fled in the 
fighting and are beginning to rebuild their shattered lives. ``There 
are first signs of life,'' he told reporters in Pristina, three days 
after touring Kosovo's countryside for the first time in nine years. 
``There is a great willingness on the part of the people to get back 
to their homes and properties. They should be offered a bit of sense 
of security.'' Rugova voiced hope that the 2,000-strong international 
monitoring mission led by the Organization of Security and Cooperation 
in Europe will provide that. The mission is expected to be launched 
later this month. The U.S. envoy for Kosovo, Christopher Hill, was 
back in Kosovo on Friday. Hill, who is also the U.S. ambassador to 
neighboring Macedonia, said in Belgrade Thursday that the talks were 
producing hopeful signs despite occasional skirmishes in Kosovo. Rugova 
said he was working with Hill on an interim agreement for Kosovo and 
on forming ``an independent Kosovo police force which will reflect 
the ethnic structure and which would work with the help of the international 
community.'' There are new signs of defiance this week by Yugoslav 
President Slobodan Milosevic, whose government rejected attempts by 
the U.N. War crimes tribunal to come investigate charges of war crimes 
and atrocities against civilians in Kosovo. The team was supposed 
to be headed by the tribunal's chief prosecutor, Louise Arbour. In 
Brussels, Belgium, on Friday, NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana 
said the alliance ``strongly supports Mrs. Arbour's request.'' He 
urged Milosevic to cooperate fully with the international tribunal 
according to its obligations under a U.N. Security Council resolution. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>