<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981106.1154 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Anger grew over the slow pace of relief and survivors of Central America's 
worst disaster in memory pleaded for help Friday in the devastated 
countryside, where doctors rationed out slim medical supplies to sick 
and injured refugees. Though tons of aid was arriving from across 
the world for victims of last week's Hurricane Mitch, the region's 
fractured road system and limited air transportation forced many to 
continue waiting. Six-year-old Justa Pastora Povera Guillen, laid 
out on a cot at a refugee center in Posoltega, shook with fever. Dabbing 
the girl with a wet cloth, Dr. Rigoberto Sampson gave her half a tablet 
of Tylenol and said her yellowish eyes suggested malaria. There was 
little he could do. ``We are lacking medicine. We can't give her blood 
tests to see whether it's malaria but because of the situation here, 
I think it is,'' he said. The devastation has overwhelmed Central 
America, where officials say more than 10,000 people died in flooding 
and mudslides. Honduras said 569,000 were homeless and about 1 million 
others lost loved ones or property. Nicaragua said more than 750,000 
of its people had been affected. Scarcities were readily apparent 
in the Honduran capital, Tegucigalpa, where many supermarket shelves 
were bare, 1-2-mile-long (0.8-kilometer-long) lines of cars formed 
at gasoline stations and hundreds of people lined up at the few trucks 
with potable water. ``I need gas to drive around to find water for 
my family and my neighbors,'' said an exasperated Boris Vermont, 35, 
who spent two hours in line at a gas station where fuel ran out Friday. 
CARE worker Pilar de Pastor sat helplessly in a jeep on a Tegucigalpa 
street; there was no aid to deliver. ``We're hoping to get two helicopters 
from Palmerola'' air base up north, she said. ``Maybe today they'll 
come.'' Nicaraguan victims have accused President Arnoldo Aleman of 
being slow to help some of the worst-hit regions due to widespread 
support of leftist Sandinistas, the former rebels who governed through 
the 1980s. ``The government has not sent anything. The only ones who 
are helping us are the Sandinistas,'' Posoltega Mayor Felicita Zeledon 
said. Sixty-year-old refugee Elba Josefina Aguilera agreed. ``From 
the government we haven't received anything,'' she said. ``The only 
things we've received are from CARE. It seems to me it's political 
because the mayor is Sandinista.'' Crowds of hungry flood victims 
had jeered Aleman, calling him a murderer, when he visited nearby 
Leon on Tuesday. A French military squadron reached Posoltega on Friday 
to evaluate the refugees' needs. French Commander Bernard Demaret 
said a plane carrying 90 tons of supplies would arrive later Friday 
and its load would be split between Nicaragua and Honduras. President 
Clinton has ordered dlrs 70 million of aid be sent into the region. 
His wife, Hillary, and Vice President Al Gore's wife, Tipper, planned 
separate trips to Central America in a show of support. Private relief 
groups in the United States said they were flooded with calls volunteering 
private money and supplies. Dean Owen, spokesman for World Vision, 
called it ``one of the largest efforts we've seen in several years.'' 
The international group hopes to raise dlrs 5 million in money and 
donations of blankets, towels, soap and other personal care items. 
Taiwan pledged dlrs 2.6 million in relief to Honduras, Nicaragua, 
El Salvador and Guatemala. The four countries are among a dwindling 
number that recognize Taiwan, which China claims is a breakaway province. 
Brazil said it would send food, medicine and field tents, and Central 
American embassies and consulates in Brazil opened special bank accounts 
to collect monetary donations. Spain approved an emergency aid package 
of dlrs 13.4 million. The U.S. Navy said its Mobile Construction Battalion 
Seven was ordered Friday to leave its station in Puerto Rico and head 
to Honduras to help the rebuilding effort. In Honduras, relief workers 
waited anxiously for promised aid _ and scrambled to find aircraft, 
trucks, gasoline and aviation fuel to deliver it to hundreds of isolated 
towns. ``One plane (from the United States) had to cancel yesterday,'' 
reportedly because pilots couldn't get landing clearance, said Tom 
Turley of the Connecticut-based Americares. ``We put in a lot of time 
and effort getting trucks and gas, and now we have to hold back on 
it.'' CARE _ working with the U.S. Southern Command's Joint Task Force 
Bravo in Honduras _ planned to move 60 tons of food a day, but local 
food stocks are low. Local CARE reserves are nearly depleted, and 
workers were told they likely won't get to the devastated southern 
town of Choluteca by land for at least two months. ``The situation 
there is grave,'' acknowledged Gloria Manzanares Vaquero, CARE director 
for central and southern Honduras. The government _ which already 
declared a state of siege and overnight curfew to prevent lawlessness 
_ banned alcohol sales indefinitely Friday. More than 2,000 people 
have been detained this week for violating the curfew. At the primary 
school turned into a shelter in Posoltega, children and weary adults 
shared a moment of levity, laughing at tricks performed by a juggler 
from the Spain-based Clowns Without Borders. Others had a hard time 
smiling. Susana Benevidas returned to the shelter carrying a large 
empty bucket. ``I went to look for water because my children are thirsty 
but there isn't any,'' the mother of four said. ``A water truck has 
shown up only twice _ but it runs out very quickly.'' On the mountainside 
above Posoltega, where some 2,000 people were killed a week ago when 
the crater lake atop Casitas Volcano broke open, military brigades 
continued to burn or bury the victims' bodies. Mayor Zeledon recalled 
that when she took office she had hoped to help Posoltega develop 
from being one of Nicaragua's poorest towns. ``Now the misery is greater 
and my program has changed into helping Posoltega survive, to go on 
living, although with a bitter memory,'' she said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>