<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981106.1090 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the worst violence in Kosovo since a peace accord last month, five 
suspected ethnic Albanian guerrillas died Friday in a shootout with 
Serb police, according to a Serb media statement. Details provided 
by the Serb Media Center, a mouthpiece for Serb authorities, could 
not be immediately confirmed. But previous statements about similar 
violence have accurately reported the number of casualties. The deaths 
raised the number of ethnic Albanians killed since Thursday afternoon 
to seven and documented an upsurge in violence as the United States 
and European nations try to push ahead with the Oct. 12 agreement 
with Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic. Foreign observers in Kosovo 
say attacks by both Serb forces and ethnic Albanian guerrillas have 
increased this week. The rebel Kosovo Liberation Army, meanwhile, 
says Serb police continue attacking ethnic Albanian villages to prevent 
refugees from returning to their homes. U.S. envoy Christopher Hill 
met with KLA officials Friday in Dragobilje, a village 40 kilometers 
(25 miles) southwest of Pristina. Ethnic Albanian sources said he 
gave the rebels a draft agreement that would restore self-rule for 
the ethnic Albanian majority in Kosovo. Hill's office would only say 
that he met with the rebels to discuss the peace process. The rebels 
have rejected any political agreement that stops short of full independence 
for Kosovo. KLA representative Jakup Krasniqi confirmed the meeting 
and said his side would comment on the document once it has reviewed 
it. Showing its dissatisfaction with the Kosovo peace process, the 
KLA said Friday it intends to establish its own civilian rule in territory 
it controls. In a statement carried by local media, the guerrilla 
group said its military command would form local government institutions, 
disregarding both Serbian authorities and ethnic Albanian political 
leaders. Such a move _ while difficult to achieve _ would widen a 
rift among Kosovo Albanians, most of whom support moderate leader 
Ibrahim Rugova, and the minority that reject Rugova's nonviolent strategy 
for the KLA. Rugova has been elected Kosovo president in elections 
Serb authorities consider invalid, and an ethnic Albanian assembly 
also exists, though it is rarely convened and also is not recognized 
by Serbian authorities. At his weekly news conference Friday, Rugova 
said he hoped a 2,000-strong international monitoring mission led 
by the Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe would provide 
security for returning refugees. The mission is expected to be launched 
later this month. Milosevic stripped the majority ethnic Albanians 
of self-rule in 1989 in Kosovo, a province of Serbia, the dominant 
Yugoslav republic. That started a period of protests and increased 
violence that led to his crackdown on Albanian separatists in February. 
Western powers led by the United States threatened NATO airstrikes 
against Serb and Yugoslav forces in Kosovo last month to force Milosevic 
to agree to end his offensive, reduce forces to pre-crackdown levels 
and let refugees return home. The agreement also calls for reaching 
a political settlement, and the proposal Hill gave the rebels on Friday 
was worked out with moderate Albanian leaders who lack the support 
of the KLA. Despite agreeing to troop pullback after being threatened 
by NATO airstrikes, Milosevic is showing new defiance. The Serbian 
government, which he controls, has rejected attempts by the U.N. War 
crimes tribunal to investigate charges of war crimes and atrocities 
against civilians in Kosovo. The team was supposed to be headed by 
the tribunal's chief prosecutor, Louise Arbour, but were refused visas 
to investigate. A U.S. State Department expert on war crimes said 
Friday the move would hurt Milosevic. David Scheffer told reporters 
in Sarajevo, Bosnia-Herzegovina, that blocking the war crimes tribunal 
from doing its work means economic and other sanctions on Yugoslavia 
would remain locked in place. He also said Milosevic agreed to permit 
the investigators in Kosovo as part of the package to avert airstrikes, 
saying NATO ``still has the authority'' to attack if the agreement 
is not fully honored. Reporting on Friday's attack, the Serb Media 
Center said a police patrol in southern Kosovo came under fire from 
guerrillas and police fired back, killing five of the attackers. No 
policemen were injured, the statement said. Two other ethnic Albanians 
were killed Thursday, according to ethnic Albanians interviewed in 
central Kosovo. Police reported one guerrilla died in a shootout near 
Klina. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>