<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981106.2130.1511 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fans of the rolling stones call them the "greatest rock and roll band 
in the world." But they aren't resting on their laurels. Mark Scheerer 
reports. They've been touring since the dawn of time it seems. And 
when the rolling stones cranked up their "bridges to Babylon" tour 
a Year ago in chilly Chicago, they had no idea what was in store. 
Every other tour, you've known that you're going to start there and 
it's gonna finish there, and it does. But this tour -- no, we're not 
finished yet, you know? As documented in their seventh live album, 
"no security," featuring a couple of random European fans on the cover, 
this trek took its toll on their health. I had laryngitis twice, and 
I had to cancel like a few shows and replace them with other ones, 
and that was a real drag. I hate that. And Keith also had an accident 
where he broke his ribs. I broke three, actually. Yeah, and punctured 
a lung. And it's a ludicrous story, really. Ludicrous only if you 
can't picture Keith up a ladder in his study looking for a book when 
the shelf topples over. Everything goes in slow motion at those times. 
And the desk is coming for my temple, and uh-uh, I shove that out 
the way. And I say, "I know I'm going to take it somewhere." And the 
chair rolled over, and it -- bang. And I never did find the book. 
Speaking of books, there's a new coffee-table Tome about the stones 
and their three-plus decades of rolling around the world. And someday, 
Mick might get to make the movie he wants to about the music world. 
Martin Scorsese and rich Cohen and myself, we're writing a screenplay 
about the music business, about characters in the music business and 
their lives over 30 years. Rock's most volatile pair still have trouble 
being on the same page. Jagger and Richards, for example, make different 
predictions about how many north American Arena shows they'll be doing 
after the first of the year to stay warm for some June makeup shows 
in England. If we do something, it will be quite a short, sweet thing. 
Oh, yeah, and I think through to June pretty much, as well. Sure, 
the live album, "no security," is going to generate some age-related 
wisecracks like "no social security." But at this point, pensions 
don't seem to be a problem. You certainly, I hope, have enough security 
yourselves. Well, personally, yeah. Hey, we just enjoy it. I think 
we think we're getting the Hang of this thing, you know? Mark Scheerer, 
"CNN Entertainment News," New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>