<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981106.0130.1470 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some big-name fashion designers are making the unfashionable hospital 
gown chic. Jeanne Moos has a front row seat on the hospital runway. 
There is nothing less hospitable than a hospital gown. Your buttocks 
is hanging out. Turn around. That's number one peeve. But if being 
overexposed by hospital gowns gets you down, get a Load of this. Mercy 
Mercy is what you'd need wearing this sequined silver gown by anne 
Klein in the hospital. Talk about bed sores. But it's got something 
no hospital gown's got. Matching sequin undies. The maternity Ward 
here at Hackensack University medical center was rocking. Women with 
newborns and nurses watched this fashion show. Patients gave the critiques. 
Beautiful. A little heavy for the hospital. Hackensack medical center 
asked five New York designers to create hospital gowns. We gave them 
our gowns. We told them what's wrong with them. Designer Nicole Miller 
came up with a floral number featuring an angled and overlapping back. 
I know. I have visited people in the hospital and seen things I wasn't 
meant to see. Patients resort to desperate measures when faced with 
skimpy gowns. I tell them to give me two and I put them on each way. 
And when this guy's wife was a patient -- She needs to walk around 
backwards. It's so bad that when they made the movie "The X-Files," 
David duchovny didn't just shoot a hospital scene, he shot a Moon. 
I get out of the bed in the hospital gown, and my entire is flapping 
in the breeze there. Duchovny's behind was left behind on the cutting 
room's floor. Easy, easy. He could have used this gown made by a California 
company called no Moon. Note the cheeky logo. Velcro fasteners and 
a generous cut allow you to cover your assets. Okay, so some of the 
designer gowns aren't practical. This is for like "General Hospital." 
Yeah, exactly. And this cashmere gown by halston is dry-clean only. 
But holding a wrap sure beats holding your back. Pretty woman I couldn't 
help but see pretty woman It sure doesn't take doctors long to figure 
out how to get into a Gown, any gown. I see there's a button right 
here. But when it comes to the bottom line -- not a single butt hung 
out. That's important because you never know who's looking. Next thing 
you know, they'll be making hospital gowns at the gap. You may not 
be ready for your appendectomy, but you'll be ready for your close-up. 
Jeanne Moos, CNN, Hackensack, New Jersey. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>