<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981106.2130.0206 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In other news, the Middle East peace process has been put on hold, 
after a Suicide bombing at a crowded open-air market in Jerusalem 
today. The two suspected bombers were killed in the attack, 21 others 
were injured. The bombing prompted the Israeli cabinet to suspend 
consideration of the wye river peace accord. Jerrold Kessel reports. 
The wreck of the bombers' car hauled away. The bombers' intention, 
Israeli and Palestinian officials believe, was not only to wreak death 
and destruction, but also to scuttle the recently concluded Israel/Palestinian 
peace accord. Both attackers died in the explosions. The two bombers 
were sent by the terrorist organization, the Islamic Jihad, that is 
located in several cities in the territories under the control of 
the Palestinian authority. Confusion, panic and pain. The wounded 
were ferried to hospital and the Israeli government put on hold plans 
to ratify a land-for-security agreement. It's going to be irresponsible 
on our part to give Mr. Arafat control over more and more territories 
while he cannot really put an end to terrorism. The only answer to 
those extremists is that the peace process must move on. Under the 
cloud of the attack, Yasser Arafat convened his cabinet. Before that, 
he telephoned Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu to express 
his sorrow. It was described by Netanyahu's spokesman as "A very constructive 
conversation." Arafat reportedly responded positively to Netanyahu's 
insistence that he clamp down hard on the militants. Via Israeli television, 
the Palestinian leader also sought to assure the israeli people that 
he would do just that. My security officers and I are making 100% 
effort. And, of course, we hope to reach 100% result. Despite the 
angry Israeli government demands, the renewed security relationship 
are alive and must, says Israel's defense minister, be kept alive. 
Our security is in contact with the Palestinian's security team. There's 
no doubt this terror would like to kill our people and kill the whole 
peace process in the Middle East. The Israeli prime minister's application 
of massive pressure on the Palestinian leader stems, say analysts, 
from the pressures of his hard-line right on him. I don't think he's 
given up on the agreement altogether, and I think he still feels bound 
to it. But he's going to make life as difficult as possible before 
the agreement gets under way. In the Gaza strip, a combined rally 
of Palestinian groups, including the Islamic Jihad, opposed to the 
peace process. At the rally, there were chants -- "Yasser Arafat, 
rejoin our freedom fight." The Palestinian leader, by his wye agreement 
undertaking, is committed to precisely the opposite. Jerrold Kessel, 
CNN, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>