<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981106.1830.1601 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight, the crew of the shuttle "discovery" is storing the gear and 
preparing for tomorrow's landing. Forecasters are saying the weather 
in Florida may turn cloudy, that could force a landing at Edwards 
air force base in California. Of course, we have seen a good deal 
of these astronauts on television during the mission. But NBC's Robert 
Hager today got a chance to give us a whole new view of what it's 
like on board discovery. This is a full-scale replica of the shuttle. 
The astronauts use it to train. Now, everything from here back is 
the cargo bay. It's only in this part, from here forward, that the 
crew lives and sleeps. Here's how you get in -- through this Hatch. 
You enter into what's called the mid deck. It's very small. You can 
walk across it in just a few steps. But this is what serves as one 
time a living room, dining room and sleeping quarters for the crew. 
On landing tomorrow, it's where Glenn a two crewmates will sit. Meantime, 
in space with the seats folded away, it has been the main astronaut 
gathering place. Here's where astronauts sleep in bunks -- or hammocks. 
And here's where meals are prepared. Food packages pushed up here, 
where water squirts in to hydrate them and a Warmer heats them. And 
ever wonder what the shuttle has for a lavatory? Well, this is it. 
Looks sort of like an airplane lavatory -- has a curtain for privacy. 
And since you can't have a shower in space, each astronaut gets one 
wet towel a day to take a sort of birdbath. And everywhere on the 
wall, velcro for astronauts to lean against to keep from floating 
away. This is the tunnel the astronauts float through into the two-person 
laboratory where they do science experiments. And then since there 
is only one, small window down here, better sightseeing is up here 
on the flight deck. Of course, in space, you could float up. During 
landing, the flight deck holds four. The cockpit looks very much like 
the cockpit of an airplane -- a jetliner. Commander brown sits over 
here in the left seat. On reentering the atmosphere for landing, he 
can maneuver the shuttle some by using this stick. Otherwise, in space, 
he uses this thruster. Light years from the little "friendship 7" 
capsule John Glenn first used to get to orbit. A thoroughly modern 
spacecraft -- whether it's here in the simulator building, or preparing 
to return from a nearly 4 million mile trip in space. Robert Hager, 
NBC news, Houston. Just hope that they remember to return their try 
trays to an upright position before landing tomorrow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>