<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981106.1830.0849 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight, Jesse "the body" Ventura. It's been just 
three days since his big election victory, but it seems like the new 
governor elect of Minnesota is everywhere. Even in a discussion about 
the future of house speaker Newt Gingrich on this morning's "today 
show." Who do you want to see as speaker of the house if it's not 
Newt Gingrich? Well, I don't know. I think maybe Jesse "the body." 
Well, we should probably get him. It sounds like he stands for something. 
But before Ventura can be speaker, he has to be governor of Minnesota, 
a Job he says he's taking very seriously. Tonight, we want to hear 
from Ventura himself, how he won, what he wants to do, and then what 
Minnesota thinks of him now that he has won. We begin with Ventura's 
philosophy tonight "in his own words." I think maybe the general public 
is looking to look up to a powerful, strong figure. In light of what's 
going on, they need someone to look up to and I'm 6'4" time for a 
little credibility, honor and bringing dignity back to our country. 
The democrats and republicans don't supply that in my opinion. Lowering 
taxes, how's that for a start in get our taxes down. Cut down the 
size of government. Allow people to have more money in their own pocket 
and not be paying the government. I believe it is time to go back 
to neighborhood schools so that parents then can take an active involvement. 
Parents must be involved in schools for schools to succeed. I was 
asked, Jesse, do you support legalizing drugs and prostitution? And 
I replied, absolutely not. Well, conveniently the press left that 
out. But I did go on to state that I'm open-minded enough to look 
at alternatives if something's not working. I'm human. I'll probably 
make mistakes. But let's remember, we all make them F. they're mistakes 
from the heart, then you don't have to apologize for them. Jesse Ventura 
tonight "in his own words." But good intentions and plain speaking 
go only so far in politics. First, you have to govern. Tonight, there 
are many who wonder if Jesse Ventura is up to the job. Here's NBC's 
Anne Thompson, "in depth." Jesse Ventura today, the most talked about 
man in America, as reality sinks in for the governor-elect and his 
wife. She's like, "what have you gotten us into?" And across Minnesota, 
the people also ask, "now what?" From 28-year-old Brian donahue who 
voted for Ventura, but now says -- It does scare me a little bit. 
But Jesse's bigger than the rest. -- to retired schoolteacher Jerry 
wallin, who never supported ventura. They're saying, "what's going 
on here? What's happening to those minnesotans?" Who have they voted 
for? Even Ventura's inner circle don't know what's next, because they 
can't get through the media crush to talk to the governor-elect. The 
brain behind the body is dean Barkley. Ventura's chief campaign strategist 
is a former lawyer who runs a car wash. He knows everyone is watching, 
waiting for Ventura -- To fail. To screw up. To prove all these guys 
are just a bunch of idiots who don't know what they're doing. But 
we know what we're doing. They know they must assemble a transition 
team, appoint a 75-person governor's staff, make 900 more appointments 
in the next year. And submit a $23 billion, two-year budget by February 
4th, just a month after he takes office. Then there's the job of governing 
Minnesota, population 4.5 million people. Here, the Senate is controlled 
by the democrats. The house by the republicans. Ventura belongs to 
neither. He's a member of the reform party and that, says veteran 
political reporter dane Smith, will cause problems. He's going to 
have a hard time governing. He has no members of the reform party, 
the perot-inspired party, in the legislature. On top of that, those 
closest to Ventura have little or no government experience. He doesn't 
even know what he doesn't know yet. Because he hasn't been there. 
But Ventura's supporters, like Brian donahue know what they want him 
to do. The bottom line? Less taxes off the paycheck. The former wrestler 
who won because he's not a politician will, in the end, be judged 
like all politicians -- by how well he gives the people what they 
want. Anne Thompson, NBC news, St. Paul, Minnesota. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>