<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981106.1830.0071 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. Major news tonight, when the congressional election 
results came in on tuesday night, a huge disappointment for the republicans, 
Newt gingriching in the speaker of the house, immediately blamed the 
news media. Since then many of his fellow republicans have been saying 
openly Gingrich is the problem, and he must go. Some of his former 
allies are openly challenging his leadership team. And tonight, Gingrich 
has decided to give up the fight. NBC's Tim russert broke the story 
earlier this evening. Tim, what's the situation? The speaker is still 
down in Georgia. When is he going to formerry resign? As we speak, 
he is working on the statement in his own handwriting. He called his 
innermost sanctum and staff and closest advisers and said, it's over. 
I'm getting out. Not only not seeking re-election as speaker, but 
resigning from the House of Representatives. He just was re-elected, 
as you know, on Tuesday to another term representing Marietta, Georgia. 
The speaker had been making calls assessing just how much damage had 
been done. He concluded today that after Bob Livingston had made his 
statement clear that he was going to challenge the speaker, that it 
was best to move on, move on not only with his life and his to end 
his political career. I asked his top adviser who called me whether 
the speaker would take a Respit and he said, I doubt it. Four years 
ago they were talking about a revolution that would last into the 
21st Sen tuer E. Gingrich was talking about running for president 
in the year 2000. What happens now to the republican leadership in 
the house? After all, they still do have a majority, although it is 
somewhat smaller. Bob Livingston that I mentioned did announce for 
speaker today. But now the deck is shuffled. Look for Bill Archer, 
chairman of the ways and means commit toe emerge, and perhaps even 
several other candidates. It is open season. Republicans covet these 
leadership positions and you're going to see an awful lot of them 
running. And you're dead right about speaker Gingrich. He came home 
from a trip to Mongolia and said, even in Mongolia, they know who 
I am. They have a copy of a contract with America, his political Bible. 
But Tom, even Newt Gingrich's most grudging opponents would have to 
acknowledge the republicans would have never recaptured the house 
in 1994 for the first time in 40 years without his leadership. Tim, 
the DNA of the republican leadership will not really change in terms 
of the philosophy of fiscal conservativism and going hard for a tax 
cut in the year 1999, will it? no. But it will have a smile on it. 
The one thing we learn from the election on Tuesday is that republican 
governors from Connecticut, New York, Massachusetts, Minnesota -- 
not in minnesota, Michigan, Wisconsin and Texas and Florida, are conservatives 
who are pragmatists, who govern with a smile, compass et conservatism 
as George bush called it down in Texas. The republicans in the house 
believe there was a valuable lesson learned there, that Newt Gingrich 
had to go, they had to start fresh. One of his closest friends said 
Newt was radioactive. He finally accepted it. Tim russert tonight 
on the decision of house speaker Newt Gingrich to give up the speakership 
and to resign from the Congress at the end of this term. As we were 
saying, this is a long way from those heady days just four years ago 
when Gingrich eng ooerd the republican takeover of the house. For 
more on this story tonight, let's go to Capitol Hill now and NBC's 
Gwen ifill who has been tracking it all day along. Newt Gingrich saw 
his house leadership collapse with Tuesday night's election returns. 
He saw his fate sealed when his old friend, house appropriations chairman 
bob Livingston, decided to challenge him. I do so because I believe 
that we're at a crossroads, a crossroads for our party. I cannot say 
that I have a majority. But I do believe, when the dust settles, that 
I am the new speaker of the house. Joining Livingston today in staging 
a leadership revolt -- Steve largent, a football hall of famer from 
Oklahoma who will run against majority leader Dick Armey. Results 
speak for themselves, and November 3rd didn't speak. It screamed that 
we desperately need a change. While the storm clouds built in Washington, 
Gingrich remained in georgia today, avoiding all public comment about 
his predicament. Instead, his office released this statement, declaring 
the speaker -- an aide said Gingrich made 50 calls today, receiving 
dozens of pledges of support. "He's running for speaker," she said. 
"There's nothing to reconsider." But some republicans are already 
abandoning the speaker. My preference at this time would be to move 
to new faces here in washington. I think you can't get there from 
here with Newt Gingrich leading the team. Gingrich allies say Livingston 
only this morning promised not to run against the speaker in exchange 
for more power, but withdrew the offer before Gingrich could respond. 
While Armey, working from his Texas home, wrote house republicans, 
urging his colleagues to take a deep breath before deciding how to 
vote. It resembles Bosnia without the peacekeepers. Newt Gingrich 
decided to cut his losses and save his party. But now turmoil in his 
home district. He had been elekded just Tuesday night. Now probably 
a special election replaces him and his seat, Tom. Gwen Ifill tonight. 
Stunning news from Washington. Newt Gingrich giving up the speakership 
and leaving Congress. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>