<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0283 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Corporate root canal. It's an apt phrase for the pain of installing 
those monster, run-the-whole-show software packages that coordinate 
a manufacturer's entire business from the time raw materials come 
in the door to the time the customer pays the invoice. Yet companies 
find the software's promises of slashed costs and supercharged productivity 
irresistible, so the programs, known as enterprise resource planning 
software, or ERP, are spreading fast. AMR Research, a research firm 
in Boston, estimates that worldwide sales of enterprise software and 
related services like maintenance and training totaled $10.9 billion 
last year. And the Gartner Group, a research firm in Stamford, Conn., 
expects sales to keep growing by at least 20 percent a year. ERP programs 
are pricey, costing a minimum of $300,000 for a tiny shop and rising 
into the hundreds of millions for a global giant like Coca-Cola or 
General Motors. But analysts say that nearly every sizable manufacturer 
in the United States and Europe either has ERP, is getting it or is 
considering getting it soon. The boom has meant big business for consultants 
like Arthur Andersen and for software vendors like Peoplesoft and 
Oracle from the United States and Baan of the Netherlands. And it 
has been a bonanza for the German giant SAP AG, which owns more than 
a third of the enterprise software market. Its sales of ERP products 
ballooned to $3.35 billion last year, from just $633.6 million in 
1993. But popularity does not mean painlessness. Like oral surgery, 
the process of installing enterprise software is never quick or easy 
and can often be a scary mess. Whole departments must be retrained, 
jobs redefined, and procedures discarded or rebuilt from scratch. 
The inevitable glitches and unforeseen consequences can drive workers 
crazy for months. And no two installations are exactly alike. Though 
its core is packaged, off-the-shelf computer coding, an ERP program 
lets a company choose from a myriad of preset configurations and options. 
Should customers be tracked by name, location or account number? Should 
sales reports be generated weekly, daily or hourly? Should labor costs 
be aggregated plant by plant or apportioned among product lines? ``There 
are 8,000 switches that you can flip to manipulate the software to 
handle business processes your way,'' said Mark Gulling, ERP program 
manager for Eastman Kodak, which began installing ERP software from 
SAP in September 1997 and does not expect to be finished until 2001. 
SAP is trying to make the process easier for its customers. It now 
offers a product called Asap _ officially, Accelerated SAP, but the 
pun on ``as soon as possible'' is quite intentional _ that uses a 
methodical question-and-answer format to guide customers through the 
software's many options. ``The big goal is to have no surprises,'' 
said Werner Dilzer, SAP's global director of implementations. But 
that goal is still some distance off, as can be seen in the experiences 
of three SAP customers in the ERP front lines. One made just about 
every mistake in the book; another succeeded from the start, and the 
third is only starting _ but trying to learn from predecessors' mistakes. 
BROTHER INDUSTRIES: Learning the Ropes, The Hard Way Back in early 
1996, Brother Industries (USA) in Memphis, the American typewriter- 
and word processor-making arm of Brother Industries Ltd. of Japan, 
figured that installing SAP's enterprise software in eight months, 
tops, would be a snap. Brother would simply dump all the data from 
its existing software systems into the new data base. And while the 
company was at it, why not simultaneously change over from a big mainframe 
computer to a client-server system, based on desktop computers, that 
nobody in the company had yet been trained to use? And of course, 
the information technology people could run most of the project. Yeah, 
right. ``They figured, it's packaged software, they didn't have to 
train anyone _ four information systems folks could easily teach 250 
users how to run it,'' said Samuel A. Cox, the chief information officer 
hired by Brother in mid-1997 to clean up the resulting mess. Everything 
that could go wrong did. Plants chronically ran low on raw materials 
because no one had fed vital data to the new system about how long 
it took to get parts from Brother's suppliers in mainland China _ 
often six weeks or longer by the proverbial slow boat. Emergency air-freight 
shipments, though expensive, might have been a solution, except that 
all the pertinent vendor information was now locked up in new computers 
that no one had thought to equip with surge protectors; they kept 
crashing with every thunderstorm. ``This was a real case of garbage 
in, garbage out,'' Cox said. The project team was made up almost entirely 
of technologists who did not really understand what the system was 
supposed to accomplish. For example, the team added up how many people 
worked on each assembly line and the volume of parts and materials 
ordered by each plant, figuring that the arithmetic was nuanced enough 
to account for costs. But the numbers proved far too broad-brush for 
operations executives who needed an accurate gauge of the cost of 
making each product. They needed to know how employees' time was divided 
over work on the line, coffee breaks and training; how many parts 
were actually used and how many wound up as scrap. Safety glasses, 
work gloves and other general-use materials needed to be factored 
out. So did a lot of obsolete data. For years, employees had added 
new parts numbers to the data base but never bothered to delete the 
out-of-date ones. When the time came to switch to the SAP system, 
half the 10,000 capacitors, screws, resistors, and such listed in 
the data base were inactive. But the information was still dumped 
into the new system. The huge amount of deadwood data slowed down 
everything from checking for duplicate parts orders to analyzing the 
supplier list. Even worse, when Brother's employees started adding 
the additional information that the SAP software required _ the time 
that each part sits in inventory before it is used, say, or the ratio 
of bad to usable parts in each shipment _ they labored to find data 
for twice as many parts as necessary. By the time Cox arrived, the 
new system was far over budget and months behind schedule. He immediately 
joined forces with Douglas Price, who at the time was Brother's vice 
president for manufacturing, to figure out what the company's operations 
people actually needed. ``Sam understood that SAP is not about hardware 
or systems or software, but about the user community and its needs,'' 
said Price, who was later wooed away from Brother to become a consultant 
on SAP software for Pricewaterhouse Coopers. Together, Cox and Price 
did the groundwork that should have been done at the outset, analyzing 
labor and unit costs and waste rates at each plant and feeding the 
data into the system. Finally, Cox said, the program began doing what 
it was meant to do: keeping materials flowing, logging orders in, 
sending bills out, highlighting the most efficient operations and 
red-flagging the least. Once the system was debugged, Brother found, 
for example, an inefficiency in its keyboard assembly line that it 
could correct by giving line workers a simple insertion tool. And 
it learned that productivity was greater in areas of its plants that 
did not arbitrarily shift workers from line to line, so it now keeps 
teams of people working together on the same models. Now that it has 
tamed manufacturing control functions, Brother is expanding the program. 
Starting in November, a sales and distribution module will rapidly 
convert sales orders to production orders. Next on the agenda are 
production planning and warehouse management. CULTOR FOOD SCIENCE: 
Getting It Right The First Time In a sense, Cultor Food Science in 
Ardsley, N.Y., a subsidiary of Cultor Ltd. of Finland, was a shoo-in 
for getting a workable ERP program up and running in just six months. 
In early 1996, the company acquired the food ingredient division of 
Pfizer Inc., sending Cultor Food's annual sales from $150 million 
to $400 million in one big jump and challenging it to integrate a 
much larger operation into its own. ``Sure, there's always resistance 
to change, but it helps when there's no entrenched system to replace,'' 
said Richard Baratta, the company's director of finance. Still, the 
biggest factor in Cultor's successful adoption of enterprise software 
was probably its extensive preparation. Cultor's management began 
by figuring out which specific sorts of data, reports and control 
systems it needed and then challenged software program vendors with 
a kind of test: Show us how your program processes orders overseas, 
prove that it can track our product from our shipping dock through 
a European middleman to an ultimate user, and show us how you account 
for on-paper profit transfers among plants. ``We knew what information 
we needed, and we weren't buying any program until we were sure it 
could provide it,'' Baratta said. SAP got the highest marks on the 
test, so in mid-1996, Cultor assumed the role of student: It bought 
the SAP package and became one of the first companies to try its Asap 
product. The company assembled a team of six, drawn from both the 
newly acquired Pfizer division and the old Cultor and including both 
technical and operations managers. Cultor gave the team a separate 
project room and established 48-hour deadlines to make decisions. 
Team members talked frequently with operations people to see whether 
the evolving program was really meeting their needs. It didn't always. 
The human resources department dropped out of the project when it 
became clear that the system could provide only 40 percent of the 
data it needed. Manufacturing, on the other hand, signed up for the 
program late in the game. ``If you're already setting up systems to 
track raw materials coming in and product going out, it makes no sense 
to have this production planning gap in the middle,'' Baratta said. 
Other departments made bad choices and had to backpedal. Sales initially 
insisted that the system account separately for orders to each of 
Cultor's three product divisions, even if the orders came from the 
same customer. Within a few weeks, sales managers saw that this method 
caused duplication and made the company miss chances to combine orders 
into one shipment. Cultor returned to accounting for orders by customer, 
not by division. Then came a training blitz that did not stop with 
just a few department heads. It reached, for example, to the quality 
manager who for years had set aside Friday afternoons to enter a week's 
worth of quality test results but now would have to enter them as 
soon as the tests were completed. ``The SAP program won't add product 
to the inventory list unless it's passed inspection, so our inventory 
records wouldn't make sense otherwise,'' Baratta explained. Cultor 
also learned the importance of keeping all its plants and divisions 
in the loop. Many Cultor plants use one another's products as ingredients 
and were accustomed to faxing orders back and forth. When the North 
American plants became the first to implement the new software, they 
stopped the practice, assuming that the system would handle internal 
order processing electronically. It does _ but the European plants, 
not yet on the new system, weren't alerted to check for incoming electronic 
orders. ``We didn't do a great job of communicating,'' Baratta acknowledged. 
Even so, Cultor managed to get five plants in three countries running 
on ERP software in just six months. Its advice to others? ``Remember 
that time is money with SAP,'' Baratta said. ``So get it up, get it 
running, tweak it if you have to, but don't discuss, discuss, discuss. 
If you make a wrong decision, you can always change it later.'' VISTEON 
AUTOMOTIVE: Taking It Slowly, To Dodge Pitfalls Most veterans of ERP 
installations say two important ingredients for success are narrowing 
scope and bringing users on board. If so, Visteon Automotive Systems 
should do just fine. Visteon, the $17 billion, 80,000-employee automotive 
components unit of Ford Motor Co., started installing SAP enterprise 
software only in late August and is early in the process. But for 
a year now, Stephen Delaney, Visteon's vice president for supply and 
process leadership, has eaten, breathed and slept ERP He and his project 
team built an extensive wish list by interviewing every employee who 
would use the new software. Then they drafted 50 specific goals related 
to speeding up the order-to-shipment process, cutting costs and increasing 
productivity. They dropped any request that did not directly advance 
those goals. For now, Visteon's system will not bother with data about 
tariffs and customs procedures, nor will it include manufacturing 
data. Why? Feeding those masses of information into the system might 
distract attention from the need to improve the handling of costs, 
materials planning and order processing. ``Manufacturing is not a 
weak area for us,'' Delaney said. ``We know we have to fix up our 
transaction analysis first.'' Users made 115 requests for data reported 
in ways that deviated from the program's standard formats, but the 
project team whittled those down to a handful. The accounting department 
wanted to stick with software it had grown to love; the ERP team said 
no. ``Accounting transactions are the blood cells running through 
the veins of the business transactions, and doing it outside SAP would 
take away from the business process,'' Delaney said. Once the company 
bought the SAP package, Delaney assembled 60 people from Visteon operations 
and 40 from information technology and set them to configuring the 
software full-time. He sequestered them in a leased building across 
the street from Visteon's Dearborn, Mich., headquarters and declared 
it off-limits to their old bosses and colleagues, except for ERP business. 
The group reports to Delaney, who in turn reports to Visteon's president. 
The team is setting what Delaney calls ``inchstones'' instead of milestones. 
The team sets weekly goals for configuring the system and tracks the 
hours spent on each goal. As each portion of the program is installed, 
the productivity gains or cost savings are measured against expectations. 
``We will be able to see, almost person by person, what we are doing 
right and what we have to rethink,'' said Dave Bent, director of processes 
and systems. In the works is a bonus system for team members who consistently 
meet their inchstones. For now, Visteon is installing SAP software 
only in its smallest division, a $700 million glass unit that employs 
about 400 people, does most of its business in North America and does 
not have thousands of permutations and combinations of its product 
to account for. But representatives from other plants are participating 
in the glass project to make sure it incorporates functions that their 
operations will need. The glass division is scheduled to switch to 
the new system next July, and Delaney wants it to run for at least 
six months before he starts rolling out the SAP software to other 
units. Will it work? Ask him in 2002, when the whole company is supposed 
to be up and running. SOME PAINKILLERS FOR THE START-UP By CLAUDIA 
H. DEUTSCH c.1998 N.Y. Times News Service The pitfalls of installing 
enterprise resource planning programs _ software packages that coordinate 
a manufacturer's entire operation _ are legion. Technology and operations 
workers may find themselves working at cross-purposes, for example, 
or management may fail to set or enforce deadlines. Or maybe the company 
is biting off more sweeping changes than it can chew. Vendors, consultants 
and rueful been-there, done-that customers say the companies that 
avoid the worst headaches have these characteristics in common. _ 
The project has a high-level sponsor. ``Middle management makes the 
system work, but middle management takes its clues heavily from senior 
management,'' said David Alschuler, a vice president of the Aberdeen 
Group, a market research firm in Boston that has studied ERP installations. 
_ The goals are specific and manageable. For example, a program can 
be set up to allocate inventory efficiently _ to large customers first, 
to high-priority countries first, or to fill orders as they come in. 
But it can't do all three at once. _ Business changes are made before 
the software is configured. If the company is about to start selling 
over the Internet, for example, the new sales system is put in place 
before locking in the way the ERP software will handle sales and distribution. 
_ End-users are on the project team. The system has to do what operations 
managers need, not what technologists think they need. ``The IT department 
may be facilitating this, but it is the operations people who will 
really drive it,'' said D. Michael Travis, head of Arthur Andersen's 
ERP consulting practice. _ The team is sequestered. Freed from regular 
duties, team members work in a separate project room where they can 
kick around ideas without distractions from regular bosses and colleagues. 
_ The team can make final decisions, but on short deadlines. ``A wrong 
decision is better than no decision, because at least something is 
getting done,'' said Werner Dilzer of SAP, the German software giant. 
_ Implementation is gradual. Madness lies in trying to roll out a 
system simultaneously to every plant in 20 countries. Taken one country 
or business unit at a time, it becomes manageable. _ Ample time is 
spent on training. An administrative assistant who enters a purchase 
order once a month might need only a day's lesson; a person responsible 
for the checking and recording of inventory probably needs at least 
a week. _ Old security blankets are discarded. Companies may be tempted, 
for example, to force the system to keep generating paper reports 
just because the staff is used to them. Inevitably, though, people 
will make changes on paper and forget to enter the changed data in 
the system. Better to scrap the paper reports entirely. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>