<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0493 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Saturday, Nov. 7: House 
Speaker Newt Gingrich was swept away by the congressional equivalent 
of a barracks coup, and it happened with a speed that actually merits 
one of the most overused adjectives in the political dictionary. It 
was, in fact, stunning. Our guess is that earlier in the day, Gingrich 
was himself stunned as he measured by telephone the erosion of his 
support in the Republican conference that he and such hard-handed 
deputies as Dick Armey had run with harsh efficiency. As he sought 
votes among the 223 Republican House members who survived the Tuesday 
election, Gingrich discovered that it is hard to spin professional 
spinners. He had argued that the loss of five GOP seats rather than 
the expected gain of 10 to 20 was, in fact, a good showing. It was 
only if you accepted his spin that maintaining razor-thin majority 
control was a victory. Not even his closest supporters bought that. 
Moreover, they thought the Gingrich-endorsed television ad blitz about 
the Clinton sex scandal was a huge strategic blunder. So they forced 
out the leader who took them to control of the House in 1994. It was 
a fitting if unpredictable end for a man who always saw politics as 
blood combat. Gingrich was the intellectual architect and chief spokesman 
for the '94 sweep. He did it by nationalizing the 435 separate House 
contests, a brilliant tactical coup that stunned President Clinton 
and the Democrats. Then hubris set in. His contempt for fund-raising 
laws and House ethics and his role in the 1995 government shutdown 
frightened the public enough to make him one of the nation's most 
unpopular figures. His handling of the 1998 election frightened fellow 
Republicans enough to make them start shopping for a new speaker. 
The transit of Newt Gingrich from party superstar to repudiated prophet 
illustrates how hard it is for a radical, polarizing figure to last 
in leadership. He scorned the conventional wisdom of figures as different 
as Richard Nixon, Lyndon Johnson and Bill Clinton about commanding 
the bipartisan center. ``I am a revolutionary,'' he crowed. The Democrats, 
he said, ``are the genuine reactionaries. We are going to change their 
world.'' But in Washington, he who lives by macho bluster may be undone 
by it. As a matter of survival, Gingrich's fellow Republicans decided 
to change his world and save their own. The skills that had made him 
brilliant in opposition and cunning in insurrection were not suited 
to enduring leadership. The revolution he had started claimed him. 
In one sense, Gingrich may be more mourned in the White House than 
in the Republican caucus. He was Clinton's most reliable foil. On 
foreign-policy issues he was often a White House ally. But the White 
House also knows that with his passage, much of the energy will fade 
from the impeachment process. The Republicans, for their part, face 
a leadership struggle and a definitional crisis. From Gingrich's example, 
they should see the dangers of ferocious rhetoric and abandonment 
of the center. He was, after all, an expert in how to seize power, 
but a novice in holding it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>