<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0354 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Back in 1993, Colgate-Palmolive chief executive Reuben Mark received 
2 million stock options in addition to his salary and bonus. Colgate's 
board explained that the huge grant was the only one Mark would receive 
until 1998. But in 1996, Colgate hired two consulting firms, Towers 
Perrin and Hewitt Associates, to review the company's executive-compensation 
plans. The consultants found that Mark's long-term incentive package 
had fallen ``significantly below the median'' of companies they used 
for comparison. So in 1997, a year early, the board granted him 2.6 
million more options _ a package it promised would have to last Mark 
through 2003. In the grand scheme of things, giving Colgate's chief 
a new grant of stock options a year early is not such a big deal. 
Sure, his total compensation went up 83.5 percent annually over the 
last four years, while Colgate's total returns rose an average of 
25.9 percent. But the company has outperformed the market, and the 
stock must keep rising for Mark to exercise his options at a profit. 
Yet this and hundreds of other examples, each with their own twists, 
help illustrate how hard Corporate America works to make sure that 
few chief executives feel underpaid. Through an elaborate process 
fraught with conflicts of interest and marred by questionable assumptions, 
executive pay is often set with methods imported from Lake Wobegon, 
Garrison Keillor's imaginary place where ``all the children are above 
average.'' The issue is not just the hundred-million-dollar payouts 
that a few chief executives collect by reaping the rewards of huge 
stock-option grants. Nor is it simply that some executives whose companies 
do poorly are nonetheless richly rewarded. Rather, an examination 
of the interplay among chief executives, corporate directors and the 
consultants who help set pay levels calls into question whether ``pay 
for performance'' _ the mantra of executive compensation for the last 
two decades _ has been distorted almost beyond recognition by the 
maneuvering that goes on behind closed boardroom doors. Performance 
certainly plays a role in executive compensation. But other forces 
conspire to escalate pay beyond anything performance strictly justifies: 
_ By setting their chief executives' pay above the median of whatever 
peer group of companies they choose for comparison, boards constantly 
ratchet up the compensation base line. If all companies in the peer 
group aim to pay in the top quarter of the group, for example, that 
level will just keep rising. _ Top executives, rather than the board 
of directors, typically control the hiring and firing of consultants 
who are brought in to design pay packages. _ Many directors who sit 
on their board's compensation committees have ties to management that 
raise doubts about their independence and objectivity. _ Boards justify 
raises by saying they have to pay their chief executives ``competitively'' 
in order to retain them, even if those executives are underperforming. 
Such mechanisms work against anyone trying to set compensation at 
appropriate levels, said Robin Ferracone, president of SCA Consulting, 
a compensation and management consulting firm based in Los Angeles. 
``Those forces tend to loom large and lead to abuses,'' she said. 
``And when you have a whole string of them, shareholders haven't gained 
a thing. Instead, they've paid out a ton of money to keep people around 
who are underperforming.'' A result of all these forces is reflected 
in a study conducted for The New York Times by Graef Crystal, who 
edits a San Diego-based newsletter on executive compensation. Crystal 
looked at the performance of 383 large companies where the same chief 
executive was in office from 1993 to 1997. An investor who put $100 
in those companies at the end of 1993 would have had $202.10 four 
years later, for an annual return of 19.2 percent. So if the pay of 
the companies' chiefs tracked that performance, their average compensation 
would roughly have doubled, from $2.78 million in 1993 to about $6 
million four years later. In fact, according to Crystal's analysis, 
the executives' pay climbed 38.1 percent a year, to an average of 
$10.1 million. Who is to blame for this gap between pay and performance? 
Experts in both pay and corporate governance say that there is no 
single culprit _ except, perhaps, unchecked human nature. ``It's not 
evil of management to seek the highest possible pay package they can, 
because we all try to maximize our value,'' said Charles Elson, a 
professor at the Stetson University College of Law in St. Petersburg, 
Fla., and a director of three public companies. ``And it's not evil 
for a compensation consultant to have an affinity for management. 
Nor is it evil for a director to feel an affinity for the CEO who 
appointed them. But it's a process that creates a one-sided result.'' 
To be sure, pay consultants say many directors have become more vigilant 
in recent years, in part because rich compensation packages have often 
come under sharp attack by large shareholders, including pension funds. 
``The amount of backbone and independence has increased by several 
orders of magnitude,'' said Ira Kay, global practice director for 
compensation consulting in the New York office of Watson Wyatt Worldwide. 
Still, with the average chief executive's pay rising twice as fast 
as performance over the last four years, such vigilance has not forged 
a very strong link between pay and performance. Running a large corporation 
requires a rare set of skills. So it is perhaps understandable that 
directors would consider their chief executive an above-average boss 
worthy of above-average compensation. But many companies set their 
executives' pay by looking at what similar companies pay their executives. 
And if they all are trying to make their chiefs feel special _ say, 
by paying them above their peer group's scale _ that can create powerful 
updrafts for executive compensation. ``There is a huge problem with 
those surveys,'' said Jay Lorsch, a Harvard Business School professor 
who specializes in corporate board issues. ``They are self-fulfilling 
prophecies. There is a ratcheting effect.'' Many companies in the 
Dow Jones industrial average, for instance, pledge to keep their executives' 
pay well above the median of their respective peer groups. Philip 
Morris' goal is to compensate its executives in the ``upper quadrant'' 
of its peer group. The same goes for Coca-Cola, while IBM shoots for 
the 75th percentile. American Express uses the third quartile as its 
reference point. It is not just Dow industrial companies that aim 
to compensate their executives at levels comparable to that of their 
peers. GTE's proxy states that the company's philosophy is to be 10 
percent to 15 percent above ``a median grant posture'' of its comparison 
group of companies for long-term incentive pay. From 1993 to 1997, 
the company's stock rose at an average rate of 17.8 percent a year; 
the pay of GTE chief executive Charles Lee rose an average of 75.8 
percent a year, to $13.35 million from $2.15 million. Lee received 
a new grant of stock options every year from 1993 to 1997, for a total 
of more than one million options. ``The bulk of the chairman's compensation 
is in long-term incentives that are directly tied to shareholder value,'' 
a GTE spokeswoman said. Options sometimes are used to motivate underperforming 
executives, and at other times to reward good past performance. But 
options issued simply to keep an executive apace with his peer group 
may have nothing to do with his performance. Many companies first 
settle on an executive's compensation and then determine what performance 
will be expected of him, said Jean Head Sisco, a member of the compensation 
committees of Textron, Nieman Marcus, and Chiquita Brands International. 
``The status quo should not allow a person to reach the upper percentiles,'' 
said Ms. Sisco, who is also a partner in Sisco Associates, a management 
consulting firm based in Washington. ``But it is obvious that at certain 
companies, that is allowed to happen. Just studying the proxies tells 
you that.'' When a company's directors want independent expertise 
as they design their executives' pay packages, they rely on the advice 
of a small coterie of compensation consultants. The problem is that 
the selection and hiring of the consultants is typically controlled 
by management itself. If the executives do not like the opinions offered 
by their consultants, they can easily replace them with others more 
willing to act as their advocates before the board of directors. In 
interviews with 10 consultants, estimates of the number of their prospective 
clients who have shopped this way for more accommodating advice ranged 
from 5 percent to 20 percent. A more pliant consultant can, for example, 
select a more favorable group of peer companies on which to base a 
chief executive's recommended pay. Or the consultant can make adjustments 
that benefit the executive in the various parts of a pay package, 
including salary, bonus, restricted stock and many forms of long-term 
incentive compensation. ``Unfortunately, anything can be justified 
in executive compensation, because there are so many rules to the 
game,'' said Judith Fischer, publisher of Executive Compensation Reports, 
a newsletter. Experts in the field of corporate governance generally 
agree that it is a mistake to leave management in charge of hiring 
compensation consultants. Instead, they say, it should be the responsibility 
of the board's compensation committee. ``It's the relationship that 
counts,'' said Ira Millstein, a partner at the New York law firm of 
Weil, Gotshal &AMP; Manges who advises many boards on governance principles. 
``Who do you report to? Who hires you? Who fires you? My answer to 
all three is that it should be the compensation committee.'' It would 
be unusual, of course, for a company to report in its annual proxy 
statement that it had left the selection of its compensation consultant 
to top management. But many compensation consultants say boards often 
defer to management's advice on which firm to hire. And some large 
companies acknowledge that their compensation committees follow the 
lead of management. In the 1997 proxy for Goodyear Tire &AMP; Rubber, 
for example, the compensation committee said it ``met with the chief 
executive officer to receive his recommendations regarding 1997 adjustments'' 
of top executives. It added that it relied principally on surveys 
to set pay levels, but also considered the chief executive's recommendations 
``on certain subjective factors, including his evaluation of the performance 
of each executive officer, the performance of the company and general 
economic and competitive conditions.'' A Goodyear spokesman said that 
the chief executive did not make recommendations regarding his own 
compensation, and that his guidance on his aides' compensation did 
not influence board decisions on his pay. At other companies, like 
Cummins Engine, the process is more clearly driven by directors on 
the compensation committee. ``We've thought of compensation consultants 
rather like auditors,'' said Hanna Holborn Gray, the retired president 
of the University of Chicago who has been the chairwoman of Cummins' 
compensation committee for six years. ``We need an independent perspective.'' 
Who serves on the compensation committee is as important as where 
the committee gets its advice. In a 1993 report, the National Association 
of Corporate Directors wrote that compensation committees ``should 
be made up exclusively of independent outside directors selected by 
the outside directors and approved by the whole board.'' The commission's 
rationale? ``Achieving both the appearance and the reality of independence 
demands no less,'' the report said. Despite this unequivocal recommendation, 
however, many compensation committees have members who at least have 
the potential to engage in mutual back-scratching with the chief executive. 
Directorship, a consulting firm in Greenwich, Conn., said 67 of the 
839 large public companies in its data base have current or former 
executives of the company on the compensation committee. And at 12 
of those 67, the committee's chairman is a current or former executive. 
Among them is Occidental Petroleum, which has been criticized by institutional 
investors over the $95 million paid last year to its chief executive, 
Ray Irani, to replace his old contract with a new one. A separate 
study of 1,197 companies by Investor Responsibility Research Center, 
based in Washington, found that 522 directors on compensation committees 
had affiliations _ as suppliers or former employees _ that called 
into question their independence. One example is MBNA Corp. of Wilmington, 
Del., one of the nation's leading issuers of credit cards. The chairman 
of its compensation committee is James Berick, whose law firm provides 
services to MBNA. Also on the committee is Benjamin Civiletti, the 
U.S. attorney general from 1979 to 1981, who is now chairman of another 
law firm that counts MBNA among its clients. From 1993 to 1997, MBNA 
was an impressive stock-market performer, returning 49.5 percent a 
year, on average. But total compensation for MBNA chairman and chief 
executive Alfred Lerner rose at roughly three times that rate _ an 
average of 147 percent a year. In an interview, Berick said his firm 
bills MBNA for less than $30,000 worth of services a year. Berick, 
who was a college roommate of Lerner's, said that MBNA shareholders 
were satisfied and that he considered himself independent. ``The facts 
are important, and not the perception or appearances,'' he added. 
Civiletti also said that the volume of legal work his firm did for 
MBNA was incidental and that he, too, considered himself independent. 
``I think substance is much more important than possible appearance,'' 
he said. One common justification used by companies for above-average 
compensation is that ``competitive'' pay packages are necessary to 
retain top executives _ even underperformers _ who might otherwise 
be tempted to leave for a better offer. The laws of supply and demand 
are certainly at work when a chief executive at one company is actively 
courted by another company. Many such executives will hire the likes 
of Joseph Bachelder, a New York lawyer, who has negotiated on behalf 
of chief executives like George Fisher of Eastman Kodak and Louis 
Gerstner of IBM. ``As in all matters involving a willing buyer and 
a willing seller, the interplay of a free market, so to speak, is 
at work,'' Bachelder said. ``When you're in the middle of a negotiation, 
you appreciate there is a market for the talents of these CEOs.'' 
But most of the inflationary effects of executive pay do not occur 
at hiring time. Instead, chief executives are regularly granted raises 
on the assumption that they have one foot out the door, even though 
they may not. As consultants describe the scenario, directors decide 
that they must pay their incumbent chief executives ``competitively,'' 
even if their performance alone would not justify such a level. Time 
Warner, for example, states in its proxy that its compensation committee 
surveys a broad range of companies that it considers its ``most direct 
competitors for executive talent.'' So even though Time Warner's stock 
dropped 15.3 percent from 1993 to 1996 _ a period during which the 
Standard &AMP; Poor's 500-stock index rose 58.8 percent _ the company 
gave Gerald Levin, its chief executive, a bonus of $4 million each 
year. After Time Warner stock rose sharply in 1997, Levin got a $6.5 
million bonus. ``There are major conflicts between providing competitive 
pay and pay for performance,'' said Donald Sullivan, who oversaw Towers 
Perrin's compensation consulting practice before retiring in 1994. 
``If a company had a bad year _ a period of less-than-stellar performance 
when bonuses should appropriately suffer _ they will say that we have 
to stay `competitive,' so let's ignore performance,'' Sullivan said. 
``It's an absolutely no-lose situation. There is only one side to 
that coin.''(BOX) SLOWING THE PAY LOCOMOTIVE By ADAM BRYANT c.1998 
N.Y. Times News Service What will slow the rise in executive pay? 
A bear market would help, many experts say, because shareholders would 
start voting down management plans for issuing shares to reward top 
executives and other employees. Even now, votes against such proposals 
are rising. Generally, experts say, the key is for directors to act 
more like shareholders. Charles Elson, a Stetson College law professor 
who serves on three corporate boards, argued that director nominees 
should be required to buy a considerable amount of company stock _ 
say, $100,000 worth _ before joining a board and then be compensated 
with stock for their services. Then, Elson said, directors will consider 
the company's money their own and be more likely to resist a chief 
executive who wants an unreasonably large share of it. ``That way, 
any penny that is overpaid comes out of the director's pocket as opposed 
to some vague force known as the company,'' he said. The amounts involved, 
he acknowledged, may amount to no more than pennies a share, but people 
nevertheless have a keen sense of what is rightfully theirs. Elson 
has seen the process work first-hand. When he was appointed a director 
of Sunbeam Corp. in 1996, he was required to invest $100,000 of his 
own money to buy 5,000 shares in the company. Indeed, Elson had advised 
Albert Dunlap, then Sunbeam's chief executive, to impose the requirement 
on all his directors. With the additional compensation he received 
in Sunbeam stock in subsequent years, the total value of Elson's holdings 
rose to $250,000. But after the company foundered earlier this year 
under Dunlap's leadership, the value of Elson's holdings fell steeply, 
to less than $50,000 at one point. And it was Elson who, in June, 
made the motion to the Sunbeam board to remove Dunlap. The Sunbeam 
board has been widely reported to be fighting with Dunlap over his 
severance pay. ``Having a large equity stake in a company,'' Elson 
said, ``really wakes you up.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>