<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0169 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It has all the makings of an investing whodunit. The so-called January 
effect _ the tendency of small-capitalization stocks to thrash their 
large-cap siblings in the first month of the year _ has occurred with 
such regularity over the last century that even hard-nosed statisticians 
are impressed. Indeed, since 1926, small-cap stocks have returned 
five percentage points more in January, on average, than large-cap 
stocks. During the other months of the year, large caps have outperformed 
small caps by a tiny amount. You'd think that by now, researchers 
would have figured out the exact cause of the January effect. But 
they haven't. Of course, investors who want to take advantage of the 
phenomenon might think its explanation is irrelevant. Why not just 
buy small caps on Dec. 31, sell them on Jan. 31 and be done with it? 
Can't the philosophical debate be left to the ivory tower? Well, no. 
The effect has become so accepted that unless there is some strong, 
specific force that confines it to the first month of the year, the 
effect should start occurring earlier and earlier _ before the new 
year even begins. That's because investors would start buying small 
caps sooner, to beat others to the inevitable climb in prices. Over 
time, the January effect would become the December effect, then the 
November effect. Eventually, it would disappear. Until recently, perhaps 
the most plausible explanation of the January effect was the fact 
that many investors sell stocks to lock in losses for tax purposes 
as the year winds to a close. Such moves, the explanation goes, put 
intense downward pressure on the relatively illiquid small-cap stocks, 
setting up the conditions for a January rebound. But two economists 
at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Lucy Ackert and George Athanassakos, 
recently wrote a working paper that rejected this hypothesis. They 
discovered that the January effect was a combination of two separate 
seasonal patterns: small-cap strength as well as large-cap weakness. 
The tax-loss selling theory really can't explain the latter. However, 
there is another hypothesis that can explain both patterns. Proposed 
over 10 years ago by two professors, Josef Lakonishok of the University 
of Illinois and Robert Haugen of the University of California at Irvine, 
it focuses on the practice of portfolio hedging. Because most money 
managers receive performance-related bonuses at year-end, many have 
an incentive to make their portfolios look increasingly like the Standard 
&AMP; Poor's 500 as Dec. 31 approaches. A money manager whose portfolio 
is now outperforming the index, for example, knows that he will receive 
a good bonus for beating the market _ provided that he can hold on 
until year-end. So he might aim to lock in his above-market performance 
by selling small caps and buying the S&AMP;P 500. A manager who is 
lagging behind the market might do the same thing, but for different 
reasons. As Dec. 31 nears, his desire to take risks in order to bounce 
back is outweighed by another desire: to not end the year at the bottom 
of the rankings. Come Jan. 1, however, the compensation slate of money 
managers is wiped clean, and they are suddenly free to take risks 
again. So they might dump many S&AMP;P 500 stocks they bought late 
in the previous year and replace them with small caps. The likelihood 
that portfolio hedging is the cause of the January effect is good 
news for those betting on it. As long as managers continue to receive 
performance bonuses, the effect is unlikely to either creep into December 
or to dissipate. But before deciding to make a short-term bet on the 
January effect by buying a basket of small-cap stocks, investors should 
remember that the difference between bid and ask prices on such shares 
is typically high _ often 5 percent or more, versus 0.5 percent or 
less for large caps. That's a high hurdle for a short-term trade. 
A better tactic is to buy a futures contract on a small-cap index 
like the Russell 2000 while shorting a large-cap index like the S&AMP;P 
500. Aside from offering low commissions, the tactic is attractive 
because it will make money even in a market decline, as long as small 
caps don't fall as much as the S&AMP;P 500. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>