<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0451 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John Olson, an engineer at General Electric Co., was hospitalized 
for depression for four months in 1991. Soon after he returned to 
his job at the company's astrospace unit, he was laid off in a widespread 
downsizing. When a similar position at GE Astrospace, which ultimately 
became part of Lockheed Martin Corp., opened up a year later, Olson, 
still unemployed, applied. Although he was told, he said, that he 
would be recommended for the job, he did not get it. Now, six years, 
three federal court opinions and thousands of lawyers' hours later, 
Olson is finally set to go to trial. An appeals court ruled that he 
had a claim that he was entitled to pursue _ not because he was mentally 
disabled under federal law but because the company might have discriminated 
by treating him as if he were. ``It's a very stigmatizing thing,'' 
Olson said. ``You don't want to let your co-workers know'' about mental 
problems. With his case scheduled for a jury trial in U.S. District 
Court in Camden, N.J., in January, he said, he wants to make it easier 
``for other people who have been discriminated against for suffering 
from depression.'' Olson's case shows what a legal quagmire is taking 
shape. Until now, some plaintiffs like him have been caught in a no-win 
situation: They must show that they are qualified for the job in question, 
but when they do, courts often rule that they are not disabled. ``It's 
a horrific Catch-22,'' said Chai Feldblum, a law professor at Georgetown 
University Law Center who was instrumental in drafting the Americans 
With Disabilities Act. But guidelines issued last year by the Equal 
Employment Opportunity Commission and a recent Supreme Court opinion 
could help employees escape that double bind and win more cases. And 
there is an explosion of litigation. ``It's one of the fastest-growing 
areas of employment law,'' said James McDonald Jr. of Fisher &AMP; 
Phillips in Newport Beach, Calif., who represents management in employment 
matters. In 1992, the EEOC recorded 91 complaints of discrimination 
on the basis of emotional or psychiatric impairment, or 9.1 percent 
of all disability claims. By 1997, with the number of mental disability 
claims skyrocketing, that had jumped to 2,789, or 15.3 percent, making 
this, for the first time ever, the largest single category of claims. 
Complaints outnumbered those related to HIV, cancer, substance abuse, 
vision, hearing and diabetes-related disabilities combined. And preliminary 
numbers for fiscal 1998 show yet another increase. Until now, said 
Susan Stefan, a professor at the University of Miami School of Law, 
many competent employees with mental illnesses like schizophrenia, 
bipolar disorder and depression had lost their cases because courts 
had found they were not disabled. And Olson's lawyer, Stephen Klausner, 
of Klausner, Hunter &AMP; Rosenberg, in Somerville, N.J., noted: ``If 
the patient is taking medication, you've got to make sure the dosage 
doesn't so adversely affect him or her that she can't do the work.'' 
From 1992 through 1997, companies won 92 percent of all final court 
decisions under the Americans With Disabilities Act, said John Parry, 
director of the American Bar Association's Commission on Mental and 
Physical Disability Law. For mental disability cases, companies won 
even more often. But in its new guidelines, the EEOC basically said 
that a mental problem can be labeled a disability even if it does 
not hurt a person's job performance. And the Supreme Court decision, 
which concerned HIV discrimination, may increase employees' chances 
by leading courts to broaden their views of disabilities. The new 
guidelines have also called attention to employees' rights and helped 
educate managers, said Peggy Mastroianni, associate legal counsel 
at the EEOC. ``Human resources departments now understand,'' she said, 
``that you can have a very productive worker who has a psychiatric 
illness _ that both things can be true.'' But managing workers who 
appear to have mental problems is tricky business. When an employee 
engages in some bizarre behavior, ``it can be a minefield'' for employers, 
said Harriet Cooperman, head of the labor and employment law group 
at Weinberg &AMP; Green in Baltimore. If a company takes any action, 
``it's subjecting itself to liability because the employee can turn 
around and claim that the employer perceives the employee as having 
a disability and is discriminating against the employee on that basis,'' 
Ms. Cooperman said. ``Recognizing a problem and referring the employee 
to counseling or treatment or suggesting that they get help is the 
humanitarian thing to do,'' she said, but it can also expose the company 
to a lawsuit. Thus, employee assistance programs are much more risky, 
said McDonald, the California lawyer. ``It used to be that employers 
could set up programs to help employees deal with mental and emotional 
programs,'' he said. ``But now we see in an increasing number of cases 
that EAPs are just another source of liability.'' His advice to employers: 
``Focus on the conduct, not on the condition. Don't try to play armchair 
psychiatrist.'' And despite the success most companies have had in 
court, fending off discrimination claims based on mental disability 
is not easy. ``Unlike a physical condition that is readily, medically 
diagnosable, a mental condition is often very amorphous,'' said Robert 
Bernstein, managing partner of the Newark, N.J., office of Epstein, 
Becker &AMP; Green and a lawyer for GE Astrospace. A mental condition, 
he said, ``is based on essentially the unverifiable statements of 
the person who suffers from the condition, so it becomes very difficult 
to rebut.'' He declined to comment on the merits of the Olson case. 
Navigating a case through the system is costly. ``These cases can 
cost more to fully litigate than the damages,'' Ms. Cooperman said, 
``with attorneys' fees sometimes in the hundreds of thousands of dollars.'' 
Plaintiffs can find lawyers to take cases on a contingency basis, 
as Olson did, and thus avoid big legal bills. The GE Astrospace case 
is a vivid example of how tortured litigating these cases can be. 
Olson filed a complaint with the EEOC after learning he had lost out 
on the job, but the agency found no reasonable basis for his claim. 
Olson then filed a case in U.S. court, citing what he said were violations 
of federal and New Jersey workplace discrimination law. Again he hit 
a roadblock. The court dismissed the case, finding that Olson was 
not disabled. But again Olson did not walk away. Instead, he appealed 
to the 3rd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals and finally won the decision 
allowing his case to go forward. The court also said that because 
New Jersey's law had a broader definition of disability than did the 
federal law, Olson had a potential state claim for discrimination 
on the basis of having a mental disability as well as for being regarded 
as mentally disabled. Another concern for employers: Under disability 
law, employers are required to provide reasonable accommodations to 
disabled employees. For a physical disability, the form this takes 
is often clear _ it might be a ramp for a person in a wheelchair. 
But with mental disabilities, accommodation is more complex. Requests 
for, say, an isolated cubicle or time off to calm down can be misunderstood 
by managers and resented by co-workers. Accommodating employees is 
not necessarily a one-shot deal but can be a continuing obligation, 
as IBM learned the hard way. Elizabeth Criado, who moved from New 
York state to take a position with IBM in San Juan, Puerto Rico, had 
been an award-winning marketing representative. But after more than 
six years she was finding the pressure, including having a new manager, 
overwhelming. In mid-1994, at her new supervisor's suggestion and 
on the advice of her doctor, Ms. Criado, then 43, took a leave of 
absence for anxiety and depression. IBM expected her to return on 
Aug. 1, but her doctor, she said, faxed the company a letter saying 
she needed more time. In mid-August, IBM, which said it had never 
received the fax, sent its own letter _ dismissing her. Ms. Criado 
called and wrote the company to try to straighten out what she thought 
was a misunderstanding. But, she said, there was no reply. ``I had 
put so much of myself in my job,'' she said. ``I had awards all over 
the place. I went from being Cinderella to the wicked witch overnight.'' 
Finally she sued, claiming discrimination on the basis of a mental 
disability. IBM lost. In June, the 1st U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals 
upheld a jury verdict of more than $500,000, finding that IBM's grant 
of a single, finite leave did not fulfill its obligation to accommodate. 
For Ms. Criado, who has not had a full-time job since, it was a bittersweet 
victory. ``Between what I ended up paying in taxes and lawyers, I 
could have made more money working,'' she said. IBM disagrees with 
the decision, saying it had done all it could to balance the needs 
of the employee with the business. Jeffrey Huvelle, a partner at Covington 
&AMP; Burling in Washington, who handled IBM's appeal, said: ``If 
an employee comes with a request, companies now have to be very careful 
in assessing the information the employee provides. In some cases, 
that means the company has to consult its own physician or have the 
person examined by its own physician to see if there is a way of accommodating 
the workplace demands. The disability law imposes a particular challenge 
to small companies that don't have in-house medical advice.'' Employers 
may have to adjust their work standards case by case. ``They are used 
to enforcing standards of attendance and conduct on a consistent basis, 
treating everyone alike,'' he said. ``In part they do this to ensure 
they're not treating people differently based on race, sex or age. 
But sometimes when an employee has a mental disability, the law now 
imposes an obligation to take that into account.'' But under the law, 
an employee's needs cannot undercut the essence of the job itself. 
Thus, a waitress in Alabama who could not handle the stress of working 
busy nights and learning menu changes was found unqualified for the 
job and lost her case. Still, managers should not brush off employee 
complaints of mental problems, said Christopher Collins, an lawyer 
at Proskauer Rose in New York. ``It's vitally important that employers 
can point to a record at the end of the day that they took a request 
for accommodation seriously.'' For those cases that do make it to 
a jury trial, depending on state law, there may be no cap on liability. 
With no limit to punitive damages in New Jersey, Klausner said, there's 
no telling what Olson could win. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>