<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0171 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many people have at least two jobs. One is doing whatever they do 
all day; the other is fighting their insurance companies. My situation 
is even worse than most. My first job is also fighting with insurers. 
I'm a lawyer who represents corporate policyholders in coverage disputes, 
often with millions of dollars at stake. I'm also the mother of three 
sons, ages 2 to 10, who do things like fall on rocks and break out 
in high fevers at 2 a.m. I am still fighting a yearlong fight with 
my health insurer over our 1997 family deductible. The amount was 
supposedly $750, but our insurer decided to keep nearly twice that 
much. After noticing the problem last November, I gathered a year's 
worth of files and prepared for frustration. First, I spoke to a reasonably 
nice female voice somewhere in New Hampshire, who assured me we were 
owed about $600. She gave me a claim number and told me to wait for 
the check. No check came, so I called back in December. A male voice 
in New Jersey verified the claim number, told me to keep waiting and 
wished me a happy holiday. The winter passed. I called again. I was 
told the order couldn't be reprocessed because something called the 
``accumulator'' had been broken since October. Until it was fixed, 
no one could help me or the million others with similar problems. 
The accumulator, apparently, is a computer at my insurer that accumulates 
my money in its bank accounts. No wonder it wasn't being fixed. Sometime 
in March, after much carrying-on, the company finally started reprocessing 
my claims. The last payment was approved in July. I'm still waiting. 
As a veteran of such wars, I have accumulated the following techniques 
for fighting back at insurers: KEEP RECORDS Make copies of everything, 
because sending something to your insurance company is like tossing 
it in the trash. Note every code number and the name of every person 
you talk to. You will need this information, because after you get 
through the automated phone system, wait on hold, explain your problem 
to a series of baffled supervisors and hear their promise that it 
will be fixed within a few weeks, they hang up, go to lunch and forget 
they ever knew you. To get anything done, you need to prove you have 
called or written many times before. FOLLOW UP ON CLAIMS A favorite 
tactic of insurers seems to be to ignore claims. Every year, I find 
that no action has been taken on some of my claims while amazing things 
have happened to others: The company sends duplicate checks, for example, 
to doctors whom I already have paid in full. If you persist, chances 
are you'll wear the company down. QUESTION EVERYTHING An insurer may 
reject a claim as being ``above the usual and customary charges.'' 
Well, maybe it is and maybe it isn't. Once, I got sick of this game 
and decided to fight. I needed a special test for a pregnancy and 
assumed that the company would reject the bill as too high. I priced 
this procedure, a chorionic villus sampling, or CVS, at every location 
in my area and found that prices varied by $800; I selected the cheapest 
place. The insurer immediately rejected part of my claim, and I was 
loaded for bear. I asked what the usual and customary charge was. 
I was told it was confidential. I asked how the charge was calculated. 
Same answer. Then I shared my research and dared the insurer to find 
a cheaper place. The truth came out. The insurer explained that it 
had compared the fee for the mandatory counseling concerning this 
test, which involves a life-and-death decision about whether to terminate 
a pregnancy, with an ordinary office visit involving, say, a sprained 
ankle. Apparently, because all office visits take place in an office, 
the insurer thinks they should cost the same. (The insurer and my 
doctor worked it out, so I guess I won.) It's your duty to protect 
yourself against the broken accumulators of the insurance world. So, 
congratulations on your new job. The hours will be long. There is 
no salary. And of course, the benefits are lousy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>