<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0425 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A day after France's Socialist prime minister called for the rehabilitation 
of French soldiers executed for refusing to fight in a World War I 
battle that cost 300,000 French lives, the country's Gaullist conservative 
president, Jacques Chirac, on Friday called the prime minister's remarks 
``inopportune.'' The 1917 battle, along a ridge road called the Chemin 
des Dames, remains a sensitive subject in France as it prepares to 
celebrate the 80th anniversary of the Nov. 11 armistice that ended 
the war. An aide said Chirac's office had received outraged complaints 
from families of soldiers killed in the war and from some of the few 
hundred surviving veterans after Prime Minister Lionel Jospin made 
his remarks Thursday. Recalling the battle of the Chemin des Dames 
at a ceremony for the dead in the village of Craonne, Jospin said: 
``Some of these soldiers, exhausted by attacks that were doomed in 
advance, slipping in mud stained with blood, plunged into bottomless 
despair, refused to be sacrificed. Let these soldiers, `shot as examples' 
in the name of discipline whose rigor was equaled only by the hardships 
of battle, be re-integrated today, fully, in our national collective 
memory.'' Chirac, who has been forced to live with Jospin's leftist 
coalition government since elections called by the president last 
year failed to produce the expected Gaullist victory, on Friday let 
the prime minister know he had gone too far, softening the blow by 
issuing the statement from his office in the Elysee Palace rather 
than in his own name. ``At the moment when the nation is commemorating 
the sacrifice of more than a million French soldiers who gave their 
lives between 1914 and 1918 to defend their invaded homeland, the 
Elysee finds any public statement that could be interpreted as rehabilitation 
of the mutineers inopportune,'' Chirac's office said. The power of 
the past remains strong in Europe. In Britain families of soldiers 
executed during the war for desertion and cowardice won permission 
this year for the first time to hold a ceremony in their memory. It 
will take place Saturday at the Cenotaph, the monument to the war 
dead in Whitehall, London. The French started their offensive on the 
Chemin des Dames in the spring of 1917. The offensive, ordered by 
Gen. Robert Nivelle, failed to drive the Germans from the road. The 
setback frightened French politicians who had come 70 miles from Paris 
thinking they would see a great French victory. Instead, it sent them 
scurrying back to the capital with fears that the war might soon be 
lost. Weeks of slaughter demoralized tens of thousands of French soldiers 
who had held the lines through three years. At the end of May 1917, 
as many as 30,000 soldiers abandoned the trenches for the rear and 
refused orders to return to the front. Angry commanders arrested their 
leaders and condemned 412 of them to death, though only a few, between 
27 and 49 by various estimates, were actually executed. French troops 
later regained the initiative and finally pushed the Germans off the 
Chemin des Dames in October. But from that day on, the mutineers were 
treated as disgraced and the subject as taboo. Stanley Kubrick's ``Paths 
of Glory,'' a 1957 movie about the mutinies, was banned in France 
when it was made and remained banned until 1972. Jospin, 61, who served 
as a lieutenant in the French army in the early 1960s, decided that 
the moment had come, 80 years after the end of the First World War, 
to put an end to an old quarrel, his aides said. Chirac's office disagreed. 
``The moment just wasn't right,'' an aide to Chirac said Friday. ``To 
put those who refused to fight and those who fought and died on the 
same level _ it just wasn't the right time to do that, and we have 
had an enormous negative reaction.'' Chirac decided this year to award 
all 1,500 surviving Allied veterans, including about 200 Americans, 
a high military distinction created by Napoleon: the Chevalier Cross 
of the Legion of Honor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>