<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0465 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There was lots of celebrating in this cotton-growing town in the San 
Joaquin Valley when a maximum-security prison opened here 10 years 
ago. It would bring jobs and economic growth to the stagnant farm 
belt, not to mention put more criminals away. But while the jobs came, 
the prison has, more than anything, brought Corcoran a bad name. Months 
after it opened as part of a prison construction boom in California 
that coincided with a push for tough new sentencing laws, the state 
prison at Corcoran began to develop a reputation as one of the deadliest, 
most abusive prisons in the biggest, most troubled prison system in 
the United States. Now, state lawmakers and prison officials are examining 
why Corcoran, and by extension, the entire state prison system, veered 
out of control. From 1988 to late 1994, when whistle-blowers inside 
Corcoran went to the FBI, the prison's guards shot to death seven 
inmates and wounded 43, more than in all other prisons in the country 
combined. And while the shootings at Corcoran stopped when the federal 
authorities moved in, they continued at other California prisons. 
At High Desert Prison, guards have killed three inmates and wounded 
11 since the maximum-security institution opened three years ago. 
``California correctional officers, on at least a few occasions, have 
shot and killed an inmate who was locked in a cell, in a fist fight 
with an inmate, with no weapons in sight,'' said state Sen. John Vasconcellos, 
a Democrat from San Jose. ``No other state has done that.'' At the 
end of a series of recent legislative hearings on abuses at Corcoran, 
Vasconcellos called for a meeting of prison leaders from other states 
to review California's prison system, particularly its violent form 
of inmate control. But some wonder what took so long. In October, 
five prison guards at Corcoran were indicted on state charges of conspiracy, 
accused of having an inmate rape another inmate in 1993. In February, 
as part of a four-year federal investigation into abuses at the prison, 
eight guards were indicted on civil rights charges, accused of staging 
gladiator-style fights among prisoners in exercise yards and shooting 
at the inmates when they did not stop fighting on command. In 1995, 
a federal judge ruled that treatment of prisoners at the maximum-security 
Pelican Bay Prison, at the northern tip of the state, was cruel and 
inhumane. Also in 1995, five supervisors at Corcoran and 10 other 
guards were accused by whistle-blowers of beating a busload of handcuffed, 
shackled prisoners who had been transferred to the prison. A local 
grand jury declined to indict the guards but the Department of Corrections 
handed out punishments ranging from dismissal to demotion. In September, 
the disciplinary penalties were overturned by a court on a technicality. 
There is no one answer to why California became the model for how 
not to run prisons. But the troubles began when the state embarked 
on the biggest, fastest prison construction boom in the country's 
history. When the building began in 1982, the state had 12 prisons 
and 31,000 inmates. Now, it has 33 prisons and 160,000 inmates. The 
boom, prison officials say, was prompted by a series of tough-on-crime 
laws drafted by the Legislature (most famously the ``three strikes'' 
under Gov. Pete Wilson that mandated life terms for third felony convictions). 
As prisons were built, the Department of Corrections hired thousands 
of prison guards, many of whom had no experience in law enforcement 
beyond the six weeks' training given by the state. Like the system's 
critics, C.A. Terhune, who became director of the corrections department 
last year, said the system grew too large, too fast. But he also blamed 
the state's entrenched prison gangs, which he called ``second to none'' 
in the country. Just as significantly, Terhune said, his department, 
with an annual budget of $4 billion, not only has the nation's largest 
prison population, it is also near the top in the ratio of inmates 
to guards, 7.6 to 1. ``While California was building its prison system, 
there didn't seem to be a concurrent budgeting of resources,'' Terhune 
said. ``It's only begun in this last year or so to really commence 
the process of staffing up.'' The prisons' security housing units, 
or super-maximum prisons within the prisons, where most of the shootings 
have taken place, were built so that one or two guards with high-powered 
riles could watch over a yard with dozens of the most troublesome 
prisoners. Other states with super-maximum security units have nothing 
close to the same numbers of incidents of guards using lethal force. 
But in California, use of force was a major factor in the inmate control 
equation. ``The design, the staffing, and many of the factors that 
go into the program operations of the California prison system were 
based on having lethal force as a control mechanism,'' Terhune said. 
``It is a reality of life that we have to live with.'' Terhune acknowledged 
that the department's use-of-force policy had not been defined in 
writing and that it needed to be strictly defined and enforced. Echoing 
the Correctional Peace Officers Union, the second most powerful union 
in the state after the teachers' union, he said that the system's 
27,000 prison guards needed reinforcements and more training. ``A 
lot of good things happened in these hearings,'' Terhune said, ``and 
I think one of the main ones is that a six-week academy is not sufficient 
for the task that we ask of our officers.'' But long-time critics 
of the California prison system remain skeptical of the department's 
willingness and ability to reform itself. Corey Weinstein, a doctor 
who directs the Corcoran Committee of California Prison Focus, a San 
Francisco-based watchdog group, said recent history suggested it would 
not happen. `Only after abuses are exposed in the press do they act,'' 
Weinstein said. ``Only when the public sector has forced them into 
acting have they acted.'' Weinstein pointed to the catastrophe of 
the integrated prison yard policy, in which rival gang members imprisoned 
in security units were put in tiny, concrete recreation yards together 
to force them to get along. In the mid 1980s, the policy backfired 
when guards began shooting and killing inmates to break up fights 
at the California Correctional Institute at Tehachapi. Still, officials 
continued the policy when Corcoran and Pelican Bay prisons were opened 
in 1988 and 1989, respectively. Pelican Bay prison was built to house 
the ``worst of the worst.'' It quickly became a place where prisoners 
claimed they were beaten, brutalized and tormented. In 1995, a federal 
court agreed. In a class-action civil rights case, Judge Thelton Henderson 
of U.S. District Court in San Francisco ruled that the prison caused 
``senseless suffering and sometimes wretched misery.'' Like many critics 
of the system, Weinstein blames the prison guard union for some of 
the problems. The union, which has contributed more than $1 million 
to the political campaigns of Gov. Wilson and Attorney General Dan 
Lungren since 1992, has stymied one investigation after another, largely 
by directing guards not to answer questions. Accusations of corruption 
and abuse of force by prison guards circulated through all the state's 
major newspapers before the governor and attorney general began investigations 
into Corcoran in 1996. The investigations failed to uncover any crimes 
by officers. George Galaza, the warden at Corcoran, said the accusations 
of continued abuse and neglect at his prison were ``lies.'' ``I wouldn't 
be sitting here if that was going on,'' said Galaza, who became warden 
of the 5,000-inmate prison in 1996. ``With all the different agencies 
scrutinizing this place, if something was going on, I'd be behind 
bars if anything was going on.'' Guards at Corcoran said they were 
tired of being made out to be the criminals, in a prison filled with 
some of the state's toughest inmates. Lt. Rob Vella, who has been 
at Corcoran since it opened, said that even criticisms of the old 
integrated yard policy was simplistic. ``There are just so many facets 
to it,'' he said. ``When we separate the gangs, the ones that used 
to get along start forming rivalries.'' Vella was standing watch in 
the security housing unit, where inmates are monitored from across 
an indoor courtyard, in a control room where guards lock and unlock 
doors by remote switches. The prisoners, locked in their cells for 
23 hours a day, were receiving their lunch by guards wearing protective 
masks, in anticipation of being hit by feces and urine. In the general 
unit, Lt. Rob Dean, one of a group of guards accused of wearing black 
masks and beating inmates who were getting off a bus in 1995, was 
watching prisoners walk from their units to the cafeteria for dinner. 
Dean said the charges were politically motivated. ``If we were doing 
all the things they said, these guys wouldn't respect us,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>