<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0497 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
All year long, Rep. Robert Livingston made no effort to mask his lean 
and hungry look. ``I'm running whether they like it or not,'' the 
Louisiana Republican declared in his genial, plodding way last March 
when he ignored the warnings of shocked party leaders that he dare 
not go around openly campaigning to succeed Newt Gingrich as speaker. 
``I can sew it up,'' Livingston announced serenely, months before 
many caucus members were ready to listen to him in his unalloyed ambition. 
But he kept to his rounds and they are listening now, reeling from 
the trauma of Tuesday's election failures and the even bigger aftershock 
of Gingrich's decision to resign the speakership Friday night in the 
face of the uprising brought to a head with Livingston's public challenge 
of his old friend. ``I love him dearly,'' Livingston declared in disowning 
the knife-wielding role of a Brutus in confronting Gingrich with the 
message that his leadership time was over. In the Republican scramble 
that followed, talk emerged of a flood of other possible candidates, 
but none would prove so bold as Livingston in daring to bell the wily 
gray cat in the first place. His boldness forced Republicans to weigh 
the tempting possibility of forgoing an all-out fight in favor of 
someone as unsensational as Livingston _ an 11-term, 55-year-old traditionalist 
who quietly cuts legislative deals as if politics were carpentry, 
not the thrust-and-chop martial arts that Gingrich often seemed to 
prefer. In the first wave of potential rivals, other lawmakers being 
mentioned included Bill Archer, the Ways and Means chairman, Christopher 
Cox of California, James Talent of Missouri, and others, with one 
of Livingston's lieutenants spreading the word that a host of national 
Republican leaders had been calling Livingston encouragingly in the 
wake of the election. The callers supposedly included Gov. George 
W. Bush of Texas and his brother, Jeb, the governor-elect of Florida, 
as well as Govs. George Pataki of New York, John Engler of Michigan 
and Tommy Thompson of Wisconsin. ``So it comes down to leadership,'' 
Livingston said gently in formally throwing down the gauntlet, sounding 
as taciturn as an anti-hero in a black-and-white Western. By nightfall, 
Gingrich had decided not to put up a fight. In his long, unspectacular 
months of campaigning for the speakership, Livingston slowly measured 
House Republicans' wariness at the clenched-fist image of Gingrich 
that, they feared, was giving voters ever deeper pause at the Republican 
voting lever. By contrast, Livingston's supporters found him soothingly 
colorless in announcing his challenge. He talked of being a ``stay-at-home'' 
House manager, a ``straightforward'' caucus leader, but, mercifully 
in the view of Gingrich critics, hardly another ``revolutionary'' 
to generate heated headlines from the ramparts. With Republicans far 
from settled on their new speaker, the stolid Livingston presented 
his own sales pitch as a politician whose instincts run to fiscal 
fine print more than combative sound bites. While Gingrich was spending 
the past four years fatally compounding his reputation for scrappiness, 
Livingston was serving as chairman of the Appropriations Committee, 
building power as the ``Pope of Congress'' with ranking authority 
over the ``cardinals,'' the 13 subcommittee chairmen who handle the 
nation's major fiscal legislation. ``He holds the checkbook,'' one 
member noted reverently. Livingston, a dedicated study in gray amid 
a day of Republican turmoil, indeed offered himself as a pontiff of 
sorts for House Republicans _ a leader who supporters say could best 
bridge jagged party factions, cut back on aggressive oratory and deliver 
major bills to passage. As Gingrich was toppled, rivals were already 
targeting Livingston as just the sort of legislative technocrat, wide-spectrum 
compromiser and backroom friend of Democrats whom the revolutionaries 
of 1994 loved to castigate. But stark Republican losses in the last 
two congressional elections had dampened the fervor of revolutionaries 
and moderates alike for the style of Gingrich. ``I think we're a party 
that might be ready to have a low-profile speaker,'' said Rep. Joe 
Scarborough, one of the most outspoken firebrands from the 1994 Contract 
With America class. ``We have given Bob Livingston more hell than 
anybody, but now we want the trains to run on time,'' said Scarborough, 
a Florida lawmaker, echoing one of Livingston's mundanely phrased 
speakership promises. Scarborough said the election on Tuesday delivered 
the bitter lesson that Republican campaign attack advertisements were 
no substitute for solid delivery on the workaday issues dear to voters. 
``Livingston understands the House and offers something closer to 
the style of Tom Foley and Tip O'Neill,'' added Scarborough, a tooth-and-claw 
conservative incongruously appreciating two former Democratic speakers 
for their skills in managing their party's agenda. It remains to be 
seen whether other conservatives agree or opt for candidates more 
sharp-edged in their partisanship. The heart of the challenge remains 
Livingston, who was on the verge of quitting politics last year in 
favor of a lucrative lobbyist's job when Gingrich convinced him to 
stay. Gingrich indicated he might run for president in 2000, leaving 
Livingston a peaceable path to the speakership. After the shrinkage 
of the Republican House majority by the voters, however, Livingston 
put his simmering ambition on full boil. ``With Newt, we've had a 
very partisan, confrontational atmosphere,'' said Rep. Ron Packard 
of California, who has been active all year in garnering private promises 
of support for Livingston. ``Now, with our margin reduced, we just 
don't have a lot of wiggle room. Bob's ability to work with all parts 
of the conference is even more necessary if we're going to get things 
done.'' Packard said a symptom of the problem was Gingrich's decision 
to emphasize an attack message about President Clinton's impeachment 
inquiry in the closing hours of the election campaign. ``We were never 
consulted on whether to spend a lot of money on those Clinton ads,'' 
he said, citing House Republicans' resentment of Gingrich's imperiousness. 
``We were never even asked.'' In contrast, he insisted, Livingston 
would be a model of inclusiveness. Livingston's tendency to be overlooked 
can serve him well. In the controversial ``train wreck'' budget showdown 
of 1995, when Republicans were blamed for shutting down the government, 
Livingston was hardly the great compromiser as he thundered in debate, 
``We will stay here until doomsday!'' But it was Gingrich, not his 
appropriations chairman, who came to personify the issue. ``Livingston 
would come across to the public as being reassuring _ he carries no 
baggage,'' said Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., waiting to see how the field 
of candidates might develop. ``With Newt, we could never really break 
loose,'' King said. ``We couldn't get back on the offensive.'' Livingston's 
past fights include staunch support for the Reagan administration's 
aid to the contra fighters in Nicaragua and for the proposal for a 
vast ``Star Wars'' missile defense. But he has survived more as a 
fiscal conservative than as a social-issue ideologue _ a politician 
whose leadership style has the quality more of a cement block than 
of a flaming comet. ``The public had simply decided not to listen 
to Speaker Gingrich,'' said another House Republican firebrand, Lindsey 
Graham of South Carolina, in a political eulogy rooted in an appreciation 
of Livingston as just the lackluster man of the hour the Republicans 
needed. ``Newt was our Moses: He led us toward the Promised Land but 
did not quite get there himself.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>