<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0415 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Impressive indeed, this John Glenn rally in the stock market. In the 
seven trading days since Glenn was lifted into space, the Dow Jones 
industrial average has rocketed 7.2 percent. Even more remarkable, 
the Dow has rallied 19 percent from its Aug. 31 low. Of course, anytime 
a market moves up this far this fast, it leaves plenty of investors 
behind. Those who sold stocks during the late summer or early fall 
are kicking themselves for their caution. But chasing stocks after 
a nearly 20 percent spurt doesn't feel right, either. What should 
investors do? Buy junk bonds. Because of their outsized risk, these 
securities are regarded more like stocks than bonds. But unlike equities, 
junk bonds have not yet rallied from depressed levels. That is because 
there's still less liquidity in the junk market; trading isn't near 
the usual volume for this arena. Fears of a credit pullback and another 
travesty like the one that befell the Long-Term Capital Management 
hedge fund have kept the market frozen for high-yield bonds. Although 
the first signs of a thaw are emerging, these bonds still trade at 
exceptionally high yields relative to Treasury bonds with comparable 
maturities. For example, the yield on Merrill Lynch's High Yield Master 
index now stands at 5.76 percentage points above 10-year Treasuries. 
That is down from the peak spread of 6.44 percentage points on Oct. 
16, but still well above the historical average spread of around 4 
percentage points. Junk bonds look especially compelling if you believe 
the bulls' case for stocks. This view says that there is no recession 
on the horizon, that further interest rate cuts from the Federal Reserve 
Board will make sure none appears, that worries of a credit contraction 
are overblown and that corporate earnings will not be as weak as previously 
thought. If the bulls are right, junk bonds will be big money makers 
for investors. But an appealing aspect to buying junk bonds at current 
levels is that the reward potential is great and that the chance of 
disaster is far less than it is in the stocks that are back to their 
all-time highs. Even if the nation slips into a recession and default 
rates rise on junk debt, prices of these already depressed bonds are 
not likely to crater. If prices do fall a bit, investors collect a 
considerable yield for their trouble. That high-yield bonds have not 
yet responded to the Fed's recent rate cuts at least partly reflects 
investor unease about rising defaults among issuers of risky debt. 
Defaults have averaged 3.3 percent of all issues annually since 1971, 
but hit a low of 1.4 percent in the spring of 1997. Recently, the 
rate has crept up to 2.6 percent. But Martin Fridson, chief high-yield 
strategist at Merrill Lynch, says the market in junk bonds is so beaten 
down right now that even a 5.5 percent default rate wouldn't trash 
it. Indeed, according to Fridson's calculations, junk's current premiums 
to Treasury yields are roughly the same as what they would be if default 
rates were 13 percent. Nobody believes that defaults are going to 
rise to double digits. The reason that the spreads grew as wide as 
they did was that liquidity evaporated. ``In effect, you're already 
at a spread consistent with a default rate three or four times where 
you actually are,'' Fridson said. Because of the high costs associated 
with buying individual junk issues, high-yield mutual funds are the 
way to go for most investors in this market. Funds rated highly by 
Morningstar, and with relatively high yields and low expenses, include 
Fidelity High Income, Legg Mason High Yield Primary and Vanguard High-Yield 
Corporate. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>