<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0398 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The stock market has spoken. Its tidings: Happy days are here again. 
As of Friday's close, most broad market measures were either close 
to their summer highs or at them. The Dow Jones industrial average 
closed the week at 8,975.46, up 59.99 points for the day and 4.46 
percent for the week. That places the Dow only 3.8 percent below its 
July 17 peak and up 19 percent from its Aug. 31 low. For the year, 
the Dow is up a respectable 13.49 percent. Big-capitalization stocks 
that make up the Dow average are not the only ones moving up. The 
Wilshire 5000 index, the best approximation for the entire U.S. stock 
market, has shown an even better performance. It has jumped 21 percent 
from its Oct. 8 low, and is up 12.4 percent for the year. Friday, 
the Wilshire had a value of $11.5 trillion. In about one month, the 
value of the index has risen more than $2 trillion. As of Friday, 
the market has gone eight sessions without a down day, its second 
example of such durability in less than one month. But extended moves 
like these are unusual: to find a third example of such staying power 
requires a trip back to 1997. What's fueling this move? Traders and 
strategists point to several disparate factors. Most significant, 
perhaps, is a sea change in monetary policy not just domestically 
but around the world. Central banks, beginning with the Federal Reserve 
back in September and extending to Britain, Latin America and parts 
of Asia, have been reducing interest rates fairly aggressively. According 
to Jeffrey Applegate, chief investment strategist at Lehman Brothers, 
since the September rate cut by the Fed, 27 central banks have done 
the same. ``In the last month and a half, the global policy outlook 
has improved,'' Applegate said. ``Then this week we had a slew of 
data that was stock-market friendly. I think the fear trade is out 
of the market.'' Lower interest rates are almost always a tonic for 
stocks largely because they mean reduced borrowing costs _ and the 
potential for higher profit margins _ for corporations. So it is not 
surprising that historically, a cut in the discount rate _ the Fed's 
borrowing rate for banks _ is followed by an average 12-month increase 
in the Standard &AMP; Poor's 500 index of 18 percent. Stocks have 
been getting an additional lift from a giant increase in the money 
supply. According to Ian Shepherdson, chief U.S. economist at High 
Frequency Economics in Valhalla, N.Y., the broadest measure of money 
supply, known as M-2, which includes currency in circulation, savings 
accounts and money market mutual funds, has grown by 2.5 percent in 
the last two months. The annualized rate for the last three months 
is 9.3 percent, the fastest annual expansion since 1987. ``This tells 
me that there isn't a credit crunch,'' Shepherdson said. ``And all 
this liquidity sloshing around has got to go somewhere.'' That somewhere 
appears to be the stock market. An increase in the money supply comes 
basically from the Fed providing reserves to the banking system, which 
banks use to lend. ``New lending and investing power is created as 
money turnover speeds,'' said Robert Parks, an economist and consultant 
to institutional investors in Scarborough, N.Y. ``It brings increased 
spending power that can go into stocks.'' Another supply of money 
coming into stocks is from investors selling Treasury holdings in 
recent days. When Russia effectively defaulted on its debt in August, 
Treasuries became the darling of investors. No more. The price of 
the 30-year bond has tumbled this week. Its yield, which rises when 
the price falls, ended at 5.38 percent, up from 5.15 percent a week 
earlier. An interesting, if somewhat obscure, reason for the advance 
in equities may be the decline in stock volatility recently. Volatility 
_ basically the range from high to low in stocks during the trading 
day _ peaked on Oct. 15. Applegate notes that since 1948, the S&AMP;P 
500 has risen an average 12 percent in the twelve-month period after 
a peak in volatility. ``As long as the policy outlook continues to 
look good, then risk aversion should come down, volatility should 
come down and returns should come up,'' he said. Although the stock 
market is clearly enjoying the recent spate of good news, it is choosing 
to shrug off some troubling indicators. Corporate earnings, for example. 
While all the earnings announcements are not quite in for the third 
quarter, the period was a disappointment. Even though many analysts 
have focused on the positive announcements, those were a distinct 
minority. According to John Manley Jr., equity strategist at Salomon 
Smith Barney, of the 428 companies that have reported third-quarter 
results, fewer than 36 percent recorded a positive surprise. Manley 
defines a positive surprise as a company that reports a result greater 
than the consensus estimate on Wall Street one month before the quarter 
ended. Neither do stocks seem to care that it is becoming increasingly 
likely that the Fed's policy-making committee will not cut rates at 
its Nov. 17 meeting. Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Fed, said on 
Thursday that investors and lenders appear less fearful than they 
had been. If the deep freeze in the credit markets is indeed beginning 
to thaw, as Greenspan seems to believe, another quick rate cut is 
less likely. Some investors are calling the recent moves in stocks 
the John Glenn rally. After all, since Glenn blasted off from Cape 
Canaveral, the market has rallied nearly 10 percent. As long as he 
has been in orbit, so has the stock market. Glenn returns to earth 
Saturday. Investors clearly hope the stock market does not follow 
suit. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>