<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0495 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A year after Camden Sylvia and Michael Sullivan disappeared, their 
loft in lower Manhattan is silent and unchanged, as if awaiting their 
return. Their bed, their watercolors, the table and chairs, stand 
in the dusty shadows like stage props. A vase wants fresh flowers. 
The clothes still hang neatly, unused. The couple, who lived at 76 
Pearl St., puttered with plants and paintings and jogged along the 
old lanes of the financial district, were last seen on Nov. 7, 1997, 
after a dispute with their landlord, Robert Rodriguez, who is the 
focus of suspicion by their friends and the police. Without bodies 
or other evidence of a crime, however, police have been powerless 
to question the landlord, who cannot be called a suspect, or even 
to search his upstate home. By twists and turns, the case has become 
one of the strangest and most frustrating in the annals of New York's 
unsolved crimes. But on the first anniversary of their disappearance 
Saturday, Ms. Sylvia and Sullivan have not been forgotten. Friends 
are planning a vigil, from noon Monday to noon Tuesday, outside their 
building to remember them, to protest at the door of Rodriguez's ground-floor 
locksmith shop, and to keep the public and police focused on a case 
that has been agonizing for many. ``There is no way to describe the 
torment this has been for the family and friends,'' said Kim Magistro, 
a neighbor and one of the vigil's organizers, who, like many, voiced 
frustration with a stymied police investigation. ``And to think that 
the prime suspect is not cooperating, it's not just.'' There are others 
suffering similarly. In the last year, several people have disappeared 
under circumstances that have left families and friends bereft and 
emotionally unresolved. In July an 82-year-old widow, Irene Silverman, 
vanished from her East Side town house, and officials say they believe 
_ but have no solid proof _ that she was killed by mother-and-son 
swindlers seeking her fortune. And two weeks ago, Kristine Kupka, 
28, a pregnant Baruch College student, vanished after going out with 
a man believed to be the father of her unborn baby. Police have no 
evidence against him, but relatives and friends of Ms. Kupka's have 
voiced suspicions and campaigned to widen attention to the case. They, 
too, have been invited to the vigil. ``A lot of tragic things happen 
in life,'' said Charles Delaney, a neighbor of the missing couple. 
``But in most cases _ death at an early age, a car crash _ people 
who love and miss the departed ones have some knowledge of what happened, 
and are able to have closure. We have been denied that. We are trapped 
in a mystery, like something out of Conrad or Kafka.'' A year ago 
Saturday, witnesses say, Ms. Sylvia, 36, an artist and real estate 
agent, and her companion, Sullivan, 54, an actor and art gallery worker, 
argued with their landlord over a lack of heat, and they threatened 
to withhold the $300-a-month rent on their fifth-floor, rent-stabilized 
walkup loft. Later that day, they rented a movie, ``Addicted to Love,'' 
at a video store on Park Row near City Hall. Then they disappeared. 
Friends said that they were creatures of habit, that it was unthinkable 
that they would go off on an adventure without telling anybody. In 
their loft, there were signs they had not gone away: Sullivan's wallet 
on a table, a set of keys, a passport, their clothing in place. A 
week later, as detectives sought to question him, Rodriguez vanished 
from his home in Slate Hill, Orange County, telling his family he 
was going to Manhattan to talk to police. He resurfaced two weeks 
later, but has since refused to talk to the police or to let them 
search his property. In a cat-and-mouse game, police have flown over 
the seven-acre property in helicopters and sent dogs sniffing around 
its edges for something that would provide cause for a search warrant; 
they also have questioned 100 potential witnesses and conducted a 
wide-ranging search for the couple, all to no avail. While Rodriguez 
is not formally a suspect, police have focused their suspicions on 
him, saying he has never explained his dispute or last contacts with 
the couple, or his own two-week disappearance. And they assume that 
the couple were killed. ``We are investigating a missing persons' 
case technically, but we are using the resources of the Manhattan 
South homicide squad, anticipating that foul play has been employed,'' 
said Assistant Chief Kevin Farrell, the commander of Manhattan detectives. 
Police have found that Rodriguez bought his loft building in 1993 
for $205,000, paying in part with insurance money from a suspicious 
fire at his upstate home. They also have reopened an inquiry into 
the 1991 disappearance of a Rodriguez associate, David King, after 
the two had a business dispute. But the results of the inquiry into 
the couple's disappearance have been disappointing to many. ``My main 
frustration continues to be that the police have not brought in the 
landlord for questioning,'' said Jerry Goldfeder, who represents the 
missing couple's families. ``It's very, very difficult not knowing 
whether your loved ones are alive or dead. There's no closure.'' He 
said Ms. Sylvia's mother, Laurie Sylvia, an advocate for the disabled, 
had continued to pay the rent on the couple's loft after their disappearance. 
While Rodriguez rejected the payments, he has made no eviction effort. 
``Can you imagine any judge granting an order of eviction?'' the lawyer 
asked. ``It would raise questions as to his motivation.'' So the loft 
at the top of 76 Pearl St. remains as it was a year ago. But neighbors 
doubt that the couple will ever come back to reclaim it. ``I think 
my neighbors are dead,'' said Delaney. ``I think somebody killed them.'' 
Rodriguez did not respond to messages left at his shop, but his lawyer, 
Joseph Marro, said his client knew nothing about the couple's disappearance 
or whereabouts. He said suspicions voiced by police and others were 
unfair to Rodriguez. The lawyer said Rodriguez last saw Ms. Sylvia 
on Nov. 7, 1997, when she gave him a letter complaining about a lack 
of heat. He said the landlord let uniformed officers into his building 
several days later, when the couple were reported missing, and even 
responded to questions at that time. Police insist that hope is alive, 
if not for the couple, at least for a resolution of the case. ``I 
believe that in time we will solve this mystery,'' Farrell said. ``A 
homicide is not closed until it is solved. The person or persons who 
are responsible for the disappearance of Camden Sylvia and Michael 
Sullivan should not rest easy.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>