<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0549 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It seemed somehow the ultimate irony of this strange political year, 
the year stigmatized by President Clinton's affair with Monica Lewinsky. 
Instead of Bill Clinton being the one to fall, it was Newt Gingrich. 
Four years after the Georgia Republican was hailed as the visionary 
who won control of Congress for his party in 1994, Gingrich stepped 
down Friday night, facing a mutiny from Republicans who insisted that 
his flaws could cost them the very majority he had created. In more 
heady days, the mercurial Georgia Republican had called himself a 
``transformational figure'' and a ``definer of civilization.'' But 
Friday evening at 6:30 p.m., ET, facing a leadership challenge, Gingrich 
told his fellow House Republicans in conference calls that he was 
``a target'' and would step down for the good of the party. He was 
not just leaving as speaker. He was leaving Congress at the end of 
this year. Republicans said that he tried to discuss his decision 
with dignity. But they said he could not hide his bitterness and sadness 
as he spoke of those who would ``cannibalize'' the party because they 
wanted things their way or no way. Gingrich's sudden fall came just 
four days after a midterm election that dealt Republicans a setback 
even more unexpected than their 52-seat pickup which he organized 
in 1994. But losing five seats was the occasion, and yet not the cause, 
for the antagonism that brought Gingrich's turbulent rein as House 
Speaker to such an extraordinary end. The anger against him had been 
building all year and Republicans say that by Friday Gingrich's troubles 
ran extremely deep _ fueled by his miscalculations on election strategy, 
his persistent unpopularity with the public and his failure to rally 
the divided House Republicans around an agenda. In 1994, House Republicans 
ran and won on an organizing theme, the ``Contract with America,'' 
which stressed less regulation, tax cuts, term limits and a balanced 
budget. But once they worked out a balanced budget, with tax cuts, 
in 1997, they seemed an ideologically spent force. The Republicans 
went into this year's election largely running on the past. And its 
result provided one more reason for change. Gingrich is almost universally 
disliked by House Democrats, and some Republicans said that now that 
they have an almost unworkable six-vote majority, they need a speaker 
who can work with Democrats, not infuriate them. ``What I believe 
desperately needs to take place is to heal the alienation that currently 
exists,'' said Rep. Steve Largent of Oklahoma, a conservative football 
Hall of Famer who announced his own challenge Friday to Gingrich's 
second-in-command, Rep. Dick Armey. Largent cited the rifts not just 
inside the Republican caucus, but between House Republicans and Democrats, 
House Republicans and the White House. The heart of the speaker's 
problems, many Republicans said, is that he had never made an adequate 
adjustment from minority to majority, from intense backbench opposition 
to governing. ``Revolutionizing takes some talents _ many talents,'' 
Gingrich's challenger, Rep. Bob Livingston of Louisiana said, as he 
announced the candidacy for speaker that drove Gingrich from office. 
``My friend, Newt Gingrich, brought those talents to bear, put the 
Republicans in the majority. Day-to-day governing takes others.'' 
As a minority firebrand, Gingrich attacked Democrats, including Speaker 
Jim Wright, over ethics issues. Throughout 1996, they returned the 
favor, and as Congress convened in 1997, he was barely re-elected 
speaker, and then reprimanded and fined $300,000 for bringing discredit 
on the House by using tax-exempt money to promote Republican goals. 
The hard-edged partisan bite that worked for Gingrich in the minority 
came across as stridency in power, Republicans said. ``Whenever we 
try to go on the offensive the White House tries to make Newt the 
issue and whenever that happens we lose,'' said Peter King. In fact, 
Gingrich and Clinton have been locked for years in a strange symbiotic 
competition. It was Clinton's failed attempt to pass national health 
care that helped bring Gingrich into the majority. It was the Speaker's 
gamble on shutting down the government in the winter of 1995-96 that 
assured Clinton his own re-election. And this year it was Gingrich's 
misreading of the public mood on impeachment that helped bring about 
his own demise. But most of Gingrich's problems had nothing to do 
with Clinton. In a fractured Republican caucus struggling to define 
itself, he could never satisfy every ideological instinct and faction. 
So at the end he came under attack from moderates and conservatives, 
and was not even defended eagerly by some of those for whom he raised 
hundreds of thousands of dollars in campaign funds. It was those same 
ideological divisions that made it so hard for him to craft an agenda 
for his party this year, even on fiscal issues which once unified 
Republicans. When Gingrich allowed Rep. John Kasich, the budget committee 
chairman, to try to rally House Republicans around a conservative 
blueprint for more than $100 billion in new savings, the moderates 
refused to back it. When House Republicans supported a $70 billion 
tax cut, Senate Republicans refused to pass it. The disarray was so 
complete that Congress for the first time since 1974 failed to ever 
pass an actual budget. That stalemate put the Republicans in the weakened 
state that left them with little alternative in October but to reach 
an agreement with Clinton on a massive $500 billion spending bill 
that alienated their conservative base on the eve of the election. 
Gingrich's defenders said their colleagues were being hypocrites, 
blaming him for their own unwillingness to strike compromises. ``It 
wasn't a problem with leadership,'' said Rep. Mike Parker, a Mississippi 
Republican who is retiring and thus barred from voting in the leadership 
election. ``It was a problem of followership. We had all these people 
who wouldn't get along. We couldn't get the rank and file members 
of the Republican conference to take the votes necessary even down 
to passing a budget.'' (MORE) nn But Gingrich's critics say it was 
his role to bridge these divisions. ``That's the challenge of leadership,'' 
said Rep. Marge Roukema, R-N.J. ``I'm sorry. The Democratic Party 
used to be very fractured between its southerners and the liberals. 
That's the challenge.'' Perhaps Gingrich might have survived if he 
had not already had such a tumultuous political history, leaving enemies, 
Democrat and Republican alike in his wake. He has had more admirers 
than friends among House Republicans. His raw ambition _ he wanted 
to be speaker from the time he was 14, said _ scared some colleagues 
and awed others. His inability to keep from sounding boastful, or 
in 1995, complaining about not getting a good seat on Air Force One 
en route to Yitzhak Rabin's funeral. But, until Friday, he always 
rebounded. When his own firebrand conservatives and leadership tried 
to mount a coup against him in the summer of 1997 _ before the balanced 
budget deal, he survived by drawing support from the barons of the 
party _ the committee chairmen. And one of the most important of them 
had been Livingston, who let it be known that he would wield his power 
over spending to keep rebels in line. As a new rebellion brewed this 
his week, Gingrich looked for support. Just hours before he stepped 
down, his spokeswoman Christina Martin said he had made 50 calls since 
Wednesday seeking commitments. But his party wanted to avoid the bruising 
confrontation that would come with a leadership struggle. Republicans 
said Gingrich understood he had to leave when Rep. Bill Archer, the 
Ways and Means chairman, who had originally promised his support, 
called back later and told him it was time for him to go. So Friday 
night he left, saying ``I urge my colleagues to pick leaders who can 
both reconcile and discipline, who can work together and communicate 
effectively.'' He added, ''They have my prayers and my thoughts as 
they undertake this task.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>