<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0357 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
William H. Gross may never be popularly seen as challenging Peter 
Lynch's or Warren Buffett's status as America's pre-eminent market 
sages. After all, what are the chances of hitting investing grand 
slams _ with their attendant publicity _ in boring old bonds? Actually, 
they're quite good. So Gross is gathering as much acclaim as a bond 
investor can hope for. Pimco Advisors Holdings, his employer in Newport 
Beach, Calif., expects that by the end of the month it will complete 
its own TV studio so Gross can better accommodate the growing requests 
for interviews. Gross, 54, is portfolio manager of Pimco's Total Return 
fund, which has ranked in the top percentile of its peers in virtually 
all the standard return periods of the last decade, according to Morningstar 
Inc., the Chicago financial publisher. This year, it gained 8.7 percent 
through Oct. 31, compared with 6.3 percent for its peer funds and 
7.7 percent for its benchmark, the Lehman Brothers Aggregate Bond 
Index. In the last decade, Total Return has returned 10.26 percent, 
versus 7.5 percent for its peers and 9 percent for the index. Widely 
available to individuals only since last spring _ the minimum investment, 
previously $1 million, is now $250 _ the fund has ballooned to $22.69 
billion, twice as large as its nearest competitor. In recent months, 
convinced that financial and economic contagion from Asia was proving 
more acute than widely recognized, Gross swung from what he called 
a milquetoast bullish stance to what became by summer a bold bet on 
lower rates. That was just in time, as a safety-obsessed market drove 
down the yield on Treasury securities, which moves in the opposite 
direction from prices. The benchmark 30-year bond briefly touched 
4.75 percent, the lowest yield in a generation. Then, about a month 
ago, Gross retreated a bit, cutting the duration of his portfolio 
to a somewhat less aggressive 4.6 years, from 5. (Duration refers 
to the average weighted life of all payments related to a bond, interest 
as well as the return of principal when it comes due. Maturity, which 
is usually longer than duration, refers simply to the time before 
a bond is due.) ``We took a bit off the table,'' he said, adding that 
Total Return was still primed for slight declines in rates over the 
next six months _ perhaps to 5 percent, from the current 5.25 percent. 
Managers of general bond portfolios usually adopt the ``top-down'' 
approach to investing, which gives the most weight to economic trends. 
That is because bonds _ at least until recently _ have tended to move 
in tandem with economic forces. But to Gross, who contends that the 
timing of the next recession is unknowable, there is more involved 
than just trying to plumb the business cycle or the impact of distress 
in Asia. In what Gross calls Pimco's ``super tops-down'' approach, 
he steps back to assess longer-term fundamentals like the graying 
of the populations of industrial countries. ``Some things, like demographics, 
are known with almost complete certainty,'' he said. The same, he 
added, goes for the trend toward globalization and the worldwide buildup 
of corporate and government debt. Besides deciding on a portfolio's 
proper duration, bond managers must also fathom the yield curve _ 
the array of fixed-income rates ranging from a matter of days to 30 
years or more _ to determine the best mix for producing that duration. 
One common approach, called the ``barbell,'' involves big commitments 
to the short and long ends of the curve. That method is attractive 
when the long-term sector is expected to do well relative to intermediate-maturity 
bonds. Another is the ``bullet'' _ a heavy concentration in intermediates 
due, say, between 2 and 10 years _ a strategy toward which Gross aggressively 
shifted the Total Return portfolio in July and August. ``One of the 
main statements that the portfolio is making is that it's fairly concentrated 
in intermediate maturities,'' Gross said. ``The bullet strategy,'' 
he added, ``does well when the Federal Reserve is in the market, so 
to speak, and is actively lowering interest rates.'' Before July, 
his portfolio had been in a half-barbell, half-bullet position. That 
was before he perceived the Federal Reserve as being seriously concerned 
about the possibility of a global meltdown and likely to lower short-term 
rates. Total Return, which Gross calls a plain-vanilla bond fund, 
uses no leverage, though some 20 percent of its Treasury portfolio 
is in higher-returning futures. Because of quarterly expirations, 
they tend to magnify the portfolio's turnover rate, which is 173 percent. 
Although Total Return could invest as much as 20 percent of its portfolio 
overseas _ and half of this in emerging markets _ Gross keeps foreign 
exposure to a minimum and says such holdings should be confined to 
the highest possible quality. ``I've not had a Russian bond and never 
will,'' said Gross, who is no stranger to risk-taking: He played blackjack 
professionally in Las Vegas for five months after college. He also 
doesn't much favor corporate issues these days, even though this sector 
has improved lately after its problems helped prompt the Federal Reserve 
to cut rates again last month, outside a scheduled policy meeting. 
``I would continue to be leery about corporates,'' Gross said, citing 
what he considers significant risk that they might go into default 
in a recession. ``We're hunkering down and climbing into the bomb 
shelter,'' he said, keeping to shorter maturities and stressing high 
quality. Eventually, he added, corporate spreads and yields will become 
more attractive, and that ``will be a better time to buy.'' Such is 
Gross' impact and reputation, however, that he must shroud such decisions 
in CIA-like secrecy, using as many as 10 dealers, few if any of them 
privy to more than minimal information. He checks Bloomberg and Telerate 
monitors in his basement at home before heading for work but doesn't 
take action before reaching the office, usually by 6:30 a.m. ``I was 
one of the best,'' said Gross, a card counter who said he has been 
thrown out of more than one casino. ``I proved a point, that I could 
beat the system.'' After serving in the Navy, he intended to find 
a stock-market job, but wound up as a credit analyst in the bond department 
of Pacific Mutual Life Insurance, from which Pimco evolved. Now he's 
the biggest owner of Pimco and the closest thing in the bond business 
to a cult figure. Gross has relatively little involvement in Pimco's 
management, , though he was a co-founder. ``It's very difficult to 
manage a business and run a portfolio at the same time,'' he said. 
This results in a relatively modest salary of $200,000, but he makes 
many times that much in performance pay tied to Pimco's bottom line. 
Because he isn't an executive, the amount is not found in filings 
with the Securities and Exchange Commission. As for investing his 
personal fortune, which runs into nine figures, Gross said the portion 
not in Pimco Advisors is mostly invested in the Total Return fund 
and in municipal bonds that he selects himself. Something else he 
has been doing is buying more stock, actually partnership interests, 
in his own company, Pimco Advisors Holdings, traded on the New York 
Stock Exchange. Pimco, growing at 15 percent a year, has a bond-like 
yield, largely because it pays no corporate-level income tax, which 
is levied against investors. But it provides a way for anybody to 
bet on Gross' continued success with bonds, about half Pimco's total 
business, while being well paid in the interim. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>