<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0531 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
House Speaker Newt Gingrich, who orchestrated the Republican takeover 
of Congress in 1994 and pressed the impeachment inquiry into President 
Clinton, was driven from office Friday by a party that swiftly turned 
on him after its unexpected losses in Tuesday's midterm elections. 
Catching virtually everyone on Capitol Hill by surprise, Gingrich 
announced Friday night in two conference calls to other Republicans 
that he would not seek re-election as Speaker and would leave Congress 
altogether when his term expired in January. ``This will give us a 
chance to purge some of the poison that is in the system,'' Gingrich 
said, according to a party aide who heard one of the calls. Gingrich's 
decision to resign was a stunning reversal for one of the most combative 
and personally confrontational politicians in America. He made his 
name a decade ago by bringing down one Democratic Speaker, Jim Wright, 
and continued his assaultive style through the elections with last-minute 
commercials reminding voters of the Clinton scandal. His reflexive 
pugilistic response was evident even Friday night. In his second conference 
call, according to several members who listened, Gingrich blamed House 
conservatives for his downfall. Although it was their revolutionary 
zeal he harnessed to take control of Congress, they have become his 
most bitter critics in the last two years of his tumultuous tenure 
as speaker. On Friday night he called them cannibals who had ``blackmailed'' 
him into quitting, said those who has listened to the call. Rep. Michael 
P. Forbes, R-N.Y., said: ``Newt said all those who had marginalized 
the Republican Party had engaged in cannibalism. He said, `Refer to 
the clips.' He's blaming others.'' Another Republican, who spoke on 
condition of anonymity, described the conference call this way: ``He 
started off very statesmanlike, but then you could see the anger building. 
When someone asked him why he was leaving, he said, `A handful of 
members have blackmailed the conference.' He said, `They're hateful.' 
And he said, `They're cannibals.''' Gingrich's move set up a scramble 
for a successor in the powerful post. The speaker, who is second only 
to the Vice President in line for succession to the Presidency, controls 
the legislative agenda, committee assignments and chairmanships in 
the House of Representatives. Gingrich consolidated the power of the 
office to a greater extent than other speakers in recent decades. 
The 105th Congress is now in adjournment, but Gingrich has said that 
he would call the House back into session to vote on articles of impeachment, 
if they are approved by the House Judiciary Committee. He said he 
would step down at the end of the year, just before the 106th Congress 
takes office. Gingrich announced his move just hours after Rep. Robert 
L. Livingston, R-La. announced he was running for speaker, putting 
himself forward as a pragmatist and a manager. After the Gingrich 
calls, Rep. Bill Archer, R-Texas, announced he was considering his 
own run. Livingston and Archer are chairmen of the two most powerful 
committees in the House, Appropriations and Ways and Means, respectively. 
Rep. Christopher Cox of California, chairman of the Republican policy 
committee, also announced his candidacy for speaker tonight, on CNN's 
``Larry King Live.'' In a statement Gingrich said, ``The Republican 
conference needs to be unified, and it is time for me to move forward.'' 
He said he hoped his colleagues would pick a successor ``who can both 
reconcile and discipline, who can work together and communicate effectively.'' 
Referring to his wife, he told his colleagues he was resigning from 
Congress because ``Marianne and I are tired. We need time off to get 
to know each other again.'' He also acknowledged his own knack for 
bringing negative attention to himself and to his party. ``If I stay,'' 
he told his colleagues Friday night, ``my controversial nature would 
overshadow any successes we might have,'' an understatement to those 
who recalled his suggestion two years ago that he forced a shutdown 
of the government because he was miffed about having to sit in the 
back of Air Force One on a trip with Clinton. According to a Republican 
who took notes on one of the calls, Gingrich said: ``There is a lot 
of bitterness amongst some of the members. So long as I am around, 
I will always be a target in the news media, which would mean we would 
never be able to get our message out.'' Clinton, who was traveling 
in Arkansas Friday, said: ``Newt Gingrich has been a worthy adversary 
leading the Republican Party to a majority in the House and joining 
me in a great national debate over how best to prepare America for 
the 21st century. Despite our profound differences, I appreciate those 
times we were able to work together in the national interest, especially 
Speaker Gingrich's strong support for America's continuing leadership 
for freedom, peace and prosperity in the world.'' Many Republicans 
took the opportunity to portray Gingrich as a visionary. Rep. Sherwood 
Boehlert of New York said that during the first conference call, ``there 
was shock and surprise and strong expressions of appreciation for 
leading us to the Promised Land.'' His supporters said Gingrich had 
the votes to win re-election as speaker, a vote to be conducted by 
secret ballot on Nov. 18. Kenneth Duberstein, a former official in 
the Reagan administration, said, ``I have no doubt he had the votes 
to be Speaker, but I'm not sure he had the votes to govern.'' He said 
that because of the deep rifts in the party, Gingrich would not have 
been able to implement his plans. In an unusually biting reaction, 
Rep. Richard Gephardt of Missouri, the Democratic leader, said he 
hoped that Gingrich's resignation would clear the fierce partisan 
air that he had fostered. ``I hope that whoever succeeds Newt Gingrich 
as Speaker will immediately begin the process of repairing the damage 
that was wrought on this institution over the last four years,'' Gephardt 
said. House Republicans predicted that Gingrich's resignation would 
set off a more wide-ranging and hectic scramble to replace him than 
had been anticipated. ``There will be a lot of pretenders to the throne 
who will test the waters,'' said Boehlert, who had supported Gingrich 
for re-election. ``There won't be any shortage of candidates.'' Archer's 
name gained currency earlier Friday when conservatives, who were already 
furious with Gingrich, said they were dissatisfied with Livingston 
as well. Archer's actions captured the dizzying pace at which events 
unfolded _ and the appeal of having Gingrich out of the race. His 
aides said Friday afternoon that Archer was ``reviewing his options'' 
and that if he decided to run, he would announce his candidacy next 
week. They faxed a statement at 7:29 Friday night saying that Archer 
was ``saddened'' by Gingrich's resignation. Eleven minutes later, 
they faxed a statement from Archer saying he was ``actively considering'' 
running for speaker. Livingston has a huge head start. He had been 
campaigning for speaker anyway on the chance that Gingrich might step 
aside to run for President. Since Tuesday, he has converted those 
long-range plans into an extensive and immediate telephone campaign 
to shore up support. He has contacted not only Republican House members 
but an array of prominent Republicans across the country, including 
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani of New York. At a news conference outside the 
Capitol Friday afternoon, Livingston said he was running. He cast 
himself as someone who could make the trains run on time and who would 
not lose himself in the high-blown revolutionary speechifying that 
he implied had consumed Gingrich, who has spent much of his time traveling 
and raising money. ``I'll be more of a stay-at-home type of speaker 
who wants to get the job done,'' Livingston told reporters. Gingrich 
remained at his home in Georgia Friday, calling members and seeking 
their support. His press secretary, Christina Martin, issued a statement 
Friday afternoon saying: ``As architect of the Republican majority, 
Speaker Gingrich is determined to correct the mistakes of the past 
and implement a positive, issue-oriented legislative agenda.'' She 
said in an interview tonight that Gingrich had broached the possibility 
of resigning with his wife on Thursday and that he had reached a decision 
Friday afternoon. His staff was caught by surprise. ``This office 
was in full vote-counting mode,'' Martin said. Gingrich's plans beyond 
resignation were uncertain. He said he would take six months off next 
year. But he made no mention of his earlier notion of running for 
President, a path that many of his friends said they presumed was 
now impossible. Gov. John Engler of Michigan, a Republican, suggested 
that he replace Jim Nicholson as chairman of the Republican National 
Committee. ``I would love for Newt to become our national chairman 
right now,'' he said. In a sign of the turmoil aswirl in the party, 
the governor said Gingrich would be more adept at handling the press 
than Nicholson. ``The media circus surrounding politicians is not 
his strength,'' he said of Nicholson. Engler said he spoke by telephone 
with Gingrich. ``He's weary and said he was tired _ it's been a grueling 
campaign,'' Engler said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>