<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I call them two-season trees. They are the kind whose foliage is aflame 
at this time of year and whose branches are decked with beautiful, 
often fragrant flowers in spring or summer. They offer shade and splendor, 
providing a handsome return from a horticultural budget. My first 
two-season tree was a Japanese stewartia (S. pseudocamellia). I chose 
it six years ago for its white, camellialike flowers from late June 
into early July; its fiery orange-red foliage from late September 
through October, and, as a bonus, its reddish and orange-brown exfoliating 
bark in winter. Growing about a foot a year, it is now 20 feet tall 
and should top out at about 35 feet. Its noninvasive root system allowed 
me to place it about 12 feet from a back room with three large, north-facing 
windows. I love to relax there and gaze out at the tree's ever-changing 
scenery. And relax I can because, aside from a weekly watering during 
its first year, the stewartia has required no care. I thought it would 
be great to have more multiseason attractions. My problem was how 
to stack them into my quarter-acre lot in central New Jersey. I began 
by working backward. Two Carolina silverbells (Halesia carolina) are 
now situated behind the stewartia. In mid-May, I peer through the 
airy spaces between leaf buds ripening on the stewartia and admire 
a vista of white flowers dangling from the silverbell branches. These 
exquisite flowers do resemble bells and hold for about two weeks. 
There was room for just one more tree to anchor the row, and selecting 
it was difficult _ there are just so many excellent candidates. A 
local street planting of Cumulus shadblows (Amelanchier X grandiflora) 
convinced me that I had found the right choice. Though most shad-blows 
are bushy, the Cumulus cultivar assumes a slim columnar form, an apt 
shape for my small property. Its numerous small white blossoms open 
among slate gray branches by mid-April and, if hungry birds aren't 
too quick, become attractive red fruits in summer. I have now created 
a four-tree row that comprises three different species, which are 
unified by similar heights, flower color and leaf size and shape. 
For my indoor viewing pleasure, however, I have made sure that bloom 
times are staggered. From April into early July, I can watch a tide 
of white flowers wash down through the trees to my house. And then, 
shortly after Labor Day, I am treated to spectacular foliage. It spreads 
from the middle, starting with the splash of lemon yellow on the silverbells. 
Shortly afterward, orange and scarlet flecks appear on the Cumulus 
foliage, and then the stewartia picks up the beat, with intense hues 
ranging from giddy orange to a voluptuous red purple. It was a challenge 
to work Forest Pansy (Cercis canadensis) into my limited landscape, 
as its heart-shaped leaves and reddish-purple flowers did not fit 
in with my mixed tree border in the back. In what some may regard 
as heresy, I replaced an old lilac on the side of the house with this 
stunning redbud cultivar. While I miss the lilac scent and flowers 
in May, Forest Pansy provides much longer interest. In mid-April, 
its sleek, dark gray branches are studded with tiny blossoms, and 
in fall this same background color highlights lemon yellow leaves. 
It is during the warm months, from May well into August, that Forest 
Pansy is especially appreciated, for its branches are decorated with 
handsome foliage, starting as a rich dark purple and eventually becoming 
blotched with dark green. Now, I'm trying to decide how to work in 
a franklinia (F. alatamaha). This tree was discovered by the Pennsylvania 
botanist John Bartram in the 1700's but has since disappeared in the 
wild. Its leaves resemble those of magnolias, and like native magnolia 
varieties, it features large white flowers throughout summer. Unlike 
magnolias, however, it often blooms into fall when the leaves turn 
a blazing scarlet. Then, of course, there are the beautiful, disease-resistant 
Rutgers dogwood hybrids (Cornus kousa X C. florida) with abundant 
flowers in late May and red and purple fall foliage. Yellowwoods (Cladrastis 
lutea) are towering trees with sculptured slate-gray bark, panicles 
of fragrant white flowers in early June and golden yellow fall foliage. 
Nannyberry viburnums (V. lentago) are short trees with creamy white 
spring flowers, blue summer fruits and purplish-red fall leaves. The 
list goes on. Hawthorns, especially Crataegus phaenopyrum Princeton 
Sentry and C. viridis Winter King, have white spring flowers, red-orange 
or purple fall foliage and red berries through much of winter. Sourwood 
(Oxydendron arboreum) has sprays of white pendulous flowers in July 
and stunning October displays of scarlet leaves. While the selection 
of many-seasoned trees is rich, the supply is not. It is a mystery 
why so many of these beautiful, low-maintenance, multiseasonal trees 
are not more widely grown and offered. Now is an especially frugal 
time to begin a search, because local nurseries are featuring end-of-season 
sales on woody plant materials. If these offerings do not include 
two-season trees, ask your nursery to locate sources during the coming 
months for early spring planting. You'll still be getting a bargain: 
two or more seasons of interest from just one easy-care plant. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>