<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0426 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the flood waters generated by a huge hurricane finally receding, 
now that nearly two weeks of torrential rains appear to have ended, 
relief workers and international aid groups on Friday stepped up their 
efforts to reach survivors in isolated rural areas across Central 
America and to rush food, medicine and other vital supplies to them. 
The combined death toll from the storm, Mitch, which officials describe 
as the worst natural disaster to strike the subcontinent in this century, 
is estimated at more than 11,000, mostly in Honduras and Nicaragua. 
In an indication of the difficulties that lie ahead, several thousand 
others are still listed as missing, and more than 1 million have been 
left homeless. Thanks to improving weather, however, airlifts of basic 
supplies to the main disaster zones in both countries are finally 
in full swing. Through midweek, helicopters leaving from the Nicaraguan 
capital for hard-hit areas like Esteli and Matagalpa with rice, beans, 
sugar and other basic foods were repeatedly unable to land and were 
turned back by bad weather. In one indication of how international 
cooperation is beginning to take effect, a small Mexican air force 
plane landed at midmorning Friday at the airstrip in Chinandega, the 
northwestern town closest to the most damaged area. The plane was 
met by a photographer and about 12 local volunteers, who began loading 
large sacks of rice donated by the United States onto trucks. An hour 
later another aircraft landed, and a group of French and Scandinavian 
doctors immediately headed for the hospital, where survivors of the 
mudslides that entombed six villages around Posoltega, killing more 
than 1,500, are being treated. Reversing the lowered profile that 
it had cultivated since civil wars in the region ended early in the 
decade, the United States has approved $70 million in emergency aid 
to Central America and has sent helicopters and food. Both Hillary 
Rodham Clinton and Tipper Gore are scheduled to visit Central America 
in the next two weeks as an additional expression of U.S. concern. 
Friday afternoon former President Jimmy Carter, who helped broker 
the elections in 1990 that led to the end of the Sandinista revolution, 
arrived here to assess storm damage. President Carlos Flores of Honduras 
announced that former President George Bush is to visit that country 
over the weekend. New problems were emerging, however, particularly 
the threat of epidemics. Nicaraguan officials acknowledged Friday 
that there have been limited outbreaks of cholera in a few areas. 
International relief groups warned that the huge new bodies of stagnant 
water that have been created are likely to lead to the appearance 
of malaria, dengue fever and other mosquito-borne diseases. With many 
bridges and roads still out of service, and farms and fields throughout 
the region destroyed just as an especially rich harvest was about 
to begin, some shortages of basic crops like beans and rice were reported. 
Consumers here and in other cities complained that some prices had 
doubled, leading local offices of the national emergency committee 
to plead with store owners not to withhold supplies or manipulate 
prices. The biggest challenge to President Arnoldo Aleman, however, 
is the popular discontent with his government's delays in sending 
assistance to the areas where it is most needed. In a typical expression 
of anger a survivor of the Posoltega mudslide, Francisco Sandoval, 
complained on Thursday, ``The government has done nothing to help 
us.'' Vice President Enrique Bolanos, who was put in charge of the 
National Emergency Committee that is overseeing relief efforts, has 
pleaded for patience, pointing to the bad weather and widespread damage 
to communications and roads that initially slowed operations. But 
leaders of the Sandinista Front have been critical of the conservative 
government's decision to suspend the powers of mayors, one-third Sandinistas, 
and to concentrate power in its hands. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>