<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0463 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Japanese interest rates were already the lowest on record, so it had 
seemed impossible that they could go any lower. But they have: Some 
interest rates are now dancing into negative territory. This week, 
investors have bought short-term Japanese government bills that have 
negative yields. In other words, the buyers are paying more money 
than they can expect to earn when the bills mature in six months, 
in effect paying simply for the privilege of holding bonds. Likewise, 
a few foreign banks are paying interest, instead of earning interest, 
for clients to borrow their money. In some countries, bank depositors 
have occasionally earned negative real interest rates, meaning that 
their yields were less than the inflation rate. But this is much rarer: 
The nominal interest rate is negative. ``We've basically never seen 
this before,'' said William Campbell, a strategist with J.P. Morgan 
in Tokyo. The slide below zero shows how some investors have become 
so downbeat about the Japanese economy that they are willing to invest 
only in government bonds, the safest bets in the country. It also 
means that there are so many yen around that some banks, mostly foreign 
banks, are willing to pay someone to take them off their hands for 
a time. Why would anyone pay someone else to take his money? Why not 
just keep it? Partly for convenience. A bank could keep the yen, but 
that could lead to extra expenses. So long as the interest rate is 
only slightly negative, it may prefer to buy bills even if there is 
a slight cost. A bank could keep its yen at the Bank of Japan, but 
with so much cash, there are transportation costs. There is also a 
larger issue. ``It's symptomatic of radical pessimism of the economy,'' 
said Jeffrey Young, an economist with Salomon Smith Barney in Tokyo. 
The rush to Treasury bills is virtually an escape from Japanese banks, 
analysts say. With the economy in recession and piles of bad loans 
eroding the capital bases of the banks, some of Japan's weakest financial 
institutions are caught in the struggle for their corporate lives. 
Such is the distrust of Japanese banks that investors may prefer to 
pay for the right to put their money in government Treasury bills 
for a few months instead. At least, the feeling seems to be, then 
it will be safe. Indeed, the same flight to quality drove down yields 
on U.S. Treasury bills to virtually zero in the Depression. Still, 
while Treasury yields typically serve as benchmarks for lending rates, 
the negative yields in Japan have not yet led consumer and corporate 
rates below zero. Also this week, a few foreign banks, like Barclays 
Capital, J.P. Morgan and Citibank have announced negative interest 
rates on lending yen to other banks. Barclays Capital advised other 
banks that if they wanted to borrow yen, they would be charged the 
equivalent of an annual interest rate of minus 0.03 percent. That 
means that Barclays would pay the borrowers to borrow, so for every 
million yen borrowed, the client would over a year's time receive 
300 yen. A spokeswoman at Barclays Capital, the investment arm of 
Barclays Bank, said, ``We have traded at that rate quite frequently.'' 
She added that transactions were also recorded at negative 0.08 percent 
as well. J.P. Morgan also offered rates as low as negative 0.0625 
percent, but the bank declined to say how many transactions were concluded 
at such negative interest rates. Richard Mahony, spokesman for J.P. 
Morgan in London, said that in the current market environment, Morgan 
could still finance itself with yen so cheaply that it could ``profit 
by lending at zero or even slightly negative rates.'' Indeed, the 
reason that foreign banks have such cheap access to yen currency is 
the troubles in the Japanese economy. Japanese banks have an acute 
demand for dollars to help finance their overseas operations, but 
U.S. banks are hesitant to lend dollars to them, because of heightening 
concern over the Japanese financial system. The ``Japan premium,'' 
the higher costs that Japanese banks have to pay for dollars, compared 
with the rates that U.S. banks pay, has risen sharply. For months, 
U.S. banks have been trimming their dollar lending to Japanese institutions, 
and in the increasingly uncertain outlook for the global economy, 
U.S. institutions have been trying to shed, rather than increase, 
their risk. Particularly as the year end nears, U.S. banks are skittish 
about having their balance sheets reflect a great deal of exposure 
to Japanese banks. So instead of lending dollars, U.S. institutions 
are using swaps to turn over dollars to Japanese banks in exchange 
for yen. Recently, the Japanese demand for swapping yen for dollars 
has become so intense that U.S. banks have been swapping huge quantities, 
leaving them sitting on piles of extremely cheap yen. As a result, 
many foreigners are sinking their yen into safe six-month Japanese 
government bills. And the reason the banks can accept negative returns 
on the Treasury bill is that when they obtain yen from Japanese banks, 
they are being paid enough to hold it so that they can profit by lending 
it to the government at the barely negative rates they receive on 
the bills. All this puts the Bank of Japan in a bit of a quandary. 
It has been trying to stimulate the economy and get more money flowing 
through the economy to alleviate a credit crunch that is crippling 
companies. Instead, foreign banks are ending up with much of the yen, 
and the Bank of Japan may need to inject dollars into the market in 
a pinch, if foreign banks refuse to supply the dollars. ``I think 
the Bank of Japan is very worried about this,'' said Xinyi Lu, chief 
strategist at Paribas Capital Markets Ltd. in Tokyo. On Thursday, 
when the government auctioned Treasury bills worth $13.6 billion, 
foreign banks were falling over one another to buy the government's 
six-month bills so that the cost to the government was only 0.03 percent. 
But there was such an appetite in the Japanese Treasury market that 
in the day's trading, prices surged, driving the yield on certain 
six-month bills into negative territory for the first time. (Bond 
yields and their prices move in opposite directions.) In other words, 
investors were so eager to buy the bonds that they were willing to 
take slightly negative returns of 0.005 percent. For the moment, then, 
the government is virtually receiving free money. But it is not helping 
the economy very much. ``It's like saying, while you have cancer, 
`Don't eat as much,' '' Campbell said. ``You're just saving on groceries.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>