<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0468 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A red Fiat belching smoke sent shoppers fleeing moments before it 
exploded outside a bustling marketplace on Friday morning, killing 
the two bombers, injuring 24 other people and disabling the U.S.-brokered 
peace effort. The Israeli Cabinet immediately suspended deliberations 
on the peace accord that was reached in Wye Mills, Md., last month 
and called on Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian leader, to prove he was 
cracking down on terrorism. Reverberating through the heart of downtown, 
the blast Friday morning was the second since the Israelis and the 
Palestinians signed the new land-for-security agreement. The Israelis 
believe that Islamic Holy War, a militant fundamentalist organization, 
bears responsibility for the attack at the heavily guarded Mahane 
Yehuda market, where terrorists have staged several deadly bombings 
before. The attack occurred during the typical Friday shopping rush 
before the Sabbath. At 9:40 a.m., the Fiat, chugging along like a 
car about to quit, began emitting smoke. The smoke served as the first 
alarm, followed by a series of small explosions, that sounded like 
firecrackers. In the minutes before the final boom, as the car aimed 
to climb the sidewalk, the police moved quickly to clear the busy 
area, in an effort to minimize the final toll. The bombers died, their 
car blown to bits of twisted metal. But once the flames ebbed and 
the thick black smoke cleared, only one victim proved to be badly 
injured. ``I started running like a crazy person,'' said Sigal Yitzer, 
who was recovering from minor injuries in a Jerusalem hospital. ``I 
thought only of my two 18-month-old twins at home, and if I should 
die, who would be their mother?'' Arafat condemned the bombing, spending 
the day in meetings in Ramallah with his top security advisers and 
Cabinet. But his aides expressed concern that the attack had provided 
Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli prime minister, with an excuse for 
reneging on his commitment to the peace accord. ``I am sure the result 
of this terrorist action will be to give a gift, an umbrella, to Netanyahu,'' 
said Freich Abu Madein, the Palestinian minister of justice. Implementation 
of the accord was supposed to have begun last Monday, but the Israelis 
delayed it, with Netanyahu insisting he needed the approval of his 
Cabinet and Parliament first. Then, he postponed convening his Cabinet, 
demanding written guarantees that the Palestinians would arrest 30 
fugitives. When the Israeli ministers finally met, in a rambunctious 
all-day session on Thursday, they indicated that they might give the 
peace accord only conditional approval, if any. They had just reconvened 
on Friday morning when they received news of the explosion. They immediately 
moved to suspend their vote on the accord _ and thus, its implementation 
_ until Arafat declared ``all-out war'' on terrorism, according to 
Cabinet Secretary Danny Naveh. ``We expect Arafat to do what is being 
demanded of him,'' said Silvan Shalom, the Israeli minister of science. 
``He needs to combat the terror infrastructure. He has done that in 
the past and he needs to do so now.'' Netanyahu issued no public statements. 
He did not visit the scene, and he did not visit the injured at the 
hospital. On her way to work on Friday morning, Yehudit Levy, a bank 
clerk, had stopped at the Haba bakery on Jaffa Street to buy a chocolate 
croissant for breakfast when she noticed the smoking Fiat, which she 
later called ``a real jalopy.'' Concerned for the driver, she ran 
to rap on his window, motioning toward the smoke. ``I saw the face 
of the terrorist,'' she said. ``It was dark, thin and kind of pinched. 
He gripped the steering wheel hard and stared straight in front of 
him. He looked scared. I couldn't understand why he wasn't getting 
out of this dangerous car. I wanted to help him.'' Two border police 
officers came running toward her, shouting for her to move away from 
the car. People were pushing each other out of the way, whimpering 
and screaming. Smoke was pouring from the exhaust pipe. ``The smoke 
saved us,'' Levy said. ``We ran away from the smoke. If it wasn't 
for the smoke, there would have been a terrible massacre because it 
was very crowded.'' Aryeh Mizrachi, a fruit vendor, said he saw sparks 
and heard a put-put sound, followed by an explosion that knocked him 
and dozens of others off their feet. The flaming car shot into the 
air, splintering into shards of metal and glass that littered the 
marketplace and the charred street. Many people crawled into alleyways 
and shops. ``There was hysteria,'' said Eliad Duan, an Israeli border 
policeman. Afterward, Levy, who had run to shelter, emerged to see 
a border policeman lying on his back in the street, and two mangled 
corpses, one of whom was the driver, his face sheared away. Describing 
the operation as amateurish, Israeli police later said that it was 
unclear whether the bombers intended to commit suicide or to plant 
the bomb and flee. Israeli television reported on Friday night that 
two suitcases filled with explosives may have been detonated in desperation 
because the Fiat was breaking down. A Palestinian official said the 
bombers carried Israeli identification cards and lived in East Jerusalem. 
He identified one as Yousef Izghaiar, 22, who was released four months 
ago from an Israeli jail where he spent two years for taking part 
in Islamic Holy War operations. ``It is clear that there are certain 
types of attacks where our deployment, no matter how tight and reinforced, 
is not hermetic,'' Police Chief Yehuda Wilk said. `But this is the 
type of incident which could have ended much, much worse, especially 
if the explosion had happened inside the market.'' Barely a half hour 
after the bombing, shoppers had resumed their errands in the market, 
and some even begged the police to allow them to cross the barricades 
so they could visit their favorite spice or dried-fruit stalls. ``Unfortunately, 
we've gotten used to this,'' said Ariel Twito, 36, as he ate a banana 
across the street from where the bombers' corpses lay under tarps. 
But Chada Weinberg, an elderly woman, was distraught. Her husband 
had gone to the market to buy chicken while she stayed home cleaning 
for the Sabbath dinner. When she heard of the bombing on the radio, 
she rushed over. Her husband always waited for the bus in the crosswalk 
where the explosion had taken place, she said, and he was very late 
in returning. Twenty years ago, Mrs. Weinberg said, after another 
terrorist attack, she had accompanied her sister to the Mahane Yehuda 
market to search for her brother-in-law. He had ended up a casualty, 
and her sister a widow with seven children. Shaking and crying, Mrs. 
Weinberg collapsed at an olive stand as yeshiva students with cell 
phones called hospitals for her. They finally located her husband 
_ home with a chicken waiting to be broiled. Mrs. Weinberg wiped her 
eyes and hugged the vendors, the yeshiva students and the journalist 
by her side. ``Thanks be to God,'' she said. The Jewish settlers in 
the West Bank, who vehemently oppose the land-for-security deal as 
a betrayal, called on Netanyahu to respond to the terrorist attack 
by abandoning the peace accord. ``The more he continues these terrible 
peace agreements, the more terrorist attacks we will have,'' said 
Aharon Domb, the settlers' leader. But several Israelis criticized 
Netanyahu's government for responding to the terrorists' provocation 
by backing away from the peace accord, which has a tight, 12-week 
implementation schedule. ``It's a grave thing that in the wake of 
such an act, the government stops its talks,'' said Yossi Beilin, 
a Labor Party member of Parliament and an architect of the Oslo interim 
peace agreement. ``After all, this is exactly what the terrorists 
want.'' In the first act of terrorism that followed the signing of 
the accord, a suicide bomber attempting to blow up a schoolbus of 
children near a Jewish settlement in Gaza was foiled by a jeep of 
soldiers, one of whom was killed. The Palestinians responded to that 
incident with an instant crackdown on Hamas, arresting more than a 
hundred members and placing its spiritual leader, Sheik Ahmed Yassin, 
under house arrest. In Gaza on Friday, several thousand militant Palestinians 
rallied to protest Yassin's arrest, the peace accord, and the detention 
of Palestinians in Palestinian jails. They chanted anti-Israeli, anti-American 
and anti-Arafat slogans. No Hamas leaders attended, surprising the 
organizers. `` Netanyahu, if he stays with his stubbornness, there 
will be many arrows directed at his head,'' said one speaker, Imad 
Falouji, the communications minister for the Palestinian Authority. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>