<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0410 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What is Rep. Henry Hyde up to? On the one hand, the Illinois Republican 
who heads the House Judiciary Committee moved Thursday to wrap up 
the impeachment inquiry quickly by naming only one witness, Independent 
Counsel Kenneth Starr. At the same time, Hyde fired off a pointed 
letter asking President Clinton to say flatly whether he lied under 
oath, tampered with witnesses or obstructed justice. If Clinton objects 
to any of the 81 findings drawn from Starr's 445-page report, as surely 
he will, the investigation could drag into next year. Hyde's letter 
was clearly a maneuver to shift the onus to the president and set 
him up as uncooperative, said a Republican aide. ``It was for political 
gain,'' the aide said. ``It's a gamble, a calculated risk. It makes 
it look like the White House is obstructing.'' The combative missive 
might have made political sense for Hyde before the midterm elections, 
when House Republicans expected to pad their majority in the next 
Congress by at least 10 to 15 seats. But after Tuesday's stunning 
gains for Democrats, and the prospect of a slimmer Republican majority 
voting on impeachment next year, the tactic seemed confrontational. 
The disjointed approach stemmed in part from bad timing. Hyde had 
intended for weeks to seek confirmation from Clinton of selected facts 
in the Starr report to spare the committee the time-consuming process 
of deposing witnesses and holding hearings. For its part, the White 
House is content to watch the apparent confusion at the committee 
quietly from the sidelines. Gregory Craig, the White House's coordinator 
of impeachment strategy, said the president's lawyers would respond 
quickly to the committee's requests for information. But Craig and 
other top White House officials had little else to say about the matter 
this week. They have settled on a strategy of portraying the president 
as hard at work on substantive issues like Social Security and health 
care while professing equanimity about the impeachment process on 
Capitol Hill. ``I have nothing to say about it,'' Clinton said Thursday. 
``I want these hearings to be constitutionally fair and expeditious. 
And at the appropriate time , we will say whatever we intend to say.'' 
Privately, however, some White House officials are now expressing 
confidence that the president will emerge from the impeachment proceedings 
with a largely symbolic vote of censure _ at the most. From the beginning, 
Hyde's inquiry, led by former Chicago prosecutor David Schippers, 
has tried to make the best legal case it can against Clinton. Investigators 
have insulated themselves from the political maelstrom swirling around 
them. But impeachment is not playing in a courtroom. It is playing 
in Congress, where the lawmakers who will ultimately decide Clinton's 
fate are sensitive to the shifting political ground in a way that 
Hyde's prosecutors are not. And the conventional wisdom among Democrats 
and a growing number of Republicans, who now believe the polls they 
dismissed before the elections, is that impeachment is a political 
loser. ``The outcome is all but certain: this thing ain't going anywhere,'' 
said Rep. Mark Sanford, a conservative Republican from South Carolina. 
So Hyde is in a box. He wants to end the inquiry as soon as possible. 
``If it goes down, it goes down; Henry has no vested interest in any 
particular outcome,'' said one of Hyde's closest aides. But Hyde feels 
deeply bound to follow the constitutional process to its end, to insure 
the proceedings have some shred of public credibility and to satisfy 
the Republican Party's conservative base. Hyde has also dismissed 
the idea of short-circuiting the process and censuring Clinton. But 
a group of 10 moderate Democrats and Republicans on the committee 
will meet as early as Sunday to discuss alternative punishments. Calling 
Starr to testify Nov. 19 is a gamble for both parties. A Republican 
aide familiar with the proceedings said the reason for summoning Starr 
as a witness, despite the Republican's reluctance two weeks ago, was 
twofold. Some members believe that Starr will help their case. ``Hyde 
feels Starr is a very credible person and much maligned,'' said another 
Republican aide. ``He thinks when the American people see he doesn't 
have horns and a tail, he'll be credible. But it's no slam dunk for 
either side.'' Starr's popularity rating is so low it can only go 
up, and that should take some of the heat off Republicans on the committee. 
Besides, many Republicans thought there was no way around calling 
Starr since he was the one person many Democrats seemed intent on 
calling. Democrats are torn over whether to call for additional witnesses. 
Rep. Martin Meehan of Massachusetts said it would be unthinkable to 
make a judgment without calling major witnesses. But other Democrats, 
who believe impeachment is dead, are advising against it. Why aggravate 
the process? they ask. ``If this is what gets us to closure, then 
why intrude?'' a Democratic aide familiar with the proceedings said. 
Rep. Zoe Lofgren of California said she sees business as usual. She 
is one Democrat who believed that calling Starr was a waste of time 
since he has not been a witness to anything. And if Republicans wind 
up dragging the whole thing into next year, arguing that the president 
was not cooperative, they will be shooting themselves in the foot 
again, she argued. ``The elections have not changed the majority's 
approach at all,'' Ms. Lofgren said. ``The president said it should 
be fair, constitutional and expeditious. Well, all I see is expeditious. 
I don't see fair and constitutional. There are a lot of things that 
are quick. A lynching is quick.'' Democrats are convinced impeachment 
is dead _ definitely in the House and maybe even in the Judiciary 
Committee _ and that Hyde is trying to find a graceful exit. ``They 
are trying to figure out how to fold their tent as quickly as they 
can without looking like they are folding tent,'' a Democratic official 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>