<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0014 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What's on the minds of the people who will design the cars of the 
next century? In projects developed in internships this year, they 
balanced the promise of high technology against a desire for environmental 
awareness and a quest for cars with personal style. Each year, dozens 
of college students majoring in automotive design spend their summers 
sketching and ultimately creating models of vehicles that they think 
represent a direction for the future. The internships give students 
real-world experience in their chosen field, and they offer the automakers 
a look at what young designers are thinking. Vehicles conceived over 
the summer at Chrysler Corp., General Motors Corp. and the Center 
for Creative Studies in Detroit illustrate how different from the 
present the automotive future may be. Many of the student designs 
would use fuels other than gasoline and power sources other than the 
internal-combustion engine. Some were intended to be built of lightweight, 
recyclable materials. A few were planned to travel on ``smart' highway 
systems that don't even require a driver. Despite the environmental 
sensibility exhibited in the designs, the students also stressed the 
qualities of fun and personality. Chrysler took in a half-dozen design 
interns, as well as three engineering students. Each student designer 
was asked to develop a concept vehicle, and the engineering interns 
helped to determine the appropriate powertrains and materials for 
each vehicle. For the first time in the summer design program, students 
built full-scale replicas of futuristic cars, trucks and sport utility 
vehicles. They used computers to sketch their ideas and generate the 
models in three dimensions. And they produced full-size interiors 
separate from the scale-model exteriors _ so someone could sit in 
the mockup and have a sense of what it would be like to drive the 
car. In the past, students were limited to creating miniature clay 
models. Directions for their assignments were simple: ``Do whatever,'' 
said Chrysler's chief designer, Neil Walling. David Miglia, the design 
studio engineering adviser who helped to coordinate the interns' work, 
said the intent was for the students to ``break the paradigm of conventional 
thinking.'' ``Whatever'' resulted in these six distinctive vehicles: 
_ The Jeep Centaur, a cross between a midsized truck and a sport utility 
vehicle that rides high and digs deep with a retractable plow that 
folds into the grille. _ The Cyclos, a sporty car for first-time buyers, 
designed to travel on intelligent highway systems in which vehicles 
respond to centralized commands relayed through devices placed in 
or along the road. The Cyclos would be fitted with exercise machines 
to allow the ``driver'' to have an aerobic workout while commuting. 
_ The Jeep Orienteer, a new type of race car with electric power running 
all four wheels, intended for a new, theoretical electric-car competition 
that the designer called ``Rally Cross 2.'' An adjustable suspension 
would allow the Orienteer to climb steep grades and sand dunes but 
also adapt to highways. _ The Dodge Shield, a personal protection 
vehicle with bulletproof doors and windows and a skeleton-like frame 
that is visible from the outside _ playing out a design trend in which 
mechanical components are exposed, not hidden behind body panels. 
_ The Jeep Terrain, a sporty camping vehicle with a fold-out tent 
in the rear and hot and cold storage compartments in the console, 
aimed at first-time vehicle buyers who are environmentally aware. 
It would run on fuel cells, a promising technology that uses hydrogen 
to generate electricity to power motors without producing emissions. 
Water generated as a byproduct could even be consumed by the campers. 
_ The Ohmega, a sleek, fast commuter car half as wide as the automobiles 
of today, that would position the passenger behind the driver. It 
would travel automated smart highways at speeds of up to 200 miles 
an hour using wheel-mounted electric motors. At General Motors, 30 
students from 18 schools in the United States and Australia created 
vehicles from sketch to scale model. The students worked in eight 
teams _ each including a student designer, sculptor and engineer _ 
with GM designers as mentors. Each team was asked to create a vehicle 
for one of GM's marketing divisions that addressed future trends but 
also fit with the division's brand identity. The students used computers 
to sketch their designs and generate one-third-scale models, as well 
as mock vehicle interiors. The results were the GMC Kodiak, a full-size 
luxury utility vehicle; the Oldsmobile Cygnus, a midsize sport sedan; 
the Saturn Modulus, a reconfigurable commuter car; the Chevrolet E3, 
a new-generation multi-purpose vehicle; the Cadillac Barcelona, a 
six-passenger luxury sedan, and a four-door luxury convertible for 
Buick. At the Center for Creative Studies, one of the nation's top 
schools for automotive design, three interns participated in the 10th 
annual internship program sponsored by the American Iron and Steel 
Institute. The three were assigned to create a concept proposal for 
a vehicle that would appeal to young, first-time car buyers and cost 
less than $16,000. Their proposals included sketches as well as scale 
models. The Luna, based on a Saturn coupe that is popular among first-time 
buyers, had a lunar theme. The front and rear hoods bear lines resembling 
a crescent moon, giving the car personality, a key consideration of 
young buyers. The Photon, a highly efficient performance vehicle, 
would combine the best attributes of hot rods and hatchbacks to recreate 
a retro-style Pontiac. The low-slung profile and stocky back end were 
reminiscent of hot rods and muscle cars of the 1960s. But the hatchback 
would have practical cargo space. The doors are hinged to open like 
a clam shell, allowing easier entry and exit than the hot rods of 
the past. The Halo was a sport utility that caters to drivers who 
actively participate in a variety of sports. The two-door vehicle 
would carry four passengers, four sets of golf clubs and their camping 
gear. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>