<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0459 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who for almost 
five decades has been a fixture of American politics as a presidential 
adviser, scholar and member of Congress, announced Friday that he 
would not run for re-election when his fourth term ends in 2000. ``It 
will have been 24 years,'' Moynihan said in an interview, adding: 
``I've been very happy, and there was a very positive note to this 
last election. It's time to make room for others.'' The departure 
of Moynihan, 71, who has been among the state's most popular elected 
officials for years, is certain to trigger fierce competition in both 
major parties to replace him. By Friday afternoon, a dozen of the 
state's best-known politicians were being mentioned as possible candidates 
for the seat, including Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, a Republican; state 
Comptroller H. Carl McCall, a Democrat, and Andrew Cuomo, the U.S. 
secretary for housing and urban development, also a Democrat. Moynihan's 
announcement comes at moment when New York's congressional delegation 
has been steadily losing seniority and influence in the Republican-controlled 
Congress. In the last two years, six members of the state's 31- member 
House delegation have resigned or announced plans to retire, including 
its three most powerful Republicans: Susan Molinari of Staten Island, 
Bill Paxon of Buffalo and Gerald Solomon of Glens Falls. And on Tuesday, 
Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, the last remaining Republican in the Senate 
from New York, New Jersey or Connecticut, was defeated by Rep. Charles 
Schumer, a nine-term Democrat from Brooklyn. Well before Moynihan 
first made his announcement that he will retire, during an interview 
with Gabe Pressman of WNBC-TV, New York Republicans had been warning 
that the entire metropolitan area would lose much clout in Congress 
if D'Amato was defeated. But Friday, jubilant Democrats argued that 
Tuesday's election, in which their party gained five seats in the 
House, has led them to believe that they can recapture control of 
the House in 2000 and of the Senate in 2002. ``The same general trends 
which elected Chuck Schumer and which produced a complete Democratic 
Senate delegation in the metro area will be working in 2000,'' said 
Sen. Robert Torricelli, D-N.J. Moynihan's announcement prompted a 
flood of news releases from Gov. George Pataki, Giuliani and City 
Council Speaker Peter Vallone praising his 22 years in office and 
bemoaning his decision to leave. Quoting an assessment of Moynihan 
in the Almanac of American Politics, Giuliani called the senator ``the 
best thinker among politicians since Lincoln and the best politician 
among thinkers since Jefferson.'' Moynihan has had a chilly relationship 
with President Clinton, and Friday the task of comment on his tenure 
fell to Vice President Al Gore. Gore issued a statement that said: 
``Daniel Patrick Moynihan's retirement from the Senate will mark a 
true milestone in the history of our nation's public life. Sen. Moynihan 
has been both an extraordinary public servant as well as a visionary 
thinker.'' Moynihan has had one of the most varied careers of any 
member of the Senate. He started as an aide to Gov. W. Averrel Harriman 
in the 1950s, was assistant secretary of labor in the Kennedy and 
Johnson administrations, chief domestic adviser to President Nixon 
and ambassador to the United Nations under President Ford. He has 
also been ambassador to India, taught urban studies at Harvard University 
and written or edited 18 books, most recently ``Secrecy: The American 
Experience.'' In the Senate, he is the ranking Democrat on the powerful 
Finance Committee, where he has played a leading role in shaping tax, 
health care and Social Security policies. He was also the main author 
of a 1991 law that set aside billions of dollars for highway and mass 
transit projects across the country. Although many New York politicians 
had thought it unlikely that Moynihan would seek a precedent-setting 
fifth term _ he had done very little fund raising to prepare for a 
race _ few expected him to declare his plans so soon after the 1998 
elections. Privately, many Democrats said they were relieved that 
he had made the announcement early, thereby giving candidates time 
to raise money and support before the 2000 primaries. There has been 
much grumbling among local Democratic officials in recent years about 
Moynihan's lack of involvement in the party, which had been devastated 
by the elections of Pataki and Giuliani. And there had been some speculation 
in Democratic circles that Moynihan might face a primary in 2000, 
just as Sen. Jacob Javits did in 1980, when D'Amato rose from obscurity 
to defeat him soundly on his way to a first term. But many analysts 
have said it would have been difficult for even a well-known Democrat 
to oust the senior senator, who in almost all of his races has been 
the Democrats' top vote-getter and whose margin of victory in 1988 
set a record for New York statewide elections. Still, Moynihan himself 
said in an interview Friday that he was concerned that other Democratic 
candidates would have had to restrain their campaign preparations 
until he announced his plans, and he said he did not want those contenders 
to endure months of speculation about whether he would run. ``I wanted 
to let the party know that the seat will be open, and all comers are 
welcome,''he said. There have also been many questions about Moynihan's 
health _ at a campaign event with Schumer last month, he had to be 
assisted from the stage when, suffering from the flu, he became dizzy. 
But Friday, the senator said he felt in good shape and that his decision 
was not influence by health concerns. ``I do have a problem, which 
is I have a torn miniscus in my right knee which I incurred in the 
Senate, having followed the instructions of my wife to start exercising 
about a year ago,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>