<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0499 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Justice Department officials are discussing whether to seek the extradition 
of Augusto Pinochet, the former dictator of Chile, in connection with 
four killings that took place under his regime more than 20 years 
ago, Justice Department officials said Friday night. They said the 
move could take place if Pinochet is set free by Britain's House of 
Lords, which is reviewing a request for his extradition on genocide 
charges filed by Spain. Two of the killings under discussion took 
place in Washington in 1976. The victims were a former Chilean foreign 
minister, Orlando Letelier, who had escaped the Pinochet regime and 
worked at a liberal research institute, and his American colleague, 
Ronni Moffitt. They were blown up in a car about a mile from the White 
House, by a time bomb detonated by two members of the Chilean secret 
police. The former chief of the Chilean police, Manuel Contreras, 
went to prison three years ago for the crime. In the two other killings, 
which took place in Chile, the victims were two Americans who disappeared 
in the 1973 coup that swept Pinochet's military government to power. 
They were Charles Horman, a 31-year-old Harvard graduate working in 
Chile as a filmmaker and writer, and Frank Teruggi, who like Horman 
was associated with a left-leaning magazine published in Chile. The 
film ``Missing'' was based on the story of Horman's disappearance. 
Justice Department officials said the move could take place if the 
British House of Lords rejects Spain's request to extradite the 82-year-old 
general, who ruled Chile from 1973 to 1990. ``We are discussing the 
extradition of Pinochet as a backup if he gets immunity in the U.K.,'' 
said a Justice Department official who spoke on condition of anonymity. 
``It's one of the options we are discussing.'' Another Justice Department 
spokesman, Bert Brandenberg, said the issue is under consideration 
at the middle ranks of the Justice Department. The move has not been 
formally discussed or approved by Attorney General Janet Reno or by 
the White House, he said. Suits have been filed against the retired 
general by at least seven European countries. In Spain, Switzerland 
and France, prosecutors have asked for his extradition. Pinochet was 
arrested in Britain on a Spanish warrant three weeks ago. Spain's 
national court ruled last week that he can be tried in Spain on genocide 
charges. Chile's goverment has acknowledged that more than 3,000 people 
died or disappeared as the general, his troops and his secret police 
crushed dissent after taking power. The dead included some foreigners 
_ Spanish, French and American citizens among them. The Pinochet case 
has few precedents. Attempts by nations to bring foreign rulers to 
justice for crimes against humanity are excursions into uncharted 
legal waters. It is uncertain how or where Pinochet could be tried 
if he is released by Britain. The move by the Justice Department ``could 
open up a can of worms'' in secret U.S. government files, a former 
senior U.S. intelligence officer who served in Chile in the 1970s 
said. President Richard Nixon, his national security adviser, Henry 
Kissinger, and the CIA were deeply involved in attempts to overthrow 
the elected president of Chile, Salvador Allende, a Marxist, before 
he was killed in Pinochet's 1973 coup. The CIA was keenly aware of 
the murder and torture committed by the Pinochet regime, said the 
retired intelligence officer, who asked that his name not be published. 
``The torture that they used was completely barbaric,'' he said. ``But 
their army felt that they were in a war and the guys that they captured 
and tortured and killed were guys that would have killed them if they 
could. And Pinochet was the head honcho so he's responsible for that 
war.'' Pinochet cannot be tried in Chile. He has immunity from prosecution 
as a senator-for-life, a job that he created in a constitution that 
he shaped before he ended his 17-year dictatorship and stepped down 
in 1990. A British court has ruled that he has absolute immunity from 
prosecution as a former head of state. A five-judge panel in Britain's 
House of Lords is hearing an appeal. The Chilean secret police organization 
that killed Letelier and Moffet, the directorate of national intelligence, 
worked closely with the CIA in Chile, sharing intelligence on suspected 
communists. It was disbanded in 1977. Thousands of U.S. government 
files on the era remain secret. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>