<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0297 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In late March 1995, just weeks before leaving office, President Francois 
Mitterrand inaugurated the $1.5 billion complex that would house the 
new National Library of France. The last of what are known as the 
``Grands Travaux,'' or great works, that would mark Mitterrand's 14 
years in power, it was also his favorite, so much so that he picked 
the design and rushed its construction in just 19 months. After his 
death in January 1996, the library was given his name in what seemed 
like an appropriate tribute to a man who literally imposed this personal 
whim on the nation. Now, however, Mitterrand's strong identity with 
the library has turned him into an easy target of blame for what is 
fast becoming a major source of embarrassment to the government and 
of irritation to its users. From its very unveiling in late 1989, 
Dominique Perrault's design was questioned. The idea of storing books 
in four glass-faced towers, L-shaped to evoke open books, was ridiculed 
by library experts. Many critics also said that the rectangular complex 
beneath the towers was too sprawling to be practical. But work went 
ahead anyway, on a site overlooking the Seine in eastern Paris. The 
library's troubles, though, were not over. Once construction was completed, 
it took three years for 11 million volumes to be moved from the old 
National Library on the Rue Richelieu, with the public reading area 
finally opened by President Jacques Chirac in December 1996. But the 
entire library went into operation only on Oct. 9 this year, 18 months 
behind schedule, when the area set aside for 2,000 scholars was ready. 
Then, 11 days later, the library was shut down by a strike. In truth, 
public sector strikes have become something of a habit in France of 
late, but this strike went beyond customary demands for higher wages 
to spotlight the deeper crisis gripping what only three years ago 
was being proclaimed as ``the first library of the third millennium.'' 
The 17-day strike of some 800 of the 2,800 staff members was settled 
Friday, although things may not return to normal for several days. 
More seriously, some problems exposed by the strike may take years 
to resolve. In fact, given the design of the building, some complaints 
will be impossible to satisfy, even with an annual budget of $180 
million. ``Unfortunately, it is too late to change the structure of 
the building,'' the library's director-general, Francois Stasse, said 
in a letter to the staff last week. ``Neither can we reduce the distance 
between the towers nor bring daylight into windowless rooms.'' What 
in fact provoked the strike was a massive computer breakdown on Oct. 
13, which forced library workers to hand-carry books to scholars and 
suggested that the rush to open the library last month had forestalled 
proper testing of complex equipment. ``But the breakdown was merely 
the catalyst that revealed much deeper social malaise,'' explained 
one senior staff member who did not join the strike. For the strikers, 
the comfort enjoyed by public visitors and scholars contrasts with 
the poor working conditions of much of the staff, above all those 
involved in finding and delivering books to scholars on the premises. 
The strikers also complained that a flood of temporary workers had 
been hired without adequate training to work with computers. Further, 
many books are too large to use an automated delivery system, requiring 
staffers to carry them through heavy doors and long corridors. The 
striking unions said that, as a first step, the scholars' area should 
be closed on Mondays as well as on Sundays to allow time for special 
training. The government resisted, arguing that every major library 
in the world was open at least six days a week. As part of Friday's 
settlement, however, the scholars' area will be closed all day on 
Monday through Jan. 31 next year and on Monday mornings through June 
30. The public reading area will also close on Mondays, but it is 
open on Sundays. As the library's troubles have spilled into the public 
domain, complaints about the monarchical manner in which Mitterrand 
_ ``the Prince,'' as some newspapers have called him _ gave birth 
to the project have escalated. ``If the library was invented to illustrate 
the archaic and arbitrary nature of the Grands Travaux, it is a success,'' 
Jean-Michel Helvig wrote in a signed editorial in Liberation. But 
the library's architect also has not escaped fresh criticism, although 
Perrault, 44, has been quick to point out that his design followed 
the instructions given to competing architects and that he had no 
responsibility for the computer failures. ``We're like children wanting 
everything now,'' he said. ``A period of adjustment is indispensable.'' 
With French newspapers mischievously reporting the success of the 
new British Library in London as a way of dramatizing the setbacks 
here, Perrault even tried to reassure the French through a bizarre 
form of logic. ``What is great is that we are 15 years ahead of the 
British Library, which the English took 25 years to build,'' he said. 
``That means we still have plenty of time to sort out our problems.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>