<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0411 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Department of Transportation plans to publish a rule next month 
that would establish, for the first time, a uniform system for installing 
child safety seats in cars without using seat belts. The rule, under 
negotiation for years with manufacturers of cars and of child seats, 
will affect new cars and safety seats. Cars would need two attachment 
points where the seat back cushion and the seat bottom cushion meet, 
and one attachment point at the top of the seat. Safety seats would 
have devices that clamp to the attachments. Every year more than 1,000 
children under the age of 5 die in car accidents, although no one 
is sure how many would be saved by better seats; a substantial fraction 
of the children killed were not buckled into the seat or had no seat 
at all. Kathleen Weber, director of the Child Passenger Protection 
Research program at the University of Michigan Medical School, said 
earlier studies showed that use of a properly installed seat cut the 
risk of serious injury or death by 70 percent, and that seats installed 
improperly but still attached to the car cut the risk by 44 percent. 
At Century Products Co., a leading manufacturer of infant and child 
seats, Greg Pinto, a product manager, said, ``There are a certain 
percentage of crashes out there that are plain-old not survivable 
because they're so horrendous, but a universal child restraint anchorage 
will make installation easier, and hopefully more secure.'' The Society 
of Automotive Engineers sets a voluntary standard for seat belts and 
safety seats in an effort to make the two compatible, but not all 
seats on the market follow that standard. The National Highway Transportation 
Safety Administration standard would take years to take full effect 
because the car hardware would be required only on new models, and 
even that would not cover all new models for several years. Child 
seats would be sold with two different attachment systems, so that 
they could be used in new cars or old ones. Spot checks by the police 
show that baby seats now in use, nearly all of which attach to the 
seat belts meant to restrain adults, are often installed improperly. 
Dr. Ricardo Martinez, administrator of the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration, said most were too loose or were hooked up 
without a locking clip, so that the lap belt could play out in an 
accident. ``You're not getting the full protection of the system, 
and that's our concern,'' he said. Some manufacturers have argued 
against the new requirement. Cosco Inc., a manufacturer of low-cost 
baby products, predicted that the higher cost would reduce the sales 
of car seats, and thus their use. But safety experts said that improperly 
installed seats were common and were only about half as effective 
in reducing death or serious injury as properly installed seats. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>