<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0416 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last year, after airplane production at Boeing Co. became so fouled 
up that the aerospace giant was forced to halt assembly of its 747 
and 737 jets for several weeks, the company's top executives began 
holding monthly teleconferences for reporters and Wall Street analysts. 
Month after month, as Boeing chairman Philip Condit, president Harry 
Stonecipher and commercial airplane chief Ronald Woodard were peppered 
with questions, Alan Mulally, the head of the new space and defense 
businesses that generate 40 percent of the company's annual revenue, 
sat by in silence. No one ever asked him a question. ``It was kind 
of like, doesn't anybody care?'' Mulally recalled in a recent interview. 
Now, after stepping into the shoes of Woodard, who was ousted Sept. 
1, Mulally is no longer feeling neglected. He is the point man for 
Boeing's turnaround, the star of what is probably the greatest high-wire 
act in Corporate America today. If he succeeds as president of the 
commercial airplane division, he will very likely be the top candidate 
to follow Condit as chairman and chief executive. If he fails, he 
will just as likely join Woodard in early retirement. Though Boeing's 
fortunes have improved lately, its flagship passenger-airplane division 
is still a mess. Boeing must meet its commitment to churn out a record 
180 jets this quarter, even as many customers are having trouble paying 
for them. The company is one of only two suppliers of large commercial 
airplanes left in the world, but its profit margins on its jets are 
lower than the margins at most personal computer makers. Worst of 
all, its customers are angry. During meetings with Boeing executives 
in October, both the United Parcel Service and United Airlines complained 
about Boeing's poor service. One United executive called the company 
a ``dysfunctional organization.'' And around the same time, in an 
unusual public outburst, Gordon Bethune, the chief executive of Continental 
Airlines and a former Boeing executive who is close to Woodard, said 
the wrong man had been forced out. Mulally has moved quickly, reshuffling 
the executive ranks and introducing a new organization that divides 
the commercial-airplane division into three separate groups: one for 
narrow-body planes, one for wide-body planes and one for customer 
service. Each is now responsible for its own profits and losses, a 
revolutionary concept at Boeing, where even top executives do not 
know exactly how much it costs to make their planes. Mulally said 
his first priority was to deliver all the planes Boeing has promised 
by the end of the year, and to then focus on raising profit margins. 
Unlike the patrician Woodard, 55, who exuded confidence even as Boeing's 
troubles grew and its stock price declined, Mulally, 53, comes across 
as an eager-to-please Boy Scout. After laying out his turnaround strategy 
to a reporter in a long, breathless speech, he stopped suddenly to 
ask: ``What do you think?'' And when questioned about the pressures 
he faces, he responded: ``I'm pleased to serve.'' But those who know 
him say that his earnest exterior hides a steely resolve. He is known 
as a man who can cut through Boeing's notorious bureaucracy and fix 
a problem for a customer or a supplier with a few phone calls. ``His 
reputation among the financial analysts is probably as more of a cheerleader,'' 
said Byron Callan, an analyst at Merrill Lynch. ``But when you talk 
to people who deal with him on a business basis, he is really pretty 
hard-headed.'' Mulally joined Boeing in 1969, a 24-year-old with a 
new master's degree in engineering who packed his belongings into 
his Volkswagen Beetle and drove to Seattle from his home in Kansas. 
He cemented his reputation in the early 1990s working for Condit as 
the chief engineer of the 777, Boeing's newest and most sophisticated 
wide-body jet. It is still his defining moment at Boeing. At a black-tie 
airline-industry dinner in New York in October, Mulally displayed 
the full range of his social skills. Early on, he was spotted chatting 
amiably with Bethune, who told him that his public criticisms had 
been aimed at Boeing, not at Mulally. Later, sitting a table between 
Trans World Airlines chairman Gerald Gitner, and Continental president 
Gregory Brenneman, Mulally hooted and cheered like a rowdy football 
fan for Lord King, the 81-year-old retired chairman of British Airways, 
who was on the dais. It was Lord King who chose the 777 for British 
Airways, forever earning Mulally's gratitude. ``Lord King!'' he repeatedly 
shouted in a hoarse voice over the low din of banquet conversation. 
``Lord King! Lord King!'' As the verbal tribute continued on and off 
for several minutes, Lord King, who is hard of hearing, showed no 
reaction. Asked about the episode, Mulally said, ``He makes my eyes 
water just to think about him.'' In August 1997, after Boeing acquired 
the space division of Rockwell International and McDonnell Douglas 
Corp., Condit put Mulally in charge of consolidating Boeing's much 
enlarged space and defense portfolio. Analysts give Mulally mixed 
reviews for his brief performance running those businesses. But that 
did not prevent Mulally from becoming a sought-after executive. Earlier 
this year, he turned down an offer to become heir apparent to the 
chief executive at the Raytheon Company, choosing to keep his wife 
and five children in Seattle and to bet his future on Boeing. ``It 
was a great opportunity and I was glad to be asked,'' he said. ``I 
just think this is a fabulous franchise.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>