<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0404 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
American Family Publishers, one of the nation's two biggest sweepstakes 
companies, was accused by the Florida attorney general Friday of preying 
on the elderly through deceptive magazine solicitations and by selling 
names of senior citizens and retired people who enter sweepstakes 
to operators of other contests. Advocates for the elderly have long 
contended that magazine sweepstakes and similar contests take advantage 
of senior citizens with deceptive and confusing language. But a civil 
suit filed by the office of Attorney General Robert Butterworth on 
Friday was the first formal accusation of such conduct. The suit claimed 
that the sweepstakes company designs its mailings to appear to be 
official documents and uses two celebrities, Ed McMahon and Dick Clark, 
as spokesmen specifically to take advantage of the elderly and other 
vulnerable people. The company was also accused of double-billing 
customers and using collection agencies to try to collect unenforceable 
debts. The suit disclosed for the first time that American Family 
Publishers is able to identify the age range of sweepstakes entrants 
and sells the names of senior citizens and retirees to other contest 
operators. Often fraudulent telemarketers bilk older consumers out 
of substantial sums after buying their names from mailing-list providers. 
The suit did not link American Family Publishers lists to any fraudulent 
operations. But it said that last year the company advertised for 
sale or rent the names and addresses of 349,542 people age 55 or over 
who had entered sweepstakes and the names and addresses of 118,081 
retirees who had entered. In addition to preying upon the elderly, 
the solicitations are designed to prevent average consumers from making 
reasonable purchasing decisions, and the average consumer has been 
and continues to be deceived by the deceptive solicitations and fraudulent 
billing practices, said the suit. The accusations were contained in 
an amended complaint filed in state court in Tampa. The complaint 
expanded charges of deceptive practices brought against the company 
last year. American Family Publishers settled similar suits brought 
by other states, but has been unable to negotiate an agreement with 
Florida. In addition to American Family Publishers, the complaint 
added new defendants, including Time-Warner, the world's largest entertainment 
company and part-owner of the sweepstakes company, and Time Inc. Susan 
Caughman, chairman of American Family Publishers' parent company, 
and Timothy Adams, president of Time Customer Services, which handles 
billing, were also named as defendants. Jeanne Meyer, a spokeswoman 
for American Family Publisher's, said the suit was unfounded and that 
the company never targets elderly consumers. ``AFP is a mass marketer 
and the charges regarding the elderly are not true,'' Ms. Meyer said. 
``The attorney general has spent months trying to prove something 
that is not true.'' She also said that the company does not sell lists 
of people who enter contests, selling only the names of people who 
do not order magazines. Peter Costiglio, spokesman for Time-Warner 
and its subsidiaries, said the suit was unreasonable and unwarranted. 
``It appears to be an action to intimidate and harm reputations,'' 
Costiglio said. ``It is pure and simple an unreasonable exercise of 
the attorney general's power.'' About one third of all new magazine 
subscriptions are generated through sweepstakes, which offer multimillion 
dollar prizes to lure people into buying magazines. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>