<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0564 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who for almost 
five decades has been a fixture of American politics as a presidential 
adviser, scholar and member of Congress, announced Friday that he 
would not run for re-election when his fourth term ends in 2000. ``It 
will have been 24 years,'' Moynihan said in an interview, adding: 
``I've been very happy, and there was a very positive note to this 
last election. It's time to make room for others.'' The departure 
of Moynihan, 71, who has been among the state's most popular elected 
officials for years, is certain to trigger fierce competition in both 
major parties to replace him. By Friday afternoon, a dozen of the 
state's best-known politicians were being mentioned as possible candidates 
for the seat, including New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, a Republican, 
and Democrats H. Carl McCall, the state comptroller; Andrew Cuomo, 
the U.S. secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and Donna Shalala, 
the U.S. secretary of Health and Human Services. Moynihan's announcement 
comes at moment when New York's congressional delegation has been 
steadily losing seniority and influence in the Republican-controlled 
Congress. In the last two years, six members of the state's 31- member 
House delegation have resigned or announced plans to retire, including 
its three most powerful Republicans: Susan Molinari of Staten Island, 
Bill Paxon of Buffalo and Gerald Solomon of Glens Falls. And on Tuesday, 
Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, the last remaining Republican in the Senate 
from the metropolitan region of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, 
was defeated by Rep. Charles Schumer, a nine-term Democrat from Brooklyn. 
Well before Moynihan first made his announcement that he would retire, 
during an interview with Gabe Pressman of WNBC-TV in New York, New 
York Republicans had been warning that the entire metropolitan area 
would lose much clout in Congress if D'Amato was defeated. But Friday, 
jubilant Democrats argued that Tuesday's election, in which their 
party gained five seats in the House, had led them to believe that 
they could recapture control of the House in 2000 and of the Senate 
in 2002. ``The same general trends which elected Chuck Schumer and 
which produced a complete Democratic Senate delegation in the metro 
area will be working in 2000,'' said Sen. Robert Torricelli, D-N.J. 
Moynihan's announcement prompted a flood of news releases from Gov. 
George Pataki, Giuliani and New York City Council Speaker Peter Vallone 
praising his 22 years in office and bemoaning his decision to leave. 
Quoting an assessment of Moynihan in the Almanac of American Politics, 
Giuliani called the senator ``the best thinker among politicians since 
Lincoln and the best politician among thinkers since Jefferson.'' 
Moynihan has had a chilly relationship with President Clinton, and 
Friday the task of comment on his tenure fell to Vice President Al 
Gore. Gore issued a statement that said: ``Daniel Patrick Moynihan's 
retirement from the Senate will mark a true milestone in the history 
of our nation's public life. Sen. Moynihan has been both an extraordinary 
public servant as well as a visionary thinker.'' Moynihan has had 
one of the most varied careers of any member of the Senate. He started 
as an aide to Gov. W. Averell Harriman in the 1950s, was assistant 
secretary of labor in the Kennedy and Johnson administrations, chief 
domestic adviser to President Nixon and chief representative to the 
United Nations under President Ford. He has also been ambassador to 
India, taught urban studies at Harvard University and written or edited 
18 books. In the Senate, he is the ranking Democrat on the powerful 
Finance Committee, where he has played a leading role in shaping tax, 
health care and Social Security policies. He was also the main author 
of a 1991 law that set aside billions of dollars for highway and mass 
transit projects across the country. But arguably Moynihan's impact 
was greater as a writer and thinker than as a legislator. Known for 
his tweed jackets, knit ties and untamed shock of white hair, he often 
expounded on the floor of the Senate and to reporters on issues as 
far-ranging as race relations, welfare policy, nuclear arms proliferation, 
relations between India and Pakistan and the history of architecture. 
In ``Beyond the Melting Pot,'' which he wrote with Nathan Glazer in 
1963, Moynihan analyzed the impact of ethnic rivalries on American 
politics. In a 1965 report, he warned about the growth of single-parent 
families. And in his most recent book, ``Secrecy: The American Experience,'' 
he warns against the dangers of government secrecy. In the interview 
with Pressman, Moynihan said his wife and closest political adviser, 
Elizabeth, had ``made up our mind four years ago'' about not running. 
``I'll have served four terms in the Senate, just as dear Jack Javits 
had done,'' he said, adding parenthetically, ``I wished he had let 
it stay at that.'' Moynihan noted in the interview that he had read 
a news article last week in which McCall, the state comptroller, mused 
about running for the Senate in 2000. Looking into the camera, Moynihan 
said, ``This is to say, Carl, I won't be in that primary _ I hope 
you are.'' Noting that Sen. Carol Moseley-Braun, D-Ill., the Senate's 
only black member, was defeated on Tuesday, Moynihan said that McCall 
``may decide that he owes it to his community'' to run. ``I hope he 
does,'' he continued. ``It's not right that the U.S. Senate should 
be all white.'' Although many New York politicians had thought it 
unlikely that Moynihan would seek a precedent-setting fifth term _ 
he had done very little fund raising to prepare for a race _ few expected 
him to declare his plans so soon after the 1998 elections. Privately, 
many Democrats said they were relieved that he had made the announcement 
early, thereby giving candidates time to raise money and support before 
the 2000 primaries. There has been much grumbling among local Democratic 
officials in recent years about Moynihan's lack of involvement in 
the party, which had been devastated by the elections of Pataki and 
Giuliani. And there had been some speculation in Democratic circles 
that Moynihan might face a primary in 2000, just as Sen. Jacob Javits 
did in 1980, when D'Amato rose from obscurity to defeat him soundly 
on his way to a first term. But many analysts have said it would be 
difficult for even a well-known Democrat to oust the senior senator, 
who in almost all of his races has been the Democrats' top vote-getter 
and whose margin of victory in 1988 set a record for New York statewide 
elections. Still, Moynihan himself said in an interview Friday that 
he was concerned that other Democratic candidates would have had to 
restrain their campaign preparations until he announced his plans, 
and he said he did not want those contenders to endure months of speculation 
about whether he would run. ``I wanted to let the party know that 
the seat will be open, and all comers are welcome,'' he said. There 
have also been many questions about Moynihan's health. At a campaign 
event with Schumer last month, he had to be assisted from the stage 
when, suffering from the flu, he became dizzy. But on Friday the senator 
said he felt good, and that his decision was not influenced by health 
concerns. ``I do have a problem, which is I have a torn miniscus in 
my right knee which I incurred in the Senate, having followed the 
instructions of my wife to start exercising about a year ago,'' he 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>