<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0501 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is Churchill Downs, but somehow the place has a different feel 
and texture this week. Not so light and effervescent, as when it is 
host to the event for which it is so widely known _ the Kentucky Derby. 
This is a different atmosphere. There is the familiar early morning 
buzz of activity as grooms, trainers and practice riders move through 
the bone-chilling dawn air in brisk, syncopated rhythms, getting the 
horses ready, moving them out, bringing them back in. But what you 
feel is not excitement but tightly wound tension, the tension of a 
truly great competition. Instead of the Derby, it is the 15th Breeders' 
Cup _ in particular, the mile-and-a-quarter Classic, which is being 
portrayed as one of the great horse races of all time. The Derby attracts 
a crowd of about 140,000 on the first Saturday in May; the seven races 
in this Saturday's Breeders' Cup will draw half that many. A large 
number of those who attend the Derby are not horse racing fans but 
tourists, or students who crowd the infield, or novices drawn by the 
lure of an event that has run nonstop for 123 years. The Derby is 
a party. The Breeders' Cup, especially this one, is not. It's a celebration 
of racing at its finest, but no party. The mood, like the weather, 
is crisp, clear and highly focused. ``This is like the races of races,'' 
said the trainer Patrick Byrne, who will have a significant role in 
Saturday's drama. ``This is more about the industry, the breeders, 
the core racing fans.'' The featured event Saturday afternoon is a 
long-awaited meeting between Skip Away, the 1997 Classic winner and 
the loser of only one race this year, and Silver Charm, the 1997 Kentucky 
Derby and Preakness winner and the 1998 winner of the Dubai Cup. They're 
competing in a field of 10 horses that is being called one of the 
strongest ever assembled. The Breeders' Cup Classic hasn't seen a 
drumroll like this since Sunday Silence edged Easy Goer in 1989. The 
Classic had one other highly anticipated duel, and it also lived up 
to expectations. In 1987, Ferdinand and Alysheba staged the first 
race between two Kentucky Derby winners. Ferdinand, a year older than 
Alysheba, beat him by a nose. Much has been made over the financial 
implications of the race: if Skip Away finishes third or better, he 
overtakes Cigar and becomes the first race horse to earn $10 million. 
Earlier in the week, R.D. Hubbard became the first owner to pay an 
$800,000 fee for the right to run a horse in a race when he supplemented 
Gentlemen into the Classic. Frankly, I'm not intrigued by the financial 
implications of this great race. In fact, I'm tired of financial implications 
as a marker of an athlete's value _ be they human or be they horse. 
The most compelling dimension of this Breeders' Cup is that, in the 
Classic, it is providing one of the great showdowns in racing history: 
Skip Away; Silver Charm; Gentlemen, with his 13 victories in 23 career 
starts; Awesome Again, a Byrne horse who is undefeated in five starts 
this year; Touch Gold, Byrne's other horse in the race and the winner 
of the Belmont Stakes a year ago. We're looking at the equivalent 
of undefeated teams meeting in the Super Bowl, or the perfect-game 
pitcher facing the champion home run hitter. This is one of those 
days _ too rare in horse racing, boxing and track and field _ when 
the best meets the best. The low-key Byrne is right in the middle 
of it. Last year at this time he was reveling in the glow of seeing 
his 2-year-old horse, Favorite Trick, win the Breeders' Cup Juvenile, 
a victory that clinched Horse of the Year honors for the horse and 
Trainer of the Year honors for Byrne. But Byrne had to abandon Favorite 
Trick when he signed a five-year contract to become the trainer for 
Frank Stronach. Friday afternoon, Byrne admitted that he was feeling 
the pressure, not simply of having two horses in the Classic, but 
of the weight of having been a king and trying to do it again. ``Once 
you've hit the big times and you start to produce these major stakes 
winners, you're expected to turn out stakes winners,'' he said. ``We 
have four running tomorrow and expect to have a good shot in the Classic 
and the Sprint,'' he added. But, good chance or not, that tension 
was there, and Byrne acknowledged it, attributing it to the uncertainty 
of the seven races and the knowledge that in a race of the Classic's 
magnitude, with an unprecedented field, even the very best effort 
might not be enough. ``That's the thing about horse racing,'' he said, 
walking back to his stable. ``Anything can happen. You just never 
know.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>