<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0405 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The burning question for the Kremlin these days is not the future 
of capitalism, the lack of a national idea or NATO's creep to the 
East. It is about food. With winter fast approaching, this nation 
is locked in a primordial struggle to feed its citizens and prevent 
them from freezing. It is a race against time. Food reserves are dwindling. 
Remote cities have been left without heat. And the massive logistical 
task of moving grain, meat and fuel is well behind schedule. It is 
a mark of Russia's anxiety that Prime Minister Yevgeni Primakov's 
aides put aside their pride on Friday and concluded an agreement to 
buy $625 million worth of grain, meat, milk, soybeans and other food 
assistance. According to Christopher Goldthwait, the senior U.S. Agriculture 
Department official who helped negotiate the new food accord, without 
assistance, the Russians would run out of wheat before their next 
harvest. ``We project they will run short some time in the month of 
July,'' Goldthwait said in an interview. Even now Russia is plagued 
by regional shortages. Russia's agriculture ministry has reported 
shortfalls in 22 of the nation's 89 regions. Russia's disastrous harvest 
_ the worst in 45 years _ is just part of the reason. The tendency 
of the nation's regions to go their own way, lax government management 
and Russia's financial crisis have turned a difficult situation into 
an increasingly desperate one. Many grain producing regions have been 
hoarding their supply. The collapse of the banking system and fuel 
shortages have also delayed the sale and distribution of what food 
is available to regions that do not produce their own grain. ``Distribution 
is a big problem,'' said Victor Lishchenko, a leading agricultural 
specialist. ``The nation is vast and many local governors practically 
do not let the grain out of their borders.'' Quantity is not the only 
problem. The quality of Russia's store of grain is uneven, diminishing 
its value for making bread or raising livestock. The decline in domestic 
food production has been aggravated by a sharp decline in imports, 
another consequence of the nation's plummeting currency. Before its 
financial crisis, Russia used to import more than 40 percent of its 
food. But imports have fallen to a fraction of that, and the foreign 
food that is being shipped is being sold at skyrocketing prices. Russia's 
needy have been hit hard. Relief groups are besieged with reports 
of orphanages that have five rubles a day (about 30 cents) per child 
to buy food and prisons that spend even less on their inmates. ``We 
think the situation is critical,'' said Margarita Plonikova, Moscow 
representative of the International Federation of the Red Cross and 
Red Crescent Societies. Even ordinary Russians have felt the pinch. 
Even before the financial crisis, the annual consumption of meat had 
declined to about 95 pounds a person, less than half of American levels. 
And since the crisis, Russia's pasta factories have been working overtime, 
a sign that Russians are changing their diet. Vasily Shishkaryov, 
a worker at Moscow's Zil truck factory, said that many of his fellow 
workers had all but given up eating meat, turning to potatoes and 
vegetables from garden plots. Food is not the only problem. The Russian 
government is also struggling to keep its citizens supplied with heat 
and power. Russia's Fuel and Energy ministry said this week that it 
had only received 3 percent of the money it was due to buy fuel for 
the nation's northern territories. As the food crisis has grown, the 
Kremlin has begrudgingly recognized the seriousness of the situation. 
At first, it continued to allow farmers in the south of the country 
to export their grain. (Russian grain exports are to be limited under 
the new American-Russian food accord.) Then Primakov aides said that 
the nation did not need food aid, suggesting that talk about food 
assistance was simply a Western plot to dump an agricultural surplus 
on Russia. But as the Russians re-examined their stocks and confronted 
the difficulty of distributing food supplies, they began to document 
their shortfalls for their U.S. counterparts. The Russians even urged 
that the first of the U.S. shipments arrive before the end of the 
year. Under the accord reached Friday, the United States will supply 
3.1 million metric tons of food, including 1.5 million tons of wheat, 
which is being provided for free. Another 1.5 million tons of feed 
grain, meat, dry milk, soybeans. rice, corn and other goods is being 
purchased by the Russians with the help of a 20-year loan at a nominal 
interest rate. The United States is also providing 100,000 tons of 
food to private relief groups for distribution to Russia's needy. 
The Russians intend to sell much of the food at home at market rates. 
With corruption rampant in Russia, the United States wants to prevent 
Russian businessmen from skimming off the profits. The Americans rejected 
the Russians' insistence that the revenue be used to support their 
agricultural sectors. Instead, the Russians are obliged to use the 
proceeds to pay pensions and fund other social programs. The United 
States is footing the $260 million bill for sending the different 
shipments for Russia. Relief organizations, meanwhile, are mounting 
their own campaigns to buy and distribute food. Still, U.S. officials 
said that the food aid may not be sufficient and may need to be increased. 
``This is a question that we have left open,'' Goldthwait said. ``We 
will continue to assess whether or not there is a need for additional 
commodities.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>