<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981106.0165 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Consider the option offered to many working parents in the brave new 
``flexible'' workplace: the right to earn a part-time salary for the 
privilege of leaving promptly at the end of a full day. If that sounds 
like a bad bargain, there are deeper compromises to contemplate in 
today's corporate world of flex time, teams and short-term projects, 
according to Richard Sennett. Sennett's provocative, and often persuasive, 
new book, ``The Corrosion of Character: The Personal Consequences 
of Work in the New Capitalism'' (W.W. Norton, $23.95), argues that 
for employees, the re-engineered, routine-bashing workplace is just 
as bad as the rigid bureaucracy it is replacing. Maybe worse. All 
this flexibility, says the writer, a sociologist at New York University, 
may help feed the frantic product reinvention and short-term gains 
that our economy now demands. But it is not about personal power or 
freedom, as advertised. It's just another form of capitalist control: 
a confusing regime that erodes employees' sense of work, place and 
self. To be nimble enough to succeed, he argues, employees are bending 
themselves too far. Human character cannot develop in a culture that 
worships risk, uncertainty and a plug-in work force, he says. Character 
is formed from long-term mutual commitments _ from sustained work, 
from a sense of purpose and, yes, even from steady routine. Sennett, 
who with Jonathan Cobb wrote ``The Hidden Injuries of Class'' in 1972, 
has been watching workers for a while. And he stresses that he is 
not calling for a return to the days of Draconian work rules and the 
endless repetition of the same few, simple tasks. Instead, he wants 
Americans to retrieve some of the values that stood alongside (or 
stood up to) the old, rigid way of management. His, of course, is 
a tricky business, and ``The Corrosion of Character'' doesn't always 
pull it off. There's a whiff of nostalgia here, despite the author's 
protestations. But Sennett's argument, which weaves the work of Denis 
Diderot, Joseph Schumpeter and Daniel Bell into everyday life, is 
illuminating. The book begins with the author's accidental airport 
encounter with a man he calls Rico, the son of a janitor he interviewed 
years ago for ``The Hidden Injuries of Class.'' Rico is a successful 
management consultant _ safe, it seems, from the kind of dull job 
his father held and from a life measured in small home improvements 
and savings. But independent consulting is unsatisfying, confesses 
Rico, who was downsized out of an engineering position. He is weary 
of drumming up clients, tired of pleasing them to the point of distorting 
his MBA training, unsettled by his four relocations. His last move, 
he says, was for his wife's job, but now she, too, is disappointed. 
She is a manager, but feels she has little control: Some of her staff 
work at the office, some at home and some a thousand miles away, where 
they are reachable only by computer. Because of her company's strict 
guidelines on cybersupervising, her flexible workplace affords her 
no flexibility. Rico also worries that his children have no ``ethical 
discipline.'' They take his success for granted, he says, and seem 
to be headed into Mall Rat mode. The couple's career paths are too 
fragmented, he adds, to provide life lessons about sustained endeavors, 
patience or loyalty. ``The Corrosion of Character'' introduces us 
to other new-economy workers as well. The author returns to a Boston 
bakery visited for his earlier book and finds its current employees 
_ in sharp contrast to their predecessors _ to be indifferent to their 
work. Their baking, which is now computer-supervised, is determined 
by the temporary daily needs of their local market niche: they make 
mounds of bagels one day, stacks of French bread the next. Sennett, 
who seems to be simply cranky about the changes at a once-familiar 
shop, doesn't make much of a case here. The story of Rose, a smart 
manager-bartender at the author's favorite New York watering hole, 
proves more compelling. She follows the siren song of risk-taking 
and accepts a job at an ad agency. But she feels invisible working 
on a team that is always collectively blameless and that values soft 
communication skills over concrete ideas. Employees in the new economy 
are being cheated, the author concludes. They lack a usable work ethic, 
because there is little long-term planning in a work culture that 
thrives on uncertainty and denies time's ``trajectory'' into the future. 
They lack social bonds based on mutual trust because they're encouraged 
to hop from project to project. And they lack a respect for sustained 
routine. ``Today we stand on a historical divide on the issue of routine,'' 
the author says, after a bracing dip into the differing 18th-century 
views of Diderot (it's dignified and necessary) and Adam Smith (it's 
numbing). In our own century, the author notes, routine, or rather 
escape from it, has been an ``arena of empowerment'' for American 
labor as it fought for fundamental changes in the way work is done. 
Are we sure, Sennett asks, that routine is inherently demeaning? That 
long-term commitments are stagnating? That flexibility is the same 
thing as freedom? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>