<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981106.2000.2999 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mullins. A primitive tribe that lives in India's Andaman Islands is 
endangered perhaps by home cooking. Nearly 200 Jiwara tribes people, 
almost half the population, have left their jungle homes and moved 
toward the township near the island's administrative center. The lure 
may be prepared food. For centuries, the Jiwaras have lived on coconuts 
and raw meat, but in recent months, they've shown a taste for the 
cooked food left behind by Indian anthropologists. Researcher Ray 
Chadori says that the Indian government's interest in civilizing the 
Jiwaras represents an official change of heart. Earlier, the government 
of India immediately after the country's independence, they decided 
to leave these tribal people alone as they were pretty hostile to 
the modern civilization. But later on, it was decided by the government 
of India, as well as by the anthropologists in the country, that if 
these people were left alone, they could be really on the verge of 
extinction, particularly because of the lack of modern medication 
and modern food items, and many other facilities available through 
the advancement of science and technology. Therefore, it was decided 
later on, particularly since the 1980s, which is more than one decade 
now, that these people they should be involved in the modern civilzational 
process, and the government should try and anthropologists should 
try to study them. And not only that, there should be effort, serious 
efforts to neutralize their hostilities. I would think that there 
is something that would be disturbing in all of this for many people. 
They are losing basically a way of life that's been in existence since 
the stone age, and it's hard to believe that they would just be approaching 
extinction at this point if they have survived so long without the 
amenities of the modern age. Exactly. In fact, you see that the initiative 
taken by the anthropologists must be praised just for the sake of 
survival of one of the most primitive tribes in India. But at the 
same time, we have to take note of the situation that these people, 
they were never familiar with modern kind of food items and particularly 
the cooked food. So now when they have developed some kind of a taste 
of these food items, and they have not learned that process of cooking 
because the anthropologists and other experts, concerned experts, 
they could not really train them up for this cooking method. So now 
they are forgetting perhaps their traditional method of having food 
and gathering and hunting. And under the circumstances, it might lead 
to a real crisis for them. Do you suspect that there are other issues 
at hand here that in actually, these people could have survived on 
the kind of diet that they've survived on for thousands of years now, 
and also that there is another interest at play here, and that's the 
timber industry, that this is an area desirable for logging? And so 
maybe there was a profit motive in trying to get some of these people 
anyway off their land. Yeah, that could be one of the reasons because 
nowadays when you're talk in terms of economic development and it 
is also very important in terms of the Anikawa Islands, it is one 
of the areas in this Bay of Bengal region. So in that context, it 
could be that some of the people interested in the timber industry, 
they would be rather happy to just bring these people out of the jungle 
and rather creating some kind of scarcity of food of the traditional 
food for the Jawiras. But at the same time, I would like to that when 
the anthropologists, they tried to just befriend, these - one of the 
primitive tribes in India, they had to be more cautious in the sense 
that, well, modern food items can really bring them closer to modern 
civilization. But if they cannot learn the process of cooking, if 
they cannot be trained in that process, it is likely to endanger these 
rare species of human beings. And do you feel as though we are seeing 
the possible end of this primitive civilization? I think that if this 
crisis goes on and if they cannot adjust themselves with modern civilization 
and modern means of livelihood, and at the same time they tend to 
forget their traditional means of livelihood, it could be the end 
for them. Ray Chadori is a political scientist speaking to us from 
Calcutta. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>