<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981106.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There are some people, President Clinton said today, who have a big 
stake in the continuing misery and hatred in the Middle East. The 
president was reacting to a car bomb attack this morning which is 
holding up an accord he helped negotiate between Israel and the Palestinians. 
The explosion killed the two attackers and injured 21 other people 
at Jerusalem's Mahaneyohuda Market. Police say the suicide bombers 
belonged to the Islamic militant group, Hamas, which has killed scores 
of Israelis in similar attacks. THE WORLD's Richard Myron begins our 
coverage with a report from the scene. It was a familiar scene here 
in Jerusalem. Police evacuated people away from a bomb site and frightened 
shoppers running for cover. This morning, two charred bodies lay alongside 
the wreckage of a red car opposite a bakery at the entrance to the 
market. The bodies were those of the bombers who died during the explosion. 
Police say casualties could have been huge, but a small preliminary 
blast warned people to flee before the main detonation. Within a couple 
of hours, the debris and the bodies had been cleared away allowing 
the pre-Sabbath shoppers to resume their business. Because of crazy 
Arabs, I won't do my shopping on Friday. I will change my life. I'm 
not a friend here. And that we want to show that what happens happens 
and we go on. The market's been a target before. Fifteen people were 
killed in a suicide bombing here last year. The mayor of Jerusalem, 
Ahad Almed, said the incident proved that the Palestinian authority 
had to act more strongly against Islamic militants. What concerns 
me that the leader of Hamas, Sheik Yassim, who made a public announcement 
that he will command his people to do it, is still not tried, convicted, 
and punished by the Palestinian authorities. The bombing interrupted 
the deliberations of the Israeli Cabinet on the Wye Plantation land-for-security 
accord signed last month at the White House. The Cabinet secretary 
said the group would meet again when the Palestinian authority takes 
what he called intensive steps for an all-out war against the terrorist 
groups. A few hours later, the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, flew 
into the West Bank town of Romalla to meet with his Cabinet. Arafat's 
aides condemn the bombing and urge the Israeli prime minister to proceed 
with the ratification of the agreement. Sierra Buziad, a member of 
the Palestinian Legislative Council, says that the peace process shouldn't 
be held ransom by this morning's attack. We know all of us, we know 
that there are enemies for peace, and there are people who will try 
to stop the peace process, and we should not surrender to them. And 
if the Israeli government decide to stop the implementation, that 
simply surrendering to fanatics and extremists and terrorists. And 
they should not do that. There was some hope that the agreement reached 
at Wye Plantation would reinvigorate the peace process, but today's 
attack and the one last week in the Gaza Strip underlies the fragility 
of relations between the two sides and implied that the early hopes 
may be inflated. For THE WORLD, this is Richard Myron in Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>