<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981106.2000.1258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is Friday, the day we ask foreign journalists based in Washington 
D.C. how they're covering the week's top news stories. Today, we've 
invited Jose Lopez, the Washington correspondent for "Notumex,", a 
Mexican news agency, and Debra MacGregor, Washington correspondent 
for the "Southern News of Canada." Topping this week's American news, 
of course, were the national elections. Why don't we start off with 
you first, Jose. How did you capture this week's vote in your headlines. 
U.S. elections are seen as a vote of confidence on Bill Clinton. The 
main headline that ran in Canadian newspapers was "Clinton the Real 
Winner in the '98 Vote." But also, Canadians were very interested 
to see the general shift towards the center in American politics. 
And the sort of the sub headline was "Hard Line Republicans Left to 
Question Tactics as Democrats Beat Odds." And also, a lot of trends 
in Canadian politics tend to lag the U.S. So I think Canadians are 
very interested in that broad sort of mandate and message that came 
from these elections. Were there aspects of this election that you 
think were particularly revealing about American society that emerged? 
Yes. To some extent, you know, it was for many of us striking to find 
out that, you know as the elections were coming, there was this switch 
towards, you know, Democrats, because of the Clinton scandals. In 
many our countries, there was this perception the Lewinsky matter 
would be a major factor in U.S. elections. And now the fact that a 
number of voters said the Clinton/Lewinsky matter was not really a 
big factor when they were casting their votes was something very revealing 
for us, because, you know, being this - regarded as puritanic society, 
we were expecting the could also come a marriage like, a moral marriage 
message about what the president was doing. What we got was completely 
different. So in Mexico, there was a big interest to find out that 
it didn't play a significant role as it was expected, and that even 
though some Democrats benefited from that. How are you, Jose, as a 
journalist, making the link between the results of the election and 
perhaps the lack of the Lewinsky factor and the progress toward impeaching 
the president? Oh, absolutely. We made a big story yesterday, of course, 
about the scaling back of the investigation, and everything was linked 
to the Lewinsky matter no matter what exit polls says and no matter 
what politicians say and no matter what the White House position is. 
There is a complete link about what happened, the message of the electorate 
towards the Lewinsky matter, the fact that they are angry, and the 
fact that they are making a big issue impeachment and the politicians 
have not taken into account the real problems, the Social Security 
issues, education issues. And of course it's something we're going 
to be moving also this week. This week, we will make an analysis about 
how this will play a role in, you know, defining or shaping the congressional 
leadership for the next legislature. And Debra MacGregor, what about 
for your Canadian readers? Canadians generally tend to like U.S. presidents, 
and I think there's been a lot of support for Bill Clinton, you know, 
and it doesn't depend on the party. They liked Ronald Reagan, too. 
So I think that generally, we will continue to write a lot about this 
process. But we're writing to an audience that is probably very relieved 
that the United States isn't going to lose its president over this 
matter. One other point before we leave the issue of the elections, 
one of the ballot questions, of course, dealt with marijuana, and 
that was a particularly interesting issue for many Mexicans. True, 
it was. As you know, one of the most dramatic episodes of the relationship 
between the U.S. and Mexico, and of course, with other Latin American 
countries is the annual certification process where the U.S. makes 
a judgment as to which countries are cooperating or not. And, of course, 
the fact that now one-fifth of the U.S. population live in the states 
that authorize the use of marijuana for legal purposes gives ammunition 
to critics of the certification process because this is regarded as 
a hypocritical society that makes a judgment on those countries which 
supply the drugs when there is an increasing tolerance in this society 
to consume them then, of course, the U.S. being the most important 
consumer of illegal drugs in the world. Were there any other particular 
American stories that are setting off your radar? Well, I think we've 
all been so focused on Washington that it's even hard to get your 
head up to see them. But I think looking ahead, one of the things 
that comes out of this election is who will be running in the presidential 
race in 2000. And if we look down the road a little bit, I think there 
will be a lot of interest now in hearing more about, you know, the 
Bush brothers or some of the other people that are now going to come 
forward on the Democrat side. Is Al Gore going to be a candidate and 
are we going to see these people run? So I think there will be, you 
know - It's almost as if the presidential campaign started Wednesday 
morning, and I think, you know, that's kind of where the kinds of 
things that we'll be looking at in the next while. Would you say the 
same for you, Jose Lopez? Yes, I agree with her except for one thing. 
We are covering, you know, for Mexican and Latin American readers 
the problems with Mitch, the Hurricane Mitch are very important. So 
actually, the coverage of Hurricane Mitch displaced the coverage of 
U.S. elections. We were amazed to find out that we were not very well 
published because, you know, a lot of the readership was paying attention 
to the dismal problems that were causing Mitch. So one of the things 
we will be covering is what kind of help is being given to Central 
America from the U.S., from the organizations in the near future. 
Jose Lopez is the Washington correspondent for "Notumex," the Mexican 
news agency. Debra MacGregor is the Washington correspondent for the 
"Southern News of Canada." Nice to talk to you once again. Thank you. 
Nice to talk to you, Lisa. Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>