<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981106.2000.2343 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The German/Jamaican society is celebrating Octoberfest tonight. What's 
wrong with this picture? Well, first of all, it's the wrong month 
for Octoberfest, but that can be easily accounted for. Hurricane Mitch 
drenched last week's scheduled festivities. But the very notion of 
Germans celebrating Octoberfest in Jamaica does require further explanation. 
Enter THE WORLD's Boris Maksimov. In the heart of Kingston, Jamaica, 
quite goodly number of people are drinking, chatting, and basically 
enjoying themselves, a pretty normal thing to happen on a Friday night, 
except for the small fact that this is the gathering of the German/Jamaican 
society. A German flag is hanging on the wall right next to the schedule 
of German language classes. Beer is flowing freely and most people 
are gathered around the main attraction: fresh fish being barbecued. 
What on earth is going on? Here in the world capital of reggae,, and 
rum, people are coming together in the name of things German. Why? 
Andre Shorlimmer, the vice president of the German/Jamaican society. 
It's a good question. I think it's more about socializing than anything 
apart from the serious thing that we do with the German classes, bringing 
Germans and Jamaicans together. And as you can see here, I think we 
have more Jamaicans here than Germans. Quite a large number of them 
speak German. But, you know, it's a nice thing, it's a get together. 
True, most people devouring the unbelievably tasty fish are Jamaicans 
with a sprinkling of expatriate Germans. But the German/Jamaican collection 
goes back, way back to the beginning of the last century. In the western 
part of Jamaica, in the parish of Westmoreland up in the mountains 
sits a place called Seifort Town. The moment you roll into Seifort 
town, you feel that something is different. Suddenly, there's a whiff 
of Central Europe in the air. Houses are built differently here with 
wooden lattice work bordering the roofs like in any self-respecting 
village from the Rhine to the Volga. The roofs are steeper than elsewhere 
in Jamaica. The local bakery proudly announces the name of the owner, 
Miss Schultz. In this Protestant country, another unexpected site 
greets you, the largest church in town is Catholic. Father Paul is 
the priest here, and he has studied local history closely. After the 
abolishment of slave trade, Lord Seifort was given a piece of land 
here in this part of Jamaica for the intention of planting coffee 
and other crops. The British lord quickly discovered that he needed 
fresh manpower, since local Jamaicans didn't want to work in the fields. 
So he did the next best thing: went to Saxony in Germany and recruited 
a few hundred Germans to come to Jamaica to settle his land in the 
hills. But then... When they came here, they could not see what they 
are promised but they are forced to stay because they did not come 
with enough cash to go back. So they are forced by the situation to 
stay, and they decided to live with the indigenous and they have marriage 
indigenous people, too, so... So since 1835, Germans have been quietly 
living and farming in this part of Jamaica. Six or more generations 
passed, a lot of German/Jamaicans left the country to go to America 
or Canada. A lot intermarried with black Jamaicans. But when you wonder 
about Seifort Town, you do come across people that are blonde, blue-eyed, 
and very, very local. How do they see themselves? As Germans, German/Jamaicans, 
Jamaicans, Jamaican/Germans, something else? My foreparents is from 
Germany. David Hacken, a local farmer who wouldn't look out of place 
anywhere in lower or in upper Saxony, I came across him by the side 
of the road as he and his neighbors, black, mixed, and white like 
himself, were discussing something that involved farm implements. 
And they all insisted on one thing. There ain't Germans no more. There 
ain't no blacks. There ain't no Chinese, and there ain't no coolies. 
It's all one mixed. All of us is one set of people. One set of people. 
No difference. Very quickly, those German and non-German Jamaicans 
got bored with me and with talking about identity and switched to 
a real conversation about chain saws, farming, and prices, all in 
Jamaican Patua. As far as the locals are concerned, all the German 
stuff is ancient history. Sure they migrated to Jamaica, everyone 
came here in the past, the wine of Germans, too. Nowadays, all that 
is left of the Germaness of Seifort Town is a local museum and some 
brown blue-eyed people with German sounding last names. No one feels 
German anymore. They're Jamaican now. After all, Jamaica's national 
motto is: Out of many, one. Seems to have worked. Just to remind me 
of that, David Hacken, the blondest of Seifort Town inhabitants have 
a statement to make. We're born in Jamaica. We're going to stay here. 
There's little to add to that except the usual. For THE WORLD, this 
is Boris Maksimov. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>