<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981106.2000.0566 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
David Barralon is a senior advisor to Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu. He is in Jerusalem now. Mr. Barralon, how close were you 
to the attack? Were you anywhere near the scene of the bomb? No, not 
really near but we saw the smoke coming up from the burnt car, which 
was the car loaded with explosives that could have caused a terrible 
tragedy today. It was really nothing but a miracle that nobody except 
the attackers was killed. And apparently was also within ear shot 
of where the Israeli Cabinet was meeting, and there were immediate 
reverberations. The Cabinet suspended discussion of the Wye agreement. 
In a sense, what do you say to those who believe that moves like that 
actually play right into the hands of Hamas, which would like nothing 
more than to derail the peace process? Yeah, well, we've been hearing 
this for five years and this is precisely why the government was elected 
in the first place. The previous government kept saying that they 
would go on with the peace process regardless of terrorism, but the 
terrorist wave, which is the worst ever in the history of the state 
of Israel, did not cease. And obviously, you cannot go on excusing 
inaction on the part of the Palestinian authority against the terrorist 
organizations by saying, "Well, we must not play into their hands." 
Of course, we must not but we must also fight them. Any regime that 
purports to be pro peace, purports to be anti-terrorism must indeed 
fight terrorism and not just give lip service to the fight against 
terrorism. And those demands have been made of the Palestinians. They 
insisted they're making, in fact, a 100 percent effort with Yasir 
Arafat putting the spiritual leader of Hamas, Sheik Yassim, under 
house arrest and cutting his phone lines. The security forces seem 
to be rounding up extremists. What at this point does the Israeli 
government want beyond that? Look, it's not a secret how you fight 
terrorism. You don't just round up people to pacify world public opinion. 
You do a thorough job. And the thorough job has been required of the 
Palestinians for five years now. It means outlawing the terrorist 
organizations, confiscating their arms, stopping the financing, stopping 
the incitements, stopping the preaching in mosques for the destruction 
of Israel, stopping demonstrations in which the American and the Israeli 
flags are burned and which calls for the destruction of Israel are 
made. And if you don't stop these things and you arrest some people 
every once in a while to pacify public opinion, it's very doubtful 
that you're really serious about the fight against terrorists. David 
Barralon is senior advisor to the Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu. Thank you very much. A Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>