<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981106.2000.0855 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Holy Roman Emperor Charles V once said, "I speak Spanish to God, Italian 
to women, French to men, and German to my horse." Alas, today's European 
leader is not quite as multilingual, which is causing problems. And 
as the European Union expands, so do the problems. THE WORLD's Margaret 
Evans eavesdrops on some of the cross-culture communications going 
on at E.U. Central. If ever there was a modern-day tower of Babel, 
the European capital of Brussels is it. A walk down the corridors 
of power here at the European Union headquarters treats visitors to 
a smorgasbord of languages, from Swedish to Greek to Portuguese. The 
European Union has 11 official languages all entitled to equal treatment. 
That means many of the daily meetings here need enough interpreters 
on hand to handle 110 possible language combinations: Finnish to Spanish, 
Italian to French, Danish to Greek, English to German, and so on. 
Knowle Merlus, the head of the E.U.'s Interpretation Services, he 
says things were a lot simpler when he first came to Brussels as a 
young interpreter. Arriving myself here in '64, I think we have more 
or less 30 interpreters around because we had six countries and four 
languages. Now we have 15 countries and 11 official languages, so 
to manage all this is quite a job, I must confess, to look for the 
quality, to control it, to find it, to train the people, and so forth. 
The E.U. employs the largest interpretation staff in the world, larger 
even than the United Nations, which limits its official languages 
to just six. The Union also translates more than one million pages 
a year into all 11 languages. As well as being extremely costly, there's 
no doubt the language maze slows things down. One way the Europeans 
are trying to cope is by turning in part to machines. Machine translation 
is there for officials to use on a help-yourself basis. Dorothy Senes 
oversees a service called Sistron. It's a translation system developed 
in the United States in the 1950s and first used by the U.S. Air Force 
to translate Russian to English. The E.U. has updated it so it can 
handle 17 different language pairs. Officials here log on to the Internet, 
send in their document, and a rough translation comes back within 
minutes. Of course, as Senes points out, it's not perfect. The problem 
with this translation is that of ambiguity. How's a machine to know 
that the word "avocar" is a lawyer or an avocado? So we have to tell 
the machine, OK, we're working in this domain. Please select this 
dictionary. It's only used for rough draft so that people can find 
out faster just what their colleagues in different departments are 
up to. The official translations are carried out by a staff over 1,000 
translators who tend to work almost round the clock. Much of the ease 
decision making process depends on how quickly the translators can 
turn their documents around. (SINGING TO TUNE OF "YESTERDAY" BY THE 
BEATLES: Frequently, all we talk about transparency. We proliferate 
all passity, when what we need is clarity. Translators like David 
Monkum singing here say European officials don't make it any easier 
by writing the originals in such heavy-handed, long-winded, and bureaucratic 
prose. Monkum is spear-heading a campaign called Fight the Fog. He 
and a troop of translators hold writing seminars for the bureaucrats 
here starting them all out with this song, a plea to keep it simple. 
(SINGING TO TUNE OF "YESTERDAY" BY THE BEATLES: You wrote something 
long, that is wrong, it will not do. Keep it plain and short, and 
the message will get through. Just write with clarity. But the European 
Union's language problems are about to get even bigger. The Union 
is planning to expand, eventually adding up to ten new countries where 
the languages will be Estonian, Polish, Hungarian, the list goes on. 
Head interpreter, Knowle Merlus, says that finding people with the 
right language combinations will pose a major challenge. To put an 
example, where would you find people with Greek as mother tongue having 
Czech, Romanian, and Polish? Some people here argue that there is 
no way the European Union can cope with more than 20 languages, that 
it will be too expensive and may even harm its relations without outside 
trading partners by slowing down decision-making even further. But 
the question of language is a highly political one. The Europeans 
might be on their way to becoming a United States of Europe, but they're 
still sovereign states, and the core of nationhood often revolves 
around language. That means few countries will be willing to sacrifice 
their mother tongues for the sake of old fashioned efficiency. Reporting 
for THE WORLD, this is Margaret Evans in Brussels. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>