<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981106.2000.2026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Not since 1780 has the Atlantic produced a deadlier storm than Hurricane 
Mitch. During its rampage through Central America last week, Mitch 
killed more than 10,000 people, left thousands more missing, and set 
the stage for possible epidemics of cholera, malaria, and dende. The 
United States is pumping in $70 million worth of assistance Nicaragua, 
Guatemala, El Salvador, and the country hit hardest, Honduras. Fernando 
Cordeiro is the program coordinator with UNICEF in the Honduran capital, 
Tegucigalpa. Mr. Cordeiro, I know that you just arrived there. The 
scale of the tragedy is hard to grasp from this end. Could you give 
us your initial impression about the extent to the destruction? Well, 
I can tell you that the figures that we received this morning, they 
are talking about 6,500 people dead. I'm talking in terms of Honduras, 
more than 11,000 missing, and 1.9 million have been in a way were 
not affected. We fear that a great amount of these people are practically 
homeless. As you probably know, practically the entire road infrastructure 
of the country was also destroyed by the hurricane, leaving inter-city 
communications completely blocked. So are people able to communicate 
at all by telephone or any other means? Well, practically we can communicate 
I would say a great percentage of the time by telephone, but we still 
have some areas that we cannot reach by land, and we know that some 
people are in particular need of assistance. Now we are receiving 
information of the catastrophe on the south part of the country because 
in the very beginning, we were talking about north, but now we realize 
that the entire country was affected, and we are trying to program 
and reprogram our system in order to assist these people in the central 
part as well as in the south part of the country. In such a desperate 
situation like this, how do you figure out what to do first? And it 
sounds as though... We have a team, if I could say, of volunteers. 
These volunteers go shelter by shelter in order to make an assessment 
because the situation is changing rapidly. The number of infectious 
disease is increasing now and they then let us know the amount of 
people, the number of disease, the population affected by the disease, 
and also the needs of the shelter. Do you feel as though you've been 
able to make a dent in the situation now as vast as it is? Yes, I 
mean, I think that the figure that have been provided now are quite 
accurate, and this shows, I mean, that the few figures that I provide 
you before, it shows you that the entire country has been affected. 
I mean, you can compare. It's like a country in a war situation with 
the number of deaths and missing people, and the damage of the infrastructure. 
I mean, practically the entire breach of the infrastructure has been 
destroyed. I wonder if you have been involved in any kind of a relief 
effort prior to this that... No, this is my first experience, and 
I can tell you that it's amazing in the way I can see, not only in 
my colleagues that they are working against the watch, if I could 
say, because I mean, every minute, every minute you have something 
to do. So we reacted very quickly in terms of to organize our own 
teams, because this is also new for the team that they are operating 
here, you know, for the entire U.N. system. It must feel overwhelming. 
Completely, completely. I mean, but we are in good spirits, I can 
tell you. This is a very important point that we want to highlight. 
I mean, we are a little bit tired after a week and a half now, but 
we understand that the needs are - is our major objective now to attend 
to these needs as soon as possible. Well, Mr. Cordeiro, we thank you 
for taking the time out to speak with us. You are welcome. Fernando 
Cordeiro is the program coordinator with UNICEF speaking to us from 
the Honduran capital of Tegucigalpa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>