<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981106.0500.2998 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Delegates at the United Nations climate change conference in Buenos 
Aires, Argentina, are wrestling with different approaches to the problem 
of global warming. That could prevent them from reaching an overall 
agreement by the end of the session next week. As VOA's Greg Flakus 
reports from Buenos Aires, one of the big problems involves the U.S. 
position on emissions trading. In separate news conferences Thursday, 
both European Union representatives and U.S. negotiators said they 
see signs of progress in behind-the-scenes meetings, but it was clear 
that a gap continues to exist between the Europeans and the United 
States over the issue of emissions trading, by which an industrialized 
nation could meet part of its commitment to reduce pollution by helping 
less prosperous nations to reduce their emissions of carbon dioxide 
and other so-called greenhouse gases. European Union representative 
Jos de Beck told reporters that it would be unacceptable to allow 
the United States to use trading mechanisms to avoid making real cuts 
in domestic emissions. . That's the essence of what we are saying, 
nothing more, nothing less. U.S. negotiators responded by saying that 
the agreement reached in Kyoto, Japan, last year includes the idea 
of emissions trading as a flexible way to meet emission reduction 
targets. They rejected the idea of arbitrary caps on such a program, 
saying it would be better to let the market develop on its own. Dirk 
Forrester, head of the White House Climate Change Task Force, rejected 
the notion that the United States is seeking to avoid domestic pollution 
reduction by setting up wholesale trading in emissions cuts with other 
countries. He said a number of programs have been started with private 
sector companies to reduce domestic air pollution. But he said no 
specific percentage of reduction had yet been established. At this 
point in time, there's an awful lot of opportunity for firms to put 
on the table, if you will, but I haven't got qualified members yet, 
because those discussions are not completed. Among the programs Mr. 
Forrester mentioned are plans to improve energy efficiency in homes, 
buildings, and vehicles and to reward firms that produce energy-efficient 
products. Another divisive issue at this conference involves the stand 
by some developing nations, notably China and India, which insists 
that they should be excluded from any commitments to reduce emissions. 
Argentina, as the host nation, and a member of the Developing Nations 
Forum, has proposed voluntary targets for poor nations, where energy 
consumption per capita is already low compared to industrialized nations. 
There is, however, no sign yet that such a compromise would be embraced 
by either China or India, whose pollution levels are expected to exceed 
those of the United States within the next 20 years. Greg Flakus, 
VOA NEWS, Buenos Aires. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>