<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981106.0500.2213 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Central America, the death toll from Hurricane Mitch has risen 
beyond 10,000. Health officials from El Salvador to Honduras fear 
more deaths from hunger and disease. Hundreds of thousands of people 
are homeless, and as many as 13,000 people are missing. The United 
States has announced a $70 million aid package with airlifts of food 
starting tomorrow, Saturday. One U.N. agency says Mitch's destruction 
has sent Central American development back about 20 years. There are 
home-grown efforts to get relief aid to parts of Central America. 
Typical is what's happening in Nicaragua near the Cacitas volcano, 
whose slopes were turned into mud slides by the rains of Hurricane 
Mitch. VOA's Bill Rogers has a report. Scores of men with machetes 
chopped down small trees Thursday alongside a muddy dirt track leading 
up toward the rolling green foothills of the Cacitas volcano. The 
torrential rains that caused the fatal landslide gouged huge gaping 
ruts along the track, which once served as the main road for many 
of the communities that are now buried. The men, many of them local 
farmers, drag the branches and limbs to fill the ruts. Andres Zapata 
said they organized themselves to repair the road so that trucks bringing 
food and other supplies can pass. "We're fixing this road," he said, 
"because no vehicles can come up here, and we need the supplies." 
Mr. Zapata added many small communities further up the side of the 
volcano are in desperate shape following this past weekend's massive 
landslide. Further up the road, across fields of soybeans, corn, and 
peanuts, a wall of dirt, rocks, tree trunks, and other debris emerges, 
stretching across several kilometers in some areas. Like a huge brown 
river of mud, it twists and turns across the green flanks of the Cacitas 
volcano. Beneath it lie the remains of hundreds of people, residents 
of communities like Rolanda Rodrigues, El Ygeral, and El Porvenir, 
which means "what is to come" in Spanish. The landslide was the result 
of Hurricane Mitch's pounding rains, which caused part of the volcano's 
crater to collapse, letting the lake inside form a deluge that cascaded 
down the slope. Near a huge embankment carved out by the rushing rainwaters, 
a woman sits in a thatched hut, boiling unripened corncobs to make 
them edible. Fifty-year-old Maria Lourdes Rodrigues sobs when she 
remembers how the landslide roared down the mountain. "It was horrible," 
she said, "especially when I saw my 24-year-old son start to cry. 
We thought we would die." She went on to describe how fearful she 
and her family remained that there will be another landslide. Across 
the plain of black volcanic mud, bodies lie scattered about, some 
beneath massive tree trunks, others enmeshed between broken stocks 
of sugar cane. The body of one little girl lies with her tiny arms 
splayed out, as if she were trying to swim away. The bodies of horses, 
cows, and other farm animals also appear here and there, half buried 
in the mud. Because these decomposing bodies pose a dangerous risk 
of cholera or other disease, workers from the Ministry of Health have 
begun burning the remains. Health inspector Jose Perez Avilas says 
the task is so great that workers often have to burn the bodies of 
both animals and humans together. "It's painful to say this," he said, 
"and sometimes we cry when we burn all these corpses together. But 
we have no other choice." As he spoke, a few sputtering fires from 
the burning corpses sent up billows of black smoke rising into the 
sky above the vast expanse of mud. Only the sound of distant twittering 
birds broke the silence of what is now the graveyard for hundreds 
of people. Bill Rogers, VOA NEWS, in Rolanda Rodriguez, Nicaragua. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>