<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981106.0500.1342 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During the past 25 years, legal gambling has emerged as a major industry 
in the United States, but Lady Luck doesn't smile on every community 
that takes a chance on lotteries and casinos. As VOA's Breck Artery 
reports from New York, critics still question both the economic and 
social consequences of gambling. Last year, Americans legally wagered 
$639 billion in state lotteries, at race tracks, and, increasingly, 
at gambling casinos. The gross revenues for the industry after paying 
winners amounted to more than $51 billion. That is more than the revenue 
of the motion picture industry, professional sports, and theme parks 
combined. Timothy O'Brien, a journalist who specializes in covering 
the gaming industry, as it's known, says gambling has been part of 
American culture since before the Revolutionary War in the 18th century. 
However, he says, there has been a cultural shift in the way gambling 
is perceived and marketed. We are a nation of risk takers. It pervades 
our business practices, it pervades the choices of immigrants who 
travel thousands of miles to go to new places and seek their fortunes. 
It's -- it -- there is -- we are a risk-taking country. Even so, it 
was a largely social activity. It was the neighborhood game, it was 
the back alley gambling joint. It wasn't a vast commercial gambling 
enterprise like we have now. In 1931, the Western state of Nevada 
became the first jurisdiction in the United States to legalize casino 
gambling. For the next 45 years, it had a virtual monopoly on that 
industry in the United States. But in 1976, casinos were legalized 
in Atlantic City, New Jersey, and legalization followed in several 
other states. In the 1980s, Native American tribes were allowed to 
own and operate casinos in their self-governing regions, and casino 
gambling began to proliferate across the country. Mr. O'Brien, who 
has written a book titled "Bad Debt," says casinos do not necessarily 
mean economic salvation for a community, and points to the Atlantic 
City example. I think Atlantic City is a -- is still a pretty sorry 
place, and a place to visit, because when casino gambling was legalized 
in New Jersey, in Atlantic City, in 1976, the logic was, we have a 
rundown old resort town with high rates of unemployment and a very 
dependent local African-American population. Maybe gambling can resolve 
those problems. And it hasn't really fulfilled the promise. There 
is still a lot of dilapidated housing there, rutted roads, and high 
rates of local unemployment still exist. Mr. O'Brien says the main 
problem in Atlantic City is that it draws the vast majority of its 
customers from the nearby New York and Philadelphia areas, and most 
of those gamblers visit only for a few hours. By contrast, he says, 
Las Vegas, Nevada, draws gamblers from all over the United States 
and from other nations as well. His research shows that for casino 
gambling to have a positive economic impact on a community, it must 
draw large amounts of money from outside the community. But even if 
casinos do provide an economic boost to a community, Timothy O'Brien 
says they also bring problems. There's the social fallout that the 
economics don't capture, whether it's increased compulsive gambling, 
traffic congestion. There's fears in Las Vegas that the local water 
supply's going to be tapped early into the next century. They've witnessed 
the arrival of gangs from Los Angeles that target the casinos. Detroit, 
Michigan, is the latest U.S. community to legalize casino gambling, 
with three casinos scheduled to open there within the next two years. 
But Mr. O'Brien is skeptical that Detroit will see the economic benefits 
it anticipates. They'll get some jobs, they'll get some tax revenue, 
and they'll get a lot of problems. The auto industry in the United 
States has shrunk, and that was Motown's bread and butter for a long 
time. And I don't think that a well-paying middle-class job in the 
automobile industry is replaced by a low-paying service job in casinos. 
So it's not going to generate the kind of wages that will create other 
forms of consumption, that can bring the city along. Mr. O'Brien says 
the past 25 years have demonstrated that casino gambling is not necessarily 
a cure for financially troubled communities and should not be used 
as a substitute for other forms of economic development. Breck Artery, 
VOA NEWS, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>