<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981106.0500.1828 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The major news story of the morning, a car bomb exploding at the entrance 
to a crowded market in central Jerusalem. Israeli police say two people 
were killed and 17 others were injured. VOA's Jerusalem correspondent 
Al Passen told VOA's Curt Henchin police officials are calling it 
a miracle that many other people were not killed and injured. It seems 
that for some reason, the car absorbed most of the force of the explosion, 
and they think this may be because it was not actually a car bomb, 
that it was perhaps a suicide bomber with a bomb on his body, who 
was in the car on his way to the market, presumably to go inside to 
the more crowded area and set off the bomb. But the bomb seems to 
have gone off a bit prematurely, and they think that the suicide bomber 
is one of the three dead. They think maybe another one was the driver 
of the car, but they're not sure. And they're concerned that a third 
victim may be somebody who was outside the car, possibly a police 
officer. Some of the witnesses say that there were two small explosions 
and then the big one, and they report that some people were heading 
toward the car to see what was going on, and other people were saying, 
"No, no, get away," and then suddenly there was an explosion. And 
I have a recording here of an eyewitness account that was broadcast 
on Israel Radio. It's in Hebrew, but I think you'll get the flavor 
of the scene with the police yelling on megaphones in the background, 
and the man describes what he heard. And you'll hear him say, "Boom 
boom boom." All right. ... What he's saying is that he heard "Boom 
boom boom," and then the car exploded. Well, we are -- yes, we're 
watching some television coverage of this here in Washington, Al, 
and it does appear that this hulk of what used to be an automobile 
is in a street and not near a market. And this seems to go along -- 
at least the footage we've seen, and we don't see the market, we see 
the car. And this seems to go along with your theory that the car 
was heading into the market but did not make it. The car was going 
along the street. Some reports indicate that it may have been going 
the wrong way down the street, but it's not clear, because it may 
have spun around as part of the explosion. It pulled up onto the sidewalk, 
which is not unusual in Jerusalem. People are often parking or stopping 
momentarily on the sidewalk. And then the bomb went off. And this 
is right at the eastern entrance to the market. The market is a maze 
of alleyways, some of them covered, some of the open. The alley which 
leads in from the eastern side is open air, so to really enter the 
market, you walk down this alley, where there are some stalls, and 
then you enter the covered area. A bomb which would go off in the 
covered area, which is a much more compact space with a roof and much 
more crowded, would have been much more damaging than the bomb that 
apparently went off, as you say, on the street, on the sidewalk, right 
by the entrance to the alley that goes into the market. Al, the Israeli 
cabinet was meeting at the time of the blast. What's the status of 
the cabinet now? Well, soon as they heard about it, the cabinet meeting 
was suspended, and a couple of the ministers went out to the scene, 
including the police minister, also the mayor of Jerusalem was out 
there. And the government announced that it would convene the cabinet 
again very soon, but not to continue discussing the Wye River agreement, 
but rather to discuss the bombing and related security issues. So 
it seems that the discussion of the Wye River agreement, which began 
yesterday, on Thursday, was to continue today, possibly resulting 
in a vote today, but also possibly being extended, then, until Sunday, 
which is the next day they can meet. That is because the Jewish Sabbath 
begins in about three hours at sundown. Jerusalem correspondent Al 
Passen spoke with VOA NEWS NOW's Curt Henchin and Ray Kugell. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>