<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981106.0500.3215 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Female country groups are rare in Nashville, and that may be one reason 
why this year's breakthrough act has attracted so much attention. 
Another reason for their success is talent and hard work, which earned 
the band millions of fans and respect from the country music industry. 
They are known as the Dixie Chicks, and the group took its name from 
a well-known country rock song called "Dixie Chicken." VOA's Mary 
Morningstar has more on the Dixie Chicks and their current multimillion-selling 
album, "Wide Open Spaces." Let 'er rip, let 'er fly. Come on, baby, 
stay until you think I'm going die,, let 'er rip, let 'er fly. The 
biggest-selling country group of 1998 is the Dixie Chicks, a band 
consisting of Natalie Mains and sisters Marty Sydell and Emily Irwin. 
Marty and Emily formed the Dixie Chicks in the late 1980s, and after 
releasing three independent albums, added Natalie to the lineup for 
their major label debut, "Wide Open Spaces." Mains was attending college 
when she received the call inviting her to join the group. She made 
an immediate decision to leave school and begin a career in music. 
We went to my dad, and he's a steel guitar player in Texas, and he 
had played on two of their previous albums. And we just met that way. 
They used to come over to my house for dinner, and we'd slip them 
tapes, and they called one day, and I had an economics test the next 
day, so I decided it was time to drop out. Natalie Mains' father, 
Lloyd Mains of the famous Mains Brothers Band, performs on the Dixie 
Chicks' latest album, "Wide Open Spaces." The collection produced 
the top 10 single "I Can Love You Better," and also includes the trio's 
recent number one hit, "There's Your Trouble." There's your trouble, 
there's your trouble, seeing double with a... Many people in the country 
music industry describe the Dixie Chicks as the real deal. In addition 
to their superb three-part vocal harmonies, Marty, Natalie, and Emily 
are talented musicians who play fiddle, dobrow, mandolin, banjo, and 
guitar. Their album "Wide Open Spaces" has sold more than 2 million 
copies, and recently earned the Dixie Chicks the Country Music Association's 
Horizon award and vocal group of the year honor. Marty Sydell says 
the group has a unique way of celebrating success. Natalie already 
has a tattoo. She's the rebel of the group. And Emily and I never 
had one. And she kind of made a dare back in January when the album 
came out, and said, "Well, y'all, we ought to do something kind of 
for -- to symbolize sisterhood and make a pact if things go really 
well this year." So for every number one song, and we have one of 
those, and for every gold and platinum album, we will get a little 
chick foot. So far, three chicken foot tattoos are inconspicuously 
placed on the Dixie Chicks' feet. And Marty, Emily, and Natalie will 
soon be getting their fourth tattoo. The Dixie Chicks' current single, 
the title track to "Wide Open Spaces," has reached number one on "Billboard"'s 
country charts. I'm Mary Morningstar. Who doesn't know what I'm talking 
about? Who's never left home, who's never struck out to find a dream 
and a life of their own? and many will follow. A young girl's dreams 
no longer hollow. It takes the shape of a place out West, but what 
it holds for her, she hasn't yet guessed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>