<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981106.0500.0361 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Clinton administration officials, including those at the Pentagon, 
are warning Iraq they may resort to force to get Baghdad to get rid 
of its weapons of mass destruction. The administration is getting 
no public support for military action from Iraq's neighbors, in spite 
of visits to several Middle East nations by Defense Secretary William 
Cohen. Pentagon correspondent Jim Randall reports. Pentagon officials 
say Defense Secretary William Cohen held successful consultations 
with leaders in Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and several Gulf states over 
the past few days. Pentagon spokesman Mike Doubleday says Mr. Cohen 
found the Gulf states united in condemning Iraq's refusal to allow 
United Nations weapons inspections. I think it's very clear that the 
secretary came away from his visits feeling that any of the support 
that the United States needs to take appropriate action to uphold 
U.N. Security Council resolutions is there. But so far, no Arab state 
has said in public it would allow military action to be launched from 
its territory. A news report from the Gulf says the president of the 
United Arab Emirates urged patience and the need to seek a diplomatic 
solution to the Iraq crisis. Other Gulf leaders, at least in public, 
also called for a peaceful resolution to the crisis. Iraq blocked 
inspections by U.N. officials seeking to find and destroy Iraq's programs 
to produce weapons of mass destruction. Baghdad promised to get rid 
of those weapons and their means of production in the agreement that 
ended the 1991 Gulf war. When Iraq invaded neighboring Kuwait in 1990, 
the United Nations imposed economic sanctions. The U.N. says it will 
not end those sanctions until and unless Iraq keeps its promise to 
get rid of its chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons and allow 
U.N. weapons inspectors to verify the claim. Iraq says its people 
are suffering and demands that the U.N. set a timetable to end the 
sanctions before the inspections resume. U.S. officials say Iraq's 
action challenges the credibility of the United Nations Security Council 
and threatens the peace and stability of the region. If Washington 
decides to take military action, the United States has about 23,000 
military personnel located within striking distance of Iraq. Defense 
Secretary Cohen continues his talks in Jordan, Turkey, and Paris before 
returning to the United States Friday evening. White House officials 
say President Clinton's national security adviser, Sandy Berger, heads 
for Europe soon for consultations in France and elsewhere on the Iraq 
crisis. Jim Randall, VOA NEWS, at the Pentagon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>