<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981111.1269 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Considered one of the Third World's most feared armies before the 
Gulf War, Iraq's military suffered a humiliating _ and quick _ defeat 
in 1991. Today, it is far leaner but less powerful, less equipped 
and less of a threat. About 375,000 men serve in the army, significantly 
fewer than the 500,000 mobilized during the Gulf War. But sanctions 
and a lack of money and spare parts have left much of the army in 
shambles, even though its smaller size means it requires less upkeep. 
``It's quite a mess,'' said Peter Felstead, editor of Jane's Intelligence 
Review in London. ``I don't think there's much of a conventional threat 
there.'' The one exception is the Republican Guard _ but it's a qualified 
exception. Long considered the key to Saddam Hussein's power, the 
elite unit performed poorly in the Gulf War, only to regroup in the 
weeks after the war to save Saddam by crushing a Kurdish rebellion 
in the north and a Shiite Muslim revolt in the south. By far the best 
equipped and best paid, the Republican Guard has seven or eight divisions, 
although estimates differ on total manpower. Of Iraq's total tank 
force of 2,000 _ far fewer than the 5,500 it had before the Gulf War 
_ 800 are believed to be in its hands, including 500 high-quality 
T-72s. It is thought as well to have 1,000 armored fighting vehicles 
and 500 artillery pieces, Felstead said. While Iraq's military is 
much scaled back from its pre-Gulf War strength, it remains larger 
than the forces of its small neighbors. U.S. officials also have expressed 
fears that it would only take weeks for Iraq to reconstitute its chemical 
and biological weapons programs if U.N. arms monitoring stopped. ``If 
the inspectors are not permitted to visit suspect sites or monitor 
compliance at known production facilities, they may as well be in 
Baltimore, not Baghdad,'' U.S. President Bill Clinton said. ``That 
would open a window of opportunity for Iraq to rebuild its arsenal 
of weapons and delivery systems in months _ I say again, in months 
_ not years.'' Former weapons inspectors have said that Iraq might 
be able to quickly mix small batches of chemical and biological weapons 
if it restarted the programs. The amount of poisons would be small 
but would give Iraq a terror weapon to intimidate its neighbors. In 
any confrontation with the United States or Iraq's neighbors, however, 
Baghdad's conventional forces would be the key. Since the war, the 
government has set up a special guard under the command of one of 
Saddam's sons, Qusai. Thought to have 15,000 men, the battalions are 
well-armed and believed to be extremely loyal. ``He is well-protected 
by these elite units,'' said Sean Boyne, a military analyst in Ireland. 
``The only way to get to him would be to get inside one of their more 
trusted units.'' Like everything else in Iraq, the military has wrestled, 
usually unsuccessfully, with the impact of eight years of U.N. sanctions 
_ particularly in securing spare parts for aging armaments. Nevertheless, 
Iraq still produces parts for the T-72 tank, small arms like AK-47s, 
ammunition, some artillery and rocket-launchers and artillery shells, 
Boyne said. Other pieces are kept going by smuggling in parts or cannibalizing 
other equipment, he said. In addition to the special guard, Iraq has 
spent many of its scarce resources on upgrading its air defense against 
bombing and cruise missile attacks, most of it Soviet-designed. But 
while advanced for the Third World, it is not considered a match for 
U.S. forces, especially radar-evading, stealth aircraft or cruise 
missiles. The rest of Iraq's military poses little threat. The army 
relies on conscripts whose loyalty is doubtful. The 17 or so divisions 
have nearly 2,000 pieces of artillery and a significant number of 
anti-tank weapons. But the equipment is outdated and often unserviceable. 
Iraq's air force once boasted 700 aircraft. About 350 remain, but 
only about half are fit to fly, military analysts say. A lack of parts 
keeps many of the best aircraft, such as the MiG-29s, on the ground. 
``I think they're unlikely to put them up in the air because they're 
just going to be shot down,'' Felstead said. The military has about 
500 helicopters as well, but again, a lack of spare parts makes them 
largely ineffective except in operations against guerrillas fighting 
in the north and south. In any last-ditch effort to keep power, the 
government might call on the Fedayeen Saddam, a paramilitary force 
of 40,000 run by Saddam's eldest son, Odai. The ruling Baath Party's 
1 million members are armed as well, with light weapons, rifles and 
grenades. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>