<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981111.1232 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu won narrow approval from his Cabinet 
Wednesday for a land-for-deal with the Palestinians but his ministers 
placed a series of conditions on the agreement signed with Yasser 
Arafat last month at the White House. After two weeks of delays and 
American pressure, eight of 17 ministers voted in favor, five ministers 
abstained and four voted against in what appeared to be a political 
blow for Netanyahu who had expected broader support. In approving 
the latest Mideast peace accord, the Israeli government voted to withdraw 
its troops from 13 percent of the West Bank and expand Palestinian 
autonomy. But pinned implementation on four stipulations which could 
disrupt the deal altogether. At the same time, the government announced 
plans to speed up construction of a new Jewish neighborhood on a disputed 
Jerusalem hilltop and confiscate sections of West Bank land for settler 
bypass roads. The Palestinians cautiously welcomed ratification of 
the accord but dismissed the conditions as ``violations.'' U.S. Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright called the vote an important step in the 
peace process. And Jewish settlers, some of whom will find themselves 
in isolated West Bank areas after the withdrawal, lashed out at the 
government for giving up land which settlers consider to be their 
biblical birthright. ``For Sale: State of Israel, a giveaway,'' read 
a large banner at a protest rally where over ten thousand settlers 
and their supporters gathered in Tel Aviv as the Cabinet met. In a 
news conference immediately following the vote, Netanyahu said the 
land, which Israel captured in 1967, was ``precious and important.'' 
He said that Israel reserved the right to annex large areas of the 
West Bank if Arafat made good on a threat to unilaterally declare 
Palestinian statehood in May. Each stage of the phased pullback over 
the next three months would require separate Cabinet approval, a move 
which would likely delay implementation. ``The Cabinet will convene 
to review Palestinian compliance with their commitments. Only then, 
when the Cabinet sees a complete compliance ... will it approve the 
next phase,'' Netanyahu said. The agreement would stop in its tracks 
if the Palestine National Council does not hold a formal vote by mid-December 
to revoke clauses in the PLO founding charter that call for Israel's 
destruction, Netanyahu said. In a fourth clause, Netanyahu said if 
Israel carries out an additional pullback which it promised to do 
last year, the Palestinians would receive no more than 1 percent of 
the West Bank. ``The condition are part of game between Mr. Netanyahu 
and his right wing ministers. We refuse them completely,'' senior 
Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat told The Associated Press. ``This 
is a clear and serious violation of the Wye River agreement and we 
call on the American administration to come down to the area to observe 
who is implementing the agreement and who is not implementing,'' Erekat 
said. Netanyahu said that he would allow the opening of the Palestinian 
airport next week and would also begin releasing some 750 Palestinian 
security prisoners at that time. But Israel would not meet a Monday 
deadline to withdraw troops from 2 percent of the West Bank, said 
Netanyahu adviser David Bar-Illan. The troop redeployment cannot take 
place until parliament has approved the deal Tuesday. Bar-Illan said 
it would likely take place ``towards the end of next week.'' Over 
the past two weeks Netanyahu postponed Cabinet debate three times 
and broke off a Friday debate after a suicide bombing by Islamic militants 
at a Jerusalem market which injured 21 Israelis. The United States 
urged Israel to try and stick to the original time table of the agreement. 
U.S. President Bill Clinton spoke with Netanyahu on Tuesday night 
about the land-for-security agreement and about the U.S. showdown 
with Iraq over weapons inspections. An Israeli official said the United 
States has let it be known that its policy of being tough on Iraq 
was encountering problems in the Arab world because Israel had not 
moved forward on its implementation of the Wye agreement. Wednesday's 
vote was the third time since Netanyahu came to power in 1996 that 
his Cabinet has narrowly approved withdrawals from the West bank, 
Which each vote, the powerful Jewish settler lobby which helped put 
Netanyahu in office, has distanced itself from his administration. 
At Wednesday's rally, thousands of settlers and mostly religious Jews, 
lobbed their first direct hit at the government which it vowed to 
bring down. ``This is a confused and fractured government,'' said 
right wing lawmaker Rehavam Zeevi. The agreement ``will lead to the 
endangerment of the Jews in the Holy Land and bring war closer to 
their homes.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>