<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981111.1243 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With Roberto Baggio showing signs of rust Wednesday in his return 
from a long injury absence and Brazil's Ronaldo held out as a precaution, 
Internazionale of Milan could only muster a 1-1 comeback draw at third-division 
Castel di Sangro, but that was good enough to sneak into the Italian 
Cup quarterfinals on a 2-1 aggregate. Internazionale next faces defending 
titlist Lazio of Rome, in what will be a rematch of last season's 
UEFA Cup final, won by Inter. Lazio played a 1-1 draw at AC Milan 
on Wednesday to advance on a 4-2 aggregate. Elsewhere, Russian striker 
Igor Kolyvanov hit a penalty kick with one minute left as Bologna 
rallied for a 2-1 win over Sampdoria of Genoa, which finished the 
game with eight players on the field, while Udinese defeated Vicenza 
1-0. Bologna and Udinese advanced, since both matchups' first legs 
had ended 0-0. AC Parma settled for a 0-0 draw against Bari and qualified 
for the quarterfinals on a 2-1 aggregate. Juventus of Turin, which 
has won a record nine Italian Cups, was locked in a 1-1 draw at lowly 
Venezia in a game headed to supplemental time. AS Roma hosts Atalanta 
of Bergamo Thursday night, while Serie A leader Fiorentina advanced 
Tuesday by routing Lecce 4-0 _ with all the goals in the second half 
_ to win 5-0 on aggregate. At Castel di Sangro, the small-town club 
which upset Serie A sides Perugia and Salernitana in earlier rounds 
of the competition took a 1-0 lead in the 75th minute on striker Alberto 
Bernardi's header off a corner kick. Inter pulled even just two minutes 
later when Youri Djorkaeff, a member of France's World Cup champions, 
connected on a penalty kick awarded for a foul on Nicola Ventola. 
Baggio played 60 occasionally effective minutes and was replaced by 
playmaker Andrea Pirlo. The 31-year-old Baggio had been sidelined 
with an inflamed knee tendon since a Sept. 20 league game. Ronaldo 
returned last weekend from his own extended layoff due to knee tendinitis 
and is expected to play in Sunday's Serie A game against Sampdoria 
of Genoa. Castel di Sangro played the final five minutes with 10 men, 
because defender David Bianchini was expelled for dissent. At Bologna, 
Kolyvanov hit the winner after Davide Fontolan was fouled. Samp's 
players argued vehemently with the referee and two were expelled, 
joining teammate Vincenzo Iacopino, who was sent off in the 49th. 
The visitors took the lead nine minutes into the game, when Francesco 
Palmieri headed in Argentine playmaker Ariel Ortega's free kick. After 
Iacopino was red carded, Bologna's veteran forward Giuseppe Signori 
tied the score in the 66th. Bologna coach Carlo Mazzone was expelled 
in the 26th for arguing with the referee. At Vicenza, Argentine striker 
Roberto Carlos Sosa _ who tallied the injury-time equalizer against 
Juventus last weekend in league play _ was left unmarked in the 67th 
minute and slotted in countryman Mauro Navas' cross. At Milan, Chilean 
striker Marcelo Salas lobbed the ball over German 'keeper Jens Lehmann 
to put Lazio ahead in the 41st minute, and Maurizio Ganz leveled the 
score for the hosts off a breakaway in the 55th. The two-leg quarterfinals 
are scheduled for Dec. 2 and Jan. 27. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>