<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981111.0290 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The anticipated showdown between Japan and the United States at next 
week's Pacific Rim summit appears already under way, with Washington 
accusing Tokyo of offering money to other Asian nations to weaken 
a proposed free-trade pact. Japan will donate dlrs 204 million to 
Asian nations to help develop their fishing and forestry industries, 
a major Japanese newspaper reported Wednesday. The aid, promised for 
the next five years, will be announced at a meeting Saturday of representatives 
in the Malaysia capital ahead of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
summit next Tuesday and Wednesday, the Asahi said. The United States, 
Australia and Canada will be pushing the 21-member trade forum to 
agree to a plan to cut tariffs in nine sectors covering dlrs 1.5 trillion 
in global trade by 2020. The industries would be chemicals, forest 
products, medical equipment, energy, telecommunications equipment, 
environmental goods and services, gems and jewelry, fisheries and 
toys. But Japan, in its worst recession since World War II, insists 
it can't accept a fixed schedule for opening its forestry and fishing 
industries to outsiders because of domestic politics. APEC's aim is 
free trade among the developed member nations by 2010 and developing 
countries by 2020. The Japanese aid offer is apparently an attempt 
to push Japan's position that technical assistance to develop industries 
is more crucial than tariff reductions to wrest the region out of 
its current economic crisis. U.S. Trade Representative Charlene Barshefsky 
accused Japan of trying to derail the proposed free-trade pact, known 
as early voluntary sectoral liberalization. She said it would fall 
apart unless Japan, the world's second-largest economy, signs on to 
all nine sectors. ``Japan is going around the region promising overseas 
development assistance to countries that don't participate'' in the 
pact, she said. ``It's completely outrageous.'' She said forestry 
and fisheries were two sectors that could make a significant contribution 
to the trade package as a whole. ``We have to press Japan hard on 
this,'' Barshefsky said in Washington Tuesday. ``Other nations have 
as well, and we wait to see whether Japan will become a constructive 
force in APEC, or whether it will continue on a destructive path that 
it has thus far set for itself.'' Malaysia, the host for the sixth 
annual summit, indicated Tuesday that other Asian nations may line 
up behind Japan on its stand against fisheries and forestry. Malaysian 
trade minister Rafidah Aziz said Japan shouldn't be pressured into 
signing on to the pact and that it could still move forward without 
those two sectors. Rafidah also indicated that Malaysian Prime Minister 
Mahathir Mohamad would attempt to steer summit debate toward regulatory 
controls on currency speculators. In September, Malaysia imposed sweeping 
capital controls to curb flows of speculative money and peg the Malaysian 
currency at 3.80 ringgit to the dollar. Mahathir has long held that 
the Asian currency and stock market turmoil was brought about by speculative 
attacks by currency traders and in no way reflected weaknesses of 
the battered economies. During the summit, Thai Prime Minister Chuan 
Leekpai is expected to urge Mahathir to ease his currency controls 
to facilitate border trade, the Thai newspaper The Nation reported 
Wednesday. APEC comprises Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China, 
Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, 
Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and 
the United States. Russia, Peru and Vietnam will join APEC during 
this summit. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>