<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981111.0304 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Soldiers fired warning shots and beat students with sticks Wednesday 
when they blocked protesters from marching toward Parliament, where 
a special assembly discussed how to reform Indonesia's authoritarian 
political structure. Witnesses said the violence broke out when a 
car driven by students rammed into a group of riot officers on a main 
thoroughfare near a group of luxury hotels in downtown Jakarta, injuring 
four soldiers. Two students and a photographer were hurt when angry 
troops lashed out with rattan canes. Witnesses said the car drove 
at high speed toward a group of police who had blocked several thousand 
students from marching. Frustrated by the security clampdown, the 
students staged a sit-in street protest. Later, scores of troops and 
police with riot shields gathered near the presidential palace and 
the National Monument, about one kilometer (half-mile) away, as a 
precaution against further trouble. Meanwhile, police and soldiers 
blocked separate protest marches near the meeting of the People's 
Consultative Assembly, the nation's highest legislative body. The 
assembly is meeting until Friday to map out a new system of government 
after decades of military-backed rule under ex-President Suharto. 
One group of 500 students drove in a convoy of buses to within about 
a kilometer (half-mile) of the legislature before heavily armed soldiers 
stopped them near the studios of state-owned television. There were 
no reports of arrests. The students, many of them wearing yellow university 
jackets, waved red and white Indonesian flags and chanted anti-government 
slogans. Some held up a banner that read: ``Put Suharto on trial.'' 
Another group of students sang the national anthem outside a nearby 
hotel where assembly delegates are staying. In May, students occupied 
the Parliament building for days before Suharto quit and ended 32 
years in power. However, this week thousands of troops and police 
have been guarding the green-domed legislature. About 30,000 security 
personnel have been deployed across the capital to safeguard the assembly. 
The march that ended in a clash with riot officers began at Proclamation 
Park, a symbol of Indonesia's struggle for independence from Dutch 
colonial rule. Leading opposition figures are not included in the 
ranks of the assembly and the students and other opponents are unconvinced 
by promises that it will institute sweeping democratic change. The 
students want the military out of politics and demand that Suharto 
be tried for corruption and human rights abuses. Many suspect President 
B.J. Habibie, once a Suharto protege, will use this week's meeting 
to bolster his position. He's expected to be a candidate for the presidency 
when the assembly chooses a head of state late next year. The assembly 
is to set a date for parliamentary elections, probably in May. It 
is also expected to support new laws to legalize a large number of 
new political parties. It is likely to back moves to reduce, but not 
abolish, the military's representation in Parliament. The streets 
were quiet and traffic in the normally congested city was light Wednesday. 
Many residents chose to stay at home. Some shops and schools were 
closed. Fears over potential of violence have slashed retails sales 
in Jakarta by an estimated 70 percent, the newspaper Bisnis Indonesia 
said. About 1,200 people were killed during last May's violence. Most 
were trapped in shopping centers that were set afire. Many of the 
centers were owned by members of Indonesia's Chinese minority, whose 
relative prosperity is resented by some other Indonesians amid the 
worst economic crisis in 30 years. When the assembly's session opened 
Tuesday, pro- and anti-government groups clashed and threw rocks at 
one another in several areas before being dispersed by security personnel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>