<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981111.0911 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The wife of the U.S. vice president pledged new hurricane aid Wednesday 
in Nicaragua, after bringing medical supplies and a promise of dlrs 
10 million in additional U.S. aid to the hurricane-devastated countries 
of Central America. Tipper Gore, wife of Vice President Al Gore, announced 
Wednesday that the United States will send 12 additional helicopters 
to help with relief efforts and donate dlrs 1.5 million to the Pan-American 
Health Organization to help buy medicines for victims of the deadly 
storm Mitch. She and a U.S. congressional delegation planned to visit 
refugee camps and survey relief efforts in Nicaragua before returning 
to Washington. As Mrs. Gore examined the devastation in Central America, 
governments and lending institutions around the world moved to help 
the region pick up the pieces. France canceled debts owed by Nicaragua 
and Honduras, while Ireland announced it was doubling aid to countries 
ravaged by the storm. Britain said it wanted to contribute to a trust 
fund for the region and added its support to calls for a moratorium 
on debt payments by all affected countries. Cuba announced it was 
canceling Nicaraguan debts of dlrs 50 million, and the World Bank 
announced it was making dlrs 200 million in assistance available from 
existing projects. Mitch formed as a tropical storm Oct. 22 in the 
Caribbean and became a hurricane three days later, battering Honduras 
while stalled just off the coast. It moved inland as a tropical storm 
on Oct. 27 and continued to dump rain. The storm knocked out hundreds 
of bridges, leaving many communities isolated. It devastated power 
and sewer lines throughout Honduras and ravaged the nation's farms. 
Mrs. Gore flew to the Nicaraguan capital from neighboring Honduras, 
where she spent Tuesday night in a pup tent in a schoolyard. She had 
helped clean the school and feed hungry children in the Honduran capital 
of Tegucigalpa on Tuesday. ``This is a tragedy of Biblical proportions,'' 
she said after meeting with residents of Tegucigalpa's El Chile neighborhood, 
which was ripped apart by a torrent of mud. ``They're telling me stories 
of entire villages being washed away.'' Mrs. Gore's visit did much 
to heighten spirits in El Chile. Hundreds of children followed her 
through the streets, and a few pushed past security to hold her hand. 
``The important people never come to this neighborhood,'' said 27-year-old 
Claudia Boquin, who put her daughter on her shoulders for a better 
view. Mrs. Gore delivered an aid shipment that included blankets, 
sheets and drinking water for residents who have had little since 
Mitch killed an estimated 6,600 Hondurans last month. Central American 
presidents say the storm killed an additional 3,400 people in the 
region. Honduran President Carlos Flores welcomed the international 
support, including the contributions of Mrs. Gore. With her boots 
and pants still caked with mud, the president invited her to his home 
Tuesday night for a pizza dinner. ``The example is something that's 
not forgotten,'' Flores told Mrs. Gore. Mrs. Gore said U.S. military 
engineers would help repair Honduran roads and bridges and ensure 
that fuel and food reached the country's stricken towns. The dlrs 
10 million in new U.S. aid comes on top of the dlrs 70 million the 
U.S. government already has committed to Central America. Mrs. Gore 
was joined on her trip by Brian Atwood, who heads the U.S. Agency 
for International Development; Dennis Martinez, a Nicaraguan who pitches 
for the Atlanta Braves baseball team; and John Leonard, deputy assistant 
secretary of state for Latin America. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>