<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981111.1238 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Peaceful resolution of the Kosovo conflict is a long way off, the 
American head of a new foreign mission to the Serbian province acknowledged 
Wednesday amid reports of more violence. NATO officials also voiced 
concern about continuing clashes in Kosovo a month after an agreement 
aimed at halting the unrest. U.S. diplomat William Walker, chief of 
a verification mission still being put together, arrived in Pristina 
the day after three Serb policemen were injured in an attack on their 
police station, presumably by ethnic Albanian guerrillas. The mission, 
organized by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, 
will send as many as 2,000 unarmed monitors into the field to check 
whether Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic is complying with agreements 
he signed on ending the hostilities. Walker called it perhaps the 
last chance ``to avert an irrational spiral of more violence'' in 
Kosovo, where the ethnic Albanian majority seeks independence from 
Serb rule. Serb forces in February launched a crackdown on ethnic 
Albanian separatists. Several hundred people, mostly ethnic Albanians, 
have been killed and as many as 300,000 were driven from their homes. 
The violence has continued past the Oct. 12 agreement by Milosevic, 
under the threat of NATO airstrikes on his forces, to sharply reduce 
the number of police and soldiers in Kosovo. In the past week, at 
least two Serb policemen have been killed and three injured, while 
six guerrillas of the Kosovo Liberation Army have died from police 
gunfire. ``It is obvious that we have a long way to go from this battlefield 
to the negotiating table,'' Walker said. Western powers led by the 
United States believe the verification mission will restore stability 
in Kosovo by having the unarmed foreigners roaming the region to report 
on any violence or violations of the agreements Milosevic reached 
with U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke and the OSCE. Walker was unable 
to provide a firm date for launching the mission, which will absorb 
a previous Kosovo observer mission that started in July. He called 
it the most ambitious undertaking to date of the 54-nation OSCE. The 
OSCE's Permanent Council on Wednesday estimated costs for the year-long 
mission at dlrs 200 million. The council, meeting in Vienna, Austria, 
approved expenditures of dlrs 64 million for the rest of 1998, with 
1999 outlays to be decided later, spokeswoman Melissa Fleming said. 
Security for the verifiers depends on guarantees given by Milosevic 
and the rebels, Walker said. Foreign nations sending verifiers to 
Kosovo ``gambling with the lives of their citizens that the overwhelming 
majority of people in Kosovo want the violence to end,'' he said. 
But there was little sign of abating violence Wednesday. Belgrade's 
state-run Tanjug news agency reported that ethnic Albanian guerrillas 
opened fire Wednesday on a Serb farmer and three other men picking 
corn near Klina, 45 kilometers (28 miles) west of Pristina. The report 
said the farmer returned fire and a police patrol helped him repel 
the attackers. No injuries were reported. In Glogovac, police showed 
damaged walls at their station caused by a rocket fired during an 
attack Tuesday night. Three policemen were injured. Police accuse 
the rebels of launching repeated attacks in recent weeks to try to 
provoke a harsh response that could prompt world leaders to order 
military attacks. NATO officials fear that the recent incidents could 
lead to a renewal of outright fighting in Kosovo. ``There is a great 
deal of concern about the deteriorating situation ... and the deaths 
that have occurred, and obviously we condemn these incidents,'' a 
NATO official told reporters on condition of anonymity after the weekly 
meeting of alliance ambassadors in Brussels, Belgium. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>