<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981111.0904 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With exorbitantly high interest rates strangling South America's largest 
economy, Brazil's Central Bank is expected to heed President Fernando 
Henrique Cardoso's call to start lowering the country's key lending 
rate. The Central Bank's Monetary Policy Committee is scheduled to 
set the new lending rate on Wednesday evening. A recently announced 
fiscal austerity package, last week's congressional approval of a 
social security reform bill and an expected International Monetary 
Fund rescue package ``justify a lowering of interest rates,'' said 
presidential spokesman Sergio Amaral. ``The president expects interest 
rates to fall,'' Amaral said at a briefing Tuesday night. He did not 
say by how much Cardoso is expecting the lending rate to fall, but 
added that for next year, the government was projecting annual interest 
rates of 21 percent, compared to today's 50 percent. Most analysts 
expect the Central Bank's decision will point to a gradual, rather 
than sudden drop in interest rates. Luciana Fagundes, an economist 
at Lloyds Bank, told the O Estado de Sao Paulo newspaper she expected 
the new lending rate to be between 37 percent and 40 percent. Marcel 
Solimeo, chief economist of the Sao Paulo Chamber of Commerce, said 
that even a small reduction would ``have a positive psychological 
effect on the consumer and help stimulate sales.'' With more than 
50 percent of retail sales made on installment plans, any drop in 
interest rates would be welcome news to both consumers and store owners. 
Solimeo recently predicted a somber Christmas season, with sales during 
the final two months of the year expected to drop by almost 10 percent 
compared to the same period in 1997. Brazil's key lending rate was 
nearly doubled to 49.75 percent in September as investors fled the 
country following Russia's default and devaluation in August. The 
country's foreign reserves have fallen to around dlrs 45 billion from 
the dlrs 70 billion posted at the end of July. ``With interest rates 
like these, it's impossible to draw up any coherent investment or 
expansion plan,'' Aldo Lorenzetti, president of a large electrical 
appliance factory, said earlier this week. Business leaders have warned 
that the success of the government's fiscal austerity package depends 
on lower interest rates. A document prepared by the National Confederation 
of Industries points out that continued high interest rates will increase 
the public deficit _ now at 7 percent of gross domestic product _ 
and lower tax collection as economic output dwindles. The belt-tightening 
measures unveiled Oct. 28 area mix of taxes and spending cuts in a 
bid to save nearly dlrs 24 billion in 1999 and some dlrs 80 billion 
by 2002. The measures must be approved by Congress. The government 
hopes the measures will qualify Brazil for an IMF rescue package, 
expected to be announced within the next few days. The IMF has insisted 
on a tough plan to slash Brazil's deficit before going ahead with 
an estimated dlrs 30 billion to dlrs 40 billion aid program. Analysts 
say the austerity measures are likely to aggravate the country's economic 
slowdown and push unemployment above its current official rate of 
7.8 percent. Independent economists say unemployment is closer to 
20 percent. The latest official figures released Wednesday show that 
the country's industrial output declined for the fourth consecutive 
month in September, falling 2.4 percent from August. The government-run 
Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics said production in 
September was also down 6 percent compared with the same month in 
1997. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>