<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981111.1253 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The following is the official text of the Israeli government's decision 
to approve the Wye River Memorandum peace accord signed with the Palestinians 
at the White House on October 23. ___ 1. The Israeli government approves 
the Wye River Memorandum signed in Washington on October 23, 1998, 
(henceforth ``the Agreement'') and will present it to the Knesset 
for approval. 2. a) The implementation of all the Palestinian obligations 
throughout all phases of the agreement is a condition for the implementation 
of the Israeli obligations under the agreement according to the timetable 
set in it. b) The implementation of each phase of the Further Redeployments 
mentioned in the agreement will be brought before the Israeli government 
for prior discussion and approval. 3. a) The government approves the 
map of the first phase of the Further Redeployment as presented to 
the government. Approval of the maps of the additional phases of the 
Further Redeployment shall be given in the ministerial committee mentioned 
below, which shall decide the matter with the government's consent. 
b) In accordance with Paragraph 36(A)(6) of the Basic Law, the prime 
minister has appointed a ministerial committee consisting of the minister 
of defense, chairman; the minister of foreign affairs; the minister 
of education, culture and sport; the minister of immigrant absorption; 
and the minister for public security. c) Government ministers may 
view the maps of each phase of the Further Redeployment at the government 
secretariat as the date of its implementation approaches and they 
may appear before the committee and express their views. d) The minister 
of defense will determine the work agenda of the Committee. 4. a) 
Since the signing of the agreement, official Palestinian declarations 
regarding the PLO Covenant have substantively contradicted the agreement. 
b) The agreement decrees a decision at the Palestinian National Council 
to confirm the Palestinian Authority Chairman's statement in his letter 
to President Clinton regarding the cancellation of the Palestinian 
Covenant articles which contravene the PLO's commitment to denounce 
terrorism, recognize Israel and live peacefully with Israel. c) In 
light of the above, the fulfillment of Israel's commitment according 
to the agreement is conditioned on a properly conducted vote at the 
Palestinian National Council. 5. a) Israel persists in its demand 
for the transfer of suspects and wanted fugitives according to the 
agreement. b) As for the list of 30 suspects, the government notes 
the Prime Minister's statement, according to which: The arrest of 
the 30 suspects is included in the Working Plan for Combating Terrorism, 
so that one third will be arrested at each phase of the 12 weeks, 
and the U.S. has promised Israeli that this will be implemented. The 
U.S. has also committed to Israel that there will be special arrangement 
to prevent a ``revolving door'' policy in relation to these prisoners, 
and that if nevertheless a release of these prisoners will occur, 
it will be considered a violation of the agreement. 6. As to the third 
Further Redeployment, in so far as Israel, according to its own judgment, 
will make a decision on it, the scope of the redeployment will not 
exceed the total of one percent in all categories. 7. In the negotiations 
on Judea, Samaria and the Gaza District, the government will preserve 
the vital national interests of the State of Israel, as affirmed in 
the government's decision of January 14, 1998. These include security 
areas, the areas around Jerusalem, the areas of Jewish settlement, 
infrastructure interests, water sources, military and security locations, 
the areas around north-south and west-east transportation arteries, 
and historic sites of the Jewish people. 8. The government asserts 
that a unilateral declaration by the Palestinian Authority on the 
establishment of a Palestinian state, prior to the achievement of 
a final status agreement would constitute a substantive and fundamental 
violation of the Interim Agreement. In the event of such a violation, 
the government would consider itself entitled to take all necessary 
steps, including the application of Israeli rule, law and administration 
to settlement areas and security areas in Judea, Samaria, and Gaza, 
as it sees fit. Israel reiterates its position, in accordance with 
the agreement with the PA, that the final status must be the result 
of free negotiations between the parties without the implementation 
of unilateral steps which will change the status of the area. 9. The 
government will continue to pursue its policy of strengthening and 
developing the communities in Judea, Samaria, and the Gaza Strip, 
on the basis of a multi-annual plan. 10. The government will see to 
it that security roads will be built in Judea, Samaria, and the Gaza 
District. 11. The government expresses its hope that there will be 
complete compliance with the provisions of the Wye River Memorandum, 
and that this agreement will contribute to the advancement of peace. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>