<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981111.1130.0126 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States is honoring its military veterans today. And John 
Glenn and his space shuttle "discovery" crewmates will be honored 
in the veterans day parade in Houston, Texas. Keith Oppenheim is standing 
by live in Houston with the latest. Hi, Keith. I'm on the corner of 
Smith and Texas in downtown Houston, a Couple blocks away from the 
start of the parade scheduled for about three hours from now. This 
is actually Houston's first-ever veterans day parade, but it's being 
called Houston celebrates America's heroes, a tribute to the "discovery" 
crew and John Glenn. Houston is getting ready. 100 giant bags of biodegradable 
packing materials are being moved to the right places to shower on 
the seven "discovery" astronauts. For 77-year-old John Glenn, that 
will be reminiscent of 36 years ago, when the success of his three 
orbits in "friendship 7" was celebrated in a New York ticker tape 
parade. I got great satisfaction the first time out of just being 
up there and being the first one to do this for our country. And here 
I am all these years later, I'm very, very proud and have a great 
sense of satisfaction, participating with such a great crew as this. 
The entire crew will be hailed in the Houston parade, but no doubt 
it is John Glenn alone who has given inspiration to the senior set. 
I'm pushing 70, it means it's not all over yet. he's 77. Maybe I can 
play a few more rounding of tennis. But the celebration today is not 
just about the triumphant return of the world's oldest astronaut, 
it is also a reminder that for three decades, Houston has played a 
special role in America's quest into outer space. Think about John 
Glenn coming -- I mean, going to space the second time, it brought 
back notoriety to Houston. I think Houston is one of the most mobile 
and upcoming cities and it's just progressing and this helps. At the 
end of the parade, there will be a grand finale, six of the "discovery" 
crew members will drive by in 1955 classic thunderbird convert convertibles. 
Then John Glenn, his wife, annie the mayor of Houston, Lee brown, 
and also don Goldin, will drive by in a 1926 rolls Royce. Reporting 
live, I'm Keith Oppenheim. As you said, Glenn is popular all over, 
but particularly in Houston. I bet a big crowd is expected there today. 
We've heard estimates of up to 750,000 people coming down to downtown 
Houston to watch this parade, but there's really nothing to compare 
it to, because this is the first-ever veterans day parade in this 
city. Keith, we'll check back with you later to see how it went, thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>