<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981111.0130.1482 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hot pink? Metallic blue? Burnt umber? No, they're not crayola crayons, 
but they could be the best words to describe the appearance of some 
New York dogs. Jeanne Moos has their colorful story. Some people dress 
their pets, some people even diaper them. But if you really want to 
go all the way -- now, is he going to be completely blue? Completely 
blue. She's going to be hot pink. Hot pink? Completely blue? What 
is it? It is the latest service offered by a New York store called 
"Urban pets" -- or maybe we should say "urbane." Do you think that 
breed looks good in pink? Yeah. I think it's a nice -- it looks classy. 
Classy? At one point, Misha looked like she was getting a bloodbath. 
But hey, it's only food coloring. What do you call yourself? I guess 
a fur colorist. I don't know. Eric Gonzalez first began coloring pets 
when he dyed a poodle purple to accompany a model down the runway. 
The vegetable dye only works on white or cream-colored pets. He's 
a natural platinum blonde here. Before -- after -- How funny. Before 
-- after -- Oh, you look so handsome, you look like a little smurf 
dog. Urban pets also dyes cats. In fact, the most difficult dye job 
so far involved putting spots on a White cat, turning meow to moo. 
A cat, they wanted it to --? To look like a cow. The dyeing process 
is pretty simple. Though Max here had a last-minute panic attack. 
After you bathe the pet, you squirt dye all over him, avoiding the 
eyes. You're looking good. Max didn't seem to think so, as he tried 
to cover his rear. You must immediately dry the dog once the food 
coloring is on, so it sets. Who would do this to their pet? You know, 
some people, their dogs are like their kids. You know, he's like -- 
Would you dye your kids? Yeah. Sure makes it easy to spot from a distance. 
It's a leftover from halloween or something. Actually for halloween, 
Misha's owner dressed her up as Jackie O in cape and matching hat. 
Sources tell us, even JFK Jr. brought his dog here to be dyed for 
halloween. And this woman had her pet turned into a pumpkin. Come 
here, sweetie. Unless you wash it off, the food dye stays on about 
two weeks. If it's attention you want, don't dye your own hair, dye 
hers. Beautiful. Absolutely beautiful. -- Western civilization and 
it's come to this. You shouldn't with nature because nature will you 
in the end, you know? I want one. a dye job costs 45 to 85 bucks. 
How about that? Vets tell us dogs are colorblind, though when pink 
met blue, she showed her true colors. Jeanne Moos, CNN, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>