<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981111.2130.1503 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Teenagers are bombarded with images of thin models in magazines, movies 
and on television. Cherie Sylvester reports on the pressure to be 
thin in Hollywood. Despite a denial of anorexia in "people" magazine, 
Calista flockhart will probably be asked eating disorder questions 
for years to come. That's the downside. The upside -- a renewed dialogue 
about the pressures to stay thin in hollywood. This, from teen sensation 
brandy -- I am so caught into that, "oh my God, I have to lose weight. 
Where is my fen-Phen?" I know fen-Phen's off the market, but, you 
know, it's like, "where is it?" I need to be thin. I can't eat a lot 
of McDonald's. I think it's very important to teenagers who are in 
the films to be very thin. But unfortunately, some of us can't get 
to that point. Like, I have thighs up the ying-Yang. Her "I still 
know what you did last summer" co-star, Jennifer love Hewitt, says 
it's about self-image. I don't like to get over a certain weight because 
the camera does add pounds. And I like to feel good about myself or 
what I'm seeing on screen, but it's not a big thing. Studies show 
that Hollywood's images have affected our cultural ideal. The ideal 
body image has gotten thinner, even as the population at large has 
gotten, well, larger. I've had clients come in with pictures of Calista 
Flockhart. I've had clients come in with pictures of Kate Moss and 
say, "this is what i think I'm supposed to look like." Eating disorders 
affect 2 million Americans. Experts note the problems are even more 
prevalent in Hollywood. Any time you get a group of women that is 
in an environment where thinness is a prerequisite to succeed, the 
rate of anorexia goes up ten times. So actresses as a group are a 
very high-risk group. Chicken fingers, hot dogs, quesedillas -- now, 
you really need to update this menu. This "90210" star has come to 
terms with, quote "not being the skinniest girl on TV." Thank God 
I've worked with people who've never pressured me into having to lose 
weight. But there is a certain amount of double-talk when weight comes 
up as a job requirement. Power producer Jerry bruckheimer -- You hire 
the actress for who they are and what they are and how talented they 
are, not necessarily how much they weigh. Certainly, looks bear a 
big part of it, because audiences want to look at appealing things. 
Former "designing woman" Delta Burke felt the pressure. She now says 
her salad days were far from glamorous. I was starving and so thin. 
And if I stood up, I passed out. They still said I was too big. I 
looked back at that film now. I was a goddess, a bleeping goddess 
is what I was. And I never knew it. I never saw it. Burke has since 
moved to New Orleans and designs plus-sized clothing. I feel good 
about myself, and I never did here. You know, you're just never quite 
good enough here. Sherri Sylvester, CNN, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>