<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981111.2100.0829 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're back now, continuing our coverage. A clear sign of the seriousness 
of this latest crisis came when the chief u.N. weapons inspector pulled 
out all of his foreign staff out of Iraq. Mr. Butler is with us this 
evening from New York. How will this U.S. air strike differ from previous 
U.S. attempts to pun usual Iraq? Brian that's for the U.S. authorities 
to decide. This is a very serious confrontation by Iraq of the security 
council, and I don't see any diplomatic solution around as we speak 
tonight. There's a growing sense that air strikes or enforcement is 
becoming more and more likely. Are the inspectors that made up your 
team and continue to make up your team as has been reported, are they 
hoping -- helping with target list formation? Absolutely not. I heard 
a suggest of this today. That is propaganda. We have a clear knowledge 
of what we've been to inspect and where Iraq made weapons of mass 
destruction. We have an utterly firm policy on all the information 
being passed to us and that is, it stays with us. Be sides, the United 
States military doesn't need information us from. I'm sure they've 
combot what they need. I want to emphasize, not us from. Are all of 
your people identifyable? Are they all out and and do you think the 
government and by extension, the people of Iraq have been sufficiently 
warned, because various reports have us just a few hours away from 
some kind of action here? All of our people are out and safe, thank 
God. We worked very fast on Tuesday night all through the night to 
make that possible. They arrived safely in Bahrain in the middle of 
Wednesday. Jrblings what do you do literally after the smoke clears 
now? When would be the first trip back into Iraq to look at what is 
left? Well, I can't know that either, Brian. The lodgic of the situation 
is that Iraq has to owe bithe disarmament law. If it refuses to do 
so and military action is therefore taken, one of the first things 
I'm sure would be pointed out to them when, as you put it, the smoke 
is cleared, is why this happened, they have to obey the disarmament 
law. Based on what you know from your post at the U.S. what might 
have been shared with you from U.S. officials, do you have any doubt 
something is imminent tonight? Again, I'm sorry. I don't know about 
that I was gitch a strong recommendation on Tuesday night by United 
States authorities that I should remove my people. My first responsibility 
was for their safety and therefore, I acted accordingly. Richard Butler, 
thank you very much for coming on the air with us tonight. ok. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>