<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981111.2100.2168 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is another component the military is powerless to do anything 
about next week the earth will pass through the tale of temple-tuttle, 
producing meteors that may affect satellites and the earth's orbit. 
They are worried the meteor shower could inflict damage on military 
satellites involved in communingses. With us to explain the seriousness 
of this threat is Geoff Chester of the U.S. naval observatory. He 
is with us from our Washington bureau tonight. As meteor showers go, 
how large this is one? As meteor showers go, is the headlines this 
will make the damage it will cause ort show put on earth? One of those 
situations where we can't tell you for sure. The problem with this 
storm or this particular meteor shower is that it is shown in the 
past a propens ti to storm about every 33 years. That's every time 
that the come et comes back to the inner solar system. It doesn't 
always do that it did it in 1833, 1866, in 1999 and 190 o'everyone 
expected a big one in 1933. Nothing showed up. In 1966, we had probable 
lit single greatest meteor storm in recorded history. Whether this 
will repeat itself again this time or not is anybody's guess. I don't 
think we're going to see anything like we saw in 1966. However, I 
think there is a possibility that the activity could be 10 times, 
maybe 100 times more than it has been in the past few years. Of course, 
what wasn't a problem in 1966, satellite business, it wasn't up and 
running. Now, I'm told, we have 90,000 tons of equipment in space, 
shting right now. In the worst-case scenario, could say television 
networks, computer networks be knocked off the air or offline? The 
interesting situation is even if we were to have 150,000 shooting 
stars per hour visible from the ground, the space between them is 
still really quite enormous. The likelihood of any single satellite 
being struck and incapacitated by one of these is fairly small. With 
the large number of satellites up there and potential for a large 
number of hits, it's possible that one satellite might suffer more 
damage than another one would the damage itself is not so much a particle 
kind of shooting through it like a bullet, shooting through the satellite. 
The damage is more likely to be caused by lots of small impacts building 
up what is essentially a big static charge on the satellite, which 
will discharge through a critical computer chip or something like 
that. These things happen randomly with meteor showers or without. 
We had one two or three weeks ago that knocked out an earth's censor. 
Another suffered a similar act months ago, knocked out a lot of pagers. 
We don't know exactly what the effect will be. My personal take is 
if we take the proper precautions, try to station the satellites in 
such a way they present the minimum crosssection to be hit by one 
of these particles, most satellites will probably come through OK. 
Final question, Geoff. If you're the Pentagon and satellites take 
on a crucial role because they give you your day to day snapshots 
of momplets and baddle field assessments, are you a little more than 
worried tonight? I would take same precautions a commercial satellite 
operator would do, one that carries this program around the world. 
Try to minimize the cross-section and critical components that could 
be hit by these particles. Most satellites are designed to with stand 
impacts of this sort. We go through meteor showers like this several 
times during the course of a Given year. Some showers produce rates 
of 100 shooting stars per hour if you see them from the ground. It's 
possible we'll see this much out of this storm. We may see 10 times 
as much. Still, the threat to individual satellites is not that critical. 
Rare as the human who can actually explain, let alone understand astronomy, 
geoff Chester is one of them. We'll probably have you back next week 
for a post game show. Thank you for coming object on tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>