<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981111.2100.0063 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And good Thursday evening to you tonight. American forces a wait a 
final order before launching attack from land, sea and air on several 
already-selected targets inside Iraq. Iraq has answered the American 
threat, and the president has been notifying congressional leaders 
throughout this day. Here is the very latest as we go on the air this 
evening. More American fighting personnel and hardware heading to 
the Persian gulf region tonight to join the 23,000 already in place. 
More combat aircraft and the U.S.S. anti-price carrier on the way. 
We owe owe they say they have complied with the U.N. weapons inspectors. 
The U.S. state department says Iraq is trying to shift the blame here. 
A U.N. spokesman says, unlike last name, Kofi Annan has no plans to 
travel to Baghdad to intervene in this. Egypt and other Arab states 
says Iraq will be solely to blame for any military action if it fails 
to comply with U.N. demands. We have all angles of this story covered 
this evening. We'll be checking in live at the White House. At the 
Pentagon from Jim miklazewski, Linda Vester in Baghdad and Tom aspell 
is in Tel Aviv. We begin with NBC news White House correspondent David 
Bloom. David? The president's national security team has finished 
a roughly two-hour meeting. Its purpose was in part to select final 
target sites in Iraq. All indications are any U.S. military strike 
against Iraq would not come until tomorrow night. We're also told 
this evening it is increasingly likely that the president's planned 
did he parture Saturday night for an Asia submit could be canceled 
or postponed. From Iraq's deputy prime minister, a highly personal 
attack on president clinton. Tariq Aziz delaming this -- blaming this 
latest crisis from refusing to free Iraq from economic sanctions. 
They are being blocked continuously, illegally by his government. 
He and his government are the problem, not Iraq. But Iraq's argument 
was significantly undercut today when eight Arab nations issued this 
statement warning Iraq must act to avoid military confrontation. If 
it fails to do so, the Iraqi government will be solely responsible. 
There is nothing to negotiate. They have a simple choice, to reverse 
course or face the consequences of refusing. Tonight as the president's 
national security team meets, U.S. and U.N. officials say any attack 
is not likely until at least tomorrow eveninging. why? Because U.S. 
bombers and fighters are not yet in striking position. It is Friday 
and holly day in Baghdad. And because Kofi Annan is set to meet tomorrow 
afternoon with the U.N. security council. I have no plans to go to 
Baghdad at the moment. Nice senior officials insist President Clinton 
has made no final decision authorizing the use of force. It can end 
peacefully if Iraq, which is to say Saddam, comes back into total 
and prompt compliance. Departmently secretary of state warned today 
of a series of U.S. military strikes, possibly lasting a week or more. 
It's not at all clear tonight that president or the American people 
have the stomach for such a sustained campaign, and the civilian casualties 
which would be sure to follow. Brian? David Bloom, thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>