<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981111.2100.1158 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With this latest crisis in Iraq, many are wondering whether a new 
round of air strikes will accomplish anything more than the last ones 
have. We're joined tonight by retired lieutenant general Bernard Trainor. 
He served in both Korea and Vietnam wars. He was dependency cheer 
of staff for the joint chiefs, co-shor of the general's war. He is 
currently a military analyst for NBC news. He is affilliated with 
Harvard universities. General, you heard from Mr. Butler no way the 
U.S. weapons inspector helped in selecting of the target list. How 
then do we know what to go after this time and how will this mission 
differ from the others? Brian, there's almost a sense of deza vou. 
The class of targets we went after in 1991 in desert storm will be 
the same targets we'll go after this time. The sort of thing that 
supports the infrastructure and power base of Saddam hussein, with 
one major exception. The 32,000 strikes that took place in 1991, almost 
90% of them were against the Iraqi field forces that were in quathe. 
There are no -- Kuwait. There are no Iraqi force necessary Kuwait. 
That's taken out of the equation. It's the political infrastructure, 
command and control infrastruketure, republican guard. Known and suspected 
facilities for weapons of mass destruction that sort of thing. It 
will be in large measure a repeat of what we saw back in 1991. General 
what about what they like to call collateral damage, in this case 
civilian lives? How do you protect against that? We're going to have 
something more on the crews missile later in this broadcast. It is 
not pin-point accuracy. Number one, you don't hit a target where there 
are any civilians and innocents around. Saddam Hussein has been clever 
enough to put a lot of his fat yilts in populated areas and put a 
lot of his equipment and so forth next to mosques and institutions 
like that which we dare not hit. The other thing you can do is to 
ensure you're using precision-guide munitions. 7% of the strikes that 
took place in the gulf war were with P. -- P.G.M.'s. they got a lot 
of publicity. Most of them were using conventional ordnance. This 
time we're probably talking about 40% to 50% of the weapons out there 
are P.G.M.'s tees are very accurate. Nonetheless there will be civilians 
killed and damage to nonmilitary instant talations. That's the cost 
of war. Some of this will require actual American pimets flying aircraft 
and dropping bombs and missiles. How much anti-aircraft fire should 
they be told to expect? You tell pilots to expect the worst. They're 
afraid of the golden bebe that gets them. Saddam Hussein's defense 
ability is nothing like it what is during the gulf war. The initial 
strikes will be largely designed to take out his air defenses, his 
early warning radar, fire direction radar, missiles themselves, his 
aircraft. He still has about 350 aircraft, although they are not top 
of the line and their pilots don't have any significant training. 
These will be the things that will be taken out. When manned aircraft 
go in to carry out their missions, the threat is minimized. To say 
the threat is going to be eliminated would be wrong. You must be prepared 
for the fact we're going to take pilot losses. Lieutenant general 
Bernard Trainor retired, thank you very much. I know you're all but 
moving into our studios in the next couple of days if there is an 
air strike as we expect. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>