<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981111.2100.1970 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're joined tonight by a man who has seen Iraq's capabilities, Dr. 
John hillen is a former U.S. army officer who rved in the Persian 
gulf war where he was awarded the bronze star for actions in combat 
and curnedly on the council on foreign relations. He joins us from 
Washington. Dr. hillen, what do you think is the policy at work here? 
That's by way of asking again how will this action differ from the 
others we have seen in that theetsner It's hard to tell at this point, 
Brian. I think what we've seen and talked about tonight is throwing 
the first punch. We know there is a possibility U.S. may take military 
action, and that the the form that military action will take. What 
we haven't heard from the White House is how that military action, 
once taken, will lead to the solution we want in Iraq. We know what 
the first play of the game is, but we're not quite sure about the 
entire game plan. Everyone talks about that as kind of the holly policy 
grail, but what can the options be after the smoke clears on what 
could be a protracted three, four, five, seven-day cruise missile 
and bombing campaign? The preferred option is Saddam does what we 
want, which is to comply with the sanctions regime and behave in accordians 
with international norms. Despite this muscle, we're left to hope 
he complies. The president said in his speech yesterday he hopes and 
prays that Saddam will cooperate. Even after striking Saddam with 
air power, you are left in a sense to hope he cooperates. You merely 
put more pressure on him in terms of compelling Saddam to do exactly 
what we want that might require more force. I'm not sure we're willing 
to go there right now. When you use terms like compelling, he was 
about at vanquished as any enany could have been years ago after the 
major conflict. Here we're back at this point in 1998, did you think 
after that conflict that we would be in this spot? Well, we knew at 
the time we were not going after Saddam. We evicted the Iraqi army 
from Kuwait and performed the mission that U.S. approved and the U.S. 
people agreed to support. What has happened since then is obviously 
this recuring pattern of Saddam acting up and U.S. having to react. 
You can almost set your watch by it. It happens with great regular 
laret. Unless we're prepared to continue to accept this as a way of 
doing business -- And it's a very expensive way of doing business, 
we have to make fundamental choices. Will we pull back and live with 
Saddam or move forward and must are the international Con census and 
political consensus in the U.S. to undertake a More exensive plan. 
Does American intelligence know where he is at any given time? I think 
they have a fair idea. There is no doubt the weapons could be used 
to strike at or around him. He's an elusive fellow. As are his weapons 
of mass destruction. There are no guarantees. They've got a pretty 
good idea of his where abouts. John hillen, thank you very much for 
your views on this next engagement with Iraq. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>