<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981111.2100.2598 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More an week ago now, Minnesota voters shook up the political landscape 
and surprised the rest of the country by electing a third-party candidate. 
Not only is Jesse Jesse a former pro-wrestler, but a member of former 
military forces. Last Tuesday he became the first perform party candidate 
to be elected to office. He spent the day at the national governor's 
association seminar nor new governors. He is with us from Delaware. 
Mr. governor elect, has it dawned on you with Americans headed off 
for some sort of conflict in Iraq, among your roles as governor, control 
of the national guard, could you have or could still be called upon 
to volunteer one of your units in an effort, probably the biggest 
responsibility of any state governor? Well, that's certainly it. For 
right now, I'm just the governor elect. We still have governor Carlson 
in charge of Minnesota. It would have to be after January 4, before 
that would fall on to me. I hope this is resolved prior to my taking 
office. We should note you had a voice up until about yesterday, but 
you have been being talked to and being asked to talk at the governor's 
gathering. What's been the reaction to the members of what will be 
the freshman class of governors to your presence? Well, they're excited. 
They've been terrifically nice. We're all meeting each others, shaking 
hands and talking a few election stories. It's been very cordial and 
fun, and most of all for my wife Terry, it's given her an opportunity 
to meet some of the other governor's wives. Some have been around 
for a while. They'll tell us things that will be helpful in the next 
four years to come. You've seen some of the coverage nationally that 
features some critics or columnists in your home state or fellow politicians 
or aides in the state house saying he doesn't have anyone on his team 
who knows how the game is played. Isn't that part of why you ran, 
and part of your thrill atic elected, that you don't want to fall 
into that trap? That may be it exact lifment we ran under the old 
premise here in the United States of America that everyone is really 
qualified. If you look at the qualifications, it says live in the 
state for one year, be over 25 years of age. Plus, I believe very 
strongly that our fore fathers created this country for someone to 
go and serve. When they're done serving, go back to what you used 
to do I think we've lost sight of that I think that message went out 
to the people of Minnesota and they said, hey, we're going to go for 
it. We're going to try it. Who knows what could happen in other states 
in years to come. You mention arne Carlson remains in office. Do you 
have a team that is working with his folks, what's usually a Peaceful 
transition in the federal and state and local level as one office 
holder gets prepared to take the office over? It's going great. I 
made chief of staff Steve fosacker. He was part of the transition 
staff when the new University president came in Steve has taken omplete 
he's doing a great job so far. Governor Carlson has been supportive. 
We want to may the transition as soon as possible. We all agree that 
well-being of the state of Minnesota is first and foremost, not any 
of our individual beliefs or anything like that I have to ask you 
a military question given the timing of this interview tonight. We 
learned after the gulf war the first team, the first American forces 
to arrive in the gulf were Navy seals. They came on land in the dark 
of night and were there for days. Some of them actually, physically 
lit up with lasers, some of the targets building that lace other owe 
sensing aircraft came in and hit. They stayed quiet and were self-sufficient. 
What should we be thinking about this kind of mission, the role of 
those kinds of American forces, and while not wanting to endanger 
anyone, do you think they're playing that same role as we speak right 
now? Well, I've been out for a long, long time now. You can rest assured 
the Navy seals nrks my opinion, are the most elite, best motivated 
fighting man we have in this country. Rest assured, I can probably 
say they're playing a big role in this. I know nothing about it. I 
wouldn't Venture to mage any guess of the sort. Rest assured the Navy 
seals will be playing a part as they will in any encounter the United 
States has. I want to say to them, I'm proud of you as being a former 
member. They will do an outstanding job. That may be a television 
first, the government elect of the staste minnesota with an inside 
the park greeting for his fellow members of the navy seals. Jesse 
Jesse, thank you vitch for coming on the air. Rest that voice. Thank 
you Brian. God bless all our soldiers. What they're going to face, 
they need all our best well wishes, our prayers and thoughts go out 
to them now. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>