<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0324 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In these days when nobody's memory is sacred, the likes of J.D. Salinger 
and Philip Roth have been skewered by former lovers, and Paul Theroux 
has described every odd element in the character of V.S. Naipaul, 
nobody has suffered more from critical reappraisal than that onetime 
legend of raw, courageous integrity, Lillian Hellman. Indeed, Hellman, 
the playwright and memoirist who died in 1984, has by now been attacked 
by so many for so many different reasons that her reputation, both 
when it was good and when it was challenged, seems an emblem of the 
vagaries of opinion, the transience of fame, the elusiveness of truth. 
Not all that long ago, her autobiographical books _ ``An Unfinished 
Woman,'' ``Pentimento'' and ``Scoundrel Time'' _ were icons of an 
era, moral beacons for the generation coming of age, telling of an 
effort to remain truthful to one's convictions in the face of the 
forces of dishonesty and repression. The Hellman of ``Scoundrel Time'' 
was a heroic martyr of the McCarthy witch hunts when so many who were 
less courageous named names before the House Un-American Activities 
Committee. Hellman's book ``Pentimento,'' about her supposed experience 
smuggling money to the anti-Hitler resistance in Europe before World 
War II, was made into a movie, ``Julia,'' with Jane Fonda and Vanessa 
Redgrave. After the movie came out in 1977, millions watched on television 
as Hellman got a standing ovation at the Academy Awards celebration. 
During that time she appeared in an advertisement, posing dramatically, 
proud and dark-haired, as a living legend. In the absence of any polling, 
it is difficult to say how many of her former admirers retain their 
full-blooded esteem for Hellman, the author of ``The Little Foxes,'' 
who famously wrote, in a letter to the House committee, ``I cannot 
and will not cut my conscience to fit this year's fashions.'' Certainly, 
many of Hellman's works, which include the anti-fascist play ``Watch 
on the Rhine,'' ``The Children's Hour'' and the lyrics for Leonard 
Bernstein's musical ``Candide,'' have their place in American cultural 
history. But there is also no question that Hellman's critics, many 
of whom have been gunning for her for decades, have had their day, 
and her reputation for integrity has suffered accordingly. The decline 
tells something about the nature of legend, its susceptibility to 
wear and tear. In Hellman's case, the posthumous re-examination has 
to do with the playing out of old battles between American liberals 
and conservatives, or to put this another way, between anti-communists 
and those who felt that American anti-communism was more dangerous 
than communism itself. Since the Soviet Union's collapse and revelations 
in Soviet archives indicating the U.S. Communist Party's near-total 
subservience to Moscow, Cold War conservatives have gained strength 
in a number of old arguments, including the one that has long swirled 
around Hellman. Beyond that is the simple, slow accretion of new biographical 
information about her. And legends, based on a degree of myth, often 
fail to survive new information. The latest stab at the Hellman reputation 
comes from writer Rosemary Mahoney, who spent the summer of 1978 at 
Hellman's house on Martha's Vineyard and has now written a book about 
the experience, ``A Likely Story: One Summer With Lillian Hellman'' 
(Doubleday). Ms. Mahoney writes that she went to Hellman's home to 
be a part-time housekeeper, but Hellman turned her into a full-time 
servant. Ms. Mahoney here gets some revenge for that insult, drawing 
a stinging portrait of her boss (and of some of her boss' friends) 
as petty, frightened, vain and imperiously cranky. Ms. Mahoney deals 
primarily with the personal side of the Hellman issue, but most of 
the attacks on her have been more political than personal. Or they 
have to do with the old stories she told in her memoirs. Indeed, some 
scenes in Ms. Mahoney's summertime portrait show Hellman worrying 
about early attacks on her veracity, striving to figure out a way 
to respond to them. Among the earliest and probably the still most 
famous anti-Hellman salvo was delivered by novelist Mary McCarthy, 
who said of Hellman on television in the late 1970s, ``Every word 
she writes is a lie including `and' and `the.''' In 1981, Martha Gellhorn, 
the former wife of Ernest Hemingway, questioned the veracity of some 
portions of ``An Unfinished Woman,'' in which Hemingway and Gellhorn 
play a prominent role. A couple of years later, a far heavier blow 
to Hellman's record for veracity came when psychoanalyst Muriel Gardiner 
published a memoir, ``Code Name: Mary,'' in which she identified herself 
as the historical Julia, the main figure, aside from Hellman herself, 
in ``Pentimento.'' It did seem, especially after a devastating article 
on Hellman and ``Pentimento'' that appeared in Commentary a year or 
so later, that Hellman had falsely made herself the heroine of somebody 
else's story. One of the most complex and sustained criticisms of 
Hellman is contained in a recent book, ``The Stolen Legacy of Anne 
Frank,'' by Ralph Melnick (Yale University Press). The ``stolen legacy'' 
is Anne's, in Melnick's view, specifically the way in which Hellman 
and a group of others in theatrical and movie circles, all of them 
close to the Communist Party, conspired to remove the specifically 
Jewish character of Anne's tragedy, turning her instead into a universal 
symbol of persecution. Melnick argues that Hellman was an anti-Semitic 
Jew and a pro-Stalinist at a time when Stalin was waging a campaign 
against what Soviet propaganda called ``bourgeois Jewish nationalism.'' 
Melnick tells a complicated story with a large cast of characters, 
but in essence he makes the case that Hellman's role in suppressing 
Anne's Jewishness was a counterpart to Stalin's murderous persecution 
of ``Jewish nationalists.'' The point about Hellman is that she was 
at the vortex of ideological and political struggles of yesteryear 
and that these combats are being cast in a different light today. 
Recent articles have reported on a scholarly reassessment of the McCarthy 
period. It does not exonerate Sen. Joseph McCarthy for his dishonesty 
or brutality, but it does support the position that Moscow-controlled 
communists were more powerful and more threatening than many had believed. 
Hellman, whether she was a communist or not (and the latest evidence 
is that she was, at least for a few years), was probably too stubbornly 
individualistic to submit much to party discipline. But she was loath 
to criticize Stalinist excess and very quick to condemn others who 
did criticize Stalin's cruelties. And, as Mary McCarthy put it (with 
some exaggeration), Hellman does seem to have falsified much in her 
own record. The tide has shifted. Stalinist apologetics are out of 
fashion. That fact, and the slow accumulation of anti-myth information 
about Hellman, have combined to tarnish her once radiant reputation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>