<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0446 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Israeli Cabinet, after a two-week delay, conditionally approved 
the land-for-security peace accord Wednesday night, attaching a series 
of stipulations and threats that the Palestinians interpreted as overtures 
to conflict, not resolution. The approval by the 17-member Cabinet 
was a shaky victory for Benjamin Netanyahu, the beleaguered Prime 
Minister of Israel who faces stiff opposition from the right. Eight 
of the Cabinet's 17 ministers voted in favor, five ministers abstained 
and four voted against the agreement, which was reached with American 
mediation at talks last month between Netanyahu and Yasser Arafat, 
the Palestinian leader, at the Wye Plantation in Maryland. The ratification 
came after three days of raucous deliberation, interrupted by a terrorist 
attack last Friday and resumed Wednesday morning. ``The agreement 
may have been reaffirmed technically, but the ministers have no confidence 
in the government,'' said Yitzhak Levy, the Minister of Education 
and leader of the National Religious Party, who voted against it. 
The Cabinet's approval was welcomed by Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albrigh ``as an important step forward in the peace process,'' the 
State Department spokesman, James Rubin, said. The agreement goes 
to the Israeli Parliament on Thursday, where a majority is expected 
to approve it, although the vote could be complicated if a motion 
of no-confidence _ or of confidence _ in the government is appended. 
The feeble majority in the Cabinet underscores the weakness of Netanyahu's 
coalition, which has become increasingly dysfunctional as a governing 
body. In a televised news conference announcing the ratification, 
Netanyahu, flanked by Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon, issued what amounted 
to a threat to annex chunks of the West Bank if the Palestinians moved 
next spring to unilaterally declare an independent state. ``We reserve 
the right to apply Israeli law to the security areas, to the Jerusalem 
area and the area of the settlements and to other things that are 
accepted as vital interests of Israel,'' Netanyahu said. The Cabinet 
shackled its support for the agreement to conditions that are likely 
to prove future points of friction. It said that the entire Palestinian 
National Council, which has 670 members, must meet and vote by a majority 
to strike clauses calling for Israel's destruction from the Palestinian 
covenant. That goes beyond the text of the accord, which makes no 
mention of a vote or a majority decision. And some Palestinian leaders 
have proclaimed that no vote will be taken because they believe a 
vote taken in April 1996 should suffice. The Cabinet also declared 
that in the third redeployment, which the peace accord says will be 
deliberated by a committee, Israeli troops will withdraw from no more 
than an additional 1 percent of the West Bank. And the ministers said 
they will reconvene to reconsider the accord's approval after each 
brief phase of the 12-week implementation period, weighing whether 
the Palestinians have lived up to their promises before recommitting 
to the next troop withdrawal. Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, 
tried through his chief spokesmen to emphasize his relief that the 
accord had been ratified. ``The important thing is that they approved 
the agreement,'' said Nabil Abu Rudaineh, a senior spokesman. He added, 
using Netanyahu's nickname: ``Now Bibi has no excuse for delaying 
further. The implementation will create an atmosphere of trust among 
the parties.'' But other Palestinian leaders chafed at what they saw 
as the Israelis' audacity in attaching conditions to an international 
agreement that was not meant to be amended by one side. The implementation 
was structured in phases so that the Israelis and the Palestinians 
could progress toward a relationship of trust. ``The Palestinian leadership 
does not accept any of these conditions,'' said Hassan Asfour, a top 
aide to Arafat. ``This sets a dangerous precedent for the relationship. 
We are not agents of the Israelis. We do not do as they command. We 
will abide by the terms of the international agreement, and only by 
those terms.'' Netanyahu announced that he was ready to take two concrete 
steps in the next week _ to allow the opening of the Palestinian airport 
in Gaza and to return ``a batch'' of political prisoners to the Palestinians, 
``not ones with blood on their hands or members of Hamas,'' he said. 
He did not mention the first Israeli troop withdrawal, which is supposed 
to take place no later than next Monday. It has inevitably been delayed 
by the postponement of the Israeli Cabinet's ratification of the accord. 
The Israelis agreed to withdraw from an additional 13 percent of the 
West Bank in exchange for a Palestinian crackdown on terrorism. About 
15,000 Jewish settlers, who arrived in hundreds of buses from the 
West Bank, rallied against the agreement in Rabin Square in Tel Aviv 
on Wednesday night, playing to the jeering crowd a tape of a speech 
by Netanyahu in which he said it was wrong to turn over any territory 
to Arafat. ``In Jerusalem sits a clumsy, useless and confused government 
which doesn't care that our Jewish brothers in Hebron, at Katif, and 
in Judea will be hung out to dry,'' said Rehavan Zeevi, head of the 
far-right Moledet Party. ``And maybe, God forbid, murdered.'' But 
it is unclear where such rhetoric will lead, as the right wing does 
not want to topple Netanyahu only to find itself responsible for installing 
a Labor government. Also, there may be a sizable gulf between the 
settlers and their leaders. A survey by a polling firm, working for 
the leftist Peace Now group, found that only 40 percent of Jewish 
settlers were emphatic in their opposition to the peace agreement. 
In the news conference, Sharon, who was brought into the government 
partly to placate the right, presented the Israeli withdrawal from 
the West Bank as an inevitability because of the interim peace agreement 
signed by the previous government in Oslo. But the current government, 
he said, toughened it with reciprocal demands for security. ``What 
we were able to achieve, and I don't think anyone could achieve more, 
was the minimum evil,'' Sharon said. ``It's not an easy retreat. It's 
difficult and painful. But we made every possible effort not to harm 
our security.'' Appearing on a late-night interview show, Netanyahu 
said his chief concern was not Palestinian autonomy but Palestinian 
arms. ``I know there is a majority of Israelis who believe a Palestinian 
state will exist, but I am confident if we are sane that we don't 
mean an armed state next to us,'' he said. ``When you have an autonomous 
state, it's very hard to restrict sovereign decisions such as an alliance 
with Saddam Hussein. My insistence is to sterilize elements which 
will stop the Palestinians not from running their lives but from threatening 
us.'' Some political insiders expected the Cabinet to attach one more 
condition: the start of construction of a new Jewish neighborhood 
at Har Homa, in the vacant hills of southeast Jerusalem. That did 
not happen, although Netanyahu implied Wednesday night that his government 
would move forward on the project. ``Watch the papers,'' he said, 
referring to the legal advertisements that must be placed to solicit 
construction bids. Construction at Har Homa would expand the city's 
borders before its fate is decided in the delicate final phase of 
peace negotiations. It is a very sensitive issue. An Israeli decision 
to build at Har Homa provoked the 19-month freeze in the peace talks 
that ended with the signing of the peace memorandum at the White House 
on Oct. 23. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>