<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0379 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They all laughed when I sat down at the digital grand piano, but when 
it began to play ... They kept laughing when I yielded the piano bench 
to the ghost of Sergei Rachmaninoff, whose virtual fingers flitted 
over the keys in a dazzling performance of his arrangement of Nikolai 
Rimsky-Korsakov's ``Flight of the Bumblebee.'' It is impossible not 
to laugh, or at least smile, at the sight of a piano seemingly playing 
itself so frantically. And it is nearly impossible to suppress a sense 
of wonder when contemplating how recent advances in computer technology 
have allowed great pianists, some of them long dead, to perform concerts 
on the piano in one's living room. As we approach the 300th anniversary 
of the invention of the piano, artists, engineers and computer programmers 
are finding new ways to combine the richness and versatility of traditional 
pianos with the power of microprocessors. The familiar acoustic grand 
piano has not changed much in the past century, but new generations 
of pianos, some of them digital and some both acoustic and digital, 
are emerging as we enter the 21st century. The instrument that caused 
such wonder and delight in our house is the new Yamaha Disklavier 
Grantouch digital grand piano, or DGT7, which we have been testing 
in our music room for several weeks alongside our 1920s-vintage Baldwin 
grand. The DGT7 is certainly not for everybody, in no small part because 
of its $18,695 price tag, but also because many people prefer their 
grand pianos to make music the old-fashioned way, by causing hammers 
to strike metal strings of different lengths. Instead, the DGT7 creates 
its sounds by plucking them from a large database of digitized sounds 
and playing them through a set of speakers hidden where the strings 
used to be. Digital pianos are typically used by rock bands and musical 
hobbyists or by people who do not have room for a conventional piano. 
The most common models are not much more than a keyboard plugged into 
an amplifier, and the sounds they make are easily recognizable as 
electronic. Yamaha, which has been making pianos for more than a century, 
decided to put a digital piano into the same physical form as its 
acoustic grands, thereby greatly improving not only its appearance 
but also its feel and sound. The result is the DGT7. Gleaming black, 
the DGT7 is as beautiful an instrument as any conventional acoustic 
grand piano, and Yamaha says it is constructed with the same care 
and craftsmanship. The keyboard action, a complex construction of 
keys, hammers and some 12,000 additional parts, is the same as that 
used in concert grands, and it has the same feel when played. Since 
there are no strings, there is no need for an iron frame to support 
the literally tons of tension put on the strings of an acoustic grand 
piano. Instead, the DGT7 has an elaborate set of solenoids and optical 
sensors that measure the location, speed and force of the pianist's 
actions on the keys, the hammers and the three foot pedals. The sounds 
themselves are drawn from a database with 30 megabytes of digitized 
sounds _ about 10 times the sound capacity of earlier digital pianos 
_ sampled from a 9-foot Yamaha acoustic concert grand. When the middle 
C key is struck, for example, the sensors feed data to a microprocessor, 
which selects the most accurate corresponding middle C sound from 
the database: legato, staccato, loud, soft, sustained and so on. Added 
to those factors is the ``voice'' of the note _ colored for the reverberations 
of a concert hall or a cellar, as a single note or as part of a chord, 
as a piano or as a harpsichord, etc. The variables are nearly infinite. 
Because its sounds are synthesized, the DGT7 never needs tuning, and 
because each note is a clone of one produced on the big concert grand, 
the notes are as perfect as the speakers can make them. The result 
is that this five-foot digital piano has a sound much bigger than 
its actual size. The real magic of the digital piano, however, arises 
from its ability to record and play back performances. The DGT7 has 
a small computer console under the keyboard that reads performance 
instructions _ coded as standard MIDI files _ from the user's Macintosh 
or Windows PC, from another MIDI instrument or from the Internet. 
Players can record their own performances onto a disk or play back 
any of the thousands of amateur and professional performances, like 
the Rachmaninoff performance, that have been captured as MIDI files. 
The Internet is becoming a vast repository of such piano performances. 
Professionally recorded floppy disks ranging from classical to contemporary 
are available at prices ranging up to $35. (A reminder about copyright 
laws is appropriate. Sharing original compositions and public domain 
works on the Internet is fine, but flooding the world with your interpretations 
of Barry Manilow's ``Feelings'' is legally, if not morally, wrong.) 
To test the DGT7's performance capabilities, Nick, the aspiring concert 
pianist in our household, selected a diskette of Alexei Sultanov playing 
Chopin's ``Polonaise in A-flat Major,'' a work that requires that 
the pianist both caress and pound the full span of the keyboard. The 
DGT7 met the test with ease. Hearing the same performance on an audio 
CD and hearing it being actually played on the DGT7 in one's parlor 
are two very different experiences. It would be a mistake to think 
of the DGT7 as merely the latest version of the player pianos that 
were popular in the 1920s and 1930s. Besides having better sound, 
the digital pianos have an impressive repertory of technical tricks. 
The volume, both for conventional playing and for playing back recordings, 
can be set as loud or soft as desired. By plugging in a set of headphones, 
the pianist can practice well into the night without disturbing anyone 
in the next room or apartment. The keyboard action can be turned on 
or off during playback. When it's on, viewers can marvel at the key 
action, as if a ghost were playing the piano. When it's off, the owner 
can play along and improvise on the recording. The tempo can be regulated, 
allowing the user to slow Rachmaninoff's ``Bumblebee'' sufficiently 
to see each key being depressed. Alas, watching the keys provides 
no clues to his fingering. Still, I cannot imagine a finer teaching 
tool for lucky piano students and teachers. With a twist of the dial, 
one can instruct the piano to play only the left hand or right hand 
or to transpose the key. As impressive as the DGT7 is, the sounds 
it makes are still only clones of the real thing. So several companies 
are marrying the digital recording and playback capabilities of a 
digital piano with their best acoustic concert grand pianos. Two models 
today, the Boesendorfer 590SE and the Yamaha Disklavier Grand Pro 
DS6PRO, are considered state of the art. Only a few dozen of these 
high-end models are in use around the world, perhaps because of their 
$140,000-plus price tags. Other acoustic pianos with electronic reproduction 
capability are available for $50,000 and up. The inventor of the modern 
acoustic reproducing piano, Wayne Stahnke, recently harnessed his 
many skills in engineering, computer science and music to recreate 
the original performances of Rachmaninoff, who died in 1943. Stahnke 
painstakingly restored Rachmaninoff's original performances from paper 
rolls that the Russian composer and pianist made on a mechanical reproducing 
piano, converted them into digital form, replayed them on the Boesendorfer, 
and recorded the output digitally to a CD. The result is ``A Window 
in Time: Rachmaninoff Performs His Solo Piano Works'' (Terarc CD-80489, 
about $15), a remarkable new audio CD that some critics assert recreates 
a live performance by Rachmaninoff. It is certainly a showcase for 
the capabilities of pianos in the digital age. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>