<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0293 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There are ways to get more out of that technical support phone call 
_ when you finally have to make it. Here are some suggestions: TRY 
TO FIGURE IT OUT Before calling, write down the exact wording of any 
error messages you encounter. Try to reproduce the problem, and if 
you can, start to troubleshoot the process. If you are running several 
programs, close one and try to reproduce the problem. Anything that 
points to the cause of the problem will help make the support call 
more efficient. DO SOME RESEARCH Before picking up the phone, check 
online support sources. You may be able to solve your own problem 
or discover that it is part of a known problem or bug. If there is 
a bug, most manufacturers will not charge for the service call. BACK 
UP BEFORE CALLING At the first sign of trouble, you should back up 
your crucial data files. (You have been doing this unfailingly all 
along, right?) Fixing some technical problems may require drastic 
solutions like reinstalling your operating system, which may put your 
data at risk. Technical problems are stressful enough without also 
gambling with your work. CHECK THE CONNECTIONS What looks like a catastrophic 
hardware failure may just be a loose cable. If your mouse, keyboard, 
printer or monitor stops working, first check the connectors at the 
back of your computer to make sure they have not come loose. You could 
save yourself 15 minutes on the phone _ and some embarrassment. HAVE 
A PEN AND PAPER HANDY When you are on the phone, it helps to jot down 
names of people you talk to and the steps you take to solve your problem. 
Since you will probably have to restart your computer during the process, 
you cannot take notes on a word processing document. KNOW YOUR SYSTEM 
If you are calling a computer system manufacturer, have your serial 
number or invoice number ready. For all other calls, you will need 
to know your computer's processor type, operating system, RAM and 
model name. Technicians may also ask what kind of CD-ROM, modem, printer 
or other hardware you have. To find these details under Windows 95 
or 98, right-click on My Computer on the desktop and select Properties. 
Hardware details are under the Device Manager tab. KNOW YOUR SOFTWARE 
Jot down the release and serial numbers of whatever software is involved, 
including the operating system. Most of these details can be found 
under About on the Help menu. TAKE A NUMBER, AND WRITE IT DOWN Get 
the name and direct telephone number of any technician you speak with, 
and write down your customer ID or case number. If you do not resolve 
your problem on the first call, you can quote these in subsequent 
calls, like an insurance claim number, to save time. This may also 
help you prove things were awry before the warranty was up. And if 
you get good service, you will be able to pass on thanks. GO WITH 
THE FLOW Let the technician walk you through the questions. It may 
be slow going if you have already tried to solve the problem, but 
being methodical saves time in the end. And do not conceal anything 
that you may have done to your computer. Even if you think you did 
something stupid, your support representative needs to know about 
it if he is going to do his job. TAKE CHARGE IF NECESSARY If you are 
getting nowhere with a particular technical representative, it is 
quite acceptable to ask _ without being hostile _ to speak with a 
supervisor or specialist. Or you can hang up and call back _ another 
good reason to write down that customer ID. DO NOT LEAVE A CALL OPEN-ENDED 
If a technician needs time to research your question, do not hang 
up without knowing when you can expect a call back. And keep your 
case number and other notes handy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>