<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After decades of close calls with bankruptcy, a federal government 
bailout and finally a recent flood of profits from minivan and Jeep 
sales, Chrysler Corp. will disappear as an independent company on 
Thursday, merging with Daimler-Benz AG of Germany. With $140 billion 
in annual sales, the new company, DaimlerChrysler AG, will become 
the world's fourth largest, after General Motors Corp., Ford Motor 
Co. and Mitsui of Japan. DaimlerChrysler will have 428,000 employees 
and sell vehicles ranging from $12,120 Plymouth Neons to $137,895 
Mercedes-Benz CL-600 coupes. Shareholders of both companies are exchanging 
their shares for stock in the combined company, which will have dual 
headquarters here in this northern suburb of Detroit and in Stuttgart, 
Germany. Robert Eaton, Chrysler's chairman, and Juergen Schrempp, 
Daimler's chairman, will serve as co-chairman for three years; then 
Eaton is to retire and Schrempp will run the company alone. Chrysler 
and Daimler have also gone to elaborate lengths to prevent cultural 
clashes, but one of the most popular subjects of speculation now in 
the global auto industry is whether the combined company can raise 
revenues and cut costs while avoiding the cultural conflicts that 
have plagued previous cross-border alliances in the auto industry. 
Chrysler and Daimler executives are convinced that the combined company 
will be more competitive. ``There isn't any doubt this merger is based 
on growth,'' Eaton said in an interview here Wednesday. ``If anything, 
the opportunities get clearer.'' But skeptics recall that the last 
trans-Atlantic partnership, the controlling stake in American Motors 
Corp. that Renault of France obtained in the early 1980s, produced 
few savings and deep management differences; Renault ended up selling 
the company to Chrysler in 1987. Further, skeptics note that Daimler 
and Chrysler plan to continue selling all their same cars and trucks 
under the same brand names and using the same dealerships. Indeed, 
the two partners want customers to continue to perceive their brands 
as completely different, and will not even share many engines and 
other important parts. John Smith Jr., chairman and chief executive 
of GM, said in an interview Wednesday that the merger would not significantly 
increase the competitive pressure on his company. DaimlerChrysler's 
size might allow it to demand slightly better deals from parts suppliers, 
he said, but added, ``I don't see there's that much in the way of 
great synergy.'' Chrysler and Daimler officials strongly disagree. 
Chrysler decided a year ago that it had to expand outside North America 
to prosper in the long term, but that it lacked the resources to do 
so on its own, Eaton said. Slightly less than a quarter of Daimler's 
revenue comes from North America, compared with 90 percent for Chrysler; 
thus, he said, Daimler is a logical partner for marketing Chrysler's 
vehicles overseas. The merger partners plan to save money by combining 
operations that customers do not see, said Thomas Stallkamp, Chrysler's 
president. For example, when Daimler's automaking division, Mercedes-Benz, 
ships sport utility vehicles from its factory in Tuscaloosa, Ala., 
the trucks return to Alabama empty. Soon, the trucks will carry vehicles 
south from Chrysler's assembly plants in the upper Midwest and Ontario. 
Eaton said that he had signed Wednesday the last document necessary 
for Mercedes to start producing its sport utility vehicle in Chrysler's 
Jeep factory in Graz, Austria. The official language of the combined 
company will be English, partly because many German engineers speak 
English, while few Chrysler engineers speak German. Top jobs and even 
upper-middle management posts will be shared fairly evenly among Americans 
and Germans. Thursday will be the final day of trading for Chrysler's 
stock on the New York Stock Exchange. Shares of DaimlerChrysler, trading 
on a when-issued basis, rose 18.75 cents Wednesday to close at $75.875, 
while Chrysler gained 12.5 cents, closing at $47.0625. Regular trading 
of the combined company's shares is to begin Tuesday under the symbol 
DCX. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>