<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0401 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As they battle for slots in the House Republican leadership, the candidates 
talk passionately about their party's need for new faces. Or a new 
generation of leaders. Or better communication. But what is it they 
want to communicate? It is difficult to find a single answer. The 
majority that Newt Gingrich built is so deeply splintered that it 
seemed at times during the last congressional session to devolve into 
its 228 component parts, each Republican member of the House with 
a different idea of what the party should be. Is it the Eisenhower-era 
road building party that Rep. Bud Shuster of Pennsylvania might have 
envisioned when he pushed through the he largest public works bill 
ever before Congress? Or is it the party of frugality and small government 
that Rep. Joe Scarborough of Florida calls for when he criticizes 
that bill as a pork-laden abomination? Is it the Teddy Roosevelt-style 
reformist party that Rep. Christopher Shays of Connecticut fights 
for when he calls on Republicans to overhaul campaign finance law? 
Or is it a party so in step with its corporate donors that Rep. Tom 
DeLay of Texas, the House majority whip, feels free to pressure trade 
associations to hire Republicans as their lobbyists? How can New York 
Rep. Sherwood Boehlert's idea of conservation ever square with Rep. 
Helen Chenoweth's support of the Idaho timber industry? For all his 
flaws, Gingrich was widely acknowledged as his party's most skilled 
conceptualizer and theoretician. But over the past year, with a majority 
five seats larger than the one the Republicans will have in the 106th 
Congress, Gingrich could make no coherent synthesis out of this swirl 
of interests. Rep. Robert Livingston, R.-La., who will take over the 
speaker's post, has already made clear that he does not intend to 
be a theoretician. Rather he will use his management skills to make 
sure legislation is moving through the House. He has also said that 
because of the narrow, six-seat Republican majority, he will be looking 
to strike compromises with conservatives and moderate Democrats. But 
watchful Democrats, who now think they could win back the House in 
2000, suspect that such management skills will not be enough to provide 
the Republicans with a compelling new message for the electorate. 
``When the history of the Republican revolution is written, Bob Livingston 
will play Brezhnev to Newt Gingrich's Lenin,'' said Mark Mellman, 
a pollster for the House Democratic leadership, contrasting the latter-day 
bureaucrat with the Communist revolutionary. ``Members of Congress 
care deeply how the bows in the legislative packages are tied,'' he 
said. ``The public doesn't care a whit about that. They care about 
agenda and message.'' Part of the Republicans' dilemma is that the 
political ground has shifted with their own policy successes. Ever 
since Ronald Reagan, Republicans have thought that their philosophy 
of tax cutting, a strong defense and a scaled-back federal government 
would triumph. In fact, until Bill Clinton came on the scene, both 
parties had come to believe that the Republicans had a natural advantage 
in the race for the presidency that some called an ``electoral lock.'' 
The Republican takeover of Congress in 1994 left the self-proclaimed 
Republican revolutionaries with an even greater sense of omnipotence. 
Even last week on the election day that led to his party's loss of 
seats and his own resignation, Gingrich called Clinton's presidency 
``an ongoing, slow-motion collapse of the Democratic majority that 
Franklin Roosevelt created.'' But congressional Republicans, while 
holding their majority, have been floundering since Clinton flummoxed 
them by agreeing to a balanced budget with tax cuts, signed into law 
their welfare overhaul and proclaimed that the ``era of big government'' 
had ended. Democrats came out of last Tuesday's election believing 
that they now have the edge on policies that the public supports _ 
on education, and regulation of health maintenance organizations, 
the economy and Social Security. ``It's the first time in my life 
that the Democrats are in the mainstream of the country on issues 
that people care about,'' said Douglas Sosnik, 42, a senior adviser 
to Clinton. The White House is working to unveil new proposals in 
these areas and to make another run at proposals that died this year. 
As they wonder where to go, Republicans are uncertain whether to fight 
back on this Democratic ground or put renewed emphasis on traditional 
Republican issues. Shays says that the Christian right has to stop 
having a disproportionate influence on his party. ``As soon as my 
leaders started to jump when the Christian Coalition and Gary Bauer 
and others said jump, we lost a lot of voters,'' he said. But Rep. 
David McIntosh of Indiana says moving toward the center would be a 
``recipe for disaster.'' ``I think the message in this election was 
that Reagan Democrats in particular and Perot independents felt there 
was not a big difference between congressional Republicans and President 
Clinton so they went back to their traditional habits of voting.'' 
Many Republicans believe their best course is to show the ``compassionate 
conservatism'' of the party's successful governors, making their party 
more diverse to reflect the nation's changing demographics and focusing 
on the issues that unite all of their factions. ``I think the party 
has the best cohesion when it talks about fiscal issues,'' said Rep. 
Rick Lazio, R-N.Y. ``The public needs to know the Republican Party, 
as it lowers taxes and lives within its means, is also watching out 
for those less fortunate.'' So Rep. Jennifer Dunn of Washington, who 
is vying for majority leader, and Rep. J.C. Watts, the one black Republican 
in Congress, who is competing for conference chairman, may be picking 
up some currency as leaders who can appeal to women and minorities. 
But even on fiscal policy, Republicans these days have had their troubles 
finding unity. All year long, members of Congress battled over whether 
to have a tax reduction focused on married couples, or a tax cut focused 
on capital gains. At one point some House Republicans sought a $700 
billion tax reduction over five years. That idea was quickly squelched 
by Senate Republicans. Tax reform has brought no greater consensus, 
with House members splintering over whether they want a flat tax or 
to replace the income tax entirely with a national sales tax. Perhaps 
the best the House Republicans can do is create a few waves and let 
the party's presidential candidates move to center stage to fight 
out in primaries the issues that have divided Congress. Said Sosnik, 
who remembers the Democrats' own plight when Reagan and Bush held 
the presidency: ``I do believe at the end of the day God invented 
presidential primaries so that parties out of power can have a leader 
and have a message.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>