<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0368 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Agriculture Minister Nick Brown has always tried to keep his private 
life to himself. But when he heard that The News of the World, a Sunday 
newspaper specializing in sleazy sex stories, was about to publish 
a salacious interview with one of his former lovers, he took a deep 
breath and made a dramatic public confession. Yes, he said on Sunday, 
I am gay. Following the recent resignation of a Cabinet minister after 
an incident in a well-known gay meeting place, and the ``outing'' 
of yet another on television, Brown's admission has become part of 
one of the stranger periods of Prime Minister Tony Blair's 18-month-old 
Labor government. And in the process, it has drawn the country into 
a frenzied discussion about gays, public life and the role of the 
ever-intrusive news media. Homosexuals still live fairly uneasily 
in Britain, where sex between men became legal only in 1967. The number 
of openly gay men and women has increased here strikingly in recent 
years, but the country still has no laws specifically banning discrimination 
against homosexuals. Blair's government is the first that has been 
forced to deal with the issue in this way. In the past, homosexual 
sex became an issue in the high reaches of the government mostly in 
times of scandal: usually when a married Cabinet member was found 
to be leading a double life. But in this case, the prime minister 
already knew that Brown was gay, and immediately announced that the 
minister had done nothing to embarrass anyone. Brown met with a group 
of Devon farmers, who walked with him in a muddy field and said they 
didn't care whether he was gay or not, as long as he solved the country's 
farming crisis. But The Sun, which is owned by Rupert Murdoch, as 
is The News of the World, sent the story soaring out into another 
dimension altogether. ``Tell Us the Truth Tony,'' it wrote across 
its front page, raising the McCarthy-esque specter of cadres of secret, 
high-placed homosexuals nefariously foisting their own agendas on 
the country. ``Is Britain being run by a gay Mafia of politicians, 
lawyers, palace courtiers and TV bigwigs?'' The Sun, which is Britain's 
most popular daily newspaper and prides itself on being uniquely in 
tune with the common man, was not a lone voice in the wilderness. 
The Daily Telegraph printed a letter comparing the ``nauseating lifestyle'' 
of homosexuals to ``that portrayed in the recent BBC1 program `Wildlife 
on One,' showing the activities of the pygmy chimps.'' And Lord Tebbit, 
a former Tory Cabinet member, told The Times of London (also owned 
by Murdoch) that gays should be barred from certain top-level government 
jobs so that they would not be ``in a position to do each other favors.'' 
A lot of this stems from a deeply enduring strain of homophobia in 
British society, both encouraged by and reflected in its right-wing 
newspapers. But those old views seem to be coming up against a more 
permissive attitude that has left many Britons unsure of how to approach 
the issue of gays in public life. ``We're at a crossroads where people 
are not sure what they should be doing with the lesbian and gay issue,'' 
said Mark Watson, the communications director at Stonewall, an interest 
group for gays and lesbians. ``The News of the World and The Sun are 
indulging in old-style gay bashing. But society has actually moved 
on, and everyone is trying to find out where they should position 
themselves on gay rights.'' Meanwhile, a poll commissioned by the 
liberal Guardian found that 52 percent of those surveyed believed 
that being gay was compatible with being in the Cabinet, while 33 
percent said it was not. ``Britons have today declared their own verdict 
which, like the Americans who voted last week, shows their distaste 
for those who would poke and pry into the lives of others,'' wrote 
the paper in an editorial. ``The Sun's effort yesterday is in the 
worst tradition of conspiracy theories through the ages, mixing prejudice 
with fear to brand an entire community as outsiders plotting against 
the rest of us,'' The Guardian continued. ``Such a tactic has no place 
in our national dialogue. The senior staff at the Sun should be ashamed.'' 
In the government, Blair has always taken the view that it doesn't 
matter if you're gay, as long as you do your job. That is why he allowed 
Brown to stay on, but accepted the resignation of Ron Davies, the 
married Welsh secretary, who came to him with a compromising story 
of being robbed at knifepoint by a group of people he had met on Clapham 
Common, one of south London's better-known gay hangouts. And that 
is why he isn't bothered by the sexuality of Chris Smith, his arts 
secretary, who is openly gay, or of Peter Mandelson, his trade secretary, 
who has never publicly discussed his sexuality but who was identified 
as being gay on television last week. Faced with the tabloids' treatment 
of Brown, who said he found the whole incident ``enormously embarrassing,'' 
in part because his seriously ill elderly mother had not known he 
was gay, the government seemed unsure of what to do. John Prescott, 
the deputy prime minister, went on television to condemn the way the 
newspapers had acted as ``judge, jury and executioner'' in the Brown 
case. But Blair himself, probably not wanting to offend any of the 
Murdoch-owned newspapers, whose support he depended on in the last 
general election and which collectively command more than half the 
newspaper readership in the country, made it clear that the government 
would not formally complain. ``Blair Backs the Sun Over Gays!'' proclaimed 
The Sun cheerily, printing several photographs of Brown meeting a 
huge pig and wearing a regulation blue hairnet while touring a dairy 
farm (``Gay minister Nick Brown does his best to keep a straight face 
yesterday,'' the caption said). All this has put the prime minister 
in a curious position. After a year and a half in office, he is still 
seen as personally unassailable. Without being able to criticize him 
directly, news organizations have found a variety of stand-ins from 
his Cabinet. That is why it has so delighted in tormenting Mandelson, 
one of Blair's most trusted advisers, who is seen by his critics as 
an American-style spin doctor, a ``prince of darkness.'' When a gay 
columnist for The Times of London announced on television that Mandelson 
was gay, too, it was the moment some papers had been waiting for. 
The Sun _ which has been particularly nice to Mandelson lately, because 
Murdoch is trying to buy one of Britain's top soccer teams and might 
need his support _ piously urged him to reveal all to the world. Like 
the characters in ``Seinfeld,'' whose protestations that they are 
not gay are invariably followed by their assertions that there is 
nothing wrong with being gay, The Sun seemed to be trying to have 
it both ways, needling Mandelson while proclaiming that he was a great 
guy. ``Being gay is not wrong, or a source of shame,'' the paper wrote. 
``Indeed, politics has always attracted gays, much as the theater 
does.'' The Sun set up a phone number, urging gay members of Parliament 
to call in and confess to being ``part of the gay Mafia.'' But no 
one phoned. ``We didn't really think anyone would, did we?'' said 
a Sun editor, who would not give her name. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>