<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0303 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The future of artwork is on the computer. You might not like what 
computers produce, you might miss the intoxicating smell of oils or 
the tactile quality of a broken-crockery painting _ you might wonder 
whether electronic art is even fine art _ but tomorrow's works are 
bound to be created digitally. On the plus side, children who learn 
to make art digitally can become old masters of the genre by the time 
they hit 10. The four programs reviewed here range from the simple 
to the very complex and sophisticated. All will build a foundation 
of computer skills for children as young as 3. That's good: they will 
never know computer fear and will become proficient at the keyboard 
and with operating systems and printing. A harder question is whether 
any of these programs teach children to draw in the sense of lines 
across a page. In Crayola's Make a Masterpiece, for example, only 
some of the graphics and art tools bear any relation to real ones 
(like paintbrushes and colored pencils). The notions of how art can 
be made, modified, enhanced, scrapped and even finished are its most 
obvious lessons. Still, the program relies on graphics that are more 
goofy than those Michelangelo might have had in his studio. Does it 
matter? No. The Kid Pix and Art Dabbler software programs try very 
hard to create a true art environment. Their tools are vast and original, 
and both programs offer the basic paintbrushes and colored pencils. 
Dabbler may come close to teaching techniques, including how tools 
have different effects on others (a crayon drawn on cotton paper, 
for example), and even trigger something in the recesses of a child's 
imagination. And Kid Pix teaches how to use computer graphics. The 
remaining program, Orly's Draw-a-Story, is an art and writing program 
with a very winning lead character named Orly. Does it teach children 
how to draw? Not especially, but it may convey the value of an illustration 
with a story. But if you're just the tiniest bit old-fashioned (even 
sentimental) and want your children to further their art skills, none 
of these programs can replace a real art class in a real studio taught 
by a real artist. Messiness has its virtues; it's part of the process 
of making art. But these programs do spark creativity. Before you 
add any of these software programs to your palette, you may want to 
consider a new canvas. There are electronic drawing pads available, 
like Pablo from Kidboard, that essentially replace the mouse as a 
chief drawing tool with something closer to a pen. (Kidboard is currently 
selling Pablo bundled with Art Dabbler and Kai's Power Goo, both from 
Metacreations.) With Pablo, a 6-by-8-inch drawing pad with a pressure-sensitive 
stylus, you can still perform all the functions you would with a mouse, 
but you can draw as you would on paper, making thicker or thinner 
lines and even tracing drawings onto the screen. And the stylus fits 
children's small hands better than a mouse. MAKE A MASTERPIECE (IBM 
and Crayola; $19.95; Windows 95 and 98, Macintosh 7.5 and later.) 
When a software program can keep an impatient 4{-year-old in front 
of a computer monitor for three squirm-free hours, you know it's exceptional. 
This foray into Make a Masterpiece also meant a bout of independence 
for this child, who didn't need much help. Who sent this godsend, 
anyway? From the moment that Scribble, a guide with a French accent, 
introduces himself, this art program for children 5 to 12 (and overeager 
4-year-olds) is friendly and approachable. Like a good friend, he 
asks, ``How you doing?'' Given this simple introduction, it's then 
a surprise to discover that Masterpiece is, in fact, close to being 
a real art workshop _ without the mess. The major components are animated 
art tools and techniques and a catalog of famous artworks from the 
National Gallery in Washington and the State Hermitage Museum in St. 
Petersburg, Russia. The graphics look professional but are also vividly 
appealing to children. And the sound effects aim to be silly but authentic. 
(The Magic Marker tool makes a not-unpleasant screechy sound, replicating 
the noise of a marker sliding across a TV screen.) Like a mille-feuille, 
Masterpiece has many layers, which is another reason the child sat 
still for so long. She started with a simple project: painting against 
a mountainous landscape backdrop. She chose from a rich palette of 
Crayola colors, then moved into an array of stroke styles (like squiggles 
and brushstrokes) and equipment (pencils, brushes, oil, markers, watercolors 
and the like). She finished her masterpiece by dabbling on an eclectic 
group of icons. Egg splats, anyone? They make an excellent (italics)splat(end 
italics) noise. Her multimedia artwork _ a handsome mountain obliterated 
with curlicues, slashes and unidentifiable markings _ was overwrought 
and inspired but heavy on the popcorn. There was still one step left, 
a task prompted by Scribble, who asked, ``Do you want to add this 
to your permanent collection?'' Clicking yes, the 4{-year-old placed 
her painting in a frame that would have suited a Bonnard and hung 
her work in a gallery setting. Voila. A few flaws in this studio: 
the stencils tool is hard for even an adult to figure out, and the 
library of museum artworks seems slightly superfluous, especially 
for younger children. But Crayola and IBM have thought of almost everything 
with Masterpiece. For young children who can't read yet, the audible 
prompts _ polite instructions from Scribble _ are an effective lure 
and guide. The program is also neatly integrated: the art tools float 
on the screen rather than sitting at the bottom in bars, and a child's 
artwork can be stored easily in the ``gallery.'' For children who 
can read, the wide selection of tools and techniques turn this software 
into a long, satisfying engagement. It's hard to say au revoir. ORLY'S 
DRAW-A-STORY (Broderbund; $19.99; Windows 3.1 and later, and Macintosh 
7.0 and later.) The narration on Orly's Draw-a-Story quickly pulls 
children in. Orly is the narrator, a young Jamaican girl with a set 
of dreadlocks and a cheeky manner. Her sidekick, a frog named Lancelot, 
is also equipped with a Jamaican accent. This relatively easy program 
has an added allure of Caribbean music, which helped hook both my 
10-year-old son and 4{-year-old daughter. No one can resist Orly, 
who is fond of saying, ``No problem.'' The program opens with the 
facade of Orly's house, where children can choose the Learn or Play 
options or the Orly's Stories curtain. (The cursor is an animated 
blue butterfly.) Behind Learn are art tools and a tutorial, including 
instructions on how to use the ``draw pad'' canvas. (Orly's other 
friends, New and Undo, replace the paper when needed.) Behind Play 
are the same activities that are behind the curtain: six pictures 
that represent Orly's Stories, Make Your Own Storybook and Doodle 
Pad, the program's three avenues of fun. My daughter clicked on Orly's 
Stories and landed at four narrated tales with titles like ``The Strange 
Princess.'' Orly begins telling a tale, and children are asked to 
draw pictures at certain points in the story, like painting an eye. 
My daughter arranged a black iris, blue whites and big red veins, 
prompting Orly to remark: ``This is kind of creepy. I don't like that 
staring at me.'' Depending on the picture Orly requests, the draw 
pad can be blank or contain a few elements to help a child along. 
When Orly asks for a submarine, for example, a periscope and a submarine 
window appear in the draw pad, leaving the rest to the child's imagination 
(with a supply of colored pencils and paint, which sit in a bar at 
the bottom of the screen). In addition, 20 different sounds are available 
by clicking the OK box. The other two features, Make Your Own Storybook 
and Doodle Pad, require more skill than Orly's Stories. (A child who 
isn't reading yet will need guidance on the first go-rounds for all 
of the program's activities.) In Storybook, a child can write and 
illustrate a story and view it in the Junkyard Drive-In Theater. The 
screen presents a blank window resembling an open book; on the left 
is space for pictures. An array of Jamaican settings (think palm trees) 
can drop into the blank space, or you can create your own foreground. 
When Orly is done with a story, she asks if you would like to save 
the work. Click on Yes, and a window appears, offering titles and 
pictures to wrap it all up. As a final touch, a child can ring a big 
bell by clicking on it when she is done drawing. It's a feature taken 
for granted until you're using a different software program and your 
child says, ``There's no bell.'' The art tools consist of pencils 
and paintbrushes, with a hefty supply of colors and shades, as well 
as zany textures and patterns. For colors, a child can hold down the 
paintbrush and dip it into a lineup of paint cans. (Most children 
age 4 and older can probably handle this.) Dabs or strokes are put 
to work. An eraser and a sponge also pop up for starting over. But 
because Orly's Draw-a-Story is not only about art but includes writing, 
the tools are limited. Orly is the main attraction here; her presence 
is just as irresistible to young girls as to boys (though boys 9 and 
up might not want to claim her as their own). She can keep children 
gliding from one project to another for most of an afternoon. KID 
PIX STUDIO DELUXE (Broderbund; $29.95; Windows 3.1 and later, and 
Macintosh 7.0 and later.) While Orly's Draw-a-Story required some 
hand-holding, Kid Pix Studio Deluxe demanded lots of assistance _ 
at first. Fortunately, the tools are so clever and extensive that 
an adult will jump at the chance to provide technical help. And once 
you discover that the program can talk _ type the words in English 
or Spanish and it says them back _ you know you're approaching the 
new millennium. The first Kid Pix, introduced in 1991, broke ground 
in children's computer-art programs. In the current version, many 
of those elements are in place _ digital puppets and a slide show, 
for example. The enhanced or new features leapfrog on this fun. Take 
the updated stamp collection: kids can now choose from 2,500 stamps, 
including dynamite and ladybugs, all of which can bounce, twirl and 
dance chorus-line style or singly across the screen. The alphabet 
stamps are also adventurous, with a different voice for each letter. 
Who would have thought that the letter E would produce a chorus? The 
program also offers an extensive collection of other types of graphics. 
What distinguishes Kid Pix in the category of children's art software 
is the tremendous catalog of art supplies and tools, many of which 
can be animated. Simple tasks, like drawing a line, are rarely straightforward: 
Do you want to have thick or thin lines or to make them transparent? 
How about some spirals to jazz things up? Better yet, how do you feel 
about bubbles (and blub-blub noises)? More serious art styles are 
just as important. The brush tool, for example, produces letters as 
delicate as calligraphy. The most memorable tools and effects are 
both ludicrous and sophisticated and demonstrate the strength of computer 
art: what you can't do on a canvas you can do digitally. (Wouldn't 
Jackson Pollock be jealous?) Indeed, the effect that sticks in your 
mind long after you turn off the computer is the electric mixer, which 
runs itself across the screen, churning whatever it passes. One result 
is a swirling pattern of marbleized monotones and bright colors, a 
living Missoni sweater. The major drawback of Kid Pix for younger 
children is that they will need to read and create files to save their 
work, which involves pull-down menus and the like. It's not a big 
problem, but if this program had the integrated format of Crayola's 
Make-a-Masterpiece, it would be nearly perfect. But you can't have 
everything, even in the shadow of the millennium. ART DABBLER (Metacreations; 
$49; Windows 95 and 98 and Macintosh 7.5 or later.) Dabbler is a well-stocked, 
serious art studio, with tools and graphics that simulate those you 
would find in a genuine studio. The Dabbler tools, which can create 
effects and styles ranging from pointillism to Impressionism, allow 
children to produce works that look authentic. For artists, this is 
challenging and satisfying; for nonartists, Dabbler is like taking 
an introductory course at a good art school. Children from age 4 to 
about 7 will probably need constant assistance; older children should 
be able to solo after a few tries with an adult. An abbreviated printed 
guide comes with the package; a longer tutorial, on the CD-ROM, requires 
Adobe Acrobat 3.01, which can be downloaded free on the Web. In Dabbler, 
the art tools and colors are in virtual drawers at the top of the 
screen; there is also a standard Windows menu. A white drawing pad 
appears, accompanied by rock music. (You can turn off the sound.) 
You can also experiment with background textures like cotton paper 
and fabric. You can then click on the color wheel, where a huge array 
of tints is presented. Tools are next: you can choose a pen or chalk 
(which ends up resembling pastels on paper) or ink, among many others. 
You can also determine how thick you want the tools' impressions to 
be. You are the artist, after all. Drawing with chalk against a dark 
background (this is the most useful background for seeing how tools 
behave) reveals a backdrop's texture. If you switch to the crayon 
tool, it makes a denser mark; if you change the texture, you can achieve 
a rubbing effect with the crayon. A water-drop effect turns the graphics 
into a watercolor, resulting in a beautiful, sophisticated artwork. 
(Not all the tools react with the paper texture.) Dabbler's canny 
ability to simulate a tactile experience and blend one tool with another 
becomes more evident the more you experiment. The ``flipbook'' animation 
feature allows children to make short cartoons and is very entertaining. 
Its tutorial is helpful, and verbal instructions serve as a patient, 
clear teacher, so you really can't feel lost. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>