<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0104 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A new technology intended to replace the traditional home videocassette 
recorder is expected to get an important vote of confidence on Monday 
with the announcement that a co-founder of Netscape Communications 
Corp. has invested in one of two companies developing digital television 
recording systems. Marc Andreessen, who founded Netscape along with 
Jim Clark in 1995, will announce that he is investing in Replay Networks 
Inc., a small Silicon Valley start-up company and will join its board. 
Replay Networks, based in Palo Alto, is one of two Silicon Valley 
companies developing television systems that enable viewers to watch, 
store and retrieve programs in novel ways, including pausing while 
the programs are in progress and returning to the point of the pause 
as much as 30 minutes later. In December, the company will begin shipping 
the system, known as ReplayTV, which will enable users to record a 
complete program that is already in progress, to automatically record 
programs that meet a predetermined criterion _ for example, movies 
featuring a particular actor _ and to intelligently skip commercials. 
But just as important as the bells and whistles, Replay executives 
say, is that unlike most traditional VCRs, ReplayTV is simple enough 
to program without resorting to a manual. The system includes an interactive 
programming guide that the viewer can use to instruct the system to 
record all programs related to a particular sports team, for example, 
or to capture a particular program whenever it is on. ``The thing 
that most people can relate to is never missing their favorite show,'' 
said Anthony Wood, Replay's founder and chief executive. ``People 
have busy lives, and it's not worth it to program their VCR.'' Both 
Replay and Tivo Inc., based in Sunnyvale, are trying to adapt a strategy 
of Internet Web portal companies like Yahoo and Excite to television 
by offering viewers the ability to create custom TV channels. Both 
companies' technologies are essentially powerful computers with large 
hard drives that can store seven to 40 hours of digitized video. And 
both intend to license their technologies to consumer electronics 
manufacturers that will produce the new VCRs at prices below $500. 
According to Carmel Group, a consumer electronics market research 
firm, the market for so-called personal TV systems will reach $380 
million and 760,000 subscribers next year. The two companies are developing 
different business models, but both are built around subscription 
services that require a new generation of digital VCRs capable of 
delivering them. Both companies will transmit electronic program guides 
to their subscribers via telephone connections. However Tivo plans 
to charge viewers a $10 monthly fee, while Replay intends to support 
its service by advertising alone. Replay executives also said that 
the two services were different in their privacy policies. The Replay 
system will not collect information on users' viewing habits; Tivo 
plans to monitor that information and sell advertisers the ability 
to deliver their commercials to the specific audiences they want. 
Consumer versions of both systems are expected to be available sometime 
in mid-1999. However, Replay plans to begin shipping a high-end $1,000 
version of its product before the end of the year in an effort to 
jump-start the market for the recorders. Indeed, it was Replay's advertisements 
in home theater magazines that attracted Andreessen's interest in 
the company. A high-end video buff, Andreessen said he contacted Replay 
in an effort to become a product tester of their system, which he 
described as something ``I had to have.'' He said that the Replay 
system made more sense to him than the WebTV set-top box, a technology 
now owned by Microsoft Corp. that connects users to the Internet through 
their television sets. ``ReplayTV will do for TV what the browser 
did for the Internet,'' said Andreessen, who was a part of the team 
at the University of Illinois that developed the technology on which 
Netscape was founded. ``It's the browser for TV.'' While WebTV tries 
to integrate the Internet with television, Replay, he said, ``is an 
effort to enhance the TV experience first and foremost.'' ``You sit 
back 10 feet, and you're relaxed and you watch what you want to watch,'' 
he said, noting that watching television is a very different activity 
from surfing the World Wide Web on a personal computer. Andreessen 
declined to disclose the amount of his investment. Several people 
with knowledge of the company's history said that Replay had spent 
about $1 million _ an unusually low amount _ to develop its technology 
since the company was founded in September 1997. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>