<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0476 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Bok Amphitheater here lies below the library, a Georgian brick 
building on Main Street. A graceful double flight of stairs leads 
down from the library to the amphitheater's lawn, green as the Emerald 
City of Oz and ringed by a tiered horseshoe of low stone terraces, 
its symmetry broken by huge mossy boulders. The open end of the horseshoe 
overlooks Camden harbor across a park sloping to the shore. Around 
the closed rim, trunks of birches tilt at bold white angles among 
stands of hemlock and black spruce. As a child, I played in there 
and wondered how such a beautiful, mysterious place came to be. Ferns 
flourished under the trees; it was an idealized woodland, an American 
Forest of Arden, where, naturally enough, Shakespeare was often played, 
too. Although it was in the center of town, the evergreens screened 
the noise of commerce and the presence of surrounding buildings, even 
the library. Between 1929 and 1931, Fletcher Steele, one of this country's 
most brilliant landscape architects, designed the amphitheater and 
the library grounds; at the same time, Olmsted Brothers, the firm 
headed by the son and stepson of Frederick Law Olmsted, laid out the 
harbor park. Together, these are recognized as one of the great achievements 
of landscape architecture in America. After 70 years, they badly need 
restoration, but the story of the efforts to preserve them is a comedy 
of errors, an object lesson in how such a project can go wrong. Meanwhile, 
the landscape is languishing. Shrubs in the park have disappeared; 
its grass has worn away. The amphitheater's magical ferns have died 
off, as have some trees; branchless trunks of overgrown evergreens 
weave a threadbare fabric between the town and theater. Two years 
ago, an underground addition to the library was built, and many large 
trees on the library lawn were removed. A new entrance opened into 
a hillside beside the amphitheater, and with little regard for the 
imaginative adventure the amphitheater offers, a new children's garden 
was wedged between it and the entrance. A cluttered, literal landscape, 
this garden features benches in the shape of shelves supported by 
concrete books complete with titles. Moreover, a hill in the harbor 
park blocked the view of the water from the new library entrance. 
The library trustees were preparing simply to bulldoze that hill, 
when Eleanor Ames, a respected landscape historian who lives near 
Camden and was alarmed by what was happening, organized a private 
effort to finance a restoration plan. The purpose of the plan was 
to make the library trustees and the public aware of the place's historical 
importance and to educate them in how to preserve an important work 
of art. A committee was formed, and after a careful review it hired 
Patricia O'Donnell, whose firm, Landscapes, had done distinguished 
restoration and rehabilitation on historic locations, including Olmsted's 
Prospect Park in Brooklyn, his Emerald Necklace in Boston and the 
Taconic Parkway in New York State. Ms. O'Donnell prepared the plan 
in collaboration with Robin Karson, Steele's biographer, and Charles 
Beveridge, editor of the Frederick Law Olmsted Papers in Washington 
and author of ``Designing the American Landscape,'' an authoritative 
book on Olmsted's work. The plan is an elegant and scholarly work, 
proposing restoration of the amphitheater and suggesting changes in 
the harbor park to accommodate new patterns of use. Both to satisfy 
the trustees' desire for a view and to make the new bunkerlike library 
entrance more attractive, the plan called for narrowing the summit 
of the hill. The trustees looked at the plan, saw the light, and two 
of them immediately offered to contribute $700,000 toward its implementation. 
Camden has never lacked for patrons. In 1928, Mary Curtis Bok, the 
daughter of the publishing magnate Cyrus Curtis, paid for the design 
and construction of the harbor park, the amphitheater and the library 
building. Placement of trees, vistas, contours, the demolition of 
warehouses and boat works: all were brilliantly orchestrated. The 
landscape cost more than the library; it was part of Mrs. Bok's grand 
plan to reshape the waterfronts of Camden and Rockport two miles south. 
Most people do not know that many of the postcard images of the Maine 
coast, what seem classic scenes of pristine wilderness, are, in fact, 
designed landscapes. ``It wasn't until I began working on the Olmsted 
papers that I realized the firm had designed a landscape I passed 
every day,'' said Charles Beveridge, who grew up in Camden. Coastal 
Maine, according to a recent survey conducted by the Maine Olmsted 
Alliance, a private group dedicated to the preservation of designed 
landscape, is rich in such places. Most were built between the last 
decades of the 19th century and the Depression. Many were private 
gardens for wealthy summer people, but others, including the carriage 
and motor roads of Acadia National Park, were built for the public 
and paid for by private benefactors. While Mrs. Bok named the Camden 
library trustees stewards of the amphitheater and the harbor park, 
she donated the land to the town. The trustees held a few poorly attended 
public hearings on the restoration plan, but since its implementation 
was already paid for, there seemed to be no reason for the plan's 
widespread dissemination. But the last meeting was televised on the 
local cable channel. With no chance to study the plan, with no clue 
as how it came to be, with very little information on why solutions 
were proposed, people were outraged. ``They're shaving the hill!'' 
became the opponents' rallying cry. Ms. O'Donnell had proposed removing 
many overgrown trees and replacing them with new ones, and the day 
before the town voted on the plan, its opponents, a group called Friends 
of the Park, tied yellow ribbons around the trunks of the doomed trees. 
Townspeople assumed that the plan was a tool for the trustees to get 
their view of the harbor, and they voted it down by 2 to 1. After 
the defeat, a commission was appointed to study the plan and to submit 
it to the kind of careful review that should have taken place in the 
beginning. Restoring a beloved landscape is as tricky as restoring 
the ``Mona Lisa.'' ``It is difficult to understand landscape as art,'' 
said Ms. O'Donnell. ``Places become beloved in their decrepitude; 
people have a visceral reaction against change.'' Landscape is art, 
but it is also real estate, and the controversy in Camden centers 
on possession, not preservation. Paradoxically, the library trustees' 
support of the plan became its downfall. ``This is a power struggle,'' 
explained one opponent, anonymously. ``It is not a fight between philistines 
and esthetes. It's about money.'' Beveridge agreed. ``This kind of 
fight in a New England town is always a different story, a story of 
groups and their relationships,'' he said. ``It becomes a question 
of how to include all groups in the planning process.'' As far as 
the landscape goes, the real issue, however, is how to preserve it 
while responding both to changing uses and changing notions of what 
landscape ought to be and do. The amphitheater's beauty lies in how 
Steele edged back and forth between civilization and wilderness. He 
used only native plants growing within five miles of the site. With 
a huge labor force (during the Depression, Mrs. Bok employed many 
inhabitants of Camden), Steele transplanted full-grown trees and enormous 
rocks in an extremely subtle design. He set plants in precise rhythms; 
he placed boulders to echo the random glacial terrain of the Camden 
hills. The space is both strange and familiar; it offers the solitude 
of a walk in the woods and the community of an open lawn; it is both 
private and public. ``The amphitheater is very symmetrical,'' Ms. 
O'Donnell explained. ``Then Steele breaks apart the symmetry. He creates 
echoes, birch clumps paired with hemlocks. We very carefully tried 
to understand what he did. Many big trees were in major shock from 
replanting. By the late 60s there were major losses. We worked on 
teasing apart the spacing, making it available for contemporary maintenance.'' 
Cutting down trees used to be a civilizing act; now it is considered 
barbarous. But pruning, not planting, is the difficult part of managing 
a garden. Cutting back and cutting down seem like destruction; it 
takes effort to understand how that can mean a landscape's preservation. 
Designed landscapes imply a tension between nature and art. Nature, 
messy and evolving, behooves us to leave it be; art grants the illusion 
of stillness. Landscape, then, is the most fragile of art forms; its 
permanence relies on constant change. Rustics and nobles stripped 
of evidence of rank wandered in the Forest of Arden; only in that 
woodland could disputes resolve and enemies become friends. At the 
end of ``As You Like It,'' the wise fool Touchstone, as a way to avoid 
arguments, advises trading ``ifs'' _ choices _ instead of insults. 
``Your `if' is your only peacemaker; much virtue in `if,' '' he says. 
The struggle over Camden's local Arden has all the elements of comedy: 
good intentions, bad misunderstandings, muddled motives, mutual mistrust. 
The landscape was built in an age of imperious generosity. Its future, 
however, depends its surviving the democratice process. So far, there 
have been plenty of accusations; some ``ifs,'' some possibilities, 
might hasten a happy ending. This landscape was built in an age of 
imperious generosity. It endures as a sublime reminder that sometimes 
art can improve upon nature. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>