<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0289 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pick up a phone while your computer is connected to the Internet, 
and you hear what sounds like the braying of an electronic donkey. 
Somewhere inside that set of squawks might be a picture of your grandmother, 
an e-mail to your boss or perhaps the newest version of Doom slowly 
downloading to your computer. Bits and bytes have been turned into 
audio chatter by a technological workhorse: the modem. The mystery 
unravels a bit when you consider a modem's full name: MOdulator/DEModulator. 
A modem takes digital information, in the form of single binary digits 
(bits), and passes those bits through a series of steps to repackage, 
or modulate, them into analog signals _ sound waves, in this case 
_ so the bits can be passed over a regular phone line. The process 
is reversed as the modem deciphers, or demodulates, information coming 
in from the phone line. Before modems, computers had to be ``hard 
wired'' together, even over long distances, to talk to one another. 
Modems have made communication cheaper and easier, eventually leading 
to the Internet. Although phone companies' switching equipment turns 
analog signals into digital ones for transmission over long distances, 
the weak leak is still the analog hookup between a home or business 
and the phone company. A modem translates between the computer's digital 
world and the phone line's analog audio world. The computer sends 
out information packets as a series of ones and zeros. Since a telephone 
carries information in the form of electrical signals representing 
sound waves, the quality of transmission can vary widely from place 
to place. One house might have clean lines, while clicks and radio 
stations might intrude upon the lines of the house next door. The 
distance from a switching station can also affect clarity. A phone 
line carries only the small range of frequencies in which most human 
conversation takes place: about 300 to 3,300 hertz. The modem works 
within these limits in creating sound waves to carry data across phone 
lines. But modem designers have become increasingly clever at squeezing 
more bits into that tonal range. Software that runs in the modem analyzes 
data for repetitive information, like the space character repeated 
100 times in a row or the word ``the'' occurring over and over. Before 
transmission, these patterns are replaced with symbols or codes. The 
receiving-end modem takes the codes and reconstructs the original 
redundant bits, sending them to the receiving computer without any 
loss of information. Modems use different tones to represent different 
bits of data. Each set of tones is called a symbol. Baud measures 
the number of symbols, or discrete units of information expressed 
by phase and amplitude modulation, per second. The measurement is 
named for Jean-Emile Baudot, a Frenchman who developed a binary code 
in the 19th century. Modems were first widely used in the late 1960s. 
They ran at 110 baud, sending one bit per symbol, or 110 bits per 
second (bps). The 300-baud modems that showed up in the early 70's 
were an enormous improvement, akin to the leap from 9,600 bps to 28.8 
kilobits per second (kbps). But the breakthrough that led to today's 
fastest modems was the idea of sending several tones at the same time, 
creating a mini-symphony of sounds in each symbol. So starting with 
the 1,200-baud modems that came into general use in the early 1980s, 
each symbol has been carrying many bits at once, not just a single 
bit. Phone line quality has also continued to improve, so more tones 
can be used over a greater frequency range. A 33.6-kbps modem, for 
instance, transmits about 9.8 bits of data per symbol (data for correcting 
errors are also sent), at a rate of about 3,429 symbols per second. 
The 56K (56 kbps) modems run no faster than 33.6 kbps ``upstream,'' 
to an Internet service provider, and about 40 to 50 kpbs ``downstream,'' 
with data coming from the ISP to the user's computer. The transmission 
is all digital on the ISPs end, allowing it to do a better job encoding 
information for sending, but the specialized equipment the ISP uses 
is not available for a user's modem. Today's modems have more computing 
power than the personal computers that connected to them in the 110-baud 
days. But their function is still the same: turning bits into boops. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>