<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0277 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of the happiest moments of legal secretary Norma Carey's life 
was the day she threw away her carbon paper. It was the early 1970s 
when her employer, a law firm in Washington, D.C., switched from carbons 
to copiers. ``I was absolutely delighted,'' said Ms. Carey, 64, a 
secretary for Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer &AMP; Feld. No more ink on 
the hands from handling slimy black carbons. No more furious erasing. 
And no more re-typing 20-page documents. Not once, Ms. Carey says, 
has she felt nostalgic about the messy stuff. With today's laser and 
ink-jet printers, word processors, and voice recognition and spellchecking 
software, carbon paper _ invented by an Englishman named Ralph Wedgewood 
in the 1820s _ is but a shadow of the crucial commodity it was. Using 
carbon paper today is like using a mortar and pestle instead of a 
food processor, or pounding your laundry against a rock instead of 
using a washing machine. Yet there remains a small but steady demand 
for it. ``Somebody's buying it,'' said Jim Gordon, president of Form-Mate 
Carbon Products Ltd. of Toronto. Eighty percent of Gordon's business 
is in one-time carbon paper _ the thin, tissuelike carbon paper found 
in business forms that is used once and thrown away. The remainder 
of his business is in re-usable carbon paper _ thicker, carbon-coated 
paper sheets available in office supply or stationery stores and usually 
used in typewriters or by hand to make duplicates. Many of his orders 
are for export, Gordon said, to countries that are not as technologically 
advanced as the United States. ``I wrote a report back in 1976 that 
predicted there would be no need for carbon paper within 10 years,'' 
Gordon recalled. ``That was 22 years ago.'' A handful of companies 
in North America still manufacture carbon paper. Norman McLeod, a 
senior consultant with CAP Ventures of Norwell, Mass., said 24,000 
tons of one-time carbon paper was produced in 1997, down from a peak 
of 220,000 tons in 1979. Today, a few thousand tons a year of re-usable 
carbon paper is produced, down from about 30,000 tons annually 25 
years ago. Demand has dropped by 85 percent in the last 20 years, 
McLeod said. The reason: Computers have made manual and electric typewriters 
all but obsolete. Copying machines, laser printers and carbonless 
paper _ a chemical process that creates copies without the need for 
carbon paper _ were the final blow. But McLeod said he did not believe 
that carbon paper would disappear entirely. ``It's not the way it 
used to be,'' said Jeffrey Dadowski, president of Codo Manufacturing 
in Leetsdale, Pa., ``but there's still a lot of use for it.'' Codo 
has been making carbon paper since 1928. Most of the business is in 
one-time carbons for business forms, but Codo also manufactures special 
carbon-coated paper that dentists use to make an impression of the 
teeth, and carbon paper used to make patterns for dressmaking. ``Carbon 
is still the best inexpensive way to make multiple copies,'' Dadowski 
said. ``With the carbonless forms, after the third or fourth copy 
you can't read it.'' FryeTech Inc. of Boca Raton, Fla., is the nation's 
leading manufacturer of carbon paper, with $48 million in sales last 
year. The company began as Frye Copy Systems in Des Moines in 1912, 
and as demand for carbon paper shrank FryeTech bought up its competitors. 
Most of its business is in making one-time carbons for multipart business 
forms. ``As long as computers are not 100 percent foolproof, there 
will be a need for carbon,'' said Marc Leder, managing director of 
FryeTech. The ink on carbon paper also works well in cold environments, 
unlike carbonless paper. That is why many fuel-oil companies use carbon 
forms for receipts, and why airlines that fly in cold climates have 
luggage tickets with one-time carbons on hand when computers fail. 
At the Korectype Co. in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, three 
ancient carbon-coating machines sit forlornly in a corner of a 170,000 
square-foot factory presided over by the company's founder and 72-year-old 
president, Victor Barouh. When the factory opened 35 years ago, half 
its revenue came from carbon paper. Today, the re-usable carbons it 
makes represent just 1 percent or 2 percent of revenue, and most of 
that is sold overseas. The company also makes the special carbon paper 
for dentists, in addition to ribbons, ink jets, correction fluid and 
correction tape for typewriters. The carbon-coating machines, which 
are at least 75 years old and the size of small jeeps, apply a mixture 
of ink and wax to paper that is drawn through a series of rollers. 
The paper is coated with ink mixed with hot water then drawn through 
several chilling rollers that have cold water circulating through 
them and solidify the ink mixture on contact. These days, Barouh said, 
the three machines are rarely used. Korectype produces at most 50,000 
boxes of re-usable carbon paper a year, and only about 100 boxes are 
sold in the United States. An order filled in mid-October was bound 
for a South American country, where, Barouh said, ``the dealer will 
probably sell it to the government.'' Who in the United States buys 
carbon paper these days? Many small businesses like video repair shops, 
dry cleaners, shoe stores and delicatessens use business forms with 
one-time carbons attached. Staples, the office supply chain, sells 
slightly more than 1,000 packages of re-usable carbon paper a week, 
and sales have declined every year for the 12 years the chain has 
been in business. Some small stationery stores carry carbon paper 
_ just in case. Hygrade Typewriter and Stationery Co. in Morristown, 
N.J., a 65-year-old family-run business, sells just 12 sheets of carbon 
paper a month now. ``It's a quiet item,'' owner John Hunt said. Before 
``N.C.R. paper'' _ no carbon required _ and copying machines, carbon 
paper was the only way to make duplicates, Hunt said. Law firms used 
to be big customers, Hunt said, and the store would typically sell 
between six and 12 boxes of 100 sheets each a month. Today's typical 
buyer might occasionally need a sheet or two to copy a handwritten 
letter, or transfer a pattern. Unlike antique typewriters, carbon 
paper has not caught on as a collectible _ with one exception. ``The 
packages they came in were so lovely,'' said Darryl Rehr, author of 
the book ``Antique Typewriters and Office Collectibles.'' Rehr occasionally 
finds them at flea markets or antique malls. He also points out that 
carbon paper played a starring role in the invention of the typewriter 
in 1873, when Christopher Lathan Sholes used it to demonstrate his 
first typewriter. But carbon paper's legacy lives on in the modern 
office in the abbreviation ``cc'' for carbon copy, which still appears 
at the end of many a memo composed on a personal computer and sent 
via e-mail. And programs used to compose e-mail have a ``cc'' function 
to send a message to more than one person. Recently, Theresa Scheese, 
39, a freelance secretary in Yardley, Pa., had to explain the abbreviation 
to her two children, ages 13 and 10, who had seen it on America Online. 
``I said well, a hundred years ago when I started typing, `cc' meant 
carbon copy,'' Ms. Scheese recalled. She went on to explain to the 
children how she used to spend days typing and retyping lengthy forms 
that sometimes involved as many as 10 carbons. The children's response: 
``Why didn't you just use a copier?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>