<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0287 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's a very special time for a computer game about anticompetitive 
business tactics. While the Department of Justice scrutinizes Microsoft, 
we can play Railroad Tycoon II on our Windows-compatible PCs, build 
simulated choo-choo empires on the Internet and wallow in the fantasy 
of untrammeled monopoly power. Of course, we all oppose monopolies 
on principle. But when you're not playing for real-world stakes and 
you're the robber baron, it's easy to enjoy. In the words of Mel Brooks, 
it's good to be the king. Like its predecessor, Sid Meier's classic 
Railroad Tycoon, Tycoon II takes place in the unregulated heyday of 
19th-century industrial expansion, when magnates like Cornelius Vanderbilt 
and Jay Gould could strong-arm rivals, collusively divide the marketplace, 
use the stock market as their personal piggy bank and bribe the government 
with relative impunity. Leveraging an essential service to crush your 
rivals was standard operating procedure. No one could prosecute you 
for making the entire chain of supply an essential part of your operating 
system. Running a ham-fisted monopoly did not require an army of lawyers. 
Corporate life was simpler then. Tycoon II evokes that era in sepia 
tones, literally. On a tactical level, the game is about laying track, 
building stations, buying locomotives and transporting cargo. As with 
many strategy games, there is an impressive depth of logistical detail 
and clockwork: dozens of engines to choose from, 34 types of cargo, 
5 styles of railroad station architecture, construction expenses, 
loading logistics and the minutiae of routing. But on a deeper level, 
Railroad Tycoon II is about vertical integration and financial management. 
You can make a tidy profit hauling goods and raw materials from one 
place to another. But why not buy the mines, refineries, mills, factories 
and storefronts while you're at it? It makes everything smoother and 
easier and more profitable. And it makes the shareholders happy. And 
ultimately, that is the be-all and end-all of this game. At its core, 
this is a game about the stock market. If you're foggy about bond 
ratings, book value and five-year weighted returns, prepare to master 
the basics of corporate accounting. Because your mission, at the end 
of the day, is to drive up the price of your stock by reducing your 
debt relative to the size of your assets and by showing a solid profit 
over a number of years. (I know it sounds loony, but that's how it 
worked before Internet companies started going public.) If you get 
bored milking the cash cow, you can resign as chairman, hold onto 
all your high-yielding stock and buy control of another company or 
start a new one from scratch. If there are enough players on the map, 
you don't need to lay a single rail _ you can just invest in other 
people's companies and play Railroad Tycoon II strictly as a stock 
market game. You can be the Paul Allen of the railroad industry. A 
good chunk of your success, on a macro level, hinges on timing bond 
issues, buying out your partners, leveraging your shares and short-selling 
your competitors. Rest assured that if you get in over your head with 
borrowed money or borrowed stock, your opponents will seize the opportunity 
to drive you into bankruptcy. ``It's a pretty wide-open simulation 
of corporate business warfare as it existed then and as it exists 
now,'' said Phil Steinmeyer, Railroad Tycoon II's producer, who worked 
as a consultant for the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad before starting 
a computer game company. ``I was a programmer working primarily on 
back-office stuff. We were trying to deal with and computerize waybilling, 
a settlement system for railroads that was 150 years old. We reduced 
the amount of humans needed to process that by about 80 percent through 
computerization, just creating very advanced rules system for evaluating 
the way bills came through. The traditional view that the railroad 
is a bunch of guys out there with pickaxes and tons of engineers and 
firemen is outdated now. It is, to a large extent, an operational 
and information management task.'' It's a network. It requires large 
capital investments. It hauls traffic. In some ways, the railroad 
network is not unlike the telecommunications network, which has also 
spurred an enormous economic transformation and has similarly outpaced 
the government's ability to deal with it. Undeniably, there are parallels, 
which is why 19th-century antitrust laws are being used to scrutinize 
the software industry. But there are also substantial differences 
that create a certain degree of legal uncertainty. And where there 
is legal uncertainty (and vast amounts of money), there are lobbyists. 
In their era, the robber barons lobbied ferociously, albeit unsuccessfully, 
to thwart federal regulations. ``And in a void of government regulations 
about the software industry,'' Steinmeyer said, ``we're seeing Microsoft 
throw cash at the government. We're seeing Microsoft's opponents throw 
cash at the government, in terms of high-powered lobbyists and all 
manner of ways that corporations influence the government. It's not 
quite so direct and crass as it might have been in the 1800s in terms 
of flat-out bribes. But it is the modern equivalent thereof. ``And 
I wouldn't be surprised if as the computer industry ages a bit, people 
look back on Bill Gates the way they look back on Cornelius Vanderbilt. 
Some will view him as a scoundrel who was a monopolist and a vicious 
individual. And others will look at him as the guy who built the software 
industry. And both views, to some extent, will be true.'' (Railroad 
Tycoon II; developed by Poptop Software; published by Gathering of 
Developers; CD-ROM for Windows 95, 98 and NT; $49.95.) out 
</TEXT>
</DOC>