<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0413 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Pentagon's abrupt buildup of air power in the Persian Gulf expands 
the number and types of targets the United States can strike in Iraq, 
and the magnitude of damage it can inflict on President Saddam Hussein's 
government. In a move timed with President Clinton's Veterans Day 
warning to Saddam, Defense Secretary William Cohen signed orders Wednesday 
dispatching 129 aircraft, 84 of them combat jets, to the Gulf region. 
They will join 170 already based in Saudi Arabia and Kuwait or aboard 
the aircraft carrier Dwight D. Eisenhower in the Persian Gulf. It 
was the largest single buildup of U.S. forces in the Persian Gulf 
since October 1994, when the United States ordered thousands of Army 
troops, aircraft and warships to the region after Iraq sent armored 
units toward its border with Kuwait. In previous confrontations, the 
Pentagon has massed forces in the region more gradually. The new forces, 
which had been on standby, are expected to begin moving from bases 
around the United States in the coming days and should arrive in the 
region by the weekend or early next week, officials said. But that 
does not preclude an U.S.-led strike before then, they said. Clinton 
has not yet ordered an attack, and a senior Pentagon official said 
an option called for striking immediately, primarily with cruise missiles 
aboard warships in the Persian Gulf, and following up with a battering 
of military targets if Saddam still refused to cooperate with arms 
inspections. Even after Wednesday's decision, U.S. forces in the Gulf 
will still not be as large as they were at the peak of the last threatened 
confrontation with Iraq earlier this year. At that time, the United 
States had 44,000 troops, 440 aircraft and 34 warships, led by two 
aircraft carriers. By this weekend, by contrast, there will be 27,000 
troops, 300 aircraft and 14 warships. However, when the Pentagon reduced 
the force in the region last spring, it doubled the number of Tomahawk 
cruise missiles aboard warships plying the Gulf to about 250 to 350, 
giving the smaller force a larger punch. The new aircraft being sent 
to the region include a dozen of F-117 ``stealth'' strike fighters 
able to evade air defenses and attack with surprise and precision, 
as well as a dozen B-52s equipped with 96 cruise missiles that can 
be fired from the skies hundreds of miles from Iraq. The B-52s are 
being sent to Diego Garcia, a U.S. base on British territory in the 
Indian Ocean; the F-117s are expected to go to Kuwait. The Pentagon 
also ordered the Air Force to send an ``air expeditionary force,'' 
composed of 36 fighters and 6 B-1 bombers to an unspecified place. 
If the United States attacks, it would be the first combat mission 
for the B-1 in its troubled three decades of development. Reflecting 
the wariness of some Gulf allies to be seen openly supporting the 
United States against an Arab state, the Pentagon declined to identify 
the country that had agreed to allow the force to be based on its 
territory. The Army will also send 3,000 soldiers to join 1,500 already 
on exercise in the desert of Kuwait. The Pentagon also plans to send 
Patriot missile batteries, as well another 1,000 soldiers to operate 
and protect them. The Patriots, widely used in the Persian Gulf war, 
protect against the possibility that Iraq will retaliate with Scud 
missile attacks on U.S. forces or the Gulf allies. Tuesday, Cohen 
also announced that he had speeded up the arrival of a second carrier, 
the Enterprise, with 70 aircraft, as well as several escort ships; 
the Enterprise is now scheduled to arrive Nov. 23, ostensibly to replace 
the Eisenhower, though both could stay awhile, especially if attacks 
are underway. In the days leading up to Wednesday's deployments, the 
Pentagon had drawn up two basic options, one involving a swift strike 
with forces already in the region and another that called for a buildup 
like that announced Wednesday. The new forces will allow the United 
States to mount a more sustained attack. In the last showdown, the 
Pentagon's commanders drew up plans for four days of strikes against 
Iraq's military bases and command centers, as well as facilities associated 
with its chemical and biological weapons programs. The force there 
now is large enough and powerful enough to carry out a similar objective, 
officials said. ``With more things to put on his capabilities,'' a 
Pentagon official said, describing Wednesday's announcement, ``you 
can degrade his capabilities more substantially.'' So far only Britain 
has openly joined the United States in threatening Saddam with force. 
Britain has a total of 18 Tornado attack fighters in Kuwait and Bahrain 
that could be used in an attack. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>