<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0414 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If she could fly, Reina Palacios says, she would flap her wings and 
soar above her apartment in Newark, N.J., fly across the country and 
south to El Salvador, where she would search for the three teen-age 
daughters she has been unable to reach since Hurricane Mitch devastated 
Central America two weeks ago. But Ms. Palacios can fly only in her 
imagination. Like thousands of Central American immigrants in the 
United States, Ms. Palacios, an applicant for political asylum, is 
unable to search for her daughters in El Salvador, because federal 
law would prevent her from returning to the United States. Their inability 
to travel home has always presented difficult choices for illegal 
immigrants orthose in the process of becoming Americans. But, Central 
Americans say, the challenge had never been more anguishing than it 
is now when, night after night on the evening news, they helplessly 
watch the wreckage caused by a storm that swept up villages and flooded 
cities, leaving more than 11,000 people dead. Ms. Palacios, like many 
others, faces a heart-breaking choice: leave to aid her family and 
remain with them in a devastated country where few jobs are available 
and salaries are low. Or stay put and continue working here to support 
them while pursuing her goal of becoming a permanent resident so that 
she eventually can bring the rest of her family to the United States. 
``There are days I can function,'' Ms. Palacios, 34, said softly. 
``But then there are other days when I think my head is going to explode. 
I have terrible nightmares. Big waves come crashing down on me as 
I look for my girls.'' For two weeks now, Ms. Palacios has been dialing 
the number of the only family with a telephone in the village where 
her daughters, 13, 14 and 16, live with their paternal grandmother. 
She gets nothing but a busy signal on the other end. The storm cut 
almost all communication between the countries it affected the most 
_ Nicaragua, Honduras and El Salvador _ and the rest of the world. 
Bridges have fallen and roads are flooded, making it nearly impossible 
for people in the same country to communicate with each other. ``This 
is agony for us,'' said Guillermo Chacon, a community organizer from 
El Salvador who is an advocate for Central Americans on New York's 
Long Island. ``I can not describe how deeply painful and sad it is 
to know that your family is lost and you cannot go to their rescue.'' 
For days, Maria Cristina Guevara, a Honduran who has lived in South 
Florida for 10 years, did not know whether her family had survived 
the hurricane. Five days ago, one of her brothers was finally able 
to call her from a borrowed telephone. He told her they nearly lost 
their home _ the roof and a wall are gone and all the furniture was 
ruined. He also told her they have nothing to eat. ``I'm desperate 
to go,'' said Ms. Guevara, 52, who every month sends her family part 
of the salary she earns as a housekeeper. ``But if I go, they'll lose 
their only chance for recovering from this disaster.'' If Ms. Guevara, 
who is here illegally, were to leave, she could not return to the 
United States because she lacks an immigration status or a visa, a 
requirement before a foreigner can board a plane to come to the United 
States. And if she went to an immigration office seeking help, the 
law dictates that she be deported. But immigrants like Ms. Palacios 
_ part of a group of thousands of Guatemalans and Salvadorans victims 
of the Central American wars of the 1980s who have been allowed to 
remain in the country legally while the government processes their 
political asylum applications _ can travel to their countries by asking 
the Immigration and Naturalization Service for a special permit. The 
permits, which are difficult to get, are granted at the discretion 
of directors of local INS offices around the country. Even if the 
permits were easily obtained, immigration officials discourage Central 
Americans who are here legally but not yet permanent residents of 
the United States from traveling abroad, said Elaine Komis, an INS 
spokeswoman in Washington. If they leave and come back, she said, 
they may not be able to become residents of the United States because 
they will enter into another category of immigrants for whom there 
are no legal protections under the current laws. ``I would never tell 
them what to do,'' said an INS official in Washington, who was reluctant 
to attach her name to a warning for immigrants. ``But if we were having 
a secret conversation, I would tell everyone to stay firm and try 
to communicate through telephone, letters, Internet, any other means 
possible until they adjust their status.'' Immigration lawyers and 
advocates for immigrants agree. They too are advising their clients 
to avoid traveling. ``The bottom line is that the whole thing is a 
mess and there is no easy way for them to go,'' said Ann Pilsbury, 
the director of Central American Legal Assistance, a center in Brooklyn 
that helps Central Americans with immigration issues. ``The fact of 
the matter is that nobody can guarantee people that it won't have 
a fatal effect on their case.'' Despite the advice of lawyers, consular 
officials fear that some people are leaving the country anyway, either 
because they do not understand the laws of the United States or because 
they are so desperate that they no longer care about returning. Juan 
Antonio Villalobo, vice consul of El Salvador in New York, said that 
about 28 Salvadorans came to his office last week seeking a special 
passport to travel home. He expected the number to grow this week. 
``They have been told that their families are lost, and they want 
to look for them,'' Villalobo said. ``They must have a strong motivation 
to make a decision to leave like that, without a guaranteed return.'' 
Santos Mateo Hernandez, a Honduran who is applying for political asylum, 
may just be reaching the point of desperation Villalobo worries about. 
After almost two weeks without news from his wife and five children, 
he was able to speak to his family Sunday. He learned his family lost 
the crops they depend on and, therefore, have nothing to eat. His 
daughters, 6 and 8, are ill with stomach problems. Because there are 
unreachable in a town called Lloro, he can not send them medicine 
or money. ``My problem is I can't be with them when they need me the 
most,'' said Hernandez, 35, who lives in Queens, New York City. ``And 
that is killing me inside.'' Most of the Central Americans who are 
now unable to travel to their countries applied for political asylum 
years ago and have been living in the United States for a dozen years 
or more. They have learned English, found jobs, opened bank accounts, 
paid taxes and started families, while still not having a legal status 
in this country. According to 1997 population updates, prepared by 
the Census, there are about 1.3 million Salvadorans, Guatemalans and 
Hondurans in the United States. That number may include people who 
are here legally as well as illegally, because the census does not 
categorize individuals by immigration status. About a quarter of a 
million of the Salvadorans and Guatemalans, though, are protected 
from deportation because the law allows them to remain in the country 
while a determination in their political asylum claims is made. There 
is a huge backlog of asylum applications, and the majority of cases 
have not been heard. A new law in December halted the asylum process. 
The new law granted Nicaraguans permanent residency, but it offered 
Salvadorans and Guatemalans the possibility to apply to avoid their 
deportation only. It did not address Hondurans who are here illegally. 
``This is just another story of the injustice visited upon these people,'' 
said Philippe Weisz, a lawyer who works with Central American immigrants 
in New Jersey. ``Had the Salvadorans and Guatemalans had the opportunity 
to have their asylum cases heard when they fled to the United States, 
many would be lawful permanent residents, if not citizens of this 
country.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>