<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0283 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After receiving a thumping on election night, the Republican attempt 
to impeach President Clinton has begun to flounder badly. As it should. 
The American people saw that it was a put-up job. And a very dangerous 
one, at that, according to the views expressed by Chief Justice of 
the U.S. Supreme Court William Rehnquist. In speeches, in law review 
articles and in his 1992 book, `Grand Inquests,` Rehnquist has called 
impeachment power a `wild card` that, if misused, could destroy the 
constitutional checks and balances and the nation's founding principle 
of separation of powers. `Misused` is precisely the term to describe 
this politically motivated impeachment inquiry. The GOP is creating 
a constitutional crisis of the highest magnitude. If a majority in 
the U.S. House votes for impeachment, conservative, Republican appointee 
Rehnquist will preside over Clinton's trial in the Senate. And he 
is fully aware of the gravity of such action and what it might mean 
to the future of our nation. Rehnquist will be a stickler for proper 
legal procedure. And he will undoubtedly hold that which is submitted 
as evidence to a high level of proof. He is not likely to allow partisan 
shenanigans. Reacting to the wrath of voters in the election, Chairman 
of the House Judiciary Committee Henry Hyde, R-Ill., now says that 
he wants to speed things up. He plans to call only one witness for 
the committee's impeachment inquiry --- special prosecutor Kenneth 
Starr. Starr is the man who has made a lucrative career out of trying 
to bring down the president. What a deal. All that Starr can provide 
is biased hearsay evidence. Starr didn't witness anything. He only 
knows what others told him, whether they spoke truth or not. And how 
does one cross-examine a witness who didn't witness anything? What 
prosecutor wouldn't love to be the only witness in a criminal trial? 
To be able to pick and chose what to call `evidence` for a jury to 
hear? Imagine the prosecution rate if that were the way trials were 
run in the United States. What kind of inquiry is Hyde proposing? 
Laying tracks. To railroad the president. But it won't happen. Even 
if the House drafts and passes articles of impeachment against the 
president, there aren't the votes in the Senate to make it stick. 
It takes a vote by two-thirds of the Senate to find a president guilty 
of an article of impeachment. That means 67 senators must vote for 
impeachment. There are only 55 Republican senators. It's unlikely 
that 12 Democrats will vote to impeach their president _ especially 
since the charges do not rise to the level of `Treason, Bribery, or 
other high Crimes and Misdemeanors` as required by Article II, Section 
4 of the U.S. Constitution. The operative word in `other high Crimes 
and Misdemeanors` is `other` meaning that high crimes must reach to 
seriousness of treason and bribery. Many constitutional historians 
think the phrase means criminally indictable offenses against the 
government. While some claim that `high crimes and misdemeanors` are 
whatever the U.S. House of Representatives says they are, such a statement 
lacks historic perspective and knowledge of how our government works. 
If that concept were true, then the controlling party in Congress 
could shuck uncooperative presidents like ears of corn and throw them 
to the hogs. In `Grand Inquests,` Rehnquist, reflecting upon the impeachment 
trials against U.S. Supreme Court Justice Samuel Chase in 1805 and 
President Andrew Johnson in 1868, writes: `The acquittal of Andrew 
Johnson by the Senate was of course a victory for the independence 
of the executive branch of government, just as the acquittal of Samuel 
Chase sixty-three years earlier had been a victory for the independence 
of the judicial branch.` Despite the 130 years separating the two 
Democratic presidents, Johnson and Clinton, there are telling similarities 
in the attempts to impeach them. Both Houses of Congress were controlled 
by the Republican Party. In both eras, the radical wing of the GOP 
pushed for impeachment. In both eras, the Republican leadership felt 
that the president was thwarting its agenda. And in both eras, the 
GOP felt the president to be personally unsuitable to be in office. 
The crucial differences, however, are immense. The charges against 
Johnson were certainly more serious to the nation than sexual escapades 
between consenting adults and lying about them. Johnson was charged 
withunlawfully removing the secretary to the Department of War, acting 
contrary to the law when he appointed someone else to take the secretary's 
place, inducing a general to disobey an act of Congress, and making 
disparaging remarks about members of Congress. Seven Republican senators 
understood the larger ramifications of voting for the impeachment 
of Johnson and voted to acquit. Sen. William Pitt Fessenden, R-Maine, 
wrote to explain his acquittal vote: `To depose the constitutional 
chief magistrate of a great nation, elected by the people, on grounds 
so slight, would, in my judgment, be an abuse of the power conferred 
upon the Senate, which could not be justified to the country or the 
world.` In a 1991 Northwestern University Law Review article, Rehnquist 
summed up his feelings about the impeachment trials of Chase and Johnson: 
`Had these two trials resulted in conviction rather than acquittal, 
the nation would have moved closer to a regime of the sort of congressional 
supremacy that was dreaded by men such as James Madison, the Father 
of the Constitution.` The Republican leadership made a serious mistake 
by going down this perilous path. They should just drop the entire 
idea and begin grappling with the national problems the people want 
solved. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>