<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0281 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The heart of the tourist season is still months away, but already 
I miss the Canadians. Tourism officials fear that Canadian tourism 
may be down this year due to the falling value of the Canadian dollar, 
otherwise known as the ``loonie.'' In the fall of 1997, Sarasota County 
had more visitors from Canada than any other foreign country. The 
second-most foreign visitors came from England and the third-most 
from (shudder) France. My fear is that Canadians will find it is more 
fun to stay home and nurse their sick loonies back to health than 
it is to come to Sarasota and stand in line three hours for a table 
in a restaurant that does not accept loonies, healthy or otherwise. 
An even more alarming possibility is that Canadians will find someplace 
else to spend their loonies, worthless as they may be. According to 
Kevin Lawler, executive director of the Sarasota Convention and Visitors 
Bureau, more than a few Canadians plan on vacationing in Cuba this 
winter, a sure sign that Castro's days are numbered. Cubans can and 
have endured many hardships, from food shortages to the defection 
of their best baseball players. But the prospect of thousands of sunburned 
Canadians wearing ``I'm With Stupid'' T-shirts playing shuffleboard 
on the Plaza de la Revolucion may be more than even these long-suffering 
people can take. While some second-rate local writers, desperate for 
a column, have taken some cheap shots at Canadian tourists in the 
past, the truth is that we need the Canadians more than they need 
us. Besides pumping upwards of $1.65 into the local economy each year, 
Canadian tourists help keep our reflexes sharp with their unique style 
of driving and also lend an international ``flavor'' (maple syrup) 
to our community. Canadian tourists are a hardy bunch and think nothing 
of jumping in the Gulf of Mexico on cold January days. Locals, who 
won't stick a toe in the Gulf until the water temperature is 85 degrees 
or higher, never cease to be astonished by this and often come down 
with a cold or the flu just thinking about it. (While this isn't necessarily 
good for us, it is good for the doctors and pharmacists who, after 
all, have a stake in this thing, too.) Canadians, with the exception 
of those from Quebec, also speak English, more or less, which is not 
something you can say about visitors from Scotland or France. The 
fact that we share a common language allows Sarasotans and Canadians 
to engage in any number of rich and stimulating conversations, such 
as: Canadian tourist: It is a fine day for a swim, eh? Local: What? 
I can't hear you. My ears are frozen. Tourist: This feels like Lake 
Huron in July, eh? Local: A heron, an egret ... what do I look like? 
Miss Hathaway? Tourist: This sure beats shoveling snow, eh? Local: 
Would you mind putting on some clothes? The glare off your stomach 
is hurting my eyes. Tourist: Do me a favor and hold my loonies while 
I take a dip, eh? Local: Hold your own loonies, you pervert. I'm going 
inside where it's warm. Tourist: It's 80 degrees. You must be hot 
in that snowsuit, eh? Local: Is that an iceberg floating out there 
or is that your wife? Tourist: It has been a pleasure talking with 
you. Sarasota is a beautiful place and the people who live here are 
most friendly, eh? Local: If I see you on the beach again dressed 
like that I'll have you arrested. Tourist: Have a good day. Come visit 
us in Ottawa, eh? Local: Oh, and by the way. That lever on the left 
of your steering column? It's called a turn signal. Try using it. 
(David Grimes is a columnist for the Sarasota (Fla.) Herald-Tribune.) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>