<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0356 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The man this city's top crime fighters call a mafia chieftain and 
a cold-blooded killer was decorously receiving supplicants at his 
tenement headquarters here one recent afternoon. Each of them reverently 
touched his feet before addressing him. Arun Gawali, self-consciously 
costumed in the homespun cotton that was the trademark of India's 
great pacifist, Mohandas K. Gandhi, admitted in an interview to a 
criminal past he says he now deplores, but denied any part in the 
audacious blazes of gunfire that have rat-a-tat-tatted a message of 
fear across this city of more than 10 million people. ``This part 
of my life I have dedicated to God,'' he said solemnly, ``and to my 
guru, Brahama Devi Prajapita.'' But police say this sinner's declared 
reformation is a hoax. Though he has been often accused, but never 
been convicted of a crime, they say Gawali is one of the gangsters 
responsible for a recent spate of violence and a mounting furor over 
what is widely seen as a breakdown of law and order in India's financial 
capital, a place where lots of people are making piles of money that 
criminal gangs covet. There have been a dozen bloody shootouts here 
in just the past five weeks, 81 so far this year, leaving 88 people 
dead. One of the most sensational took place directly across the street 
from police headquarters in broad daylight. Days after that attack, 
young men roared up to a cafe on motorcycles and shot the owners dead 
at the cash counter in front of terrified customers. Last week, gunmen 
sprayed bullets at a real-estate agent reading his newspaper on a 
crowded train platform and hit two bystanders as well. The next day, 
the pool of blood remained, an object of horror and curiosity to commuters. 
The victims have included businessmen who refused to submit to extortion, 
as well as some who were involved with the mafia, police say. The 
impunity with which big-time gangsters seem to operate in Bombay has 
fed corrosive public suspicions, common across India, that politicians 
protect criminals in exchange for a steady flow of illegal money to 
pay for their election campaigns. For months, moviegoers have packed 
the cavernous Eros Theater downtown to watch the film, ``Satya,'' 
a gritty saga of crime, political corruption and betrayal in Bombay. 
One recent night, the audience howled at the vulgar jokes of the gangsters, 
but left the theater grim-faced after the police commissioner, the 
crooked politician and all the main gangsters were murdered. To many 
in the audience, it seemed that real life was right up there on the 
movie screen. The fear of the city's businessmen is palpable. In one 
of Bombay's poshest financial districts, a rich builder and hotelier 
described the work of the extortionists. His sister had applied for 
a bank loan, he said, and soon got a call from a thug who told her 
that if her balance sheet was so good she had better give him money. 
``Someone at the bank had leaked her financial statement,'' her brother 
said, speaking on the condition of anonymity. ``I've also received 
threats. I don't want to get in trouble.'' But it's not just the city's 
wealthiest magnates who are targets. Increasingly, its run-of-the-mill 
merchants are getting squeezed, too. Police and business leaders speculate 
that an economic recession in Bombay and plummeting real estate values 
here have reduced the money available from the biggest businessmen, 
forcing gangsters to turn to smaller prey. A jeweler in the city's 
teeming wholesale bazaar in South Bombay said his brother-in-law, 
also a jewelry shop owner, said he got a telephone call recently. 
``Give us 11 lakh rupees'' _ $26,442 _ ``or we will kill you,'' the 
caller demanded. ``He was so terrified that he shut down his shop 
and he's gone into hiding,'' the jeweler said, adding that he was 
too frightened to give his name. The spreading threats and the killings 
of several prominent businessmen have galvanized the city's business 
community to lobby for action. The man gunned down last month across 
from the police station, after all, was the son of Raichand Shah, 
a department store owner and president of the Federation of Retail 
Trade Associations. Shah said he believes his eldest son, Bharat, 
39, was killed because he had encouraged other businessmen to seek 
police protection rather than pay extortion. The father said he has 
been threatened since his son's murder, adding that a caller had told 
him, ``Don't talk about us or your fate will be like your son's and 
your other children will be killed.'' Citing the Shah case, Mohan 
Gurnani, president of the Federation of Associations of Maharashtra, 
an umbrella group of business organizations, said he has informed 
state and city officials that if crime is not under control by December, 
his members will stop paying their taxes. ``If you can't protect our 
lives and property, why should we pay you taxes?'' he told the officials. 
The city's top elected officials are promising a tough crackdown. 
And the police are feeling the heat. D. Sivanandhan, the joint commissioner 
of police for crime, is working nights and weekends to battle the 
gangsters. Last week, the jaunty, mustachioed officer strode down 
the palm-shaded veranda of the colonial-era police headquarters and 
into his office, where he sketched out the Sisyphean task his officers 
face _ one he is convinced will require that victims summon up the 
courage to resist the demands of extortionists. More than half the 
city's residents live in slums, creating an ever ready army of alienated, 
unemployed young men for the gangsters' ends. Most of his frontline 
officers themselves earn a pittance of $65 a month, a situation that 
he acknowledged makes them tempting targets for bribes. His officers 
are also demoralized by a judicial inquiry report released in September 
that accused the police of claiming self defense in cases in which 
it appeared they had summarily executed gangsters. ``We've arrested 
hundreds of gangsters,'' the police commissioner said. ``We haven't 
killed all of them. The human rights people should look at such cases.'' 
But even when his officers do arrest the goondas _ as gangsters here 
are often called _ it is very difficult to convict them, he said. 
``The mafia can scare the wits out of witnesses,'' he said. ``We have 
no witness protection program like the United States. It's unaffordable.'' 
Sivanandhan regards Gawali, the purportedly reformed criminal who 
now presents himself as a man of peace, as one of the criminals who 
has gotten away with murder. Gawali was recently released from jail 
after being held for a year under a state law that allows the detention 
of suspected criminals for that period of time, police officials say. 
He had earlier been held for six years in jail on various charges 
including murder and extortion, police officials say, but has so far 
always been acquitted. ``He's a cold-blooded killer,'' the police 
commissioner said. ``But he's donning a new role. Overnight, he wants 
to become a political leader and a philanthropist. But his money is 
extortionist.'' ``He has no proof,'' retorted Gawali from his headquarters 
in a millworkers' tenement. A member of the lowly vegetable sellers' 
caste and son of a milkman, Gawali, 48, says he is a changed man. 
It was the politicians who made him a criminal, he said. ``I used 
to provide them with muscle power.'' But he said he has since fallen 
out with his former political patrons and is now active in a new political 
party. A thin, intense man in wire-rimmed spectacles, Gawali looks 
more like an intellectual than a gangster. He spoke proudly of his 
offer to give any widow of a slain policeman 100,000 rupees, about 
$2,400 _ an offer that has outraged the police brass who see it as 
a brazen attempt by the wolf to pose as a lamb. But Gawali insists 
he is just trying to be a good citizen. Three women have accepted 
so far, he said. Before he began shaking hands with a long line of 
waiting visitors who know him by the pet name, ``Daddy,'' Gawali described 
himself as man in the process of becoming a political leader. A portrait 
of Gandhi chatting with Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first prime minister, 
hung just over his shoulder. ``I was a rebel,'' Gawli said. ``And 
if you are a rebel, one way leads to politics and the other to jail. 
In jail, they call you a goonda. In politics, they call you a minister.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>