<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0273 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Stairs tend to creak and squeak over time. This happens when the house 
settles or the wood ages and shrinks. The noises may seem like a minor 
nuisance at first, but they can be an indication that structural members 
have moved out of alignment. Stairways are made up of stringers, treads 
and risers. The tread is the horizontal board that you step on. The 
riser is the vertical board that supports the tread. It fits into 
a groove on the underside of the tread. The stringers are the side 
boards that support the treads and risers. Open stringers are cut 
in a sawtooth pattern; the treads and risers mate to the sawtooth 
surfaces. Closed stringers have notches mortised in their sides to 
hold and enclose the treads and risers. Some staircases may have a 
closed stringer against the wall and open stringer with a balustrade 
on the opposite side. If the stairs are very wide, they may have additional 
support boards to support the treads and risers. Called carriages, 
these long boards run parallel to the stringers beneath the steps. 
Noises like squeaks occur when two loose boards rub against each other. 
Before you can make any repairs, you will have to pinpoint the source 
of the noise. First walk on each step as you listen for the squeak 
_ sometimes it helps to do this late at night or early in the morning 
when the rest of the house is relatively quiet. In addition to the 
sound, you may be able to feel the tread flex as you put weight on 
it. This is an indication that the board is not adequately supported 
by the riser. Minor repairs can usually be made above the steps. These 
are not difficult, but because they are made on exposed surfaces, 
care must be taken to keep the repairs from becoming obvious or unsightly. 
One way to silence noise is by squeezing powdered graphite into the 
space between the rubbing boards. The graphite will lubricate the 
surfaces so they slide past each other without friction. This, however, 
is only a temporary cure and it does nothing to secure the loose boards. 
Eventually, the squeak will reoccur as the graphite wears off. For 
a more permanent solution, you can nail or wedge the boards together. 
At the front of the tread where it rests on the riser, drive 6d finishing 
nails through the tread into the riser. Drive the nails at opposing 
angles so they anchor firmly into the wood, then countersink the heads 
and fill the holes with wood filler. The rear of the tread is usually 
held securely in a horizontal groove in the base of the riser. As 
the steps age and dry out, the groove is apt to widen, giving the 
tread room to move. Tighten the gap by inserting glue-coated wedges 
into the groove. Allow about 24 hours for the glue to dry, then use 
a utility knife to trim the wedges flush with surrounding surfaces. 
To fasten a loose tread or riser to an open stringer, drive finishing 
nails through the steps directly into the stringer. Ideally, the best 
place to make repairs is under the stairs, where they will be hidden 
from view. They will also be stronger because it is easier to attach 
braces, or wedges, into gaps where all the structural elements are 
exposed. Working under the staircase is not a problem if the sides 
are open or if the underside of the steps is accessible from the floor 
below. To gain access to the underside of the steps in a closed staircase, 
you will have to open the side sheathing or remove a few steps. This 
can be a difficult job and it's best to consult with a professional 
carpenter before getting started. Beneath the stairs, inspect the 
areas where the treads and risers join with the stringers. On a closed 
stringer, examine the wedges that hold treads and risers in the mortised 
slots. They should be tight with little or no play. If not, remove 
them, apply glue and tap them back into place. Look at the top of 
the riser where it mates with the underside of the tread. These boards 
should be firmly attached to each other so there is no movement between 
them. If the joint seems loose, however, you can secure it by gluing 
wood blocks or screwing angle brackets to the surfaces where the tread 
and riser meet at right angles. Examine the groove at base of the 
riser to make sure that rear of the tread is firmly in place. If not, 
you can drive 1 1/2-inch long wood screws through the back of the 
riser into the tread, but be sure to drill pilot holes first. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>