<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0436 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In late August, as South America panicked at the possibility that 
Brazil's economy would follow Russia's into default, the government 
here scrambled for ways to protect the country's shrinking foreign 
reserves. The government announced billions of dollars of spending 
cuts and tax increases, and started discussing a bailout with the 
International Monetary Fund. Communications Minister Luiz Carlos Mendonca 
de Barros went to Madrid, where he persuaded Telefonica SA to advance 
Brazil the next $3 billion payment toward the company's purchase of 
a Brazilian state-owned telephone system. But back home, Mendonca 
de Barros took delivery of four Persian kilims to decorate his office, 
billing the government $4,000. That was a modest sum compared with 
the $38,000 that the Supreme Court, which will probably have to rule 
on a number of sacrifices Brazilians are called on to make in the 
name of austerity, forked over for Persian rugs a few months before. 
In Pernambuco, the capital of Brazil's poverty-stricken northeast, 
the Federal District Court bought $6,500 in top-of-the-line decorative 
accent pieces, including wooden vases and fruit bowls costing $500 
each. Here in Brasilia, Congress is spending $1 million to build a 
moat around itself. And the presidents of the House and Senate agreed 
to shower maximum benefits on the 594 lawmakers who will attend a 
special session to debate government cutbacks and tax increases, paying 
them $47,000 for three months _ a sum that the majority of Brazilian 
workers, making less than $330 a month, would need at least 11 years 
to earn. As the Brazilian government hoists the banner of austerity 
and finishes negotiations for an IMF-led standby loan, the gap between 
the government's calls for sacrifice and its spending practices appears 
striking. Brazil is not the only country whose leaders spend lavishly 
on furnishings or perks, but some leading economists, like Paulo Rabello 
de Castro of the Rio de Janeiro-based Atlantic Institute, say that 
systematic government overspending is so serious here that it lies 
at the heart of Brazil's financial crisis. An undisciplined government 
soaks up credit, they say, choking growth of the private sector. A 
review of purchase orders from every branch of government, obtained 
by The New York Times from a member of the Brazilian Congress concerned 
about excessive spending, along with official budget figures and spending 
regulations, suggest that the government has taken minimal steps to 
control spending, despite the crisis that has been rolling toward 
this nation since last autumn, when the Central Bank doubled interest 
rates in reaction to the crisis in Thailand. In category after category, 
government spending has gone up this year. The executive branch spent 
$221.8 million on travel between January and August this year, compared 
with last year's $206.6 million. Salaries and benefits in the federal 
judiciary were up 42.8 percent by this August over last, rising to 
$4.7 billion from $3.2 billion. Federal legislative branch salaries 
rose 10.6 percent, while those for the military jumped 20.3 percent. 
At a time of tax increases and pension cutbacks, press reports of 
loose spending are drawing angry criticism. ``Investments are being 
cut,'' Sylka dos Santos Carneiro, a reader outraged at a report of 
government spending on travel, wrote to the Rio daily Jornal do Brasil. 
``Spending on health, education and other `unimportant things' is 
being cut. The country has lost its reason!'' Augusto Carvalho, an 
opposition congressman and longtime watchdog of government waste, 
said senior officials should set an example of restraint for junior 
workers. The Congress itself, he noted, was appealing a recent court 
ruling against the $47,000 special payment. ``If we're going to the 
IMF for $30 billion, it's the Brazilian people who are co-signing 
that loan,'' Carvalho said. ``The government shouldn't spend for anything 
that's not absolutely necessary.'' Claudia Costim, the minister of 
administration and state reform, said the government needed to cut 
expenses and ``moralize'' them. President Fernando Henrique Cardoso 
sharply curtailed first-class travel by government officials recently. 
``It doesn't represent a great savings,'' Ms. Costim said in an interview 
here. ``But at a time when we're asking people to make sacrifices, 
we have to make the effort.'' While the gesture may be praiseworthy, 
the problem runs deeper. Brazilian civil servants who travel, unlike 
their U.S. counterparts, are not reimbursed mainly for receipts but 
given a generous allowance for each day away, a system common in many 
countries. A senior Brazilian official visiting Washington, for example, 
collects $280 a day whether he stays at a five-star hotel or at the 
ambassador's residence. An American official on the same trip would 
collect no more than $168 a day. The Brazilian stipends, keyed to 
seniority levels, can add up to a kind of supplemental salary. Ms. 
Costim said Brazil did not have the personnel to monitor travel receipts. 
The executive branch, though, is reviewing major government contracts 
and has ordered each agency to come up with ways to trim spending, 
she said. David Fleischer, a professor at the Federal University of 
Brasilia and the president of the Brazilian chapter of Transparency 
International, said that after October's national elections, the government 
cut the budget for auditing and tax collection, citing the need for 
austerity. He said such cuts were often a way of thanking major campaign 
donors, but Brazil could not afford such largesse now. ``It's not 
even shooting yourself in the foot,'' he said. ``It's shooting yourself 
in the head.'' Others have pointed out that the $7 billion in budget 
cuts, announced as part of a $23.5 billion austerity package recently, 
are not all based on actual savings, but on cuts to a pre-election 
budget for 1999. That budget counted on 4 percent economic growth, 
instead of the 1 percent shrinkage the government now forecasts for 
1999. In that vein, Supreme Court President Jose Celso de Mello Filho 
boasted of slashing 20 percent from the court's 1999 budget. But that 
was after initially raising it by 23 percent, he acknowledged. Mello 
also said the $38,000 in Persian carpets the court bought for its 
salon were necessary because visiting dignitaries frequently dropped 
in. Before the court bought the carpets, visitors would go to the 
courtroom itself because there was no suitable reception area, and 
the justices ended up giving cocktail parties for the visitors. ``Now, 
we just give them coffee, maybe a glass of juice,'' he said. ``It's 
in, out.'' Cesar Borges, a spokesman for Mendonca de Barros, also 
said Persian carpets were justified at the Communications Ministry, 
since foreign visitors dropped in there. Supreme Court justices have 
also been lobbying for higher salaries, which could reach $18,000 
a month. The new salary would apply to the 24 sitting and retired 
justices. At $9,150 a month, the justices already earn more than the 
president of Brazil, who collects $7,200 a month. Saying it was ``a 
very difficult time'' for Brazil, Mello said he might argue against 
an increase at a coming meeting. But Fleischer and other analysts 
suggested the justices would probably get their increases later. ``It's 
more smoke and mirrors for the World Bank, the IMF and the others, 
to show the impulse of austerity,'' Fleischer said. ``After the IMF 
signs off on the loan, it will go back to normal and they'll probably 
pass the increase.'' A number of government officials, questioned 
about the wisdom of expensive purchases, argued that the Federal Accounts 
Tribunal oversaw all spending. But the tribunal itself has also come 
under fire. So far this year, seven of its eight ministers, who are 
political appointees, have spent $640,000 on foreign travel, collecting 
$358,000 in cash. Erivan Carvalho, a spokesman for the Accounts Court, 
defended the travel, saying that Brazil belonged to a number of international 
auditors' groups. ``The tribunal already assumed those commitments,'' 
he said. ``It has to fulfill them.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>