<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0318 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nearly five years after a crucial deal lured Walt Disney Co. to 42nd 
Street and jump-started the revival of Times Square, a coalition of 
Broadway interests is struggling to carry the economic gains to the 
heart of the theater district. The group, the Broadway Initiative, 
seeks to mobilize commercial and nonprofit theaters, producers, unions 
and the city behind efforts to stimulate the Broadway theater with 
adventuresome new productions from off-Broadway and elsewhere and 
other audience-building measures. But one vital feature of the program, 
the generation of revenue through the transfer of development rights, 
has yet to materialize, forcing the Initiative to scale back its goals 
and raising doubts over its ultimate impact. ``You plan a wedding, 
and the bride gets sick,'' said Stephen Sondheim, president of the 
Initiative, attributing the uncertainties to delays in approval of 
the transfer of rights. While discussions about financing the Initiative 
are at a delicate stage, he said, ``I'm more than optimistic.'' The 
transfer of the development rights, also called air rights, was part 
of a disputed rezoning plan approved by the City Council in August. 
Air rights represent unused development potential, the difference 
between the size of a building and the maximum allowed on its site. 
Since theaters are mostly small buildings, they tend to have ample 
air rights. Under the plan, owners of 25 of the 37 Broadway theaters 
(not including those on 42nd Street and some others) can sell and 
transfer 2.4 million square feet above their buildings so that developers 
within a 45-block swath of midtown could build taller structures than 
otherwise allowed. The measure supersedes the city's zoning code, 
which ordinarily permits transfers only between sites that are adjacent, 
across the street or cater-cornered, or those linked by common ownership. 
The expanded sales of rights could generate as much as $100 million 
for the theater owners, by some estimates. In return, $10 a square 
foot from the sales, or perhaps as much as $20 million, would go to 
the city and the Broadway Initiative for a fund to help incubate new 
plays and small musicals that would not then have to be smash hits 
to survive on Broadway. The fund would also be used to help build 
new audiences and to monitor compliance with the accord. Theater owners 
who sold air rights would forgo conversion of their theaters to other 
uses. But for all the stir about the potential of air rights sales, 
particularly in a strong real estate market, no deals have yet emerged, 
although one may be pending. This has left the Initiative scrambling 
for revenue to replace a one-time $250,000 grant, out of a payment 
in lieu of taxes from the development of the Marriott Marquis hotel, 
due to run out by the end of the year. ``We'll get another grant someplace,'' 
said Arthur Laurents, the playwright and director. He acknowledged 
that members of the Initiative were cautious. ``They all want to know 
how much someone else put in,'' he said. But he added, ``It's moving.'' 
The Initiative has yet to announce specific plans to help bring any 
innovative fare to Broadway, its most prominent goal, although supporters 
say they are making progress. The uncertainty has also led critics 
of the air rights transfer to argue, as they have in the past, that 
the plan was never likely to generate much money for the theater and 
was rather a real-estate scheme to undermine zoning protections in 
the Clinton neighborhood west of the theater district. Supporters 
say the rights transfers were never held out as a panacea for the 
theater and were to be one piece of a plan that needed contributions 
from all members of the Broadway industry. In any event, the Initiative's 
interim goals have been scaled back, and it is not clear how the group 
can cover a once-envisioned annual budget of $10 million, or even 
the $4 million or less suggested in current estimates. When the City 
Council passed the rezoning plan, it was warmly greeted within the 
theater but generated a storm of opposition from community boards 
throughout the city. Organizations like the Municipal Art Society 
and the local chapter of the American Institute of Architects also 
opposed the plan, saying it would undermine zoning protections. Other 
critics produced figures suggesting that far from ailing, Broadway 
was enjoying some of its best times in years. In a compromise, the 
west side of Eighth Avenue between 45th and 56th Streets was removed 
as a site for air rights development. While some theatrical unions 
seem ready to pitch in with cash contributions to keep the Initiative 
solvent, two, representing musicians and press agents, have rebuffed 
approaches for money, contending that the air rights transfer had 
always been held out as the mainstay of the effort. One Broadway executive 
privy to the discussions recently described the state of the Initiative's 
finances as ``a mess.'' But Joey Parnes, the group's coordinator, 
disputed the characterization. ``We're proceeding in a deliberate 
fashion,'' said Parnes, a former executive producer of the Public 
Theater. ``We're working on a formula or a plan or a series of components 
of a financing plan, which we're not ready to share.'' While ``we're 
not there yet,'' he said, he expects that ``we will be there in the 
next few weeks.'' Gerald Schoenfeld, chairman of the Shubert Organization, 
Broadway's largest theater owner, said this week that while no air 
rights transfers were at hand, Bertelsmann, the music and publishing 
giant, had made an inquiry about a possible purchase of air rights 
to build above the Criterion Center on Broadway at 45th Street. Robert 
Nederlander, president of his family-owned theater chain, said he, 
too, had received some air rights inquiries but nothing firm enough 
to discuss. The absence of air rights revenues ``is a problem, no 
question about it,'' he said. The Nederlander Organization would be 
willing to pitch in with money for the Initiative, he said, ``but 
I have to see what others would do.'' Jack Goldstein, the Initiative's 
first coordinator and a top organizer of the group with Actors Equity 
Association, acknowledged that the Initiative was going through a 
challenging period. ``It's a totally new thing being tried,'' he said. 
``It's tough. If there's no transfer of air rights, we'll have to 
look at other sources.'' But Goldstein, now executive director of 
the Theater Development Fund, the theater-service organization that, 
among other things, operates the TKTS discount ticket booths, said, 
``I'm confident there will be a source of money to carry the development 
process forward, and that it will come out of the industry.'' The 
issue's tangled beginnings go back to January 1994, when the city 
and state offered low-interest loans of almost $30 million to Walt 
Disney Co. to renovate and take over the decrepit New Amsterdam Theater 
on 42nd Street. Schoenfeld and Rocco Landesman of the Jujamcym chain 
complained that no similar incentives were provided to existing theater 
owners. In response, Gov. Mario Cuomo pledged to create a state loan 
fund to repair and maintain existing Broadway theaters. Cuomo left 
office before a fund was set up, but the state commitment grew into 
the Broadway Initiatives Working Group under the chief auspices of 
Actors Equity, and support for the theater was tied to the air rights 
measure. Under the rezoning initiative announced by Mayor Rudolph 
Giuliani last December, the 25 theaters _ 12 owned by Shubert, 5 by 
the Nederlander Organization, 3 by Jujamcyn and 5 by others _ could 
sell the unused rights to build over their landmark theaters to developers 
anywhere within an area bounded by 40th and 57th Streets, Avenue of 
the Americas and Eighth Avenue, about 45 blocks in all. The developers 
could use the extra 2.4 million square feet to increase the allowable 
size of their buildings. Starting with the optimistic assumption that 
every eligible square foot would sell at $50 a square foot, the plan's 
supporters calculated that the transfers could generate $120 million. 
In return, theater owners would pay $10 a square foot from any sale 
into a theater fund, which could then total $24 million. If all the 
money were to come in at once _ which is clearly unlikely _ and invested 
as an endowment, it might yield $1 million a year in interest income, 
far below the $10 million sum the Initiative once sought as a goal, 
although funds are also to be raised from contributions, including 
those from people who work in the theater. The Initiative could operate 
on less, Parnes said, if its assistance to theater projects was cut 
back. He said the group was now aiming for a $4 million budget to 
be divided among five ``micro-loans'' of up to $500,000 each to help 
finance five plays and musicals in small or mid-size Broadway houses; 
grants to theater groups and individuals to help attract new audiences, 
especially young people, members of minorities and people from outside 
Manhattan, and a kitty to monitor the preservation of the theaters 
and cover overhead for the Initiative. But he said those figures could 
shrink substantially, depending on the resources available. The Initiative's 
efforts in recent months to seek unspecified contributions from theatrical 
unions met with varied responses. The 1,200-member Society of Stage 
Directors and Choreographers said it was willing to participate. The 
most negative reply was from the Association of Theatrical Press Agents 
and Managers, with 680 members across the United States and Canada. 
``Union members are workers, not investors,'' Gordon Forbes, secretary-treasurer 
of the union, wrote to Parnes in August. ``Their investment in this 
industry is love of theater, hard work and a commitment to be available 
to employers as part of a stable and trained work force. They should 
not also be required to pay per-capita taxes to employers or make 
speculative financial investments as a precondition of employment.'' 
On Sept. 23, after what he portrayed as a summer cooling-off period, 
Parnes wrote back to say that the Initiative had no plans ``to require 
union dues contributions.'' He said contributions would be ``completely 
voluntary and self-imposed.'' A second union, Local 802 of the American 
Federation of Musicians, with 10,000 members, has also raised objections 
to the Initiative's requests for contributions. ``In the beginning 
all we talked about was air rights,'' said Bill Moriarty, the local's 
president. ``My recollection is that the air rights were the financial 
cornerstone of this project.'' Goldstein said that there was always 
an understanding that all parties, including unions, would contribute 
to the Initiative. Concern over who might get stuck with the bills 
when there were no air rights sales was a major concern at City Planning 
Commission hearings last May. Still some opponents of the air rights 
plan maintain that the uncertainties were played down. ``They sold 
this and continued to sell this as the way to save the industry,'' 
said John Fisher, a member of Community Board 4 in Manhattan and spokesman 
for the Clinton Special District Coalition. One of the most potent 
of the theatrical unions, Local 1 of the International Alliance of 
Theatrical Stage Employees, with 2,200 members, has not raised objections 
to union contributions, although it still expects air rights to provide 
a major source of financial support, said the union's president, Edward 
McConway. ``There was a philosophical agreement that we'd all chip 
in to keep it going,'' he said. ``But exactly what we agreed to, I 
don't know.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>