<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sen. Giuliani? It could happen. Sen. Clinton? (Hillary, that is.) 
An exciting thought. Probably won't happen. Sen. Cuomo? (Andrew, not 
Mario.) Quite possible. The rush to succeed Daniel Patrick Moynihan, 
who let it be known last week that he would not seek a fifth term 
in 2000, is under way. Carl McCall says he's interested. People wonder 
if Mark Green is interested. There is talk about an Al D'Amato comeback, 
and frantic speculation that has even included such names as Colin 
Powell and Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin. The prize is a spectacular 
one. There hasn't been an open U.S. Senate seat in New York since 
1958, when the Republican, Kenneth Keating, defeated the Democrat, 
Frank Hogan. Keating himself was defeated six years later by Robert 
Kennedy. The name surfacing most frequently among the Democrats is 
Andrew Cuomo, the secretary of Housing and Urban Development. He'd 
love to run but he's got a tough decision to make. He's close to Vice 
President Al Gore and would have a big role in Gore's presidential 
campaign. Does he give that up for what undoubtedly will be a brutal 
fight for the Senate? The Republican with the best shot is none other 
than Rudolph Giuliani, the Bill Parcells of New York politics. Try 
to imagine Parcells in the Senate. It's not exactly a perfect fit, 
but Giuliani could very well win. Republican candidates in statewide 
races usually do well upstate while getting demolished in the city. 
Giuliani would not get demolished in the city. Said a prominent Democratic 
strategist: ``I think he would win if he got the nomination. I think 
it is very difficult for a Democrat to beat a Republican if the Republican 
gets more than 40 percent of the city vote. Rudy would get 40 to 45 
percent, maybe more. And he does well in the suburbs. He would be 
very hard to beat.'' Running for the Senate is hardly Giuliani's first 
choice. He would hate being just one of 100 senators, and it's almost 
impossible to picture him happily immersed in the perennial compromising 
of the legislative process. But his options are limited. He can't 
run for re-election as mayor in 2001 because of term limits. He would 
love to be on the Republican national ticket in 2000 but that's not 
going to happen. And George Pataki, who is not subject to term limits, 
will be free to run for a third term as governor in 2002 if he doesn't 
land on a national ticket himself. Giuliani's ultimate goal is to 
be president. If the choice en route is between running for the Senate 
and running toward oblivion, he would most likely choose the Senate. 
I have found nothing to substantiate the rumors that Hillary Rodham 
Clinton is interested in running for Moynihan's seat. But the idea 
of a Senate race between Mrs. Clinton and Rudolph Giuliani is such 
a splendid one that it must be kept alive at all costs. The journalists 
who would get to cover that story are of one mind: Run, Hillary, run. 
Carl McCall would be an attractive candidate, but even his friends 
wonder if he has the capacity to raise the necessary funding, and 
if he has the stamina and the will that this Senate campaign will 
require. (There are reasons why ruthless, obsessive politicians like 
Bill Clinton, Al D'Amato and Rudolph Giuliani so frequently end up 
the winners.) Also, it is by no means certain that the state's voters 
would be willing to send an African-American to the Senate in the 
near future. It's pathetic but true that McCall's race will be a handicap, 
even as we move into the 21st century. Mark Green has already had 
two unsuccessful runs for the Senate. It is believed that his eye 
is on the mayoralty. If Giuliani were to win the Moynihan seat, Green, 
the city's public advocate, would automatically succeed him and finish 
out the term. That would give him a boost in the mayoral race in 2001. 
How brutal is politics? Green's opponents, including the Giuliani 
forces, are trying to figure out a way to quickly change the law so 
that Green would not automatically succeed Giuliani. One proposal 
is to have a special election if the mayor were to leave office early. 
On Sunday I referred to a textbook by Dr. Warren Hern, calling it 
``Abortion Services.'' The correct title is ``Abortion Practice.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>