<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0282 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On election night Barbara Boxer grew as tall as Janet Reno as she 
whooped and bubbled over her win. That red-suited senator was gloating. 
Some people might consider it unladylike to gloat, but too bad about 
them. Barbara Boxer deserved to relish in victory. She deserved to 
beam and give a power salute. If she had done a cartwheel into the 
crowd it would have been absolutely appropriate. The pollsters had 
been showing her the door. Conservatives said people didn't like her 
personality. She was said to be too progressive for California. On 
Tuesday Boxer talked back to the skeptics, particularly the ones who 
declared her ``a fluke in history,'' as if any woman with her kind 
of clout was an aberration. But now she's back and that fluke theory 
turned out to be nothing more than a desperate wish that the Boxers 
could be shooed away and things returned to normal, with the boys 
leaned back in their swivel chairs, scratching their bellies and lighting 
cigars. Sorry, but normal is Barbara Boxer and all the other women 
who ran and won, who walked precincts and called voters, who wrote 
letters to the editor and tried to bust up all-male boards of supervisors 
and earn seats on city councils and school boards, who wrote checks 
to Emily's List and who knew when to back the right men. Even the 
women who ran and lost made their point. Politically passionate women 
are no flukes. There were more words that Barbara Boxer wanted to 
throw back after Tuesday. They called her ``too feisty,'' even ``too 
short,'' she said. Short is downright silly, and feisty, as it turns 
out, is fine, thank you. President Harry Truman was called feisty 
for his famous line about getting out of the kitchen if you can't 
stand the heat. The usually gentle Jimmy Carter was once described 
as strident in an uncharacteristic moment. Strident and Feisty is 
not a bad club. The words aren't going to disappear, anyhow. The morning 
after the election, Barbara Boxer was still attached to the appendages. 
Election reports referred to her as ``Boxer, a strident liberal'' 
and ``Boxer, an outspoken feminist.'' Here's a deal. We'll stop fighting 
the words if they stop fighting the women. Former Texas Gov. Ann Richards 
delivered another feisty brand of feminist political power when she 
stopped over in Santa Rosa on the eve of the election for a fund-raiser 
for congressional winner Mike Thompson. The candidate was male but 
there was decided female energy in that room in the form of women 
candidates, party hosts, event organizers, campaign managers, community 
leaders _ all major players and all looking to Richards as a role 
model. ``They say this election doesn't matter to women. Oh, my god,'' 
she said, throwing a look that asked for delivery from pinheads. Then 
Richards took on the Republican congress for being do-nothings and 
spending all its time trying to boot Bill Clinton out of a job. ``If 
we took away all the jobs of men who did what Bill Clinton did, women 
would not have to worry about affirmative action.'' She went on to 
blast the hard right for trying to insert their morality into schools. 
``They harp on abortion but that's not all they're about. They want 
to stop contraception and sex education.'' Thompson called Richards 
``one of the stars of public policy,'' and then told her she should 
run for president and he would support her. The day before Richards 
came to town there was a get-out-the-vote bash in San Francisco, starring 
Hillary Rodham Clinton, who raised hands with Boxer, Dianne Feinstein, 
Nancy Pelosi, Lynn Woolsey and a few good men. A member of the audience 
of 1,100 said afterwards, ``It gave me energy as a member of the female 
species to carry on strong for a very long time.'' The same thing 
happened after Tuesday. Women knew they'd done it. They cheered Boxer 
for skipping out of the woods, for Woolsey and Patty Murray prevailing 
and for Loretta Sanchez packing Bob Dornan home for good. They celebrated 
that 150 years ago women organized in Seneca Falls to get the vote 
and in 1998 voters preserved women's right to choose. They congratulated 
themselves for education, reproductive rights and gun control, formerly 
known as women's issues, becoming deciding concerns for voters in 
general. And for the Clinton-Monica mess not becoming a women's issue. 
They toasted the inexhaustible, unflinching Hillary for turning herself 
into a major political asset, every inch a stateswoman at podium after 
podium. It was the year that women made it happen and now that we 
know how to do it we can continue on until it's no big deal. Then 
there'll be no need to gloat. (Susan Swartz is a columnist for The 
Press Democrat in Santa Rosa, Calif. Her e-mail address is sfswartz(AT)pressdemo.com) 
NYT-11-10-98 1026EST 
</TEXT>
</DOC>