<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0292 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Often, when you're talking to phone support technicians, they are 
getting their answers by tapping into an online database. To cut out 
the middleman, many companies put their databases on line _ which 
reduces their support bills so much that they provide the service 
free. Jeffrey Tarter, executive director of the Association of Support 
Professionals, said he believed that this channel of support would 
eventually supersede traditional phone-based help. Some publishing 
companies also put their how-to articles on line, and many online 
communities provide message boards or technical advice from experts 
via online conferences or e-mail. Here are some places to get help. 
MICROSOFTome KNOWLEDGE BASE: www.microsoft.com/support This provides 
a searchable collection of articles highlighting problems, bugs, downloadable 
fixes and how-to advice for all Microsoft products. Some articles 
merely state that a problem has no known solution _ but that information 
alone can save you from wild goose chases. ZD HELP: www.zdnet.com/zdhelp 
If you just don't know how to do something, ZD Help searches through 
Ziff-Davis' database of step-by-step tips and answers to frequently 
asked questions, drawn from publications like PC Magazine. The site 
also has live support forums on Mondays from 7 to 8:30 p.m. EST (requires 
downloadable chat software). BUG NET: www.bugnet.com Bug Net chronicles 
the faults of scores of popular programs in its regular bulletins 
and provides fixes and links to downloadable updates. Much of Bug 
Net's value is in its subscription-based service, but the Web site 
maintains an archive of significant articles that you can search and 
read free. SUPPORT HELP: www.supporthelp.com TECHSTATION: www.techstation.com 
If you don't know the Web address of a company's support site, these 
two sites provide links to company pages. Support Help also provides 
a search engine that looks for company and product names and it includes 
phone support numbers and relevant Usenet newsgroups. MACFIXIT: www.macfixit.com 
This site regularly publishes troubleshooting tips and solutions for 
problems with Macintosh hardware and software. Two substantial sections 
deal with Mac OS 8.5 and the iMac. A searchable database of bulletins 
covers much ground. WUGNET, THE WINDOWS USER GROUP NETWORK: www.wugnet.com/compuserve 
This 11-year veteran of online support forums on Compuserve operates 
a large number of support forums, listed on this Web page. Messages 
posted on the forums can provide workable answers to problems in anything 
from a few hours to a few days. AMERICA ONLINE'S HELP DESK: Keyword: 
Help Desk The quickest way to find AOL's various support channels 
is through the listings at this umbrella site. The channels vary in 
the quality and type of support, but most provide message boards and 
lists of frequently asked questions. Most evenings, there are several 
scheduled conferences with experts in various areas. NO WONDER: www.nowonder.com 
No Wonder provides free support for Macintosh, Windows, Unix, OS/2 
and Be operating systems. There are online message boards, Java-based 
chat rooms and a search engine that sifts through the ZD Help archives. 
But most significant is the e-mail consultation service, in which 
a 350-strong team of volunteers provides responses to technical problems 
within 12 to 48 hours. DEJA NEWS: www.dejanews.com Anything you read 
in newsgroups should be taken under advisement. Opinions run rampant 
and the most strident voices aren't always the most authoritative. 
But by clicking through Deja News' Computers channel, you can find 
newsgroups that cover your application and problems _ and search on 
the postings you find there. Many people counsel caution before posting 
your own message on Usenet; newsgroups are often ``mined'' for e-mail 
addresses by junk e-mail companies. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>