<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0497 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As every devout moviegoer knows, we are now approaching the season 
of excess. These final weeks of the year occasion a tidal wave of 
new pictures, followed soon after by an avalanche of awards. We're 
not just talking Oscars here. Oscar, of course, is the royal prince 
of prizes. Before that epic March 21 event seizes the world's attention, 
those who find eternal pleasure in any awards ceremony can look forward 
to Golden Globes and Golden Apples and Golden Satellites and Golden 
Popcorn Buckets, to name a few of the honors awaiting the women and 
men judged the most deserving talents of the big screen. Naturally, 
the reasons for the surge of important releases right now are wreathed 
in dollar signs. For one thing, the industry always expects big audiences 
during the year-end holiday season. No less important, the people 
who bestow awards _ critics, industry folk, academics, special interest 
groups and just plain fans _ are thought likelier to remember a blockbuster 
they saw last month than a first-rate movie screened in April. Obviously, 
prizes are comforting ego-boosters for the creative men and women 
involved in film. Prizes also lend a sense of purpose and perhaps 
even power to the people who bestow them. More practically, they encourage 
spending: lines of people dropping large bills at the box office because 
they have heard that somewhere a collection of experts thought the 
title on the marquee merited special praise. The first, and oldest, 
of the prize-givers, to be heard from next month, is the National 
Board of Review of Motion Pictures. Born in 1909, the board began 
as an anticensorship group after the mayor of New York, an otherwise 
unmemorable chap named George McClennan, revoked moving-picture exhibition 
licenses for Christmas Eve 1908. Mayor McClennan was convinced that 
the new medium corrupted community morals, a complaint that has, from 
time to time, been heard since. The Board of Review has been handing 
out awards since 1929, and it attracts a parade of celebrities to 
its ceremony at the Tavern on the Green in February. Still, mentioning 
the Board of Review to members of almost any other awards group may 
elicit the same response: Who are they? You might say they are an 
elite, rather quiet, extremely serious fan club numbering about 75. 
Lois Ballon, who runs the group while disdaining a title, reports 
that the membership includes film students, retired film professionals, 
retired teachers and writers and editors. ``We're not out to be critics,'' 
Ms. Ballon says. ``We're out to appreciate film.'' They get to appreciate 
film at least 30 times a month and often, after a screening, are honored 
with a visit and a talk with the director. Their awards, which once 
bore the name of the film pioneer D.W. Griffith, now certify the significance 
of the givers. They are simply National Board of Review awards. Soon 
after the National Board prizes come the laurels conferred by the 
New York Film Critics Circle. This is a collection of 31 newspaper 
and magazine reviewers (no room here for television critics with their 
brief, chatty notices) who were described by a Los Angeles journalist 
a few years back as ``venerable but unpredictable.'' The Circle has 
been around since 1935. Predictability is a more complicated issue. 
One member, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that ``as a matter 
of pride,'' the critics, who will vote on Dec. 16, are almost never 
influenced by the commercial success or failure of a film. ``We're 
New York, not L.A.,'' the member said. On the other hand, the group 
may sometimes be driven by what another member calls ``think-alike 
Manhattan elitism,'' which can yield interesting compromises. In the 
voting last year for best picture, one bloc lined up behind ``The 
Sweet Hereafter,'' an adaptation of the melancholy Russell Banks novel, 
while another group wanted ``Titanic.'' In the end, neither favorite 
won; the compromise vote, as always by secret ballot, went to ``L.A. 
Confidential.'' Jack Mathews, a Newsday critic who has held membership 
in the critics organizations on both sides of the continent, fondly 
recalls the Los Angeles Film Critics Association as ``a ragtag bunch'' 
that allots votes not only to television critics but also to people 
no longer reviewing at all. In contrast to the New York system, the 
Los Angeles voting, on Dec. 12, is open and discussion is passionate. 
But Mathews says that ``despite all the huffing and puffing New York 
critics do about the low caliber of L.A. critics, their awards aren't 
that different.'' Except when they are. Actually, the West Coast critics 
also crowned ``L.A. Confidential'' as last year's best. But their 
fame _ or infamy _ rests on an incident in 1985, a coup engineered 
by Mathews in which they honored an unreleased movie. That year, Universal 
was sitting on a quirky futuristic film, ``Brazil,'' which Mathews 
greatly admired. Not long before voting day, Mathews organized screenings 
for the Los Angeles critics, creating a swell of energy that he described 
as ``let's-do-something-important.'' The group stunned the industry 
_ and forced the movie's release _ by showering ``Brazil'' with awards 
for best movie, best direction and best screenplay. The other major 
critics group is the National Society of Film Critics, which announces 
its selections on Jan. 3. The society's original members bolted from 
the New York Circle in 1966, grousing that its choices were too conventional. 
Perhaps the most noteworthy thing about the National Society today 
is its deeply resented membership policy. According to several critics, 
the group has a history of inviting applications and then rejecting 
the applicants. Mathews will not even consider applying. ``I just 
do not believe that as a professional I need to submit clips, like 
I'm trying to join a car club.'' Then there are the Golden Globes, 
tributes from the more than 80-odd members of the Hollywood Foreign 
Press Association, to be delivered on Jan. 24 at the Beverly Hills 
Hilton Hotel. Once these prizes were suspect items, cynically regarded 
as favors to studios that had been generous with press junkets and 
sumptuous restaurant meals. Now, after a few years of prime-time television 
coverage of the glittering ceremonies, they have not only acquired 
a kind of respectability but a reputation as fairly reliable predictions 
of the Oscars. Moreover, for at least some addicts of these rituals, 
the relaxed dining room setting of the event seems livelier and more 
appealing than Oscar night. Still, dissatisfaction lingers. There 
have always been complaints that a substantial number of Hollywood 
Foreign Press Association members are part-time journalists or not 
in the trade at all. (For years, a running gag had it that on the 
night of the Globes, you could not find a good waiter anywhere in 
Hollywood.) For this and other reasons, a former HFPA member started 
a rival group, in 1996. It is the International Press Academy, and 
it will announce its third set of Golden Satellites in mid-December. 
Its founders dream that in the great ``Star Wars'' tradition, the 
Satellites will some day vanquish the Globes. Nothing, of course, 
will overtake the evening when the Academy of Motion Picture Arts 
and Sciences sanctifies labors in 25 categories. Five thousand members 
vote in the nominating process, and there is always controversy. ``Oscar 
Snubs High and Mighty,'' a Los Angeles Times headline reported last 
year. The highly praised ``As Good as It Gets,'' and ``Amistad'' had 
failed to make the list of best picture nominees, and Leonardo DiCaprio 
had to do without a best actor nomination. There are often surprises. 
In 1997, the year independents flooded the box office, ``The English 
Patient'' gathered many nominations and a near-record 9 awards. Until 
``Titanic'' tied the record with 11 statuettes, ``Ben-Hur'' (1959) 
was the all-time winner. It would be impolite to ask how many people 
today think of ``Ben-Hur'' as a memorable film. Wait, there's more. 
Indeed, it might be said that there are more kinds of awards in the 
film industry than any art form could want or need. The following 
list is by no means complete. _ Directors Guild of America Award, 
for best director. _ People's Choice Awards, determined by nationwide 
Gallup poll. _ Independent Spirit Awards for low-budget original films, 
voted by the 8,500-member Independent Feature Project. _ Screenwriters 
Guild of America awards for, among other things, best original screenplay. 
_ Writers Guild of America, for original and adapted screenplay. _ 
Screen Actors Guild award, an eight-pound bronze human figure holding 
the masks of comedy and tragedy, for memorable performances. _ American 
Comedy Awards, for both movies and television. _ NAACP Image Awards, 
for the accomplishments of black artists in movies and television. 
_ Eddies, the American Cinema Editors award for best editing in film 
and television. _ Gavel Awards, from the American Bar Association, 
for worthy portrayals of the legal profession in film and other mediums. 
_ Golden Apple, from the Hollywood Women's Press Club, for the male 
and female stars of the year. _ Golden Popcorn Bucket, a fairly recent 
award voted by viewers of MTV, paying homage to such milestones as 
Best Kiss, Best Fight and Best Villain. _ Golden Raspberry, also known 
as the Razzies, for the year's worst achievements in film; voted by 
several hundred people said to be industry insiders and students. 
_ Sad to say, no one is yet offering an award for the Best Award. 
Or for the Worst. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>