<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0106 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ira Magaziner, the author of the Clinton administration's ill-fated 
national health plan, who most recently has led government efforts 
to foster the growth of the Internet and electronic commerce, said 
Friday that he would leave the White House before the end of the year. 
The announcement came as the administration prepares to turn over 
governance of the Internet to a private, multinational organization 
and heads into a period of presumably tough negotiations with the 
European Union over data-privacy issues. Magaziner, a senior assistant 
to the president for policy development, has led a push for industry 
self-regulation of how personal data on consumers is collected and 
used, a stance that has placed the United States at odds with the 
European Union. He said, however, that he was satisfied he had completed 
the main job by moving the broad issue of electronic commerce onto 
the world's agenda. Although he has not set a departure date and was 
not prepared to say what he would do next, Magaziner said he hoped 
to wrap up his duties in the next month and move back to Providence, 
R.I. His wife and children moved back there a year ago, and he has 
been commuting since then. Magaziner joined the administration five 
and a half years ago to draft what turned out to be a doomed effort 
to create a national health care system. Then he turned to the Internet, 
where he has been aggressively trying to shape domestic and international 
policy for electronic commerce and the Internet. In addition to helping 
win passage of two federal laws imposing a moratorium on new Internet 
taxes and protecting digital age copyrights, he successfully pushed 
for international agreements to keep the Internet duty-free and to 
set standards for international payment systems. Brian O'Shaughnessy 
of the Internet Alliance, an association of companies with Internet 
interests, said: ``I think it's pretty clear to say that at a time 
when there was a lot of confusion about where the industry was going 
both domestically and internationally, Ira Magaziner was the guy who 
rolled up his sleeves and got into the nitty-gritty of how technology 
works, what the effect would be on our society, and then took those 
notions and began to be the evangelist for the Internet industry in 
a global marketplace.'' In June 1997, after studying the Internet 
for 15 months, Magaziner released the administration's ``Framework 
for Electronic Commerce,'' which called for a hands-off, market-driven 
approach to Internet regulation. His philosophy then and now is that 
while the Internet is growing rapidly, it could be slowed by government 
intervention. Since then, he has led efforts to hand administration 
of the network over to private ownership and has traveled widely, 
pushing other nations to endorse his tax-free, unregulated approach 
to the medium. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>