<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0275 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I stared at the Chinese tree peonies, almost resentfully. ``The UPS 
man brought them yesterday,'' said my mother, Kathleen, nodding at 
the big box on the cat porch, which doesn't have cats anymore, but 
the name sticks, from the days when 15 barn cats used to claw at the 
screen door, yowling for chow. I think there was a shortage of mice 
in those days. If there's one thing this place doesn't need, it's 
more plants. That's what Kathleen and I are always saying to each 
other. I have a life in New York, and she's getting older _ 84 _ and 
finding it harder to haul water to some newly planted tree, or even 
to bend over and weed the adored arugula patch. Now she was looking 
at me, a little grin on her face. When had I ordered a bunch of tree 
peonies from Cricket Hill Garden, in Thomaston, Conn.? Then it came 
back to me, a shimmering spring day in May two years ago, as I stood, 
thunderstruck, on a hillside of luminous colors and silky petals. 
Some were wide-open semi-doubles, like Gathering of Rosy Clouds, which 
had dark red flares at the base of its pink petals and stamens laden 
with golden pollen. Others were thousand-petal types, like Princess 
Zhao Marries Beyond the Great Wall. (Princess Zhao was a concubine 
who failed to bribe the court painter. He painted such an ugly likeness 
of her that the emperor decided to give her away to some warring barbarian. 
When he realized his mistake, he executed the painter, not that that 
did Princess Zhao much good.) Still others, like Fire That Makes the 
Pills of Immortality, a silver-red bud that opens to flaming red, 
embodied the transformations of alchemy and magic. I wandered among 
all these flowers, gloriously unsettled, somewhere between worship 
and lust. The Chinese, apparently, have had this feeling for 1,500 
years. ``The flower represents the essence of the female element,'' 
said David Furman, who owns Cricket Hill with his wife, Kasha, (who 
was captivated 20 years ago when he gave her an 8-inch peony called 
Purple of the Sung Dynasty). ``The plant itself, mudan, means `male 
vermilion,''' he explained. Say no more. Just look at a tree peony 
sometime, when the dark red flower stalks are swelling with buds. 
Known as the ``king of the flowers,'' the tree peony has long been 
a symbol of erotic love, embodying both the female and male elements, 
the yin and the yang. Since the fourth century, when Xie Lingyun, 
a poet, described one blooming in the wild, they have found their 
way into Chinese poetry, ceramics and paintings. Emperors grew them 
in their palace gardens as early as the sixth century, and they have 
long been associated with wealth and nobility. There is the story 
of Empress Wu, who ruled during the Tang dynasty (A.D. 618 to 906). 
``One day she commanded all the flowers to bloom out of season,'' 
said Furman, who has a master's degree in Chinese history from New 
York University. ``They all obeyed, except for the tree peony.'' The 
Empress banished the defiant plants to the city of Luoyang, which 
is the capital of tree peonies to this day. The Furmans import their 
plants from Luoyang and from the city of Heze. They were so exquisite, 
I'd ordered a few for the following fall and then put a hold on them 
when I went off on a sabbatical. Now, here they were, my love affair 
come home to roost. My mother gave me a jolly little smile and went 
off for a nap. And I dusted the cobwebs off my old spade and told 
my back to behave. Maybe we garden from a landscape of memory. A single 
white peony, silky petals surrounding golden stamens, floats in a 
bowl on the piano of my childhood. And now I know it wasn't my Clementi 
sonatinas that made my father kiss my mother. It felt good to be digging 
again, as if something were loosening up in me, each time I lifted 
a shovelful of earth or took the sturdy fork and worked it back and 
forth in Maryland's dense red clay. Now clay is not what a tree peony 
wants, since it evolved on the dry, mountainous slopes of northern 
China. It can thrive on very little water, but to bloom prolifically 
it needs plenty of compost and good drainage. So there I was, defying 
nature, with a wheelbarrow full of compost, and a bag of Canadian 
peat, to lighten up soil with about as much tilth as the floor of 
a swimming pool. The afternoon light slanted across emerald-green 
winter wheat and soybean fields the color of cinnamon. The corn had 
been cut, leaving stubbled rows that followed the curve of Carroll 
County's voluptuous hills. Sometimes loving a place four hours from 
New York City seems like a conflict, but on that afternoon, I just 
planted peonies and let the land back into my heart. Unlike floppy 
herbaceous peonies, which can't even stand up without being staked, 
tree peonies are elegant woody shrubs with graceful branches and deeply 
cut leaves as expressive as hands. Although they bloom for only two 
or three weeks in May _ which is part of the longing they inspire 
_ their foliage is striking all summer long. Blossoms can range from 
4 inches across to a foot in diameter, and some can be 5 inches deep. 
But you have to be patient. Most don't flower until their fifth or 
sixth year, though Cricket Hill sells only four-year-old plants. One 
peony called Pea Green takes so long to bloom that Furman says he 
won't sell it to anyone older than 30. A lot of nurseries send out 
their tree peonies in the spring, but Furman frowns on this practice. 
Tree peonies set new roots as they go into dormancy in the fall, so 
in the New York area, if they're planted in October or early November, 
they will have a good six weeks or so to establish themselves before 
the ground freezes. Then, in the spring, the plants can concentrate 
their energies on growing stems and leaves. Unlike herbaceous peonies, 
which like full sun, tree peonies do best in dappled shade. I planted 
Twin Beauty next to a couple of double-file viburnums I'd had to have 
after seeing them blooming at Winterthur, the du Pont estate in Delaware. 
Twin Beauty, named after two women married to opposing generals in 
a seventh-century tale, bears red and pink flowers on the same plant, 
and some blossoms are both colors. I put Cinnabar Ramparts (an 11th-century 
writer said the petals were the color of ``crimson blood'') near a 
black pussy willow. The third, Supreme Pink, one of those thousand-petal 
types (was I out of my mind that day?), has taken the place of the 
Harry Lauder's walking stick that succumbed to a blizzard. I will 
never be a designer gardener. I collect plants the way some people 
take in stray dogs. And besides, this farm has a mind of its own. 
When I suggest to my mother that we cut down those horrible Norway 
maples and plant a hedgerow, she looks at me as if I were an ax murderer. 
She drags out the pictures of my grandmother and grandfather standing 
in the yard with a few sticks by the road. These are the trees, she 
says. I can't tell if it's really my grandparents because they're 
so young and skinny, but I take her word for it. Maybe next year I 
will order Pea Green _ and plant for the generations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>