<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0407 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
To a passer-by, this small town has an idyllic air. Its wide main 
street is packed with pickup trucks by day, empty and serene at night. 
Many of the women and little girls wear long skirts, even for riding 
bicycles. Crime is so rare that the police statistics include ``cat 
bite.'' But in 1995, amid rumors of anti-government paramilitary groups 
and hidden caches of guns, federal and state agents combed St. Marys 
and its surroundings for links to Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols, 
who had traveled in the area just before the Oklahoma City bombing. 
The town of 2,000 people quickly became stereotyped as a hotbed of 
heartland discontent. Three years later, the business that the two 
Oklahoma City bombers had here is still unknown. Talk of paramilitary 
groups has gone underground and camouflage fatigues are generally 
out of fashion. A closer look at St. Mary's, with some of the glare 
of the bombing faded, reveals something about the environment that 
helped create the right-wing movement, but it is also clear that St. 
Marys was never quite the way it was often portrayed. Rather, this 
town that was known at the time as the last civilized stop on the 
Oregon Trail, is a peaceful mix of passionately held and often conflicting 
visions of American life. St. Marys lies 30 miles northwest of Topeka 
on the banks of the Kansas River amid miles of corn and pasture land. 
From the very first, it was a place where dreams were made and broken. 
The town began in 1848 as a Jesuit mission for the Potawatomi, a tribe 
driven out of Indiana and forced to walk to Kansas, more than 600 
miles, along what became known as the Trail of Death. Then, during 
the Gold Rush, 300,000 adventurers passed through. These days, said 
Larry Teske, a St. Marys builder, ``It hasn't been a covered wagon, 
it's a station wagon or a van,'' and the families in them have come 
to stay. Teske has designed more than 100 new houses, many large enough 
to accommodate families with 9 or 10 children. While the farm population 
has been shrinking for decades, that of St. Marys has grown. Some 
newcomers are government employees and factory workers who commute 
to Topeka. But the main attraction is a religious community established 
20 years ago when the Society of St. Pius X, a schismatic Roman Catholic 
group, bought the Jesuit seminary and founded St. Marys Academy and 
College. The St. Pius families, committed to the old Latin mass, speak 
of the need to return to traditional ways, without television, without 
feminism, without welfare, without interference from the state. It 
is they who give the town the appearance of a small-town America that 
does not exist anymore. St. Pius members in and around the town have 
come to outnumber the people in St. Marys itself, many of whom belong 
to another large Roman Catholic church. The splits and silences between 
the two groups are often acute. ``You've got regular Catholics in 
this town, and you have this other outfit on the very conservative 
side,'' said James Mees, a member of the City Commission. ``You get 
a disproportionate number of right-wingers, a disproportionate number 
of John Birchers, pro-gun and anti-government.'' In the months before 
the Oklahoma City bombing, Michigan and Kansas paramilitary groups 
were recruiting in the St. Marys area, and rumors flew that weapons 
were hidden on the academy grounds and that paramilitary groups trained 
there. The Pottawatomie County sheriff, Anthony Metcalf, said with 
some exasperation that he had ``walked every inch of the campus'' 
without finding anything. After the bombing, the academy's headmaster, 
the Rev. Ramon Angles, denounced paramilitary groups in his sermons. 
Several members of his congregation, however, joined the Freemen, 
who refuse to acknowledge the authority of the federal government 
and the banking system. For a brief time, they had a compound north 
of town, with a ``Keep Out'' sign warning that the property was not 
part of the United States. That compound was instantly abandoned after 
the FBI raided the Freeman compound in Montana. But the local group, 
which included two prison guards, a former guard and an former police 
officer, had written $1 million in fraudulent Freemen checks on nonexistent 
accounts. Then last year Richard Keyes III, a bookish young factory 
worker, left St. Marys to join the separatist Republic of Texas. When 
its leaders surrendered in a siege by the police, Keyes vanished into 
the mountains. Caught months later, he is now serving 90 years in 
prison on charges that include kidnapping and burglary. ``It was not 
the town's fault, and it was not the family's fault,'' Dorothy Hoobler, 
who writes for The St. Marys Star and is the town's unofficial historian, 
said of Keyes. ``I may not condone what he did, but I don't think 
it should be a reflection on the entire town, and that was the way 
it was made out to be.'' The Newcomers: What Is Appealing Isn't Always 
Found Leo Petit, 38, a self-employed plumber, moved here 11 years 
ago from Glen Falls, N.Y. ``A lot of people thought that I was crazy, 
packing up the family and moving halfway across the country,'' Petit 
said. But ``the old ways were good enough for my mom and dad, good 
enough for my grandparents and for the saints and martyrs.'' Petit, 
his wife, Denise, and their 10 children live in Belvue, a small town 
west of St. Marys. ``I liked it here from the beginning,'' Mrs. Petit 
said. ``Everyone has always been very, very friendly.'' Her daughter 
Heather, 17, who graduated this year from St. Marys Academy, said 
she had no regrets about the school's strictness, including a policy 
that only boys can play high school sports. ``It doesn't help form 
the feminine nature,'' she said. Petit said: ``Is it heaven here? 
No. Are there problems here? Sure. I'm just trying to hang on. You 
never know what the future will bring.'' Karl and Helga Konecy would 
agree, for entirely different reasons. Konecy quit his job managing 
a power plant in Colorado, sold the family's home with an orchard, 
a lake and enough land to keep horses, and moved his wife and two 
daughters to St. Marys in 1981. The only thing they knew about Kansas 
was tornadoes, so the Konecys built their house into the side of a 
hill on an expanse of land overlooking the power plant where Konecy 
found a job. But in 1984, they parted ways with the St. Pius X community, 
which they now regard as a cult, and found themselves stranded here. 
``There's no way to return to what we used to have,'' Mrs. Konecy 
said. ``We paid a price. We paid a heavy price.'' For all its quaintness, 
St. Marys is part of mainstream America. Families drive to Topeka 
to shop in the malls, and teen-agers Rollerblade in the park and complain 
of nothing to do. The public high school embraces all kinds of opportunities 
for girls as well as boys. Next to the town park are a road and picnic 
shelter named for a pioneer family, the Urbanskys. Sidney Urbansky, 
twice elected mayor, was the last of the line. When he died in 1977 
at the age of 94, no rabbi was available for his funeral, so a Protestant 
minister read from the Old Testament. Two years later Warren and Diane 
Sickel arrived in St. Marys and found they were the only Jewish family 
in town. They still are. Sickel, the music teacher at St. Marys High 
School, has organized a community band and participates in the town's 
annual interfaith Thanksgiving service. But they also regularly make 
the 30-mile drive to Temple Beth Shalom in Topeka, and during what 
they call the ``December dilemma'' each year, they put a lighted Star 
of David in front of their house. Mrs. Sickel, an elementary teacher, 
said she likes the sense of continuity _ ``I've taught all eight kids 
in the same family''_ and the security she feels. The Society of St. 
Pius X has been criticized for anti-Semitism in remarks its leaders 
have made about the Holocaust. But the Sickels said they had not felt 
those sentiments here, and Mrs. Sickel said she knew what she was 
talking about. ``My mother had a swastika burned to the ground on 
the lawn of her condominium in Shawnee Mission,'' she said. The Farmers: 
An Embittered Few In Declining Breed Kansas had its second largest 
wheat harvest on record this year, but the price of wheat has been 
going down. To stay in business, farmers have to keep cutting costs, 
said Doug Musick, the county agent for the Cooperative Extension Service 
of Kansas State University. The profit margin is so low and land prices 
are so high _ $2,000 an acre for river-bottom land _ that ``if you 
don't have land given to you or a relative to help you, you probably 
can't start farming and be successful,'' Musick said. Charles Ronnau 
farms 1,600 acres just west of St. Marys, including 475 acres his 
grandfather bought in 1896. He rents land from 10 farms that could 
not survive after their owners grew old or died. ``Every house you 
see, a farmer lived in it and farmed that ground,'' Ronnau said quietly. 
``Now the people who live in the houses don't have anything to do 
with the land.'' Seventy-six percent of Pottawatomie County's population 
is still rural, but 75 percent of its $300 million tax base comes 
from the coal-fired Jeffrey Energy Center, which generates one-third 
of the state's electricity. Its 600-foot stacks can be seen for miles. 
Signs along highways here say, ``One Kansas Farmer Feeds 128 People 
Plus You.'' Those are fighting words to Dee Matzke, 62, who keeps 
some dairy cows on land near the county seat, Westmoreland, where 
she lives in a trailer with her husband, Alvin. ``Eighty-five to 87 
percent of the population today are parasites,'' she said over a glass 
of iced tea. ``I've really got to work to feed these other people.'' 
Her first husband, Arthur Kirk, was shot dead by a police special 
weapons team in 1984, after a face-off with sheriff's deputies serving 
foreclosure papers on his farm in Cairo, Neb. Kirk fired on the police 
and they shot back. Matzke, too, lost his farm to foreclosure, and 
in 1985 he went to prison for selling cattle that secured a loan from 
his bank. His first wife died of cancer a year after his release. 
He met Dee at farm protest meetings, but these days they expect nothing 
more from angry farmers. ``At this point, they've lost it, survived 
and moved on with their lives,'' Mrs. Matzke said. Matzke said: ``I 
fought the government five to seven years and came out a loser. You 
never win.'' The Changing Face: Defining Folks In Changing Times The 
decline of small family farms in places like Kansas, with its consequent 
depopulation and anger, is the backdrop for the rise of radical right-wing 
groups, but it is not the cause, said Leonard Zeskind, the president 
of the Institute for Research and Education on Human Rights in Kansas 
City, Mo., who has studied such groups for 20 years. Most farmers, 
he said, have not taken up arms, working instead through organizations 
like the Farmers' Union to press for change ``along legitimate and 
realistic ways.'' What caused the reemergence of anti-government sentiment, 
paramilitary groups and the Freemen in places like St. Marys was the 
shift in the nation's political climate ``in which the issue of `Who 
is an American?' is much more up for grabs,'' Zeskind said. ``It used 
to be that Americans were the people who were not Communists,'' he 
said. ``Now communism isn't around to differentiate ourselves. Who 
are we now?'' Zeskind added that Common Law theories, embraced by 
right-wing groups, ``construct a white Christian nationality.'' In 
Pottawatomie County, like many other areas of the United States, that 
also happens to define the population. St. Marys is overwhelmingly 
Christian and white. The American Indians were pushed out more than 
100 years ago, and there are no blacks and few Hispanics residents. 
But questions about who belongs here have existed ``from the very 
beginning,' said Mrs. Hoobler, the town historian. ``The town was 
settled by different groups of immigrants,'' she said. ``It probably 
is not that much different now.'' The ancestor of several St. Marys 
families was Theresa Slavin, a Potawatomi who made the walk from Indiana 
at the age of 3. At 12, she was orphaned and brought to St. Marys. 
At 25, she married James Slavin. Most of the Potawatomi in this area 
moved to Oklahoma after 1870. The rooms in which they received final 
payment for their land, in what a journalist called ``one of the most 
utterly forlorn, dismal, and miserable spectacles ever witnessed,'' 
are preserved in a museum here. But only recently have some families 
felt able to acknowledge their Potawatomi forbears, said Marjorie 
Guerich, a great-granddaughter of Theresa Slavin. Just this fall, 
she helped organize a re-enactment of the Trail of Death. Eric Pearl, 
who works in his family's farm equipment and agricultural chemical 
business, is another of Mrs. Slavin's descendants. He works at something 
that might be expected in a place when old ways of life keep changing 
and no one knows the shape of the new. He is using tractor-mounted 
computers and global positioning devices to help farmers map the soil 
quality of their fields. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>