<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0450 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
He's baaaaack. But this time, the Mets insist, Bobby Bonilla will 
be a different person and a different player. Bonilla, whose first 
tenure with the Mets was a disaster from a production and public relations 
standpoint, returned Wednesday in a trade that sent Mel Rojas, a disaster 
as a relief pitcher, to the Los Angeles Dodgers. The Mets received 
$1 million in the deal to offset the difference in salaries. ``This 
time we will make it eminently clear to him he's not expected to come 
here and carry the ballclub,'' said Frank Cashen, the Mets' interim 
general manager, who completed the swap initiated by Steve Phillips, 
who is on a leave of absence. ``It was an awful burden on him the 
first time he came. He was supposed to lead us out of the wilderness, 
take us to the Red Sea and part the waters. It didn't work that way. 
He said he couldn't swim.'' Indeed, Bonilla drowned, and took the 
Mets down with him. It was the winter of 1991-92, and the Mets, with 
Al Harazin having succeeded Cashen as general manager, embarked on 
what they thought would be a breakthrough season, adding Bret Saberhagen 
and Eddie Murray along with Bonilla. But they barely had stepped into 
the water when they went straight down. Signing a five-year, $29 million 
contract that was then a major league record, Bonilla stumbled each 
step of the way. ``You can't knock this smile off my face,'' he said 
at his introductory news conference, then proceeded to remove the 
smile himself. Besides failing to hit as he had when he was No. 2 
to Barry Bonds in Pittsburgh, Bonilla riled Shea Stadium fans by wearing 
earplugs to block out their boos and alienated reporters with his 
threats and his behavior, including an incident where he called the 
press box to complain about an error he was charged with in a one-sided 
game. But Bonilla, whom the Mets traded in 1995 to Baltimore, wanted 
to come back. He wanted to do it right this time, he told friends, 
and turn things around. The Mets' owners are among his biggest boosters. 
``I'm very upbeat about the trade,'' Fred Wilpon said. ``I think Bobby 
will have a real turnaround year. He doesn't want to end his career 
without making it in New York.'' Cashen admitted to having ``slight 
concerns'' but added, ``I really am probably assured in our own mind 
that he has matured so much since that time that he understands what 
he's going to be into, that he will be well prepared and will report 
in shape and ready to go.'' Bonilla himself was not available to react 
to the trade. The Dodgers had been unable to reach him to tell him 
about the trade, team officials said, because he was vacationing in 
Mexico. The Mets went after Bonilla, Cashen said, because they needed 
somebody to bat behind Mike Piazza, their $91 million man. ``With 
the investment we've got in him, we wanted to make sure he was protected,'' 
Cashen said at a news conference at the general managers' meeting. 
``We think that he does that for us.'' Manager Bobby Valentine said 
that Bonilla, who will be 36 years old next season, would play left 
or right field. The Mets got dismal offensive production from those 
two positions this year. ``I think Bobby Bonilla is a guy who comes 
with some risk but also comes with a lot of reward,'' Valentine said, 
then added, ``The risk is whether he catches the ball when it comes 
down.'' If the Mets sign B.J. Surhoff, a free agent, the manager would 
put Surhoff in left and Bonilla in right. Surhoff, a New York native, 
is so eager to play for the Mets that he called his agent, Greg Clifton, 
from Japan, where he is playing with a major league all-star team, 
to ask if the Mets had called. The Mets also are interested in Brian 
Jordan, a right fielder, but they most likely have too much competition 
to be able to sign him. Besides another outfielder, the Mets seek 
a leadoff hitter who could play second base. They have talked with 
the Milwaukee Brewers about Fernando Vina, but the Brewers want low-priced 
starting pitching, which the Mets can't give them. The trade with 
the Dodgers could lead to another deal that would give the Mets a 
second baseman. The teams, in fact, considered making this one a multi-player 
swap. Kevin Malone, the Dodgers' general manager, said he would consider 
giving the Mets Eric Young in a trade for Todd Hundley. ``If he's 
available, as they say he is, I'd like to have him,'' Malone said. 
``I like his competitiveness. I like his desire and passion to win. 
I like what he brings to the table. I like warriors. He's a warrior. 
He loves to play the game. The personality of the Dodgers would benefit 
greatly from someone of Todd's makeup.'' But the Mets continue to 
suggest that they will trade Hundley to an American League team. The 
Dodgers said they traded Bonilla to open third base for Adrian Beltre, 
whom Malone said is one of the game's best prospects. But they also 
wanted to shed some salary. Bonilla has two years left on his contract 
at $5.9 million a year. Rojas has one year left at $4.5 million. Rojas, 
whom the Mets obtained from the Chicago Cubs in August 1997, never 
pitched effectively for them. He was so bad that Valentine quit using 
him late in the season. The Dodgers were willing to take Rojas for 
two reasons: He made it possible for them to trade Bonilla, and Malone 
knows him from Montreal. Malone also wants to improve the Dodgers' 
bullpen, although Rojas isn't certain to do that. Bonilla doesn't 
come with any guarantees, either. He knocked in only 45 runs during 
an injury-plagued season with the Marlins and the Dodgers while hitting 
11 home runs and batting .249. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>