<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981111.0352 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What exactly is Scottish comedian Billy Connolly doing in biblical 
robes and beard in a commercial with floating goldfish that fill the 
television screen? Improbably, the answer lies in a remarkable U.S. 
invasion of the credit card industry in Britain that has left big 
British credit card issuers smarting. For the goldfish represent the 
Goldfish card, which has gained 800,000 customers since it was first 
issued in 1996 by a British subsidiary of Household International 
Inc. of Prospect Heights, Ill., in conjunction with a British gas 
utility. In just a few years, Household and other U.S. companies _ 
including American Express; MBNA of Wilmington, Del.; People's Bank 
of Bridgeport, Conn.; and Capital One Financial of Falls Church, Va. 
_ have captured 10.2 percent of the cards issued in a $136.7 billion 
market that was once controlled exclusively by four big British banks 
led by Barclays PLC with its Barclaycard. The Americans have shaken 
up the industry with innovative marketing and by offering interest 
rates that are lower than the average rates of 22 and 23 percent charged 
by British issuers. ``It's a battleground,'' acknowledged John Eaton, 
the managing director of Barclaycard. The company is still the dominant 
issuer of cards in Britain, but its share of the market there has 
fallen to 31 percent last year from 37.1 percent in 1995, and the 
number of different cards available in Britain has grown to 1,200, 
from 40 in 1990. ``It's a tough, competitive market,'' Eaton said. 
Some U.S. companies see further gains ahead. The credit card business 
in Britain is similar to the way the U.S. market was in the 1980s, 
said Patrick Nelson, corporate communications manager for Capital 
One. ``If you look back at the U.S. market in 1986, and look at it 
now, you will find only three or four of the big players in '86 are 
still there,'' he said. ``And there is that same potential here in 
the United Kingdom. U.K. High Street banks have been charging far 
too much for far too long.'' The U.S. beachhead in Britain could serve 
as a springboard into a much bigger and largely untapped market: Continental 
Europe. The Continent has outstanding Visa and Mastercard debt estimated 
at $49 billion _ much less than the $397 billion in Visa and Mastercard 
debt in the United States. Credit cards have failed to win mass acceptance 
in much of Europe, where big banks dominate with debit cards and personal 
checking accounts. The trick for any new competitors in Europe, then, 
is essentially to create a bigger market, bankers say. And that has 
happened in large part in Britain, where a boom in the overall use 
of credit cards has cushioned big banks from the effects of their 
eroding market share. ``The credit card cake has been growing all 
the time,'' said David Joy, an economist with the Credit Card Research 
Group, an industry organization. ``So while people like Barclaycard 
have been losing market share, they have not been losing money.'' 
The total amount of debt outstanding on credit cards in Britain, mostly 
Visa and Mastercard, now stands at 21.8 billion pounds, or $36.2 billion, 
up 23 percent from 17.7 billion pounds ($29.4 billion) a year ago. 
And Eaton of Barclaycard says figures showing simple market share 
are misleading. Over the last 18 months, he said, 4 million new credit 
cards have flooded onto the British market, but many of them have 
been issued to people who already held a card. ``Three years ago, 
about 20 percent of card holders had more than one card,'' he said. 
``Now it's 40 percent.'' Moreover, although credit card use has nearly 
doubled as a proportion of British retail sales to 20 percent _ of 
which Barclaycard claims 50 percent _ from 12 percent in 1990, the 
numbers show that many people still rely on cash, debit cards or checks. 
``The marketplace is now very much about share of wallet: how do you 
sustain your share of wallet?'' Eaton said. ``The most powerful indicator 
is the share of turnover in the total market. How much of customers' 
spending am I getting on a monthly, weekly basis?'' Beginning in the 
mid-1990s, some U.S. financial companies reached for the British wallet 
by taking aim where they thought British issuers were most vulnerable: 
interest rates. ``The single largest comment is: give me a low rate 
and no annual fee,'' said Carlos Mello, managing director of People's 
Bank, which introduced its card in Britain in 1996. The bank, with 
a modest British operation of 55 full-time workers, has so far issued 
120,000 cards, with an introductory rate of 6.9 percent that later 
rises to 17.9 percent, according to the Nilson Report, a credit card 
industry newsletter in Oxnard, Calif. U.S. companies are also introducing 
unfamiliar marketing strategies to Britain. Capital One, for exampled, 
offered an introductory 6.9 percent interest rate on a Mastercard 
coupled with an offer for tickets to last summer's World Cup soccer 
tournament. Other special themes include a card offering discounts 
at specific London stores and a personalized Mastercard sporting the 
card holder's photograph. It also offers a set interest rate of 12.9 
percent for customers who are confused by the idea of cards that offer 
an introductory rate that later rises. Capital One issued 630,000 
cards by the end of 1997, a year after its introduction, according 
to the Nilson Report. A Household International subsidiary, HFC Bank 
PLC, which has been in Britain since 1973, introduced a credit card 
linked to reduced prices on General Motors' Vauxhall cars. The program 
was a British version of the GM Card in the United States. Then Household 
hit on the idea of using a goldfish as its emblem, and charging 19.8 
percent interest but offering a 1 percent reduction on a gas utility's 
bills. ``Everyone has a gas bill to pay,'' said Mark Rutland, director 
of corporate communications for HFC Bank. With a growing share of 
the market, U.S. companies are expanding. Capital One, for example, 
is planning to invest $50 million in a new processing plant in Nottingham, 
in the Midlands. Plans like this show just how much the U.S. presence 
has mushroomed. Starting from scratch in 1994, Household, through 
its British subsidiaries, last year ranked as the biggest U.S. credit 
card issuer _ and the fifth over all _ in Britain, with 2.1 million 
cards issued. That represents just 4.2 percent of the market but is 
nearly a threefold increase from 1995, according to the Nilson Report. 
A close second, MBNA had 1.9 million cards issued in 1997 _ more than 
double the number in 1995. Counted by cards issued, U.S. issuers over 
all hold 10.2 percent of the British market. Barclaycard has responded 
swiftly to the U.S. challenge to its dominance. The company, which 
has some 6.5 million customers holding 15.3 million cards, announced 
last summer that it would shed 1,100 jobs _ a quarter of its work 
force _ over the next three years. It also plans to invest around 
$50 million in new systems over the next three years. And it has sought 
to counter the low-interest-rate invaders, Eaton said, by offering 
to cut its own rate to 18.9 percent from 22.9 percent for people charging 
more than $825 a month _ considerably higher than the British average. 
It has also instituted loyalty programs offering discounts on Ford 
cars and Cellnet mobile phones. Still, the U.S. insurgents are not 
the only challenge. Supermarket chains like Tesco and J. Sainsbury 
have also issued their own credit cards, along with the many building 
societies _ the British equivalent of savings and loans _ that have 
converted into banks. There also is an array of affinity cards linking 
credit to particular interests and brands. The contest may be about 
to get even sharper. An anticipated slowdown in the British economy 
next year has already doubled the number of credit card accounts in 
arrears compared with last year, according to figures from the Equifax 
financial information group, suggesting that both the newcomers and 
the veterans of the credit card industry will be scrambling to maintain 
growth. ``It'll be a tougher assignment next year,'' Rutland of HFC 
Bank said. His concerns reflect broader worries in Britain about a 
possible consumer credit crunch if the economy slows _ or even slides 
into recession as it did in the early 1990s, exacerbated by a sharp 
increase in consumer debt. ``It will be interesting to see if other 
U.S. competitors are here for the long haul,'' he said. While Barclaycard 
is being challenged at home, it is among the pioneers in Continental 
Europe. Along with Citigroup's Citibank unit, which has an estimated 
1.34 million cards in European countries, Barclaycard has sought to 
penetrate the new European markets, with 600,000 cards, for instance, 
issued in Germany alone. Here, too, competition is beginning. Though 
some U.S. banks active in Britain say they have no immediate plan 
to test the broader European market, American Express has introduced 
in Italy and Germany, as well as in Britain, a new blue card that, 
like its better-known green, gold and platinum cards, charges an annual 
fee, but unlike the others also offers revolving credit. The blue 
card, said Peter Godfrey, American Express regional president for 
Europe, the Middle East and Africa, is aiming at customers in their 
early 20s to mid-30s in nine countries from Australia to Canada, but 
not in the United States. The card has plunged into the market with 
a lower introductory rate, 1 percent standard discounts on purchases 
and _ for November _ a 5 percent, cash-back discount. While Godfrey 
declined to give figures, he said the number of initial customers 
was ``substantially above our internal forecast.'' With 11 European 
countries set to introduce a common currency, the euro, in January 
1999, the European market clearly offers new opportunities for credit 
card holders. Initially, the euro will be limited to electronic trading 
of all kinds from intergovernment transfers to stock markets. Cash 
and notes will become mandatory only in January 2002. But exchange 
rates between member countries will be fixed from the beginning of 
1999, meaning that credit cards could offer travelers a way of eliminating 
currency exchange costs if they, say, pay a hotel bill in Milan in 
euro-linked lire, and pay their credit card bill in euro-linked marks. 
The problem is that relatively few Continental Europeans use credit 
cards. ``You are dealing with a debit card, overdraft mentality in 
Continental Europe, and it's difficult to break these markets,'' Godfrey 
said. ``The key thing for us is to create that market. It is worth 
the effort to create a credit card environment in Europe.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>