<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981111.2000.2028 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Londonderry is one of Northern Ireland's most divided cities. Catholics 
live on the inner side of the ancient wall that surrounds the city; 
Protestants live on the outside. Just as they are segregated in the 
city's geography, the two groups are segregated in Londonderry's work 
force. But since 1989, Northern Ireland's Fair Employment Law has 
mandated integration of the labor force. A requirement considered 
crucial to the peace process. For her second story from Northern Ireland, 
World Anchor, Lisa Mullins, takes us to Londonderry. In the heart 
of Londonderry, tucked in a little courtyard off the street is a small 
Irish pub called Thranmaggie's. Thursday night the locals crowd in 
for a Kailee, a traditional session. That means the woman with the 
knit hat on your left and the guy holding a guineas on your right 
will probably some time during the night be called on to sing a song. 
If the spirit moves them, and it usually does. In the sandy quigly 
land and sandy hune a song, the brandy well and terry tie high to 
as for a come from. This song is about Derry. As residents call the 
city, and everyone here at Thranmaggie's Pub knows the words. Thranmaggie's 
is in the heart of Derry's Catholic hub, called Derryside. Historically, 
Thranmaggie's is not the kind of place Protestants go. Their part 
of town is down the slopes on the other side of the River Forto the 
part called Waterside. In his Waterside row house, factory worker 
Collin Richey has just slipped out of bed. It is now 3 in the afternoon 
and he has pulled on his sweatshirt and pants and is making a pot 
of tea. Richey works the overnight shift as a spinning operator at 
the Fruit of the Loom plant, just about a mile from here. Collin Richey 
is a Protestant. Fruit of the Loom is 80 percent Catholic. Derry has 
long been the center of Northern Ireland's textile industry and that 
has been the family trade for generations of Catholics. While most 
textile companies have closed their doors, the ones still open are 
under orders to change their ways and recruit more Protestants like 
Richey. Diversity laws in America usually refer to race; in Northern 
Ireland, they refer to religion. Specifically, they mean to get Catholics 
and Protestants working together at some times for the first time. 
Still, though he is Protestant, Richey never considered himself an 
affirmative-action hire. I never really thought of it whenever I started 
working. I was just glad to be getting into a company and it was the 
last thing on my mind when I joined that company. What was on Richey's 
mind was a steady paycheck and working for an American company meant 
a bigger salary. Enough for Richey to buy his first home. It is barren, 
so and that is my own room, it is a mess. The rewards of working at 
Fruit of the Loom are more than financial, they are social. One of 
the goals of integrating the work force is to forge a more stable 
foundation for peace in Northern Ireland. Richey's experience suggested 
that strategy may be paying off. It is not getting worse here. I think 
it is getting better. Ten years ago I would not ever go to the Derry 
side to drink in a bar at night. There was just no way I could of 
done it. But now I would go over to a pub. I would never have done 
that before I started at Fruit of the Loom. And then before a cease-fire 
is base on that. Before you started at Fruit of the Loom meaning the 
work environment have you what socializing more with Catholics than 
you would have in the past? Yes. I went to a Protestant school and 
then all the mits were just, nearly all, Protestants. It was not until 
I started working I really socialized with the Catholic. Because I 
never met them. And the first time over, the time drinking was Christmas, 
then at work we all the fellas. Did you ever think growing up that 
you would be spending part of the Christmas season with Catholics? 
No, never. Derry has changed and everybody has changed from what people 
can do and experience and the bridge side. So the Derryside Catholic, 
the other side Protestant, it is interesting to think of a bridge 
in terms of something that doesn't bridge the two communities, but 
divides them. Well, that is just as compli these stupid things we 
get. They know to hurt. That bridge is called Craigaven. Derry looks 
the same on both sides of the bridge. There are tidy tall row houses, 
pale blue, yellow, or brown. The kind you see in any neat little Northern 
Ireland town. Collin Richey does not give a second thought to crossing 
the Craigaven Bridge and stepping into the Catholic part of town, 
but it hasn't always been so easy for William Walker. Hello. Hello. 
Nice to meet you. May I take a seat there? You want me to go to the 
kitchen or you want-- Walker used to cross the bridge every day to 
work at Fruit of the Loom's Templemore plant in the Catholic area. 
It is about five miles from the plant where Collin Richey works. When 
Walker started working at Fruit of the Loom's Templemore location, 
he was one of only six Protestants and all of his coworkers knew his 
religion. Everybody knows that me, by the name of William, that I 
am a Protestant. Is it difficult to start working in a place that 
you know is going to be primarily Catholic? I think it is because 
you always have this in your mind especially when the troubles not 
. There are has over there and I went for me dinner and my machine 
would normally get dusty sometimes and I would come back and there 
was IRA on the machine. So how do you handle that, then? Pleasing 
your main boss at the end of the day they had to get a job done and 
you there to bring money into the house so I just go on with my work. 
Did any of your friends or did you ever partake in that on the side 
of Protestants, talking to Catholics in a way that might be considered 
provocative? Well, we maybe held our own at times, you know. And then 
there you get bad apples everywhere, you know, but most of them, you 
know, was genuine good peoples, you now. Does it feel like things 
have improved in that way now you are talking about a couple of years 
ago. I wonder especially now since the cease-fire and since the Good 
Friday Agreement. Do things feel any different for you? Definitely, 
because peace has come maybe too late for so many people in Northern 
Ireland but hopefully for Mattie, things are going a lot better. William 
Walker left Fruit of the Loom after 10 months. He now works at a more 
integrated company. But he is quick to point out that Fruit of the 
Loom has made a sincere effort to mix its work force. In fact, things 
are better at Fruit of the Loom. Eighty percent of its work force 
is Catholic, 20 percent is Protestant. Eighty to twenty does not sound 
like integration to American ears, but the ratio pleases Bob Cooper 
who chairs the Fair Employment Commission. That we would regard as 
being an integrated labor force in the Derry area. The fact is that 
Fruit of the Loom has integrated its total work force by setting up 
one facility in a Protestant area and another in the Catholic part 
of town on the other side of the Craigevan Bridge. The company's strategy 
may not be pretty, but it seems to be working. American companies 
have an added incentive to integrate. First, they get fined if they 
do not comply with the affirmative action guidelines and second, many, 
including Fruit of the Loom, have agreed to abide by something called 
the McBride Principles. Designed to integrate the work force. These 
were based on the Sullivan Principles which guided American companies 
investing in South Africa during apartheid. Under the McBride principles, 
American companies use their leverage to help right past wrongs in 
Northern Ireland, they have been passed by 16 U.S. states and more 
than 30 cities. At the forefront of the movement was New York City, 
whose current comptroller is Alan Havasy. What this is about is fairness, 
a fundamental American value system in which you prohibit discrimination 
on the basis of ethnicity or race, religion, creed, gender and all 
the other categories. And we think those are appropriate principles 
to press in Northern Ireland. While some American companies consider 
the McBride Principles an economic disincentive, just one more burden. 
Havasy insists the principles encourage good business. The approach 
this is a human rights issue with a very good economic upside. It 
is a good investment. It is smart. You will get a good return. You 
will get an excellent work force. You will get a very wholesome environment, 
but it gets more wholesome and the return is higher if there is a 
sense of fairness that is a linchpin towards the peace process. It 
is hard to tell if American companies are really convinced. Newspapers 
in Derry speculate about how secure jobs are at American companies. 
Lately, locals have been worried about Fruit of the Loom, which is 
considering closing some of its operations here to help its bottom 
line. Back at his home, Fruit of the Loom factory worker, Collin Richey 
invites me to the kitchen where his mother, who lives down the street, 
has left a huge spread of ham sandwiches and brownies. If Richey looses 
his job at Fruit of the Loom, he will be OK. He will find another 
one, he says. But what about all those friendships he has fostered 
with Catholics? Still a sensitive issue for many Protestant families 
here. Would those friendships end if his job does? And just how far 
can integration go in a city steeped in segregation? Many good fellows 
are Catholic. Could you ever have imagined that maybe, you know, 10 
years ago? No. That was different then. Did you grow up with the kind 
of household edict, you do not date Catholics. Yes. I do actually. 
It was always make sure you get one of your own sort of, I mean. I 
am the first in my family to probably to with a Catholic. If you two 
decided to get married, would the issue of children and what kind 
of faith to raise them in be very much of an issue for you? Yes. I 
think it would. My girlfriend, for a start, would not like to live 
here. She would like to move out of here. Because this is a Protestant 
neighborhood? Even she would move up the street because it is a mix 
all up the street. But she would not live here because it is all Protestant. 
And as for bringing up the children, she said that they should be 
brought up Catholic because she moves the Catholic religion and- So 
how would you feel about that? Having kids who are raised Catholic? 
Well, that is why there is no rings on the finger. Getting a ring 
on the finger, marrying a woman of the opposite faith, may become 
easier as future generations of Catholics and Protestants work together 
and hostilities subside, but not for now. As Richey prepares for his 
night shift, a few miles away in another Protestant neighborhood, 
William Walker is also thinking about family. He tucks his three-year-old 
into bed and says he hopes his kids will grow up in a Derry changed 
by peace. A city where the old blue Craigevan Bridge shortens the 
divide between Protestants and Catholics and where pubs like Thanmaggie's 
become places where ordinary people from both sides of the bridge 
can stand up and sing when the spirit moves them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>