<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981111.2000.1261 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Not only today, but every day, some of us have the privilege to glance 
across the Potomac to see these silent white rows inscribed with their 
crosses and crescents and Stars of David. To remind us that our achievements 
in peace are built on the sacrifices of our veterans in war and that 
we owe the most solemn debt to these brave Americans who knew their 
duty and did it so very well. We come together today to acknowledge 
that duty to them. President Clinton paid tribute to members of America's 
Armed Forces today at a ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery. On 
this Veteran's Day, Americans are honoring U.S. Soldiers from the 
wars in the Gulf, Vietnam, and Korea, and from World War II. But there 
were few tributes to veterans of the First World War. For one thing, 
not many of its veterans are still with us. For another, World War 
I did not have the lasting impact on this country that succeeding 
wars did. As The World's Margaret Evans reports though, such is not 
the case in Europe. In a small cemetery hidden away in a corner of 
the Belgian countryside, a bugle signals local villagers that today 
is the anniversary of the end of World War I. This quiet graveyard 
near the village of Sansaforya is one of thousands across Europe. 
But it uniquely symbolizes both the beginning and the end of the Great 
War. It holds the graves of the soldiers believed to have been the 
first and the last to die on the Western Front. A British private 
killed in August of 1914 and a Canadian solder shot just two minutes 
before the war ended at a.m., November 11, 1918. By that time, 10 
million soldiers, including 116,000 Americans, had lost their lives. 
All across Europe today at small village cemeteries like this one 
and at major ceremonies and capitals, Europeans have been pausing 
to remember the war dead. In Paris, Britain's Queen Elizabeth joined 
French President Jacques Chirac to lay wreaths and attend memorial 
services. Today, looking at the gentle Belgian landscape, it is almost 
impossible to imagine the bloodied horror of the trench warfare that 
wiped out almost an entire generation, more than 80 years ago. And 
the caretakers of those memories, the veterans, witnesses to the war 
are fast dwindling. In Belgium, a group of British and Canadian veterans 
traveled from battlefield to battlefield to relive their memories. 
Canadian vets, Fredrick Evans and Stephan Frolicksen, both over 100 
years old, say they couldn't believe it when the war finally ended. 
We should have stayed in trenches, you know, because it was an armistice. 
We did not take it for granted it was the end of the war. To us it 
was only an armistice. After that when it was settled later on. I 
was certainly afraid, afraid all the time. You have a fear, you know, 
nobody wants to die. You have a chance that you can be knocked off 
is very good. A lot of people got killed during the war. The American 
presence at these 80th Anniversary ceremonies has not matched that 
of the Europeans, the Canadians, or the Australians. World War I simply 
does not mean as much to Americans because they did not enter the 
war until its final year. As American researcher, Kirk Golsby points 
out; U.S. losses didn't compare with those of the French, who lost 
more than 1 million men. And the British, who lost 900,000. If you 
look at the statistics with the Americans in the first war, we probably 
tripped the balance or tipped the balance in the favor of the Allies. 
But the actual numbers of soldiers, the actual numbers of shells being 
fired over the lines and so on where much smaller by comparison in 
the American Army. Not to say that they were not significant, but 
they were smaller and war experiences so much shorter for us. For 
the Great War's first three years, the Americans maintained a careful 
neutrality. But when the United States did enter the war, it arrived 
in full force. Dan Plesh of the international relations think tank, 
Basic, says the United States came out of the war as a major world 
power. This emerged during the 1930s and changed the fruition during 
the Second World War. But at the end of the First World War, America 
really was preeminent and it was America that dictated the terms of 
the peace in Europe. America, you know, in the end very much enjoyed 
the idea of coming in and arbitrating the Old World. The war irrevocably 
changed the global power structure. One year after the cease-fire, 
the Versailles Peace Treaty redrew the European map. The Old Austral 
Hungarian Empire and the Ottoman Empire were no more. In their places, 
nation states were created, Yugoslavia, Hungary, Czechoslovakia. Here, 
at the Sansanforyan cemetery, people pay their respect to those who 
died in the Great War with small tokens of remembrance, poppies or 
small bouquets of flowers. The villagers say they won't forget the 
sacrifice of so many young lives. Reporting for The World, this is 
Margaret Evans in Sansanforyan, Belgium. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>