<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981111.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The countdown to a military strike against Iraq may have begun. Today 
Defense Secretary, William Cohen, ordered a major buildup of U.S. 
military force in the Persian Gulf. And President Clinton warned he 
would not give in to Iraq. The current crisis began October 31, when 
Iraq's president, Saddam Hussein, ceased all cooperation with UN's 
weapons inspectors. In a moment we will go to Baghdad to assess the 
mood in the Iraqi capital but we begin our coverage in Arlington Virginia 
with this update from The World's Andrew North. At the Veteran's Day 
ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery, President Clinton today honored 
Americans who served in war. At the same time, speculation was growing 
that he was preparing to order another war against Iraq. And in his 
20-minute speech at the cemetery, Mr. Clinton did nothing to doubt 
on that speculation. If the UN inspectors are not permitted to visit 
suspect sites on monitor compliance at known production facilities, 
they may as well be in Baltimore, not Baghdad. President Clinton said 
that, if the world ignores this situation, Iraq could again pose a 
major threat. A failure to respond could embolden Saddam to act recklessly, 
signaling to him that can with impunity develop these weapons of mass 
destruction or threaten his neighbors. I would say that U.S. strikes 
against Iraq are imminent. Former state department advisor, Harvey 
Sickamen. I mean that the United States is now in a position to strike 
Iraq with a heavy launch of cruise missiles and then to follow that 
up with the arrival of additional forces within a week or two for 
a sustained bombing campaign. And today, the Pentagon ordered more 
forces to the Persian Gulf region. Including ground base B-52 bombers, 
which will be required for a long-term military campaign against Iraq. 
The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Henry H. Shelton, 
today said U.S. forces are prepared. We have a substantial capability. 
It is a trained and ready force, however, as of today, no decision 
has been made. Although, as the president has said and as the secretary 
of defense has said, all options remain on the table. One clue to 
the timing of any sustained bombing campaign against Iraq might be 
the arrival of the U.S. aircraft carrier, Enterprise. It is currently 
on its way to the Persian Gulf to replace the carrier Eisenhower. 
And it will be carrying additional firepower. The Enterprise is expected 
to arrive in 12 days. For The World, I am Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>