<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981111.2000.0736 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Canada today is not called Veteran's Day, it is Remembrance Day. 
For the past two years though, those being remembered are not soldiers 
who died in military engagements but victims in the battle over abortion. 
Some antiabortion activists use the day to commemorate aborted fetuses. 
For most of the country, however, this has become a day to remember 
the three Canadian abortion providers and two doctors in new York 
who have been shot around this time for every year since 1994. The 
most recent shooting was the first fatal one, killing Dr. Barnett 
Slip-on at his home near Buffalo. From Toronto, The World's Patrick 
Cox reports on a holiday of fear for those on the front lines of the 
abortions rights movement. If you call the office of Winnipeg doctor, 
Jack Fainman, you will hear this message. Dr. Fainman speaking. Unfortunately, 
I am still undergoing therapy for my injury and am unable to take 
care of my patients at the present time. Dr. Fainman was sitting in 
his living room watching television one evening last November when 
a sniper's bullet pierced his shoulder blade. This month, some doctors 
who work in women's clinics are closing their curtains at home, donning 
bulletproof vests, and taking alternative routes to work. Some have 
temporarily stopped performing abortions. Their concern about what 
has become a November ritual here mounted last week when the FBI released 
a photo of James Cobb. An American antiabortion protester the agency 
wants to question in connection with the Buffalo slaying. The next 
day the Hamilton Spectator newspaper, which serves an area between 
Toronto and the New York border ran an article claiming it has positively 
identified Cobb in Canada. Deputy editor, Dana Robbins says the paper 
got the story almost by chance. As senior editor, I was carrying the 
picture and happened to set it down. A staff person saw the picture 
and uninvited said, when did we get a picture of him? At that point, 
of course, the senior editor asked of whom. And she replied that is 
the guy who has been dropping off the abortion packages. Two days 
ago the Hamilton paper received a locally mailed package with the 
same handwriting. The package contained antiabortion leaflets and 
a note saying, we continue this righteous war. It was here in Ancaster, 
an upscale town a few miles from Hamilton, that another doctor was 
shot a year ago outside Abbey's ladies wear and Ancaster Paint & Paper, 
locals voiced their fears that the violence is being imported from 
the United States. It is creepy up here a little bit. And it does 
concern me a little bit. Hopefully us Canadians stick together and 
put this to an end and find this person and stop him before it happens 
again. We have American relatives. They think nothing of carrying 
guns in their car. They think we are crazy that we do not. And wouldn't 
that be awful to think you had to go out and carry a gun to protect 
yourself? Canadians like to compare themselves favorably with Americans 
on everything from the tenor of political debate to the rate of obesity. 
So it is no surprise that opinion makers here like Toronto Globe and 
Mail columnist, Jan Wong have always believed that an American is 
targeting the Canadian doctors. It seems such an un Canadian way to 
stalk somebody and shoot them in their own homes. It seems sort of 
what we Canadians think of the stereotypical American, you know. Live 
free and die, you know. Abortion has been fully legal in Canada only 
since 1988. Most abortions are publicly paid for and more than 100,000 
are performed every year. Polls here show that about 80 percent of 
Canadians favor legal abortion. Now a days it rarely comes up in election 
debates. Still, Wong worries that violence directed at Canada's 1,000 
doctors who perform abortions could have a chilling effect. There 
is a definite danger that abortion providers, the doctors who perform 
them are going to shy away. Because why do they need this? Why should 
they take the risk? So I think it is going to be harder and harder 
to get people to perform abortions and for people, new doctors to 
go into that field. That would be a welcome trend to Canada's small 
but vocal antiabortion minority. Last week, British Columbia's Catholic 
archdiocese newspaper declared that murders of abortion doctors might 
have positive side effects. On the streets of Toronto, though, the 
movement's rhetoric is more low-key. This morning, a couple of abortion 
protesters politely handed out leaflets outside the Cabbage Town Women's 
Clinic in Toronto. Can Campbell, president of Choose Life Canada is 
one of the few north of the border who wishes Canadians were a bit 
more like Americans. While there is a much greater degree of violence 
in U.S. culture, what might be considered a positive Canadian characteristic 
of nonviolence, may also reflect a lack of willingness to get out 
and make a difference. And to resist tyranny. Choose Life Canada, 
however, forswears violent protest. Though several members have served 
jail time for violating orders keeping them at least 60 feet away 
from women's clinics. Campbell says he knows of no Canadian antiabortion 
group that endorses violence against doctors. In fact, Campbell says 
he goes to great lengths to avert the possibility of violence. I have 
advised pro-life activists who want to be there when there is some 
tension and who I know are somewhat unstable and cannot handle the 
tensions. I have advised them to stay away from such situations. At 
this women's clinic just up the street, there are rarely any picketers. 
But because it is November, the staff is weary. The last few years 
now have brought, you know, insight. Maria Cocilla who runs the Scott 
Clinic admits she feels unsafe. But Cocilla finds comfort in the fact 
that so many Canadians are on her side. People are wonderful to us. 
Our neighbors and people are very, very clear about now understanding 
what these people are really about and I think that gives you a tremendous 
amount of support. Unlike in the United States, the medical establishment 
here has vociferously spoken out against the shootings. The Canadian 
Medical Association has offered a reward of $160,000 U.S. dollars 
for information leading to the conviction of the assailant. This week, 
the U.S. Justice Department topped that with a half a million-dollar 
reward aimed at solving the killing near Buffalo. As some Canadians 
ruefully note. It has taken the slaying of an American doctor for 
both U.S. and Canadian authorities to work together to find the murderer. 
For The World, the is Patrick Cox in Toronto. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>