<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981111.2000.3226 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Music makes strange bedfellows. Japanese pop band, Pitsicopelfi adores 
Burt Backrak. Irish punk rockers have been known to favor country 
western. The World's Marco Worman has come across a Senegalese musician 
whose biggest influence comes from the torchbearers of artsy new wave 
rock. You can hear complex musical rhythms all over the globe. But 
some of the most intriguing come from West Africa. Senegalese musician, 
Wasis Jop, produces rich contemporary rhythms but says he remains 
steadfast to a very traditional upbringing. WASIS JOP, SENEGALESE 
MUSICIAN These days in Senegal, we have a republic with your own president. 
But nevertheless, in the capital, Dakar, there still is the man we 
call the Serene, who is the great dignitary, the big chief of all 
the people of Dakar. And my father was part of the elite group who 
had to elect this man. This group worked at a social level, at a spiritual 
level, and instructed me in basic values. After this huge sort of 
traditional foundation in your life, what were your influenced musically 
when you were growing up? What did you listen to? Honestly, my biggest 
influence was the songs of Dakar. When I was little, I was fascinated 
by traditional ceremonies whether it was a healing ceremony for sick 
people or coming of age rituals for boys. Music and song are always 
parts of it. Those ceremonies are the foundation of the music that 
I make today. Even if I use modern instruments, but the heart of the 
music that I make is at the edge of the ocean in Africa. So after 
these songs, after these Senegalese songs and these singers, what 
was the biggest change in your life, musically speaking? What really 
turned your head around, if there is one influence that you could 
say? That is right, the Talking Heads. If the repertoires of the Talking 
Heads and Senegalese traditional singers strike you as incongruous, 
stop and have a listen to the rhythms in this Talking Heads tune, 
Nothing But Flowers. The first time I heard the Talking Heads, I felt 
they had seized the essence of African music, the music of Ignowa 
in Morocco. Moritanian music and my music from Senegal. There was 
the spirituality in their music, a sort of translike side to it. It 
is not music for the sake of art; it enters into your body, into your 
blood. And the Talking Heads reminded me of the music I heard during 
initiation rights when I was a kid in Senegal. Wasis Jop found himself 
in another part of the world with David Burn and the Talking Heads 
suddenly aware of the curious link between Senegalese traditional 
music and a quirky little band that got its start at the Rhode Island 
School of Design. And so Jop tips his hat to the Talking Heads on 
his latest album, Johoo. Wasis Jop has met David Burn once. That meeting 
is featured in the PBS television show, sessions at West 54th. Which 
will be broadcast next month. For The World, this Marco Worman Music 
from Senegal's Wasis Jop brings this edition of the program to a close 
or this program is closed regardless. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>