<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981111.2000.3001 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The last time Kosovo made the front page, there was cause for optimism. 
On October 12, Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic agreed to sharply 
reduce his forces in the province and NATO backed off on its threats 
to launch air strikes. During the next few days, Milosevic made good 
on his promise and the crackdown he had launched on ethnic Albanian 
separatists in Kosovo came to an end. But clashes have continued. 
Today, U.S. diplomat, William Walker, arrived in Kosovo declaring 
that the 2,000 international verifiers he will need up there represent 
the last best chance to overt more violence. The World's Minad Shevek 
in Belgrade is inclined to agree. First of all, William Walker is 
a very experienced, both solider and diplomat, so he knows what he 
is talking about. And I think the problem lies with the fact that 
when we speak about Kosovo, for example, we are looking for solutions 
which would lead to peace. That is not necessarily the way that people 
on the ground, the parties involved, see the solution. Some of them 
see the solution in war. And I think that is where Walker has hit 
the nail on the head. When does the verification effort begin seriously 
in Kosovo? Nobody really knows and even William Walker has said in 
Pristina today that it is not so clear. So now if we hear something 
like that from the head of the verification mission, it means that 
they are a lot of problems still before the mission actually begins 
operating. It was clear all along that it would take time. Simply 
the logistics are overwhelming. Two thousand people need cars, petro, 
accommodation, quality accommodation is not easy to find in Kosovo. 
Blastron Slator and on top of that, all of that the security concerns. 
As we know now that no verification officially is needed to tell us 
that the violence still is going on. How serious is this beginning 
once again of the violence? At this stage, what we have it is far 
less violent that what we saw last summer. But we had two Serbian 
policemen who were abducted last Friday and they were found dead on 
Monday. They were obviously shot from close range in an execution 
style. They were actually found by western diplomats who were touring 
Kosovo. They were the first ones to see them. Yesterday, I quoted 
two Serbian sources at police station the town of Glogovitz by the 
Kosovo Liberation Army. Three policemen are said to have been seriously 
wounded. The other side, the Kosovo Albanians, are also saying that 
they have been attacked by the police. They do not give any details 
as yet. But it certainly, a quite a concern to the whole mission and 
to its purpose. There are, obviously, forces on the ground that disagree 
with the fundamental concept of this verification mission because, 
for them, the war is the solution and not peace. What is the greatest 
concern at this point if things should go wrong. That the Serbian 
police will once again go back to the presence that they had that 
Milosevic will once again be using violence. That is a realistic fear. 
There are quite a lot of families here who believe that what we are 
seeing now which means low intensity violence, low intensity warfare 
is something that we would have seen anyway. Peace agreement or no 
peace agreement, simply because it is wintertime and its rather uncomfortable 
to fight in the winter. That is something that we have seen in Croasia 
in '91 and it is something that we saw in Bosnia in '92, '93, and 
'94. But the fear here is that the fighting will start once again 
for real in the Spring simply because there is no peace agreement 
to keep. Minad, thank you very much. You are welcome. The World's 
Minad Shevek, speaking to us from Belgrade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>