<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981111.2000.0538 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The BBC's Richard Downs is in Baghdad. Richard, there are strong indications 
that Washington may be going for an imminent military attack. What 
are you hearing there from Iraqis and Iraqi sources? I think the overwhelming 
emotion here is fear. People are not really very well informed about 
what is going on. Every ounce of information that comes through to 
them is filtered by intelligence agencies, by information ministries, 
and by information departments. So that they know very little of what 
is happening. But the more senior people are prepared for an air strike. 
They are afraid of one, but at the same time, they are resigned to 
the fact that they have survived many other things before, including 
a full all out war against them, and they came through that relatively 
unscathed in terms of the regime. And they think they can tough out 
any air strikes that might come their way from the United States and 
Britain. You are suggesting or saying that the Iraqis generally do 
not know very much about the specifics of either the pull-out or the 
fact that the crisis may be deepening. Absolutely. To give you some 
indication, early this morning when the pull-out was very evident 
to us and we saw the trucks leaving town. We came back to the information 
ministry and I sent somebody from my office up to the information 
minister's office and to ask him what his response was. He did not 
even know. The information minister did not even know that the pull-out 
of the UN was actually happening. To what extents are there any signs 
of the military preparedness on the part of the Iraqis? Did either 
the average Iraqi is being told about or not being told about? We 
have not seen any military movements around the city and then you 
would not really expect that in the part of the city we are in. What 
we have noticed is over the last few days, there has been an increase 
in the number of roadblocks on key strategic roads around the city. 
One man I know. He is a young man. He is 20 years of age. He certainly 
of conscription age. He told me that there have a number of new roadblocks 
installed around the city on key strategic routes. These are soldiers 
stopping relatively young men of conscription age as I say and asking 
them for their papers and checking that they are not deserters and 
the like. That is the only military preparation that we have seen. 
What about any last-minute indication should this indeed be a last-minute 
situation of diplomatic efforts going on to stop any of the fighting 
from beginning? This is a huge problem. The Iraqis have really painted 
themselves into a corner. It is very difficult to see how they are 
going to get themselves out. The problem is that the last time they 
had a big complication with the UN, Kofi Annan, the UN Secretary General 
came in and he negotiated a solution. It is this very solution which 
the Iraqis are in breach of at the moment and which is leading to 
this current tension. It is very difficult to see Kofi Annan coming 
here to Baghdad as he did before avoiding what at the time was another 
threat of military action. I do not think he could do that and still 
maintain the dignity of his office. There is no one else on the horizon. 
We understand the Iraqis are talking to their Arab partners and to 
their brother Arab countries. But there is no public at least indication 
of where a solution might come from other than as we have heard from 
the Americans through military action. The BBC's Richard Downs in 
Baghdad. Thank you, Richard. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>