<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981127.0801 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Albania's first post-communist constitution was approved by an overwhelming 
majority of voters in last weekend's referendum, official results 
showed Friday. The constitution, which Western officials have said 
is necessary to strengthen the Balkan nation's fragile democracy, 
will take effect once a presidential decree is signed. Approval had 
been all but guaranteed after the opposition, locked in a power struggle 
with the government, urged a boycott of the vote by its supporters. 
But the opposition Democratic Party rejected the results of the referendum 
Friday and refused to acknowledge the new Constitution. Sali Berisha, 
the party's fiery leader, claimed that Albanians had rejected the 
document and said the turnout had been 39 percent. He didn't say how 
he arrived at the figure. ``If this were parliamentary elections, 
the Democratic Party would have won two-thirds of the votes, '' said 
Berisha. He invited Albanians to celebrate the claimed victory in 
a rally in Tirana on Saturday, Albania's independence day. But the 
Central Voting Commission's announcement that more than half of registered 
voters participated is a good sign for the government, which had feared 
a low turnout would weaken its hold on power and worsen the atmosphere 
of political uncertainty in Albania. The Central Voting Commission 
announced that 93 percent of those participating in the disputed referendum 
voted to adopt the constitution, with a turnout of 50.57 percent. 
The new constitution outlines civil, democratic and human rights in 
the country of 3.2 million, which emerged from communism in 1991. 
But it is unlikely to bring an end to the fierce political fight between 
the ruling Socialists and the opposition Democrats. Only a few hours 
after the voting started last Sunday, both sides claimed victory. 
The opposition also complained about what it called ``grave incidents'' 
at several polling stations, including beatings of its commissioners. 
Foreign observers said they saw no such incidences of violence. The 
Socialists, meanwhile, accused officials of local governments supportive 
of the Democratic Party of manipulating voter lists by registering 
dead people and emigrants. Foreign observers considered Sunday's vote 
an improvement over last year's parliamentary elections, marred with 
violence and irregularities. Due to disagreements over results from 
local commissions, the Central Voting Commission announced the final 
result early Friday morning a couple of hours after the legal deadline 
had expired. Despite the efforts of the Ambassador of the Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Daan Everts, the opposition 
members of the Central Voting Commission refused to agree on the final 
result. The Deputy Chief of the Commission, Pellumb Cela, of the Democratic 
Party said the turnout was no more than 39 percent. Recent opposition 
rallies against the referendum have not generated the intensity of 
those in September that resulted in two days of rioting and forced 
the ouster of the prime minister. Only 2,000 people showed up at the 
last Democratic rally earlier this week. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>