<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981127.2130.1464 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If your favorite toy from childhood is in bad shape, don't despair. 
A woman in Georgia can make them almost as good as new. Bruce Morton 
reports. Santa claus had come. This is a movie, not life. "A Christmas 
story." Wow, that's mine. Fire truck, that's mine. It's a movie, but 
it's sort of the way it ought to be or ought to have been. Christmas 
is about things, if you like, about stuff, about toys. But as we get 
older, it's about memories, too. Remember a red wagon? Remember the 
ez-bake oven? Mm, look at all the delicious food you can make with 
kenner's new ez-bake sets and ez-bake oven. Most of all, probably, 
we remember dolls and stuffed animals. But dreams fade, and so do 
poohs and barbies. Sometimes, Linda blase can make the dream, make 
the Pooh shine bright as new. Pooh came in the other day. He had an 
accident. And she loves it. And that's the main reason they come to 
have things restored is because they had them when they were little, 
and they want to bring back those fond memories. Some of the repairs 
are expensive. Some of the dolls go back to the 19th century. And 
they're expensive, worth several hundred dollars. That is not why 
Linda blase is in the business of restoring dreams, nor why her customers 
bring her their battered memories to her snellville, Georgia, workshop. 
I'm bringing back all their memories, especially if you do a doll. 
A doll doesn't Kiss and tell. A doll can get winged across the room 
and nobody cares, you can cut off its hair, take nail Polish and put 
all over its mouth, it doesn't rat on you. It's your confidant. It 
can keep secrets. She'll get rid of the nail Polish, mend the clothes. 
Dreams made good as new. It's an emotional thing. 5% of restoration 
and repair is an emotional thing. They're connected to it because 
it brings back good memories, old times. a raggedy Ann, a stuffed 
dog. There's the dog right there. Now, we've got -- have an ear. And 
we're going to fix this little sucker. She really loves him. She loves 
him dearly. No memory too torn, no dream too shabby to mend. The worse 
they are, when someone comes to pick them up, I mean, it's like unbelievable. 
This doll is a link to a parent the child never knew. Well, her mother 
died when she was 3 years old, so she actually never knew her mother. 
And this is the only thing she really has left of her mother. Linda 
blase's craft is hands-on, individual. She is passing it on to her 
granddaughter, Ashley. Start scrubbing up and down, up and down. Go 
with the grain of the doll. The payoff is when the customers come 
to collect what they have brought her. Very emotional. They cry. They 
laugh. Sometimes they yell, scream. And they're beaming when they 
walk out of here. That's the fun part. Dreams made new. Memories made 
fresh. I wonder if she does electric trains. Bruce Morton, CNN, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>