<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981127.1600.1443 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hollywood is counting on the biggest stars around to pull you into 
the theaters this holiday season. And with good reason. Last year, 
the studios made $280 million Christmas week alone. Paul Vercammen 
has a preview of this season's blockbusters. Julia Roberts, Tom Hanks, 
Robin Williams, John Travolta and Meg Ryan are headed to theaters 
for the holidays. Major star power will shine as the studios do approximately 
17% of their north American business from Thanksgiving to new year's 
day. Any more questions? So this Christmas, Robin Williams brings 
unconventional bedside manner to "patch Adams." But it is about that 
connection and very much a kind of a humane view of medicine that 
exists in many places. Julia Roberts joins Susan Sarandon in the family 
drama "stepmom." Tissue may be required. Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan hook 
up via the Internet in -- You've got mail. -- their third film together. 
We don't do it lightly, I mean, in all honesty. I mean, there's plenty 
of times that anybody will try to, like, you know, slap us together 
in something like that. Right. John Travolta takes on big business 
in "A civil action," and the Japanese in "the thin red line." Alfre 
woodard stars in "down in the Delta," the directorial debut of poet 
Maya angelou. "Mighty Joe young" offers Bill Paxton and a giant ape. 
Can you get him to put me down? It's a rough reworking of the classic 
film that was made in 1949. Of course, the holidays are a time for 
family films. You can't go wrong with children or animals. And that 
means it's time for "babe, pig in the city." Babe's competition includes 
Michael Keaton, Kelly Preston and a special snowman in "Jack frost." 
Hey, that's my branch! "Moses, prince of Egypt." Val Kilmer voices 
the hero's voice part in the dreamworks' animated story. All I've 
ever known to be true is a lie. Disney's "A bug's life," is a computer-animated 
tale from pixar. It's a bug-eat-bug world out there. Definitely not 
for the little ones, holiday thrillers -- You can't just eat, sleep 
and drink Christmas. You have to have a little new year's in there. 
"A simple plan" features Bridget Fonda, Billy Bob Thornton, Bill Paxton 
and a dangerous stash of money. In "psycho," Vince Vaughn and Anne 
Heche reopen the Bates motel. "Star trek: insurrection" is the ninth 
installment. In "the faculty," aliens make school less boring. Don't 
forget, films out before January 1st meet the academy award deadline. 
Smaller budget movies with Oscar hopes often showcase some lace, English 
accents and Helena Bonham Carter. She confronts terminal illness in 
"theory of flight." Bill Murray takes a quirky turn in "rushmore." 
I've never been in a movie that's gotten so much advanced notice. 
Gwyneth patrow is in "Shakespeare in love." Woody Harrelson goes west 
in the "hi-Lo country." Emily Watson is a cellist in "Hillary and 
Jackie." "Hurlyburly" shows hol od decadence with Sean Penn and Meg 
Ryan. It's just about as politically incorrect as you can get. a Santa's 
sack full of holiday films -- it may take until summer to catch up 
on any missed gems. Paul Vercammen, "CNN Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>