<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981127.2100.2910 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is the version of this story on the web site at MSNBC.com. and 
we return now to our exclusive report as prepared by a joint Venture, 
dathe nine NBC and "good housekeeping" magazine. You might have seen 
the television ads to donate your used vehicle for a tax write-off. 
One of the charities may not be what it claims to be. Steve Daniels 
asks the president of the charity whether any money had gone to helping 
abused children. Wy caught up with Ronald higgerson at his car lot. 
He agreed to an impromptu interview but said he couldn't answer all 
our questions because of pending litigation. Still, he made this admission. 
What percentage of your Gross revenue goes toward charitable causes? 
At this point in time, since we are rolling all the money back into 
expansion for this charity to become strong, the answer to that is 
none. Not a single penny is going toward a charitable cause? Because 
of the reason that we told you about. If, indeed, one says the charetbling 
cause must be satisfied immediately, I believe that's unfair. You 
don't have the money yet to build those shelters? No, sir. We do not. 
Is it misleading totch a banner outside your building calling this 
the foundation for abused children when not a single dollar has gone 
to help abused children? Well, we don't think so. It's something that 
we intend to grow into. But if higgerson has had growing pains, he 
admits it's not because business has been slow. I would say since 
May 10, somewhere probably now around $700,000 has been accumulated 
-- not accumulated. Generated. And $700,000 is not enough to build 
or begin your work with abused children? No, sir. Despite admitting 
no money has helped this cause, higgerson denied there is anything 
wrong with the way he has operated his car lot. He told "Dateline" 
he initially misunderstood the rules he was supposed to follow but 
says he has complied with them ever since. He wouldn't respond directly 
to Debbie and Phil's complaints about their cars, but in a letter 
he said they still owe him $500 a charge they call ridiculous. As 
for his other dissatisfied customers, he says look at the stickers 
on his cars, which said they were sold as-is with no guarantees. Generally 
speaking, we do not rip off anybody. We have not treated anybody any 
different than what Ron higgerson would like to be treated if Ron 
higgerson was buying the car. Higgerson also told "Dateline" he has 
hundreds of satisfied customers. But when we asked him to put us in 
touch with them, he refused. But we did get in touch with some of 
the people who donated the cars to his charity. Gary Carter, who donated 
the minivan Debbie is now driving was stunned we told him his donation 
has done nothing to help abused children, even though Carter was entitled 
to a tax deduction, he says still he's angry about what happened. 
I wasn't told the truth. I wasn't told what they were going to do 
with the car. Carter says he was told the minivan would be fully repaired 
before being sold. And remember Phyllis ball? She donated the truck 
Phil says has sent him to the repair shop time and time again. Phyllis 
was furious to learn it's been the source of so much grief. Do you 
think you did the right thing by donating your old truck? Not anymore. 
I felt so good when I thought I was doing something good here. I don't 
see how the man can even live with himself. Do you go home with a 
clear conscience every night? Yeah. And pretty tired. Are you ripping 
the people off, defrauding the public? no. But just three days ago, 
less than a month after "Dateline" asked him that question, the attorney 
general's office froze the charity's bank account and obtained a temporary 
restraining order shutting down the car lot. The office is pursuing 
a civil suit against higgerson, charging him with fraud, theft, and 
diversion of assets, saying the charity has sent over $750,000 on 
chabettable -- anything but charitable purposes. He also has a charge 
that he used this 1993 Jeep Cherokee for personal use instead. Higgerson 
told "Dateline" his wife paid the charity $14,000 for the vehicle. 
When "Dateline" reached higgerson on Friday, he said he denies all 
the allegations in the attorney general's lawsuit and feels he's been 
unfairly persecuted and has now resigned as president of the charity 
as a result. But he said he stands by what he told "Dateline" when 
we talked with him last month, that he had taken no income from the 
charity and was barely staying above water financially. How much money 
is in the charity's bank account right now? Right now it's about $11,000. 
What's happened to the rest of it? It went for all the expenses to 
expand the charity. Wait a minute. Any charity who has had revenue 
of $700,000 could certainly show some benefit to their charitable 
cause. If any charity that has a revenue of $700,000 has expenses 
of zero, you're probably correct. We have a location. We have a facility. 
We have staff. We have cars. We have a good, solid plat form with 
which to spring from, and that's exactly what we're going to do. Are 
you a kind-hearted do-gooder who's just been misunderstood? I don't 
know how to answer that question, Steve. We are what we are. We have 
a goal. I plan on achieving that goal, like any other businessman. 
AME businessman. But as of three days ago, the charity Ronald higgerson 
launched is out of business and pending the outcome of the attorney 
general's lawsuit against him, the foundation for abused children 
can no longer solicit or sell donated cars. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>