<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981127.2100.0618 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Amed reports that for the first time in a quarter century actual articles 
of impeachment are being drawn up, at least at the first phase, the 
next step belongs to the house Judiciary committee. Two members are 
here this Friday evening, New Jersey democratic congressman Steve 
Rothman from his home in fairlawn, New Jersey tonight. Also with us 
from his home district, republican congressman much Asa Hutchinson 
in fort Smith, Arkansas. Congressman Hutchinson, were you surprised 
at all of the answers? Wasn't this destined to be a colossal waste 
of time? Did you expect kind of a tearful admission of some sort? 
Well, there's not any surprises in these answers that have been provided. 
It's really more of the same, but it is an important step in the process. 
The president needed to have the opportunity to make any response 
that he wanted to to the committee. The questions were very appropriate 
because we're trying to streamline these hearings to get it accomplished 
and over with, and his cooperation and answers would be important 
to that. I think in the introduction he sort of set the Tone whenever 
he said that I have done wrong but I'm directing my lawyers to actively 
pursue legal defenses. And I think that sets the Tone for the answers. 
There's a lot of legal gymnastics in the answers. Congressman Rothman, 
one portion of the president's response stuck out at you, and I know 
you wanted to talk about that this evening. Well, I, too, was taken 
by the introduction to the report which says that -- I read it a little 
differently than my friend, Asa Hutchinson. The president said there 
are sound legal defenses to all the charges made by Mr. Starr. He's 
a former law professor and a brilliant man who is made mistakes, but 
a brilliant man nonetheless. He says I know my conduct was wrong, 
and he apologized for it several times during the course of his answers. 
So, I thought the Tone of the document, while being very legalistic, 
as is required in litigation, did say, listen, while I might not be 
technically guilty of perjury or subornation of perjury or witness 
tampering or the rest of the charges, he says he's not guilty of any 
of them, he says I know I did wrong and I misled people, and I apologize. 
Congressman Rothman, wasn't this a swing and a miss? The president 
had this last chance to set the record straight on areas where there 
is still confusion, areas where there have been conflicting responses 
from him in the past. no. I think again the Burden rests on the prosecution, 
on the state. This is not unlike any other proceeding in our criminal 
justice or our justice system. The state, the prosecution, has the 
right to go forth, to present fact witnesses for us to hear and cross-examine. 
By the way, not one single fact witness has been presented to the 
Judiciary committee, not one. We've had two opening statements from 
the prosecutor, Mr. Starr, but not one single fact witness. And if 
it turns out that the republican majority is going to ask the committee 
to vote on articles of impeachment without a single fact witness I 
think that would be unprecedented in American legal history. Congressman 
Hutchinson, is it not adversarial and at minimum argumentative to 
begin each president to the president -- each question to the president, 
do you admit or deny? That's certainly legal practice. It's customary. 
But I can understand the president in his answers that he gave more 
explanatory answers. So, I will give him that and his lawyers. Very 
skillful lawyering, here. But I think it sets the stage. Cheerily, 
there has not been any admission of legal wrongdoing on behalf of 
the president. And so, that sets the issues, you know, apart in the 
committee that we have to proceed with our factual record. We have 
to examine this very carefully. We have to have the hearings, because 
he's denied that there's not been any admissions here. My friend Steve 
Rothman talked about there not being any fact witnesses. We have a 
whole record of fact witnesses from the transcripts from Betty Currie 
to Monica Lewinsky. And I have reviewed those. So, the facts are out 
there. I'm interested in the president's response to those facts. 
It seems like many of the democrats on the committee have concluded 
the president lied under oath, but the president certainly has denied 
that here in his responses. Congressman Rothman, those fact witnesses 
he talks about are those fact witnesses if you accept what Starr gives 
you as fact. Well, you know, people always -- legal scholars analogize 
the role of the Judiciary to that of a grand jury. Here the prosecutors 
come forth without a single fact witness. He summarized testimony 
that was never cross-examined by anyone. And as my friend, Asa Hutchinson, 
knows, no grand jury could possibly indict anyone simply on the word 
of the prosecutor, even if the prosecutor is summarizing someone's 
testimony, albeit uncross-examined testimony. Unprecedented in the 
impeachment history of our country without fact witnesses who the 
Judiciary committee could cross-examine like any other grand jury 
would have the opportunity to. Congressman Hutchinson, can you imagine 
a court case where someone came in and said, look, trust me, everyone 
you see in here, all the transcripts, it's true. Let's go on from 
here. Actually, Steve has a point. I've advocated calling witnesses. 
I think Betty Currie would be an appropriate witness. The democrats 
would criticize us if we called wngses, saying we're trying to drag 
it out. So, I would ask Mr. Rothman what witnesses he would suggest 
to be called before the committee. We'll be glad to do it I can't 
believe we're going to have to end this interview without cross party 
agreement by both gentlemen. Thank you both for coming on the air. 
Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>