<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981127.2100.0098 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We begin this evening with the development and effort under way in 
the house. This evening, the president returned from camp David after 
his Thanksgiving holiday with a few rounds of golf under his belt 
and another legal of -- legal hurtle of sorts behind him. The 81 questions 
that cover virtually every aspect of the Lewinsky scandal as to what 
his answers have revealed and where this will lead the case on the 
hill, we'll begin with Claire Shipman. After a day of golf and handshaking, 
the president sent his response to Capitol Hill, and nowhere in the 
26 pages does he admit to perjury or obstruction of justice. His carefully 
worded answers prepared by his legal team stuck closely to previous 
testimony. He insisted he did not mislead anyone under oath. He repeatedly 
could not recall or remember details, especially when asked whether 
he'd coached his secretary, Betty Currie, to lie. I believe that I 
asked her certain questions and made certain statements, he said, 
although I don't remember exactly what I said. But he flatly denied 
asking Ms. cure reto retrieve and conceal his gifts to Ms. Lewinsky. 
Asked about the fact that he testified he received gifts from Lewinsky 
once or twice, he was also vague. At the time, those were the gifts 
I recalled. After I had a chance to search my memory and refresh my 
recollection, I was able to be more responsive. There might still 
be gifts that I haven't identified. Even the most basic questions 
were met with classic Clinton-style answers. Asked if he is the country's 
chief law enforcement officer, he said "the president is frequently 
referred to as the chief law enforcement officer, Al know nothing 
in the constitution specifically designates the president as such." 
Republicans say the White House is again splitting legal hairs. The 
fact of the matter is very clearly he lied before the grand jury, 
he lied before a federal judge, and there's really no real dispute 
about that. Others say the president's caution is appropriate. There 
have been suggestions there could be a prosecution even after the 
president leaves office. I think any answer he gives has to be done 
with the greatest care. On Capitol Hill, as the Judiciary committee 
draws up articles of impeachment a vote could come just weeks from 
now. Sources tell NBC news the president's lawyers are not likely 
to accept an invitation from republicans to come back before the committee 
to mount a defense of the president. Why would the White House pass 
up a chance to make the president's case? Simply put, they want this 
to go away as quickly as possible. And the White House is now very 
much concentrating on the end game. For example, we've been told that 
should an impeachment vote in the house fail, aides here would still 
like to see censure and they will push democrats to vote for it. The 
thinking is that no punishment at all could produce a backlash. Claire 
Shipman, NBC news, the White House. And with us this even from our 
NBC news Washington bureau with a closer look at some of those 81 
questions and the president's answers to them is NBC news justice 
correspondent Pete Williams, who has gone over the document released 
this evening. Pete, combining what Claire reported and what you've 
read so far, any surprises? Any kind of retelling, new twists, new 
versions of what's been asked and answered? No surprises. As for the 
Tone, the president doesn't rise to the bait in the house questions 
in one way. Each of the 81 questions begins by asking do you admit 
or deny something, and apparently the White House has decided this 
is like asking, how are you? Do you admit or deny that you're fine? 
One quarlt is they are very thoroughly lawyered. Claire mentioned, 
for example, his answer about whether he was the chief law enforcement 
officer. Clinton's lawyers clearly want to Con seed nothing, and several 
republicans believe he committed perjury and say it's more serious 
given his position as chief law enforcement office. The thorough lawyering, 
I think also produces answers that may strike some as a little strained. 
For example, question 20 -- do you admit or deny that you gave false 
or misleading testimony under oath when you said during your deposition 
-- So, some of this, Brian, gets us back to a fundamental question 
about what perjury is. Is it perjury if the answer is evasive or even 
misleading as long as it is literally true? That's the position the 
White House has been taking, and they say they have Supreme Court 
case law on their side. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>