<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981127.2100.2298 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We have an exclusive report for you tonight from "dateline NBC" and 
"good housekeeping" magazine. It comes during the time of year when 
charities intensify their drive for Americans to give generally. That's 
not the problem. It's where the money ends up. For example, ads asking 
people to donate their old cars to benefit a good cause, we get the 
rest of that story from "dateline NBC" Steve Daniels in this "dateline/good 
housekeeping" exclusive. I felt so good when I was doing something 
good here. It seemed like a wonderful way to go. They took care of 
everything, picked it up for you. Phyllis ball now knows things aren't 
always what they seem. It all started a year ago when she decided 
to donate an old truck to a charity advertising on television in Sacramento, 
California. Did you feel like you were going to be helping abused 
children? Oh, sure. All the time. But as you'll see later, when "Dateline" 
told her what really happened, she was angry. And you may be too. 
I feel bad for these people. I had no idea the outcome. The outcome 
can be win-win for both charities and donors, an effective way to 
turn old clunkers into cash for worthwhile causes. Donate your car 
to goodwill. It's simple. Many established OS like goodwill and the 
American lung association lung run respectable programs. And when 
it's done right. It can be an easy, hassle-free way to get rid of 
your car. You simply make a call. The charity arranges to pick up 
your car. You get a tax deduction for the blue book value. And the 
charity can then either junk the car and sell the parts or sell the 
car at an auction, like this one in Napa, California, where the proceeds 
benefit more than a dozen charities. Still, if you aren't careful 
about who gets your donation, giving your car to charity isn't always 
this this straightforward. It looks simple, but after your beloved 
junker is auctioned for a bargain price or sold for scrap parts, where 
does the money go? If you think 100% goes toward charity, you're wrong. 
In fact, in some cases, as little as a few cents of every dollar end 
up going towards a worthy cause. This car, if it sells for $600, sometimes 
as little as $6 will go toward charity. What percentage of that donation, 
of the sales price of that car, actually winds up in the hands of 
the charity? It varies. California deputy attorney general, belinda 
Johns, says surprisingly, amount charities get varies drastically. 
It can be as much as 50% or as low as 1%. 1%? yes. Is this legal? 
Oh, yes. It's legal because most charities use fundraisers or profit-making 
middlemen to run the car donation programs. But in 18988, a Supreme 
Court ruling prevented states from dictating how much money those 
fundraisers must turn over to charities. They are required to tell 
you what percentage if you ask. Only if you ask. Only if you ask. 
To avoid fundraiser fees, some charities skip the middleman altogether 
and run their own car donation program. But that's still no guarantee 
your money is going where you think it is. Consider the foundation 
for abused children, the charity Phyllis ball donated her truck to. 
It was registered as a California charity in may of 1997 by its president, 
Ronald higgerson. He said its purpose was the develop, maintenance, 
and operation of community shelters for battered women and children. 
But a year and a half later, even though hundreds and hundreds of 
donated cars have been sold on the foundation's lot, it turns out 
not a single penny of the proceeds has been used to build a single 
Shelter. I don't believe there's any evidence that money has gone 
to charity yet. And the fact that so far no money has directly benefited 
abused children has people on both sides of higgerson's business angry, 
those who donated cars and those who ballingt them, including this 
group of customers. It makes no sense how he can sit there and claim 
he's helping abused children and yet none of the money is going to 
these children. It's not right. That's not fair. These four higgerson 
customers are among dozens who also complained about the condition 
of the cars they bought from higgerson's charity. I thought I was 
helping abused children, and we were the ones that got abused. Phil 
province and Debbie Carson said they wanted to help a cause and get 
a good deal at the same time. They didn't have much to spend. Phil 
is a painter and Debbie is a store clerk. A year ago they visitted 
the foundation's car lot and purr cassed this Plymouth vogager for 
$2600 and this Toyota truck. Even know they knew the cars had been 
donated they were assured they were in good shape. We were told they 
were perfectly reconditioned vehicles that had no problems. But just 
days after taking the cars home, the couple realized that was hardly 
the case. They say they've now invested $6,000 just trying to keep 
their two vehicles on the road and had to come up with $551 to cover 
old registration fees the foundation never told them about. I got 
the biggest lemon you could find. They're looking for a decent bargain 
for a vehicle that will transport their family, and they're not getting 
that. John parino is a lead investigator with the department of motor 
vehicles. He investigated complaints that higgerson customers filed 
with his office, including some who said they were out of luck when 
they tried to get their money back. He told them he was not going 
to refund the money. It was a donation to the foundation for abused 
children: Now higgerson has a problem on two fronts, the way he sold 
cars, without a license. As a result the Sacramento attorney's office 
charged him with operating as an unlicensed dealer and fraud, both 
misdemeanors. And secondly, the California attorney general's office 
has also investigated the charity. Based on an audit, they want higgerson 
to explain what he's done with the proceeds from the sale of all those 
cars. There are a lot of people who wonder where this money is going. 
They think it's all a scam. All right. That's fine. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>