<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981127.1830.1553 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight, the "home of the BR an American world war II G.I. wh worst 
chapters of human history. Tonight, the "home of the brave" -- an 
American world war II G.I. who recorded on film one of the worst chapters 
of human history. His camera saw what the world could not -- the greusome 
scene at a Just-liberated Nazi death camp. Now he has become something 
of a savior to those who are seen in those pictures -- the survivors 
released from the camp, but captured on film. Here's Tom Brokaw. April 
10th, 1945, ahlem, Germany -- 20-year-old Vernon tott is a Member 
of the 84th infantry division. We came through six months of bloody 
battle. But when we entered this camp, it was hell on earth. Tott's 
division liberated a German prison camp that day, saving the lives 
of dozens of Polish Jews. What we saw there you would never forget. 
Tott carried with him a tattered old camera. I just started shooting 
pictures like crazy. I wanted my folks back home to see what I had 
seen there. Like so many soldiers who saved the lives of others after 
the war, an ordinary life. I just put those pictures away in a shoe 
box in the basement and forgot about them. Sioux city, Iowa -- a happy 
marriage, healthy children, a good job. Tott keeps in touch with his 
comrades -- reunions, a newsletter. A newsletter that prison camp 
survivor Benjamin sieradzki learned about. I sat down and wrote this 
letter. There was an article by Benjamin looking for that soldier 
that took pictures. Until he read it, tott had forgotten about the 
photos. So I went down in my basement and I found these 18 pictures. 
Painful but invaluable treasures for survivors to share with their 
families. It's living proof of what these people went through. Tott 
has dedicated his retirement to tracking down survivors, putting them 
in touch with one another, sharing his photos with them. So far, he 
has found 17 survivors. Like sol berkemus -- My heart -- I'm gaining 
weight by looking at this picture, that we were reborn at this moment. 
At a recent veteran's convention, a remarkable reunion as several 
survivors show up. This is a very special day for me, because I got 
to meet survivors of ahlem that I took pictures of 53 years ago. Gentleman, 
to me, you are the Angels that brought me back to life. And vern is 
the general of the Angels. Unbelievable that I can talk to a man who 
liberated us, took us out of hell. Tott's greatest hope? That future 
generations never forget. A survivor's daughter -- You have touched 
our family in a way that I could never put into words. And I just 
want to say how deeply we appreciate it, and thank you so so much. 
One soldier, 18 photographs -- indelible lessons for all time. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>