<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981127.1830.0830 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" -- tonight, police officers duped by those determined 
to die. It is a bizarre and growing phenomenon, what some call "suicide 
by cop". A sarry incident in the state of California is the latest 
case in which a Police officer has been drawn into somebody else's 
death wish. NBC's Dan Lothian tonight, "in depth." Monday evening, 
Costa Mesa, California. A hostage situation, and a gunman with a death 
wish. It was really apparent. He had an agenda, planning this, going 
to get shot by cops. Distraught over an ugly custody battle and angry 
about the education his hearing-impaired son was receiving, Michael 
generakos took two school board members hostage. But police say, his 
motive was to hurt himself, committing what's commonly known as "suicide 
by cop." A sharpshooter fired. Generakos' weapon turned out to be 
a B.B. gun. Dr. range hutson, a researcher at Harvard medical school, 
says what generakos did is part of a growing disturbing trend played 
out often as news cameras roll. The people escalate the level of lethality, 
where they force the law enforcement officer to shoot them. This is 
their whole purpose and their whole goal. And they beg sometimes? 
Yes, they ask for them to shoot them on a number of occasions. Dr. 
hutson and a colleague at the University of southern california medical 
school, Dr. deirdre anglin, reviewed 437 fatal and nonfatal officer-involved 
shootings in L.A. county over a ten-year period. What they found? 
About 11% of all officer-involved shootings turned out to be the "suicide 
by cop" phenomenon. However, in 1997, 25% of all the officer-involved 
shootings turned out to be a "suicide by cop" phenomenon. In other 
words, one of every four times a cop shot. Here in Los Angeles was 
a case where the suspect actually wanted to be killed. And it appears 
to be a growing national problem. About one-third of the victims across 
the country actually leave suicide notes. As was a case in long island 
when a troubled man with a toy gun provoked police into shooting him, 
and left behind an apology to the cop who would shoot him. Dr. anglin 
says suspects are often afraid to pull the trigger themselves, or 
they want to die, but they don't want to be responsible for their 
own deaths. An individual who is shot by somebody else does appear 
to be the victim, whereas the individual who does the shooting appears 
to be the perpetrator. Not every confrontation has a deadly ending. 
Me and you. One on one. Shoot me punk. This tense standoff where police 
were repeatedly taunted by the suspect ended after negotiations and 
a tackle. But for police officers, these are usually impossible situations. 
How to do the right thing? How to protect the public from a suspect 
whose real objective is suicide and the weapon is a police officer. 
Dan Lothian, NBC news, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>