<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0230 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the first time since Dust Bowl days, when fedora-topped G-men 
battled backroads bandits like Bonnie &AMP; Clyde, a condemned inmate 
has escaped from Texas' Death Row prison. Martin E. Gurule's daring 
scheme involved dummies and a desperate sprint through a hail of bullets. 
Gurule, 29, became the first Death Row inmate to ever make it completely 
out of the vast prison complex in Huntsville and into the surrounding 
piney woods. ``All of the others who got out of Death Row were caught 
somewhere else inside the complex,'' said Larry Fitzgerald, a spokesman 
for the Texas Department of Criminal Justice. ``He's the first to 
get all the way outside.'' On Friday afternoon, hundreds of police 
officers and tracking dogs were picking their way through the rough, 
marshy woods east and north of Huntsville, hoping to catch the trail 
of Gurule, who was convicted and sentenced to death for the 1992 murder 
of a Corpus Christi restaurant owner and a cook during a robbery. 
Helicopters equipped with infrared telescopes were buzzing over the 
Walker County treetops near the Trinity River, which runs along the 
prison's east side. Texas correction officials said that Gurule and 
six other Death Row inmates at the Ellis Unit northeast of Huntsville 
cut through a fence surrounding an outdoor recreation yard and were 
able to clamber to a rooftop before the other prisoners were taken 
back to their cells at 8:15 Thanksgiving night. Prison guards did 
not notice the men were missing because they had transformed pillows 
and sheets into makeshift dummies, making it appear they were asleep 
in their bunks, Fitzgerald said. A guard noticed the men dropping 
off the rooftop at around 12:20 a.m. Friday and immediately sounded 
the alarm and began firing as many as 20 rounds. When the shooting 
began, the other six inmates gave themselves up, Fitzgerald said, 
but Gurule kept running and made his way over an exterior fence and 
into the nearby woods. The guard said he saw Gurule fall to the ground 
briefly after he shot at him, but officials found no evidence of blood. 
Nevertheless, Fitzgerald said prison officials were confident that 
the fugitive remained somewhere in the surrounding woods, which he 
said were so thick and soggy and unforgiving that Gurule would have 
been unable to move quickly. By early Friday, officials had the countryside 
surrounded at an eight-mile perimeter, which they believed was well 
beyond the range that Gurule could have run in that time. Police officers 
stood side-by-side along all of the roads leading into the Ellis Unit, 
making it difficult for Gurule to cross out of the dense woods. Prison 
officials described Gurule as very dangerous, but said they had no 
reason to believe that he was armed. The unit is one of several that 
make up the vast Huntsville prison complex. Executions take place 
at the Wall Unit, closer to the center of Huntsville, which is an 
hour's drive north of Houston. Texas has the busiest Death Row in 
the nation. Officials said there have been 17 executions this year 
at Huntsville. Gurule was convicted of murder in the shooting of Mike 
Piperis, 46, co-owner of the U&AMP;I Restaurant in Corpus Christi, 
and Anthony Staton, 31, one of the restaurant's cooks, on Oct. 12, 
1992. Also convicted was Malisa Smith, Gurule's girlfriend at the 
time, who had worked at the restaurant. She received a 25-year sentence. 
Gurule contended during his trial that he had not gone to the restaurant 
intending to rob it, but because he had been summoned by Piperis, 
who feared that Gurule intended to turn him in to federal tax officials. 
The shootings occurred during a struggle over the gun when Gurule 
said he feared for his life. Gurule's story didn't convince the court, 
largely because both of the men had been shot in the head, execution-style, 
and because money and receipts were found in Ms. Smith's apartment. 
Police estimated that the couple made off with $9,000. Fitzgerald 
said that the search would continue into the night and until some 
sign was found of Gurule's path of flight. Officials were confident 
it would not take long. ``Often when something like this happens, 
they make all sorts of plans for what might happen inside the prison,'' 
Fitzgerald said. ``But then they find themselves standing outside 
in the woods and wonder what they should do next.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>