<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0089 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Oilers (6-5) at Seahawks (5-6) Comments: Quarterback Jon Kitna was 
the most valuable player of NFL Europe's World Bowl in 1997. Those 
Barcelona Dragons _ you can't stop them, you can only hope to contain 
them. Now, he gets only his second start in the big league against 
an average Oilers defense. He'll put up some points, but the key for 
Seattle is stopping running back Eddie George. The Seahawks have 41 
sacks, but pass rushing isn't the key, run stopping is. George already 
has 1,025 yards rushing and should add on about 100 more. Oilers, 
19-14 Saints (5-6) at Dolphins (7-4) Comments: This is where Coach 
Jimmy Johnson earns the big bucks. His Miami team is coming off a 
crushing loss to New England on Monday Night Football. After the game, 
Johnson simply stood on the sideline with his jaw open. He was stunned. 
Now Johnson must pick his mouth off the carpet and propel his team 
to win. They must have this game and it's a scary one for the Dolphins. 
Quarterback Kerry Collins is beginning to look like the franchise 
quarterback he was supposed to be in Carolina. And the New Orleans 
defense, which has played great all season, is up to the task for 
stopping one of the worst receiving corps in football. Saints, 13-12 
Eagles (2-9) at Packers (7-4) Comments: Blowout city, Part II. Some 
Minnesota coaches felt that Packers Coach Mike Holmgren was overconfident 
before his game with the Vikings. The Packers lost by two touchdowns. 
Holmgren had better not be cocky this week, no matter how bad the 
Eagles are. Coach Ray Rhodes, who was on the San Francisco staff when 
Holmgren was there, would love to beat his old friend. He'll have 
the troops fired up. But the Packers have a top-three wide receiver 
in Antonio Freeman, who is averaging 19.9 yards per catch on third 
down. He and quarterback Brett Favre hook up at least five times. 
Packers, 28-10 Redskins (2-9) at Raiders (7-4) Comments: Raiders quarterback 
Donald Hollas may not be a pretty thrower, or the best player in the 
league, but he is 4-1 as a starter, with his only loss coming to undefeated 
Denver. Not bad. Washington showed a lot of guts in coming back against 
Arizona. But they must be drained. That was a long game and it has 
been a long season. They have nothing left to play for except the 
`p' word_pride. The Raiders are playing for their own `p' word _ playoff 
position. Raiders, 30-18 Broncos (11-0) at Chargers (5-6) Comments: 
Denver can clinch the AFC West with a victory or an Oakland loss. 
But they'll win the division, either this week or next. It's just 
a matter of time. But that of course is not the story with this team 
_ whether they can go undefeated is. They won't, and this is the road 
block. The Broncos look unbeatable, especially early in the game, 
when they have outscored opponents in the first quarter by 104 points, 
the second largest margin in league history (the Chiefs did by 128 
points in 1966). If the Chargers can weather the storm early, and 
they will, they'll be in the ballgame. San Diego is a different team 
than when these two met earlier this month and the Broncos cruised, 
27-10. The Chargers' defense has gelled even more and given up just 
255.7 yards a game, tops in the league. San Diego allows only 65 yards 
on the ground. Memo to Terrell Davis: Pack some extra padding. You 
are going to get hit harder than you have all season. Chargers, 24-23 
MONDAY NIGHT GAME Giants (4-7) at 49ers (8-3) Comments: The only chance 
the Giants have of winning this game is if they open up the offense. 
That's what a vastly overmanned New Orleans team did against the 49ers 
last week and they made a game of it. The Saints threw deep on their 
very first pass play of the game. Will the Giants try that? They should. 
Have quarterback Kent Graham, who has one of the strongest arms in 
the league, throw at least 40 passes _ and not that dink and dunk 
stuff, either. The Giants will probably be in the game because Coach 
Jim Fassel knows he can't be conservative on offense if he has any 
chance of winning. Defensively is where the Giants are in trouble. 
With a few exceptions, they don't have the firepower to stay with 
the 49ers' offense, which averages an NFL-high 422.2 yards a game. 
49ers, 30-21 
</TEXT>
</DOC>