<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A city bus carrying 31 people plunged off a bridge here and plowed 
through the outer edge of an apartment roof on Friday afternoon after 
the driver was shot by a passenger. The driver, and a person suspected 
of shooting the driver, were both killed in the accident, the police 
said. Twenty-nine others were injured. The bus was just starting to 
cross Aurora Avenue Bridge, which spans the Lake Union ship canal, 
about 3:10 p.m. when the driver was shot by a passenger, the police 
said. The bus, heading south, jumped a lane of northbound traffic, 
hitting a van, then crashed through a guardrail and fell 50 feet, 
landing upright in an apartment garden in the Fremont district, an 
area of residential buildings, restaurants and businesses. Police 
officers did not disclose a motive for the shooting. They said that 
two suspects were involved, and that the second person was among the 
injured taken to the hospital. The gun was recovered at the hospital, 
the police said. Witnesses described a scene of panic as people with 
broken bones and bleeding cuts tried to crawl out of the bus. Rescue 
officials pulled out several people who were stuck in the bus. ``I 
heard a loud, crashing sound and came rushing out of the apartment,'' 
said Chris Badgley, who lives about 50 feet from where the bus landed. 
``People were screaming for help, stumbling about. I heard several 
people say there had been gunshots fired.'' Badgley said he saw two 
injured people on the roof of the apartments. When aid units arrived, 
they gave emergency treatment to people who could be seen on the apartment 
roof. All the passengers were injured, Fire Department officials said. 
Fifteen of the injured were in critical condition Friday night and 
10 were in serious condition, said a Fire Department spokeswoman, 
Sheila Strehle. The driver, whose name was not released by the police, 
was thrown from the bus, Fire Department officials said. The bus is 
a two-compartment vehicle with the two units held together by an accordionlike 
mechanism. It usually carries 120 passengers. Had the bus traveled 
another quarter-mile or so, it would have fallen several hundred feet 
and landed in the water. But because the crash happened at the low 
end of the bridge, the bus landed on ground. Dan Williams, a spokesman 
for Metro Bus who arrived at the scene within minutes of the crash, 
said the bus was not smoking when it landed. Fire Department officials 
said there was no fire on board. But they expressed amazement that 
the bus landed upright. ``Nothing like this has ever happened, that 
I know of,'' Williams said. Had the accident occurred two hours later, 
during rush hour, it is likely the bus would have been full of people, 
he said. The front of the bus, with the window shattered, came to 
a rest against a pine tree in a garden next to the apartment. A large 
section of the roof of the two-story apartment _ the part that hangs 
over the outside of the building _ was broken away in the crash, as 
was a deck. But the police said they believed no one in the apartment 
was injured. ``Because it's a nice day, I thought my friends, who 
live there, may have been gardening and could have been caught in 
this accident,'' Badgley said. Badgley called rescue units, and said 
it took at least 10 minutes for help to arrive. But Fire Department 
officials said units arrived within seven minutes. Before the authorities 
came to the scene, some of the injured helped other people get out 
of the bus, Badgley said. One of the bus compartments was shattered 
and crumpled. The bus came to a rest just a block or so from one of 
Seattle's best-known sculptures, the Fremont Troll, a large cement 
image of a troll underneath the bridge. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>