<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0217 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Once history's stage was peopled with kings and princes. Now it seems 
that almost anyone with letterhead stationary and a tax identification 
number can crowd on as well. Private organizations increasingly play 
roles once considered the preserve of governments, from drafting peace 
treaties to waging war. Last year, Jodi Williams, an American disarmament 
enthusiast, and the International Campaign to Ban Land Mines, which 
she founded, jointly won the Nobel Peace Prize for persuading 122 
governments to sign a treaty outlawing antipersonnel mines. Meanwhile, 
on the other side of the globe, the government of Papua New Guinea 
was paying $36 million to Sandline International, a British company 
selling arms and military advice, to prepare its forces for an assault 
against the secessionist island of Bougainville. To some, the growing 
role of private companies and nongovernmental organizations, or NGOs 
as they are known, in foreign policy marks a jaw-dropping transformation 
in the world's political structure. ``The steady concentration of 
power in the hands of states, which began in 1648 with the Peace of 
Westphalia, is over, at least for a while,'' said Jessica Mathews 
of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. That shift is a 
result of the growing complexity of the international agenda, of a 
communications revolution that has enabled NGOs to mobilize public 
opinion and of the reduced ambitions of governments everywhere since 
the end of the Cold War. ``As governments downsize and new challenges 
crowd the international agenda,'' P.J. Simmons of the Carnegie Endowment 
for International Peace wrote in the fall issue of Foreign Policy 
magazine, ``NGOs fill the breach.'' Other scholars are skeptical of 
such far-reaching claims. ``Of course they have increased power, but 
there has been no decrease in states' sovereignty,'' said Allan Gerson 
of the Council on Foreign Relations. Owen Harris, editor of The National 
Interest, a quarterly journal of current affairs, agrees: ``NGOs are 
successful only to the extent they can influence the decisions of 
governments. They have not supplanted them.'' Still, even the skeptics 
concede that the balance of power between NGOs and governments has 
changed. Since 1948 the number of NGOs accredited by the United Nations 
has risen from 41 to more than 1,500; according to the Yearbook of 
International Organizations the total number in existence now exceeds 
5,000. Environmental groups like Friends of the Earth dragged governments 
to the Rio Earth Summit in 1992; human rights groups like Amnesty 
International pushed them into creating the International Criminal 
Court earlier this year; relief and development organizations like 
Oxfam International channeled some $10 billion last year. Whether 
the increasing influence of NGOs is a good or bad development, however, 
is the subject of intense debate. Detractors argue that such groups 
are undemocratic, often ineffective and may pursue narrow agendas; 
promoters believe they help resolve issues that transcend national 
borders. Some people argue that they do both. In a recent study of 
cooperation between NGOs and United Nations agencies in humanitarian 
emergencies, Thomas Weiss, the director of the research program on 
global security at Brown University, concluded that NGOs are ``more 
flexible, forthcoming, responsive and cost-effective than United Nations 
institutions,'' but he added that they can be confused, naive and 
prone to ``miss opportunities for cooperation.'' Clearly, NGOs have 
chalked up their share of successes. In 1991, for instance, when the 
United Nations was negotiating a settlement of El Salvador's long 
civil war, the Ford Foundation ended up financing the peace initiative. 
``I needed money for secret trips to see the parties, even to pay 
their hotel rooms when they finally came together,'' recalls Alvaro 
de Soto, the United Nations mediator in that conflict, ``but we had 
no cash to spare.'' The following year, Comunita di Sant'Egidio, an 
Italian organization with links to the Vatican, negotiated an end 
to Mozambique's long civil war, ``the first intergovernmental agreement 
ever negotiated by a nongovernmental body,'' said Andrea Bartoli, 
Sant'Egidio's New York representative. Other groups have focused on 
building links between adversaries. The Search for Common Ground, 
for example, took a U.S. wrestling team to Tehran, Iran, in February 
and is now planning an exchange of museum exhibitions. The Consensus 
Building Institute specializes in overcoming mistrust between environmental 
NGOs and government ministers by bringing them together informally. 
Of course, such efforts do not always work. Sant'Egidio tried to broker 
limited settlements in Algeria, Guatemala, Kosovo, Burundi and Albania, 
but those soon fell apart. What's more, such private peacemaking is 
partly offset by the recent rise of private war-making, in the form 
of ``military companies'' selling arms and military assistance. In 
a study published earlier this year, David Shearer of the International 
Institute for Strategic Studies in London, concluded, ``In the past 
decade, the increasing inability of weak governments to counter internal 
violence has created a ready market for private military forces.'' 
The best known are Executive Outcome of South Africa, Sandline International 
in Britain and a U.S. company, Military Professional Resources Inc. 
of Alexandria, Va. In a study of these three organizations published 
last year by the Center for Defense Information, David Isenberg, a 
senior research analyst, said that Executive Outcome had some 2,000 
contract soldiers on call and its own fleet of aircraft and helicopters. 
The Angolan government hired it between 1993 and 1996 to train and 
arm its forces at a cost of some $40 million a year. And in 1995 and 
1996 the company also helped the Sierra Leone government subdue the 
rebel Revolutionary United Front at a cost of $35 million, one-third 
of the country's defense budget, and recapture vital diamond-mining 
areas. Sandline International told Isenberg that its purpose was to 
``fill a void in the post-Cold War era'' by offering governments ``specialized 
military expertise at a time when Western nations' desire and, in 
some instances, capacity to provide support has waned.'' Shearer said 
that both the U.S. and the British governments had little incentive 
to curb the activities of such military companies because they were 
either ``carrying out foreign policy directly or at least working 
within acceptable boundaries.'' They also provide useful intelligence, 
he said, and encourage clients to purchase their home countries' weaponry. 
Yet Western governments have also discovered a downside. Executive 
Outcome, for example, became the subject of a British government inquiry 
earlier this year over allegations that it had broken a Security Council 
arms embargo against Sierra Leone. Military intervention isn't the 
only problem posed by the nongovernmental groups. Stephen Kobrin of 
the Lauder Institute of Management and International Studies wrote 
in Foreign Policy this fall how a little-known NGO called the Preamble 
Collaborative mobilized some 600 other private organizations against 
a planned agreement among 29 industrialized governments to facilitate 
foreign investment around the world. Kobrin said that the projections 
underlying the Preamble's charge _ that the agreement gave business 
too much power _ were ``barely credible worse-case scenarios.'' Mark 
Weisbrot, the Preamble's research director, maintains that ``the agreement 
would have given foreign investors new rights against governments 
without imposing any additional obligations.'' Last summer, a number 
of Western governments, led by Britain, complained that a number of 
NGOs caring for refugees had failed to provide any adequate accounting 
for some $370 million of government money given them by the U.N. High 
Commissioner for Refugees. Meanwhile, nations like India, Malaysia 
and Brazil have complained about being lectured to by private organizations 
about their record on human rights or forest depletion. For Fareed 
Zakaria, managing editor of Foreign Affairs magazine, such complaints 
point to ``a troubling aspect'' of the rise of nonstate actors in 
international affairs, namely that they lack the democratic accountability 
expected of the governments whose traditional functions they usurp. 
Other experts counter, however, that NGOs and other nonstate actors 
must still persuade the public at large, foundations and even governments 
to reach into their pockets to provide the money they need to operate. 
Ms. Mathews worries that in the short run at least the rise of NGOs 
may ``weaken rather than bolster the world's capacity to solve its 
problems'' by encouraging governments to underfinance established 
international organizations like the United Nations. In fact, U.N. 
Secretary-General Kofi Annan disclosed last year that even he considered 
contracting out the delicate job of removing soldiers from refugee 
camps in Goma, Congo, during the 1994 Rwandan civil war to a private 
military company. In the end he decided not to, saying, ``The world 
may not be ready to privatize peace.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>