<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0206 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kenneth Prewitt, the new director of the Census Bureau, certainly 
talks like an intellectual, sprinkling his speech with Britishisms 
like ``full stop,'' when dramatically ending a thought. He has the 
lifestyle of an intellectual, living in New York's SoHo section with 
his wife, Susan Vogel, a collector of African art who last year took 
an eight-week boat trip up the River Niger, where Prewitt caught up 
with her on Christmas Eve in Timbuktu. ``The Timbuktu?'' asked an 
impressed aide, who heard the story for the first time recently. ``The 
Timbuktu,'' Prewitt assured him. But as Prewitt, who was confirmed 
last month on the day the Senate broke for recess, wanders into the 
fracas over whether the 2000 census will use sampling, he has sought 
to put the partisan denizens of Washington's political world on notice 
that he is not some pointy-headed milquetoast from academia that they 
can push around. At a meeting of the Census Monitoring Board, a panel 
set up by Congress and the administration to keep tabs on preparations 
for the 2000 census, Prewitt, 52, complained that his staff was being 
hamstrung by the constant and often redundant requests for information 
by myriad overseers, including the House Subcommittee on the Census, 
the monitoring board and the General Accounting Office. ``Maybe we 
need a hearing on oversight and monitoring responsibilities and relationships,'' 
Prewitt suggested. The message was politely delivered, but unmistakable: 
Leave us alone and let us do our job. Get the partisan politics out 
of the census. Given the importance that Republicans and Democrats 
have placed on how to conduct the census, which is crucial to congressional 
redistricting and may help determine the makeup of the House, the 
notion of politics being removed from the census may be impossible. 
But friends say Prewitt, who has moved to Washington and commutes 
home on weekends, is at least trying to bolster the morale of the 
bureau. Norman Bradburn, a professor of political science at the University 
of Chicago who has been a close friend of Prewitt for more than 30 
years, said, ``I think he's trying to reassert the professional competence 
of the bureau, and the bureau director, and to establish some sense 
that these are professionals who know what they're doing.'' Prewitt's 
full-throated cry for respect and independence for his agency did 
not come as a surprise to his friends and family. Prewitt, a former 
college professor, vice president of the Rockefeller Foundation and 
director of the Social Science Research Council, which seeks to promote 
new research in the social sciences, is well versed in the often-ferocious 
politics of the academic and foundation worlds. Ms. Vogel, his wife, 
said: ``Many people have commented on the intense politicking in academic 
institutions. The joke is that the politicking is so intense because 
the stakes are so small. But there it is. It's not something he hasn't 
done before.'' And friends say that beneath his bespectacled and slight 
frame is a man who is not averse to risk. After all, this is a man 
who every three weeks gets together with his buddies and plays ``pot 
limit'' poker, meaning that the whole pot can be bet on any one hand. 
Pots can range as high as $400. And while he is steeped in the world 
of statistics, he is also a man who lived for years in East Africa, 
where he would fly his own plane to places so desolate that should 
one develop engine trouble and go down, chances of rescue were two 
standard deviations on the wrong side of slim. ``He certainly has 
never been afraid of hard things,'' Ms. Vogel said. Throughout his 
adult life, Prewitt, who has two grown children from his first marriage, 
also has assiduously tried to find the middle ground, including carving 
out compromises between his own inner impulses toward social activism 
and scholarly contemplation. As a young man, he attended Harvard's 
Divinity School. At the same time, he worked on the weekends at a 
settlement house in Somerville, Mass., a working-class suburb of Boston. 
``I found it difficult,'' he said, ``to go from the realities of the 
kids and their lives and that neighborhood on the weekends and then 
go next to theoretical discussions.'' He forged a compromise. He quit 
divinity school. But rather than becoming an advocate, he turned to 
studying political structures and how they could be made to improve 
the lives of real people. That interest led to teaching in the mid-1960s 
and early 1970s at the University of Nairobi in Kenya and the University 
of East Africa in Uganda. Prewitt said this experience taught him 
the value that high-quality, apolitical statistical data could provide 
to governments. ``I have watched countries struggle with trying to 
put in place the capacity to guide their policies without good data,'' 
he said. ``The colonial powers did not bequeath the African nations 
the capacity to understand their own societies. And I've watched countries 
be crippled by the absence of reasonable intelligence about demography 
and economics.'' During that period he was also a professor of political 
science at the University of Chicago, where he became involved in 
the civil rights movement and participated in teach-ins against the 
war in Vietnam. In one of life's ironies, his antiwar activities in 
Chicago placed him in political opposition to the city's mayor, Richard 
J. Daley. Now, 30 years later, he is working for a son of the mayor, 
William Daley, who as secretary of commerce, oversees the Census Bureau. 
In 1976, Prewitt became the director of the university's National 
Opinion Research Center, a leading survey research organization that 
had suffered from directors who were concerned more with research 
than with management. Prewitt's colleagues figured that he would end 
up being the president of a college or university. Instead, he surprised 
them by taking a position as president of the New York-based Social 
Science Research Council, then as senior vice president of the Rockefeller 
Foundation and then once again as the head of the Social Science Research 
Council. ``He's an academic, a scholar, a well-established political 
scientist with good administrative skills and a sort of broad view 
about the development of different fields of study and institutions,'' 
Bradburn said. ``Anybody in the academic world who has those kinds 
of skills usually will become dean, work their way up to be provost 
and then to president.'' But Prewitt felt that was not for him. ``I 
was sensing that a large part of a university presidency and university 
administration has ceased being what I wanted,'' Prewitt said. ``It 
was all money raising. The jobs I took at SSRC and Rockefeller were 
closer to the research world.'' Keeping the Census Bureau squarely 
in the research world _ and out of politics _ is now the challenge 
Prewitt faces. ``He will do as well as possible under the circumstances,'' 
Bradburn said. ``It may be that the political circumstances will not 
allow the Census Bureau to do the best job that it could. If he's 
able to bring it off, people will say he did a brilliant job. If he 
doesn't, of course, he will be blamed.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>