<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0212 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Dublin drug dealer was convicted Friday by a three-judge panel in 
the 1996 murder of Veronica Guerin, a prominent journalist known for 
her aggressive reporting on Dublin criminals. The man, Paul Ward, 
34, denied helping to kill Ms. Guerin but admitted that he knew drug 
dealers who planned to do it. He acknowledged during the trial that 
he also dealt in drugs. Ward was sentenced to life in prison. Normally 
there is no parole before 14 years. There was no jury because the 
case was tried in the Special Criminal Court, established out of fear 
that criminals and terrorists could intimidate jurors. Ms. Guerin, 
37, was shot five times in the chest on June 26, 1996, as she sat 
in her car at a traffic light on the outskirts of Dublin. The killers 
rode a motorcycle and used a Magnum .357 pistol. Ward was accused 
of disposing of the gun and the motorcycle. He was the first of several 
suspects to be tried in the case. The men accused of the actual shooting 
and of driving the motorcycle have been arrested and face trials in 
the spring. Another suspect, the head of the drug gang, is in England 
fighting an extradition order. The names of the three are widely known; 
though the court has forbidden journalists to report them public, 
some have ignored the order. Ward's girlfriend, Vanessa Meehan, is 
the sister of one of the men in jail, Brian Meehan, according to police, 
who have also identified the suspected gunman as Eugene Holland. The 
chief government witness against Ward was Charles Bowden, who testified 
that he and Ward made about $500,000 each selling cannabis in a two-year 
period. Bowden, who was placed in a witness protection program, said 
Ward was intimately involved with the planning and execution of the 
crime. The court decision, read Friday morning by Justice Robert Barr, 
first attacked as unproven the police assertions that Ward had confessed 
to getting rid of the gun and motorcycle. The judges said that police 
had violated his rights by putting unjust psychological pressure on 
him, and that there was evidence they had beat him around the neck. 
Police acknowledged that they had failed to videotape or record any 
confession, and said they had lost the notes of its details. With 
Ms. Guerin's husband, Graham Turley, and other family members sitting 
in the small courtroom during the two-hour presentation of the verdict, 
Barr initially seemed on the verge of acquitting Ward. But he went 
on to say that Bowden, though a liar and criminal, now in prison on 
a six-year drug and weapons sentence, should be believed in his testimony 
on Ward's involvement. He said that Bowden was trying ``to extricate 
himself when cornered by the police,'' but that his testimony was 
not influenced by an offer of immunity from prosecution in the killing 
and placement in the witness protection program, which he will enter 
when he finishes his drug sentence. ``He was at high risk of being 
convicted of the murder and his bargaining position would have been 
reduced to zero,'' the justice continued. Asking rhetorically if there 
was any reason to believe Bowden was lying about Ward, Barr said, 
``The court can find nothing in evidence that raises such suspicion.'' 
Legal experts here had said that such uncorroborated allegations rarely 
lead to convictions. There was no immediate statement that Ward would 
appeal the decision. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>