<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0269 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The government Friday issued new rules that require drug companies 
to conduct much wider testing of drugs in children, so the companies 
can write labels that provide detailed information to doctors and 
parents about the proper use of medications by children. The final 
rules, issued by the Food and Drug Administration, were a top priority 
for President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton, but met with strenuous 
objections from many drug companies, which said they were impractical 
and burdensome. Pediatricians and patients' groups praised the rules. 
Paul Glaser, chairman of the Pediatric AIDS Foundation, which finances 
AIDS research, said, ``These rules mean that children can finally 
share in the research progress against disease.'' The White House 
said that drug companies rarely did the studies needed to assess the 
safety and proper dosage of drugs widely used to treat childhood illnesses. 
Instead, many drugs prescribed for children were tested only in adults, 
with an assumption that the drugs' effects on children would be very 
similar. About 20 percent of the drugs marketed in the United States 
have been tested and labeled specifically for children. Drug companies 
said they shared Clinton's goal of discovering better medicines for 
children. But they said the new tests would be costly and could be 
unethical, because they might put thousands of children at risk. Under 
the rules issued Friday, pharmaceutical companies must generally study 
the safety and effectiveness of drugs and vaccines in children ``if 
the product is likely to be used in a substantial number of pediatric 
patients,'' or if it provides a ``meaningful therapeutic benefit'' 
over existing treatments for children in the same age group. To gain 
FDA approval for their products, drug companies will ordinarily have 
to submit data showing their ``safety and effectiveness and benefits 
and risks'' in children. Prior efforts by the government to encourage 
voluntary testing in children have largely failed, and it is treacherous 
to extrapolate data from adults to children, the FDA said, noting 
that children were not simply little adults. Despite commitments by 
drug companies to do more studies in children, ``the percentage of 
new products entering the marketplace with adequate pediatric safety 
and effectiveness information has not increased in the last decade,'' 
the agency said. The final rules are, in some ways, more flexible 
than the proposals issued by the Clinton administration in August 
1997. Under the final rules, for example, the FDA may allow a company 
to defer testing in children until clinical trials suggest that a 
new drug is safe and effective in adults. Indeed, the agency said, 
in some cases, pediatric testing will occur after a new drug has been 
approved for use by adults. In an interview, William Schultz, a deputy 
commissioner of the FDA, said: ``We do not expect to hold up the approval 
of new drugs for adults even if the study in children was inadequate. 
Instead, we'll approve the drug for adults and then require studies 
in children.'' Rather than impose a rigid, uniform rule for all new 
drugs, the government said that the timing of pediatric studies would 
depend on various factors. If, for example, a new drug is urgently 
needed to treat a life-threatening disease in children and if there 
is no adequate therapy on the market, the government may insist that 
the manufacturer immediately begin tests in children, before full 
data on adults are available. But pediatric studies could begin later 
if similar medications were already available for children. Judith 
Bello, executive vice president of the Pharmaceutical Research and 
Manufacturers of America, a trade association for the industry, said 
Friday, ``We haven't seen the final rules and won't be able to comment 
today.'' In written comments on the proposed rules, drug companies 
including Merck, Glaxo Wellcome, Novartis and Wyeth-Ayerst said they 
wanted to discover better medicines for children, but found the details 
of Clinton's proposal extremely impractical and burdensome. Moreover, 
the companies said that children injured in drug tests might file 
lawsuits years later, after they grow up, even though parents gave 
consent for the tests. The companies said they could not obtain informed 
consent from children as they do from adults. In response, the Clinton 
administration said that children need not be exposed to ``inappropriate 
risks'' because drug companies could defer pediatric testing until 
new drugs were shown to be safe and effective for adults. In addition, 
the drug agency said it would ``seek advice from a panel of pediatric 
experts on whether additional protections are necessary'' for children 
involved in drug research. Timothy Westmoreland, a health policy expert 
at Georgetown University Law Center who supports the new rules, said, 
``It is much more unethical to expose children to drugs of unknown 
safety than to put the children into carefully controlled clinical 
trials.'' Mrs. Clinton said the new rules ``will make prescribing 
medication for children safer and may also lessen the number of side 
effects.'' The rules will be published next week in the Federal Register 
and will take effect, with the force of law, on April 1. Federal officials 
said that if a company violated the new rules, they would seek a federal 
court injunction requiring the company to assess the safety and effectiveness 
of its products in children. If the company flouted the injunction, 
it could be held in contempt of court and fined. ``Except possibly 
in rare circumstances,'' the FDA said, it does not intend to disapprove 
or withdraw approval for a drug whose manufacturer violates the new 
rules. The rules also include these provisions: _ The government may 
order drug companies to develop special ``pediatric formulations'' 
of any medicines that provide meaningful advantages over existing 
drugs for children. _ Drug companies may be required to conduct separate 
studies in children of different ages, including babies in the first 
month of life, infants in the first year of life, and adolescents. 
A drug company may be exempted from the requirement to study a particular 
drug in children if it can show that such studies would be ``impossible 
or highly impractical,'' or would pose ``undue risks to pediatric 
patients.'' A company might get a waiver if, for example, there was 
a very small number of patients with the illness. The FDA noted that 
some illnesses and conditions rarely occurred in children. For these 
conditions, it said, testing in children will be unnecessary. The 
government listed 20 such conditions, including Alzheimer's disease, 
Parkinson's disease, breast cancer, prostate cancer and lung cancer. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>