<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0249 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following are President Clinton's answers to the 81 questions put 
to him by the House Judiciary Committee as part of its impeachment 
investigation, as made public Friday by the White House: Set forth 
below are answers to the questions that you have asked me. I would 
like to repeat, at the outset, something that I have said before about 
my approach to these proceedings. I have asked my attorneys to participate 
actively, but the fact that there is a legal defense to the various 
allegations cannot obscure the hard truth, as I have said repeatedly, 
that my conduct was wrong. It was also wrong to mislead people about 
what happened, and I deeply regret that. For me, this long ago ceased 
to be primarily a legal or political issue and became instead a painful 
personal one, demanding atonement and daily work toward reconciliation 
and restoration of trust with my family, my friends, my Administration 
and the American people. I hope these answers will contribute to a 
speedy and fair resolution of this matter. 1. Do you admit or deny 
that you are the chief law-enforcement officer of the United States 
of America? Response to Request No. 1: The President is frequently 
referred to as the chief law-enforcement officer, although nothing 
in the Constitution specifically designates the President as such. 
Article II, Section 1 of the United States Constitution states that 
``(t)he executive power shall be vested in a President of the United 
States of America,'' and the law-enforcement function is a component 
of the executive power. 2. Do you admit or deny that upon taking your 
oath of office that you swore you would faithfully execute the office 
of President of the United States, and would to the best of your ability, 
preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States? 
Response to Request No. 2: At my Inaugurations in 1993 and 1997, I 
took the following oath: ``I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully 
execute the Office of President of the United States, and will to 
the best of my ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution 
of the United States.'' 3. Do you admit or deny that, pursuant to 
Article II, Section 2 of the Constitution, you have a duty to ``take 
care that the laws be faithfully executed?'' Response to Request No. 
3: Article II, Section 3 (not Section 2), of the Constitution states 
that the President ``shall take care that the Laws be faithfully executed,'' 
and that is a Presidential obligation. 4. Do you admit or deny that 
you are a member of the bar and officer of the court of a state of 
the United States, subject to the rules of professional responsibility 
and ethics applicable to the bar of that state? Response to Request 
No. 4: I have an active license to practice law (inactive for continuing 
legal education purposes) issued by the Supreme Court of Arkansas. 
The license, No. 73017, was issued in 1973. 5. Do you admit or deny 
that you took an oath in which you swore or affirmed to tell the truth, 
the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, in a deposition conducted 
as part of a judicial proceeding in the case of Jones v. Clinton on 
January 17, 1998? Response to Request No. 5: I took an oath to tell 
the truth on January 17, 1998, before my deposition in the Jones v. 
Clinton case. While I do not recall the precise wording of that oath, 
as I previously stated in my grand jury testimony on August 17, 1998, 
in taking the oath ``I believed then that I had to answer the questions 
truthfully.'' 6. Do you admit or deny that you took an oath in which 
you swore or affirmed to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing 
but the truth, before a grand jury empanelled as part of a judicial 
proceeding by the United States District Court for the District of 
Columbia Circuit on August 17, 1998? Response to Request No. 6: As 
the August 17, 1998, videotape reflects, I was asked ``Do you solemnly 
swear that the testimony you are about to give in this matter will 
be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help 
you God?,'' and I answered, ``I do.'' 7. Do you admit or deny that 
on or about October 7, 1997, you received a letter composed by Monica 
Lewinsky in which she expressed dissatisfaction with her search for 
a job in New York? Response to Request No. 7: At some point I learned 
of Ms. Lewinsky's decision to seek suitable employment in New York. 
I do not recall receiving a letter in which she expressed dissatisfaction 
about her New York job search. I understand Ms. Lewinsky has stated 
that she sent a note indicating her decision to seek employment in 
New York, but I do not believe she has said the note expressed dissatisfaction 
about her search for a job there. App. at 822-23 (grand jury testimony 
of Ms. Lewinsky). 8. Do you admit or deny that you telephoned Monica 
Lewinsky early in the morning on October 10, 1997, and offered to 
assist her in finding a job in New York? Response to Request No. 8: 
I understand that Ms. Lewinsky testified that I called her on the 
9th of October, 1997. App. at 823 (grand jury testimony of Ms. Lewinsky). 
I do not recall that particular telephone call. 9. Do you admit or 
deny that on or about October 11, 1997, you met with Monica Lewinsky 
in or about the Oval Office dining room? 10. Do you admit or deny 
that on or about October 11, 1997, Monica Lewinsky furnished to you, 
in or about the Oval Office dining room, a list of jobs in New York 
in which she was interested? 11. Do you admit or deny that on or about 
October 11, 1997, you suggested to Monica Lewinsky that Vernon Jordan 
may be able to assist her in her job search? 12. Do you admit or deny 
that on or about October 11, 1997, after meeting with Monica Lewinsky 
and discussing her search for a job in New York, you telephoned Vernon 
Jordan? Response to Request Nos. 9. 10, 11 and 12: At some point, 
Ms. Lewinsky either discussed with me or gave me a list of the kinds 
of jobs she was interested in, although I do not know whether it was 
on Saturday, October 11, 1997. Records included in the O.I.C. Referral 
indicate that Ms. Lewinsky visited the White House on October 11, 
1997, and I may have seen her on that day. I do not believe I suggested 
to Ms. Lewinsky that Mr. Jordan might be able to assist her in her 
job search, and I understand that Ms. Lewinsky has stated that she 
asked me if Mr. Jordan could assist her in finding a job in New York. 
I speak to Mr. Jordan often, and I understand that records included 
in the O.I.C. Referral indicate that he telephoned me shortly after 
Ms. Lewinsky left the White House complex. I understand that Mr. Jordan 
testified that he and I did not discuss Ms. Lewinsky during that call. 
13. Do you admit or deny that you discussed with Monica Lewinsky prior 
to December 17, 1997, a plan in which she would pretend to bring you 
papers with a work-related purpose, when in fact such papers had no 
work-related purpose, in order to conceal your relationship? 14. Do 
you admit or deny that you discussed with Monica Lewinsky prior to 
December 17, 1997, that Betty Currie should be the one to clear Ms. 
Lewinsky in to see you so that Ms. Lewinsky could say that she was 
visiting with Ms. Currie instead of with you? 15. Do you admit or 
deny that you discussed with Monica Lewinsky prior to December 17, 
1997, that if either of you were questioned about the existence of 
your relationship you would deny its existence? 19. Do you admit or 
deny that on or about December 17, 1997, you suggested to Monica Lewinsky 
that she could say to anyone inquiring about her relationship with 
you that her visits to the Oval Office were for the purpose of visiting 
with Betty Currie or to deliver papers to you? Response to Request 
Nos. 13, 14, 15, and 19: I was asked essentially these same questions 
by O.I.C. lawyers. I testified that Ms. Lewinsky and I ``may have 
talked about what to do in a nonlegal context at some point in the 
past, but I have no specific memory of that conversation.'' That continues 
to be my recollection today _ that is, any such conversation was not 
in connection with her status as a witness in the Jones v. Clinton 
case. 16. Do you admit or deny that on or about December 6, 1997, 
you learned that Monica Lewinsky's name was on a witness list in the 
case of Jones v. Clinton? Response to Request No. 16: As I stated 
in my August 17th grand jury testimony, I believe that I found out 
that Ms. Lewinsky's name was on a witness list in the Jones v. Clinton 
case late in the afternoon on the 6th of December, 1997. App, at 535. 
17. Do you admit or deny that on or about December 17, 1997, you told 
Monica Lewinsky that her name was on the witness list in the case 
of Jones v. Clinton? 18. Do you admit or deny that on or about December 
17, 1997, you suggested to Monica Lewinsky that the submission of 
an affidavit in the case of Jones v. Clinton might suffice to prevent 
her from having to testify personally in that case? Response to Requests 
Nos. 17 and 18: As I previously testified, I recall telephoning Ms. 
Lewinsky to tell her Ms. Currie's brother had died, and that call 
was in the middle of December. I do not recall other particulars of 
such a call, including whether we discussed the fact that her name 
was on the Jones v. Clinton witness list. As I stated in my August 
17th grand jury testimony in response to essentially the same questions, 
it is quite possible that that happened. . . . I don't have any memory 
of it, but I certainly wouldn't dispute that I might have said that 
(she was on the witness list).'' I recall that Ms. Lewinsky asked 
me at some time in December whether she might be able to get out of 
testifying in the Jones v. Clinton case because she knew nothing about 
Ms. Jones or the case. I told her I believed other witnesses had executed 
affidavits, and there was a chance they would not have to testify. 
As I stated in my August 17th grand jury testimony, ``I felt strongly 
that... (Ms. Lewinsky) could execute an affidavit that would be factually 
truthful, that might get her out of having to testify.'' I never asked 
or encouraged Ms. Lewinsky to lie in her affidavit, as Ms. Lewinsky 
herself has confirmed. 19. For the Response to Request No. 19, see 
Response to Request No. 13 et al., supra. 20. Do you admit or deny 
that you gave false and misleading testimony under oath when you stated 
during your deposition in the case of Jones v. Clinton on January 
17, 1998, that you did not know if Monica Lewinsky had been subpoenaed 
to testify in that case? Response to Request No. 20: It is evident 
from my testimony on pages 69 to 70 of the deposition that I did know 
on January 17, 1998, that Ms. Lewinsky had been subpoenaed in the 
Jones v. Clinton case. Ms. Jones' lawyer's question, ``Did you talk 
to Mr. Lindsey about what action, if any, should be taken as a result 
of her being served with a subpoena?'', and my response, ``No,'' j. 
at 70, reflected my understanding that Ms. Lewinsky had been subpoenaed. 
That testimony was not false and misleading. 21. Do you admit or deny 
that you gave false and misleading testimony under oath when you stated 
before the grand jury on August 17, 1998, that you did know prior 
to January 17, 1998, that Monica Lewinsky had been subpoenaed to testify 
in the case of Jones v. Clinton? Response to Request No. 21: As my 
testimony on January 17 reflected, and as I testified on August 17, 
1998, I knew prior to January 17, 1998, that Ms. Lewinsky had been 
subpoenaed to testify in Jones v. Clinton. App. at 487. That testimony 
was not false and misleading. 22. Do you admit or deny that on or 
about December 28, 1997, you had a discussion with Monica Lewinsky 
at the White House regarding her moving to New York? Response to Request 
No. 22: When I met with Ms. Lewinsky on December 28, 1997, I knew 
she was planning to move to New York, and we discussed her move. 23. 
Do you admit or deny that on or about December 28, 1997, you had a 
discussion with Monica Lewinsky at the White House in which you suggested 
to her that she move to New York soon because by moving to New York, 
the lawyers representing Paula Jones in the case of Jones v. Clinton 
may not contact her? Response to Request No. 23: Ms. Lewinsky had 
decided to move to New York well before the end of December 1997. 
By December 28, Ms. Lewinsky had been subpoenaed. I did not suggest 
that she could avoid testifying in the Jones v. Clinton case by moving 
to New York. 24. Do you admit or deny that on or about December 28, 
1997, you had a discussion with Monica Lewinsky at the White House 
regarding gifts you had given to Ms. Lewinsky that were subpoenaed 
in the case of Jones v. Clinton? 25. Do you admit or deny that on 
or about December 28, 1997, you expressed concern to Monica Lewinsky 
about a hatpin you had given to her as a gift which had been subpoenaed 
in the case of Jones v. Clinton? Response to Request Nos. 24 and 25: 
As I told the grand jury, ``Ms. Lewinsky said something to me like, 
what if they ask me about the gifts you've given me,'' but I do not 
know whether that conversation occurred on December 28, 1997, or earlier. 
Whenever this conversation occurred, I testified, I told her ``that 
if they asked her for gifts, she'd have to give them whatever she 
had. ...'' I simply was not concerned about the fact that I had given 
her gifts. Indeed, I gave her additional gifts on December 28, 1997. 
I also told the grand jury that I do not recall Ms. Lewinsky telling 
me that the subpoena specifically called for a hat pin that I had 
given her. 26. Do you admit or deny that on or about December 28, 
1997, you discussed with Betty Currie gifts previously given by you 
to Monica Lewinsky? 27. Do you admit or deny that on or about December 
28, 1998, you requested, instructed, suggested to or otherwise discussed 
with Betty Currie that she take possession of gifts previously given 
to Monica Lewinsky by you? Response to Request Nos. 26 and 27: I do 
not recall any conversation with Ms. Currie on or about December 28, 
1997, about gifts I had previously given to Ms. Lewinsky. I never 
told Ms. Currie to take possession of gifts I had given Ms. Lewinsky; 
I understand Ms. Currie has stated that Ms. Lewinsky called Ms. Currie 
to ask her to hold a box. 28. Do you admit or deny that you had a 
telephone conversation on January 6, 1998, with Vernon Jordan during 
which you discussed Monica Lewinsky's affidavit, yet to be filed, 
in the case of Jones v. Clinton? Response to Request No. 28: White 
House records included in the O.I.C. Referral reflect that I spoke 
to Mr. Jordan on January 6, 1998. I do not recall whether we discussed 
Ms. Lewinsky's affidavit during a telephone call on that date. 29. 
Do you admit or deny that you had knowledge of the fact that Monica 
Lewinsky executed for filing an affidavit in the case of Jones v. 
Clinton on January 7, 1998? 30. Do you admit or deny that on or about 
January 7, 1998, you had a discussion with Vernon Jordan in which 
he mentioned that Monica Lewinsky executed for filing an affidavit 
in the case of Jones v. Clinton? Response to Request Nos. 29 and 30: 
As I testified to the grand jury, ``I believe that (Mr. Jordan) did 
notify us when she signed her affidavit. While I do not recall the 
timing, as I told the grand jury, I have no reason to doubt Mr. Jordan's 
statement that he notified me about the affidavit around January 7, 
1998. 31. Do you admit or deny that on or about January 7, 1998, you 
had a discussion with Vernon Jordan in which he mentioned that he 
was assisting Monica Lewinsky in finding a job in New York? Response 
to Request No. 31: I told the grand jury that I was aware that Mr. 
Jordan was assisting Ms. Lewinsky in her job search in connection 
with her move to New York. I have no recollection as to whether Mr. 
Jordan discussed it with me on or about January 7, 1998. 32. Do you 
admit or deny that you viewed a copy of the affidavit executed by 
Monica Lewinsky on January 7, 1998, in the case of Jones v. Clinton, 
prior to your deposition in that case? 33. Do you admit or deny that 
you had knowledge that your counsel viewed a copy of the affidavit 
executed by Monica Lewinsky on January 7, 1998, in the case of Jones 
v. Clinton, prior to your deposition in that case? Response to Request 
Nos. 32 and 33: I do not believe I saw this affidavit before my deposition, 
although I cannot be absolutely sure. The record indicates that my 
counsel had seen the affidavit at some time prior to the deposition. 
34. Do you admit or deny that you had knowledge that any facts or 
assertions contained in the affidavit executed by Monica Lewinsky 
on January 7, 1998, in the case of Jones v. Clinton were not true? 
40. Do you admit or deny that during your deposition in the case of 
Jones v. Clinton on January 17, 1998, you affirmed that the facts 
or assertions stated in the affidavit executed by Monica Lewinsky 
on January 7, 1998, were true? Response to Request Nos. 34 and 40: 
I was asked at my deposition in January about two paragraphs of Ms. 
Lewinsky's affidavit. With respect to Paragraph 6, 1 explained the 
extent to which I was able to attest to its accuracy. With respect 
to Paragraph 8, I stated in my deposition that it was true. In my 
August 17th grand jury testimony, I sought to explain the basis for 
that deposition answer: ``I believe at the time that she filled out 
this affidavit, if she believed that the definition of sexual relationship 
was two people having intercourse, then this is accurate.'' 36. Do 
you admit or deny that you had knowledge that your counsel viewed 
a copy of the affidavit executed by Monica Lewinsky on January 7, 
1998, in the case of Jones v. Clinton, at your deposition in that 
case on January 17, 1998? Response to Request Nos. 35 and 36: I know 
that Mr. Bennett saw Ms. Lewinsky's affidavit during the deposition 
because he read portions of it aloud at the deposition. I do not recall 
whether I saw a copy of Ms. Lewinsky's affidavit during the deposition. 
37. Do you admit or deny that on or about January 9, 1998, you received 
a message from Vernon Jordan indicating that Monica Lewinsky had received 
a job offer in New York? Response to Request No. 37: At some time, 
I learned that Ms. Lewinsky had received a job offer in New York. 
However, I do not recall whether I first learned it in a message from 
Mr. Jordan or whether I learned it on that date. 38. Do you admit 
or deny that between January 9, 1998, and January 15, 1998, you had 
a conversation with Erskine Bowles in the Oval Office in which you 
stated that Monica Lewinsky received a job offer and had listed John 
Hilley as a reference? 39. Do you admit or deny that you asked Erskine 
Bowles if he would ask John Hilley to give Ms. Lewinsky a positive 
job recommendation? Response to Request Nos. 38 and 39: As I testified 
to the grand jury, I recall at some point talking to Mr. Bowles ``about 
whether Monica Lewinsky could get a recommendation that was not negative 
from the Legislative Affairs Office,'' or that ``was at least neutral,'' 
although I am not certain of the date of the conversation. To suggest 
that I told Mr. Bowles that Ms. Lewinsky had received a job offer 
and had listed John Hilley as a reference is, as I testified, a ``little 
bit'' inconsistent with my memory. It is possible, as I also indicated, 
that she had identified Mr. Hilley as her supervisor on her resume 
and in that respect had already listed him as a reference. 40. For 
the Response to Request No. 40, see Response to Request No. 34, et 
al., supra. 41. As to each, do you admit or deny that you gave the 
following gifts to Monica Lewinsky at any time in the past? a. A lithograph 
b. A hatpin c. A large ``Black Dog'' canvas bag d. A large ``Rockettes'' 
blanket e. A pin of the New York skyline f. A box of ``cherry chocolates'' 
g. A pair of novelty sunglasses h. A stuffed animal from the ``Black 
Dog'' i. A marble bear's head j. A London pin k. A shamrock pin l. 
An Annie Lennox compact disc m. Davidoff cigars Response to Request 
No. 41: In my deposition in the Jones case, I testified that I ``certainly 
... could have'' given Ms. Lewinsky a hat pin and that I gave her 
``something'' from the Black Dog. In my grand jury testimony, I indicated 
that in late December 1997, I gave Ms. Lewinsky a Canadian marble 
bear's head carving, a Rockettes blanket, some kind of pin, and a 
bag (perhaps from the Black Dog) to hold these objects. I also stated 
that I might have given her such gifts as a box of candy and sunglasses, 
although I did not recall doing so, and I specifically testified that 
I had given Ms. Lewinsky gifts on other occasions. I do not remember 
giving her the other gifts listed in Question 41, although I might 
have. As I have previously testified, I receive a very large number 
of gifts from many different people, sometimes several at a time. 
I also give a very large number of gifts. I gave Ms. Lewinsky gifts, 
some of which I remember and some of which I do not. 42. Do you admit 
or deny that when asked on January 17, 1998, in your deposition in 
the case of Jones v. Clinton if you had ever given gifts to Monica 
Lewinsky, you stated that you did not recall, even though you actually 
had knowledge of giving her gifts in addition to gifts from the ``Black 
Dog?'' Response to Request No. 42: In my grand jury testimony, I was 
asked about this same statement. I explained that my full response 
was ``I don't recall. Do you know what they were?'' By that answer, 
I did not mean to suggest that I did not recall giving gifts; rather, 
I meant that I did not recall what the gifts were, and I asked for 
reminders. 43. Do you admit or deny that you gave false and misleading 
testimony under oath in your deposition in the case of Jones v. Clinton 
when you responded ``once or twice'' to the question ``has Monica 
Lewinsky ever given you any gifts?'' Response to Request No. 43: My 
testimony was not false and misleading. As I have testified previously, 
I give and receive numerous gifts. Before my January 17, 1998, deposition, 
I had not focused on the precise number of gifts Ms. Lewinsky had 
given me. My deposition testimony made clear that Ms. Lewinsky had 
given me gifts; at the deposition, I recalled ``a book or two'' and 
a tie. At the time, those were the gifts I recalled. In response to 
O.I.C. inquiries, after I had had a chance to search my memory and 
refresh my recollection, I was able to be more responsive. However, 
as my counsel have informed the O.I.C., in light of the very large 
number of gifts I receive, there might still be gifts from Ms. Lewinsky 
that I have not identified. 44. Do you admit or deny that on January 
17, 1998, at or about 5:38 P.M., after the conclusion of your deposition 
in the case of Jones v. Clinton, you telephoned Vernon Jordan at his 
home? Response to Request No. 44: I speak to Mr. Jordan frequently, 
so I cannot remember specific times and dates. According to White 
House records included in the O.I.C. Referral, I telephoned Mr. Jordan's 
residence on January 17, 1998, at or about 5:38 p.m. 45. Do you admit 
or deny that on January 17, 1998, at or about 7:02 P.M., after the 
conclusion of your deposition in the case of Jones v. Clinton, you 
telephoned Betty Currie at her home? 46. Do you admit or deny that 
on January 17, 1998, at or about 7:02 P.M., after the conclusion of 
your deposition in the case of Jones v. Clinton, you telephoned Vernon 
Jordan at his office? 47. Do you admit or deny that on January 17, 
1998, at or about 7:13 P.M., after the conclusion of your deposition 
in the case of Jones v. Clinton, you telephoned Betty Currie at her 
home and asked her to meet with you the next day, Sunday, January 
18, 1998? Response to Request Nos. 45. 46 and 47: According to White 
House records included in the O.I.C. Referral, I placed a telephone 
call to Ms. Currie at her residence at 7:02 P.M. and spoke to her 
at or about 7:13 P.M. I recall that when I spoke to her that evening, 
I asked if she could meet with me the following day. According to 
White House records included in the O.I.C. Referral, I telephoned 
Mr. Jordan's office on January 17, 1998, at or about 7:02 P.M. 48. 
Do you admit or deny that on January 18, 1998, at or about 6:11 A.M., 
you learned of the existence of tapes of conversations between Monica 
Lewinsky and Linda Tripp recorded by Linda Tripp? Response to Request 
No. 48: I did not know on January 18, 1998 that tapes existed of conversations 
between Ms. Lewinsky and Ms. Tripp recorded by Ms. Tripp. At some 
point on Sunday, January 18, 1998, I knew about the Drudge Report. 
I understand that, while the report talked about tapes of phone conversations, 
it did not identify Ms. Lewinsky by name and did not mention Ms. Tripp 
at all. The report did not state who the parties to the conversations 
were or who taped the conversations. 49. Do you admit or deny that 
on January 18, 1998, at or about 12:50 P.M., you telephoned Vernon 
Jordan at his home? Response to Request No. 49: According to White 
House records included in the O.I.C. Referral, I telephoned Mr. Jordan's 
residence on January 18, 1998, at or about 12:50 P.M. 50. Do you admit 
or deny that on January 18, 1998, at or about 1:11 P.M., you telephoned 
Betty Currie at her home? Response to Request No. 50: According to 
White House records included in the O.I.C. Referral, I telephoned 
Ms. Currie's residence on January 18, 1998, at or about 1:11 P.M. 
51. Do you admit or deny that on January 18, 1998, at or about 2:55 
p.m., you received a telephone call from Vernon Jordan? Response to 
Request No. 51: According to White House records included in the O.I.C. 
Referral, Mr. Jordan telephoned me from his residence on January 18, 
1998, at or about 2:55 p.m. App. at 2879. 52. Do you admit or deny 
that on January 18, 1998, at or about 5:00 p.m., you had a meeting 
with Betty Currie at which you made statements similar to any of the 
following regarding your relationship with Monica Lewinsky? a. ``You 
were always there when she was there, right? We were never really 
alone.'' b. ``You could see and hear everything.'' c. ``Monica came 
on to me, and I never touched her right?'' d. ``She wanted to have 
sex with me and I couldn't do that.'' Response to Request No. 52: 
When I met with Ms. Currie, I believe that I asked her certain questions, 
in an effort to get as much information as quickly as I could, and 
made certain statements, although I do not remember exactly what I 
said. See App. at 508. Some time later, I learned that the Office 
of Independent Counsel was involved and that Ms. Currie was going 
to have to testify before the grand jury. After learning this, I stated 
in my grand jury testimony, I told Ms. Currie, ``Just relax, go in 
there and tell the truth.'' App. at 591. 53. Do you admit or deny 
that you had a conversation with Betty Currie within several days 
of January 18, 1998, in which you made statements similar to any of 
the following regarding your relationship with Monica Lewinsky? a. 
``You were always there when she was there, right? We were never really 
alone.'' b. ``You could see and hear everything.'' c. ``Monica came 
on to me, and I never touched her right?'' d. ``She wanted to have 
sex with me and I couldn't do that.'' Response to Request No. 53: 
I previously told the grand jury that, ``I don't know that I'' had 
another conversation with Ms. Currie within several days of January 
18, 1998, in which I made statements similar to those quoted above. 
``I remember having this (conversation) one time.'' App. at 592. I 
further explained, ``I do not remember how many times I talked to 
Betty Currie or when. I don't. I can't possibly remember that. I do 
remember, when I first heard about this story breaking, trying to 
ascertain what the facts were, trying to ascertain what Betty's perception 
was. I remember that I was highly agitated, understandably. I think.'' 
App. at 593. I understand that Ms. Currie has said a second conversation 
occurred the next day that I was in the White House (when she was), 
Supp. at 535-36, which would have been Tuesday, January 20, before 
I knew about the grand jury investigation. 54. Do you admit or deny 
that on January 18, 1998, at or about 11:02 p.m., you telephoned Betty 
Currie at her home? Response to Request No. 54: According to White 
House records included in the O.I.C. Referral, I called Ms. Currie's 
residence on January 18, 1998, at or about 11:02 p.m. App. at 2881. 
55. Do you admit or deny that on Monday, January 19, 1998, at or about 
8:50 a.m., you telephoned Betty Currie at her home? Response to Request 
No. 55: According to White House records included in the O.I.C. Referral, 
I called Ms. Currie's residence on January 19, 1998, at or about 8:50 
a.m. App. at 3147. 56. Do you admit or deny that on Monday, January 
19, 1998, at or about 8:56 a.m., you telephoned Vernon Jordan at his 
home? Response to Request No. 56: According to White House records 
included in the O.I.C. Referral, I called Mr. Jordan's residence on 
January 19, 1998, at or about 8:56 a.m. App. at 2864. 57. Do you admit 
or deny that on Monday, January 19, 1998, at or about 10:58 a.m., 
you telephoned Vernon Jordan at his office? Response to Request No. 
57: According to White House records included in the O.I.C. Referral, 
I called Mr. Jordan's office on January 19, 1998, at or about 10:58 
a.m. App. at 2883. 58. Do you admit or deny that on Monday, January 
19, 1998, at or about 1:45 p.m., you telephoned Betty Currie at her 
home? Response to Request No. 58: According to White House records 
included in the O.I.C. Referral, I called Ms. Currie's residence on 
January 19, 1998, at or about 1:45 p.m. App. at 2883. 59. Do you admit 
or deny that on Monday, January 19, 1998, at or about 2:44 p.m., you 
met with individuals including Vernon Jordan, Erskine Bowles, Bruce 
Lindsey, Cheryl Mills, Charles Ruff, and Rahm Emanuel? 60. Do you 
admit or deny that on Monday, January 19, 1998, at or about 2:44 p.m., 
at any meeting with Vernon Jordan, Erskine Bowles, Bruce Lindsey, 
Cheryl Mills, Charles Ruff, Rahm Emanuel, and others, you 17 discussed 
the existence of tapes of conversations between Monica Lewinsky and 
Linda Tripp recorded by Linda Tripp, or any other matter related to 
Monica Lewinsky? Response to Request Nos. 59 and 60: I do not believe 
such a meeting occurred. White House records included in the O.I.C. 
Referral indicate that Mr. Jordan entered the White House complex 
that day at 2:44 p.m. Supp. at 1995. According to Mr. Jordan's testimony, 
he and I met alone in the Oval Office for about 15 minutes. Supp. 
at 1763 (grand jury testimony of Vernon Jordan). I understand that 
Mr. Jordan testified that we discussed Ms. Lewinsky at that meeting 
and also the Drudge Report, in addition to other matters. Supp. at 
1763. Please also see my Response to Request No. 48, supra. 61. Do 
you admit or deny that on Monday, January 19, 1998, at or about 5:56 
p.m., you telephoned Vernon Jordan at his office? Response to Request 
No. 61: According to White House records included in the O.I.C. Referral, 
I called Mr. Jordan's office on January 19, 1998, at or about 5:56 
p.m. App. at 2883. 62. Do you admit or deny that on January 21, 1998, 
the day the Monica Lewinsky story appeared for the first time in the 
Washington Post, you had a conversation with Sidney Blumenthal, in 
which you stated that you rebuffed alleged advances &AMP;om Monica 
Lewinsky and in which you made a statement similar to the following?: 
``Monica Lewinsky came at me and made a sexual demand on me.'' 63. 
Do you admit or deny that on January 21, 1998, the day the Monica 
Lewinsky story appeared for the first time in the Washington Post, 
you had a conversation with Sidney Blumenthal, in which you made a 
statement similar to the following in response to a question about 
your conduct with Monica Lewinsky?: ``I haven't done anything wrong. 
64. Do you admit or deny that on January 21, 1998, the day the Monica 
Lewinsky story appeared for the first time in The Washington Post, 
you had a conversation with Erskine Bowles, Sylvia Matthews and John 
Podesta, in which you made a statement similar to the following?: 
``I want you to know I did not have sexual relationships with this 
woman Monica Lewinsky. I did not ask anybody to lie. And when the 
facts come out, you'll understand.'' 65. Do you admit or deny than 
on or about January 23, 1998, you had a conversation with John Podesta, 
in which you stated that you had never had an affair with Monica Lewinsky? 
66. Do you admit or deny that on or about January 23, 1998, you had 
a conversation with John Podesta, in which you stated that you were 
not alone with Monica Lewinsky in the Oval Office, and that Betty 
Currie was either in your presence or outside your office with the 
door open while you were visiting with Monica Lewinsky? 67. Do you 
admit or deny that on or about January 26, 1998, you had a conversation 
with Harold Ickes, in which you made statements to the effect that 
you did not have an affair with Monica Lewinsky? 68. Do you admit 
or deny that on or about January 26, 1998, you had a conversation 
with Harold Ickes, in which you made statements to the effect that 
you had not asked anyone to change their story, suborn perjury or 
obstruct justice if called to testify or otherwise respond to a Request 
for information from the Office of Independent Counsel or in any other 
legal proceeding? Responses to Requests Nos. 62-68: As I have previously 
acknowledged, I did not want my family, friends, or colleagues to 
know the full nature of my relationship with Ms. Lewinsky. In the 
days following the January 21, 1998, Washington Post article, I misled 
people about this relationship. I have repeatedly apologized for doing 
so. 69. Do you admit or deny that on or about January 21, 1998, you 
and Richard (Dick) Morris discussed the possibility of commissioning 
a poll to determine public opinion following The Washington Post story 
regarding the Monica Lewinsky matter? 70. Do you admit or deny that 
you had a later conversation with Richard (Dick) Morris in which he 
stated that the polling results regarding the Monica Lewinsky matter 
suggested that the American people would forgive you for adultery 
but not for perjury or obstruction of justice? 71. Do you admit or 
deny that you responded to Richard (Dick) Morris's explanation of 
these polling results by making a statement similar to the following: 
``(w)ell, we just have to win, then''? Response to Request Nos. 69, 
70 and 71: At some point after the O.I.C. investigation became public, 
Dick Morris volunteered to conduct a poll on the charges reported 
in the press. He later called back. What I recall is that he said 
the public was most concerned about obstruction of justice or subornation 
of perjury. I do not recall saying, ``Well, we just have to win then.'' 
72. Do you admit or deny the past or present existence of or the past 
or present direct or indirect employment of individuals, other than 
counsel representing you, whose duties include making contact with 
or gathering information about witnesses or potential witnesses in 
any judicial proceeding related to any matter in which you are or 
could be involved? Response to Request No. 72: I cannot respond to 
this inquiry because of the vagueness of its terms (``indirect,'' 
``potential,'' ``could be involved''). To the extent it may be interpreted 
to apply to individuals assisting counsel, please see my responses 
to Request Nos. 73-75. To the extent the inquiry addresses specific 
individuals, as in Request Nos. 73-75, I have responded and stand 
ready to respond to any other specific inquiries. 73. Do you admit 
or deny having knowledge that Terry Lenzner was contacted or employed 
to make contact with or gather information about witnesses or potential 
witnesses in any judicial proceeding related to any matter in which 
you are or could be involved? Response to Request No. 73: My counsel 
stated publicly on February 24, 1998, that Mr. Terry Lenzner and his 
firm have been retained since April 1994 by two private law firms 
that represent me. It is commonplace for legal counsel to retain such 
firms to perform legal and appropriate tasks to assist in the defense 
of clients. See also Response to No. 72. 74. Do you admit or deny 
having knowledge that Jack Palladino was contacted or employed to 
make contact with or gather information about witnesses or potential 
witnesses in any judicial proceeding related to any matter in which 
you are or could be involved? My understanding is that during the 
1992 Presidential campaign, Mr. Jack Palladino was retained to assist 
legal counsel for me and the campaign on a variety of matters arising 
during the campaign. See Response to No. 72. 75. Do you admit or deny 
having knowledge that Betsy Wright was contacted or employed to make 
contact with or gather information about witnesses or potential witnesses 
in any judicial proceeding related to any matter in which you are 
or could be involved? Ms. Betsey Wright was my longtime chief of staff 
when I was Governor of Arkansas, and she remains a good friend and 
trusted adviser. Because of her great knowledge of Arkansas, from 
time to time my legal counsel and I have consulted with her on a wide 
range of matters. See also Response to No. 72. 76. Do you admit or 
deny that you made false and misleading public statements in response 
to questions asked on or about January 21, 1998, in an interview with 
``Roll Call,'' when you stated ``Well, let me say, the relationship 
was not improper, and I think that's important enough to say. But 
because the investigation is going on and because I don't know what 
is out _ what's going to be asked of me, I think I need to cooperate, 
answer the questions, but I think it's important for me to make it 
clear what is not. And then, at the appropriate time, I'll try to 
answer what is. But let me answer _ it is not an improper relationship 
and I know what the word means.''? Response to Request No. 76: The 
tape of this interview reflects that in fact I said: ``Well, let me 
say the relationship's not improper and I think that's important enough 
to say. . . .'' With that revision, the quoted words accurately reflect 
my remarks. As I stated in Response to Request Nos. 62 to 68, in the 
days following the January 21, 1998, disclosures, I misled people 
about this relationship, for which I have apologized. 77. Do you admit 
or deny that you made false and misleading public statements in response 
to questions asked on or about January 21, 1998, in the Oval Office 
during a photo opportunity, when you stated: ``Now, there are a lot 
of other questions that are, I think, very legitimate. You have a 
right to ask them; you and the American people have a right to get 
answers. We are working very hard to comply and get all the requests 
for information up here, and we will give you as many answers as we 
can, as soon as we can, at the appropriate time, consistent with our 
obligation to also cooperate with the investigations. And that's not 
a dodge, that's really (what) I've _ I've talked with (our) people. 
I want to do that. I'd like for you to have more rather than less, 
sooner rather than later. So we'll work through it as quickly as we 
can and get all those questions out there to you.''? Response to Request 
No. 77: I made this statement (as corrected), according to a transcript 
of a January 22, 1998 photo opportunity in the Oval Office. This statement 
was not false and misleading. It accurately represented my thinking. 
78. Do you admit or deny that you discussed with Harry Thomasson, 
prior to making public statements in response to questions asked by 
the press in January, 1998, relating to your relationship with Monica 
Lewinsky, what such statements should be or how they should be communicated? 
Response to Request No. 78: Mr. Thomasson was a guest at the White 
House in January 1998, and I recall his encouraging me to state my 
denial forcefully. 79. Do you admit or deny that you made a false 
and misleading public statement in response to a question asked on 
or about January 26, 1998, when you stated ``But I want to say one 
thing to the American people. I want you to listen to me. I'm going 
to say this again. I did not have sexual relations with that woman, 
Ms. Lewinsky''? Response to Request No. 79: I made this statement 
on January 26, 1998, although not in response to any question. In 
referring to ``sexual relations'', I was referring to sexual intercourse. 
As I stated in Response to Request Nos. 62 to 68, in the days following 
the January 21, 1998, disclosures, answers like this misled people 
about this relationship, for which I have apologized. 80. Do you admit 
or deny that you made a false and misleading public statement in response 
to a question asked on or about January 26, 1998, when you stated 
``I never told anybody to lie, not a single time. Never?'' Response 
to Request No. 80: This statement was truthful: I did not tell Ms. 
Lewinsky to lie, and I did not tell anybody to lie about my relationship 
with Ms. Lewinsky. I understand that Ms. Lewinsky also has stated 
that I never asked or encouraged her to lie. 81. Do you admit or deny 
that you directed or instructed Bruce Lindsey, Sidney Blumenthal, 
Nancy Hernreich and Lanny Breuer to invoke executive privilege before 
a grand jury empanelled as part of a judicial proceeding by the United 
States District Court for the District of Columbia Circuit in 1998? 
Response to Request No. 81: On the recommendation of Charles Ruff, 
Counsel to the President, I authorized Mr. Ruff to assert the Presidential 
communications privilege (which is one aspect of executive privilege) 
with respect to questions that might be asked of witnesses called 
to testify before the grand jury to the extent that those questions 
sought disclosure of matters protected by that privilege. Thereafter, 
I understand that the Presidential communications privilege was asserted 
as to certain questions asked of Sidney Blumenthal and Nancy Hernreich. 
Further, I understand that, as to Mr. Blumenthal and Ms. Hernreich, 
all claims of official privilege were subsequently withdrawn and they 
testified fully on several occasions before the grand jury. Mr. Lindsey 
and Mr. Breuer testified at length before the grand jury about a wide 
range of matters, but declined, on the advice of the White House counsel, 
to answer certain questions that sought disclosure of discussions 
that they had with me and my senior advisers concerning, among other 
things, their legal advice as to the assertion of executive privilege. 
White House counsel advised Mr. Lindsey and Mr. Breuer that these 
communications were protected by the attorney-client privilege, as 
well as executive privilege. Mr. Lindsey also asserted my personal 
attorney-client privilege as to certain questions relating to his 
role as an intermediary between me and my personal counsel in the 
Jones v. Clinton case, a privilege that was upheld by the Federal 
appeals court in the District of Columbia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>