<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0176 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
To appreciate the attention to detail of Rakesh Gangwal, who was recently 
promoted to chief executive of US Airways Group, consider this: While 
reviewing a training tape for flight attendants, he was dismayed to 
see the person portraying a business traveler lick her finger to turn 
a magazine page. Of course, she was not trying to model behavior for 
the flight attendants. But no matter: Gangwal said it should have 
been caught and changed. ``The tape was about excellence, and we don't 
want to depict that image, even to ourselves,'' he said. ``It slipped 
through the system.'' And it is not just training videos he reviews. 
If there is any menu alteration, or any change to the script for flight 
attendant announcements, or any adjustment in the responsibilities 
of maintenance foremen, Gangwal wants to know about it. Sweating the 
details has long been the hallmark of US Airways' chairman, Stephen 
M. Wolf, for whom Rakesh has worked at United Airlines, Air France 
and US Airways, where the two executives took charge early in 1996. 
And so it is not surprising that Gangwal shares aspects of his management 
style. But with the appointment of Gangwal as chief executive _ Wolf 
remains chairman _ Gangwal now moves over to the captain's seat. His 
flight plan is ambitious: to expand the airline's route network and 
its fleet, and to improve its profitability and key measures of its 
service. Indeed, he and Wolf have made quick progress on all these 
fronts, including sharp improvements in on-time performance. But what 
intrigues many about Gangwal is his seemingly contradictory management 
style. It is top-down, in that he reviews decisions deep in the organization. 
But it is also bottom-up: He has established dozens of task forces, 
involving employees in addressing everything from inadvertent deployment 
of evacuation chutes to the launch of Metrojet, the low-cost operation 
US Airways established to better compete with Southwest Airlines and 
Delta Express. ``I love it when front-line employees come up with 
ideas, because I know they are the things that generally work,'' he 
said. His style, Gangwal acknowledged, can be difficult for division 
heads to adjust to, since they must be able to accept direction not 
only from Gangwal but also from lower-level employees. Yet those executives 
are also expected to have strong ideas of their own and make things 
happen quickly. Of the roughly 30 executives in jobs at the vice-president 
level or above when Wolf and Gangwal arrived, about three-quarters 
have been replaced. ``I do impose my views in setting direction and 
in what we are trying to attain, but then I let the process take over,'' 
he said. ``It's a very fine line.'' A native of Calcutta, Gangwal 
came to the United States to get an MBA from the Wharton School of 
the University of Pennsylvania, where he helped pay his tuition by 
teaching math and statistics to fellow students. He first worked with 
United as a consultant with Booz-Allen &AMP; Hamilton, then joined 
United in 1984 as manager for strategic planning. It was shortly after 
he was put in charge of the company's yield-management system _ an 
arcane science of maximizing revenues _ that Wolf arrived to run United. 
If nothing else, Gangwal said, he probably made an impression on his 
new boss with his candor, explaining that he had just been given his 
new assignment and that it would be a long time before he understood 
it well. ``But I'm getting deep into this stuff, I find it exciting, 
and we'll do a lot of creative things,'' Gangwal recalled quickly 
adding at the time. He did that and more. Gangwal overhauled United's 
route structure, including building up its Denver hub. And when Wolf 
left the airline in 1994 in the wake of an employee buyout and began 
consulting with Air France, he recruited his former lieutenant to 
Paris. Gangwal quickly introduced modern airline business practices 
to Air France. The fact that he did not know French was a blessing 
in disguise, he said, because he did not have to read lengthy reports 
on pending decisions that, to him, were obvious. When Wolf was recruited 
to USAir (he renamed it US Airways), he told the board he would not 
come without Gangwal. And now Wolf is pulling back, confident that 
Gangwal is watching the details. That means long days for Gangwal. 
He is in the office here by 7 in the morning and heads home by 7 p.m. 
to spend some time with his 9-year-old daughter, including helping 
her with mathematics. (``Math cleanses your mind for thinking clearly,'' 
he said.) Then he puts in a couple more hours of work before bed. 
He likes to travel, and _ before the current professional basketball 
strike _ occasionally took in an NBA game. His heart is with United's 
hometown Chicago Bulls, but he also likes the Washington Wizards. 
Eventually, he expects not to worry so much about details, but it 
won't be soon. ``Steve has the amazing ability to let go when things 
are going right,'' he said. ``That's something I definitely want to 
learn, but at this stage I feel that there are too many things I want 
to put my imprint on as we build this airline.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>