<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0273 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rep. C.W. Bill Young of Florida, the new chairman of the House Appropriations 
Committee, need not map strategy for protecting his turf from empire-building 
Republican leaders. The outgoing chairman did the job for him. In 
a 15-point manifesto delivered to the speaker of the house, Young's 
predecessor demanded total control of the appropriations process ``without 
being subject to the dictates of any other member of Congress.'' The 
chairman, he declared, must be the final authority. The author of 
that letter was Robert Livingston of Louisiana, now the GOP choice 
for speaker, who, like Luther nailing his theses to the church door, 
faxed his demands to Newt Gingrich's office. Livingston quickly rescinded 
his ultimatum, but Gingrich stepped down a few hours after receiving 
the letter. As Livingston's successor, Young said he held on to a 
copy. ``I thought his letter was right on target,'' Young said, deadpan. 
In truth, Young, who turns 68 next month and has kept a low profile 
in his 28 years in Congress, does not intend to hold Livingston to 
his own petition. But he does not believe he will need to. Livingston 
will not allow the breakdown in the appropriations process that occurred 
this year, Young said. The outcome was an end-of-the-session pile-up 
that resulted in a $520 billion omnibus budget measure negotiated 
by a handful of people, read by few lawmakers and disdained by Republican 
voters. ``He has had that experience and he is not going to let that 
happen to me,'' Young said. ``It was a terrible process. I will try 
to avoid that.'' Young said he hoped to complete House spending bills 
as early as June. Young's selection as chairman reflects the desire 
of Republican House members to restore order in the post-Gingrich 
era. Though senior to Livingston, Young was passed over for the helm 
of the committee after the Republicans captured the majority in 1994. 
Critics dismissed him as too steeped in the old-guard mentality of 
the committee, where senior members of both parties got together to 
protect their pet projects and parcel out money. He was seen as not 
having enough Republican revolutionary fervor. Now those same attributes 
of bipartisanship, collegiality and consensus-building are seen as 
desirable as Republicans try to get the machinery of the House running 
smoothly in the wake of their election losses. ``Bill Young is a first-class 
guy,'' said Rep. W.G. Hefner, D-N.C., who served alongside Young on 
the panel for decades. ``And I am just glad to see the crazies didn't 
take over and let somebody else be chairman. He is deserving and is 
an honest broker.'' Though a self-described conservative, Young has 
a reputation for working well with Democrats. He noted that in his 
tenure as chairman of the subcommittee that finances defense and intelligence, 
the panel never voted on its bill but instead worked out disagreements 
and passed it by mutual consent. ``Bill reaches across the aisle and 
that is awfully important when you are dealing with tough subject 
areas,'' said Rep. Jerry Lewis, R-Cal., who will succeed Young as 
defense subcommittee chairman. Young came by his ability to work with 
the opposition from years of being in the minority party. When he 
was elected to the Florida Senate in 1960 after a few years as an 
aide to a Republican congressman, Young was the sole Republican in 
the chamber. Sent to Washington in 1971, he was one of just three 
Republican congressmen from the heavily Democratic state. ``When you 
are the only Republican state senator for quite a while, you know 
you have to get along with the other side,'' said Young, who eventually 
became minority leader in the Florida Senate. Because he never sought 
the media spotlight and concentrated for years on defense and intelligence 
_ two policy areas often considered in secret _ Young is not a well-known 
figure in the House. He is probably best recognized for his imposing 
pompadour, which has thinned since his early days on Capitol Hill 
but is still conspicuous. He is also something of a throwback in an 
institution dominated by lawyers, businessmen, academics and other 
highly educated professionals. Born in the hardscrabble coal country 
of Western Pennsylvania, he dropped out of high school to support 
his family. In his office, he keeps a photograph of the converted 
toolshed his family lived in behind his grandmother's house until 
a flood washed the shed down the Allegheny River. ``If I ever get 
to feeling, `Hey, I really am something, I am chairman of the Appropriations 
Committee,' I glance at that little house and realize I'm not anything 
any different from anybody else,'' he said. Young does not consider 
himself an old-school pork barreler, despite his longevity on a committee 
famous for funneling money to the districts of its members. He said 
he had some success keeping his defense bill free of pure pork _ projects 
without sound justification or a direct relationship to national defense 
or intelligence _ but was occasionally overruled by his leaders or 
the Senate. He also opposes the politically tinged riders on spending 
bills that contributed to the appropriations meltdown this year. He 
makes no apologies for his determination to go after money he thinks 
his state or district, St. Petersburg, deserves. Beginning in 1986, 
he designated millions of dollars for a bone-marrow-donor registry 
he started after a young leukemia victim from his district died when 
no match could be found. When the National Institutes of Health was 
cool to the idea, Young had the Navy do it. In his new role, Young 
promised to vigorously seek money for the costly plan to revitalize 
the Everglades. Young is far removed from the social whirl of Washington 
and lives about 30 miles south of the capital, where he devotes his 
dwindling free time to coaching his 11- and 14-year-old sons in sports. 
A third son is in the Air Force. He said politics cost him a first 
marriage. ``One of the big mistakes that people in political life 
get to is they ignore the home part of it, they ignore the family 
part of it,'' he said, recounting his own experience. ``I am determined 
not to do that.'' Young's ascension is symbolic of Republican gains 
made in Florida, which, with 15 members, now has the second-largest 
Republican delegation in the House behind California's. Other Florida 
lawmakers are also moving into influential Republican leadership positions. 
Rep. Tillie Fowler of Jacksonville, for example, is the new vice chairwoman 
of the Republican Conference and the highest-ranking woman in leadership. 
It is quite a turnaround for Young, who once thought he might be the 
member of a permanent minority. ``I went for many, many years wondering 
if I would ever, ever get to serve in the majority, and probably had 
convinced myself that I wouldn't'' he said. ``Now just a few years 
later I'm chairman of the Appropriations Committee and that is quite 
a change, I have to tell you.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>