<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0332 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The admitted vote fraud at New York City's largest municipal union 
grows out of a system in which officials with a strong interest in 
the results usually oversee both the voting and the counting of the 
ballots, union leaders and labor experts say. That is why, they said, 
the large-scale fraud in the 1996 ratification vote on District Council 
37's current five-year contract was not an isolated instance of vote 
rigging at the union, which represents 120,000 workers. Over the years, 
they said, ballots have been dumped down fire escapes, officials designated 
to count votes have deliberately defaced ballots, and union leaders 
have given allies hundreds of extra mail-in ballots to fill out as 
they wish. And last January, hundreds of ballots in the race for the 
presidency of an engineers' local were stolen from the district council's 
locked security office. That occurred after the incumbent, who was 
close to Stanley Hill, the council's executive director, saw that 
he was trailing in a preliminary vote count. ``There have been suspicions 
of vote fraud at DC 37 for years,'' said Carl Biers, executive director 
of the Association for Union Democracy, a nonprofit monitoring group 
in New York. ``A lot of members have no faith in the elections. The 
best thing would be for an independent outside group to administer 
their elections.'' At a news conference Monday, Hill announced that 
the council's associate director and another senior official had resigned 
after they admitted knowing about the fraud in the 1996 vote. Hill 
has told other union leaders that the two officials not only knew 
about the fraud but also participated in it. The fraud took place 
during a complicated ratification process that involved 56 union locals 
and stretched out over two months. Each local chose how to conduct 
its vote: some locals voted by hand at union meetings, some had members 
cast ballots at work sites, and others had members mail ballots to 
district council headquarters. A handful of locals, to avoid suspicions 
of fraud, had the American Arbitration Association administer and 
count their vote. The vote fraud is part of a broad investigation 
by Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau, who is also looking 
into allegations of embezzlement, falsifying records, and kickbacks 
from caterers, travel agencies and other vendors. Lawyers knowledgeable 
about the investigation said that Joseph DeCanio, president of a highway 
workers' local, had told prosecutors that the fraud took place when 
several union officials filled out phony ballots at a large clerical 
workers' local. The local is headed by Albert Diop, one of Hill's 
staunchest allies. Diop and Hill denied knowing anything about the 
fraud until The New York Times reported last week that prosecutors 
were investigating the ratification vote. In an interview this week, 
Hill said he had no idea why the two officials who resigned _ Martin 
Lubin, the council's associate director, and Mark Shaplo, Lubin's 
top assistant _ helped rig the vote. Neither Shaplo nor Lubin has 
publicly spoken about their resignations or the vote fraud. Several 
union leaders said these two officials might have wanted to spare 
Hill the embarrassment of having his rank and file reject a contract 
_ containing an unpopular two-year pay freeze _ that he had negotiated. 
The two officials, union leaders say, might have also wanted to please 
Hill's ally Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, who might have felt betrayed by 
a contract defeat. ``Clearly the whole purpose of the fraud was to 
affect the outcome,'' said Charles Ensley, an opponent of the contract 
who heads a 14,000-member social workers' local. With the presidents 
of several locals calling for Hill to resign or for the parent union 
to place the council into trusteeship, Mark Rosenthal, president of 
a local representing 2,800 motor vehicle operators, said Friday that 
Ensley should be the next executive director. Although they said they 
did not know the specifics, several union leaders at District Council 
37 said they believed that thousands of phony ballots were probably 
stuffed into mail bags so they would be counted with other ballots 
cast by the clerical workers' local. According to lawyers knowledgeable 
about the investigation, DeCanio has told prosecutors he once saw 
hundreds of blank mail-in ballots in Shaplo's office. Several union 
officials said the vote rigging in the clerical local was not the 
only suspect activity in the 1996 ratification vote. DeCanio has told 
other union leaders that some local presidents gave council officials 
false vote totals: for instance, if 200 members at a local's meeting 
voted in favor of the contract, the local's president might report 
that 300 had. John Socha, president of a local representing workers 
at the Queens Public Library, said he complained to Hill in 1996 that 
council officials had counted his local's mail-in ballots without 
anyone from his local present. Socha said this was suspicious, and 
he added that he was surprised when council officials announced, against 
his expectations, that his local had voted overwhelmingly for ratification. 
One official said that when it looked as if the contract would be 
defeated, members of the council's staff were sent into the field 
to urge workers to vote for ratification. This official said staff 
members were even told to give mail ballots to members from locals 
that had already carried out their votes at union meetings. Union 
officials point to other recent episodes of vote fraud. Last week, 
DeCanio pleaded guilty to embezzlement and to giving hundreds of blank 
ballots early this month to the candidate who he wants to succeed 
him as president of the highway workers' local. At his guilty plea, 
DeCanio explained that he had hoped his preferred candidate would 
fill in the ballots fraudulently to guarantee his victory. And in 
the election last January for the presidency of the 6,800-member Civil 
Service Technical Guild, Roy Commer was leading the incumbent, Louis 
Albano, a Hill ally, in the preliminary count. Both sides agreed to 
suspend the count well past midnight one night, before a final tally 
was made. The ballots were then locked inside the council's main security 
office, but when union officials took the election materials out several 
days later, they discovered that ballots and other materials had been 
stolen. ``I was incredulous,'' said Commer. ``I became very angry 
and disheartened. I thought, if they could do this in the first election, 
what would stop them from doing it until they got it right?'' Council 
officials ordered a new election, and Commer won. His opponent, Albano, 
has repeatedly denied encouraging or knowing about the theft. ``There 
was a widespread suspicion that whenever ballots were sent into the 
mail room and counted at D.C. 37 headquarters, the results came out 
the way the leadership wanted,'' Rosenthal said. Hill insists that 
vote fraud at the council is limited to a handful of examples. Yet, 
in discussing the issue, he pointed to a long history of fraud, noting 
that when he ran for the presidency of the social workers' local in 
1970, his opponent was found to have thrown ballots down a fire escape. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>