<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0276 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Javier Garcia Paniagua, a former senior Mexican official whose hardline 
views exemplified those of a group within the governing Institutional 
Revolutionary Party known as the ``dinosaurs,'' died of a heart attack 
on Tuesday in Guadalajara. He was 61. The son of a defense minister, 
Garcia held many of Mexico's most important posts during the 1976-82 
government of Jose Lopez Portillo, an era marked by anti-guerrilla 
campaigns, ultranationalist foreign policies and state-dominated protectionist 
economics. Under the traditional Mexican system in which presidents 
pick their successors, Garcia was one of Lopez Portillo's two final 
choices to become the governing party's presidential candidate in 
1982. The president's eventual selection of Miguel de la Madrid, an 
economist educated at Harvard, marked a watershed in Mexican politics, 
dividing the PRI into two camps and ushering in an era in which foreign-trained 
technocrats have dominated the Mexican presidency. De la Madrid was 
succeeded in 1988 by Carlos Salinas de Gortari, a Harvard-trained 
economist, who was in turn succeeded by Ernesto Zedillo, a Yale-trained 
economist, in 1994. All of them have been leaders of the technocrat 
wing of the PRI, which has faced constant opposition from the party's 
traditional politicians, who are schooled in populist politics and 
pork-barrel methods of government and who are called dinosaurs because 
they have resisted party reforms. Garcia was born on Feb. 13, 1937, 
the son of Marcelino Garcia Barragan, an army general who became Mexico's 
defense minister during the 1960s. Perhaps because of his long-standing 
ties to the armed forces, Zedillo sent Gen. Enrique Cervantes Aguirre, 
the current defense minister, to carry his condolences to Garcia's 
family in Guadalajara. Garcia's first public post, during the late 
1960s, was as manager of a state-run agricultural bank. His family 
ties to power allowed him to rise quickly, and the PRI installed him 
in the Senate in 1970 when he was only 33 years old, ignoring a constitutional 
requirement that senators be at least 35. In 1977, the president named 
Garcia to head the Federal Security Directorate, the powerful plainclothes 
police agency. In that post, he directed a violent counterinsurgency 
campaign that virtually wiped out several leftist guerrilla groups. 
During the last three years of Lopez Portillo's presidency, he rose 
to serve as a deputy interior minister, agrarian reform secretary 
and president of the PRI. A year before Lopez Portillo finally selected 
his candidate, many newspapers were already suggesting that Garcia 
would be the choice, and he made clear in public statements that he 
expected to be named. But plunging world oil prices in 1982 sank Mexico 
into a lengthy debt crisis, and Lopez Portillo picked de la Madrid 
because he wanted a candidate with good relations in the international 
banking community. When he learned that he had been passed over, Garcia 
barely contained his fury, and after a three-month stint as labor 
minister, retired from public life. In 1990, he returned to serve 
as Mexico City's police chief and then to head the national lottery, 
but only briefly. He lived his last years in retirement in Mexico 
City, in Guadalajara and at his ranch in Jalisco state. Garcia is 
survived by his wife, Olivia Morales de Garcia, and six children: 
Javier, Enoch, Dolores, Olivia, Claudia and Marcelo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>