<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0291 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Saturday, Nov. 28: One 
of the most damaging consequences of the world's economic troubles 
is that parents are pulling their children out of school. Girls are 
the first casualty. In most poor and even middle-income countries, 
many girls stay home while their brothers go to primary school. Countries 
are now recognizing the harm caused by this educational gender gap, 
however, and some are trying new ideas to get girls into school and 
keep them there. Even in some countries where primary school is free, 
parents must pay for uniforms, shoes, supplies and transportation. 
Families also lose the economic contribution the child can make. Since 
girls are likely to care for siblings and help with housework, parents 
tend to need their labor at a younger age than boys'. In most of the 
developing world, moreover, girls have lower status, and a long walk 
to school may be unsafe for them. Especially in places where the quality 
of instruction is poor, many families think of girls' education as 
a luxury. As a result, in sub-Saharan Africa, where only half the 
children age 6 to 11 go to school, 68 girls are enrolled in primary 
school for every 100 boys. The gap is just as bad in many South Asian 
and Middle Eastern nations. In Latin America, rural areas are the 
problem. In rural Guatemala, for example, two-thirds of the girls 
who start first grade drop out before third grade. As a consequence, 
60 percent of women in Guatemala cannot read. Rural zones worldwide 
are also home to the most traditional families and people who may 
not speak the language of instruction. More important, rural families 
are poorer than those in cities, and their schools are both worse 
and more sparse. The last 10 years have seen new attention given to 
the consequence of keeping girls out of school, spurred by several 
U.N. conferences on population and women's issues. Studies show that 
attention to girls' education directly affects a nation's progress. 
While educated men have more children than their unschooled counterparts, 
education encourages women to marry later and have fewer and healthier 
children. Educating women increases the chances that a family will 
spend its income on the children. A focus on keeping its girls in 
school also changes social attitudes, which has improved school attendance 
for boys. The good news is that many of the programs to keep girls 
in school have been successful. Malawi doubled girls' school attendance 
from 1990 to 1996 by eliminating school fees and uniforms and adding 
22,000 new teachers, so students are more apt to find a school nearby. 
Scholarships, some just $5 a month, compensate families for the loss 
of girls' income in Bangladesh, Pakistan and Guatemala. In some Mexican 
schools, children can bring the young siblings in their care, which 
also gives the babies a more stimulating environment. Many countries 
have increased girls' attendance simply by improving the quality of 
schools and teaching. These pilot programs have not spread very far. 
Traditional societies can be suspicious of focusing on girls. The 
World Bank and regional development banks embrace girls' schooling, 
but the programs needed are huge and expensive. Educating girls, however, 
is a good investment, producing lower birth rates, healthier children 
and a better-schooled and richer population all around. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>