<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0314 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Robert Eisner, former president of the American Economic Association 
and a staunch advocate of a view now unpopular among a rising number 
of academic economists that active government spending is needed to 
achieve full employment and growth, died Nov. 25 at his home in Evanston, 
Ill. He was 76. The cause was complications from a bone marrow disorder, 
his daughter, Mary Eccles, said. Eisner, the William R. Kenan Emeritus 
Professor of Economics at Northwestern University, served several 
years as the chairman of the university's economics department. Professor 
Robert Coen of Northwestern, who was a student of Eisner and a longtime 
colleague, said: ``He was a leading authority on the economics of 
public budgets, business cycles, Social Security and taxes. He brought 
a rare combination of passion and scientific precision to policy discussions. 
His technical contributions were central to some of the most important 
policy debates of recent times.'' Robert Solow, a Nobel laureate in 
economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, said: `` Eisner 
was fearless. He never softened his language to ingratiate. Yet no 
serious person in the profession ever dismissed his views.'' Eisner's 
early statistical studies concluded that business investment in plant 
and equipment was determined more by the state of the economy _ how 
close the economy was operating to capacity _ than by interest rates 
and other economic factors. His research made him skeptical that monetary 
policy, which operates through interest rates, could keep the economy 
on a steady upward climb. He called instead on government to drive 
the economy toward full employment, running deficits if need be. This 
so-called Keynesian view _ that the economy could not on its own achieve 
full employment and could use help from the government _ conformed 
to the teachings of leading figures within the economics profession 
during the 1950s and 1960s. But the view increasingly fell out of 
favor in the aftermath of the inflationary bursts and soaring deficits 
of the 1970s and 1980s. Eisner, in scores of professional publications, 
congressional testimony and articles for newspapers, backed up his 
call for active fiscal policy by criticizing what he regarded as simplistic 
attacks on deficit spending. Eisner argued in several books in the 
1980s and 1990s that the government's measure of deficits greatly 
exaggerated their size and importance. Once the impact of inflation 
and the size of the economy were taken into account, he concluded, 
the country could readily afford deficits of $200 billion or more. 
He also cautioned against cutting federal spending on education, research 
and infrastructure for the sake of reducing federal borrowing. Eisner 
also took issue with economists who attributed the nation's lagging 
growth rate to low savings _ a faulty diagnosis, he said, that led 
to regrettable policy prescriptions. Again, he dissected the way government 
measures savings, concluding that it was arbitrary and narrow. In 
a phone interview, he once said: ``When a firm pays for slabs of concrete, 
we call that investment. But when parents pay tuition for their children, 
we call that consumption.'' The key to growth, he wrote, was to increase 
investment spending by running a fully employed economy rather than 
to persuade families and government to consume less. His most pointed 
criticism was directed at economists who advocated what he regarded 
as the pernicious idea that the government could not use monetary 
or fiscal policies to drive unemployment below, say, 5.5 percent or 
6 percent, out of fear that the effort would lead to escalating inflation. 
The idea, Eisner argued, relegated millions of workers to needless 
unemployment. Coen said Eisner took satisfaction in the fact that 
unemployment has now fallen well below levels that his critics said 
could never be achieved and, as a byproduct, the once-threatening 
deficit has been eliminated. His most recent book, ``Social Security: 
More, Not Less,'' takes on critics of Social Security who contend 
that the program is financially decrepit and must be radically overhauled, 
perhaps by turning it into a system of individual savings accounts. 
By Eisner's calculations, the system is only modestly out of financial 
alignment and can be balanced with minor tinkering. He took aim at 
critics who pointed to the financial drain that the growing population 
of elderly would put on future taxpayers, but who ignored the fact 
that those same taxpayers would have fewer children to support and, 
besides, would be earning far higher wages than today's workers. Eisner 
proposed innovative ways for the government to keep track of the economy 
and its own books. For example, he sought ways to take official account 
of the work contributed by at-home spouses. Several of his ideas have 
been formally adopted. Others, though excluded from formal government 
documents, are included in occasional reports. Eisner was, according 
to colleagues at Northwestern, a zealous teacher who took special 
delight in teaching introductory courses to undergraduates. He was 
a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and of the Econometric 
Society, and was the 15th recipient of the John R. Commons Award of 
Omicron Delta Epsilon, the international honor society in economics. 
Eisner was born in New York City, received his bachelor's degree from 
City College in 1940, his master's degree in sociology from Columbia 
University in 1942 and his doctoral degree in economics from Johns 
Hopkins University in 1951. He served in the U.S. Army from December 
1942 to August 1946, rising to the rank of captain. He is survived 
by his wife of 52 years, Edith; two daughters, Mary Eisner Eccles, 
of Chevy Chase, Md., and Emily Eisner, of Chicago; a brother, Alan 
Eisner, of Redwood City, Calif.; and three grandchildren. Despite 
his often controversial views, Eisner, according to colleagues, remained 
highly popular among his peers. James Tobin, a Nobel laureate from 
Yale University, said: ``Bob was never considered an outlier. His 
colleagues knew he played in the right ball park.'' Nor, Solow of 
MIT said, are Eisner's Keynesian views necessarily a relic: ``He taught 
the profession a lot. And it ain't over. The Keynesian idea, or some 
such variant, that the economy is not self-correcting and needs government 
help is coming back. Eisner is not obsolete.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>