<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0233 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I had to be the happiest consumer in New York when I heard that the 
Duane Reade drug and cosmetics chain had plans to open 30 new stores 
by the end of this year. At around 2:30 a.m. on certain fidgety nights, 
I entertain the thought of boarding the A train from my apartment 
in Cobble Hill, Brooklyn, to go shopping at the 24-hour Duane Reade 
store on the corner of 57th Street and Broadway. Just knowing I have 
this option provides a level of comfort otherwise missing from the 
life of an insomniac with a day job. I first became a disciple of 
Duane Nation in the mid-1980s, when I would escape an entry-level 
job to spend lunch hours at a branch of the chain. I loved the concept 
of finding happiness for $20 one day and 20 cents the next. I was 
enthralled by the chaotic nature of it all: watching a yuppie with 
a basket full of Slim-Fast inhale a bag of Munchos behind a Chia Pet 
display; finding a jar of Fluffernutter next to a jar of Tucks medicated 
pads. Could I find a bar of soap in Brooklyn at 3 a.m? Moot point. 
Even if I lived next door to a CVS Pharmacy (bor-ring) or a Rite-Aid 
(bland), I would still be headed toward Duane's _ the uberstore for 
the toiletry-obsessed. It is the only place in New York that I feel 
perfectly comfortable asking, ``Can I put this bag of Cheetos on my 
bank card?'' For this and many, many more reasons, including the double-ply 
shopping bags and an impressive selection of K-Tel cassette tapes, 
you will find me purchasing something at a Duane Reade every day of 
the week. I may never save enough money for a down payment on a co-op, 
but I will have 18 different bottles of Sally Hansen Hard as Nails 
and six different brands of depilatories _ and really, what's more 
important? Often during my lunch hour, I go on these intense Duane 
benders, where I troll the aisles with one purpose: to need it all. 
The heavier my basket gets, the more I feel myself developing the 
symptoms described on the back of all the boxes _ headaches (pain 
relievers and sinus masks), heartburn (antacids), infections (triple 
antibiotic ointments). I'm a hypochondriac in a candy store. Other 
times I drop by just for a quick glance at the 99-cent pantyhose in 
orangesque shades that haven't surfaced since the mid-'60s. Either 
way, it is always a life-affirming experience. Recently, the presence 
of a new Duane Reade store at 89th Street and Madison Avenue has had 
residents of the Carnegie Hill neighborhood crying foul over the big, 
bold red-and-blue sign outside. But I say, step inside and see the 
show. You don't know what you're missing. You'll thank me the next 
time you run out of Final Net. Sure I could shop at Ricky's or Broadway 
Love's, with their floor-to-ceiling selection of unpronounceable hair 
products. But their club-kid salesclerks just sneer you down when 
you resist their attempts to saddle you with a $90 bottle of shampoo. 
That type of attitude would never go down at Duane's, where Prell 
Concentrate is still a very beautiful thing. Furthermore, it is written 
into the training manuals that no Duane Reade employee is ever to 
speak directly to a customer, only to other employees, often in a 
language I don't understand, while the checkout line snakes eight-deep 
out the front door. Occasional pointing in the general direction of 
an aisle is acceptable, but even that's pushing it. Over time, I have 
learned to depend on Duane Reade's presence as a constant in my life. 
Its jam-packed aisles of eclectic merchandise coming at me from every 
possible angle gives me that warm ``welcome home, Barbara, where've 
you been?'' feeling I get from my own jam-packed, eclectic home. When 
you're shopping at 3 in the morning, a store should really feel like 
home. Thus I find it a sign of acceptance, not suspicion, that the 
security officer at the front of the store still gives me that knowing 
``if you're a customer, you're a shoplifter'' glance when I come through 
the door. But more than anything right now, I love how Duane Reade 
has managed to rise above the whole generic vibe of chain retailing. 
How it is highly unlikely that I will ever see a custom CD called 
``The Music of Duane Reade'' for sale at the registers. How I'll never 
have to worry, the way I do with Old Navy and Gap purchases, that 
I'll show up for work on a casual Friday wearing the same sweater 
as two of my colleagues. After all, who's going to stop me in the 
elevator and go, ``Oh my, is that Arrid X-tra Dry? It's perfect for 
my new sweater!'' or ``That conditioner _ to die for.'' If they did, 
then I'd invite them on my next Duane bender. Although it's a safe 
bet they'll be asleep when I'm shopping. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>