<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0376 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A federal agency released a 26-page report Friday citing several examples 
of serious mistakes in emergency treatment at Kings County Hospital 
Center in Brooklyn _ flaws that the hospital says it is now fixing. 
The report, prepared by the federal Health Care Financing Administration, 
criticized the hospital's staff for making quick, and faulty, judgments 
about the severity of some patients' injuries and for repeatedly failing 
to provide adequate follow-up care. In a case earlier this year, a 
patient was discharged even though CAT scans showed that a pool of 
blood in his brain was growing, the report said. It also criticized 
the treatment provided to patients with illnesses from heart failure 
to syphilis, and it found that on busy days, emergency physicians 
had downgraded the urgency of some cases without thoroughly examining 
the patients. Federal and state regulators discovered these problems 
during inspections at the hospital in October. Hospital executives 
said they had taken significant steps to correct them, and the federal 
agency has given the hospital 90 days to complete the changes. But 
some doctors and leaders of medical labor unions said the latest findings 
added to their concerns that the quality of care at the city's public 
hospitals was declining in an era of budget and staff cuts. Kings 
County Hospital, which serves many poor people in Brooklyn, has long 
been noted for its active trauma center. But like many public hospitals, 
its emergency rooms are often overcrowded, which seems to be behind 
many of the failures cited in the federal report. The report said 
the difficulties typically began as nurses tried to screen which patients 
needed emergency care and which could be treated in a hospital clinic 
a block away. Regulators found that a number of illnesses were initially 
diagnosed as being less serious than they were and that none of the 
patients sent to the clinic were escorted to insure that they had 
arrived. Patients suffering from diverse ailments like back pain, 
numbness in the hands and a hernia were all returned to the emergency 
room after being incorrectly sent to the clinic for treatment, the 
report said. In one case, an obstetrician was not called immediately 
when a pregnant woman arrived in the emergency room in labor. She 
ended up bleeding so much that she needed a transfusion. And one patient 
suffering from congestive heart failure received only partial workups 
during repeated visits to the emergency room, the report said. It 
said that a social worker had noted on the first visit that the patient 
was uninsured but that five months passed before anyone wrote in the 
medical records that the patient could not afford heart medications. 
``It appears that a pattern developed wherein the patient would run 
out of medication, develop congestive heart failure and be readmitted 
to the hospital,'' the report said. ``There was no evidence of coordination 
of services for this patient.'' The report also said the problems 
at the hospital had been referred to two other oversight agencies 
in the federal Department of Health and Human Services, which could 
levy fines. Still, the hospital has been taking the right steps to 
correct problems, the regulators wrote, adding that ``we have determined 
that the immediate and serious threat to patient health and safety 
has been removed.'' Hospital officials said they had merged the clinic 
that treats less-serious cases into the full emergency room operation 
to eliminate the concerns about the patient-screening process. They 
said this also should make it easier to coordinate follow-up treatment 
for many patients. The hospital has also gone over its screening policies 
with its emergency nurses and doctors and plans to review 100 to 150 
emergency cases a week for the next several months to check their 
decisions. George Proctor, the hospital's operating chief, said the 
recent problems focused mainly on medical processes and coordination. 
He said he believed they affected only a small percentage of the 100,000 
patients seen in the hospital's emergency room each year. Proctor 
also noted that Kings County had received a commendation from a hospital 
accreditation agency. ``I think that, overall, the quality of the 
emergency care we provide is excellent,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>