<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0312 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As many as half the handguns used in crimes had been purchased from 
federally licensed dealers within the previous three years, passing 
far more quickly from manufacturer to dealer to criminal than previously 
believed, according to new federal law-enforcement data that are expected 
to play a major role in lawsuits against the handgun industry. That 
finding, along with other evidence that is emerging in the suits, 
challenges a long-held view that most guns used in crimes are stolen, 
say academic experts, gun-control advocates and lawyers suing the 
gun makers. They say the data show that many handguns enter an illegal 
black market even as they leave the store, contrary to the industry's 
argument that its dealers are not the source and that measures like 
better inventory control and tighter regulation would do little to 
keep guns from criminals. ``The data is hugely significant, because 
it shows that there is a stream of guns, especially semiautomatic 
handguns, that are moving very rapidly out of gun stores into the 
hands of criminals,'' said David Kennedy, a researcher at the John 
F. Kennedy School of government and director of the Boston Gun Project, 
which has helped reduce juvenile violence in Boston by identifying 
and cracking down on gun dealers who sell to minors. ``It means this 
is something we can fix,'' Kennedy said. Spokesmen for the gun industry 
call the statistics exaggerated and argue that in any case, the length 
of time between sale and crime is a poor gauge of whether a gun has 
most likely been stolen. One of the first tests of the research's 
significance will be in New York, where Hamilton vs. Accu-Tek, a suit 
brought by the relatives of gun violence victims, is scheduled for 
trial this January in U.S. District Court in Brooklyn, N.Y. This suit, 
like one brought by the city of Chicago, accuses gun makers of creating 
a public hazard by flooding the market with their products and, through 
negligence in distribution control, virtually guaranteeing that some 
guns will wind up in the hands of people who have no business owning 
them. A study prepared for the plaintiffs in the Hamilton case, based 
on data compiled by the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, 
contends that nearly 40 percent of the handguns used in crimes around 
the country had been purchased from licensed dealers within the preceding 
three years. The bureau itself, which is collecting the data as part 
of a major new effort to trace the origins of handguns confiscated 
in crimes, has reported that 48.8 percent of the confiscated guns 
that it could trace had been sold by dealers within the previous three 
years. ``I think there is a large segment of gun makers who should 
know that criminals and young people are a large share of their market,'' 
said Kristen Rand, a lawyer for the Violence Policy Center, a research 
and advocacy group in Washington. ``The great unknown is whether they 
deliberately turn a blind eye because they don't want to know what 
is happening.'' Guns legally move from a manufacturer to a distributor 
and then to licensed dealers. But the new data suggest that many handguns 
enter the illegal market through dealers who sell them to straw purchasers 
acting for other customers, to out-of-town buyers who cannot legally 
buy guns back home, or to buyers who lack gun permits. In Chicago, 
for example, which has one of the nation's most restrictive gun laws, 
undercover officers recently went to suburban dealers and were able 
to buy guns while posing as members of city street gangs. Chicago 
is using evidence from that sting operation to seek hundreds of millions 
of dollars in a lawsuit against gun makers. Both the analysis prepared 
for the Hamilton case and the data compiled by the ATF are strongly 
disputed by the gun industry. ``Obviously if a gun is stolen, it can 
be stolen when it is young, so their assumption is incorrect, that 
short `time to crime' means the gun is purchased by a criminal and 
not stolen,'' said James Dorr, a Chicago lawyer who represents three 
of the gun makers named in the Hamilton suit: the Smith &AMP; Wesson 
Corp.; Sturm, Ruger &AMP; Co., and the Colt's Manufacturing Co. In 
addition, Dorr said, the analysis in the Hamilton suit and the firearms 
agency's own estimate fail to take sufficient account of the large 
number of guns that for any of several reasons _ their age, perhaps, 
or the erasure of their serial numbers _ cannot be traced to the manufacturer 
and licensed dealers. ``Given all of this, we think their high-end 
figure is meaningless,'' Dorr said of the ATF's estimate. But officials 
of both the firearms agency and its parent, the Treasury Department, 
said their data had been carefully weighted to include guns that could 
not be traced. That is why the agency provided a range, one official 
said, with a low estimate that 26.6 percent of all guns seized in 
crimes had been purchased within the last three years. The high estimate 
of 48.8 percent reflects only those guns traced to dealers. The figures 
were based on a study of all handguns seized by the police in several 
cities during 1996 and 1997. The estimates in the Hamilton case are 
based on a different set of data: the firearms agency's figures on 
confiscated handguns traced nationwide from 1989 to 1997. These estimates 
were prepared by economists with National Economic Research Associates, 
New York consultants who often provide expert testimony for corporations. 
The economists, working for Elisa Barnes, the lawyer who filed the 
Hamilton suit, estimated from ATF data that 23 percent to 25 percent 
of all handguns sold from 1989 to 1992 had been used in a crime by 
the end of 1997, and that 54 percent of handguns used in a crime in 
New York state had been purchased within the preceding three years. 
In addition, the economists estimated from the agency's data that 
90 percent of handguns used in crimes in New York state were originally 
sold in other states. More than half the handguns used in crimes in 
New York, the economists concluded, were brought in from just five 
states, all with lax gun-control laws: Virginia, Florida, Georgia, 
North Carolina and South Carolina. Statistical analysis proves, the 
economists said, that the sales in these states with weak gun-control 
laws ``are higher than can be explained by legitimate demand _ suggesting 
that a substantial proportion of sales in such states are not for 
legitimate purposes but for resale to the criminal market.'' They 
contend that gun makers deliberately oversupply dealers in these Southern 
states, knowing that the excess guns will be taken to states like 
New York with strong gun laws. A review of depositions by some of 
the 50 gun makers being sued in the Hamilton case, the economists 
said, ``suggests that many if not all manufacturers deliberately chose 
not to exercise any supervision over the distributors and dealers 
to which they sell.'' That, Dorr said, is ``absolutely incorrect.'' 
Such accusations ``ignore the regulatory system'' in which all dealers 
must be federally licensed and all handgun sales are ``pre-approved'' 
by law enforcement officials, under either the Brady Law or equivalent 
state laws. If there are rogue dealers selling to criminals, he said, 
it is up to law enforcement to arrest them. Moreover, Dorr said, although 
the firearms agency usually communicates with the manufacturer when 
doing a trace of a gun seized in a crime, it does not disclose anything 
about the crime, or even that there has been one, leaving the gun 
maker in the dark about whether its product has actually been used 
for criminal purposes. Ms. Barnes, the lawyer in the Hamilton suit, 
said gun makers could reduce the number of guns flowing to criminals 
by adopting modern inventory control and other strict distribution 
standards. Such measures are already widely used by the makers of 
other hazardous products, like scuba gear and certain chemicals and 
paints. Coincidentally, the five-day waiting period required before 
buying a handgun under the Brady Law will expire on Monday. It is 
supposed to be replaced by a system in which gun dealers can immediately 
get information, from computers set up by the FBI or state police 
agencies, on whether a customer is a convicted felon. But Ms. Rand, 
of the Violence Policy Center, said that ``nobody knows what will 
happen'' on Monday, because Congress has not approved sufficient money 
to create the FBI system and many states have moved slowly to set 
up databases of their own. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>