<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Not all of a gardener's tools require sharpening, oiling and stowing 
for the winter. Some of them, in fact, get their heaviest workout 
in the off-season: a gardener's books. Many a winter's evening is 
happily spent leafing through the library when nothing else is in 
leaf. A garden library has something in common with the garden. It 
grows, sometimes uncontrollably. Mine has several hundred volumes 
now, some purchased new but more picked up at used-book stores and 
rummage sales. Some are businesslike books on plant diseases, insects 
and propagation techniques. Some are collections of essays on gardening 
by the likes of Henry Mitchell and Allen Lacy, cherished as much for 
the quality of their prose as for their practical guidance. Some are 
historical in nature, although perhaps they weren't intended to be. 
Consider ``How to Make a Vegetable Garden,'' a 1905 volume by Edith 
Loring Fullerton. An adventurous gardener who lived in Medford and 
Wading River on Long Island, N.Y., Mrs. Fullerton once sowed the seeds 
of a newly introduced salad green. Her seed catalog called it roquette, 
as it is still known in Britain, but on this side of the pond we usually 
call it arugula. To say that she didn't care for it is a sizable understatement. 
``Do not, I beg of you, raise roquette in your garden,'' she wrote. 
``It is not fit to associate with quiet, peaceful, dignified, stately 
vegetables of the truly edible sort.'' A glance at the accompanying 
photograph explains the problem. Mrs. Fullerton's stunted and sad-looking 
arugula plants had bolted to seed, a point at which the leaves would 
have been strongly flavored enough to singe one's tonsils. Fortunately 
for modern gardeners, there are plenty of books available on how to 
grow arugula and other specialty vegetables, so no one need suffer 
Mrs. Fullerton's unpleasant surprise. The most-used books in my collection 
are references, rather than how-to books. I keep one at hand to cross-check 
catalog descriptions. This has prevented a few catastrophes, as when 
a plant is described in a catalog as an easy-care ground cover and 
in a reference book as an invasive weed. Some of my favorites are 
wildly out of date, like a reference from the early 1960s that recommends 
killing earthworms to prevent their ``unsightly castings'' from marring 
the lawn surface, but these books are so full of useful information 
on how to grow a particular plant that they earn their keep on the 
shelf. The most comprehensive is Hortus Third, by the staff of the 
Liberty Hyde Bailey Hortorium at Cornell University. A wonderful book 
it is, all 1,288 hefty pages of it, and it was a pricey addition to 
the library. But it, too, is out of date. In the years since its 1976 
publication, the taxonomists have been busy rearranging the classifications 
of many common garden plants. At the moment, the better catalogs are 
helpfully referring me from Chrysanthemum to the new classifications, 
like Leucanthemum, Dendranthema and Tanacetum, but one day the forwarding 
addresses will be dropped. I need a new taxonomy guide, and there 
are two leading contenders: ``The American Horticultural Society A-Z 
of Garden Plants'' (DK Publishing, 1997, $80), and the ``Index of 
Garden Plants: The New Royal Horticultural Society Dictionary,'' (Timber 
Press, 1994, $60). The ``Index of Garden Plants'' is a pared-down 
version of the Royal Horticultural Society's four-volume dictionary, 
which at $800 is a bit out of my price range. The one-volume version 
still lists 60,000 plants and includes growing information. The American 
Horticultural Society's tome has fewer entries, but 15,000 listings 
should cover most of what I need to know, and it has illustrations. 
During the gardening season, the most-thumbed books are how-tos. I 
still use and love ``Crockett's Victory Garden'' (Little, Brown, 1977), 
by James Underwood Crockett, the first host of the popular public 
television program. It is out of print but still turns up occasionally 
in used-book stores. ``Garden Way's Joy of Gardening'' (Storey Books, 
1983) is also a good general guide to vegetable gardening and is still 
available for $20. I have beautiful garden books, many of them gifts, 
that are lush with photographs of elaborate gardens that mere mortals 
can but dream about. I have equally treasured books with broken spines 
and shabby covers, found at yard sales by friends who feed my plant 
passion whenever the opportunity presents itself. One such find is 
the smallest in my collection, 4 inches by 5 inches and a mere 60 
pages long. It's the New Pronouncing Dictionary of Plant Names (American 
Nurseryman Publishing Co., 1989, $6). This tiny book keeps me from 
embarrassing myself by referring to calendula as cal-en-DOO-la instead 
of cal-EN-doo-la, and it tells me that ``calendula'' is the botanical 
name for pot marigold, which is even easier to say. It tells me that 
if a species is named ``graveolens'' (pronounced gra-VEE-oh-lenz), 
it means heavily scented, a useful bit of knowledge when I'm considering 
a new plant for the garden. Fine tools, these books. They offer so 
much utility for so little maintenance _ no sharpening, no oiling, 
no new spark plugs. They do, of course, need occasional dusting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>