<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0193 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A fireplace cast its homey glow as 15 friends at a long wooden table 
clinked glasses. The women sipped Bellini cocktails, while the men, 
in jeans and French-blue shirts, fell to talking sports over ravioli 
alla salvia. Morgen Schick, the 28-year-old hostess, turned to make 
sure the guests on her right were engaged in conversation, then turned 
to the left to see that another friend was served dessert. She cast 
a glance at her boyfriend, Drew DeMann, a sports chiropractor, to 
check that he, too, was having a good time. With a staff of 30 at 
her disposal, Ms. Schick, who is a model with the Ford agency, felt 
carefree enough to seek the culprit who had removed her plate, with 
its slice of a cake that she had bought specially at the Cupcake Cafe. 
``I wasn't finished!'' she protested. She had pulled it off, this 
dinner party. Not bad for someone who was in Portugal 12 hours earlier 
on a photo shoot. What made it all possible was that the party was 
not in her home but at Serafina, an Italian restaurant on East 61st 
Street, where private dinners for 6, 8, 10 or more are given almost 
every night. These are not dinners tucked away in private rooms nor 
held for business reasons. They are the intimate, private entertaining 
normally associated with a dinner party at home _ but given in the 
noisy din of a restaurant. In a city where apartments are too tiny 
to accommodate a crowd, where people are too busy to prepare a meal 
and where many a host prefers the buzz to the quiet of home, restaurant 
dinner parties are an increasingly popular feature of social life. 
They are given in restaurants as gilded as Le Cirque 2000 and as populist 
as the family-style Carmine's on Broadway in the 90s. Some cost as 
little as $20 a head, and others run to $5,000 for 20. Hosts have 
been known to bring place cards, linens, special wines and desserts 
and, in one case, centerpieces of topiary Labrador retrievers. ``I 
never have a good time at home,'' said Ms. Schick, explaining why 
she gave her party at the crowded Serafina, which recently changed 
its name from Sofia Fabulous Pizza. ``I'm always nervous about everyone 
doing their job. Here I called 10 days ago. I knew it would be a fun, 
cool atmosphere in a good location. I give them a credit card ahead 
of time and I'm done.'' As the city's busiest month of socializing 
begins, many popular restaurants are booked heavily for private dinner 
parties. ``I have at least one dinner party going every night,'' said 
Howard Stein, the owner of Gertrude's, a restaurant in a town house 
next door to Serafina. ``My place is full of Europeans with pied-a-terres.'' 
They fly into Manhattan, meet a group of friends over pasta with caviar, 
then fly home _ as Prince Albert of Monaco did a few weeks ago, when 
he gave a dinner for 12 at Serafina. Elizabeth Negrotto, the general 
manager of Monzu, a Sicilian-inspired restaurant in Soho, said: ``We 
see so many small dinner parties now. People bring place cards, and 
sometimes they ask me to get little gifts, little favors from the 
neighborhood for the table.'' David Edwards, an advertising copywriter, 
once had his girlfriend, Solange Amar, cover a table at Monzu with 
rose petals for a dinner party, which he gives in restaurants every 
three weeks or so. ``I do it to keep in contact with friends and to 
build a sort of like-minded circle of people,'' said Edwards, 38. 
``It seems to be the New York thing to do. You have built-in atmosphere. 
People feel immediately comfortable. It's awfully difficult to replicate 
that in an apartment.'' Allan Block, vice chairman of Blade Communications 
in Toledo, Ohio, which publishes The Toledo Blade, visits Manhattan 
every weekend and invariably gives a dinner for 8 to 10 at expensive 
Upper East Side restaurants like Le Cirque 2000 and Daniel. ``I like 
people,'' said Block, 44, a bachelor who has an apartment in the Ritz 
Tower. ``I don't like to be alone. The goal is to meet people and 
to become friends. I don't consider myself selective. It's a matter 
of who is available and who wants to go out. I organize at the last 
second.'' He has one prerequisite: ``They have to be people that want 
to dress properly. I tend to go to places where males are dressed 
in jacket and tie and women in dresses. If someone is going to dress 
in jeans, they can't go.'' In this very image-conscious city, where 
residents may not care to be sized up by their furniture, their addresses 
or their children, restaurant dinner parties allow hosts to entertain 
people they don't know well enough to admit comfortably into their 
homes. It is a safe middle ground, not as personal as home, more engaging 
than a bar. The promise of a meal in a trendy restaurant can also 
lure power guests who might otherwise decline, so that restaurant 
entertaining can be a means of social climbing. Or, it can be a social 
leveler, letting the working magazine editor invite out the Park Avenue 
doyenne. Across a restaurant table, all that matters is one's charm 
and sense of style. ``We're in the middle of everything,'' DeMann 
said at Serafina, looking around. At other tables sat Ivana Trump 
and actor Armand Assante. ``Waiters are banging all around. People 
are giggling. When there's a lull in conversation, there's enough 
ambient noise to keep the party going.'' Etiquette expert Letitia 
Baldrige vigorously disapproves of this entertainment trend, which 
she views as a cop-out by those who have recently attained affluence 
but lack the social graces to match. ``If you can afford to have a 
dinner party in a restaurant, you can afford a nice apartment to entertain 
in,'' she said. But for Manhattan's nouveaux riches _ Wall Street 
bonus babies and Internet entrepreneurs _ ``it's too intimidating 
to entertain at home,'' she said. ``They don't know how to handle 
the crowd, they don't know how to present each other, and they don't 
want ladies going into the boudoir, checking their medicine cabinets 
and checking if they have Viagra pills.'' She told of the time a maitre 
d'hotel pointed out to a neophyte hostess that she had all the men 
sitting next to one another. ``The woman didn't know how to seat!'' 
exclaimed Ms. Baldrige, who was the White House social secretary to 
Jacqueline Kennedy. But such traditional niceties do not matter to 
a hostess like Ms. Schick, who chose not to arrange the seating at 
her dinner at Serafina. ``I don't want to be that controlling,'' she 
said. By the end of the evening, most of the men at her party ended 
up talking to one another, and one couple had placed themselves side 
by side. (Etiquette books advise against seating couples together, 
because, as Ms. Baldrige put it, ``You don't want pillow talk.'') 
In New York, however, hostesses with impeccable credentials have devised 
a new etiquette for the restaurant dinner party. Gale Hayman, a cosmetics 
entrepreneur, who is married to William Haseltine, the founder of 
Human Genome Sciences, a pharmaceuticals company, gives dinner parties 
at their home in Washington, but always entertains in restaurants 
in New York, the couple's second home. She is as precise about the 
details of a restaurant party as one in her home. ``I preorder everything 
if it's more then eight people,'' she said. ``I ask the chef, What's 
fresh, what's good? When people come, the wine is already on the table. 
The San Pellegrino is on the table. ``The round table is my No. 1 
choice,'' she added. ``I'm a stickler. It allows everyone to talk. 
My husband is a scientist, and we have lots of topics to chat about. 
Being seated elbow to elbow is essential. You must be cozy and tight 
with people so they can talk across.'' A restaurant dinner party need 
not be fancy. Jeannie Bochette, the marketing manager of business 
development at Steelcase, the office-furniture maker, lives in Stuyvesant 
Town with her husband, Louis Bochette. She gives dinner parties in 
local restaurants for 10 people almost every other month. ``I do it 
in a restaurant because I work full time, and I do not have the time,'' 
Mrs. Bochette said. ``I always bring spring flowers like impatiens 
or ivies. I buy them at the flower market for about a dollar apiece. 
You wrap it in a tissue and put it where you would normally put a 
place card.'' At La Goulue, the clubby restaurant on Madison Avenue 
popular with the lunch set, Francois Latapie, the owner, said he is 
selective about the customers he allows to monopolize a big table 
for a party. He wants to give one up only if the host is likely to 
bring an attractive, social crowd. One of his favorites is Geoffrey 
Bradfield, a decorator, who took over 60 seats at the coveted center 
tables in the spring for a party for the Earl and Countess Bathurst. 
It was this party that had the topiary Labrador retrievers, a nod 
to the pets of the guests of honor. ``Geoffrey knows the best people 
in town,'' Latapie said. ``Knowing him and the degree of finesse he 
has as a person, you don't have to worry who he brings. Plus, he is 
organized. His party is not going to get out of control. People are 
not going to run around the restaurant or be on the phone.'' Bradfield 
has raised the dinner party in a restaurant to an art form. He sends 
engraved invitations, then a secretary calls to make sure guests understand 
the dress code _ usually black tie in winter. After the main course, 
Bradfield usually clinks his glass and announces that all the men 
must move over two seats. After dessert, he clinks again, and they 
move a second time. For a Russian-themed Christmas supper last year 
at L'Ermitage, Bradfield leased huge candelabras, tied white stalks 
to them and dusted fake snow. Many of the 50 guests, who included 
Chappy Morris, Andrew Roosevelt, Tara Rockefeller and Billy Bancroft, 
are still talking about the affair a year later. Someone like Marjorie 
Gubelmann, 29, a venture capitalist and frequent restaurant-dinner-party 
guest, almost prefers these parties to dinners in homes. ``I like 
the see-and-be-seen atmosphere, the air-kissing everywhere,'' she 
said. ``The schmoozing. The overpriced bistro food. It's a fabulous 
dining experience.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>