<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0315 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Over the last five months, a one-acre plot of land nestled in the 
Staten Island Botanical Garden has been slowly transformed into an 
outpost of China. About 40 Chinese craftsmen have toiled nonstop to 
build the Chinese Scholar's Garden, an exquisite collection of pavilions, 
bridges and ponds. They used traditional tools or just their hands 
as they put into place thick cedar columns, latticed door frames and 
hand-finished granite panels. A tablet over the entrance declares 
in red and gold Chinese characters, ``The Garden Where One Experiences 
Many Beautiful Things.'' On Friday, it became the Garden Where Craftsmen 
Experience Excitement and Nervousness. I.M. Pei, the architect famous 
for structures like the pyramid-shaped addition to the Louvre, was 
standing at the garden entrance inspecting their handiwork. His interest 
was in architecture and ancestry, since Pei's family is known for 
having an impressive garden of its own in Suzhou, China, a city famous 
for its scholars' gardens. The craftsmen had traded rumpled work clothes 
and wooden tools for jackets and cameras, and were chatting with Pei 
as he strolled the grounds. His verdict was evident as he spoke to 
them in Chinese, punctuating his words with smiles and laughs. The 
noon sun cast a glow on the garden's white walls matched only by the 
pride on the craftsmen's faces. ``Today is a wonderful day for shapes 
and shadows,'' Pei said. ``I think the workmanship is excellent, and 
I'm impressed. Of course, you can't expect it to be like I'm used 
to seeing in Suzhou, but it comes quite close. I'm very impressed.'' 
Pei had come to the garden at the invitation of his stepmother, Aileen 
Pei, who was vital in helping raise part of the $10 million needed 
for the project. This week she made a few trips to Staten Island (with 
cookies and cake for the workers) to show off to friends and donors 
the progress of the garden, which has occupied much of her attention. 
The landscaping will be done early next year. She got her first glimpse 
of the project two years ago, when Frances Huber, president of the 
Staten Island Botanical Garden, showed her a model during an afternoon 
tea. The model was sort of bulky, so Mrs. Huber kept it in the trunk 
of her car when showing it off. Its surroundings notwithstanding, 
Mrs. Pei was impressed. Mrs. Huber was ecstatic, since she knew that 
Mrs. Pei's support brought a measure of artistic integrity to the 
garden as well as a wealth of contacts. ``There are a lot of connections 
that are very personal and go back and forth with the old southern 
China crowd,'' Mrs. Huber said. ``Many of them left right before the 
Second World War, and they were in finance and banking. They came 
to New York and maintained those friendships. This is kind of the 
old society crowd. They still exist. And she's the doyenne of it. 
A friend of hers called her the Brooke Astor of the Park Avenue Chinese.'' 
Mrs. Pei reached out to friends, even showing a videotaped piece on 
the garden to dinner guests at her Park Avenue home. She said she 
was lucky with the first foundation she approached, the Luce Foundation. 
``To do anything in New York, it takes a lot of people,'' Mrs. Pei 
said. ``I know Hank Luce very well. When he gave money, the rest was 
easier, you know.'' One question that potential donors asked was: 
Why Staten Island? Why not spread the wealth, both cultural and financial? 
There is a certain appropriateness to the location, since the garden 
is at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center, once a home for merchant seamen, 
some of whom no doubt saw the real thing during their travels to the 
East. Which raises another question: Why scholars' garden? Yangming 
Chu, the curator, explained that tests in the humanities were given 
to recruits for government service in imperial China. Naturally, scholars 
scored best. ``When they retired, they wanted to create a natural 
garden inside the city,'' Chu said. ``When you close the door, you're 
in nature. It's to get away from the city's chaos and to look for 
beauty. How do you do that but with a garden with trees and ponds 
where you can write poetry, have parties and entertain friends?'' 
That tradition still makes sense to today's civil servants. How many 
police officers have moved to Staten Island in search of solitude 
after a day on the beat? But no back yard could ever compete with 
the tea house at the scholars' garden. After his tour, Pei and his 
party sat down for a meal. He looked down the table and spotted a 
relative. ``Have you ever been to Suzhou?'' he asked the girl, who 
shook her head. ``You must. That's where your family comes from.'' 
Considering the fine example recreated in New York City, she doesn't 
have to hop a slow boat anywhere. The Staten Island ferry is faster. 
And free. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>