<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0202 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Posting the worst performance since the keeping of records began nearly 
four decades ago, Hong Kong said Friday that its economy shrank by 
an estimated 7 percent in the third quarter. But officials here said 
the territory might have hit bottom _ with agencies like the World 
Bank and the International Monetary Fund forecasting that economic 
output would rebound in the second half of 1999. Still, a report Friday 
by the Asian Development Bank predicted that for all of 1999, Hong 
Kong's economy would contract by 2 percent. Hong Kong's economy has 
been shrinking at an accelerating rate since the first quarter of 
this year, as the Asian financial crisis has pummeled retail sales, 
exports, tourism and domestic consumption. Friday's announcement was 
a new low. ``These were quite depressing figures,'' said Sir Donald 
Tsang, the financial secretary of Hong Kong, at a news conference. 
But Tsang expressed some optimism. He said the Hong Kong government 
expected a full-year decline of 5 percent in the economy. That implies 
Hong Kong's gross domestic product, the broadest measure of economic 
growth, would decline by less than 7 percent in the current quarter. 
``We have to go through what I call a psychological barrier,'' Tsang 
said, noting that Hong Kong probably faced two more quarters of negative 
performance before the trend reversed. For all the horrendous numbers, 
Hong Kong's stock market barely wavered Friday, with the Hang Seng 
index edging down 37 points, or three-tenths of 1 percent, to close 
at 10,732. As they have for nearly two months, investors disregarded 
Hong Kong's fundamentals, preferring to focus on recent cuts in interest 
rates here and in the United States, which they believe will reinvigorate 
consumer demand. ``Yesterday we had a historic low in export figures 
and the market went up; today we had a historic low in economic output, 
and the market barely moved,'' said Dong Tao, the senior regional 
economist at Credit Suisse First Boston here. ``The market is simply 
ignoring all the bad news.'' Real estate prices have rebounded even 
more sharply than the stock market. An index that tracks the shares 
of Hong Kong's leading property developers has risen 90.7 percent 
in the last two months _ the sharpest increase ever in that period, 
according to a report by Morgan Stanley Dean Witter. It is unclear 
what the growing disparity between the markets and the underlying 
economy means. Some forecasters say the improved sentiment will pull 
up the economy, since Hong Kong has always been fueled by intangible 
factors like consumer confidence. Some say the rising property and 
share prices merely delay what will be a painful economic adjustment. 
``Hong Kong is on a placebo therapy,'' Tao said. ``The improved sentiment 
is a good thing. But placebos are just sugar pills.'' Others say the 
buoyant markets prevent Hong Kong from reducing its costs, which are 
the highest in Asia and put it at a competitive disadvantage. Singapore, 
vying with Hong Kong to be the financial hub of East Asia, adopted 
a package of wage and pension reductions earlier this week that will 
carve $6.5 billion in costs out of its economy. ``The recovery in 
Hong Kong will be the slowest in the region simply because the price 
levels haven't fully adjusted,'' said Marc Faber, the chairman of 
Marc Faber Ltd., an investment advisory firm here. Faber said Hong 
Kong's high costs were already affecting areas like shipping. He said 
container traffic in Shenzhen, a mainland Chinese city across the 
border from Hong Kong, had increased 90 percent so far this year, 
while traffic in Hong Kong's port was up only marginally. There are 
signs that Hong Kong is beginning to confront its costs. On Thursday, 
Hong Kong Telecom reached an agreement with its employees to tie their 
bonuses to the company's financial performance. Hong Kong Telecom 
had earlier announced an across-the-board salary cut of 10 percent. 
But it was forced to retreat after employees protested and it came 
under criticism from Hong Kong's chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa. Beyond 
cutting costs, analysts said there was little Hong Kong could do to 
hasten its recovery. With an economy heavily reliant on trade, Hong 
Kong's future depended very much, they said, on the health of its 
trading partners, primarily China and, to a lesser extent, the United 
States and Japan. ``If we had a situation where Japan and the rest 
of Asia stayed lackluster, the U.S. and Europe slowed to 2 percent 
growth, and China slipped to 6 percent, next year could be pretty 
bleak,'' said Ian Perkin, chief economist of the Hong Kong General 
Chamber of Commerce. There was scarcely a hint of boom times in the 
statistics released this week. Retail sales declined 20 percent in 
the third quarter, while exports fell 17.5 percent in October. And 
tourist arrivals declined 11 percent in the first 10 months of the 
year. Hong Kong's consumer price index rose just one-tenth of 1 percent 
in October _ the smallest increase ever _ prompting some analysts 
to declare that Hong Kong had entered a deflationary spiral. But Friday, 
a government economist took issue with that, noting that in a genuine 
deflation, property and share prices would have to fall as well. Nor 
are real estate and stocks the only things going up. While the number 
of people visiting Hong Kong has declined over the year so far, tourist 
arrivals rose two-tenths of 1 percent in October. And the Hong Kong 
Monetary Authority reported that its foreign reserves rose slightly 
last month, to $88.7 billion. More important, analysts said fears 
that China would become the next casualty of the Asian crisis have 
receded a bit. China's economy expanded 7.6 percent in the third quarter, 
compared with the corresponding quarter last year. That is an increase 
from 6.6 percent expansion in the second quarter. The strength of 
the Chinese economy is crucial to Hong Kong, because much of its trade 
consists of exports that flow from the mainland into Hong Kong, where 
they are repackaged and shipped elsewhere. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>