<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0260 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Joshua Cohen, a senior at the University of Michigan, has a dozen 
folders in his file cabinet that are crammed with financial reports 
and news clippings about companies he is pursuing for a job. He bought 
a cellular phone so he would be available to recruiters 24 hours a 
day. Cohen, an English major who has already had internships at Salomon 
Smith Barney and Bear Stearns, said job hunting was ``like taking 
an extra class,'' but it might well add up to even more than that. 
Companies are on campus nearly every day, and Cohen sometimes spends 
several hours with a recruiter; once, he skipped a class for one such 
meeting. With only six months until graduation, the class of '99 is 
prepping for entry into the real world. While many seniors will not 
begin job-hunting until next semester, a growing band of students 
seeking jobs on Wall Street and in consulting have already begun a 
recruiting game that just keeps getting more competitive. A year ago, 
with the markets roaring, the appetite for new blood was huge. As 
students scrambled to win entry-level jobs at top companies, companies 
were racing to snare the top students. The cream of the class emerged 
with multiple offers and five-figure bonuses for jobs that typically 
encompass the grunt work of basic research and support. But now, with 
the markets' tumultuous summer and fall bringing cutbacks on Wall 
Street, the competition among the students has heated up further. 
To land jobs, the class of '99 is leaving no angle unexamined. ``I 
really think I should put it on bond as opposed to linen,'' a senior 
at Cornell University said recently to her two roommates. It was almost 
1 a.m. the night before a campus job fair, and she was talking earnestly 
about her resume. ``I read that you don't want to stand out, so linen 
paper is definitely out,'' she said anxiously, declining to be identified 
for fear that her comments might affect her chances of landing a certain 
consulting job. ``And I have to print it on white paper, not cream.'' 
For students, the angst is heavy with deja vu. Just four short years 
after agonizing over SATs and college applications, they are again 
polishing cover letters _ in some cases still ghost-written by parents, 
and now almost always edited by professors and career counselors. 
Glorified descriptions of internships and extracurricular activities 
may pepper the resumes _ laser-printed, of course, on fancy paper. 
Calls go out to family members and friends in search of a ``connection.'' 
Even those SAT scores cannot be forgotten: some consulting firms ask 
for them, along with college transcripts. While graduating seniors 
have long faced this trying process, by many accounts the intensity 
of the job hunt has stepped up recently. ``The last couple of years 
has really stretched rational thinking,'' said David Reed, director 
of global recruiting at Andersen Consulting in Chicago. Though this 
is clearly a buyers' market, top employers have not eased up. Partly, 
no doubt, this is because they still want the best people, even if 
there are fewer jobs to fill. But, perhaps too, the recruiting frenzy 
has taken on a life of its own. So with some Wall Street firms offering 
starting salaries in excess of $50,000 for undergraduates with nothing 
more than a B.A., the competition _ on both sides _ can reach fever 
pitch. ``A lot of employers really ratcheted up starting salaries, 
and bonuses have become much more prevalent,'' Reed said. The pressure 
has created a new breed of ultra-informed, sometimes overzealous students 
who come to the recruiting process with broad knowledge _ and sometimes 
experience _ in a given industry. ``They are just so much more sophisticated,'' 
said Peter Kiernan, a partner on the recruiting committee at Goldman, 
Sachs. ``If I were to look at the students today compared with the 
students even two years ago or five years ago, their state of awareness 
of investment banking or sales and trading is dramatically higher.'' 
And the process starts earlier. Some students begin jockeying for 
interviews as juniors or even sophomores, vying for internships that 
might help them clinch a full-time, permanent job later. Valentina 
Chamorro, a senior at Harvard, had an internship last summer at J.P. 
Morgan, which has already offered her a post-graduation job. ``I wanted 
to get a feel for what you do day to day,'' said Ms. Chamorro, a government 
major. ``The people at J.P. Morgan were amazing and really took their 
time to teach me about banking and how to do research and how to be 
analytical.'' Cohen's internships have not landed him a job yet, but 
he still says he has the best chance at companies that already know 
him. ``They know my work ethic,'' he said. Internships have become 
especially important for students who are not finance or economics 
majors. ``As an English major, having Bear Stearns on the top of my 
resume has definitely helped,'' Cohen said. Even a path not taken 
can be a plus. Cohen was offered an internship with BT Alex. Brown 
last summer. He rejected it to go to Bear Stearns, but the offer alone 
helped him go directly to the final interview round at Alex. Brown 
this fall. An Ephemeral Prize Ms. Chamorro, with a job offer in hand, 
is one of the lucky few. Come spring, as most students well know, 
the pickings will be slim. ``No question, we will be seeing some real 
cutbacks in hiring,'' said Steve Pollack, co-founder of Wet Feet Press, 
a San Francisco company that tracks the recruiting process. But he 
hesitated to say that the cuts would be deep. ``Despite the fact that 
a lot of these banks are announcing big layoffs, they still need these 
pools of talent to come in.'' And new graduates, he added, ``are still 
relatively cheap labor.'' Cohen, who was not called back to a second 
round of interviews with Bain &AMP; Co. and Andersen Consulting, said 
he had already expanded his job hunt to include commercial banks. 
``I guess you could call that hitting the panic button,'' he said. 
``If I got an offer today, even if it's not my top choice,'' he added, 
``I'd consider taking the job, just to have something in the bank.'' 
Students seek out careers in investment banking or management consulting 
because in many ways it is the quintessential transitional job. Most 
enter the field as analysts and stay only two to three years, after 
which many pursue an M.B.A. or change careers. ``In many situations, 
the M.B.A. is the ticket for admission,'' Reed said. After graduate 
school, it is common for them to return to their original employer, 
which might well have paid their business school tuitions. Yet most 
companies are keen to stress that while they are great places to start 
out, the chances are slim that a new hire will stay even five years. 
McKinsey &AMP; Co., widely regarded as one of the most successful 
campus recruiters, tells students that only 25 percent of those hired 
in 1996 still worked for the company in 1998. The Three-Act Ritual 
In the last decade, campus recruiting has changed dramatically. Most 
Wall Street firms used to stop only at a few Ivy League schools _ 
perpetuating, some recruiters now say, the idea of an old-boy network. 
But when demand surged, Wall Street cast its nets much wider. ``That's 
good news, because at any school you hit diminishing returns,'' Kiernan 
said. ``But it means that firms have to involve more people and go 
to more schools and spend more time _ and frankly, it's more competitive.'' 
Campus recruiting today is often a three-act ritual: a career fair, 
followed by information sessions and the infamous interview process. 
The career fair, traditionally early in the school year, keeps creeping 
closer to the first week of classes. These convention-style events 
_ ``live meat markets,'' one PricewaterhouseCoopers recruiter called 
them _ usually last a day or two, and are held in athletic field houses, 
with hundreds of companies erecting fancy booths. Joining Wall Street 
firms might be recruiters from consumer products companies like Procter 
&AMP; Gamble and S.C. Johnson or technology giants like Microsoft, 
Intel and Motorola. In addition to chatting up prospective employees, 
almost every company gives away hundreds of logo-adorned goodies. 
T-shirts and pens used to be the hot items, but this year, possibly 
in a commentary on the times, everyone has been giving away stress 
balls _ those squishy, rubbery things you squeeze to relieve tension. 
Stress balls may not be enough. ``I feel like I'm selling my soul 
for the next 20 years to the most interesting offer I get,'' said 
Tamara Nedjar, a Cornell senior, as she left one of the hundreds of 
booths at this year's fair. More and more students flock to these 
events in business attire, resumes in hand, hoping to pose some memorable 
question to a recruiter. An exceptional comment _ particularly to 
a partner _ can get a student ``fast tracked'' through an otherwise 
cumbersome process. At day's end, some big firms make ``on-campus 
callbacks'' _ sometimes by e-mail _ setting up interviews or arranging 
an informal lunch. Most efforts to be noticed, though, are futile. 
Recruiters are generally low-level people, often recent hires or alumni 
of the host school. Their job is to sell the company to the students, 
not vice versa. Many recruiters who have worked the fairs say they 
can do little to help any specific student. The fairs give rise to 
some disorienting transformations. ``I ran into two friends wearing 
suits the other day,'' said Daniel Richenthal, a senior economics 
major at Amherst College. ``It's sort of like, wait a second, it seems 
like yesterday I was living in the same hallway with you and we were 
up at 3 in the morning playing music way too loud and acting stupid. 
All of a sudden you're wearing a suit, holding this leather legal 
pad on the way to an interview. It's all very surreal.'' The Simulations 
Several weeks after a fair, most companies return to campus to put 
on a dog-and-pony show called an ``information session.'' These can 
run several hours, and they almost always include a promotional video 
with the requisite images of Wall Street signs and spaceships rocketing 
off into the clouds. ``If you've been to one, you've been to them 
all,'' Cohen said. Some companies, though, are trying hip, more stylized 
videos. This year, Salomon Smith Barney, a unit of Citigroup, produced 
a short video called ``Road Show Rules,'' a parody of MTV's ``Road 
Rules'' program, replete with rock-and-roll background music. The 
15-minute video follows a couple of analysts documentary style through 
an initial public offering. Not everyone is impressed. ``Is the video 
portraying what you're going to be really doing?'' Richenthal asked. 
``If you get the job, you are going to be at the bottom of the totem 
pole. I don't know if a video with fast music and smiling people walking 
around the globe is going to be you when you are sitting in your cubicle.'' 
When Goldman, Sachs came to Cornell last month for its information 
session, it brought almost 50 employees to answer questions from a 
packed room of young people dressed in their most conservative garb. 
``They tell us, `We want you,''' Richenthal said. ``But if you look 
around the room there are 100 other people just like you _ and they 
can't want all of you.'' Some information sessions migrate to a local 
bar, where the alcohol flows freely and the tab is picked up by the 
company. Then comes the dreaded interview process _ if a student is 
picked. ``The resume is the most important aspect in terms of getting 
in the door,'' said Mariam Naficy, author of ``The Fast Track'' (Broadway 
Books, 1997), an insider's account of how to land a job at an investment 
bank or consulting firm. Ms. Naficy, who just received an M.B.A. from 
Stanford Business School, previously worked as an analyst at Goldman, 
Sachs and as a consultant at Gemini Management Consulting. ``After 
you get invited to an interview,'' she said, ``your personality and 
what you say will dramatically impact the decision.'' Ticking Time 
Bombs There are normally three rounds of interviews _ elimination-style. 
The first is usually a basic, get-to-know-you conversation. But some 
interviewers ask tough questions from the outset. ``I walked into 
the interview, and before the guy even says, `Hi, how are you doing?' 
he asks me, `What's the sum of 1 through 100 consecutively,''' said 
a student who recently interviewed with Goldman, Sachs. ``After pausing 
for a while, I said: `I don't know. Like five or six thousand?' The 
guy looks at me like SO not amused and he goes, `No, there is a real 
answer for it.''' (In case you're asked, it's 5,050.) Recruiters say 
hard questions are asked early because of a need to winnow candidate 
lists quickly and find the stars. The problem, some say, is that the 
same students end up interviewing with every company. ``At a small 
school, you end up with 5 to 10 people who are at every interview 
_ every second round, every third round _ and to some degree it can 
be true at the larger schools like Harvard, Yale and Stanford,'' Ms. 
Naficy said. As a competitive tactic, some companies have begun to 
make ``exploding offers.'' Like ticking time bombs, these job offers 
expire at a certain time if not accepted. Many recruiters liken this 
to the trend by universities to admit more students through binding 
early-decision admissions. Ms. Chamorro's offer from J.P. Morgan, 
in fact, ``explodes'' Nov. 30, and last week she was leaning toward 
accepting it. ``Obviously there is some pressure,'' she said. ``It's 
made the semester a little busier than I expected, because I obviously 
don't want to make a decision without looking into all my options.'' 
Ms. Chamorro has been exploring the consulting field, but said she 
planned to take the offer if she opts for investment banking. ``I'm 
the kind of person who goes to every store when I go shopping before 
I buy anything,'' she added. Even some internship offers ``explode,'' 
like Cohen's last spring from Bear Stearns, which he had to accept 
or reject within days. ``Some internships are harder to get than real 
jobs,'' he said. While some recruiters see exploding offers as a necessary 
evil, others say they put undue pressure on the student. ``It is coercive,'' 
Kiernan of Goldman, Sachs said. ``I tell students: `Don't let these 
employers bully you. You are a legitimate person, and if someone puts 
an exploding offer on you, in my judgment, it questions your legitimacy.''' 
By the second round of interviews, the questions typically move from 
personal histories to a student's reasoning and logic. Investment 
banks often ask brain teasers, while management consulting firms tend 
to pose questions about situations that might be encountered on the 
job. Recruiters say they are interested in the thought process, not 
necessarily in whether the answer is correct. ``The case interviews 
definitely prepare you for the bizarre,'' Cohen said. Courted at Last 
If students make it through two rounds, they are invited to company 
headquarters. For those who make it that far, most recruiters agree, 
the chances are good that a job offer is in the cards. These interviews 
often turn into all-expenses-paid weekend parties, as companies woo 
students by putting them up in fancy hotels and taking them to expensive 
restaurants. Recently Credit Suisse First Boston flew some 50 seniors 
to New York City for the weekend. The first night, they were treated 
to dinner at Tribeca Grill, then whisked by limousine to Lemon, a 
trendy bar and restaurant, for drinks. The second day is usually filled 
with intensive interviews and office tours. ``It is very seductive,'' 
Ms. Naficy said. ``It has a major influence on people who are right 
out of college and are interested in experiencing the real world.'' 
Some students take full advantage of the opportunity. ``I realized 
pretty quick you can pretty much expense completely ridiculous amounts,'' 
said a 1998 Ivy League graduate now employed at Andersen Consulting, 
who spoke on the condition of anonymity. ``Every single meal you should 
really make it your goal to eat at the most expensive restaurant you 
possibly can and order the most expensive thing on the menu. They 
will never question you.'' He said he even got one company he had 
no interest in working for to give him a free flight home for the 
holidays. That is surely not the norm, but it does show how savvy 
some students are in job shopping. Still, what has undeniably not 
changed in the last decade is the ultimate credential. ``The one common 
denominator is, somewhere along the line these individuals cared deeply 
about something other than good grades,'' Kiernan said. ``It could 
be ballet, the debating team or algebra team. If someone cares intensely 
about pursuing excellence, we think there is a predictability about 
their ability to transfer that sense of intensity and sense of purpose 
to their career.'' He added: ``It's about really caring deeply about 
something other than just the A plus.'' WHAT IS AN ANALYST? c.1998 
N.Y. Times News Service When a fresh college graduate lands a job 
at an investment bank or a consulting firm, the drying ink on the 
business cards usually says ``analyst.'' It's a bit cryptic, but it 
sounds better than ``cannon fodder.'' In this context, analysts are 
support workers for senior-level staff. They do research legwork, 
draft reports, create and update spreadsheets, assemble presentations 
and gather information from clients. At consulting firms, analysts 
are often traveling, spending up to four days a week visiting clients. 
At investment banks, analysts tend to burn the midnight oil in the 
home office instead. Analyst positions in both industries are intended 
to last only for two or three years. After that, a small number of 
analysts are promoted directly to more senior posts. The rest go back 
to school for an M.B.A. or find another career path, while their desks, 
laptops and phone extensions are recycled to a new analyst crop. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>