<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0328 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It took a 24-yard field goal by Texas kicker Kris Stockton with nine 
seconds remaining before Ricky Williams, the Longhorns' magnificent 
running back, could celebrate his remarkable season. Stockton's field 
goal gave the Longhorns a 26-24 victory over Texas A&AMP;M but the 
eyes of Texas were squarely on Williams on Friday. The record crowd 
of 83,687 at Darrell K. Royal Texas Memorial Stadium watched Williams 
become the most prolific runner in college football history. _ He 
broke the National Collegiate Athletic Association rushing record 
held for 22 years by Tony Dorsett. _ He broke the NCAA all-purpose 
yard mark set by Napoleon McCallum of Navy. _ He tied the NCAA record 
for most career 200 yard rushing games (11) held by Marcus Allen. 
_ He became just the eighth player in NCAA history to surpass 2,000 
rushing yards in a season. Over all, Williams has 6,279 yards rushing 
and 7,206 yards of total offense, and he has never returned kickoffs 
or punts. The NCAA rushing record is owned by Brian Shay of Emporia 
State (Div. II) with 6,958 yards. Jerry Azumah of New Hampshire holds 
the Division I-AA mark of 6,280 yards. Williams said his glorious 
day would have been tainted if Texas (8-3) had lost to Texas A&AMP;M 
(10-2). ``If we had lost, I wouldn't be standing here right now,'' 
said Williams, who carried 44 times for 259 yards. Williams, 6-feet, 
225 pounds, decided to skip the National Football League draft in 
April, and a chance to earn millions of dollars, in order to return 
to a Texas team that had gone 4-7 in 1997 and was starting over with 
a new coach, Mack Brown, whom Williams didn't know. Williams entered 
the game needing just 63 yards to pass Dorsett's mark of 6,082 career 
rushing yards, which he set at Pittsburgh from 1973-76. Considering 
that Williams averaged 7.1 yards per carry against the Aggies in his 
career at Texas, it wasn't a matter of whether Williams would break 
Dorsett's record. It was when he would and in what fashion. With 1 
minute 45 seconds to play in the first quarter, Williams brought a 
swift end to the suspense with a spectacular 60-yard touchdown off 
tackle run that showcased everything that makes him the favorite to 
win the Heisman Trophy. After taking the handoff, he broke free of 
an arm tackle in the backfield, pulled away from a tackle at the line 
of scrimmage, then racing down the left side line, Williams got a 
block from his teammate, receiver Wane McGarity, and then fell into 
the end zone with Aggies cornerback Jason Webster riding his back. 
Williams ran to the sideline where he was mobbed by his teammates 
and greeted by Dorsett and Earl Campbell, the former Texas Heisman 
Trophy winner. ``I was so excited for Ricky I was jumping up and down 
when he was running down the field,'' Dorsett said. After the record 
setting ball was secure, Williams went back to work on breaking the 
NCAA mark for all purpose yards (7,172) set by McCallum (1981-85). 
He picked that record up with 11 minutes to play in the fourth quarter 
when he scooted around right end on a 38-yard run. At that point Williams 
had 40 carries for 250 yards. Oddly, each record breaker was followed 
by a goof by Williams. On his first carry after setting the rushing 
record, Williams was stripped of the ball and fumbled at the 19-yard 
line. That turnover led to the Aggies' first touchdown of the game 
_ a 20-yard touchdown pass from quarterback Randy McCown to tight 
end Derrick Spiller. That score narrowed Texas' lead to 10-7. On Williams 
first carry after setting the all-purpose yards record, he fumbled 
again, bobbling a pitch that was recovered at the Texas 16. Two plays 
later McCown hit Spiller for his second touchdown of the day on a 
16 yard pass play that helped make it 23-17 Texas, and helped put 
the surging Aggies back into the game with 7:39 to play. ``I told 
Ricky to forget about the fumbles,'' Brown said. ``What was I going 
to do? Go jump on him?'' Williams performance completely overshadowed 
the accomplishment of his friend, Texas A&AMP;M linebacker Dat Nguyen, 
who passed the 500 career tackle mark. Nguyen, who has 132 tackles 
on the season, said before the game that he hoped Williams would get 
his records, but the Aggies would win the game. Williams walked away 
with the whole thing. During all the excitement over Ricky's records, 
the Aggies were sneaking back in the game. Texas A&AMP;M took its 
only lead of the game, 24-23, with 2:20 to play after McCown plowed 
in on a quarterback keeper from a yard out and the team converted 
the extra point attempt. Texas got the ball back at its own 23 with 
just over 2 minutes to play and all three time outs. They moved the 
ball down the field on the Aggies defense by passing over the middle. 
Aptly enough, Williams had the final carry of the game, a 7-yard run 
down the left side to pick up a first down at the Aggies 7. That put 
the ball on the left hash for Stockton, who had missed two other field 
goals on the afternoon. Afterward, there was a huge ceremony honoring 
Williams at midfield. It came complete with a two-minute highlight 
video on one of the scoreboard screens. of the stadium. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>