<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0244 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
By the time Howard Moss enrolled at the University of Liverpool in 
1966, the Beatles had left town, moving out into the big wide world. 
And that's what Moss, manager of the $1.23-billion Harbor International 
Growth fund, eventually did too _ alas, without ever seeing the band 
perform. (His student residence was on Penny Lane, the title of his 
favorite Beatles tune, and he calls himself ``a huge fan.'') Today, 
he works from an office in Fort Myers, Fla., for Jennison Capital 
Associates, a New York money manager that is subadviser of the fund 
for Harbor Capital Advisors of Toledo, Ohio. Still, it's a relatively 
small world these days for Moss, 50. About the only place he finds 
the sort of stocks he likes to buy is in Europe, where about 95 percent 
of the fund's assets are invested. The fund is also concentrated in 
its number of stocks _ just 24 in the portfolio. Using a bottom-up 
approach to investing based on corporate fundamentals, he likes well-managed 
mid- to large-capitalization companies with long-term annual earnings 
growth of at least 15 percent and forward price-to-earnings ratios 
below that rate. That kind of growth is hard to find in rocky economic 
landscapes like Asia and Latin America. His circumspect view may well 
have sharpened Moss' performance this year. The fund has achieved 
a return of 14.3 percent through Nov. 20 _ notably north of the 8.4 
percent for its better-known, value-oriented sister fund, Harbor International, 
and the 8.3 percent average for its peer group of foreign stock funds, 
according to Morningstar Inc., the financial publisher in Chicago. 
Over three years, Harbor International Growth has tallied an average 
annual return of 18.5 percent vs. 16.2 percent for the sister fund 
and 9.2 percent for the peer group. In 1997, as much as 14 percent 
of the portfolio was in Hong Kong real estate and bank stocks. Moss 
reduced those holdings to zero by last summer, though he acknowledged 
that the Asian crisis still hurt the fund's otherwise stellar returns. 
Asian companies outside Hong Kong don't tempt him. ``With the debacle 
of currency devaluations and falls in the stock market, the companies 
we used to follow in places like the Philippines and Thailand, specifically, 
are no longer viable, in that their market capitalizations are too 
low for us to become interested,'' he said. As for Japan, companies 
like Sony, Matsushita Electric Industrial and Hitachi ``have unfortunately 
become cyclical,'' in part because of slowing consumer spending there, 
he said. ``They are no longer secular growth companies on which one 
can rely'' for consistent earnings growth, he said. So how is Moss 
playing Europe? While he doesn't see a recession there, he expects 
economic growth to slow to 1.5 to 2 percent annually over the next 
12 to 18 months, from his estimate of 2.3 to 3 percent for this year. 
As a result, earnings in cyclical sectors like chemicals, steel and 
automaking are likely to slump, while well-managed noncyclicals _ 
the kind he prefers, in any case _ should do much better. That points 
to drug, telephone and bank companies as outperformers. He expects 
European economic growth ``to pick up from the middle of 2000 going 
forward.'' For companies that can expand, he said, the elimination 
of economic borders in the European Union offers huge opportunities. 
``From the individual company point of view, this will become the 
United States of Europe,'' he said. ``So you will see the growth of 
new, pan-European companies.'' He predicted that many of those companies 
would be based in southern Europe, where, after decades of high inflation 
and high interest rates, governments have adopted many of the disciplined 
economic policies of their northern neighbors. About one-third of 
his fund's assets are invested in southern Europe, mainly in banks 
and telephone companies. The fund's biggest holding, at 6.4 percent 
of assets, is Unicredito Italiano, a Milan-based bank previously named 
Credito Italiano. Its chief executive, Alessandro Profumo, is expanding 
the company, trimming costs and making it ``very shareholder-friendly,'' 
Moss said. He said earnings were likely to compound at more than 20 
percent a year, and that the share price, 9,597 lire on Friday, could 
double by 2001. He started buying the stock last year at 3,400 lire. 
Another big position in southern Europe, at about 5 percent of the 
fund's assets, is Telefonica de Espana, the Spanish telephone company, 
which has about 85 percent of the conventional, fixed-line business 
in Spain and 71 percent of the cellular market. Telefonica also has 
major stakes in phone companies in Latin America, where stock prices 
tumbled recently. But Moss said the growth potential of the Latin 
American telephone industry made those holdings a good long-term asset. 
He first bought Telefonica shares in 1994 at about 2,400 pesetas; 
they closed on Friday at 6,930 pesetas. He predicts earnings growth 
of 15 percent to 20 percent over the next four to five years and said 
share prices would tend to rise at the same rate. One of International 
Growth's newest holdings is Sanofi, a French pharmaceutical company, 
which Moss began buying at about 780 francs a share in late September. 
Last week, it closed at 1,049 francs. Sanofi has two new cardiovascular 
drugs _ Plavix, a blood thinner, and Avapro, which treats high blood 
pressure _ that it is marketing worldwide with Bristol-Myers Squibb. 
``The sales have literally exploded,'' Moss said. He forecasts earnings 
growth of up to 25 percent annually for the next five years. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>