<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0208 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As 34 African chiefs of state began a French-African summit meeting 
here on Friday, prosecutors turned down requests by two French human 
rights groups to begin criminal proceedings against President Laurent-Desire 
Kabila of Congo on torture charges. Kabila, whose forces took power 
last year in what used to be called Zaire, arrived on Thursday from 
Belgium, where authorities had assured him that his office gave him 
diplomatic immunity from prosecution or extradition on human rights 
charges. Here, Charles Josselin, the French minister in charge of 
relations with African countries, was asked by reporters why Augusto 
Pinochet, a former Chilean dictator, could be held in Britain for 
possible extradition to Spain on charges of murder for crimes committed 
under his rule, but Kabila and other African strongmen invited here 
could enjoy impunity. ``He was invited as the chief of state of Democratic 
Congo,'' Josselin said. ``In this capacity, he benefits from the immunity 
accorded to chiefs of state while in office, a big difference with 
General Pinochet, who no longer was,'' he said. The International 
Federation of Human Rights Leagues and the French League for the Defense 
of Human Rights had asked Paris prosecutors to begin an investigation 
of massacres allegedly committed by Kabila's forces in violation of 
a 1984 convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading 
actions. Officials in the Paris prosecutor's office said that the 
convention did not clearly apply to heads of state and that the complaints 
by the two groups had not named any individual victims of torture 
whose cases could be investigated. President Jacques Chirac, who opened 
the conference in the Louvre Museum on Friday afternoon, greeted Kabila 
perfunctorily, but planned to meet with him in the Elysee Palace on 
Saturday. Chirac renewed France's call for an international conference, 
under U.N. auspices, on peace, security and stability in the Great 
Lakes region, where both Rwanda and Uganda are supporting rebels in 
eastern Congo against Kabila's rule. Angola, Namibia, Chad and Zimbabwe 
are backing Kabila. Asked whether he might see the Ugandan and Rwandan 
leaders while he was here, Kabila said: ``A meeting with the aggressors 
is possible.'' Chirac also said that he planned to meet with all the 
leaders involved in the Congo crisis while they were here. He told 
the African leaders on Friday morning that they needed a collective 
security system of their own for resolving conflicts like those that 
a quarter of all sub-Saharan countries had been involved in this year. 
He said that France was prepared to play a peacekeeping role if international 
authorities wished. But France has cut back its forces in its former 
colonies in Africa to about 6,000 soldiers from 7,860 over the past 
two years and intends to lower that number to about 5,000 as part 
of its plan to reduce and professionalize the entire French military. 
Chirac, a neo-Gaullist conservative, and his socialist prime minister, 
Lionel Jospin, have told African leaders that the old days when France 
used to send in troops and the Foreign Legion to prop up friendly 
dictators are gone forever. ``The period of outside interference is 
over,'' Chirac said on Friday. ``There is a necessity for African 
countries and that is to inspire confidence, for without confidence 
there is no economic development. To inspire confidence in the world 
today, countries have to appear respectful of the principles of democracy,'' 
he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>