<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0294 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Earlier in this decade, on workdays, Krzysztof Oliwa did not see much 
sunlight. Learning to repair machinery in the coal mines in Poland, 
he woke up at 4:30 a.m., boarded a train at 5:07 a.m., went underground 
at 6 a.m. and came up at 3:30 p.m. to go back and practice hockey. 
``Dirty job,'' Oliwa said of his mining career. ``One mistake and 
people can get killed,'' he said. ``Lots of gases down there. I never 
got hurt, but I hit my head several times. You get so low you have 
to walk on your knees almost. My friends got hurt, they got hurt bad. 
They lost their fingers because somebody made a stupid mistake. They 
were repairing a machine and then somebody plugged it in and then 
cut off their fingers.'' Now 25, Oliwa still works hard with his hands, 
but in a different profession. A second-year left wing with the New 
Jersey Devils, Oliwa is one of only two National Hockey League players 
born in Poland. He led the NHL in fights last season with 33 and is 
among the early leaders this year with 9 in 16 games to go along with 
57 penalty minutes. At 6 feet 5 inches and 235 pounds, his size and 
toughness have earned him more room to work on the ice, which is leading 
to more playing time and more chances to show his other skills. On 
Nov. 11, Oliwa scored his first goal of the season in a 3-0 victory 
over Montreal. In recent games, Oliwa has not dressed, partly because 
the Devils have been playing talented, strong skating teams like Dallas 
and Phoenix. But against teams that have some nastiness in their game, 
Oliwa becomes valuable. Turning stereotypes inside out, he is the 
NHL's first European-born enforcer, a role usually filled by English-speaking 
Canadians. Oliwa also is another rarity: a professional athlete without 
an agent. Though he was unable to speak English a few years ago, his 
words now come in torrents, with thoughts tumbling over each other. 
Unable to write a bank check until his wife taught him, he now manages 
his financial investments with a computer he built. When he goes home 
from work, late in the evening, Oliwa cannot always fall asleep. So 
he takes his telescope into his backyard, even on chilly nights, and 
gazes into the sky, counting his blessings and contemplating his place 
in the universe. ``I look at the stars and, wow, what a great thing,'' 
Oliwa said. ``The distances are so great, it is hard to imagine. And 
don't tell me we are alone. In the universe, we are nothing. I am 
so happy I am alive. I play hockey in the NHL, I am a United States 
citizen, I have a great family, my beautiful wife and my beautiful 
daughter. When you look through the telescope and see the sky, all 
the problems, you put them behind you.'' He has had a few problems 
in his quarter-century on this planet. Born Krzysztof Grabowski in 
a town called Tychy, his mother was divorced when he was 9. She then 
moved through various jobs. ``We were poor,'' said Oliwa. He also 
did not skate until he was 10, and that was not on ice, but on frozen 
snow in the streets. After his mother remarried and he was adopted 
by his stepfather, he began to work in the mine and play organized 
hockey. But he said he never dreamed of the NHL and had hoped to play 
professionally in Germany. Urged by a scout to try out in Canada, 
he arrived alone in Welland, Ontario, to play for a Junior B team 
in the 1992-93 season. Rooming with a local family, ``he slept in 
a basement on a cot by a water heater,'' said his wife, Dawn. When 
the family had guests for Christmas, they told Oliwa to spend the 
day somewhere else. So he walked the streets, feeling a little sorry 
for himself. Not knowing much English, he was a stranger in a strange 
land. ``It was a bad feeling,'' Oliwa said, ``but I said, `Hey, it 
can't be that bad. I'm in Canada now and my friends back in Poland 
are going to work every day in a mine.''' To learn English, he attended 
classes with high school students five years younger than he was. 
``It was the worst feeling,'' he said, ``but they were nice. I would 
stay after classes and the students would help you to read and understand. 
I could speak so much better from a day-to-day basis.'' Drafted from 
a level that produces few NHL players, Oliwa went to Albany in the 
American Hockey League, the top circuit for prospects. The results 
were mixed. He spent the next four years playing in the AHL, as well 
as in the East Coast Hockey League and the International Hockey League. 
``He was going to give up,'' said Dawn Oliwa, who met her husband 
when he held the door for her at a restaurant where she worked. ``I 
made him go back.'' Recalling the early years with his wife, Oliwa 
said, ``She was there to help me out when I was on the very bottom.'' 
Every NHL team employs one or two top fighters, so Oliwa decided to 
learn the art. Not having fought in Europe, he was clumsy, losing 
his balance and most of his battles. Oliwa took boxing lessons in 
one off season, karate training in another. By the 1996-97 season, 
Dawn had given birth to Skylar, their daughter, and Krzysztof was 
called up to the Devils for one game, during which he got a major 
penalty for fighting. He spent all of last season with the Devils, 
tallying 2 goals, 3 assists and 295 penalty minutes. No one on the 
Devils earns less this season than Oliwa's $325,000, but his importance 
is appreciating. ``He's been doing a pretty good job,'' Devils coach 
Robbie Ftorek said after the Montreal game Nov. 11. ``He had a good 
scrap. He went to the net really well. He's working.'' Oliwa finished 
the game with three shots on goal and several hard hits. He even got 
a short shift on the power play. Early in the game, Oliwa dropped 
the gloves to battle Turner Stevenson, but Ftorek did not use him 
later, when several nasty fights broke out. Watching from the bench, 
Oliwa took notes. ``They were running around, hitting our best players, 
and they are getting away with it,'' Oliwa said. ``Certain things 
can't happen. We're not going to allow this to happen again.'' He 
spoke with a cool look in his blue eyes, his face expressionless, 
his voice steady, his brown hair wet, curls down the back of his neck. 
His is a face with strong, wide features. When Oliwa smiles, deep 
creases form in his cheeks. One person able to provoke this expression 
is Skylar, now 2 years old, who plays hockey with a plastic stick 
and puck in the corridor while waiting for her father to leave the 
locker room for the trip home. Dawn Oliwa says Krzysztof is ``a good 
father'' who feeds the baby, changes diapers, gives baths and ``spoils 
her.'' Oliwa seems to take well to nurturing roles. David Conte, the 
Devils' director of scouting, said that several current junior players 
in Canada who are from Poland have asked to speak with Oliwa and that 
Oliwa generously counsels them. Conte said that when Oliwa was chosen 
65th over all in the 1993 draft, he probably had played fewer games 
in his life than most North American prospects play in one year, so 
he had a lot to learn. ``In a day and age of instant gratification, 
he has a great appreciation for what has come his way,'' Conte said. 
Adding that he usually does not like discussing players with reporters, 
Conte says he makes an exception in Oliwa's case because he admires 
his perseverance and dedication. ``We haven't seen the best yet of 
Krzysztof Oliwa,'' Conte said. ``In 20 years, whenever he retires, 
I'll be pleased to say I know him. He is a good person. He is refreshing.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>