<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0299 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Facing heavy pressure to approve an agreement to bring the New England 
Patriots to Hartford but boggled by the potential cost, Connecticut 
lawmakers are frantically searching for ways to trim the deal's many 
generous provisions without driving the team away. Adding to the pressure, 
Gov. John Rowland says he thinks there might be wiggle room in the 
contract, but the team continues to insist that any change will be 
a deal buster. Rowland and the owner of the Patriots, Robert Kraft, 
dickered for months over an 18-page agreement that is to be considered 
by the Legislature in a special session on Dec. 15. Rowland is a Republican, 
and Democrats control both houses of the Legislature, but he made 
sure to include legislative leaders in the final round of negotiations 
before last week's announcement by Kraft that he had tentatively agreed 
to move the team. But now, there is rising anger among legislators 
who say they think the deal's fine print will cost the state millions 
more than was first disclosed, and legislative leaders are looking 
for ways to make it all work. ``There must be many aspects that are 
not deal breakers, and we have to find out what they are,'' said Rep. 
David Pudlin, the House speaker pro tempore. ``Many of our members 
have very specific questions, the answers to which have not been provided 
in many cases. There are a wide variety of suggestions.'' Jonathan 
Kraft, a Patriots vice president who is the owner's son and was the 
main liaison between the state and the team, indicated little willingness 
to bend. ``If it changes, then it's a different deal,'' he said. ``That 
wasn't said ominously. Those are just the facts.'' But Rowland, in 
an interview, said, ``I don't think he's going to walk away because 
he's not getting the popcorn concession. If there's huge material 
changes, then we've got a problem.'' Sometime next week, the governor 
plans to release an updated set of figures that he said will prove 
his contention that over the 30-year life of the deal, the stadium 
will not cost taxpayers money. Rep. Moira Lyons, the House majority 
leader, has asked the Legislature's Office of Fiscal Analysis to prepare 
its own estimates. Ms. Lyons, who is the only member of the legislative 
leadership who has not publicly embraced the deal, said she needs 
to know more about the deal's ramifications in order to determine 
whether it is a sound financial move for the state. ``While you want 
to continue generating the enthusiasm, coupled with that you have 
to look at the reality of what is being committed to,'' she said. 
``I just want people to give the Legislature the opportunity to do 
the job they elected us to do, and go through the bill.'' Under the 
agreement, the state would build a $350 million stadium for the team, 
which would use it rent-free in return for paying a 10 percent tax 
on ticket sales. It is the extras, though, that are drawing the most 
scrutiny from lawmakers. Under the draft agreement, the Patriots would 
reap profits from licensing a name for the stadium, while the state 
would build the team a $15 million practice center and would reimburse 
the Patriots for up to $17.5 million a year in unsold club seats and 
luxury boxes. Sen. Edith Prague, a Democrat who is a former Connecticut 
commissioner of aging, said flatly Friday that she would vote against 
the current plan. ``It makes me extremely angry when I think that 
the Patriots are going to walk away with the profits and the taxpayers 
are going to have all the headaches and pay all the bills,'' she said. 
Although Prague said she plans to try to spread the word to her colleagues 
about the potential consequences for the state, legislative leaders 
are still promising swift passage. The bill authorizing the deal with 
Kraft will not go through the usual system of subcommittees and committees, 
but instead will be considered Dec. 9 at a joint hearing to be chaired 
by the Senate president pro tempore, Kevin Sullivan, and the outgoing 
speaker of the House, Thomas Ritter. The governor and Patriots officials 
will be invited to testify, and the state's 186 legislators will be 
allowed to ask questions. Then members will be asked to vote at a 
one-day special session of the General Assembly six days later. Legislators 
said their constituents seem quite excited about the project, and 
a poll released this week bore that out. The poll, conducted by Mason-Dixon 
Political/Media Research for the Journal Inquirer of Manchester, Conn., 
found that 60 percent of respondents favored spending $350 million 
in state funds to build a new football stadium in Hartford, while 
22 percent opposed the idea and 18 percent were undecided. And the 
respondents apparently were an optimistic bunch: 36 percent said they 
would buy season tickets. The poll of 634 Connecticut adults was conducted 
Monday and Tuesday and had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 
4 percentage points. In an early indication of the hard line leaders 
plan to take on the bill, Sen. Sullivan said members could forget 
about offering their support in return for a road or some other project 
in their districts _ a not-unheard-of strategy on other measures. 
``This is a large, statewide issue,'' he said. ``We are not in the 
business of horse-trading on this project.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>