<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0340 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
City Hall, the ornate, off-white building that has stood _ in symbol 
and in fact _ for open government in New York City for almost two 
centuries, has been virtually off-limits to the public for three months 
now, as part of an extraordinary security strategy imposed by Mayor 
Rudolph Giuliani's administration. In keeping with a security plan 
called Operation Bravo, concrete barriers create what is called a 
``protective zone'' around the old building, and police cruisers block 
access to its parking area. As part of a ``pedestrian freeze'' tactic, 
police officers are turning away tourists and banning all protests 
and news conferences from the steps of a building that has been the 
historic last recourse for the city's wronged and outraged. The Giuliani 
administration justifies the need for the security crackdown by citing 
the impending trial of three terrorism suspects now in detention at 
a federal jail in lower Manhattan, not far from City Hall. But that 
trial may not take place for months, or even years, spurring criticism 
that the city's landmark of democracy will probably remain closed 
to the general public indefinitely. Civic groups, City Council members 
and state legislators have complained that although they understand 
the need for heightened security, they do not see why City Hall must 
be held captive. And this week, Judge Harold Baer Jr. of U.S. District 
Court in Manhattan agreed with a nonprofit group's contention that 
security measures at City Hall seem designed more to stifle protest 
than to bolster security. As a result, he has ordered the city to 
allow the group, an AIDS service organization called Housing Works, 
to hold a news conference Tuesday on the steps of City Hall. In his 
decision, Baer questioned how the city could deny access to small 
groups because of safety concerns, and then allow thousands to jam 
City Hall Plaza for last week's tribute to John Glenn and other astronauts, 
and for last month's celebration of the New York Yankees' World Series 
victory. The city has appealed the ruling; a hearing in the 2nd Circuit 
U.S. Court of Appeals in Manhattan is scheduled for Monday. Deputy 
Police Commissioner Marilyn Mode declined to explain the reasoning 
behind the Police Department's security plans for City Hall, other 
than to say, ``Events of the day dictate necessary security arrangements.'' 
It is not so much the decision to increase security that troubles 
people as it is the extreme measures that have been taken. Many government 
buildings, including City Hall, have long had security systems, including 
guards at the doors and metal detectors in the lobbies. And after 
the United States fired missiles at two suspected terrorist targets 
in Afghanistan and the Sudan in August in retaliation for explosions 
at two U.S. embassies in East Africa, the Police Department determined 
there was a need for more security. At the city's initiative, for 
example, sand trucks and concrete barriers were set up near the federal 
courthouse on Pearl Street. But critics say that even now, the general 
public has more access to other public buildings than they do to City 
Hall. Baer noted _ and a spokesman for the U.S. marshal's office confirmed 
_ that news conferences are still permitted in front of the courthouse 
where the terrorism suspects are to be tried. But at City Hall, people 
must prove to police officers standing guard at the barricades that 
they have business inside the building; they are then often rerouted 
from the front steps to a basement that has a metal detector. Even 
then, a person might not get through, said Elizabeth Lubetkin Lipton, 
the president of the Women's City Club, a civic group. ``We know there 
were City Council hearings where people were not allowed in.'' Tourists 
and city residents can no longer wander into a building whose doors 
were once always open to everyone from passers-by to residents wanting 
to complain about garbage pickups or to corner their Council members 
about some personal concern. The steps of City Hall, where news conferences 
and protests of all kinds traditionally take place _ just a few months 
ago, several rabbis assembled there to invoke a biblical curse _ are 
now off-limits. ``It's lost a lot of its sense of being a small-town 
center,'' said Kenneth Fisher, a Council member from Brooklyn. ``It 
used to be that people would hang out on the steps because you never 
knew who you'd see, and you could get a lot of business done that 
way. But now the nature of the building has changed.'' Stephen DiBrienza, 
another Council member from Brooklyn, agreed. ``There is not a day 
that goes by that when I leave City Hall, there are not a couple of 
tourists or city residents wanting to come in,'' he said. ``I can't 
tell you how many times I hear the police explaining to people, `I'm 
sorry, it's closed.' And I don't get it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>