<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0335 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Federal Aviation Administration is about to begin replacing the 
mainframe computers that have been the workhorses of its 20 long-distance 
air traffic control centers for high-altitude aircraft, installing 
newer, more reliable models. And it is starting in New York. The new 
computers _ the IBM model G-3 _ will replace another IBM model, the 
3083, that was installed from 1986 to 1988 but is now obsolete and 
troublesome. FAA officials said the new computers would be free of 
the year 2000 flaw. Like the current computers, the replacements will 
label each airplane on a controller's screen and show its position, 
drawing this information from distant radars and the airplanes' own 
flight plans. But agency officials and the technicians who maintain 
the computers disagree on certain aspects of the planned switchover. 
Leaders of the technicians' union, the Professional Airways System 
Specialists, say FAA is rushing the new system into place with a ``jury-rigged'' 
alarm feature that could allow the computer to fail without notice, 
for example, if the system lost track of an airplane. The technicians 
are complaining that the FAA is not buying the underlying computer 
code from IBM; doing so would have allowed them to reconfigure the 
machines themselves. They also complain that the agency is giving 
IBM the job of stocking spare parts and providing maintenance, at 
least initially. This decision, they say, means that the agency will 
not be able to repair or make changes in the new machines when IBM 
decides to stop supporting them, just as has happened with the current 
computers. The new computers are scheduled to be switched on in all 
20 Air Route Traffic Control Centers by September 1999. The first 
pair of the new computers are scheduled to go into service briefly 
on Dec. 12 at the center in Ronkonkoma, N.Y., adjacent to MacArthur 
Airport in Suffolk County. If all goes well, the system will be tried 
out again the following weekend, and then turned on full-time in January. 
The Ronkonkoma center, on Long Island, is the most complex in the 
country because it has a high volume of traffic in a relatively small 
area. The FAA has tried before to replace its aging air traffic control 
computers, but real modernization requires rewriting its one-of-a-kind 
software, and the agency has not been able to do this. The old IBM 
3083s, for example, are mainframe units that were once widely used 
by businesses. Except for the FAA, officials believe, the model is 
no longer used anywhere else in the world. The 3083s have broken down 
intermittently around the country, forcing controllers to spread planes 
more widely, and causing delays that have rippled through the system. 
Last year, IBM refused to certify that the 3083s would cope with the 
rollover of dates from 1999 to 2000, saying it could not fix them 
because it had no one who still understood the model's computer code. 
The FAA's solution was to hire retired programmers who were familiar 
with the 3083 to solve the problem. But that was a temporary solution, 
at best, because experts said that one part of the computer that burns 
out and requires regular replacement is no longer manufactured. ``They 
lost the recipe,'' said Peter Challan, director of air traffic systems 
at the FAA. The part is identified only as a CLVM. Neither FAA officials 
nor IBM officials can remember what this designation stands for. Challan 
said the part has a large, perfectly flat plate that is used to draw 
excess heat out of the computer, but which tends to be damaged by 
heat over long periods. Each air traffic control center has a pair 
of computers, one of them a backup, that together generate 120,000 
Btu an hour, as much as some home heating systems. A recent report 
by the General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, 
said that only about two dozen spares remained. But the newer machines, 
the G-3's, are no longer in production either, having been replaced 
by IBM's current model, the G-5. Challan said his agency preferred 
the G-3's because they have a long track record and have been thoroughly 
studied. The FAA has a contract that insures that outside contractors 
will provide support for the G-3 through 2008, officials said. Challan 
said about 1,000 G-3 models are still in use. One point of contention 
between FAA officials and technicians over the replacement computers 
has been the alarm system. When something goes wrong with a 3083, 
causing the system, for example, to lose track of a plane, it sounds 
an audible alarm, like a klaxon horn, according to Michael Fanfalone, 
president of the technicians' union. A technician has to push a button 
to turn the horn off. The initial plan for the G-3's was a message 
that would pop up on the screen, like an error message on a computer 
screen. But at the centers, the technician on duty might be performing 
tasks away from the screen, the union complained. Lockheed Martin, 
the company that is handling the changeover to the new computers, 
changed the programming so that if the computer's diagnostic programs 
find a problem, they will dial a telephone number at the traffic control 
centers. But Fanfalone said that that system, too, is inadequate. 
``It's like a hotel wake-up call,'' he said, except that when a technician 
answers, there is nothing on the other end of the line. He said someone 
walking through might pick up the phone, hear no one and hang it up, 
eliminating the alarm, or the phone might ring because someone had 
mistakenly dialed the number. Challan, however, said that the areas 
where the phones were located were accessible only to authorized people, 
and that everyone would be trained on what the ringing of the phone 
would mean. An old-fashioned alarm will be installed in a software 
change in February, he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>