<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last Sunday, ``60 Minutes'' broadcast a step-by-step, close-up videotape 
of a killing and gave the killer, Dr. Jack Kevorkian, a national platform 
to explain his act as a humane deed rather than a crime. Understandably, 
that broadcast ignited a new round of debate about the ethics of euthanasia, 
the ethics of the news media and the intersection of the two. With 
Kevorkian charged with first-degree murder in the case, that debate 
becomes all the more important. The videotape showed Kevorkian, in 
what he has called a deliberate effort to provoke a courtroom test 
of euthanasia, injecting lethal drugs into Thomas Youk, who was afflicted 
with Lou Gehrig's disease and who said on the tape that he wanted 
to die. Youk, 52, dies on camera. Was this, as some critics asserted, 
degrading sensationalism? Was it thinly disguised advocacy journalism? 
Or was it, as CBS and its defenders said, a newsworthy event that 
had the merit of advancing a discussion the nation must inevitably 
confront? Both critics and defenders could test their principles by 
imagining a videotaping of the procedure that opponents call partial-birth 
abortion, with its suctioning of the brain from a nearly full-term 
fetus and its collapsing of the skull. Would ``60 Minutes'' broadcast 
it? Would many of those now denouncing ``60 Minutes'' as sensationalistic 
or praising it for advancing the discussion reverse their positions? 
There is no question that the ``60 Minutes'' report advanced the discussion 
of dying in one sense. It illustrated what many opponents of doctor-assisted 
suicide, and also some of its supporters, including Kevorkian, have 
been arguing: that the moral and legal line between assisting a suicide 
and directly ending a life can be unclear. It also illustrated the 
difficulty of trying to limit such recourse, as many proposals for 
legalizing assisted suicide have done, to those within six months 
of dying. The broadcast made no mention of whether Youk would have 
met that restriction. Beyond that, it is fair to ask what was really 
learned from the Kevorkian video. In the most literal sense, it put 
a face on a victim of a debilitating and ultimately fatal disease, 
and the faces on his closest family members. But what else? The program 
gave viewers the scantiest sense of him as a person (he led an active 
life and raced cars); it told nothing of his medical condition or 
prognosis except what Kevorkian reported; and while movingly portraying 
his family's anguish (``We were at the end of our rope. We didn't 
have any options''), the report offered no specifics about what medical 
care and resources were available to them. The accusations of sensationalism 
would be easier to rebut if the broadcast had been more balanced. 
Mark Siegler, an opponent of both doctor-assisted suicide and euthanasia, 
had less than 100 seconds to express his dismay. Except for one vague 
and quickly abandoned question about ``abuses,'' Mike Wallace asked 
Kevorkian nothing about the social consequences or philosophical implications 
of his actions. Perhaps it only reflects a celebrity culture that 
Wallace's confrontational questions all focused on Kevorkian's motives, 
personality and public image. There is a lesson in all this that goes 
beyond a single report by ``60 Minutes'' and may be especially pertinent 
if Kevorkian goes on trial. A few months ago, The Journal of Criminal 
Law and Criminology, which is sponsored by the Northwestern University 
School of Law, published an article by Yale Kamisar, the Clarence 
Darrow Distinguished University Professor at the University of Michigan 
Law School. Titled ``Physician-Assisted Suicide: The Problems Presented 
by the Compelling, Heart-Wrenching Case,'' the article is a long and 
nuanced discussion of hard cases like that of Youk. Early on, however, 
the article offers a warning to the news media: ``All too often, a 
reporter believes that the way to provide an in-depth treatment of 
the subject is to set forth a detailed account of a particular individual 
begging for assistance in committing suicide _ a detailed, poignant 
account that blots out what might be called societal or public policy 
considerations.'' Kamisar is not trying to evade the hard cases. Indeed, 
his article is an effort to confront them from the perspective of 
a nonreligious, utilitarian opponent of assisted suicide and euthanasia. 
But his warning is a reminder that a lot more than hard cases may 
be at stake in this debate. The legalization of assisted suicide and 
its next-door neighbor, euthanasia, may profoundly affect _ for better 
or worse _ the routine practice of medicine for the aged and debilitated, 
the expectations and sense of obligation assumed by dying and disabled 
individuals, the relations between them and family members _ and a 
host of other attitudes and practices well beyond the ranks of the 
hard cases or even those usually cited as potential victims of abuse. 
For the news media, the real ethical challenge may be to keep the 
obvious power of heart-wrenching instances and courtroom drama from 
eclipsing these less clear-cut but ultimately more far-reaching stakes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>