<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0263 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of the surprises in the mutual fund numbers from this year's selloff 
is that investors acted differently than they did during the swoon 
in 1997, when the Dow Jones industrial average plunged 7.2 percent 
on a single day in October. This summer, investors were more willing 
to flee, or, put another way, less willing to tough out the market 
turmoil. Does that mean small investors have fundamentally changed 
their thinking about the stock market? Will they remain less willing 
to take the pain of sharp declines like those that have dotted the 
generously bullish landscape? The answers matter, because it is the 
steadfast Main Street investor who has powered the stock market for 
years. In the 13 weeks through Oct. 14 _ the day before the Federal 
Reserve cut interest rates for the second time _ $3.2 billion was 
taken out of small-company stock funds, according to AMG Data Services, 
which tracks mutual fund flows. That was a decline of 2.4 percent. 
Investors also pulled $1.4 billion, or 1.1 percent, out of international 
funds. The popular index funds favored by many 401(k) investors had 
net inflows. According to AMG's data for all funds that report results 
weekly, covering about half the total assets of all mutual funds, 
$4 billion was taken out of equity funds over all. That was about 
0.3 percent of the total. Fund families that report to AMG monthly, 
including Fidelity and Vanguard, showed outflows from July through 
early November of $2 billion from small-company funds and $3.2 billion 
from international funds. But a year ago, the story was different, 
as investors held their ground. The net new cash flow into all equity 
funds was $37.5 billion from the week ended Aug. 8, 1997, through 
the week ended Nov. 19. By then, investors had ample time to contemplate 
their future in a market that had seen the Dow drop almost 900 points, 
or 11 percent, in four days and then bounce back 563 points, or 8 
percent. In the same period, the net inflow to small-company stock 
funds was $8 billion, while $1.3 billion was moved into international 
funds. One explanation for the change this year is that this summer's 
decline was the worst since this phase of the bull market began in 
1990, with the Dow and the S&AMP;P 500 dropping 19.3 percent from 
peak to trough and the NASDAQ plummeting 29.5 percent. A 20 percent 
decline is a bear market to most analysts, and this was too close 
for comfort. ``Around the time of volatility, people act,'' said Avi 
Nachmany, the head of research at Strategic Insight, an adviser to 
mutual fund companies. ``People overcome their sense of inertia. It 
really has to be bad for people to act.'' He said his monitor of mutual 
fund flows showed that $1 of every $200 was moved out of stock funds 
for defensive purposes during each month of the latest decline. But 
he considered that a ``negligible'' and ``minuscule'' reaction by 
investors. And he argued that it was a mistake to conclude that investors 
are now more likely to bail out when the market falls. Preston G. 
Athey, president of the T. Rowe Price Small-Cap Value fund, put it 
another way: ``I don't see this as a change in behavior, because I 
look at longer-term investor behavior, and they tend to go with what 
is hot, not with what is cold.'' And it did not take much to convince 
investors that small caps were cold. Even before the July selloff 
of the big indexes, the Russell index of 2,000 smaller-company stocks 
had already fallen more than 11 percent from its April high for the 
year. The surge back into equities since early October shows that 
investors think stocks are hot again. Over all, $13 billion has poured 
into equity funds, with $2.4 billion going into small stocks and $1.4 
billion into international funds, based on AMG's weekly data through 
Nov. 23. The Investment Company Institute, which reports monthly for 
the entire industry, shows a flow of $8.7 billion back into equity 
funds in September and October. And mutual fund companies report that 
the inflows have been faster in November. Brian F. Stack, portfolio 
manager of the MFS New Discovery fund, said one difference from 1997 
is that this year, investors had time to pay attention to bad news. 
A global financial crisis had been in the air since October 1997. 
Other declines, he argued, ``have come and gone before the average 
retail investor woke up and knew what happened.'' By Friday, a wave 
of merger activity, including talk of a union between Exxon and Mobil, 
had helped push both the S&AMP;P 500 and NASDAQ indexes to new highs, 
while the Dow finished just 41 points off its record. And it seems 
likely that this quick rebound will convince many investors that they 
were wrong to get out. That means they may hold out longer in the 
next downdraft _ the right move, so long as the stock market manages 
to snap back miraculously once again. Some time, it won't. Stocks 
are back and that is great news for investors. But the rebound in 
the marquee indexes does not tell the full story, as many mutual fund 
investors will discover when they compare their own portfolios with 
the Dow, which is up 23 percent from its August low. As a group, fund 
investors still have a way to go to recover this summer's equity losses. 
According to AMG, the assets of equity mutual funds, including domestic 
and international and small- and big-company stocks, are still around 
$175 billion _ or about 7 percent to 9 percent below their levels 
when the Dow peaked in July. This is largely because a lot of stocks 
have not rallied as much as the new index highs might make one think. 
Salomon Smith Barney calculates that as of Wednesday, the average 
stock on the New York Stock Exchange was still down 28.5 percent from 
its 52-week high. The average NASDAQ stock was off 39.7 percent. Jeffrey 
M. Warantz, a vice president at Salomon, also notes that while the 
rally from the summer lows began from a broad base, including small 
and big stocks alike, it narrowed after Nov. 9. So it was just the 
big-name stocks that carried the indexes the final lap to their new 
highs. Of the stocks in the S&AMP;P 500, 40 percent are still down 
20 percent or more from their 52-week highs. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>