<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0316 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With Decision Day looming, Albert Belle may still opt to remain with 
the Chicago White Sox, a lawyer with knowledge of negotiations between 
free agents and clubs said Friday. While Belle's agent continued to 
negotiate with the Baltimore Orioles, the lawyer said the outfielder 
had spoken with Jerry Reinsdorf, the Chicago White Sox owner, to determine 
if there was a way he could comfortably return to the team. That way, 
the lawyer said, could be paved by money being added to Belle's existing 
contract or be accomplished through a contract extension or an extension 
of his no-trade provision, which expires after next season. Arn Tellem, 
Belle's agent, and the Orioles planned to talk again Saturday. With 
an offer of $65 million for five years, the Orioles are the only alternative 
right now that Belle has to the White Sox. The Boston Red Sox had 
expressed interest, but said earlier this week that they no longer 
were pursuing him. Under a clause in the five-year, $55 million contract 
he signed two years ago, Belle has until next Wednesday to be a free 
agent and sign with another team or choose to stay with the White 
Sox. In speaking with Reinsdorf, the slugging left fielder apparently 
wants to determine whether the White Sox will take steps to become 
a serious contender in the next couple of years. But, the lawyer said, 
Belle also wants assurances that the club will not turn around a year 
from now and trade him. They could do that once his no-trade provision 
disappears from the contract. Reinsdorf did not return a telephone 
call seeking comment. The White Sox might be relieved to be free of 
the $35 million they owe Belle for the next three years. They had 
the fourth-lowest attendance in the major leagues last year and have 
shown no indication they will do anything to rouse the fans next season. 
Randy Johnson is another free agent who expects to make a decision 
in the next few days. Alan Nero, one of his agents, said the pitcher 
hopes to decide by Monday if he wants to stay home and play for the 
Arizona Diamondbacks or pitch for Anaheim, Los Angeles or Texas. All 
four teams apparently have offered four-year contracts for $12.5 million 
or $13 million a year. ``It's a tough decision,'' Nero said. ``Randy's 
really struggling.'' The agent said the Yankees removed themselves 
from Johnson's list by failing to make an offer. The continued presence 
of the Dodgers on the list was somewhat of a surprise. Given Johnson's 
choice of teams and his earlier stated criteria for selecting one, 
the Dodgers appeared to trail the others because they play in the 
National League and hold spring training in Florida. However, the 
Dodgers are considering selling their Vero Beach complex and moving 
their spring operations to Arizona. In addition, Johnson has decided 
the league does not matter, and he also likes the prospect of playing 
for Davey Johnson, the Dodgers' new manager. Some baseball executives 
nevertheless continue to believe that the left-hander will choose 
between the hometown Diamondbacks and the Angels, whose signing of 
Mo Vaughn on Wednesday has not dimmed their interest in giving Johnson 
a lot of money, too. The Diamondbacks are not on the playing level 
of the Angels, the Rangers or even the Dodgers, but Nero said Johnson 
believed they would be a contender before long. ``Over the four-year 
period,'' the agent said, ``we all believe and have enough confidence 
in Jerry Colangelo and Buck Showalter that they will contend in that 
period.'' The Diamondbacks, who a year ago acquired and gave lucrative 
contracts to shortstop Jay Bell and third baseman Matt Williams, have 
signed Todd Stottlemyre and Armando Reynoso, both pitchers, as free 
agents this off-season. The expansion team, which plays only a few 
miles from Johnson's new house, had been interested in Bernie Williams, 
but the Yankees signed him on Wednesday. ``Once they signed Williams, 
that took Arizona out of the picture and cleared that up,'' Nero said. 
The other attractive pitcher available as a free agent is Kevin Brown. 
He is being sought primarily by the Orioles and the Colorado Rockies. 
Brown, who pitched for Baltimore in 1995, has played on World Series 
teams the past two years, Florida last season and San Diego this, 
and the Orioles are probably closer to reaching the playoffs than 
the Rockies. But the Rockies are more likely to make the most lucrative 
offer. The agent Scott Boras said he wanted a six-year contract for 
Brown, and he sought more money than the $12.5 million a year the 
Red Sox gave Pedro Martinez a year ago. If Brown picks the Rockies, 
Boras may try to get an $84 million contract, whose $14 million average 
would make the pitcher the highest-paid player in baseball history. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>