<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0108 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
SUNDAY GAMES Cardinals (6-5) at Chiefs (4-7) Comments: The Cardinals 
are in the playoff hunt. When is the last time you heard that phrase? 
The Chiefs may not make the playoffs. When was the last time you heard 
that as well? Arizona is ahead of where most thought they'd be this 
season because quarterback Jake Plummer is playing unbelievable football. 
He has a 96.2 passer rating in his previous four games. He will have 
a tough time this week because the Chiefs have the second best pass 
defense in the league. But because Kansas City is reeling so badly 
now, the Cardinals win a close one on the road. Cardinals, 27-24 Falcons 
(9-2) at Rams (3-8) Comments: The Falcons are no longer worrying about 
winning the NFC West. They see the San Francisco 49ers in their rear-view 
mirror. The Falcons are looking at the bigger picture, and their eyes 
are turned towards Minnesota. There is a chance, albeit slight, that 
Atlanta could get the home-field advantage throughout the playoffs 
if the Vikings slip. That is their greater goal, and the Falcons won't 
let a sorry Rams team get in the way, even if quarterback Chris Chandler 
is ailing. Atlanta clinches a playoff birth with a victory or a New 
Orleans loss and Detroit tie or loss. Falcons, 35-7 Panthers (2-9) 
at Jets (7-4) Comments: The Jets this year have often followed up 
a great victory with a puzzling loss. Last week, they hammered a solid 
Tennessee team. This week come the hapless Panthers. Will history 
repeat itself? Not this time. Coach Bill Parcells has probably spent 
the past few days yelling at the Jets from sunrise to sunset, trying 
to imprint on their brains that Carolina is dangerous. The only true 
danger on the Panthers is linebacker Kevin Greene, tied for the league 
lead in sacks with 14. He'll do some damage. Jets, 28-17 Colts (2-9) 
at Ravens (4-7) Comments: The kind of year quarterback Peyton Manning 
is having is scary. He's a rookie, and unlike many rookie quarterbacks 
he has taken every snap, all 693 of them. His streak of a touchdown 
pass in every game this year is the most by a rookie since Joe Namath 
in 1965. But Manning can't play safety or linebacker or defensive 
line. The Colts have one of the worst defenses in football, giving 
up 367 yards a game. Baltimore's offense should pick Indianapolis 
apart, especially running back Priest Holmes, who ran for 227 yards 
last week against Cincinnati. Ravens, 21-14 Jaguars (8-3) at Bengals 
(2-9) Comments: Blowout city. The Jaguars are not happy campers after 
losing to Pittsburgh last week. While the home team has won the past 
five meetings, and six of the last seven games in this series were 
decided by 8 points or less, this game won't be close. Jacksonville 
cranks up its running attack and quarterback Mark Brunnel, who has 
a 97 rating in past three games against Cincinnati, will throw for 
over 300 yards. Jaguars, 28-0 Buccaneers (4-7) at Bears (3-8) Comments: 
Tampa Bay is probably the most disappointing team in the league. Things 
will only get worse. Chicago has just three victories but a number 
of their games have been extremely close; they should have seven or 
eight W's. The last time Tampa Bay was at Chicago, the Bears won by 
6 points off two Buccaneers fumbles. This season, Chicago's 12 fumbled 
takeways ranks third in the NFC. Don't be scared by the fact Erik 
Kramer isn't starting _ he's being replaced by backup Moses Moreno 
_ because the Bears are going to run the ball a zillion times anyway. 
Chicago, 15-9 Bills (7-4) at Patriots (6-5) Comments: How this game 
turns out depends on the index finger of quarterback Drew Bledsoe. 
He has two slight fractures and Bledsoe maintains he can play; he's 
listed as questionable. But there is some question about whether it's 
possible for a quarterback to effectively throw a football the entire 
game with such an injury, though Bledsoe threw beautifully in the 
final minutes against Miami. If he plays, the Patriots win, because 
this team could be on the verge of a three- or four-game winning streak. 
They are also starting to get some of their injured players, like 
wide receiver Terry Glenn, back on the field. Doug Flutie is the X-factor, 
as he's coming home, and could be pumped up. He's 10-0 at Foxboro 
Stadium _ 5-0 when he played with the Patriots and 5-0 with Boston 
College. Patriots, 17-16 Oilers (6-5) at Seahawks (5-6) Comments: 
Quarterback Jon Kitna was the most valuable player of NFL Europe's 
World Bowl in 1997. Those Barcelona Dragons _ you can't stop them, 
you can only hope to contain them. Now, he gets only his second start 
in the big league against an average Oilers defense. He'll put up 
some points, but the key for Seattle is stopping running back Eddie 
George. The Seahawks have 41 sacks, but pass rushing isn't the key, 
run stopping is. George already has 1,025 yards rushing and should 
add on about 100 more. Oilers, 19-14 Saints (5-6) at Dolphins (7-4) 
Comments: This is where Coach Jimmy Johnson earns the big bucks. His 
Miami team is coming off a crushing loss to New England on Monday 
Night Football. After the game, Johnson simply stood on the sideline 
with his jaw open. He was stunned. Now Johnson must pick his mouth 
off the carpet and propel his team to win. They must have this game 
and it's a scary one for the Dolphins. Quarterback Kerry Collins is 
beginning to look like the franchise quarterback he was supposed to 
be in Carolina. And the New Orleans defense, which has played great 
all season, is up to the task for stopping one of the worst receiving 
corps in football. Saints, 13-12 Eagles (2-9) at Packers (7-4) Comments: 
Blowout city, Part II. Some Minnesota coaches felt that Packers Coach 
Mike Holmgren was overconfident before his game with the Vikings. 
The Packers lost by two touchdowns. Holmgren had better not be cocky 
this week, no matter how bad the Eagles are. Coach Ray Rhodes, who 
was on the San Francisco staff when Holmgren was there, would love 
to beat his old friend. He'll have the troops fired up. But the Packers 
have a top-three wide receiver in Antonio Freeman, who is averaging 
19.9 yards per catch on third down. He and quarterback Brett Favre 
hook up at least five times. Packers, 28-10 Redskins (2-9) at Raiders 
(7-4) Comments: Raiders quarterback Donald Hollas may not be a pretty 
thrower, or the best player in the league, but he is 4-1 as a starter, 
with his only loss coming to undefeated Denver. Not bad. Washington 
showed a lot of guts in coming back against Arizona. But they must 
be drained. That was a long game and it has been a long season. They 
have nothing left to play for except the `p' word_pride. The Raiders 
are playing for their own `p' word _ playoff position. Raiders, 30-18 
Broncos (11-0) at Chargers (5-6) Comments: Denver can clinch the AFC 
West with a victory or an Oakland loss. But they'll win the division, 
either this week or next. It's just a matter of time. But that of 
course is not the story with this team _ whether they can go undefeated 
is. They won't, and this is the road block. The Broncos look unbeatable, 
especially early in the game, when they have outscored opponents in 
the first quarter by 104 points, the second largest margin in league 
history (the Chiefs did by 128 points in 1966). If the Chargers can 
weather the storm early, and they will, they'll be in the ballgame. 
San Diego is a different team than when these two met earlier this 
month and the Broncos cruised, 27-10. The Chargers' defense has gelled 
even more and given up just 255.7 yards a game, tops in the league. 
San Diego allows only 65 yards on the ground. Memo to Terrell Davis: 
Pack some extra padding. You are going to get hit harder than you 
have all season. Chargers, 24-23 MONDAY NIGHT GAME Giants (4-7) at 
49ers (8-3) Comments: The only chance the Giants have of winning this 
game is if they open up the offense. That's what a vastly overmanned 
New Orleans team did against the 49ers last week and they made a game 
of it. The Saints threw deep on their very first pass play of the 
game. Will the Giants try that? They should. Have quarterback Kent 
Graham, who has one of the strongest arms in the league, throw at 
least 40 passes _ and not that dink and dunk stuff, either. The Giants 
will probably be in the game because Coach Jim Fassel knows he can't 
be conservative on offense if he has any chance of winning. Defensively 
is where the Giants are in trouble. With a few exceptions, they don't 
have the firepower to stay with the 49ers' offense, which averages 
an NFL-high 422.2 yards a game. 49ers, 30-21 
</TEXT>
</DOC>