<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0210 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu cut short a trip abroad Friday to 
reconsider the Israeli army's long occupation of southern Lebanon 
after the killing of seven Israeli soldiers there in the last week 
and a half. While there is a cyclical nature to the debate here on 
Lebanon policy, the spate of recent casualties has increased pressure 
on the Israeli government to contemplate a unilateral withdrawal of 
its troops from southern Lebanon after 20 years there. At the end 
of a day of fierce battle between Israeli soldiers and guerrillas 
of the Iranian-backed Hezbollah or Party of God, two young soldiers 
were killed when a roadside bomb blew up their armored vehicle on 
Thursday night. Netanyahu, who was in London, canceled a weekend trip 
to Spain, issuing fighting words. ``We are now under murderous attack 
by Hezbollah, who are attempting to shock us into leaving Lebanon 
without fulfilling our purpose there,'' Netanyahu said from London, 
before returning for an afternoon of strategy meetings. ``Our soldiers 
are heroically standing up to the attack, and I say that we will not 
put our tail between our legs and leave.'' Nonetheless, Netanyahu 
added that he was willing to consider a proposal from Foreign Minister 
Ariel Sharon that some have found surprising. The hawkish Sharon, 
who as defense minister led the ill-fated Israeli invasion of Lebanon 
in 1982 after a series of assaults on Israel by militant Islamic guerrillas 
based there, now sides with Israeli doves on this issue. He favors 
a withdrawal of troops, although he suggests a gradual one, accompanied 
by a threat of harsh retaliation for any guerrilla incursions into 
northern Israel. In Beersheba on Friday, thousands poured into the 
military cemetery for the funeral of Eyal Cohen hours after the 20-year-old 
soldier was killed on Thursday night. Hundreds of soldiers came directly 
from the Lebanese front, backpacks and machine guns slung over their 
shoulders. Mourners built a hill of flower bouquets, still covered 
in cellophane, atop the fresh grave. The soldier's brother-in-law, 
a former fighter in Lebanon himself, delivered the eulogy. ``The river 
of Lebanon is soaked with blood,'' he said. ``The government has to 
decide whether it crosses to the river bank of peace or the river 
bank of war.'' Some 2,200 Israeli troops are assigned to a strip of 
southern Lebanon to counter what Israel calls a guerrilla war waged 
by the Iranian-backed Shiite Muslim militants. Israeli opponents argue 
that at this point it is the Israeli army's presence that sustains 
the bloodshed. The conflict began in the 1970s when the Palestine 
Liberation Organization of Yasser Arafat, now based in Gaza, was exiled 
in southern Lebanon, staging incursions on Israel with assistance 
from Hezbollah and others. Israeli troops, under Sharon, eventually 
marched over the border almost all the way to Beirut and shelled Palestinian 
refugee camps and military installations. They drew international 
condemnation, but chased the Palestinians into Tunisia. The Israelis 
eventually withdrew into a southern band of Lebanon and focused on 
preventing Hezbollah from shelling settlements in northern Israel. 
Ever since, Israel has maintained a presence there, even after the 
settlers in northern Israel, tired of the conflict, began to favor 
their withdrawal. The military opposes any move. With each year that 
the low-level war in southern Lebanon has continued, the Israeli public 
has grown less tolerant of the occupation. A poll in the newspaper 
Maariv on Friday showed 40 percent support for a unilateral withdrawal, 
up from 22 percent last March, and 16 percent in February 1997. The 
poll was taken on Wednesday, after three of the seven were killed. 
At the end of a week of televised funerals, the public's weariness 
with the fighting in Lebanon grew palpable. When a loudspeaker aboard 
a bus announced Cohen's death on Thursday night, a boisterous group 
of Israelis traveling from Jerusalem to Tel Aviv was sobered to a 
hush. Some cried out, ``No!'' or ``Not again!'' and some wept. Heart-rending 
images appeared ceaselessly on Israeli television. One news program 
presented a home video made last weekend by a soldier killed on Wednesday. 
It showed the soldier, Uriel Peretz, 22, proud in a crisply ironed 
uniform, begging his mother to join him in front of the camera. ``Mom 
doesn't want to have her picture taken because she is afraid,'' he 
told the camera. ``Nothing will happen to me. Don't worry.'' The seven 
deaths bring to 22 the number of Israeli soldiers killed in Lebanon 
this year. Last year, 39 were killed, an increase after years averaging 
25 deaths. Israeli army officials were hoping that this year's toll 
would be low and thus quiet the pressure that built last year for 
withdrawal. ``Politicians have told us in meetings that 20 soldiers 
a year is not a high price to pay,'' said Shrilly Kantor, 28, who 
protested in front of the Defense Ministry in Tel Aviv on Friday. 
The Israeli army's chief-of-staff, Lt. Gen. Shaul Mofaz, said Friday: 
``Anyone who is looking for easy solutions should remember that there 
are no magical ones. So long as we are in the security zone and fighting 
against the Hezbollah, there will be a price. But any other alternative 
seems to us to be worse, more dangerous and likely to increase the 
number of soldiers and civilians in the north who get hurt.'' From 
Netanyahu's Cabinet, the range of suggested responses covers the strategic 
map. Sharon favors a staged withdrawal because the current approach 
clearly does little more than contain the conflict. Defense Minister 
Yitzhak Mordechai is pressing for an international agreement that 
would enable the Israelis to pull out and be replaced by an international 
force. And Avigdor Kahalani, the public security minister, suggested 
bombing. ``For every soldier killed there, there must be darkness 
in Beirut,'' he told the Israeli radio Friday. It is unclear whether 
Netanyahu, in meetings that are to continue on Sunday, will push hard 
beyond a reconsideration of military tactics to rethink his Lebanon 
policy. In the past, he has said a withdrawal from Lebanon must be 
based on some kind of an agreement with Syria, through whose borders 
the weapons flow to Hezbollah. Syria is opposed to a unilateral Israeli 
withdrawal because it wants to use its control of Lebanon _ and of 
Hezbollah's battle _ to force Israel into negotiations for the return 
of the Golan Heights. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>