<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981127.0195 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The new Hammacher Schlemmer catalog is selling aluminum Christmas 
trees with rotating electric-light wheels that change the color of 
the tree every seven seconds. The odd thing is not that these gaudy 
inorganic trees are back in production, it's that I desperately want 
one. After a decade of celebrating a tasteful Christmas with freshly 
cut evergreens, I'm craving the over-the-top holiday artifice of my 
youth. Growing up in the 1960s and early '70s, about 10 minutes from 
Martha Stewart's home town of Nutley, N.J., I experienced Christmas 
not in the understated, handmade style that the domestic goddess espouses, 
but in the more-is-more, store-bought-is-better tradition of our Italian-American 
household. Each year, we had three trees _ one green, one silver, 
one white _ set up in various rooms of our house. But not once did 
a fragrant, natural tree ever pass through the front door of that 
suburban bi-level. Real trees dropped needles that my mother said 
she would still be vacuuming out of the carpet next Lent. Real trees 
dried out as soon as you brought them inside, my parents explained, 
and all of Nana's antique balls would fall off and break. Worst of 
all, real trees caught fire when families like ours were at church, 
and ruined their holidays. Certainly, I didn't want that to happen. 
So Christmas instead came in cardboard boxes, do-it-yourself style. 
What would start as a dowel rod and some feathery bottle washers would 
become, at my father's hand each year, a cone-shaped Christmas tree 
in under an hour. We had a lot of good Christmases that way. But 10 
years ago, when I moved to New York, I vowed I would have only real 
trees, simply decorated. No garlands. No satin-covered Styrofoam balls. 
Just nature and blown glass. I had grown ashamed of my less-than-tasteful 
Christmases past. So what had always been very Marian _ my beautician 
mother, that is _ became very Martha. My more minimalist trees over 
the years were quite lovely, if I say so myself, particularly as my 
ornament collection began to grow with exquisite additions _ of expensive 
decorations bought as collectibles or thriftily purchased at half 
price on the day after Christmas and saved until the following year. 
This year, however, I want to break with tradition again and go artificial. 
Not quite sold on the Hammacher Schlemmer model, a couple of friends 
and I began our search for a perfect fake tree last weekend. In a 
vintage station wagon, we made the rounds of the Christmas emporiums 
I had visited as a child, several lawn and garden stores that every 
November metamorphose into replicas of the North Pole. But the Christmas 
Ice Caverns at Fairfield Home and Garden, and a store called Fountains 
of Wayne, a backyard-statues place that shares its name with an alternative 
rock band, didn't have exactly what I wanted. They sold only realistic-looking 
fake trees. I wanted a fake tree that looked fake. But there are limits. 
An Internet search the other day yielded such oddities as the Wall 
A Tree, a $69.95 fake made of 100-percent post-consumer recycled plastic 
that ``hangs like a picture'' and fits ``any place there isn't space,'' 
and a second, tabletop tree with ``fiber optic branch tips'' for about 
$65. One is too Castro Convertibles. The other is too '70s head shop. 
Neither is what I want. Ms. Stewart may have the answer again, however. 
In her Martha by Mail catalog, the design guru is selling reproductions 
of antique feather trees _ artificial Christmas trees made of real 
feathers _ at prices ranging from $300 to $600, depending on size. 
Decidedly fake without being tacky, they're patterned after German 
originals first popular in the 19th century. There are white ones, 
pale green ones and one three-foot silver model for $198, with tinsel 
substituting for feathers, that would look great in my Chelsea apartment. 
For once, I won't have to move any furniture to accommodate it. Perhaps 
I am nostalgic for artificial trees because we almost lost my 79-year-old 
mother to heart failure last June. A tree like we used to have would 
celebrate the past. Considering my suburban heritage, the quiet evergreens 
that sprang up in my apartment over the last 10 years seem more artificial 
than the obviously fake tinsel tree I desire today. Somehow, an artificial 
Christmas tree seems more modern, more inviting and more truthful. 
In its artificiality, I hope to find a glimmer of the genuine wonder 
that used to be there each year when the trees came down from the 
attic and the tea kettle was put on the stove for some instant hot 
cocoa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>