<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981127.2000.2896 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "The World." I'm Tony Kahn. Figures released today showed 
that India's car output leaped by a third last month, compared with 
October of 1997. But economists shrugged off the search, saying it 
was from a very low base. The real action in India's automobile industry 
these days is in foreign cars. The government has recently allowed 
foreign manufacturers more access to the Indian market. As a result, 
motorists now have a real choice when it comes to choosing a new model. 
The home-grown Maruti Suzuki, an Indian- Japanese joint production 
still controls 80 percent of the market but, as "The World's" Tina 
Kurae reports from Delhi, the competition is just getting started. 
This slick television advertisement touts one of several new small 
cars, breaking into the Indian market. The Hyundai Cantro, a joint 
Korean model, hopes to court the potential 200,000 Indian car buyers, 
many of whom are just starting new families. Hyundai Limited is banking 
on the Indian buyer who's looking for a bit more luxury in their car 
and the response has been greater than anticipated, according to Hyundai 
India's director of marketing and sales, Bibi Yasubu. We were expecting 
in the first phase of our. What we eventually ended up with was something 
best. Far beyond our optimistic numbers also. 15,000 may not seem 
like an extraordinary number of cars in a country the size of India. 
But it's only recently that these foreign companies have had access 
to India's strong middle class. Over the next few months, Indian drivers 
will be able to choose from a wider variety of cars than ever before, 
including another joint Indo-Korean model, the Dain Matese, which 
was launched recently in the capital. Here at the Dain dealer, just 
out Delhi, Gudji Fahnhansval takes me for a test drive in their latest 
model, the Matese. The car is comparable with any car in the West. 
It handles the bumpy Indian roads well. Gudjit has no doubts about 
the quality of the car and he agrees with some consumers that the 
price is a little out of reach for the average Indian. the technology,. 
any other car in the market. But, what. But for the Indian consumer, 
the best value for money is still within a very tight budget. For 
the last 30 or 40 years, Indian car buyers have paid about $4,000 
for a small car. Now, they've been asked to pay between $6,000 to 
$8,000. So the test will be in whether Indians are ready to part with 
money for value. Standing on a street in Delhi, it's obvious that 
there are more and more new foreign cars on the roads. With economic 
liberalization, companies like Ford, Honda, Toyota, Good morning and 
Daewoo rushed in for a share of the Indian market. But there's been 
criticism of some other foreign cars being sold here, which some say 
are inferior in quality, compared to the same models elsewhere in 
the world. The experts say things are changing and the quality of 
the new cars coming onto the market is very high. Dr. Shupab Pat of 
the Association of Indian Automobile Manufacturers, or AIAM, says 
safety standards are generally quite good. The one exception is air 
bags, which would not be practical because of the bad road conditions 
in India. And regarding safety standards, uh, we got a European standards. 
And we are not compromising on the safety features, except for in 
the air bag. Because air bags you may not be able to put in India, 
but the price. But you. The Indian market has been a difficult one 
to crack for foreign companies. But the air bag issue aside, India's 
auto industry is undergoing sweeping changes. New modern gas stations 
are everywhere with a choice of unleaded, leaded and diesel gas. Service 
stations are equipped with the latest in auto repair technology. This 
all points to a new era for the automobile in India, which is likely 
to leave far behind low-budget car models of the past. For "The World," 
this is Tin Ku Rae in Delhi, India. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>