<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981127.2000.1188 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "The World." I'm Tony Kahn. It's Friday, the day we ask Washington-based 
foreign journalists how they're covering America's top stories. Yurid 
Eisevogel is the Washington correspondent for the Dutch newspaper 
"NRC Handelsblat" and Andrew Philips is the bureau chief for the Canadian 
weekly news magazine "McLeans " and they're our guests today. We begin 
with a prominent voice from this week's news. I've got to force them 
to act. They must charge me, because if they do not, that means they 
don't think it's a crime, because they don't need any more evidence, 
do they? Do you have to dust for fingerprints on this? That was the 
voice of Jack Kevorkian who was charged this week with first-degree 
murder. Three days after the TV news magazine "60 Minutes" broadcasted 
videotape of him assisting in the suicide, actually administering 
the lethal injections himself to a terminally ill patient. Yurid, 
let me begin with you. How did you end up covering this story for 
your readers? " The headline in my paper was, which translate as euthanasia 
shown on American TV to provoke trial. Mm-hmm. And the fact that this 
was show on TV was a very important angle of the story. I wonder, 
Yurid, in your country, is this an issue which is such a hot-button 
issue? Well, in a way, it still is, but I think that the question 
of whether or not it should be possible for people to have the right 
to voluntary euthanasia is more or less settled. The latest polls 
show that 92 percent of the people support the rights for, uh, voluntary 
euthanasia. So... Mm-hmm. ... that's that's a very remarkable difference 
from, uh, from... Now, Andrew Philips, Canada is only a channel click 
away and I would assume that many of your leaders have an opportunity 
to see some of this footage. Well, you're right that Canadian television 
viewers basically all get CBS, so they can see "60 Minutes" just as 
easily as anybody in the United States and I'm sure many of them did. 
We would -- we haven't written our -- we were weekly. We haven't quite 
written a headline yet. If we did, it would probably be something 
along the lines of Dr. Death Strikes Again, because he is a household 
name in Canada. And I think that, as Yurid mentioned, the -- the new 
twist on the story here is the -- is the death on television. And, 
uh, uh, that would never happen in Canada, let me put it that way. 
I -- I cannot imagine that a broadcaster would show a death like that. 
And I think that if that were to happen in Canada, the reaction would 
be even more negative towards a broadcaster than it has been towards 
"60 Minutes." Your own sensibilities, in a sense, were offended when 
you saw this. You felt that, what, you were being manipulated somewhat 
or that, uh? yes. Yeah. I think partly manipulated. I think that my 
-- my -- not -- not only my sensibility as a Canadian, but also my 
sensibilities as a journalist. There are many things that go on in 
life, you know, that journalists can see and witness. We don't necessarily 
put them in people's faces all the time. Uh, we exercise our judgment. 
Um, perhaps, you know, we'll get to that point over time. I don't 
think we're there now and I think that was a big, big jump for "60 
Minutes" to tape that. Compared to -- to what you daily see on American 
television, I think the program was really never balanced and -- and 
-- uhm, well done. What -- what surprised me and -- and shocked me 
a little bit was CBS chose to use the video shot by Kevorkian and 
so they -- they gave their instrument, their prime instrument as a 
television station out of hand and they didn't do it themselves. How 
then do you feel the media should be involved and how is it involved 
in your countries in raising important and unresolved social and moral 
and ethical issues? I think subjects like these would be more in the 
political arena whereas as it seems here that very sensitive subject 
likes legalization of marijuana, like doctor-assisted suicide... Mm-hmm. 
...and many politicians seem to be afraid to touch on it and that 
means that the discussion is not being played out in politics and 
-- and you're looking for other ways to -- to see how -- people are 
looking for other ways to see how they can start the discussion in 
making it nation wide and this is... Yeah. ...obviously one of those 
means to do that. Well, setting aside all the questions of life and 
death, any other stories coming out of the states this week that have 
particularly interested you or that you're dying to cover from your 
own angle? Well, there's one of particular interest to Canadians that 
I've been covering, uh, and that's the case of a man from Canada who's, 
uh, about to be executed in Texas. And we, of course, don't have the 
death penalty. We haven't had it, uh, for many years. And so, there's 
kind of a fascination, uh, with, uh, the death penalty and with Texas, 
in particular, where about a third of all executions take place. And 
so, uh, that's getting a fair amount of publicity. Presumably, Kevorkian 
will not be involved in that. Although if he is, that'll be a whole 
new angle, won't it, for -- for you? Well, it -- it's sort of -- you 
know, if you want too complete the circle, it's actually, in a sense, 
the same method of death. It's lethal injection... Mm-hmm. Exactly. 
...which is essentially what Kevorkian performed on this, uh, on this 
-- on this man. And Yurid? Well, the very big story now in the paper 
this week, of course, was as in many other papers all over the world, 
the -- the Pinochet story. And what I would like to do a story about 
that hasn't been done yet is the difference in approach to the situation 
from the United States and in many western countries. I mean, there 
has been in -- a lot of elation about, uh, the recent, uh, decision 
in Europe. And of course, the United States is much -- much more reserved 
about what is going on in this matter and what -- what may be the 
effect of it. As somebody said, uh, well, uh, what if somebody's going 
to look at Henry Kissinger's role in -- in, uh, Pinochet's coming 
to power. Yurid Eisevogel, the Washing correspondent for the Dutch 
newspaper "NRC Handelsblat" and Andrew Philips, the bureau chief of 
the Canadian news weekly "McLeans," thank you both. Thank you. Thank 
you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>