<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981127.2000.0377 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "The World." I'm Tony Kahn. The Hezbollah guerilla group has 
claimed responsibility for last night's attack that took the lives 
of two Israeli soldiers in Southern Lebanon. The deaths cut short 
a European visit by Israel's prime minister and reignited debate over 
the Jewish state's occupation zone in Lebanon. Israel has controlled 
parts of Southern Lebanon for 20 years and set up a self-declared 
security zone there in 1985. In a moment, we'll consider the view 
that in Southern Lebanon, Israel is spending more in blood and diplomatic 
capital than it's getting back in the way of security. But first, 
"The World's" Richard Myron reports on the fallout from yesterday's 
attack. A rabbi intones prayers of the funeral of Staff Sergeant A. 
L. Cohen who was killed last night in action in Lebanon. Family and 
friends, along with fellow soldiers, stand and sob around the grave 
site. Cohen's father says that enough Israeli soldiers have died and 
he'll now join the movement calling for Israel to withdraw unilaterally 
from Lebanon. The Israeli Prime Minister Benyamin Netanyahu cut short 
a visit to London and, upon landing in Israel, consulted with his 
defense minister. Netanyahu said Israel would continue its presence 
in Lebanon. We were, therefore, purposed to protect the north of our 
country. We find a way to protect the north of our country and our 
allies in South Lebanon and, at the same time, reduce our presence 
in Lebanon, we'll consider that. And I think that Israel will do what 
it has to do to defend itself, defend its people and its soldiers. 
Earlier this year, the Israeli government accepts the United Nations 
resolution which called for it to withdraw immediately from Lebanon. 
But, the government said it would only do so when the Lebanese army 
is deployed in its place. The Lebanese government has said it won't 
do anything until Israel unilaterally pulls out its forces, which 
Israel refuses to do. Some members of the Israeli cabinet, including 
Minister of Internal Security Avigda Kahalani believe that the only 
way to get Lebanon to act is to attack it every time the Israel army 
suffers losses. We have to give a warning to Lebanon government that 
if they continue at their rate, we will attack some target in Lebanon. 
I'll from our bridges. They should be involved in south of Lebanon. 
They should move some forces to South Lebanon. I think Israel, we 
are ready to withdraw from South of Lebanon, but we will never withdraw 
if somebody will not take care of this area. But other Israelis say 
that the Army should withdraw unilaterally from the security zone 
it established 13 years ago. That's the only way out of what's being 
called the Lebanese mud, according to Yosi Bailin, a labor member 
of the Israeli parliament. The only way right now, to put an end to 
this is to withdraw unilaterally from the security zone, to go back 
to the international border, to know in advance that the U.N. forces 
will replace us, re-deploy in the south of Lebanon and enable the 
Lebanese army to re-deploy there, too. That might be more secure for 
us than our own soldiers remaining there and dying there. These calls 
for Israel to withdraw unilaterally are getting louder in the country. 
Earlier today in Tel Aviv, demonstrators carrying signs that said 
"enough blood" and "withdraw from Lebanon now" blocked a road outside 
the headquarters of the defense ministry. I was a soldier in Lebanon. 
I served there for over a year. I buried some very good friends who 
were killed there and we're sick of it. We're all of sick of it. The 
Israeli public is sick of it, I'm sick of it. It's a war that doesn't 
need to go on. It's a war that we cannot win, that we never could 
have won in the first place. The time has come to admit that we made 
a mistake and bring our soldiers home finally. But polls show that 
most Israelis see no choice but to maintain the security zone in Southern 
Lebanon. This man is typical. I don't think they can withdraw, because 
they're forced to because of security considerations. They can't just 
leave it. I don't think the situation should remain the status quo 
because, you know, people are dying and it's not getting anywhere 
either, but something has to be done, but we can't just leave there 
because it's, uh, it's an open door and it's right on Israel's, you 
know, uh, front lawn, you know. Hezbollah has become increasingly 
effective in inflicting casualties on the Israeli army in Lebanon. 
The guerilla group's attacks have claimed the lives of seven Israeli 
soldiers in the past 11 days. Most Israelis understand the quagmire 
in Lebanon will end not on the battlefield, but only when a negotiated 
agreement is reached with Lebanon and the country that calls the shots 
there, Syria. For "The World," this is Richard Myron in Jerusalem. 
Kasim Jaffar is a writer and commentator on Middle East affairs, currently 
working in the gulf state of Qatar. He says Israel's self-declared 
security zone in South Lebanon is anything but secure. I really believe 
that naming this area as a security zone has become such a misnomer 
now that it has really become ridiculous. This is not providing security 
for anybody. It hasn't been established for a very long time now that 
this security zone is the source of all the tensions and problems 
that are happening in South Lebanon. This is, basically, an area of 
occupation which the Israelis have managed to keep with growing losses, 
over the past few years against the wishes of a great section of the 
Israeli population and even within the Israeli military and political 
leadership. And at the same time, it has proven an extreme liability. 
So perhaps it is now time, in fact, it is high time, to review the 
whole situation and the whole motion of the so-called security zone. 
As you say, this goes way back. Many Israeli soldiers, thousands have 
suffered casualties, but what are we seeing here now? Is this just 
more of that escalation or has something fundamental changed and has 
it really become a different kind of crisis? Well, you see, if we 
look at this from an Israeli point of view, then perhaps they have 
a legitimate concern whereby they have to secure the stability and 
law and order on their northern borders. On the other hand, if we 
look at it from a Lebanese point of view, this is an occupation. There 
are elements there which are resisting that occupation, regardless 
of who is opposing those elements, whether it's the Syrians or the 
Iranians or whoever it may be. As far as the Lebanese government is 
concerned, they cannot stop those military operations by those elements, 
whether it's Hezbollah or anybody else, for that matter, unless the 
Israelis declare their intention to withdraw unconditionally from 
that particular area of South Lebanon as, indeed, it is determined 
by the United Nations Security Council's Resolution 425. There is 
a very explicit resolution from the Security Council dating back to 
1978, stating that Israel should withdraw unconditionally from that 
particular part of South Lebanon and to leave the matters there for 
a United Nations peacekeeping force, alongside the Lebanese army. 
What kind of guarantees does Israel really have that, if it did withdraw, 
it would be as safe or safer than it has been? I think if the Israelis 
declare officially and without any ambiguity, their intention to withdraw 
alongside cooperation with the United Nations and in conjunction with 
the Security Council resolution then perhaps the Lebanese government 
will be forced to sit down and talk to the Israelis. Unfortunately, 
so far, neither this present Israeli government nor the one before 
it has acknowledged the necessity to sit down and talk about withdrawing 
unconditionally. Let me ask you about what you think the intentions 
of the Netanyahu government might be, because there has been talk 
of a wider review of policy there. Do you feel that there is no possibility 
that they might consider a withdrawal? Well, we know very well that 
there are increasing forces and demands within the Israel constituency, 
not only to review the situation in South Lebanon, but even to withdraw 
from South Lebanon. Unfortunately, I don't think the present Israel 
government is really serious about that. Perhaps what we are seeing 
now is another way for the Israelis to retaliate against those latest 
operations by the Lebanese guerrillas and perhaps we will lead the 
whole area into another round of very serious confrontation. Mr. Jaffar, 
thank you very much for speaking with us. My pleasure. Kasim Jaffar 
is a writer and commentator on Middle East affairs. He spoke with 
us from Joha Qatar. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>