<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981127.2000.2486 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The environmental group Friends of the Earth has declared tomorrow 
international no-shopping day. In retaliation for what the organization 
regards as the rampant consumers in between Thanksgiving and Christmas, 
it has launched this ad, telling consumers to stop doing what comes 
naturally and to boycott shops for 24 hours. A waste or a wicked waste 
of money and raw materials, but a at 29.99. And the, cute and cuddly 
and no off switch, tells complete gibberish. Your darling children 
will think it really loves them. Emotional crisis solved for only 
9999. This was brought to you by productions, bringing you all the 
guilt of the festive season. Easy credit terms, no guarantees, no 
refunds. Friends of the Earth spokesman Nick Chiles says that behind 
the ad's joke lies a serious message. What they're saying is for one 
day, we should stop in our tracks and think about the consumers and 
the way we're following and the things that we're buying, the things 
that we've been throwing away and whether we actually need to be in 
this rat race where we're running around buying more and more and 
more and more, because the advertisers are telling us to buy more 
and more and more. environmental indications of using more of these 
resources, dumping all those broken toys, that's broken products into 
the environment. We need to step back and think about that and wonder 
what it's doing. Well, is there one part of the planet where you would 
advise on behalf of what you believe in, uh, Santa should not stop 
with his sleigh and his advertising agencies and everything else, 
what part of the world would that be? The U.S. and the U.K. have got 
key responsibilities here. We're it's two biggest consumers in the 
world and we're using up more than our fair share of resources and 
pumping out more than our fair share of pollution. We should stop 
that, step back and -- and think about what we're doing here. You're 
asking people, of course, to -- to see a -- the big picture, when 
what they're caught in the middle of is usually a traffic jam desperately 
trying to get a toy for somebody. Now, can you make the case to that 
person that that toy is actually going to hurt the planet? How are 
you going to make them make that connection? Well, firstly, we need 
to think about why we're buying these things, all of these things, 
especially look at kids' toys. Kids get toys now, they use them for 
a few days, they get thrown away or they get left in the piles and 
there's piles of toys there. We're doing that because kids are getting 
advertised at. Kids are facing so many at them, getting them to pester 
their parents to go and buy more and more things for them. We need 
to rethink the way we do that and, perhaps we need to control the 
advertising industry because, you know, the things we consume, the 
materials to make them are being mined from somewhere or forests have 
been chopped down and they'll end up in rubbish tips someday, polluting 
someone's back yard and that's not really the way we want to go forward 
in the next century. Well, it's not only the product, of course, but 
also the packaging, I would assume, the things that we don't even 
think about as being a part of the process and a kind of assault on 
the environment. We all see the size of our dust bins after, uh, Thanksgiving 
or after Christmas. They can end up in landfill sites somewhere. Surely, 
we can enjoy ourselves in ways that don't collect huge amounts of 
rubbish and don't cause environmental damage. We can enjoy each other's 
company and that's the greatest thing about Christmas and Thanksgiving. 
Of course. Well, we can, in the sense that we have the capacity, but 
in another sense, we don't and probably never will, if it's completely 
left up to people to just decide not to do something, which they're 
compelled to by everything in their environment, by the force of the 
advertising, by their peer pressure, by everything else. And somebody's 
who's got a serious concern, how can you really get people to do something 
that's so against the grain? It's a big cultural change and big cultural 
changes don't come quickly and they don't come easily. So I think 
what we're doing in groups across the world are doing the same. Let's 
start thinking about it. And over time, it will change and I'm convinced 
that in 20 or 40 year's time, we'll really look back at how we consume 
and -- and the things we're doing now to celebrate Christmas and Thanksgiving 
and see them as being a mad way of celebrating what, in fact, are 
just good family events, where we can enjoy each other's company without 
buying lots of rubbish. That's Nick Chiles, campaigner with Friends 
of the Earth in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>