<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981127.2000.2009 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
According to a poll released today in Montreal, Quebec's ruling "Partique' 
Dequa" is poised to defeat the pro-Canadian unity liberals in Monday's 
provincial election. If the Partique' Dequa does win, it will gather 
strength in its drive to gain independence for the eastern province. 
That movement is based primarily on the party's devotion to protecting 
the French language in a country and a continent where it has nearly 
disappeared. "The World's" roving reporter Boris Maximof who has drove 
to Quebec more than once in his life, has our story. Back in 1980 
when I emigrated to Canada and landed in Montreal, the city looked 
a bit unusual. Almost all available space on the walls was covered 
with graffiti. But every message had one or two words only. "Oui," 
said some. "No merci," said the others -- yes, or no thanks. Only 
a few a few months earlier, the province had voted a referendum about 
whether to separate from Canada, and the idea was turned down by the 
voters. And yet, the question remained open. But when the idea of 
Quebec independence was a romantic affair. Poets, writers, politicians 
and students joined hands and sang songs about a country that didn't 
exist. Almost 20 years passed. They another referendum on independence 
came and went and nothing changed.. But do you know this, something 
did happen. Successive governments of Quebec took certain measures 
to ensure that, at the minimum, nobody would ever be in any doubt 
as to the nature of Quebec. A Montreal custom that wouldn't be out 
of place anywhere else in North American, immigrants from all over 
the world are patiently learning French. Language is a big deal in 
Quebec. All the governments, whether separatists or not, have a mission. 
They don't just raise taxes health service, everyone in Quebec politics 
is convinced that the French language must be protected here in their 
only bit of North America where it managed to survive. One of the 
reasons is that French is the only official language here and that 
means, for example, that the immigrants learning French do it not 
in school or some community center, but in a government institution, 
at taxpayer's expense. It's a big building and, uh, we've been, uh, 
concentrating in all these services for the new immigrants, including, 
uh, the French courses. Mimi Combrione, the head of the Montreal Branch 
of the Quebec Immigration Department, she says that the idea is simply 
not to make sure that immigrants can speak the official language in 
the province. They learned our -- what wasn't -- whatever society 
here, how to live here, how to go out to get the metro, how is the 
medical system and everything. So it's a integration course, let's 
say, in French at the same time. And the language law in Quebec does 
not stop at teaching immigrants. The provincial government has a department 
for the protection of the French language: Office de la Francais. 
One of the services it offers is the language hotline. If you have 
a sudden need to know the correct French word or expression, just 
call the department. There is more, something called the Charter of 
French Language. The Charter of French Language is the law that makes 
it an obligation to use French and has the objective to make French 
the normal and every day language of work, business and commerce in 
Quebec. Jiran Perquette, the representative of the Office de la Francais, 
the government department charged with ensuring compliance with the 
language law. So what does the law cover? Let's talk about public 
signs. The -- the law says that you must have the commercial sign 
in French. You may use other languages, like English, Italian, Greek, 
but French must be markedly predominant. Now, with regard to the language 
of work, all firms that have more than 50 employees in Quebec, must 
obtain what we call certificate of Francization, which means they 
must show to us that French is the normal and every day language of 
work, which does not exclude the use of other languages, but makes 
it that in a normal day, uh, the majority of the people in Quebec 
do work in French. Et cetera, et cetera. All the labels on all the 
products must be in French. The immigrants must send their children 
to French schools and the Quebec government even has rules and regulations 
about which language must appear on the web sites. Why go to such 
lengths? Does any language need that kind of strong protection. Jiran 
Perquette. We represent two percent of the population in a North American 
context where English dominates. If we did not have language legislation, 
we think that, on a long-term basis, French would become a folkloric 
language and not a modern language. That fear is real. We all know 
what happened to French speakers in Louisiana, in New England, in 
Nova Scotia and beyond. They either lost their language completely 
or are now a bit of a curiosity for tourists. Quebec is determined 
that fate. And here is where immigrants come in. When the language 
law was adopted 20 years ago, special provisions were made for the 
English Canadian, but not for immigrants. Quebec wants to ensure that 
the new arrivals would not only learn French, but also adopt that 
language for generations to come. The result is curious. At a Montreal 
Community radio station, for example, the Spanish broadcasts are, 
of course, in Spanish. But in the studio itself, the announcers chat 
in curious mixture of languages. Spanish, English and French are all 
used at the same time. People switch from one language to another, 
as if it are the most normal thing in the world and that makes Jiran 
Perquette from the French Language Ministry very happy. In essence, 
by imposing French, you have a situation here in Montreal where we 
are truly the only bilingual area, because the immigrants that come 
here, they learn English, but because they're in Quebec, they have 
to learn French and they come in here with their third language. So 
I think there's no other area in North America where there are so 
many bilingual and multilingual people here. And immigrants caught 
between English and French communities, did another strange thing. 
In Quebec, they tend to keep their mother tongue for generation, making 
it a truly polyglot society, as a result -- an interesting linguistic 
experiment on a large scale. As I was told by many people in Montreal, 
every community has its own obsessions. Americans seem to be obsessed 
about presidential sects. In Quebec, people are obsessed about language. 
After all, why not? For "The World," this is Boris Maximof. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>