<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981127.2000.0915 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Voters in the German village of Kivelendorf go to the polls this weekend 
to vote for Mayor. They know the mayor's record, but some wonder how 
well they know the mayor. As the BBC's Janet Barry reports, that's 
because there have been some changes made. A glamorous red- haired 
woman does her shopping in the high street of Kivelendorf. Just a 
few short months ago, Mitiana Linkner was a man called Norbert, a 
devoted husband and father and a mayor of this tiny eastern German 
village. One day, he decided to end a miserable double existence and 
came out as a transsexual. But Mitiana Linkner says her personal satisfaction 
has meant professional disaster. She says the villagers are bewildered 
and the council wants her out of office. : Many, many people here 
just avoid me at the moment. Some people are lobbying very, very hard 
against me. They're the ones who just don't understand transsexuality. 
There's so much ignorance about it. Some others are quite supportive, 
but the vast majority just don't want to talk about it. They're afraid 
of the whole thing. But whatever her voters feel, Mitiana Linkner's 
fame is spreading and Kivelendorf doesn't yet know what to make of 
that or its transsexual mayor. Some people here say, look, here comes 
our mayor and he's wearing a dress and he has a bust. They make fun 
of him. But I think his private life is his own affair. I'm not impressed 
by a mayor who has a sex change. It reflects badly on this village. 
It's abnormal and the village has a strange reputation now. Uvid Forcid 
tends his geese at his farmyard in Kivelendorf. He's Mitiana Linkner's 
deputy and, along with the rest of the village council, he hopes Kivelendorf 
will say no to her this weekend. He denies the campaign against her 
has anything to do directly with her sexuality. He says she's neglected 
her duties and created a media circus around her sex change. Kivelendorf 
has a bad image now. People only ever hear Linker's point of view 
and that's not fair. I travel all over Germany and people always say, 
oh, you're the one from Kivelendorf, but it's not my fault, it's all 
the mayor's fault. If he'd stayed normal, none of this would have 
happened. We'd still have our quiet village. Going about our business 
on the sleepy streets of Kivelendorf, Mitiana Linkner says her voters 
appreciate the honesty she's shown them. She says now she wants her 
critics to be honest with her and admits they just don't want a transsexual 
mayor. She says her campaign is flacking up an intolerance she believes 
lies at the very heart of German society. You know, 80 percent of 
transsexuals in Germany are unemployed. And of course, it's never 
because they're transsexual. People always find some other reason 
for it. That figure really makes you think. A lot of transsexuals 
here are waiting for the outcome of this case, have had so much support 
and all they're saying is you have to stick it out, so that's exactly 
what I'm doing. Mitiana Linker says Kivelendorf is becoming a buyward 
for intolerance. If she's voted out of office this weekend, she says 
she'll appeal to the German constitutional court and then she'll pack 
up and leave Kivelendorf and Germany for good. For "The World," this 
is Janet Barry in Berlin. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>