<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981127.0500.0350 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I'm Les Carpenter, and this is VOA NEWS NOW, we're coming to you from 
Washington. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has cut short 
a visit to Europe to consult with top advisors on a wave of attacks 
against Israeli soldiers in southern Lebanon. Two more soldiers were 
killed over night in bomb blasts claimed by Pro-Iranian Hezbollah 
guerrillas. VOA's David Gullest has details from Jerusalem. Prime 
Minister Netanyahu, who was visiting London, canceled a visit to Spain 
to fly home for urgent consultations on attacks in Lebanon which have 
killed seven Israeli soldiers since last week. Military officials 
here, say two soldiers, both sergeants, were killed overnight in the 
latest incidents involving roadside bombs in Israeli's self-declared 
Lebanese Security Zone. They say an initial bomb damaged vehicles 
in a military convoy heading into the western part of the zone. A 
second bomb was set off at the same sight, while recovery efforts 
were under way from the first blast, killing the two soldiers and 
wounding two others. Israel responded with an early morning air strike 
against Hezbollah oppositions beyond the Security Zone, its fourth 
air attack since the wave of roadside bombings began on Monday of 
Last week. Israel's staked out the roughly 15 kilometer wide Security 
Zone when it withdrew from most of the rest of southern Lebanon in 
1985. Since then Hezbollah, which is armed by Iran and given logistical 
support by Syria, has waged a hit and run campaign against Israeli 
troops and their mostly Christian South Lebanon Army Militia allies 
in the area. Lebanon expert Clinton Bailey of Tel Aviv University 
says there appears to be a connection between the latest Hezbollah 
attacks and strides made in recent weeks in the Israeli/ Palestinian 
peace process. Dr. Bailey says, Syria may be trying to remind Israel 
that the Syria/Lebanon track of the peace process has been frozen 
for two years. Syria controls almost everything to do with Hezbollah. 
Hezbollah's supplies come through Damascus from Iran, and then into 
Lebanon. Syria controls the area where Hezbollah gets organized, and 
trains and goes out for operations. So, there is a great deal of coordination. 
And if you go back over the last few years, that whenever Syria is 
in a similar situation, and wants to put pressure on Israel, to force 
Israel to the negotiating table, Hezbollah begins to operate in a 
very intensive way. And it has to be more than coincidence. The new 
attacks have prompted calls from some Israeli politicians, including 
former Prime Minister Shimon Perez, for a unilateral withdrawal from 
Lebanon. But that is strongly opposed by Israeli military leaders, 
who say Hezbollah might then be tempted to move forward and attack 
Northern Israeli towns. The Netanyahu government last April announced 
it had accepted UN Security Council Resolution 425 for a withdrawal. 
That was tied, however to a demand that Lebanon deploys its army southward 
to combat the guerrillas and insure the safety of the pro-Israeli 
militiamen. Israeli news reports say the Netanyahu government may 
reduce the number of military posts Israel maintains in the security 
zone to cut casualties. Defense minister Izhak Mordechai has warned 
Lebanon it could be held responsible for the violence. Another senior 
cabinet member, Avigdor Calihani publicly called for attacks to knock 
out electricity and water supplies to Beirut. David Gulles, VOA News, 
Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>