<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981127.0500.1354 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many Americans are staying off work today. They are extending the 
Thanksgiving Holiday Weekend to make it a long weekend. With only 
four weeks before Christmas, the Friday after Thanksgiving has traditionally 
been the biggest shopping day in America. For the past several decades 
most Americans have been shopping in vast climate controlled indoor 
malls, where hundreds of shops offer everything from bath oils to 
sofas, and even pianos. Zuwansa Hoke reports that a lot of people 
are getting tired of those crowded shopping malls. So developers are 
offering new more convenient ways to shop. Seven Corners Shopping 
Center is located in one of the busiest suburban areas of Virginia 
just outside Washington DC. Until recently it was dominated by a large 
enclosed Mall with several major department stores, and some 70 smaller 
shops and services. The large gray blocks of buildings without windows 
gradually gave way to outdoor plazas lined with stores that drivers 
can see from the road. Each store has its own entrance, so shoppers 
don't have to navigate through an entire mall just to go to one store. 
And there is car parking close to each store. The company that manages 
Seven Corners Shopping Center is called Soul Centers. Charlie Sharron 
vice president of Soul Centers Management says they transformed the 
original enclosed mall into what he calls a power center. By doing 
the power centers, we provide the shoppers in the Washington metropolitan 
area the opportunity to go in and buy specific items at lower prices. 
So the company has kept a number of tenants from 75 in the previous 
indoor mall to 35, and it has brought in several vast mega stores 
with discount prices such as Home Depot and Best Buy. The larger tenants 
tend to be known as the category killers, and they tend to be able 
to buy in balk and therefore offer their customers all kinds of electronics 
and food, everything that you could think of under the sun at a much 
less price than what it would cost if you went to a specialty shop 
which was typically found in a mall the size of Seven Corners when 
Seven Corners was a mall. Shopping malls are expensive to maintain 
because of the air-conditioning and heat they need, as well as the 
security and cleaning services. The maintenance costs get passed on 
to the customer in higher prices for mall merchandise. Also, as suburbs 
around cities, like Washington DC, get more populated malls become 
too crowded, and less convenient for shopping then they used to be. 
I'm very busy, and I simply do not have time to find a parking spot, 
and don't have the patience to fight other vehicles and other folks 
looking for a parking spot. And simply put, I go to the most convenient 
place possible. So more and more shoppers are avoiding enclosed malls. 
Retailers say the success of a shopping mall depends on the location. 
Strip malls do better along commuter routes, where people make short 
shopping stops on the way home from work, as is the case of Seven 
Corners. Enclosed malls do better near major highways connecting several 
suburbs and making the mall accessible to more shoppers. Nubar Pesh 
owns a chain of tobacco stores in Virginia called Tobacco Barn. Two 
of his stores are in outdoor strip malls and four are in enclosed 
malls. People going to a mall for shopping for a hat or a pair of 
shoes, and they want to buy something for their husband. And they 
go by and they see a nice little pipe in my store. And they say, oh 
he also smokes. So why don't we do shopping for him for a pipe. And 
this is where you get your residual business from a mall that you 
wouldn't otherwise get in a center. So, would you have preferred to 
have stayed in a closed in mall with lots of other shops around? In 
here, no. After we opened up in, especially in Seven Corners, it has 
been very successful. Because more people saw me from the road and 
they saw the sign outside. And they say, oh, how long have you been 
here? And I've been 17-20 years almost, but they just had noticed 
me because I was outside the center. And the cars going back and forth, 
they spotted me and they decided, oh there is a shop in here. Let's 
go and see what they have. Both retailers and shoppers seem to agree 
that enclosed climate controlled malls are still the best solution, 
in some parts of the country. But, Mr. Sharron says, most Americans 
shopping malls are undergoing some kind of change to accommodate the 
needs of today's busy working people. I'm Zlatisla Hoke. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>