<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981127.0500.2055 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Germany's new chancellor paid his first visit to the European Commission 
in Brussels bearing the news that he wants to reduce Germany's contributions 
to the European Union. Gerhardt Schroeder served notice that he will 
push for changes when Germany takes over the six-month Presidency 
of the EU in January. We'll get details from Ron Penstein. Germany 
along with Austria, Sweden and the Netherlands complains that its 
share of the European Union's budget is too large, compared with what 
it receives. According to European Union statistics, Germany pays 
more than five times more than any other member. Germany has 26 percent 
of the European Union's gross national product, but it pays 28 percent 
of the Union's costs. In his first visit to the European Commission 
since becoming Chancellor in October, Gerhardt Schroeder, speaking 
though an interpreter, says a compromise must be found. The unfairness 
of the net German position established by the commission will have 
to be changed. These two perspectives, the one that we want to be 
treated fairly. We don't want to have to bear such an imbalance with 
regards to our net position for all time. We have a problem there 
that the member states who profit from that clearly are reluctant 
to give anything up. And that will be part and parcel of the negotiations 
to try to find a compromise. Those reluctant to give anything up are 
the poorer members of the European Union, Spain, Portugal, and Greece, 
the beneficiaries of the union's agricultural and industrial subsidies. 
As the European Union considers enlargement to poorer countries in 
Eastern Europe, Germany's problem can only grow unless the system 
of financing the union is changed. Germany will be in charge of the 
agenda when it takes over the presidency of the European Union from 
Austria on New Years day. Chancellor Schroeder hopes to start working 
on a compromise by the time European leaders gather for their summit 
meeting in Cologne next march. Chancellor Schroeder refuses to comment 
on how Germany plans to deal with another touchy European issue, the 
future of Kurdish leader Abdullah Urjallon. Germany has an arrest 
warrant for the accused terrorist, but has not asked Italy for Mr. 
Urjallon's extradition. Chancellor Schroeder meets Italian Prime Minister 
Masemo Dillema in Bonn to try to work out a compromise. Mr. Urjallon 
has asked Italy for political asylum, and the Italian court has turned 
down Turkey's request for the Kurdish leaders extradition. Chancellor 
Schroeder does agree with the European Union's warning to Turkey not 
to organize a trade boycott of Italy. Germany has a population of 
2.5 million Turks and Kurds, and is reluctant to set off demonstrations 
by asking for Mr. Urjallon's extradition. Ron Penstein VOA News, Brussels. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>