<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981127.0500.0580 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rescue workers in India's Punjab state are continuing to search for 
bodies following Thursday's train accident that claimed at least 150 
lives. Correspondent Douglas Backshon in New Delhi told VOA's Kurt 
Henshon and Meredith Buell that rescue workers are still at the sight, 
and the death toll could still rise. Well they are back at work on 
the scene today, and they are trying to clear away more of the wreckage. 
And we're told there was one car that was badly crushed that they 
think there may be even more survivors or victims in. But it has been 
difficult to open it because it was so badly crushed. Basically they 
are hoping to clear the site today. The commissioner for railway safety 
is to begin his investigation today. And that's it from the scene. 
What we no so far about the cause or what they think is the cause 
- they really don't know. That the minister of the railways has said 
that it is too early to know the cause, but they are talking about 
a coupler breaking, which would have released the cars, and then they 
would have derailed. Or another possibility is that the derailment 
occurred - there was a fracture, a bad rail line and then there was 
a derailment. And then the coupling broke. But again this is just 
the initial looking into it. Doug, we understand 16 coaches and all 
were damaged. I imagine it was a pretty horrific scene. Are they getting 
any sort of evidence at all that some of these people inside these 
coaches may still be alive? Well, there were some. Yesterday they 
did find some people. For instance there was the story of one soldier 
who had lost an arm, who was still alive. And they put an IV on him. 
But at this point, this morning, I can't say. And it has been some 
time since yesterday. But there were some people yesterday who had 
suffered bad, you know, mutilations, who were at least alive for a 
while. But again, they have this one car that they are checking that 
has been badly crushed, that has people in it as far as they know. 
But they don't know if they are dead or alive. Douglas, I think we 
ought to, for those who haven't been listening, we ought to just briefly 
outline the scenario. What did happen? You said a coupler broke, but 
there was more to it than that, right. BACKSHON: Well, basically there 
were two trains. One train was heading north towards Amritzer, and 
some of its cars derailed. And this was on Thursday in the darkness 
of early morning. And then a second train coming in the opposite direction 
- and so these cars derailed and they fell over onto a parallel track. 
The second train coming in the opposite direction, heading for Calcutta 
hit the derailed cars of the first train. So there was a collision 
and then a second derailment. And that's what happened. And so the 
way the system there works, there is no way to notify a train coming 
in the opposite direction, that there's some huge obstruction like 
that on the track. Good question, the accident occurred -- just a 
few minutes after the initial derailment there was the collision. 
And according to the accounts, there is a rail guard, or someone stationed 
where the derailment occurred, and he is in a little station house. 
And he heard all this noise. These are according to some of the accounts 
from railway officials. And he has a phone to call the neighboring 
station. But apparently it is old equipment, a crank phone. Okay, 
you have to get some one on the line. And according to the accounts 
we're hearing, now this may be all fleshed out with the investigation. 
By the time he rang the other station, which was shortly, the train 
had already left. So, the accounts that we're getting are that the 
accident just happened within a few minutes of the derailment. And 
the notification was almost impossible, although it may have taken 
place. But will see what comes out of the investigation. Correspondent 
Douglas Backshon, in New Delhi, spoke with VOA's Kurt Henshon, and 
Meredith Buell. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>