<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981127.0500.0795 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chile's Foreign Minister, Jose Miguel Insulsa, is in London today 
to ask for the release of former military leader Augusto Pinochet. 
Mr. Insulsa is to meet with British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook, 
who says the Pinochet matter is up to the courts. The former dictator 
is under police guard in a London clinic since his arrest last month. 
He could be expedited to Spain to face charges of genocide and torture. 
John Hickman, who is Britain's Ambassador to Chile from 1982-1987. 
He's written a history of Chile. We asked him whether he ever thought 
he would see General Pinochet face extradition? No, I don't think 
I did. I don't think many people would have imagined it. I think it 
was surprising to find him arrested in the first place, and reasons 
why that happened still are not clear. Although undoubtedly, he initially 
was taken by the Spanish judge, as we've discussed. And having been 
arrested, and having that arrest having found to be illegal in the 
court of appeals as it was a few weeks ago, I think it was surprising 
to most people,/ that situation was reversed yesterday. I am very 
anxious about the effects this will have, and indeed we can already 
see that it is having. In Chile, it is re-opening divisions in the 
country, which have been at the past for many years, and which slowly, 
since the hand over of part of the government since 1990. Slowly those 
divisions and those wounds have been healing. And this even has already 
reopened the wounds quite seriously. And if the situation continues 
to be as tense as it now is, I think that damage can only get worse. 
In the worst case, we shall see a Chile, which is divided very deeply 
between, to put it crudely, between right and left. And which is taken 
back 20 years or more into a very bad period of its history. I would 
say the best resolution of the situation which is now open, is now 
possible, is that the British government, which means the British 
Home Secretary, should exercise the power which he has, to decline 
to allow the extradition proceedings to go ahead. Those proceedings, 
if they were to start and take their usual course, can be very long 
winded. They can take months even years. And during those months and 
even years in which a battle will be fought out in the English courts 
to see whether General Pinochet should be extradited to Spain to face 
some sort of trial there. Which would be seen in Chile by many people, 
including myself, as really a political show trial in which justice 
would really not be the prime consideration. I think the prospect 
of that extradition process dragging on for another period of months 
or years is such bad news for Chile, and for British relations with 
Chile, that the duty of the British government in to stop it, which 
it has the power to do, and I hope will do. John Hickman, former British 
Ambassador to Chile spoke with VOA's Erin Brommett. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>