<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981127.0500.1824 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hello again, I'm Les Carpenter and this is VOA News Now. A new round 
of attacks on Israeli troops in south Lebanon has claimed the lives 
of more than a half-dozen Israeli soldiers since Wednesday. The situation 
prompted Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to cut short a 
visit to Europe and to head home. VOA's Kurt Henschon asked Jerusalem 
correspondent David Gulles, what seems to be going on? Since last 
week we've had a series of attacks by Hezbollah guerrillas against 
the Israelis in southern Lebanon. Specifically inside the security 
zone that the Israelis staked out in Lebanon in 1985 after there major 
invasion of Lebanon. There has been a hit and run war being waged 
by these Hezbollah guerrillas for several years against the Israelis. 
Suddenly though last week the pace of attacks increased. There have 
been seven Israelis killed since early last week and several others 
injured. And additionally the Israelis have staged a number of air 
strikes against Hezbollah oppositions beyond the security zone. So 
what does this tie into, the peace process some way, to the Wye River 
Accord? Well, there may be a tie in Kurt, because as you know, the 
peace process between Israel and the Palestinians has been put back 
on track by the Wye River Accord. The Israelis last week, staged a 
withdrawal from a large part of the West Bank. That part of the peace 
process is going well. Now the Syria/Lebanon track of the peace process 
has been stalled for some time. And there are many political analysts 
in Israel who believe that the Syrians, who provide logistical support 
for these Hezbollah guerrillas may be using them as a lever to try 
to prompt Israel to pay more attention to the Syrian track of the 
peace process. Of course the Syrians are demanding the return of the 
Golan Heights, which Israel captured in the 1967 Middle East War. 
Prime Minister Netanyahu is heading back to Israel from Europe. What 
might he be doing as a first step to resolving all these issues? Well 
he will certainly be conferring with military advisors about what 
they can do immediately, to cut down on the casualties along Israeli 
troops. There has begun to be a big outcry in Israel for a unilateral 
withdrawal from Lebanon. There are many politicians, including former 
Prime Minister Shimon Perez who believe Israel should carry out long 
standing UN resolutions and leave Lebanon unilaterally. Now the military 
establishment and a lot of politicians on the right are very opposed 
to this. They say if Israel pulls out of the security zone, which 
is about 15 kilometers wide along the northern border, Hezbollah would 
merely move right down to the international border and continue its 
attacks. So, there is a growing political debate about what to do. 
VOA's David Gulles in Jerusalem. Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu 
has promised to launch a review of the situation along Israel's northern 
border. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>