<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981015.1830.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We don't know if the federal reserve intended to surprise 
people today, but they certainly did in midafternoon with just a whiff 
of alarm in the air bl the state of financial markets, the fed has 
lowered the interest rate another 0.25%. the immediate effect was 
a very vigorous rally in the stock market. When they closed an hour 
later, the Dow Jones industrials were up 330 points and the NASDAQ 
up more than 70. There is a lot to this. There's been real distress 
in the financial market. The bond market has been dislocated, there's 
nervousness about banks in trouble and corporate earnings are down 
all over the place. ABC's Betsy Stark first. She picks up the story 
from there first. The primary goal is to encourage U.S. banks and 
brokerage houses battered by big losses to keep lending money at low 
rates. Small and medium-sized businesses especially have seen their 
credit choked off in the last several weeks, increasing the threat 
of a major downturn in the economy. Green pan by cutting raids adds 
money to the system so consumers feel more comfortable in borrowing, 
so lenders and banks and mortgage companies feel more comfortable 
in lending. Fed watchers say the surprise timing of today's move shows 
just how concern Mr. Greenspan had become about the credit crunch 
continuing, despite a rate cut just two weeks ago. The announcement 
was calculated to give the Dow a boost and it did. The euphoric reaction 
is expected to carry over into Asian markets as well. But if investors 
interpret today's move as a sign the economic situation has worsened, 
stocks could sell off as quickly as they rose. However, this is powerful 
medicine. And this will filter through the economy and it will help, 
even if it does make some people nervous that perhaps the fed knows 
something more dire than the rest of us. Fed policymakers will be 
watching closely. If businesses continue to have a hard time borrowing 
money or consumers show signs their unwilling to spend, economists 
think the fed will lower rates again before the end of the year. Betsy 
Stark, ABC News, New York. With so many people interested in this, 
we seek another informed opinion. What do you and your colleagues 
think of it this? I think it's a sign to try and improve confidence 
in the credit markets. We have real concerns that money is not going 
where it should go. That is what the fed you think intended? I think 
the fed was trying to make sure fear didn't -- we're seeing signs 
that perhaps money wasn't getting to the intermediate creditors that 
it was meant for. Based on the last couple of hours, which is all 
you had, do you think this really contributes to financial stability. 
I think it does. The real test will be if it helps the lending markets. 
How much nervousness is there really out there in the financial community? 
I think people were scared. I think people were scared about the system. 
People were running all sorts of possibilities in their mind. Dark 
holes ahead kind of thing. Exactly. We didn't know how bad it could 
get. I think this adds fear -- the federal reserve is on our side. 
That's a comforting thought. Even this small cut you think actually 
makes a difference? It's what has to be done. Mr. manley, thanks very 
much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>