<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981015.1830.1050 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The trouble is some of the people back home hate each other. Simple 
animosity is not strong enough. Our Middle East correspondent Gillian 
Findlay gives us one Al example tonight. It's all about a home in 
Jerusalem. Huda il-Amin is a Palestinian and for months now, she's 
been engaging in what most people would call stealing. She's been 
taking tiles, hundreds of tiles, hand made by Palestinians and installed 
in this house by her father more than 50 years ago. It's history. 
This is our culture. It's our heritage. The house he built has had 
several owners since 1948. When she learned the current owner was 
renovating, she began her collection. The day our camera followed 
her -- Excuse me. The Israeli owners showed up too. Yes, I'm the Palestinian 
who owns the house. My name is huda il-Amin and my father built this 
house. He has put every stone in this house. Okay? In 1948, Jerusalem 
had become a battle ground like thousands of Palestinians who fled, 
huda's father believed he would soon return. But then Arab country 
as tacked Israel one day after it declared independence and the war 
was over, Israel controlled this part of Jerusalem and the homes of 
Palestinians who left, were declared properties of the new Israeli 
state. The fact the Arab armies attack attacked, including thousands 
who survived the haul cost, is how Israel -- Israelis who own the 
homes say they bought the houses legally and don't feel responsible 
for the past. I can come also to Berlin where my grandmother lived 
and say this is my house, my grandmother lived here, grew up here, 
had a whole big business here. This is also mine. It's a question 
that comes up in every war. Every war has a winner and a loser. But 
huda il-Amin refuses to accept she has lost. These are the certificate 
of registration for the -- She still has her father's original deeds 
to the house and says she is proud that, unlike some Palestinians, 
he never accepted Israel's small offers of compensation. Forget politics 
and whatever, I'm the daughter of the man who has built this house 
and I'm proud of it. From their point of view, you are stealing. From 
their point of view, yes. But from my point of view, they have stolen 
my hous In the end,lice were called, but they never arrived. Israeli 
neighbors took back most of the tiles huda had taken. This one small 
dispute ended like so many others have here, unresolved and in anger. 
I'll never let any Israeli to live here in peace. Gillian Findlay, 
Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>