<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981015.0894 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Police threw a tight security cordon Thursday around Wole Soyinka, 
Nigeria's Nobel prize-winning playwright and outspoken junta critic 
who returned from four years in exile a day earlier. Soyinka, who 
spent the day at a friend's home in the posh Lagos suburb of Victoria 
Island, was being guarded by a special police protection squad after 
compatriots of the literary figure expressed fears for his safety, 
a senior police chief said on condition of anonymity. Armed officers 
were stationed in the streets near the quiet residential home and 
police roadblocks were stepped up in the area. A family friend said 
concerns for Soyinka's welfare had prompted his supporters to rush 
him into an awaiting Jeep when he arrived home Wednesday night to 
throngs of singing people at Lagos' international airport. Although 
there was no public sign of an immediate threat against Soyinka, Nigeria 
has a turbulent history of hot-blooded politics that has frequently 
spilled over into kidnappings, bloodshed and summary arrests and detentions. 
It was the threat of arrest that prompted Soyinka to flee Nigeria 
in 1994 by slipping across the border, apparently into neighboring 
Benin, after his passports were seized. Later, he helped set up the 
National Liberation Council of Nigeria, which lobbied to bring an 
end to military rule. Both at home and abroad, he was a prominent 
critic of the regime of Nigeria's late dictator, Gen. Sani Abacha, 
whose abysmal human rights record left the West African nation an 
international pariah. Late Wednesday, the poet-playwright was taken 
to the home of Moshood Abiola, the Nigerian opposition leader who 
died in custody in July. Soyinka, who was expected to remain in Nigeria 
for about one week, had no appearances scheduled Thursday. He was 
to lecture Friday afternoon at a Lagos university and on Saturday 
visit several journalists recently freed from detention under Abacha's 
rule. Soyinka, 64, teaches at Emory University in Atlanta. He won 
the Nobel Prize for literature in 1986, the first African to win the 
award, and is the author of some 20 novels, plays and collections 
of poetry. Although Nigeria's new military ruler Gen. Abdulsalami 
Abubakar urged Soyinka to return home and promised a return to democratic 
civilian rule, the writer has remained publicly skeptical that the 
military will loosen its grip on the country's political and economic 
levers. Nigeria has been ruled by military governments for all but 
10 years since gaining independence from Britain in 1960. Presidential 
elections are scheduled for February, with a return to civilian rule 
scheduled for May. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>