<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981015.0358 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rivals China and Taiwan moved closer Thursday to resuming a formal 
dialogue broken off three years ago by agreeing to step up contacts 
between their main negotiators. To cement the improving atmosphere, 
Taiwan's top envoy Koo Chen-fu invited his Chinese counterpart, Wang 
Daohan, to visit Taiwan, and Wang agreed to come at a mutually convenient 
time. Agreement on having aides to Koo and Wang consider a resumption 
of routine talks was reached in the convivial atmosphere of a meeting 
over Chinese-style tea at a swank Shanghai hotel in the second day 
of their talks, their first in five years. While the agreement stopped 
short of resuming a formal dialogue, it was the most concrete advance 
since 1995, when relations fell to their lowest point since the Cold 
War. Under the agreement, the two government-backed bodies that Wang 
and Koo head will hold discussions on resuming negotiations. Wang's 
chief aide, Tang Shubei, said the talks would cover all issues, including 
political matters. The two organizations also will step up contacts. 
Out of concern for Taiwanese public sentiment after some high-profile 
murders, the two bodies also agreed to discuss issues of safety for 
Taiwanese citizens in mainland China. Koo's top aide, Shi Hwei-yow, 
said that Wang was invited to visit Taiwan during the general election 
campaign in November and December to give China a better understanding 
of Taiwanese democracy. Tang said Wang ``was willing to visit Taiwan 
to better understand the situation,'' but added that his schedule 
for the rest of the year was too busy. The informal setting of Thursday's 
meeting _ Koo and his wife joined Wang and his wife at a round tea 
table with their aides sitting at similar tables nearby _ belied the 
importance of the talks. Political heirs to the antagonists in the 
Chinese civil war, China and Taiwan split after Mao Tse-tung's Communists 
forced Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalists off the mainland in 1949. Koo, 
an 81-year-old business tycoon and Nationalist Party elder, and Wang, 
an 84-year-old Communist Party stalwart and mentor to Chinese President 
Jiang Zemin, held their first and until Wednesday only meeting in 
Singapore in 1993. China suspended the lower-level dialogue Wang and 
Koo started after Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui traveled to the United 
States in 1995, a move Beijing interpreted as a signal he was reneging 
on eventual reunification. A resumption of talks would suit both sides. 
The Nationalists hope to win support from the business community through 
improved ties with China. Chinese President Jiang faces pressure from 
the powerful Chinese military and communist old guard to get Taiwan 
to agree to reunification. Until now, talks have been held up by China's 
insistence that negotiations deal directly with thorny political issues, 
including reunification, while Taipei wants to have the talks pick 
up where they left off, settling practical issues like fishing disputes. 
On Thursday, Koo renewed his effort to address practical issues, such 
as business concerns, that his government wants to deal with first. 
During a luncheon with Taiwanese business executives _ who have committed 
dlrs 35 billion in investment in China over the past decade _ Koo 
said he was aware of their urgent concerns about the safety of their 
investments and their personal security. ``I hope that we can at an 
early point hold consultations to establish a normal order for economic 
and trade relations between the two sides. That will allow each of 
you to feel secure and at ease in investing in the mainland,'' Koo 
said. Koo pressed his practical agenda at Wednesday's meeting with 
Wang and during sightseeing Thursday morning. After touring Shanghai's 
Pudong district _ a swath of farmland transformed over the past decade 
into an industrial and commercial district _ Koo toured the fledgling 
stock exchange and called for ``open and fair business dealings.'' 
Later Thursday, Wang and Koo were to dine and attend a traditional 
Beijing opera together. In an indication of the hopes China is placing 
on the visit, Koo will meet Chinese President Jiang and Vice Premier 
Qian Qichen over the weekend in Beijing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>