<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981015.0186 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Typhoon Zeb roared out of the Philippines Thursday, leaving at least 
24 people dead, including a South Korean, and causing floods and mudslides 
that swept away thatch homes, disaster officials said. Its punishing 
winds also were wreaking havoc in Taiwan, where two more storm-related 
deaths were reported. At least 103,000 people were forced to flee 
their homes in the Philippines as Zeb brought rampaging floods and 
peak sustained winds of 240 kilometers (150 miles) per hour. Most 
have since returned home, but some 10,160 still were housed in 28 
government shelters. In Benguet province, at least 10 people were 
killed and an undetermined number of others were missing after boulders, 
mud and debris crashed down a mountain and covered a workers' quarters 
of the Luzon Hydroelectric Cooperative, the provincial disaster office 
said. In nearby Baguio City, also in Benguet, five people died in 
separate landslides, and Kim Young-nin, a 30-year-old student from 
Ulsan, South Korea, died after a section of road collapsed, sending 
his car plunging into a ravine, said police spokesman Chief Inspector 
Ricardo Villena. ``There are so many reports of landslides that will 
keep us busy for a while,'' Villena said. In Camarines Sur, a 40-year-old 
man was electrocuted while fixing his television antenna when a high-tension 
wire fell on his roof, and a 16-year-old boy also died after being 
bitten by a snake. In Antipolo, just outside Manila, two brothers 
_ aged 2 and 4 _ died after tons of mud and debris cascaded down a 
hill on to their hut. Their 6-year-old sister survived. Disaster officials 
said a 16-year-old boy taking shelter at a church in Solano town in 
Nueva Vizcaya province was killed when a wall crumbled and crushed 
him. Another victim in Nueva Vizcaya died when a tree fell on him. 
Two people died in a hospital from their injuries after being hit 
by flying debris in Quirino province. More casualties were likely 
because of the numerous reports of landslides and floods in remote 
areas where communications have been cut, officials said. Government 
offices and schools in the worst-affected areas were turned into emergency 
shelters. At its peak, Zeb reached ``super typhoon'' status, with 
sustained winds of 240 kph (150 mph) and gusts measuring (295 kph) 
184 mph. Zeb, the strongest of eight storms to hit the Philippines 
this year, weakened as it cut through Luzon mountains. At 4 p.m. (0800 
GMT), its winds remained at 165 kph (103 mph) with gusts of up to 
200 kph (125 mph). It was about 680 kilometers (425 miles) north of 
Manila near the northernmost Philippine province of Batanes, said 
weatherman Rene Molina. Molina said Zeb, traveling at 15 kph (9 mph), 
was expected to regain strength as it leaves the Philippines. It was 
not, however, expected to strike Taiwan with as much force as it had 
on arrival in the Philippines. ``There is no warm air where the typhoon 
can feed to reach peak power,'' Molina said. ``Taiwan is likely to 
be spared much damage.'' Taiwan and parts of Japan were bracing for 
the typhoon, which was heading toward islands on Japan's southern 
fringe early Thursday. Taiwanese police in southeastern Taitung said 
a man was swept out to sea by two-story high waves while fishing, 
and another died after being trapped overnight in heavy rain. Last 
month, Tropical Storm Vicki struck the northern Philippines, causing 
at least 52 deaths on land. A ferry also sank during the storm south 
of Manila, leaving 70 passengers dead and 80 others missing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>