<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981015.0339 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
South Africa's corporate behemoth, Anglo American Corp., on Thursday 
unveiled a huge restructuring and announced it was moving its headquarters 
to London. The new company, Anglo American PLC, would become one of 
the world's largest mining and natural resources conglomerates, with 
major holdings in precious and base metals, diamonds, industrial minerals 
and other industrial and financial activities. At the core of the 
restructuring is the acquisition of minority stakes in Minorco SA, 
its offshore natural resources arm, and Anglo American Coal Corp. 
The shakeup is a major streamlining of Anglo's Byzantine structures, 
which for years have kept its share price valued at a discount to 
its actual assets. The new group would have a market capitalization 
of 6.1 billion pounds (dlrs 10.37 billion) and would seek listing 
on the London Stock Exchange. It would also carry listings in Johannesburg 
and other major European stock exchanges, Anglo American said. The 
restructuring would effectively move ownership of South Africa's most 
prized assets abroad. The South African Reserve Bank has approved 
the plan, the company said. Anglo American shareholders will receive 
one Anglo PLC share for each company share, while Minorco shareholders 
will receive one Anglo PLC share for every two of Minorco's shares, 
or an alternative cash offer of dlrs 16 a share. As part of the restructuring, 
Minorco will dispose of its 32 percent investment in Engelhard Corp., 
a U.S. automobile catalyst maker, and its 57 percent stake in Terra 
Industries Inc., a U.S. agribusiness group. Anglo American will sell 
off its 16 percent interest in Beverage and Consumer Industry Holdings 
Ltd., which controls South African Breweries Ltd. The restructuring 
will take effect after shareholders receive documentation in early 
1999, and following compliance with London Stock Exchange requirements, 
Anglo American said. ``Anglo PLC will form a new platform to develop 
the ability of the group to compete more effectively around the world 
and to exploit new business and growth opportunities, supported by 
improved access to international capital markets,'' Anglo American 
said. Anglo American Corp., which accounts for half of the Johannesburg 
stock market's capitalization, owns the world's biggest diamond miner 
and marketer, De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., and some of the world's 
largest gold and platinum mines. Anglo American also has investments 
around the world in coal, steel, paper, timber, chemicals, motor manufacturing, 
food, financial services and property. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>