<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981015.0865 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Angolan government halted U.N. flights into territories controlled 
by the former rebel movement UNITA on Thursday _ even redirecting 
one in midair _ U.N. officials said. The move cut off supplies to 
U.N. personnel in those areas. The announcement came as the Security 
Council, concerned about the increasingly precarious security situation 
for U.N. troops in Angola, decided to extend the mandate of the U.N. 
force for only another six weeks. It wasn't immediately clear if the 
flight ban would force the United Nations to withdraw from UNITA-controlled 
areas. But spokesman Fred Eckhard cautioned that, ``Without a supply 
line, their presence in those areas is just not viable.'' Secretary-General 
Kofi Annan was bringing up the matter in a meeting Thursday with the 
Angolan vice minister for territorial administration, Higino Carneiro, 
Eckhard said. Also on the agenda was the Angolan government's decision 
last month to prevent Annan's envoy, Issa Diallo, from visiting UNITA 
leader Jonas Savimbi. The government told Diallo it couldn't assure 
his safety and threatened to stop all contact if the meeting occurred. 
In the resolution adopted 15-0, the council demanded that the government 
give the U.N. envoy free and safe access to visit Savimbi and all 
parties in the conflict. The United Nations mediated Angola's 1994 
peace accord and has maintained a peacekeeping presence in the southern 
African nation to ensure that it is carried out. The accord, known 
as the Lusaka Protocol, ended two decades of fighting that erupted 
after Angola won independence from Portugal. Angola and the United 
Nations say UNITA has resisted implementing it, particularly by refusing 
to hand over four key territories and demobilize its troops. The accord 
has been crumbling recently with renewed fighting between the two 
sides and the government's decision to negotiate only with a group 
of UNITA dissidents who split with Savimbi. Carneiro, the Angolan 
minister, defended the government's decision to recognize the dissidents 
as the legitimate UNITA representation in peace talks and urged the 
council do the same. ``We are of the belief that Mr. Savimbi has wasted 
all opportunities afforded him because he has deluded and deceived 
all those (who) are for peace and democracy in Angola,'' Carneiro 
told the council before the vote. ``No more chances for Mr. Savimbi.'' 
The council has in the past urged the Angolan government to reconsider 
its decision to stop contacts with Savimbi, who still controls land 
and troops. The council didn't address the issue of the disputed UNITA 
leadership in its resolution Thursday. Nor did it address the flight 
ban. U.N. officials in Angola notified U.N. headquarters in New York 
on Thursday morning that the government had banned flights by the 
United Nations and other international aid organizations into the 
UNITA-controlled cities Andulo, Bailundo, Mungo, Nharea and Jamba. 
One flight, bringing supplies to an Indian U.N. contingent in Andulo, 
was redirected in midair, U.N. officials said. Another flight, carrying 
the U.N. regional coordinator to Andulo, was stopped at Huambo airport 
and prevented from traveling on. One official, who spoke on condition 
of anonymity, said the U.N. task force had a one-day food supply, 
and seven days of emergency rations. Annan has warned that the precarious 
security situation in Angola, and the crumbling of the U.N.-mediated 
accord, threatened the U.N. presence there. He has warned that the 
United Nations may have to withdraw entirely from Angola by February. 
In the resolution, the council asked Annan to continue to adjust the 
U.N. presence as required. Council members agreed to extend the mandate 
of the U.N. Observer Mission until Dec. 3, and asked the U.N. chief 
to submit a ``comprehensive report'' by Nov. 23 on the future U.N. 
role in Angola. Over the past four years, the United Nations has scaled 
down its peace monitoring force in Angola from 7,000 to just 800. 
The council called on UNITA to use the next six weeks to ``transform 
itself into a genuine political party,'' and do its own part to fulfill 
the terms of the peace accord. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>