<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981015.2100.2289 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From "dateline NBC" tonight, something that is too often the case 
these days -- another case of Buyer beware. This one having to do 
with the unbelievably low air fare prices that are sometimes advertised. 
In some cases there, is a good chance the airline tickets are stolen. 
It's a serious problem, because tickets are handled just like currency. 
Since 1990, almost 10 million airline tickets have been stolen. A 
lot of people wind up paying for it in the end. Here is NBC's Chris 
Hansen with a "dateline NBC" hidden camera investigation. I always 
wanted to go to Africa and always on a sfear. Hazel bell dreamed of 
a vacation in Africa. It could be a chance to visit her only daughter 
teaching children in Ethiopia. The tickets from Virginia to Ethiopia 
don't come cheap. When she came across this ad, she called the toll-free 
number. I thought if it were advertised in "The Washington Post" it 
had to be on the up and up. Bell says the company didn't accept credit 
cards but took her check for $1,325. It seemed as if bell's dream 
would soon become a reality. On February 9, 1996, she checked in at 
the lufthansa ticket counter at dulles international a rport just 
outside the nation's capital. Within minutes she found herself surrounded 
by several airline employees. They said Mrs. bell, you cannot use 
this ticket, and I said what do you mean I can't use this ticket? 
I paid for it. They said I might have paid for it, but it's a stolen 
ticket. And I said -- and I think I started crying. Embarrassed, bell 
plunked down her credit card and purchased another ticket. This one 
nearly $400 more. I said if I got back from this trip, everybody was 
going to hear about it, and I was going to get my revenge, and I was 
hoping that we would catch the person or persons who were involved 
with it. It would take two years, but the man who bilked hazel bell 
and people in 12 other states, would be sent to jail. An isolated 
case? Hardly. Back here at dulles airport, just months later, there 
was another incident. Two brothers operating a million dollar business 
tried to board separate flights to the Middle East. But before they 
could take their first class seats, the brothers were arrested by 
police, because they were using stolen airline tickets. What's more, 
investigators found another $98,000 of stolen tickets in their bags. 
What was going on here? And why would businessmen mess around with 
stolen tickets? Seeking the answers to those questions, "Dateline" 
went undercover into the murky underworld of the stolen ticket business. 
A burgeoning black market where we found first class travel going 
for pennies on the dollar. A place where cash changes hands in back 
rooms and where few of the customers use their real names. And aside 
from the average consumer seeking a bargain, this former police officer 
says they may be the last people you want to fly with. Could be a 
terrorist? Could be. Illegal alien? Could be. Drug smuggler? Could 
be. Money launderer? Good possibility. And perhaps even more mysterious 
-- the F.B.I. knows all about the stolen ticket racket. It has done 
very little to stop it. Our story begins here in a small travel agency 
outside Chicago. ok. We're back home again, Steve. It's difficult 
to imagine this empty office space was once a bustling multimillion 
dollar business. There's our third partner. He's the youngest man. 
He makes up the third part of the three generations of Hudson and 
Hudson travel business. George Hudson's American dream. An immigrant 
from Scotland, he opened up a travel Peggy 31 years later with the 
step of his son Steve and grandson damien ran a thriving business. 
We did anywhere from $12 million to $18 million a year in this lovely 
little place. But all that changed one December night in 1996. Just 
days before Christmas, thieves broke into Hudson' travel agency. Surprisingly 
the thieves ignored tens of thousands of dollars worth of exirets, 
cash, even Christmas gifts. They walked past the office's safe and 
walked out with 24 small boxes of blank airline tickets. Nothing was 
removed except the foolproof, tamper proof airline tickets. At first, 
Hudson wasn't concerned at all. He didn't even keep the tickets in 
the office safe. After all, he thought they were just pieces of paper 
valued by his insurance company at 1/8 of a cent each. Not even enough 
to add up to the deductible on Hudson's insurance policy. Luckiest 
victims on the face of the earth. But they would soon discover their 
luck was about to change. It seemed as if they did all the right things. 
Hudson reported the theft to police, the F.B.I., and the airline's 
reporting corporation, A.R.C. A.R.C. is owned by the U.S. airlines 
and works as a middleman distributing blank tickets to travel agencies 
and collecting the money on those tickets. A.R.C. issued three bulletins 
warning all the airlines. Hudson's stoge tickets were immediately 
listed in this book. Page after page lost or stolen from the airlines 
and travel agents, but to no avail. Here's five tickets. Within days, 
people all over the country where flying on the stolen airline tickets. 
235 alone took off from the Phoenix airport. This one is from calingry 
to London. First class. All of a sudden that simple theft of blank 
ticket stock turned into a multimillion dollar heist and George Hudson 
wasn't alone. How many of you have had airline tickets stolen? Barbara, 
how were you ripped off? We were burglarized. They came in at night. 
Came in swift and out the door. They knew what they wanted. These 
people thought that the tickets had little value and couldn't be issued 
by anyone other than a travel agent. Nonetheless, burglary reports 
kept coming in from did you say, Florida, California, Kentucky, Michigan 
-- 24 different states in just two years. These are actually thieves 
for hire around the country. They go out in groups of maybe three, 
four at a time. Former Miami-dade detective Gary yallelus has spent 
years investigating an organized ring of thieves which since 1996 
has been responsible for more than 300 thefts of more than 460,000 
airline tickets. A network of criminal travel agents, takingrders, 
making airline reservations, and cashing in. A little bit of computer 
knowledge and a little bit of knowledge of what goes on that ticket 
-- it's every bit as good as a cashier's check. You literally write 
your ticket? Literally can write it for any amount you want it for. 
The losses are staggering. Over a million dollars, George? Actually 
$1,800,000. And how much have you been billed for so far? So far just 
about $600,000. $600,000? Yes, sir. What has that done to your travel 
agency? It's bankruptcied now. They're asked to pay each and every 
time their stolen tickets are used. They were adding to the hundreds 
of thousands of dollars, and I just couldn't pay them. That's right. 
The airlines are billing some of these travel agents for the cost 
of the stolen ride. Explain something to me, though. You report the 
theft to the police, you report the theft to the airlines -- Credit 
card companies can stop it. Banks can stop bad checks if you report 
the checkbook stolen but the airlines can't seem to stop it. I have 
sympathy for them on a personal level. David Collins is the president 
of the airlines' reporting corporation. But from a business point 
of view, we're distributing tickets out there. We're distributing 
valuable documents. Collins says the travel industry agreed to the 
rules, written in black and white. Keep a limited number of tickets 
in the office. Put them in a safe or lock them in a file cabinet and 
you won't be held liable. A.R.C. says more than half the travel agents 
failed to follow those rules and are now being forced to pay by the 
airlines. In some of the cases where you have been ripped off, the 
tickets were not in a vault. They were sold to us as being foolproof 
and tamper proof. They had to be printed in 24 different areas on 
the ticket. But you see what the airlines are going to say? They're 
going to say we feel bad for George but he should have followed the 
rules and kept the tickets in a vault. And that was George Hudson's 
million dollar mistake. Hudson's tickets were kept in a storage room. 
These are all from one airline. Now he has so many bills they stretch 
across his empty office floor. We got the electric chair for a parking 
ticket. Yeah. Basically. That's right. That's right. While the travel 
agents battle with the airlines over who should pay for the stolen 
tickets, the tickets continue to be sold and used for travel worldwide. 
With the help of retired detective Gary yallelus, "Dateline" decided 
to see how easy it would be to buy stolen tickets. He was sure we 
would have luck, because for nearly two years he had been telling 
the F.B.I. about a stolen ticket ring involving this man. Tony morcillo. 
So he's still in business today? yes, he is. You're confident of that? 
Positive of that. Selling stolen tickets? yes. But how easy could 
it be to buy tickets from Tony morcillo if the F.B.I. was already 
on the case? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>