<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981015.2100.3047 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Oprah Winfrey's new movie "beloved" may put her among Hollywood's 
A-list of actors and actresses. She's been there before but she still 
has a day job which virtually everybody except for a few rival television 
executives hope she doesn't quit for a very long time. This week Katie 
couric talked to future and a certain interview even she can't nail 
down. Wai fore Oprah Oprah Oh, I love TV. How long do you think you're 
going to do your show? I just signed up to 2002, and left for "beloved" 
on the same day I did my first cattlemen's deposition and when I thought 
when I walked out of the deposition that I was going to quit, that 
this was a big sign from Texas and Jesus that I was supposed to get 
out of the business, because I had gone 12 years and hadn't been sued, 
and then during the process of doing "beloved", I had awakened one 
night looking for Advil because I was in such pain in my bones from, 
you know, pulling her up, pulling her up, and I realized that I had 
never felt that kind of wearyness before. Weary. Not tired. Not Gee, 
could use a break, but just weary and felt that -- I come from a people 
who dared not quit, so I decided that I would go on, you know, and 
that's when I agreed to sign to 2000. You're not trying to be the 
high priestess of self-help? no. I'm not trying to be the high priestess 
of self-help and any labels like icon -- I mean, I never even thought 
of the word icon until people started calling me that or high priestess 
of what? I'm doing the same thing I've been doing for 12 years. Now 
people want to, you know, call me the high priestess -- and I will 
continue to do it. And so I don't care what people call me. I don't 
care. I know what I'm doing. Meanwhile you say God help the person 
with their struggle who interviews Monica Lewinsky. why? why? why? 
Obviously there were a lot of things that happened with that interview. 
She was demanding money and rights and -- She was not demanding money. 
I stand corrected. She was demanding the foreign rights. I wasn't 
speaking to her. I was only speaking to her people, and they want 
foreign rights -- from the beginning I said I'm not paying. They said 
king world, your company has offered -- they're not my company. They're 
my distributor. They don't own me, so if there were to be an interview, 
I would have to say, you know, come forward and say king world did 
offer you money but I did not. Is that understood? yes. ok. So they 
did not demand money. They told me that I had the interview. You have 
it. You have it. Don't worry. You got it. you're it. We decided Monica 
loves -- she watches -- then called back an hour later saying what 
about international rights? What about them? You just told me you 
didn't want them, and my lawyer started talking to their lawyers, 
and then when you get lawyers involved -- and then I sat down and 
said, so let me get this straight. So international rights, we would 
normally own, right? yes. And so if I give up my right to international 
rights, that means she gets whatever this company would have been 
paid? yes. Well, isn't that payment? yes. ok. My lawyer -- How much 
would that have been? I have no idea. A lot. Yeah, a lot. Do you feel 
sorry for her? Sorry, no. Because everything happens and -- in everybody's 
life based upon cause and effect. What they did and then there it 
is. There it is. There it is in your face. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>