<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981015.2100.0070 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
First tonight, it has happened again. It came from out of nowhere. 
The fed has cut a major interest rate. Now the lowest it's been in 
four years. As you may know, low rates mean a big Dow. That held true 
today. A wild run-up for the 30 industrials and a whole host of other 
stocks as well along the way. One day that made a ton of money for 
a lot of shareholders across the country who have been building financial 
storm shelters in their backyards over the past few weeks and we might 
add with good reason. With more cuts from the fed perhaps on the way, 
today's was a big one symbolically. The Dow quickly made up 4% of 
its entire value in a matter of hours. It can be done. Ron Insana 
watched it all unfold while anchoring the coverage today on cnbc. 
He is with us from their studios tonight to wrap up the day, preview 
tomorrow. ron? It was clearly an unusual day on Wall Street. The federal 
reserve has not changed interest policy between its policy setting 
meetings for over four years. The last time it moved in April of 1994, 
it raised interest rates. It was September of 1992. That was the last 
time the federal reserve actually cut interest rates between its regularly 
scheduled meetings. Now the rumors have been in the market for about 
a week that the fed could move, but what was dramatic was the timing 
of today's move. The fed waited until this was 45 minutes left in 
the trading day and then lowered two key short-term interest rates 
and as this chart shows, the response on Wall Street was dramatic. 
The Dow was up maybe 100 points and then shot up 330 points by the 
end of the day. That is the third largest point gain in stock market 
history. Over the last couple of weeks we have seen hints in the stock 
market that investors were preparing for another fed interest rate 
cut. It was last Thursday that the Dow traded as low as 7540 in the 
middle of the day but then bank and brokerage stocks turned around 
almost inexplicably amid rumors that the fed could actually move. 
Similarly the tech heavy NASDAQ composite, a bellwether of technology 
stocks gained 70 points today, a substantial gain in volume, was very 
heavy. Not quite a billion shares but still quite strong. Big winners 
of the day -- They started the day off on a positive neat but finished 
at their highs of the day, Brian. Is this based on anything or does 
it have the guts to keep going? This is based on something. There 
are a couple of rules that stock market investors have followed for 
decades. You never, ever fight the federal reserve. If the fed is 
cutting interest rates, you generally want to be invested in stocks. 
That has been the rule, unless this is a much different environment. 
If this were to be 1929 you get out of stocks but now that the fed 
is acting pre-emptively it's good news for investors. The other old 
saw on Wall Street, three stumbles and a jump. If the federal reserve 
cuts interest rates three times in a row, historically that has been 
very, very good for the stock market. The fed is trying to ease a 
credit crunch on Wall Street. Banks and brokers have not been lending 
to customers and that could bleed over to main street in that situation 
persisted for too long. Ron Insana from the studios of CNBC tonight, 
thank you, Ron. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>