<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981015.0185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The pivotal event in ``Beloved'' is the arrival of a breathtaking 
apparition. A beautiful young woman dressed in mourning is washed 
up on a riverbank, caught in a trancelike state on the verge of drowning. 
In the most exquisitely strange moments of Jonathan Demme's transfixing, 
deeply felt adaptation of Toni Morrison's novel, this creature seems 
poised at the crossroads where the supernatural and natural worlds 
meet. Bugs and butterflies mysteriously herald her arrival into the 
lives of the story's other characters, who have their own kind of 
strangeness; they know what it means to be haunted. They take the 
otherworldly in stride. Ghostly spirits already dominate their lives. 
The ever-present specter in ``Beloved'' is that of slavery, which 
Ms. Morrison conjured with such inspired obliqueness in a story set 
just after the Civil War. Much of the tale takes place in a rough-hewn 
house outside Cincinnati, where the well-traveled road outside the 
front door might as well lead from the past to the future. The house 
belongs to an ex-slave named Sethe, and the very fact that she has 
gone from plantation life to owning this place speaks long, harrowing 
volumes of its own. But ``Beloved'' avoids the literal and instead 
artfully suspends Sethe between past horrors and the possibility of 
renewal. Occult visions express her tumultuous emotions and are more 
welcome than real memories anyhow. Taking on the most enticing yet 
daunting job of literary adaptation since ``The English Patient,'' 
Demme succeeds uncannily well in bringing the novel's pulse to the 
screen. (And at times heightening it: those insects and butterflies 
are his visual inventions, as eerily attuned to Ms. Morrison's story 
as the drumbeats and a cappella voices that enhance Rachel Portman's 
stirring score.) Though this ``Beloved'' begins slowly and sometimes 
reveals its earthbound side, it accelerates into a gripping, wildly 
imaginative film that's not quite like any other. Its lynchpin is 
of course Oprah Winfrey, who had the clout and foresight to bring 
``Beloved'' to the screen and has the dramatic presence to hold it 
together. However fiercely she plays the role of Sethe, she is more 
often a person acting than an intuitive actress. So the film has its 
deliberately busy scenes, in which sharp editing and conspicuous activity 
(kneading, farming) take the place of subtler shadings. And it saves 
the story's worst traumas for Lisa Gay Hamilton, who plays Sethe as 
a terrified younger woman. But what Ms. Winfrey supplies is a sense 
of the deep, stubborn strength essential to Sethe's survival. And 
if her Sethe seems so level-headed that she could solve problems by 
talking them over with Oprah, that actually suits the grit and tenacity 
of Ms. Morrison's heroine just fine. In telling Sethe's story, the 
film faces, and largely overcomes, great structural problems. It begins 
heatedly in 1865, with Sethe's house so clearly haunted that a dog 
is sent flying across a room, though the source of this turmoil is 
not yet known. Then, in 1873, in a segment that unfolds more gradually 
than Ms. Morrison's eloquent novel does, an old friend arrives at 
Sethe's door. He is called Paul D, a slave's name, and is played sagely 
and warmly by Danny Glover with a masculine tenderness that makes 
him instantly welcome. Having wandered alone for nearly two decades, 
Paul D is looking for someplace to roost. But so is the restless ghost 
who has plagued Sethe so much that her home, in Ms. Morrison's words, 
is ``a house peopled by the living activity of the dead.'' No sooner 
has Paul D reached a truce with Denver (Kimberly Elise), Sethe's willful 
teen-age daughter, than the beautiful lost soul from the river joins 
the household too. As played astonishingly by Thandie Newton (who 
has given big performances in little-seen films like ``Jefferson in 
Paris'' and ``The Journey of August King''), she is a dangerous, captivating 
riddle, a creature who snores and grunts and drools but embodies dewy 
perfection. She calls herself Beloved. She has the skin of a baby. 
Somehow her feet are new. The word Beloved also appears on a gravestone 
that marks the epicenter of Sethe's suffering. And it takes on a sweet, 
unexpected meaning when the film is over. But with the arrival of 
the near-drowned Beloved it signals only upheaval, giving the film 
an edge of horror and bringing Sethe face to face with an unspeakable 
past. These are difficult developments to translate visually, but 
Demme affectingly mixes faded color with glorious bursts of light, 
jarring angles with startling flashbacks, the vitality of nature with 
the harshness of man, until the full weight of Sethe's memory makes 
itself felt. ``You got two feet, Sethe, not four!,'' Paul D exclaims 
in shock, when Sethe finally tells him about her most dreadful deed. 
``Why you have me? Why you leave me?,'' Ms. Newton's scarifying Beloved 
demands of Sethe. By the time Sethe is ready to answer those questions, 
``Beloved'' has summoned the outrages of slavery in ways not quite 
like any treatment of the subject before. It's in the white woman 
who helps Sethe through childbirth, declaring, ``I'm good with sick 
things, ain't I?'' It's in the rousing preaching of Sethe's mother-in-law, 
Baby Suggs (a radiant Beah Richards), who binds the ex-slaves together 
even after she becomes their most benevolent ghost. (Baby Sugg's clarion 
calls to the ex-slaves make for some of the film's most beautifully 
realized moments.) It's in Sethe's remark that she never found out 
why her mother was hung, and in the grotesque sexual assaults that 
plagued both mother and daughter. It's in the angry way Sethe exhorts 
Paul D to ``feel how it feels to be a colored woman roaming the roads 
with anything God made liable to jump on you. Feel that.'' The strange, 
raw force of this story makes itself felt through a faithful yet inventive 
screenplay (credited to Akosua Busia, Richard LaGravenese and Adam 
Brooks) and Tak Fujimoto's unusually visceral cinematography. Production 
and costume design, by Kristi Zea and Colleen Atwood respectively, 
express both the ex-slaves' past deprivation and their hard-won freedom 
to lead everyday lives. A group of endearingly demonstrative older 
actresses, among them Carol Jean Lewis and Irma P. Hall, create a 
vital sense of community by the end of the story. Like Ms. Richards' 
Baby Suggs, they invest ``Beloved'' with not only the echoes of hardship 
but also with the power to inspire. ``Beloved'' works on its own but 
is much enhanced by familiarity with the Pulitzer Prize-winning novel. 
In so ambitiously bringing this story to the screen, Ms. Winfrey underscores 
a favorite, invaluable credo: read the book. PRODUCTION NOTES: `BELOVED' 
Directed by Jonathan Demme; written by Akosua Busia, Richard LaGravenese 
and Adam Brooks, based on the novel by Toni Morrison; director of 
photography, Tak Fujimoto; edited by Carol Littleton; music by Rachel 
Portman; production designer, Kristi Zea; costumes by Colleen Atwood; 
produced by Edward Saxon, Demme, Gary Goetzman, Oprah Winfrey and 
Kate Forte; released by Touchstone Pictures. RUNNING TIME: 172 minutes. 
RATING: ``Beloved'' is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent 
or adult guardian). It includes graphic nudity, sexual situations 
and discreetly brief flashes of terrible brutality. CAST: Oprah Winfrey 
(Sethe), Danny Glover (Paul D), Thandie Newton (Beloved), Kimberly 
Elise (Denver), Beah Richards (Baby Suggs), Lisa Gay Hamilton (Younger 
Sethe), Albert Hall (Stamp Paid), Irma P. Hall (Ella) and Carol Jean 
Lewis (Janey Wagon). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>