<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981015.0212 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum may be the country's leader in exhibition 
spectaculars. In a few short years it has mounted sprawling overviews 
of the visual culture of the Russian Revolution, 20th-century Italy, 
Africa and China, not to mention Robert Rauschenberg, a continent 
unto himself. At the moment, most of the museum's available New York 
real estate is once more filled with a mind-boggling extravaganza, 
or maybe two of them, depending on how you divide things up. This 
time the French are involved, and the subject is modernism and its 
successor, post-modernism, a fitting topic for the twilight of the 
modernist century. In a nutshell: If you want to look at great art 
and lots of it, head to the Guggenheim's Fifth Avenue citadel for 
``Rendezvous: Masterpieces From the Centre Georges Pompidou and the 
Guggenheim Museums.'' If theory, architecture, work by promising young 
artists and tolerable levels of hot air excite you, the Guggenheim 
Museum Soho should be your first stop, there to fight your way through 
``Premises: Invested Spaces in Visual Arts, Architecture and Design 
From France, 1958-1998.'' But the shows are complementary, one looking 
back, the other ahead, and both reward careful attention. ``Rendezvous'' 
is divine, a dream-team, all-star show of 350 works by 150 artists. 
It brings together the cream of two world-class museums as well as 
several works from the Peggy Guggenheim Collection in Venice and a 
couple from the Guggenheim Bilbao, which seems almost too young to 
be owning art. This exhibition capitalizes on the fact that the Pompidou 
is closed for renovation, until Dec. 31, 1999, and amenable to lending 
major works in bulk; it also takes advantage of common ground. Both 
museums emerged in the middle of the century, they have emphasized 
European art and are housed in initially controversial architectural 
statements that are now beloved symbols of the avant-garde: Frank 
Lloyd Wright's inward-turning spiral and Richard Rogers and Renzo 
Piano's inside-out industrial bird cage. Their differences include 
genesis: the Guggenheim was founded by a private patron and initially 
emphasized non-French modernists like Kandinsky. The Pompidou, established 
by the French government, was initially intended as a repository for 
French art of this century and has consciously extended far beyond 
its originally boundaries. The show has been selected and beautifully 
installed by Lisa Dennison, deputy director and chief curator at the 
Guggenheim, and Bernard Blistene, chief curator and director of contemporary 
programs at the Pompidou. The exhibition's designer, the well-known 
industrial designer Andree Putman, seems simply to have tweaked the 
environment _ changing lighting, adding some faintly colored walls 
or a bit of scrim _ so that everything looks crisp and clean. Starting 
at the bottom of the ramp with a stunning cluster of Brancusi's distilled 
evocations of human and animal life, most belonging to the Guggenheim, 
the show marches upward through time. Fauvism, Cubism, Surrealism 
roll by, a little de Stijl and Russian Constructivism, then the more 
contentious postwar period. In the beginning, unity of opinion prevails 
and the collections mesh. In dazzling displays of strength, they also 
go head to head, Picasso for Picasso, Braque for Braque, Gris for 
Gris, Klee for Klee. Sometimes, an identical subject elicits fascinatingly 
different responses. One of the exhibition's richest comparisons is 
between Matisse's subtlly angular image of a sleeping woman, ``The 
Dream'' (1935, from the Pompidou) and Picasso's voluptuously curvaceous 
painting of an also sleeping Marie-Therese Walter of 1931, ``Woman 
With Yellow Hair'' (Guggenheim). Together the museums conjure a mini-Leger 
retrospective in the first of the new tower galleries culminating 
in the Pompidou's playfully majestic ``Composition With Two Parrots,'' 
whose buoyant yet shadowed figures fill a wall that seems to have 
been built for them. Upstairs there is a similar summation of Giacometti, 
a three-way collaboration among the New York and Venice Guggenheims 
and the Pompidou, followed by displays of Kandinsky, Max Ernst and 
Miro. But there are also wonderful one-of-a-kind inclusions from the 
Pompidou that provide new angles on familiar careers: a rare collage 
of an avuncular but sinister head by George Grosz that seems to be 
the point of origin for the ``Monty Python'' television graphics; 
Dali's ``Spectral Cow,'' a brilliant little Surrealist landscape that 
catalogs the artist's superfine rendering skills; an early relief 
by Jean Arp made of driftwood that adds folk-art charm to his innate 
playfulness, and a black ceramic sculpture by Lucio Fontana that suggests 
a piece of outer space violently compressed into a rough cube. The 
shape-shifting Picabia puts in multiple appearances with his gigantic 
Cubist machine, ``Udnie'' of 1913, behind the Legers, and his cacophonous 
``Cacodylic Eye,'' of 1921, covered with witticisms by the artist 
and his friends to form an early, intimate instance of graffiti art. 
In the beginning the Guggenheim and the Pompidou agree to such an 
extent that they complete each other's sentences, one owning studies 
separated at birth from finished works in the other's collection. 
The Guggenheim's Duchamp drawing ``The Chess Players'' is the precedent 
for the Pompidou's tender little canvas of the same name, a work that 
glows with an un-Duchampian love of painting while also presaging 
the atmospheric transparencies of ``The Large Glass.'' There are moments 
of striking contrasts: furniture and design objects from the 1930s 
to the '50s from the Pompidou are grouped with appropriate paintings 
from the Guggenheim. A lovely selection of Surrealist photographs 
from the French museum, most using only inanimate objects, answer 
Joseph Cornell's like-minded boxes. A Guggenheim triptych by Francis 
Bacon is grouped with two drawings by Antonin Artaud and a 1965 painting 
by Georg Baselitz, from the Pompidou, forming a surprising diagram. 
After World War II the competing masterworks are replaced by more 
pointed French-American face-offs between artists: Pollock and Masson; 
Roberto Matta and Gorky; Ellsworth Kelly and Francois Morellet; Alain 
Jacquet and Andy Warhol; John Chamberlain and Cesar, Brice Marden 
and Daniel Buren (although some of the Pollocks are the Pompidou's). 
Sometimes it's hard not to take sides. No amount of cajoling is going 
to make me think Hans Hartung is as good or even very related to Franz 
Kline. But he's definitely interesting as an inadvertent precursor 
to some of the self-conscious post-modern painting that's developed 
over the last two decades, like Jonathan Lasker's. In the exhibition's 
final gallery, the two museums are brought back into alignment again 
by their shared enthusiasm for Post-Minimalism and Arte Povera, and 
an increasingly international art scene. The proceedings end with 
Joseph Beuys' haunting, elephantine felt-covered grand piano, a fitting 
coda to Brancusi's sleekly abbreviated creatures at the show's start. 
``Premises,'' at the Guggenheim Museum Soho, is the perfect foil for 
the relatively smooth progression of ``Rendezvous.'' It fills all 
the museum's downtown branch, including newly opened if not exactly 
renovated basement galleries that add 8,000 square feet to the 23,000 
already in use. The artworks fight among themselves and sometimes 
contradict the conversation uptown. For example, one of the show's 
early galleries, not yet open, is dedicated to the Situationist International, 
whose heyday, the late 1950s and '60s, falls easily within the purview 
of ``Rendezvous.'' But the loosely affiliated S.I. artists only occasionally 
made artworks, much less masterpieces _ a concept they detested _ 
and tended to argue that a drifting stroll (or derive) through the 
streets of Paris, if attentively experienced, could be art. Also here 
is Daniel Spoerri's ``Room No. 13 of the Hotel Carcassonne, Rue Mouffetard, 
1959-1964,'' a recent re-creation of a piece based on the modest art-filled 
room where the artist spent the early years of his career. These works 
suggest that the easy flow of modernism, so prevalent uptown, was 
being disrupted long before post-modernism gleamed in any theorist's 
eye. ``Premises'' has been organized by four Pompidou curators, including 
Blistene, working with Alison Gingeras, assistant curator at the Guggenheim. 
It contains mostly French art from sundry collections and proceeds 
with an indisputably French accent, but it has the contentious, often 
pretentious chaos of large international shows like Documenta. Which 
is to say that it is noisily multimedia, virtually devoid of painting, 
infused with large doses of theory and accompanied by a catalog that 
it only intermittently resembles. Reflecting the post-modernist disdain 
of linearity, focus or integrity, the exhibition design, by Alain 
Guiheux, chief curator of architecture at the Pompidou and an organizer 
of ``Premises,'' makes extensive use of translucent plastic walls 
that allow sounds and sights to blend. Large installation pieces alternate 
with little booths devoted to video and narrow galleries that present 
slices of the history of French architecture since World War II using 
slide projections, films and architectural models that are among the 
show's most beautiful objects. Extremely informative and sometimes 
frightening (one's sympathy with Prince Charles' view of modern architecture 
may grow), the architecture galleries form a virtual show within the 
show while also lending the larger event a semblance of coherence 
that it otherwise lacks. The art itself tends to swerve between morbid 
sentimentality (Annette Messager and Louise Bourgeois) and excessive 
cerebrality (Alain Sechas and also Sarkis, whose cabinet-of-curiosities 
photographs would do just fine without their over-designed environment). 
There are a few notable exceptions, mostly among works from the 1970s 
like Christian Boltankski's harrowing three-minute video, ``Coughing 
Man,'' and among the younger generation, especially Pierre Huyghe's 
video installation ``Dubbing'' and Thomas Hirschhorn's elaborately 
handmade anticapitalist installation whose roiling organic energy 
and bristling forms (not unlike Jason Rhodes') seem to have pushed 
through the front window of the museum's bookstore and onto Broadway. 
It is strange to come away from an exhibition of French art thinking 
that the best of it is mostly French architecture. But if one leaves 
``Premises'' more dazed than visually inspired, there is also the 
inkling that the post-modern faith in scattered simultaneity and information 
overload is as much an illusion as modernism's tidy linearity. Perhaps 
it will also be as fruitful. ``Rendezvous: Masterpieces from the Centre 
Georges Pompidou and the Guggenheim Museum'' is at the Solomon R. 
Guggenheim Museum, 1071 Fifth Ave., at 89th Street, through Jan. 24. 
``Premises: Invested Spaces in Arts, Architecture and Design From 
France, 1958-1998'' is at the Guggenheim Museum Soho, 575 Broadway, 
at Prince Street, through Jan. 10. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>