<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981015.0202 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's not exactly a revelation that Degas made photographs _ his work 
has been exhibited so often lately that nothing about him remains 
a mystery _ but I would guess that the only picture by him familiar 
to many people is his double portrait of Renoir and Mallarme. In it, 
Mallarme stands, hands in jacket pockets, gazing down at Renoir, who 
sits, leaning back, smiling slightly, staring at us _ or really Renoir 
is staring at Degas, whose reflection we see in a mirror. Degas is 
beside his camera, looking a little like a ghost because his head 
is obscured by the haze of a lamp that also casts Mallarme's profile 
in shadow on the wall. Two other figures appear in the mirror, Mallarme's 
wife and daughter, both of them glancing toward Renoir and Mallarme, 
which is to say that they appear, from our view, to be looking at 
us in the mirror. Confused? I think of Velazquez (maybe Degas did 
too when he took the picture) but also about how Bonnard later turned 
the same sort of unprepossessing family portraits into similarly tricky 
visual conundrums. Degas, as much as anyone, exemplifies what Yeats 
once called the fascination with what's difficult: his art almost 
always involves a degree of convolution, one function of which was 
simply to make the eerie dexterity of his results more impressive. 
Photography was no exception, as we see in the exhibition now at the 
Metropolitan Museum, the first devoted to Degas' photographs. It includes 
nearly every photograph by him that survives, 40 of them; and together 
with a few related works, they make a handsome, solid, compact show. 
Like the double portrait of Mallarme and Renoir, much of what's on 
view at first looks basically straightforward, only to seem after 
a while complex and kind of odd. I don't mean compositionally odd. 
The oddity is more psychological. Degas' double-exposed portraits 
of friends, the Halevys, Taschereaus and Niaudets, for example, present 
us with rows of heads that seem to float in the air. A picture of 
Louise Halevy, as if in a trance, reclining on a sofa, eyes shut, 
makes the vaporous glare of a lamp at her feet into another sort of 
spooky apparition. And three glass-plate negatives of dancers, bright 
orange and red, though they may be technical failures that Degas only 
stumbled upon, are startling for making the dancers look disembodied, 
like phantoms. Almost all the photographs are dated 1895 or thereabouts. 
Evidently no one really knows how many photographs Degas took before 
or after that because he didn't regard photography as an occupation 
worth documenting or declaring publicly. He never exhibited his photographs. 
Of the ones that survive, a number were found among his belongings 
after his death in 1917. Others were probably destroyed or lost. I 
think we should be careful about what we make of these pictures. We 
know he painstakingly arranged them and forced his sitters to pose 
for annoyingly long periods of time, so there was nothing haphazard 
or casual about the results. Some are a little dull; others are astonishingly, 
touchingly beautiful, although their value to the history of art, 
which is a different matter, probably has most of all to do with Degas' 
particular approach to materials. For the period it intrigued him, 
photography joined a continuum with painting and drawing and making 
sculptures and prints, each medium intertwined with the others. Some 
photographs recalled Degas' paintings of years earlier. Some drawings 
and pastels were derived from the photographs. In other words, Degas 
worked interchangeably across media. Malcolm Daniel, the show's curator, 
writes in the preface to the exhibition catalog that ``just as he 
picked up the traditional materials of etching plate and printer's 
ink and produced unprecedented monotypes, transformed the disciplined 
application and soft rendering of pastel into a vibrant and physical 
medium, and combined the bronze caster's wax with fabric, plaster 
and other materials to shape a new colorful, textural type of sculpture, 
Degas took up photography without heed to the accepted standards of 
photographic practice, the established fashions of the professional 
portrait studio or the esthetics of the Photo-Club artist.'' I'd put 
it more simply. Good artists make the most of what a medium can do. 
Great artists make the most of what a medium can't do; they see potential 
in limitations. Perhaps what's most intriguing about Degas' photographs 
is that Degas exploited photography for what photographs are NOT supposed 
to show us, namely the unseen world. Even in his self-portraits, where 
you might think he would be straightforward, people and objects appear 
out of the darkness around him like dreams he conjured up. Daniel 
mentions that Degas' sister died in 1895. Degas' friend Evariste de 
Valernes was about to die. This may partly explains the melancholic 
and ghostly quality of these photographs. In the catalog, Eugenia 
Parry, a Degas specialist and photographic historian, also mentions 
the influence of Symbolism: ``Degas extracted from photography's exact 
science a process of suggestion, and the effects, if not strictly 
Symbolist, at times approached the expressive fantasy of pure imagination.'' 
This is a useful point: that photography, an emblem of the age of 
positivism, a mechanical process ostensibly reflecting the world exactly 
as it was, became for Degas a medium for images of a peculiar ineffability, 
the pictures' ambiguity being heightened precisely by contrast with 
the medium's objectivist associations. Did Degas also look at spirit 
photographs of the time? I wonder. It happens that several of them 
from the mid-1890's are on view in the Met's photography galleries. 
Spirit photography had been around since the 1860's. By the end of 
the last century, photography was used to serve various pseudo-scientific 
agendas. The notion of photography as a technological window into 
the psyche was then abroad. It occurs to me that the X-ray was also 
discovered in 1895 and immediately seen as an admixture of science 
and the supernatural. Simultaneously, this was the age of Bertillon 
and Lombroso, whose theories about criminals, which they connected 
to physical typologies documented in photographs, we know influenced 
Degas because, among other things, he based the head of his famous 
sculpture of a 14-year-old dancer on Lombroso's ideas. I'm not sure 
what all this means with respect particularly to Degas' photographs, 
but I mention spirit photography and Lombroso and X-rays to stress 
a simple fact: that Degas, no matter how infamously reactionary he 
may have been in his personal affairs, as an artist he was always 
skeptical about convention and cognizant of even the most bizarre 
new ideas. For this reason, among others, he is the prime model of 
the modern artist. It's typical of his unorthodox and arrogant genius 
that as a painter in the 1860s and '70s he had anticipated the cropped, 
seemingly uncomposed quality of snapshot photography, which then, 
as it were, mimicked him. Later, when he picked up a camera, he used 
it to make pictures whose strange ethos is more traditionally the 
province of a medium like painting. Peter Schjeldahl once wrote about 
``an awful coldness'' in Degas, ``which is nothing less than the thin, 
intoxicating air on the snowy peak of the capital A in Art.'' I know 
what he means, though he shortchanges the austere humanity in some 
of the work. Still, it's true that we remain especially fascinated 
by Degas because, with cool perfection, he seems constantly to reinvent 
one medium after another. Even with a passing endeavor like photography, 
he took nothing for granted. ``Edgar Degas, Photographer'' remains 
on view at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue and 82nd Street, 
through Jan. 3, then goes to the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles 
in February and to the Bibliotheque Nationale in Paris in May. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>