<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981015.0219 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
No one is yet declaring that the women's movement has achieved all 
its goals, but you know it has been largely successful in winning 
over mainstream America when a major network will devote a five-hour 
mini-series to the cause. NBC, it's safe to say, would be unlikely 
to give over two lucrative prime-time evenings to political advocacy 
unless the views expressed were no longer getting any serious argument. 
So by that standard ``A Will of Their Own,'' a melodramatic saga chronicling 
several generations of American women through the 20th century, is 
a testament to how effectively the movement has made its case. Only 
troglodytes would blink at the movie's central affirmations of equal 
rights and equal protection under the law. But it's equally telling 
that for all its political awareness, the movie, by clothing itself 
mostly in the period costumes of suffragists and '20s bohemians, isn't 
as bold as the women it portrays. Though it reaches into the '80s, 
the movie safely sidesteps unresolved feminist issues, matters like 
sexual harassment, unequal pay and Roe vs. Wade. If there's an agenda 
here, it's less to advance the feminist banner than to enshrine those 
who fought the good fight in more brutish times. Produced in part 
and written and directed by women, the movie honors the trailblazers 
who did take risks, and suffered for their pains, so that their daughters 
and granddaughters could one day have titles like producer and director. 
But don't mistake ``A Will of Their Own'' for a social-history monograph. 
This is an offering from the producers of ``The Thorn Birds,'' after 
all. And what they've produced is a faithful version of the 1992 novel 
``Daughters of the New World,'' by Susan Richards Shreve. Faithful, 
that is, to a fault. Like the book, the movie wraps its ambitious 
theme in the soggy cliches of popular romance, weighs it down some 
more with leaden dialogue, then tries to keep everything afloat with 
moral uplift, swelling music and the sheer momentum of generational 
history. Carrying the load is a cast of up-and-comers drafted from 
NBC's fall lineup and led by Lea Thompson of ``Caroline in the City,'' 
Thomas Gibson of ``Dharma and Greg'' and Eric McCormack of ``Will 
and Grace.'' Only McCormack, though, as a no-good husband, seems to 
be having any fun. The movie meanwhile trades misleadingly on the 
star power of Faye Dunaway, Ellen Burstyn and Sonia Braga, using their 
names for box-office draw but giving only Ms. Burstyn any real camera 
time, as a stiff society matron. The story they flesh out spans decades, 
beginning with calamity aboard a ship of penniless immigrants from 
Liverpool in 1894 and ending on a note of hard-won and well-heeled 
triumph in 1985. In between, girls are born, grow to women and give 
birth to girls of their own, each distinct but linked by a family 
credo that asserts that ``even a woman can make something of herself 
if she's got guts and determination.'' There is Annie (Reiko Aylesworth), 
a self-reliant housemaid in turn-of-the-century Washington who upsets 
the class system by eloping with the doctor son of her wealthy employers. 
There is her daughter, the free-spirited Amanda (Ms. Thompson), who 
has a child by a handsome photographer ( Gibson) during World War 
I only to discover he's married; she then embarks on a picture-taking 
career of her own. There is Amanda's daughter, the conventional Sarah 
(Paris Jefferson), who chooses a society marriage over college, later 
divorces her abusive politician husband ( McCormack) and becomes a 
successful businesswoman. And there is Sarah's daughter, Susan (Charlotte 
Ross, of ``Trinity''), a '60s flower child who becomes a socially 
conscious doctor. Holding this formulaic mini-series sprawl together 
is the pivotal figure of Amanda, who also has the job of recounting 
the proceedings in flashback as an old woman. (This is the sort of 
television movie in which 25-year-old actors made up to appear old 
invariably look like 25-year-old actors made up to appear old.) Born 
around 1900, Amanda is the living link for a century of women and, 
as a photojournalist, conveniently well positioned to be an eyewitness 
to history: the world wars, the winning of the right to vote, the 
birth of Planned Parenthood under Margaret Sanger (Ms. Dunaway, fleetingly), 
McCarthyism and the farm workers' movement (which is where Ms. Braga 
comes in, for a cameo). Yet for a character who sees and experiences 
so much, Amanda is curiously uninteresting. That may have something 
to do with Ms. Thompson's frequent and humorless spasms of overacting. 
Or it may be that pillars of endurance and accomplishment are admirable 
but finally boring. By contrast, in a supporting role, Ms. Jefferson 
is subtly more effective as Amanda's conventional, mistreated daughter. 
Of course, the very broadness of the ``sweeping epic'' mini-series 
genre almost necessarily precludes depth. A movie like this has a 
lot of ground to cover and a crowded cast to introduce, and even in 
five hours it's a squeeze. So we're left with a diorama of stock figures 
_ long-suffering wives, pigheaded husbands, lying lovers _ forced 
to mouth standard-issue soap-opera lines. ``Whatever happens, we'll 
get through this together,'' Gibson tells Ms. Thompson at one point. 
One imagines that real women, long accustomed to a man's world, might 
reply, ``Yes, we've heard that one before.'' PRODUCTION NOTES: `A 
WILL OF THEIR OWN' 8 p.m. Sunday on NBC (Channel 4 in New York) Written 
by Susan Nanus; David Wolper, Mark Wolper and Lynn Roth, executive 
producers; Ms. Nanus and Elliot Friedgen, producers; Karen Arthur, 
director; Tom Neuwirth, production designer; Tina Hirsch, editor; 
Judy Truchan, costume designer. With: Lea Thompson (Amanda Steward), 
Thomas Gibson (James MacClaren), Sonia Braga (Jessica Lopez de la 
Cruz), Ellen Burstyn (Victoria Steward), Faye Dunaway (Margaret Sanger), 
Reiko Aylesworth (Annie), Eric McCormack (Pierce Peterson), Paris 
Jefferson (Sarah) and Charlotte Ross (Susan). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>