<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981015.2000.2026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Slobodan Milosevic has used up more than half his grace period but 
he apparently hasn't gotten half way to compliance with the promises 
he made this week. The Serbian leader said he'd draw down his forces 
from Kosovo to the levels they were before his crackdown on ethnic 
Albanian separatists there seven months ago. Two thousand international 
monitors will verify whether Milosevic has done so, but early indications 
are not promising. Today, a NATO spokesman said Milosevic still has 
far to go. The BBC's Paul Wood is in Kosovo where he's seeing some 
movement but not enough to satisfy the international community. I 
was in the town of Milishivo today. It used to be the headquarters 
town of the Kosovo Liberation Army. It is now full of Serbian police, 
but only half a kilometer away. The are still there. And I saw four 
armored personnel carriers and several bus loads of police. They were 
on the main road. They were apparently leaving and indeed, one Serbian 
police officer told me that they were being pulled out. Now that is 
the kind of thing the international community no doubt wants to see. 
Having said that, Milosevic still has a number of fortified police 
positions. This is far more than they had in March when the conflict 
started and many people would think that puts them in noncompliance 
with the UN resolutions. Indeed. NATO has been saying that they have 
identified certain army and police units, the Yugoslavian ones that 
should be pulling out from Kosovo but are not. I assume those are 
the ones you're referring to, and if so, is there any indication that 
they will be at some point moving out? We see evidence that things 
are moving in the right direction, but whether this is the complete 
withdrawal which is being demanded by the international community 
and whether it is permanent, this will be a job for the international 
monitoring force which is arriving shortly. Richard Holbrooke, the 
American envoy, has said he wants to see the bulk of that force in 
place very, very quickly to stop any slippage by Belgrade. Realistically, 
Paul, should we be concerned at this point, so early on, that things 
aren't completely coordinated? I think there's a lot of cause for 
concern. One is that the Yugoslav authorities have promised time and 
again to fulfill demands made by the international community. They 
have not come through on that. This is why the verification element 
of Richard Holbrooke's deal was so important. But more than that, 
these are merely unarmed monitors. They are not a peacekeeping force. 
If things start to go bad here, they're going to be extremely exposed. 
One person said to me, "This is not Bosnia in 1995 with a mini dating 
for Mr. Holbrooke. It is Bosnia 1992." Well, what about those observers 
right now? We have you obviously there, but you're not one of the 
people who has been sanctioned to do it and I gather that getting 
them in place is not such an easy thing. No, it's going to be very, 
very difficult and when they get here, with such a large number, there 
won't be people who are experienced in this part of the world. And 
over the past few days we've had both sides saying that the fighting 
is continuing. I was in the village Dragabiel this morning. The man 
was saying the police had attacked them overnight with heavy machine-gun 
fire, mortar fire and grenades and one person had been injured. Further 
down the road at the police checkpoint, they said they were the ones 
under attack, the KLA had fired at them and they were defending themselves. 
Now whatever the truth of those two accounts, which one is true, we 
cannot say. Both sides are saying they're shooting and we have the 
prospect of these unarmed monitors working across what may be active 
front lines. Well presumably, rumor is far more powerful in terms 
of getting people to decide what to do than anything else. That brings 
up the refugee question. Is anybody likely to return to his or her 
home, given how confusing the situation is? They are not returning 
now and this is one of the aims of the monitoring mission, to give 
people the confidence to see an international presence on the ground, 
give them the confidence to return to their homes and this is an extremely 
urgent problem because the winter is coming here. There are still 
thousands of people out in the hills. That's why there is the urgency 
about getting the monitors into place because people will not go home 
while they see the Serbian police still in place. They might possibly 
do it if it is the police plus an international presence. Having said 
that, that's only half the battle, half the humanitarian problem because 
once the get back to their villages many of these villages are in 
ruins. Houses have been burned. Livestock is dead, and this will be 
a problem for the aid agencies, right throughout the winter. We're 
only just starting to see them tackle this problem. The BBC's Paul 
Wood from Pristinaw. Thank you, very much. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>