<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981015.2000.2279 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As Milosevic makes moves to end the crackdown in Kosovo, he's starting 
another one in Belgrade. His target is Yugoslavia's independent news 
media. Today the Serbian strongman shut down the third newspaper in 
three days to go along with the radio and television stations he's 
already taken off the air. The World's Nenad Shebach sent us this 
report from the Yugoslav capital. Hundreds of people gathered today 
in Belgrade as journalists from the banned media spoke out against 
President Slobodan Milosevic's crackdown on the independent press. 
For weeks, they've endured threats from the radical Nationalists and 
the government who accuse them of treason for disseminating what the 
Minister of Information described as defeatism and fear. Two nights 
ago the authorities finally went ahead with threatened closures. Duchen 
Seimich, managing editor of the Danas newspaper. The police came at 
about quarter past two in the night and they came in real big force 
and they threatened to use force and they were just about to start 
to beat us. Then we just briefly negotiated by ourselves whether to 
stay and risk to be beaten or just leave the place. And on the advice 
of our attorney, and we left I mean, and then they locked the premises 
but all the scene was very ugly. Duchen Seimich, the director of Serbia's 
independent electronic network says these attacks may just be the 
beginning of an ongoing campaign, but that he and others intend to 
fight back. We are expecting more closures and we will invite all 
independent medias kind of solidarity and we will try to show that 
this is really 21st century and that you can't stop the information. 
Voinden Mitrivich from the Belgrade Center for Human Rights says he's 
not surprised by the crackdown on the independent media. With the 
of the international community, any kind of concession to them has 
been interpreted that there's a green light for more repression here. 
Professor of Psychology and human rights activist Shadro Corich says 
it's typical of Milosevic to try and control information. Well, it's 
a first reflex of a totalitarian dictator and this is what Milosevic 
is. He is insecure. He is not sure how the population is going to 
react to his concessions from Kosovo so he's actually closing down 
all independent media that might broadcast some criticism or voice 
discontent the way the whole crisis has been dealt with. And there 
you see a true end to democrat in force. Today's protest rally was 
organized jointly by journalists and students of Belgrade University. 
Sora Nicolich from the student's union of Serbia says that both are 
under threat and need to join forces to fight the regime. We are all 
in this. In May and June this year, the government started to purge 
the universities in Serbia and probably occurred just a month ago, 
four professors of the law faculty were expelled and also we have 
problems in many other faculties. So I think that these attacks are 
the product of one struggle that should be, how should I say, unified. 
The protests are set to continue tomorrow at the same time and at 
the same place. Shadro Corich says he plans to be there. Well, I think 
it's my civic duty to protest. I think this is a very grave situation 
indeed. I think it was Thomas Jefferson, the American president that 
once said, the sound of free press is the sound of democracy and he 
was right. Without free press, there's nothing. You can't even speak 
about -- formally about democracy if you don't have free press. This 
is really serious fundamental for all of us in Serbia. Journalists 
from Serbia's banned media have appealed to the international community 
and colleagues from abroad not to abandon them. The more support they 
get, they say, the better the chances of returning to their offices 
and broadcasting studios which are now closed with a police seal. 
Reporting for The World, this is Nenad Shebach in Belgrade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>