<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981015.2000.0652 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And this is Andrew North. It was in September, 1993, that Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat, together with then Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak 
Rabin, put his signature to the Oslo accords at the White House. President 
Clinton summed up the mood of hope that day. The children of Abraham, 
the descendants of Isaac and Ishmael have embarked together on a bold 
journey. Together, today, with all our hearts and all our souls, we 
bid them shalom, salom, peace. In his speech afterwards, Arafat reflected 
those aspirations, that more than 30 years of struggle to create an 
independent homeland for the Palestinians at last appeared to bearing 
fruit. In the name of God, the most merciful, compassionate, Mr. President, 
ladies and gentlemen, I would like to express our tremendous appreciation 
to President Clinton and to his administration for sponsoring this 
historic event which the entire world has been waiting for. But from 
the view of most Palestinians, it's been downhill ever since. I think 
what Arafat is doing at this moment in time is a failure as far as 
the Palestinian people are concerned. Palestinian writer, Sahid Abaresh, 
the author of a new biography of Arafat, says that since 1993, the 
Palestinian leader has mishandled the peace process. First, it is 
way behind schedule and second, he started out asking for 30 percent, 
reduced that to 13 percent and now there is confusion about what the 
13 percent is going to mean. So an agreement may be reached, but it 
certainly would not be one that will be celebrated by the Palestinian 
people. Arafat's failure to win as much territory as the Palestinians 
expected is not the only complaint they have about him since Oslo 
says Rashid Halidi, a former advisor to the Palestinian negotiating 
team. Gross domestic product per capita has gone down by 40 percent. 
Unemployment is at 37 percent. These are figures that are much, much 
worse than the situation in 1991 or '92 or '93. And, everybody complains 
bitterly about the fact that they have been chopped up into dozens 
of tiny little with movement infinitely more difficult than was the 
case before Oslo. In his defense, Arafat supporters argue that it 
was the election of a more hardline Israeli government under Benjamin 
Netanyahu that shattered the hopes Oslo gave the Palestinians. But 
that argument is not one the Palestinians themselves are buying into. 
According to an opinion poll this week, Yasser Arafat's approval rating 
among his people has fallen to 43 percent, the lowest since his return 
from exile in 1994. Further complicating Arafat's problems is his 
health. Biographer Sahid Abaresh says the 69 year old leader has had 
an undetermined illness for years. Some people have said it's Parkinson's. 
My information is that it isn't, but he is suffering from a serious 
nervous disease. And so, I'm not sure that he is really responsible 
for what is happening and this is a very sad situation. This makes 
a bad situation much, much worse for the Palestinians. But even if 
Arafat's health improves, Rashid Halidi says that many Palestinians 
now believe the PLO chairman's traditional leadership style is no 
longer appropriate to his role today as head of a governmental authority. 
Some of the habits and patterns which were effective in exile and 
in a certain kind of politics are totally inappropriate for running 
a state. It's simply not possible to have a situation where everything 
has to go to the top for approval. 40 Criticism like this is leading 
to growing cause that it's time for Arafat to step down and to hand 
over the reigns of power to someone more suited to the role of government 
leader than rebel leader. For The World, I am Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>