<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981015.2000.2591 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This week we've been asking you to send in your nominations for the 
Nobel Peace prize which will be officially announced tomorrow in Oslo, 
Norway. Well, you've responded and we'll tell you what you and your 
fellow listeners had to say in just a few minutes. We can tell you 
this much right now. There was little overlap between your mail and 
the names being bandied about in Oslo. The World's Mary Louise Kelly 
reports. Among those touted as possible winners are the partners in 
the Northern Ireland peace deal, Czech President Valc Haval and Chinese 
pro-democracy activists, Wing Den and Weijing Chung. The Nobel is 
arguably the world's most prestigious prize. It can being immeasurable 
support for its winner's cause. Certainly, Bishop Carlos Belo who 
won the prize in 1996 for his human rights work in East Timor was 
mindful of the power of the Nobel when he accepted it in Oslo. I am 
here essentially as the voice of the voiceless people of East Timor 
and what the people want is peace and respect for their human rights. 
It is my fervent hope that the 1996 Nobel prize for peace will advance 
these goals. Belo and his co-winner, Jose Ramos-Hortas, haven't yet 
achieved independence for East Timor, but the prize has earned international 
sympathy for their goal. Likewise, the Nobel won support for the causes 
of Nelson Mandela and F. W. de Klerk who negotiated an end to South 
Africa's apartheid, for Burma's opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi 
and for Poland's Labor activist, Lech Walesa, and that's what the 
Nobel Committee intended. Gerr Lindestadt, director of the Nobel Institute 
and Secretary to the Nobel Committee says that in the past the prize 
was often given to statesmen at the end of their careers, a practice 
George Bernard Shaw likened to throwing a lifeboat to a swimmer who 
had already reached shore. Nowadays, Lindestadt says, the Committee 
has changed its tactics. The prize has become somewhat more interventionist, 
if we could use such a term, in the sense that it will awarded to 
individuals before they have completed their job so to speak. The 
Committee has been more willing to intervene in the middle of conflicts 
and thereby hoping to point the way out of these conflicts. It's been 
a lesson learned the hard way. Take physicist Joseph Rotblat and his 
Pugwash organization who won the Nobel in 1995 for anti-nuclear work. 
Certainly in the case of Joseph Rotblat, who -- and the Pugwash Organization, 
they had to wait a very long time. Morris Wilkins, himself the winner 
of the Nobel prize for medicine in 1962. I think if they got their 
prize, say 10 or 20 years ago, it could have been very helpful to 
raise the status and respectability of the Pugwash organization while 
we still had the Cold War and the nuclear deterrents in full force. 
I think when it came so late, it probably doesn't have very much impact 
now. The Nobel Committee has experienced some public cracks over the 
years. In 1973, two Committee members resigned after the prize went 
to Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and Le DucTho of North Vietnam. 
The prize recognized their negotiations for peace in Vietnam, even 
though war was continuing. Another controversy came in 1994 when the 
Peace prize went to Shimon Peres, Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat 
for their work toward the Middle East peace. Corey Christensen, a 
member of the Committee that year, resigned the morning the prize 
was announced. I couldn't for my conscience accept Arafat as qualified 
for the prize. Nobody could say, not even the majority in the Committee, 
that he was the man that in the last year had done most to create 
peace. You have to take into consideration, in my view, that he has 
been the foremost and the most distinct terrorist in all the world 
for so many years. But the Committee's Secretary, Gerr Lindestadt, 
defends the Arafat choice and Lindestadt says the Nobel reinforced 
the Oslo peace accord and encouraged the region's leaders to work 
together. But he admits that in the '97 year history of the prize, 
there have been some mistakes. We certainly don't claim perfection 
and my personal opinion is that if there is one major omission from 
the list of laureates, this is certainly Ghandi. I think he should 
have been included. But the striking thing on the whole is how well 
this has worked and how solid and decent a record we have compiled 
over these 97 years. Lindestadt and his fellow Committee members are 
hoping the 1998 laureate will carry on that tradition, or at least 
prove less problematic than last year's winner. Judy Williams and 
the Intentional Campaign to ban land mines won the prize, but the 
partnership ended acrimoniously this spring when Williams quit the 
campaign and announced she was keeping her share of the million dollar 
prize. Her explanation that she would use the money to finance herself 
while she writes a book is not likely to win a Nobel prize. For The 
World, I'm Mary Louise Kelly reporting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>