<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981015.0600.2701 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For years robots have played an important role in the manufacturing 
of automobiles, now a UN report predicts robots are heading for the 
home, and heading there soon. Gordon Martin has more from Geneva. 
Robots are taking over from human beings at a faster pace than ever 
in the United States, Britain, and other Western industrialized countries. 
Investment has grown substantially since the start of 1990's more 
than doubling in Britain, and tripling in the United States, but in 
Japan, a country already highly reliant on industrial robots, investment 
has declined. Reflecting a move away from automation in that country. 
These and other finds are reported in a new study by the Geneva-based 
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, the ECE. It forecasts 
of 40 percent investment gross worldwide, in industrialized robots, 
between the years 1997 and 2001. The focus of that growth is likely 
to be in Europe and North America. ECE statistician Ian Calsum says 
it's inevitable that as more robots move into factories, more jobs 
are lost. You can calculate, by taking a rule of thumb, that one robot 
replaces about between 2 and 2.5 people. So something on the order 
of 1.5 to 2 million people world wide today, or workplaces-you could 
say- have been replaced by robots. Use of robots is widespread, and 
continues to grow in the automobile industry, but the working machines 
are shifting from factories and into the homes. Finding work companions 
in the ever growing presence of the computer chip. Mr. Calsum says 
that home computers and the computerized brains in everyday appliances 
may eventually team up with robots. Bear in mind that the homes in 
15 - 20 years they will probably contain much more computers or computer 
controlled equipment than today, stoves, uh, refrigerators, heating, 
all these equipment, in one way or another be computer controlled, 
and its very easy for the robot to communicate with these kind of 
equipment. The UN statistician does not think that robots will replace 
housemaid, rather he says, maids will come equipped with their own 
robot. She will be much more efficient, she will come to your home 
with her -- her robot. That cleans, uh, and vacuum your home. And 
uh - uh- cleans your bathroom, while she does something more, more 
skilled. Young Calsum says his report forecasts the use of robots 
for chores such as mowing lawns, perhaps coupling the mower to a solar 
powered engine. A range of robotic assistance devices are also envisioned 
for the elderly and disabled. And it already predicts the day will 
come, when the steady hand of a robot assists, if not replaces some 
of the operations now performed by surgeons. Gordon Martin for VOA 
News Geneva. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>