<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981015.0600.3187 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After a four-year break from the recording studio, pop superstar Madonna, 
returned this year with a new CD Ray Of Light. The former so-called 
Material Girl is famous for her ever-changing image, and in this latest 
collection, she experiments with electronica. A computerized style 
of music complete with pulsating beats and sound effects. VOA's Mary 
Morningstar has more about Madonna's ongoing musical journey. : Madonna's 
latest album Ray Of Light was recently certified double platinum, 
in the United States. With sales exceeding 2 million copies. Now holding 
7 multi-platinum studio collections, she becomes the first female 
attest to achieve that record. Madonna recorded the 13 song collection 
with noted British producer and re-mixer William Orbit. Orbit layered 
ambient music with lush string arrangements to create a sound very 
different from her pop hits of the 1980's and early '90s. Madonna 
says many of the songs on "Ray Of Light" were inspired by her interest 
in the culture of India. I just think that - um, it's good to pay 
attention. Pay attention, be observant, constantly looking around 
me and um you know getting inspired. Right now I am obsessed with 
India so -- and I've been practicing yoga, and I've been studying 
Hinduism so it kind of depends on what I am interested in and I always 
get influenced creatively by where ever my interests are and I mean 
I don't know. I guess sometimes that ends up sort of inspiring other 
people. You only see what your eyes want to see, How can life be what 
you want it to be, You're frozen when your heart's not open You're 
so consumed with how much you get You waste your time with hate and 
regret You're frozen when your heart's not open Madonna's new musical 
direction was also influence by the birth of her daughter Lourdes, 
in late 1996. The 40-year-old singer says the responsibilities of 
raising a child lead her to contemplate life on a more spiritual level. 
Now content to keep a lower profile Madonna explains how motherhood 
has affected her career. I now have absolutely no free time. But on 
the other hand, I am a lot happier and a lot more grounded and focused, 
and little things that bothered me in the past don't bother me as 
much as they used to. Looking back on her varied and often controversial 
personas that made her a pop icon more than a decade ago Madonna says 
she no longer bases success on public approval. I think I sought it 
out much more than I do now. Now I am much more interested in being 
happy with what I have done. I'm driven as an artist, I'm driven to 
be creative. I'm not driven to be popular. You know, popularity is 
the by-product. Her latest album, "Ray Of Light," earned Madonna six 
trophies at last months' MTV Music Video Awards, the singer hopes 
to launch a world-tour to promote the collection in 1999. This week 
the new single from "Ray Of Light," debuts on Billboard's Hot 100 
chart at number 24. It's called "The Power of Good-bye." I'm Mary 
Morningstar. Your heart is not open So I must go You said it's been 
broken I loved you so Freedom comes when you learn to let go Relation 
comes when you learn to say no You are my lesson I have to learn 
</TEXT>
</DOC>