<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981015.0600.1977 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian Authority 
President Yasser Arafat are said to open a summit today in Washington. 
President Clinton opens the session at the White House about 3 1/2 
hours from now. The aim is to clear the way for talks on final status 
issues on the Middle-East peace process. VOA White House correspondent 
David Gullus reports. The two leaders will get a ceremonial welcome 
from President Clinton, at the White House. And then go directly to 
the Wye Plantation Conference site in Maryland, east of Washington, 
for what are expected to be four days of intensive US mediated negotiations. 
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and Middle East troubleshooter 
Dennis Ross will be with them for the entire conference. In an effort 
to bridge differences still blocking an interim agreement for another 
Israeli troop withdrawal coupled with Palestinian security commitments. 
The goal is to end the year and a half-long deadlock on the interim 
deal and move the parties on to the more difficult final status issues 
of the Oslo peace process including Palestinian statehood and Jerusalem. 
White House spokesman Joe Lockhart says the administration is prepared 
to do what it can to break the logjam, but he says US mediation alone 
will not be enough. The United States plays a unique role in a dispute 
that has gone on for a long time. We can play the role of helping 
each other, each side understand each other's position, but ultimately 
it will be up to the parties to make a peace. The US cannot impose 
a peace, the parties must make a peace that they believe is in their 
interest. President Clinton will spend Thursday evening with Israeli 
and Palestinian leaders at the Wye Plantation, he has cancelled plans 
for a Saturday trip to Connecticut and will available to join the 
talks over the weekend if the situation warrants. In the meantime, 
the White House has imposed what amounts to a news blackout over the 
proceedings, Mr. Lockhart says the Administration does not intend 
to have the negotiations played out in the newspapers and on television. 
The impetus for the summit came at a brief three-way meeting here 
involving the President, Mr. Arafat, and Prime Minister Netanyahu 
September 28th. US officials are increasingly concerned about a breakdown 
of the entire Oslo process if the present stalemate continues. The 
1993 Oslo Accords set May 4th of next year as a target for a final 
settlement. This is David Gullus VOA News, the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>