<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981015.1700.1366 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
YACKIE: The first immortal human beings are probably living among 
us today. Thus begins a new book by Ben Bova, a past president of 
a National Space Society and former editor of Omni magazine. Mr. Bova's 
book is entitled, Immortality, How Science is Extending Your Life 
Span and changing the world. He argues that there are men and women 
alive today who may well be alive to live for centuries. Perhaps even 
extend their life spans indefinitely. In the first of a two-part discussion, 
talks about some of the recent scientific breakthroughs with VOA's 
Dan Nobles. Dr. Bova, we are fast approaching immortality as you write 
and today, people over the age of 85 are the fastest-growing segment 
of the Nation's population. How did that come about? Life expectancy 
has increased in much of the industrialized world mainly because of 
advances in medicine and sanitation. Children no longer die of childhood 
diseases like whooping cough or diphtheria. But what I am writing 
about in my book, Immortality, is extending life span. No one we know 
of has ever lived more than 122 years. But now we are on the threshold 
of life spans of many centuries. And not only will people live for 
hundreds of years, but they will remain young. We are talking about 
he conquest of aging. And separating the physical condition of your 
body from the number of years you live. What is making this possible? 
What scientific development? Biologists are learning what are the 
clocks in our cells that tell the cells when to die. And if you can 
control those clocks, you cannot only stop aging, you can reverse 
it. So that we will live for centuries, but we will live with the 
bodies of 20 or 30 year olds. Will this be available for everyone 
or just those with money? That is why I wrote Immortality. Because 
right now no one has put it all together and realizes that this is 
coming and it is coming soon. In I would think 10 years, we will see 
clinical trials of therapies that will reverse aging. I don't want 
it to be the private preserve of an elite group. I do not want some 
bureaucracy in government or industry to hold this and suppress it 
so that the rest of us cannot have it. One thing-what are the advantages 
of regeneration? How exactly does that work scientifically? Think 
of it this way. Once you were an individual cell. But that cell had 
all the information needed to grow all the bits and parts of your 
body, your eyes, your fingers, your heart, your liver, your arms and 
legs. That information is still locked inside the DNA of your cells 
but it has been deactivated. When necessary, you should be able to 
activate specific parts of that DNA so that if you need a new heart, 
you will grow one, if you need a new leg, you will grow one. In my 
book Immortality, I talk about tests that have been done in the states 
on people who had blocked arteries in their legs that were so severe 
they could not walk and they faced amputation. They received an injection 
of growth hormone and grew bypass arteries. In Germany, the same technique 
was used for coronary arteries. With an injection of growth hormone, 
they grew bypass arteries naturally with their own tissues, without 
surgery. So this is regeneration. You can, in theory, regrow any part 
of your body if you know how to unlock the DNA and activate it and 
that is what the biologists and geneticists are learning. Today we 
see some elderly people with good bodies but decaying minds or with 
decaying bodies and fine minds so this will be able to help both classes, 
both categories? Yes. Because if you can reverse aging, you will be 
physically like a 20 or 30 year old. You will be active, vigorous. 
Your brain will be getting a good supply of blood and I think the 
nuero psychologists have found out that when you are active, when 
you are constantly receiving new stimuli, your brain functions better. 
In fact, the neurons grow new interconnections. So, in a sense, you 
get smarter. Tomorrow Dan Noble will continue his discussion with 
Ben Bova, the author of Immortality. They will discuss some of the 
social implications of extending the human life span. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>