<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981015.1700.3174 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Malaysia, ousted Deputy Prime Minister, Amwar Ebrahan is in jail, 
accused of corruption and sexual misconduct. If convicted, he could 
be sentenced to a long prison term and cained. Corespondent, Gary 
Thomas, visited an unusual tourist attraction in Koala Lampour* that 
graphically illustrates what might be in store for Mr. Anwar or anyone 
else who commits crimes in Malaysia. For more than 100 years, Fidu* 
Prison existed as a place of retribution and rehabilitation. Now the 
prison located in downtown Koala Lampour is empty of prisoners, but 
remains open as a stark, even grizzly testament to crime and punishment 
in Malaysia. Unlike some prison exhibits elsewhere in the world, this 
is no sanitized view of prison life. From the moment you step through 
the gates of the prison. Your senses are assaulted by video and sound 
designed to scare into remaining a law-abiding citizen, which is just 
what the government intends. There is the condemned prisoner's block 
and execution chamber with a sound and light show so scary that visitors 
with a bad heart or nervous condition are warned that it may be hazardous 
to their health. There is the disciplinary block the scene of countless 
teamings, with an extremely graphic video of the punishment being 
carried out. And to even more vividly bring the experience to life, 
there is Methar Isben Hussain* former prison guard turned tour guide. 
He was the chief disciplinary officer of the Fidu prison from 1971 
until the prison was closed in 1996. A caining could not take place 
without his being present. Mr. Mathar* stands over the caining tripod 
to which a prisoner would be tied with his buttocks exposed. and hand 
and slick hit* push down, there is a prison warren to catch * make 
it firm so that it will not move up. OK. Then a repeating on, and 
be stay still, so he cannot move. The prisoner would then be whipped 
with a flexible bamboo cain. With an officer counting off the strokes 
as the graphic video shows. The prisoner could be cained up to 24 
times by order of a Court or for breaking prison rules. Caining is 
still used as a form of punishment in both Malaysia and Singapore. 
The execution block is not for the faint-hearted. Here one enters 
a pitch black cell block and is suddenly confronted with flashing 
lights illuminating a hangman's noose and disembodied sounds. The 
execution order is read out and the final moments are recorded in 
excruciating detail, down to the crash of the trap door. Which Mr. 
Mathar says could be heard throughout the prison. He would not allow 
tape recording of the sounds, but Mr. Mathar, who was present for 
numerous executions, supplies details. He says prisoners were hung 
at dawn. We would just leave the body there for still about half an 
hour. Then they have the pictures. Because when they come in they 
have no pictures early in the morning * 4:15 you know. So when the 
hanging takes place say about 5:50 to 6:00. Once they do the hanging, 
they go back take the pictures, and then come back again, and then 
*. That way, he says, the guards were sure the prisoner was dead. 
Kidu Prison was closed in 1996 because it became overcrowded and was 
falling apart. In fact, it was so overcrowded in the mid-1980s, the 
prisoners were crammed 10 to a cell and had to take turns sleeping. 
The exhibit is expected to close soon perhaps within the next month, 
because the prison is becoming unsafe. It will be torn down perhaps 
to make way for a more conventional guest facility, like a hotel. 
Deterrence will make way for development. A bit of Make* history will 
venge. Gary Thomas, VOA News, Koala Lampour. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>