<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981015.1700.0355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And as we have been reporting, Israeli Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, 
Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat, and President Bill Clinton are 
set for several days of intense negotiations at a conference center 
in Maryland's rural Eastern Shore area. Israeli commentators, meanwhile, 
say the country's new foreign minister, Aerial Sherome* could play 
a decisive role at those middle-east peace talks. Reporter Ross Dunn 
has that part of our story in Jerusalem. Israeli political analysts 
say they believe the appointment of Mr. Sherome shows that Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu is ready to reach a new peace agreement with the 
Palestinians. They say that Mr. Netanyahu needs Mr. Sherome to win 
the backing of right-wingers in his cabinet to allow the transfer 
of more territory in the West Bank to Palestinian self-rule. Mr. Sherome 
is seen as a watchdog to make sure that Israel's security interests 
are protected in any such agreement. Analyst Leslie Susner who writes 
for the Jerusalem report says the Prime Minister selected Mr. Sherome 
to help in the negotiations. He will probably try to be perhaps the 
bad cop to the Netanyahu's good cop and other people playing good 
cop in the negotiations. And this will be in coordination with Netanyahu 
and will be designed to get Israel a better deal. Mr. Susner rejects 
suggestions that Mr. Netanyahu appointed Mr. Sherome to destroy the 
peace process. He says the prime minister's career is at stake and 
that Mr. Netanyahu will do everything possible to appease the U.S. 
government. He could have destroyed the process himself without bringing 
Sherome in and leaving Sherome and the right wing very happy by the 
fact that the process has been stopped. The reason he needs Sherome 
is because he fears he might have to go ahead with the process, satisfy 
the Americans. Because if there is no deal, Israel is blamed for it, 
then the international repercussions of that could be extremely dangerous 
for Israel and for Netanyahu's own political future. The director 
for the Center for Palestine Research and Studies, Halio Shikakey* 
also believes that Mr. Netanyahu wants to reach a new interim agreement 
on the future of the West Bank. He says Mr. Netanyahu fears that without 
an accord, Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat, will carry out his threat 
to declare a Palestinian state in May of next year. I think at this 
point that Netanyahu is interested in reaching in agreement. I do 
not think that he wants to risk a major failure that will only make 
the Palestinian give a larger move in May inevitable on the whole 
and their permission of the whole world that might follow. So, yes, 
I think he is interest in reaching an agreement and I also think that 
Sherome might also be interested in reaching an * of the Palestinians. 
But while there is strong pressure on the sides to succeed, the analysts 
say Mr. Sherome is expected to lower any Palestinian expectations 
about further territorial gains. In the past, he has insisted that 
Israel hand over no more than an additional nine percent of the West 
Bank before the two sides enter into negations on a final settlement 
of the Israeli/Palestinian conflict. Ross Dunn for VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>