<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981028.1830.0213 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
So och of the political debate is on television. In many parts of 
the country, it's the only connection many voters have with the issues. 
In several southern states, much of the television advertising is 
focused on gambling, morals and education. Two republican governors 
in states where they should be easy winners are having a heck of a 
fight about lotteries. Here's ABC's Rebecca chase. In the deep south, 
republicans and religious right regularly preach against the evils 
of gambling. Gambling is a moral plague that lines the pockets of 
a few rich predators. But democrats have discovered that gambling, 
if it is a state lottery, can be a winning issue. The siegelman lottery 
plan will let any student who works hard and graduates high school 
go to college tuition free. Even in staunchly conservative Alabama, 
the democratic candidate for governor, Don siegelman, has unexpectedly 
pulled ahead of republican incumbent fob James, mostly on the strength 
of one issue. I say yes to a lottery. Fob James says no. There is 
a similar story in South Carolina. In the most republican state in 
the nation, republican governor David beasley is in a surprisingly 
close race. His democratic challenger's main attack? That beasley, 
by opposing a lottery, is letting millions of dollars a year leave 
the state to play the lottery next door in Georgia -- paying for georgia 
students to go to college. Thank goodness your governor, David beasley, 
won't let ya'll have a Lottery. As you might expect, here in Georgia, 
we love David beasley. In Alabama and here in South Carolina, the 
democratic candidates have turned the lottery into an education issue, 
as a popular way to put more money into schools without raising taxes. 
We ought to use the lottery to do some specific things in education. 
In South Carolina, the $2 billion video poker industry has spent millions 
to support the lottery candidate, and defeat governor beasley. But 
beasley has tried to turn the tables, warning that the lottery is 
really a smoke screen for something much worse. This race isn't about 
the lottery. It's about whether we're going to allow organized gambling 
to buy the governor's office. This tactic seems to be working. Beasley 
has fought back, and now has a slight lead in the polls. South Carolina 
-- His latest ad features a mafia stereotype, who can't wait for democrat 
hodges to win. When he comes through, ba-da-Bing, we hit the jackpot. 
And then everything we got here in Atlantic City, you're gonna get 
right there in South Carolina. Know what I mean? Each of these elections 
will be seen as a referendum on the lottery, and whether this issue 
is powerful enough to give democrats the winning numbers. Rebecca 
chase, ABC News, Columbia, South Carolina. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>