<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981028.1830.0062 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We are going to begin tonight with what the republican 
party has in mind for the last several days of the election campaign 
-- Bill Clinton and monica Lewinsky. After being quiet on the the 
subject for most of the campaign, the republicans have unleashed $10 
million of political ads designed to move the president's affair and 
his lies about it right to the center of the final week's political 
debate. Here's ABC's John Cochran. After heated arguments among republican 
issue, they decided to take a chance, to juice up a campaign that 
has left so many voters indifferent. What did you tell your kids? 
I didn't know what to say. It's wrong. For seven months, he lied to 
us. But aren't there other things to do? And say it's okay to lie? 
Besides, the republicans are doing them. The ads do not specifically 
mention the Lewinsky scandal. One of them uses a Sly reminder, a picture 
only of the finger-wagging moment when the president denied he had 
sexual relations with "that woman." So even if there's one person 
who doesn't want the republicans in charge, remember, it's your choice. 
For balance, vote republican. The president said republicans have 
the right to show any ads they want, but -- I believe that it's always 
best if the elections are about the American people and their families 
and their future. As for himself, and the scandal -- The American 
people have had quite a decent amount of exposure to that. I hope 
very much that they have seen I am doing my best to atone for it. 
I think what people ought to say to their children is that when someone 
makes a mistake, they should admit it and try to rectify it. Republican 
leaders know their ads could provoke a backlash. That's why one ad 
will be shown only in three southern districts to boost turnout in 
areas where republican polling already shows great hostility to bill 
Clinton. This year, the question is, should we reward Bill Clinton? 
Should we make the democrats more powerful? Republicans had found 
that their earlier ads had little impact, especially on voters who 
could go either way. That is who the party is targeting with the new 
ads. Are they going to help our folks? Sure. But more importantly, 
what they are going to do is give swing voters a Rationale to continue 
a republican Congress. What finally convinced republican officials 
was the feeling that although using the Clinton scandal was risky, 
if they didn't use it and then did badly in the election, they would 
feel even worse. John Cochran, ABC News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>