<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981028.1138 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hurricane Mitch paused in its whirl through the western Caribbean 
on Wednesday to punish Honduras with 120 mph (205 kph) winds, sweeping 
away bridges, flooding neighborhoods and killing at least 32 people. 
Mitch was drifting west at only 2 mph (3 kph) over the Bay Islands, 
Honduras' most popular tourist area. The storm was only 30 miles (50 
kilometers) off the coast, and hurricane-force winds stretched 105 
miles (165 kilometers) from the storm's center. That meant the Honduran 
coast and a good portion of the interior was under hurricane conditions 
for more than a day. ``The hurricane has destroyed almost everything,'' 
said Mike Brown, a resident of Guanaja Island who was within miles 
(kilometers) of the eye of the hurricane. ``Few houses have remained 
standing.'' At its peak Tuesday, Mitch was classified as the fourth-strongest 
Caribbean hurricane this century with 180 mph (290 kph) winds. By 
Wednesday afternoon, the 350-mile (600 kilometer)-wide storm still 
packed a punch, but its sustained winds were down to 115 mph (195 
kph). The U.S. National Weather Service said only three Atlantic storms 
were stronger than Mitch at its peak: Gilbert in 1988, Allen in 1980 
and the Labor Day hurricane of 1935. The rainfall _ up to 25 inches 
(64 centimeters) in mountain areas _ began to take a toll. More than 
50 rivers had overran their banks, and the government evacuated more 
than 45,000 people from low-lying areas, according to Col. Guillermo 
Pinel, chief of the National Emergency Committee. Many towns were 
cut off by washed-out roads and downed bridges, and severed phone 
lines on the Bay Islands, making it difficult to gauge the extent 
of the damage. The government said 72,000 people were forced to flee 
their homes. President Carlos Flores Facusse declared the Caribbean 
coast a disaster zone, and officials said 23 people had died in Honduras 
alone, including 14 on Guanaja. Five people were killed in La Ceiba, 
including three police officers swept into a river in their car, said 
regional police chief Maria Lisa Borjas. The Red Cross in neighboring 
Nicaragua said eight people died there in flooding from Mitch's rains. 
In a statement, the organization blamed the deaths on the government, 
saying it ``hasn't adopted the safety measures necessary for people 
to cross rivers.'' Mexican officials said a wave kicked up by the 
storm washed a Connecticut man off a catamaran south of Cancun on 
Monday, and he was presumed dead. He was identified as Robert Gates, 
55, of Niantic. Both highways out of La Ceiba, a city of 40,000 people, 
were cut Wednesday. To the east, the Saopin bridge sagged into the 
water as the swollen river weakened its pillars. To the west, the 
Pico Bonito bridge was entirely washed away. Electricity was out in 
the entire town, and the sea moved a half-block inland in some places. 
Waves crashed against the walls of seafront discos and people waded 
through knee-deep water with furniture on their backs to flee flooded 
houses. In the Barrio Ingles shantytown, the ground was entirely covered 
in white foam from the surf, making it look like it had snowed. Mario 
Hernandez was moving his chickens from his flooded shack to a friend's 
house on higher ground. One of the 10 chickens had already drowned, 
and he planned to take it to a shelter to see if he could cook the 
bird. ``My little son didn't let us sleep all night because he was 
so hungry,'' Hernandez said, gesturing toward 9-month-old Eugenio. 
Mexico declared an alert throughout the Yucatan Peninsula, evacuating 
thousands of residents and tourists from vulnerable beach resorts 
and cutting back on pumping oil from wells in the Gulf of Mexico. 
In the Mexican resort of Cancun, 375 miles (640 kms) north of Honduras, 
tourists formed long lines at the airport trying to leave before the 
storm arrived. But as Mitch inched south, Cancun Mayor Rafael Lara 
Lara canceled the city's emergency alert. Belize City, Belize's capital 
until 1961 when it was destroyed by Hurricane Hattie, was a ghost 
town. Most of its 75,000 residents had fled in cars buses commandeered 
by the government. Police and soldiers patrolled the streets, and 
a few people wandered amid the boarded-up houses. The cable television 
company was broadcasting only the weather channel. Freddy Sikaffy 
stayed behind with his wife to take care of his Hotel El Centro, which 
was closed. But he had stored up only enough food for a couple of 
days, and that was almost gone. ``We have some water, some bread and 
some tin stuff,'' he said. ``But we thought that by Wednesday the 
hurricane would be out of here.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>