<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981028.0227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nippon Oil Co. and Mitsubishi Oil Co., two of Japan's largest petroleum 
distributors and refiners, said Wednesday they will merge next April 
to create Japan's largest oil company. Encouraged by recent deregulation 
that has eroded profits throughout the industry, the partnership is 
designed to trim costs and improve competitiveness. The new company, 
to be called Nisseki Mitsubishi Co., will boast sales of 3 trillion 
yen (dlrs 25.45 billion), an industry-leading 24 percent share of 
the domestic fuel market and more than a quarter of Japan's total 
refining capacity. Nippon Oil now is Japan's second-largest petroleum 
distributor, while Mitsubishi Oil ranks sixth. The current leader, 
privately held Idemitsu Kosan Co., has a 16 percent market share. 
Within five years of the merger, the company expects to save 70 billion 
yen (dlrs 593.82 million) by combining its two parent corporations' 
administrative, distribution and refining operations. But no immediate 
job cuts were planned, the companies said. Many Japanese oil companies 
have been hard hit by lower demand due to a recessionary economy and 
a plunge in retail gasoline prices following the lifting of a ban 
on imported fuel in early 1996. These changes have led industry analysts 
to expect further moves toward consolidation among Japan's oil distributors 
and refiners. Nippon Oil and Mitsubishi Oil, which had begun joint 
distribution of some products as early as 1985, said they began serious 
discussions about a merger in July this year. Nippon Oil president 
Hidejiro Ohsawa will become the president of the new company while 
Mitsubishi Oil president Yoshihiko Izumitani will be the chairman. 
The official merger contract was expected to be signed by the end 
of this year and submitted to shareholders for approval. One Mitsubishi 
Oil share will be exchanged for 0.525 share of Nippon Oil. Investors' 
initial reaction to the merger signaled disappointment. Shares of 
Nippon Oil Co. fell 1.23 percent to 402 yen (dlrs 3.41) and Mitsubishi 
Oil Co. shares lost 2.05 percent to 199 yen (dlrs 1.69). The Tokyo 
Stock Exchange had suspended trading in the two companies' stocks 
during the morning session, but allowed trading to resume in the afternoon 
after the official announcement of the merger. After the close of 
trading, Nippon Oil Co. reported a 62 percent drop in net profit to 
1.45 billion yen (dlrs 12.3 million) for the first six months of the 
fiscal year, citing a sharp fall in fuel prices. Mitsubishi Oil, which 
has posted losses over the last two fiscal years, was expected to 
report more red ink for the current fiscal year ending in March. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>