<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981028.1152 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As a choppy sea rocked the research boat, a winch slowly hauled up 
a 2,000-year-old granite sphinx Wednesday from the ruins of a sunken 
city where Cleopatra had a palace. The black stone figure was taken 
from its resting place to show reporters and international archaeologists 
a sample of the countless treasures discovered recently in the Mediterranean 
seabed. Egypt's Supreme Council of Antiquities proposes turning the 
site into an underwater museum, council chief Gaballa Ali Gaballa 
told reporters aboard the Princess Duda, which brought up the sphinx, 
believed to depict Cleopatra's father, Ptolemy XII. Instead of pulling 
up the artifacts _ barely a half-mile (kilometer) away from the bustling 
marina of Alexandria _ Gaballa proposes building a network of underwater 
transparent tunnels. Tourists would go down into the tunnels to see 
the ruins of Alexandria's royal court, which plunged into the sea 
more than 1,600 years ago following a series of earthquakes and tidal 
waves. ``We are opening a whole new world,'' he said. ``This is the 
world's heritage.'' A feasibility study for the museum was launched 
Tuesday. The government will need to be persuaded to get the plan 
off the ground, Gaballa said. ``It sounds crazy, but I know it is 
not crazy. I know it can be done,'' said Gaballa, Egypt's chief archaeologist. 
He refused to say how long or how much money it will take to build 
the tunnels around the site, which is about 20 feet (6 meters) under 
water. Gaballa did not rule out participation of private groups and 
UNESCO. The existence of the historically documented royal court was 
not confirmed until 1996, when French marine archaeologist Franck 
Goddio discovered the location after four years of exploration with 
the help of sophisticated equipment including a satellite global positioning 
system. Working with Gaballa's organization, Goddio drew accurate 
maps of the submerged quarters, including columns, statues, sphinxes, 
pavements, ceramics and piers. Goddio's 35-member mission also discovered 
the royal harbor of Cape Lochias and the island of Antirhodos, which 
housed one of Cleopatra's palaces, and the peninsula where her lover, 
Marc Antony, built his retreat, the Timonium. Cleopatra's original 
palace might not even have been in existence when the royal quarters 
submerged _ her rule had ended centuries earlier with her and her 
lover's suicide in 30 B.C. But many of the artifacts date to the period 
when Cleopatra lived there and many are as old as 3rd century B.C. 
Alexandria was a great city long before Cleopatra. It was built by 
Greek conqueror Alexander the Great in 332 B.C. after he saw the magnificent 
harbor. At its height, the city was a commercial and cultural center 
filled with gardens, fountains and temples. While the discovery of 
the lost city is not likely to reveal great secrets, it brings ``us 
within touching distance of history. It gives a new perspective to 
the lives of people like Cleopatra, Julius Caesar and Antony,'' Goddio 
said. Among Goddio's most treasured find is the 825-pound (380 kilos) 
sphinx dating to 50 B.C. _ a lion with a human head in Pharaonic headgear, 
bearing close resemblance to Ptolemy XII. On Wednesday, a steel frame 
hooked to a winch on the crazily rocking research boat was slipped 
under the sphinx. As the statue emerged from the water, visitors and 
crew broke into applause. The divers' mascot, a golden retriever, 
wagged her tail madly. ``Look at me. I have goose pimples all over. 
This is seeing history alive,'' Gaballa said after running his hands 
over the statue. Almost everybody on board crowded around the statue 
to have pictures taken with it. Ten minutes earlier, the divers had 
pulled out a 4-foot (1-meter)-tall black granite statue of a priest 
from a temple of the Egyptian goddess Isis, dating to the 1st century 
A.D. Both statues will be returned to the sea, Gaballa said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>