<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981028.1076 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two things told ethnic Albanians that some change has come from international 
pressure on their Serbian enemies: Uniformed guerrilla fighters moved 
openly in several areas Wednesday and the dreaded police checkpoints 
had virtually disappeared. That's not enough, though, to persuade 
most to return to their homes or trust Yugoslav President Slobodan 
Milosevic. NATO's decision to lift its deadline for Milosevic to comply 
or possibly face airstrikes only bolstered their misgivings. ``NATO, 
it isn't doing the job,'' red-eyed Albert Pacarizi, 24, said at the 
funeral of his 18-year-old cousin, a guerrilla killed Tuesday by a 
land mine left by Serb police. ``They don't attack. They just give 
a news conference.'' Scores of armed guerrillas in green camouflage 
uniforms with the red and yellow badge of their Kosovo Liberation 
Army marched in formation at the funeral. That was unthinkable three 
days earlier, when Serb police manned a checkpoint on the road to 
Dragobilje, 40 kilometers (25 miles) southwest of Pristina. The police 
withdrew on Monday as part of the Oct. 12 agreement between Milosevic 
and U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke to end the crisis in southern Serbia, 
the dominant republic of Yugoslavia. Under the deal, Milosevic must 
cut the number of troops and police in Kosovo to the levels of last 
February, when he began his crackdown on secessionist rebels. Hundreds 
have died and 300,000 ethnic Albanians have been forced from their 
homes. About 90 percent of Kosovo's 2 million residents are ethnic 
Albanian, and most favor independence. With Yugoslav forces withdrawing, 
NATO refrained from setting a new deadline after its last one expired 
Tuesday night. It kept more than 400 warplanes on alert, and the U.S. 
Navy announced Wednesday that American P-3C Orion surveillance planes 
will begin regular flights over Kosovo on Sunday. The planes can fly 
up to 12 hours without refueling and will help monitor the situation 
day and night regardless of the weather. By warning that the threat 
of attack remains, NATO hoped to guarantee the safety of the ethnic 
Albanian refugees, who are terrified of returning home unless government 
troops and Serb police have retreated completely. The threat was insufficient 
for Albanian politicians hoping the alliance would strike the Yugoslav 
war machine. ``Milosevic has known all along that NATO would not be 
bombing, that he would be getting away with what he and his military 
police have been doing here in Kosovo,'' said Muhamet Hamiti of the 
League of Democratic Kosovo. A senior NATO general, Klaus Naumann 
of Germany, said the withdrawal of Serb forces was incomplete but 
so far represented a ``considerable step in the direction of fulfilling 
the demands.'' The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe 
is accelerating efforts to send up to 2,000 unarmed personnel to verify 
compliance on the ground. Also Wednesday, a senior official with the 
U.S. Agency for International Development, Hugh Parmer, said in Pristina 
that he believed international actions had prevented thousands of 
refugees from dying this winter. The agreement enabled organizations 
to rush in clothing, food and other supplies. A U.N. refugee agency 
spokesman said people were returning home in many areas, and he expected 
the numbers to increase. ``People can't wait to return because it 
is getting very cold,'' said the agency's spokesman, Fernando del 
Mundo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>