<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981028.0439 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Having deferred airstrikes for the moment, NATO on Wednesday revealed 
plans for more spy flights to make sure President Slobodan Milosevic 
continues to withdraw forces from Kosovo and lets tens of thousands 
of refugees return home. A senior NATO general, Klaus Naumann of Germany, 
said Wednesday that the withdrawal of Serb forces was not complete 
but so far it represented a ``considerable step in the direction of 
fulfilling the demands.'' With Yugoslav forces drawing back, the Western 
military alliance did not set any new deadlines for airstrikes after 
the previous one expired Tuesday. That was a bitter disappointment 
to Kosovo's ethnic Albanian politicians, who had been hoping that 
NATO would deliver a devastating blow to the Yugoslav war machine. 
``Milosevic has known all along that NATO would not be bombing, that 
he would be getting away with what he and his military police have 
been doing here in Kosovo,'' Muhamet Hamiti of the League of Democratic 
Kosovo said Wednesday. But by warning that the threat of attack remains, 
NATO hoped to guarantee the safety of the ethnic Albanian refugees, 
who are terrified of returning home unless government troops and Serb 
police are held back. It was unclear how many refugees were returning 
home Wednesday. In Geneva, Switzerland, U.N. refugee agency spokesman 
Kris Janowski said there ``has been some movement but at the same 
time the people are still apprehensive.'' Janowski said men in some 
areas were returning to check the condition of homes abandoned during 
the fighting but it was unclear whether most felt it was safe to bring 
back their wives and children. To back up its demands, NATO decided 
to keep more than 400 warplanes on alert. On Wednesday, the U.S. Navy 
announced at its Mediterranean headquarters in Italy that American 
P-3C Orion surveillance will begin regular flights over Kosovo on 
Sunday. The planes can fly for 10-12 hours without refueling and will 
help monitor the situation day and night regardless of the weather. 
The Navy said it conducted a few such flights around the time of the 
first NATO deadline Oct. 17. The Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe is accelerating efforts to send up to 2,000 unarmed personnel 
to verify compliance on the ground. ``We know that President Milosevic 
only moves when he is presented with the credible threat of force,'' 
NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana said after a meeting of NATO 
ambassadors in Brussels, Belgium. ``This crisis is far from over,'' 
he added. ``I urge both sides to take advantage of the opportunity 
that now exists to move the political process forward.'' In an Oct. 
12 peace deal, American negotiator Richard Holbrooke demanded that 
Milosevic cut the number of troops and police in Kosovo to the levels 
of last February, when Milosevic began his crackdown on the separatist 
Kosovo Liberation Army. Hundreds have died in the fighting and 300,000 
ethnic Albanians have been forced from their homes. About 90 percent 
of Kosovo's 2 million residents are ethnic Albanian, and most favor 
independence. Kosovo is a province in Serbia, the main republic in 
Yugoslavia. In Washington, U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright 
told reporters that NATO would move quickly to use force against Yugoslavia 
if Milosevic sends troops and special police back to Kosovo. Albright 
said the NATO allies were organizing a rapid-reaction force based 
in neighboring Macedonia to protect _ if necessary _ the 2,000 unarmed 
personnel who will verify that Milosevic keeps his promises. A spokesman 
for the OSCE said Norwegian Gen. Bjorn Nygard was due in Pristina 
on Thursday to take charge of the verification operation. International 
officials hope the continued pressure will encourage many refugees 
to return home. Many of them are camping in the woods and hills, fearful 
that Serb police will shoot at them if they tried to go back. In the 
village of Ostrozub, southwest of Pristina, Avdullah Krasniqi loaded 
up his wagon with his wife, children and household goods and headed 
home Tuesday. His decision was prompted by one fact: It was getting 
colder by the day in his mountain refuge. ``We spent three months 
in the mountains,'' Krasniqi said as family members sat on a huge 
pile of carpets, kitchen utensils and other household goods, all pulled 
by the family tractor. ``It's very cold.'' The Krasniqis wanted very 
badly to go home, but they are still wary. ``We don't have any faith 
in Milosevic,'' he said, licking his thick dark mustache, and noting 
that his next-door neighbor was shot and killed on his doorstep. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>