<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981028.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Concerned about delays, the United States is pressing Israel and the 
Palestinians to start implementing their new peace agreement on time, 
officials said Wednesday. As part of that effort, Secretary of State 
Madeleine Albright called Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat and Israeli 
Foreign Minister Ariel Sharon earlier this week. ``All sides must 
begin implementation next Monday night,'' said Larry Schwartz, spokesman 
for the U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv. Under the agreement, Israel will 
withdraw from 13 percent of the West Bank over 12 weeks in exchange 
for Palestinian security measures aimed at preventing attacks on Israelis. 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu raised the possibility of a delay 
when he announced Tuesday evening that he was indefinitely postponing 
a Cabinet meeting at which the deal was to have been approved. Netanyahu 
insisted Wednesday that he needed Cabinet backing and that he would 
not start the pullback until he had it. ``It happens to be that the 
prime minister cannot put forward and cannot implement international 
treaties on his own,'' Netanyahu said. ``It has to be approved by 
the Cabinet.'' However, U.S. officials and Netanyahu's senior adviser, 
David Bar-Illan, said Cabinet approval was not a prerequisite for 
Netanyahu to go ahead with the troop withdrawal. Netanyahu's office 
said in a statement the Cabinet meeting was postponed because the 
Palestinians had not submitted a detailed security plan to the United 
States as promised. However, Israeli media said the main reason for 
the delay was Netanyahu's concern that he would not get a majority 
in his Cabinet for the troop withdrawal. Several Israeli Cabinet ministers 
who initially said they were undecided have announced in recent days 
that they would vote against the agreement. Palestinian negotiator 
Hassan Asfour said the Palestinians were aware of Monday's deadline 
and would verbally present their security plan to the Americans by 
then. U.S. diplomats met with Palestinian officials Wednesday in an 
attempt to prevent any delays in implementation. Bar-Illan noted that 
in the first week of the 12-week process, the steps to be taken must 
come from the Palestinian side and that Israel does not have to take 
any action during that time. Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, meanwhile, 
said he was confident both sides would keep their promises and that 
he was not concerned about the postponing of the Israeli Cabinet meeting. 
``There are American guarantees and international guarantees and Arab 
guarantees,'' said Arafat, who returned home Wednesday to a carefully 
orchestrated welcome by flag-waving students. Arafat adviser Nabil 
Abourdeneh said Albright called the Palestinian leader on Monday evening. 
Asked what the two discussed, Abourdeneh said that ``the Americans 
are keen on implementing the agreement.'' Israeli media said Wednesday 
that security for Netanyahu has been increased recently in response 
to the vociferous street protests against the West Bank withdrawal. 
Israel radio said Netanyahu will cut down on appearances in large 
crowds and travel to the West Bank and Gaza Strip only by helicopter. 
In recent protests against Netanyahu, demonstrators have shouted ``Traitor! 
Traitor!'' Such cries were common in the weeks leading up to the assassination 
of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin by an ultranationalist Jew in November 
1995. Also Wednesday, the Israeli army removed travel restrictions 
imposed on Palestinians in Hebron earlier this week after a Jewish 
settler was killed in the tense town. The decision was made after 
Palestinian security forces arrested two suspects in the killing of 
the settler, 29-year-old Danny Vargas from the nearby Jewish settlement 
of Kiryat Arba. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>