<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981028.0244 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An Air China jet with 104 people aboard was hijacked to Taiwan Wednesday 
by its disgruntled captain, who allegedly told authorities he did 
it because he was angered over pay and working conditions. ``I feel 
relaxed,'' Yuan Bin said in a brief exchange with reporters, after 
prosecutors questioned him at the airport before taking him to court. 
``I shall have no regret whatever happens to me.'' Flight CA905 took 
off from Beijing for the southern Chinese city of Kunming, but was 
diverted in the air and arrived safely under military jet escort at 
Taiwan's main international airport at 11:17 a.m. (0317 GMT). The 
official Central News Agency said another pilot tried to stop Yuan 
from flying to Taiwan, but Yuan told him not to interfere, saying 
he was prepared to die if necessary. The report quoted officials who 
had questioned Yuan, but it did not identify them. No passengers were 
hurt and the Boeing 737's two other pilots were allowed to take off 
from Taiwan six hours later, flying the 94 remaining passengers and 
six crew members back to China. China's Xinhua News Agency said 20 
foreigners were aboard, but it did not give their nationalities. No 
itinerary was given for the return flight. Yuan was accompanied on 
the hijacked flight by his wife, identified as Xu Mei, who also was 
detained by Taiwanese authorities. Some early media reports suggested 
Yuan had been seeking to escape an unhappy life, although officials 
did not confirm this motive. Taiwan Television showed the captain 
in his uniform white shirt, carrying a suitcase as he was led out 
of the plane by policemen in helmets and bulletproof vests. His wife 
was shown in a black coat. Interior Minister Huang Chu-wen said Yuan 
admitted he diverted the jet to Taiwan because he was displeased with 
Air China's policies and his pay. It was not immediately clear what 
Yuan hoped to accomplish. ``There was no political motive,'' Huang 
said. Chang Chia-ju, Taiwan's aeronautics chief, said Yuan would face 
trial in Taiwan. China sought his return to the mainland. The flight 
by Air China, the main airline run by the Civil Aviation Administration 
of China, was originally scheduled to stop in Kunming, then continue 
to Yangon, Myanmar, Chang said. Defense Ministry officials said the 
Air China jetliner was escorted to the airport by four Taiwanese warplanes, 
which took off after spotting the jet on radar. There was a spate 
of hijackings from China to Taiwan in 1993 and 1994 by Chinese who 
said they were seeking freedom and better job prospects. But Taiwanese 
Premier Vincent Siew condemned Wednesday's incident. ``We've never 
agreed to such deeds,'' he told reporters _ although Taiwan in recent 
memory used to shower hijackers from mainland China with gold and 
cash rewards. Taiwan began cracking down on the hijackers after longstanding 
tensions with the mainland began easing in the 1980s. The 16 hijackers 
arrested in the 1990s have all been jailed for up to 12 years. Two 
of them were paroled and sent back to China. China has demanded that 
Taiwan send all the hijackers back. The two sides were near reaching 
an agreement about repatriation in 1995 when China broke off the talks 
in anger over a Taiwanese drive to gain diplomatic recognition. In 
recent months, the two sides have slowly approached each other to 
restore the long-stalled dialogue. Hijackings in the opposite direction, 
from Taiwan to the mainland, have been rare. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>