<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981028.2130.1510 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Moviegoers who see "American history X" will be getting a lesson in 
unconventional cinema. Sherry Sylvester has the story. Oh there is 
a deeper river It is a picture of hate, carefully crafted dialogue 
spoken by an oscar-nominated actor who gained 30 pounds of muscle 
mass to be photographed by a director known for his slick commercials. 
Edward Norton's skinhead in "American history X" is picture-perfect. 
Tell me about the decision to make the character articulate and attractive. 
To me, it was important that on many levels he be a slightly heightened 
character. That he was of -- he was physically forceful, intellectually 
forceful, charismatic, a compelling leader. I got a bet. I come in 
this game right now. Same score, but we play black guys against the 
white guys. Name your price, brother. No money, no money -- for these 
courts and not just for today, for good. Is there the fear, though, 
that someone will misread the message? I don't think you can come 
away mistaking what the message of the film is. I think it's pretty 
unequivocal. This character does not get off the hook for his actions 
on any level. He -- the consequences of his choices come home in the 
worst possible way to him. I am out, and Danny is out, too. And if 
you come near my family again I will feed you your heart. The rise 
and fall of the main character is shown through in-your-face violence. 
The most unreal scene was ripped from the headlines. And headlines 
of hate crimes continue. You can't pick up the paper without reading 
about a young gay man named matthew shepard who's murdered, an abortion 
doctor in upstate New York who's killed by a sniper, a black man in 
Texas who's dragged behind a Pickup truck. But the film's message 
was sidelined during post-production. And the final film is not the 
director's final cut. Public battles between director Tony Kaye and 
distributor new line cinema included a series of publicity stunts. 
Kaye slammed the studio in trade ads, asked that his on-screen credit 
read humpty dumpty, and brought a Rabbi, a priest and a Tibetan monk 
to a studio meeting. Tony got a little frustrated. But I think he's 
just been frustrated with the practical limitations of making a movie 
with a film studio on a release schedule. All films get abandoned, 
they never get finished. And I think he'll come to grips with that 
eventually. "American history X" opens first in Los Angeles and New 
York, and norton is hoping that the attention will focus on how it 
plays, rather than how it was made. Sherri Sylvester, CNN, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>