<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981028.1130.1492 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There's a new gadget that can detect certain unsightly stains you 
wouldn't normally see. Jeanne Moos shows us how it works and what 
shows up when it does. One of the nice things about staying in hotels 
is that everything seems so neat, so clean. Sweet dreams. Whoa, look 
at that pillow. oh, my. Ultraviolet light for the ultraclean freak. 
Worried about someone else's bodily fluids and germs? When hit with 
black light, they fluoresce and they glow. Oh, yeah, see what's glowing 
on this toilet seat? Joe schulman sounds like he's struck gold. And 
he's hoping he has with his new product -- rest assured, personal 
inspection light. Imagine the fun you'll have crawling around on the 
bed in the dark with this $30 gadget. Ew, ew this one looks bad. A 
lot of folks wonder if there's anything else spread on their motel 
bedspread. We take it off the bed. I won't sleep under a blanket in 
a hotel room, unless there's a sheet on top of it as well as under 
it. I just won't do that. Sometimes I smell it -- I know it sounds 
stupid, but I do. They sound like perfect candidates for the ultraviolet 
travel light that causes phosphorous to glow. Anything that comes 
out of the human body probably contains phosphorous. The police use 
black light to comb crime scenes. That's how they first focused on 
O.J. Simpson's bloody socks. But the stains at Joe schulman's home 
are less incriminating. That is cat something or dog something. Though 
it was invisible under regular light. The gizmo is also good for finding 
lice. But when we came up empty on the dogs -- how about your son? 
I see one spot -- Right there, that one? Yeah, that's just my little 
Boo Boo. And on the rocking chair, where Mrs. schulman used to burp 
and feed her son -- what is this stuff? That's baby vomit. Joe schulman 
runs a janitorial service. To demonstrate his device, we checked into 
room seven at a fleabag motel. Eccchh, Gross me out. Who needs ultraviolet 
light here? Look at the side of that thing. But what seemed to be 
blood spots didn't glow under the black light. I thinks it's ketchup. 
Nevertheless, the toilet lived up to glowing expectations. You're 
sure? Yes I'm sure. I'm a cleaning professional. I know urine when 
I see it. What do you expect for a motel room that rents by the hour? 
Our next stop was at a chain where rooms run $75 a night. The bedspread 
was fine, but not the blanket. Here we go. Oh yeah, there's something 
on the remote control. It appears to be a glowing stain. Personally, 
I'd rather not know. The soap may say "clean and fresh," but maybe 
it's not quite as fresh as the stains. This could be a sneeze. Jeanne 
Moos, CNN, Lakewood, New Jersey. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>