<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981028.2100.1807 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Next Tuesday after the polls have closed, they'll be counting ballots 
late into the nig. In Washington state, the scene of what is expected 
to be some close races. Senator Patty Murray swept into the Senate 
in 1992's "year of the woman" or so it was called thereafter while 
her re-election is not certain, we do know either way it will be a 
woman, her republican opponent is congresswoman Linda Smith. In Seattle, 
democratic challenger Jay inslee has a shot at taking out Rick white. 
A contentious ballot measure that would abolish affirmative action 
programs, initiative 200 it's called. It's almost identical to proposition 
209 in California that got press coverage a while back. Joining us 
in Seattle is the chief political reporter Barbara serauno. If someone 
landed in Washington state, how would you brief them on the state 
of political after affairs out there? What is at the top of the list? 
Is it the affirmative action proposition? I would say so. The initiative 
200 race has inspired, I think, one of the most fascinating debates 
I've seen in this state in several years. It's come down largely to 
an issue involving racial preferences and whether or not they're appropriate 
to use in college admissions and government employment. The president, 
of course, in his famous speech at the justice department on the subject 
recommended mending it, not ending it at the federal level. What are 
people arguing about what has happened in California since prop 209? 
The supporters are arguing it's time to move beyond affirmative action, 
that to use racial or gender preferences is inherently unfair despite 
the fact that the programs were initially set up to counter the impact 
of raceism. The opponents are arguing that in fact raceism is very 
much alive and well in America and that supporters of the initiative 
are taking a meat ax approach to affirmative action. That's talk about 
Patty Murray. She was known as the sneaker wearing mom who ran for 
Senate and very much the kind of eant politician than the normal person 
running for Senate. That was how she was elected. Now with a lot of 
other congratulations at the "year of the woman," Carol moseley-Braun 
among them, Patty Murray finds herself in trouble. why? She was targeted 
by the republican party early last year as someone who was vulnerable. 
What was interesting is they did select the sthree women who were 
swept into office in 1992. The third being Barbara boxer in California. 
And to counter that, Patty has been working very hard to show she 
has been very effective in office, she's been working on behalf of 
business, free trade, securing funding for a new transit system in 
Seattle, as well as education, which is her trademark issue. It sounds 
like the race you're going to be covering is pretty much -- at least 
one of the exciting places around the country this election night. 
Thank you very much for coming on. Barbara Serrano an O with "the 
Seattle times." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>