<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981028.2100.2452 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You have godspeed, John Glenn. 10, nine, eight, seven, five, four, 
three, two, one. That was fellow Mercury astronaut, Scott Carpenter 
in 1962 speaking for an entire nation when he delivered one last message 
to John Glenn right before friendship 7 carried Glenn into space making 
him the first American to orbit the earth. Scott Carpenter will be 
here tomorrow at the launch. I've been add monnished to call you Scott 
even though that goes against what I was taught. Welcome to you. I 
purchased T shirts today for my kids and there on the front is "godspeed, 
john Glenn." Were the words thought about in advance or did it just 
come out? no. They were on the spur of the moment, and for some reason 
or other, they have a Lon jeffity I didn't figure on. And you spoke, 
as we mentioned for an entire nation, people don't realize there were 
people walking around Times Square in New York with tears in their 
eyes. Some would argue the height of the coal war and sputnik spooked 
every american and we didn't know what the soasts were up to. That 
was the major motivater for was in those days was do it better than 
the Russians. It took ause a long time and they had all the major 
firsts, but Kennedy and vonbron gave us the ultimate victory which 
was fly to the Moon. Off to remind you when you come in the main gate, 
you see the little mercury missile. As Mr. omalley used to sit in 
the block how the and hit the button that sent you guys up insists 
on calling it a missile. It's a tiny rocket. How did you get up in 
that thing? Because in those days it was a big rocket. Really? It 
really was. It's relative. It's the biggest one we had and it was 
plenty good enough to do the job we gave it. A lot of people as we 
look at videotape, our viewers do anyway, of your ride, a lot of people 
know what they know, especial the younger generation, know what they 
know from the space program from things like "the right stuff," Hollywood 
depictions. How has Hollywood been to your achievements? I think Hollywood 
has been good. You get different opinions from different members of 
my group, but I like the film and I like the book. The film is not 
a documentary, it's a docu drama. But it took some liberty but only 
with nonessential details. The essential details were portrayed accurately. 
I thought it was a great film. Ure a modest man but I want to force 
you on this point. Do you consider yourself brave? How many gut checks 
went into climbing into the capsule and realizing there's no stopping 
the countdown and going up? I don't consider myself brave. I think 
I am powerfully curious and that's a big driver. When we all volunteer 
for this sort of wk, we look at the risk benefit ratio, and you decide 
once and for all whether or not the risk is worth the benefit. Those 
of us who see it as being worth the benefit press on and forget for 
ever more the risk involved. Were you part crazy? A lot of people 
think so, and there may be some truth to that. And, of course, then 
you had -- you land and you had this unscheduled club medical vacation 
three hours all by yourself in the ocean waiting to get picked up, 
landed off target, which you had nothing -- you had no control over. 
yes. I treasured those three hours alone on the ocean. You could bond 
with your capsule? I was in a life raft. But it gave me a rare time 
to contemplate my last four hours. It's a marvelous experience. And 
I didn't have to, like everybody else had to, talk about it to anybody 
for a while. I could reminisce. A lot of what you stand for and what 
you've done over the course of your life, what isn't talked about 
is being a test pilot, the fact that you and your peers, the original 
seven would for a living climb into things that couldn't be called 
aircraft, really, not knowing if there was a rational expectation 
of coming back down again and not knowing what would Mack at mach 
1, 2, or 3, and you did that without fear or fail. Some of you were 
in crashes and got up and dusted yourself off. Do you think that is 
the underrated part of your career? Let me correct one thing you said. 
You don't do those things without fear. Fear is a useful thing. It 
makes you do a better job. It improves your vision and your strength 
and endurance and all sorts of things, so you're afraid but it makes 
you do a good job. Fear is a good cockpit companion, but it wasn't 
bravery that inspired us again, it was curiosity and a love for fine 
machinery. Is there going to be fear in John Glenn tomorrow? Of course. 
It will help him do a better job. They'll all be a little afraid, 
but nobody is going to panic. That seems hard to believe. The ultimate 
expression is, you know, he's flown his missions, he is so excited 
to be strapped into that thing, as you would be, should something 
happen to him tomorrow, you would like be it the runner up like the 
beauty panelling ents that run out there and strap in? Of course. 
But I will just as he will not think about fear or anything more than 
doing a good job. What are you going to say to John Glenn the last 
time before he goes? I've been thinking about that. I think I will 
wait a little while to see what sort of responsible continue ayity 
I will bring to play. We'll have you all day tomorrow on the air. 
We'll tell our viewers about it tomorrow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>