<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981028.2100.2002 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It discuss further over the battle of affirmative action in Washington 
state, we're joined by men on both sides, John Carlson chairman of 
the I 200 campaign in our news room in Washington. And in Seattle, 
Jose gaitan, chairman of the American bar association's commission 
on minorities and Jose, you know in increasing areas around the country, 
your position is under fire. Starting with the president's kind of 
gradual pulling back from all out affirmative action, how do you defend 
it in 1998, especially in light of what California voters did? Well, 
there's no question that this initiative is aimed at getting rid of 
affirmative action in this country. And the question is whether or 
not affirmative action is still relevant. Now, affirmative action 
was started to do away with discrimination, and the question we have 
to ask ourselves is does discrimination still exist? The answer to 
that is yes. Women make 75 cents on the dollar as compared to men. 
Hispanic women with a B.A. degree makes less than cause caution men 
with high school diplomas. Women doctors make 54 cents on the dollar 
as compared to their male colleagues. Discrimination still exists. 
The best tool we've had to get rid of this weed of discrimination 
has been affirmative action. There's no question it should continue. 
But, of course, Mr. Carlson, the other side of that is the argument 
you hear about giving assistance to those who on a level playing field 
shouldn't need it? Brian, thank you for the invitation to be here 
tonight. This is really a referendum not on affirmative action, but 
on when affirmative action goes too far. And we believe it goes too 
far when it steps over the line of discrimination and begins to use 
different rules for different races in classifying and allowing people 
into college and universities and jobs and hiring and whatnot. Jose 
and I happen to know each other, and we both come from working class 
back grounds and we're both dads today and we're both very lucky. 
Life has treated us pretty well. He has a 5-year-old, I've got a 3-year-old, 
and I think the initiative is this simple, that when Jose's son and 
my son apply to college, their race should not matter. Well, let's 
go back 20 years. Someone with Jose's Sur name might not have been 
looked at so favorably by the college before there was the kind of 
age of enlightenment, it is argued that was brought about by affirmative 
action. Jose, you want to take a crack at that? I don't think you 
have to go back 20 years. If that were the case there weren't many 
people like myself that were in law school at the time I went through. 
Look today. Ask yourself about what the distribution of women and 
minorities are within the profession. Approximately 1/3 of our country 
are people of color. Approximately 7% of the people that make up the 
profession of law are people of color. There's no question there's 
a wide disparity. What's more, women are grossly under represented 
at all the high policy levels and law firms and government and education 
as professors. There's no question the disparity continues today. 
That's why we need affirmative action to direct that disparity. John, 
you realize that some will come back to you and say to pretend there's 
no disparity is Pie in the sky? There are disparities, but a lot of 
the disparities are class or cultural driven, not necessarily racially 
driven. For instance, if someone is competing for a job and happens 
to be from a Welfare household against somebody who's in -- comes 
from an upper middle class background and it so happens the upper 
middle class pson is Hispanic or black and the poor person has to 
be white oration, should their race work against them? That's where 
I think a lot of American are saying if we're going to have affirmative 
action, base it on people's circumstances, not their skin color. John, 
I want to thank you John Carlson for coming on and Jose gaitan. And 
by way of apology, we are the victims of a satellite delay tonight. 
Thank you, gentlemen for coming on the air tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>