<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981028.2100.1107 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For their reaction to the new ads and the new numbers, we are joined 
tonight by Ann Lewis, White House communications director and Mary 
crawford, communications director for the national republican congressional 
committee both with us from Washington. And we'll begin with you. 
I know the new White House and surrogate talking point is substance 
over sex, let's get back to the nation's business, but there must 
be something in it for the republican party to spend this much and 
target these races, this must begin somewhere? Somewhere, somehow. 
Your polls would suggest it's a small group of people, so I'll let 
Mary talk about her strategy. I must say, substance. What a dynamite 
strategy. How clever of us. I think what we're seeing with these ads 
is there's a difference between the two parties. Democrats do want 
to talk about substance. We want to talk about social security, passing 
of patients' Bill of rights, a school constructions that our kids 
go to schools that are safe, raising the minimum wage. That's a positive 
agenda. With republicans, either they don't have an agenda or don't 
want to talk about it, they do have a lot ofoney. I must acknowledge 
that. When you kill a tobacco Bill, you get millions of dollars from 
contributions from tobacco companies and can put lot of ads on the 
air. What we see is they're using special interest money to pay for 
the ads. No disrespect intended, of course you want to talk about 
substance. You have ament who has admitted to a relationship with 
a 25-year-old and is anxious to change the subject? Since when is 
changing the subject to talk about the issues that mattered to people's 
lives? Why snt see it changing the subject to say the Congress you 
elect in november is going to vote and decide on how we strengthen 
the social security system. The Congress you elect this November has 
another chance to pass the patients' Bill of rights because this past 
Congress defeated it. That's an important issue. That's why we go 
to the polls. That's why we elect members of Congress so they can 
cast their votes on issues that will matter in their lives. That's 
a real difference. We're saying you should respect your members of 
Congress to legislate, not investigate. Mary Crawford? Ann is right 
about that. This election is about the issues that matter most to 
the American people, and the bottom line is Bill Clinton is the leader 
of the democrat party. Publicans very strongly disagree with his ideas 
and the democrat's ideas for what direction this country should take. 
She's right. They are concerned about social security. And because 
the republican Congress balanced the budget and did it without increasing 
taxes, we now have a surplus, and the republicans have a plan to set 
aside $1.4 trillion to save social security and at the same time provide 
tax relief to married couples in this country suffering discrimination 
in the tax code for being married. They do care about the issues. 
Ann is right about that. What are the republican controlled Congress 
get accomplished this year? The republican Congress has a strong record 
that we have been advertising since the beginning of October on. We 
started this advertising campaign by talking -- What have you accomplished? 
We have kept this budget balanced and produced a surplus. That is 
an unbelievable achievement given that when President Clinton came 
into office he was presenting budgets that had $200 billion as far 
as the eye could see. We've cut taxes and have a plan to help save 
social security and cut the marriage penalty tax. Those are real major, 
major changes. We've also continued the movement of moving people 
off of welfare to work. What did you pass this year? Brian, we have 
been very, very focused on making sure that it's just as important 
what President Clinton didn't get through in terms of extra big government 
spending, in terms of being threatened by the fact we are going to 
cut taxes and we're going to get there through because we're going 
to win seats. I think in talking -- more laws are not necessarily 
good if they're laws that take us in the wrong direction. Here are 
laws that would be good. We could have passed a patients' Bill of 
rights and fean us in the right direction. We did pass a patients' 
protection Bill. We did. You pass addeaker version in the house. That's 
not tru There is no patients' Bill of rights. The Senate killed it. 
There is a patient protection ll the republican house passed. That 
is a fact. no. It was a weaker Bill that fassed in the house and failed 
in the Senate. You have a retch can majority Congress. Nobody listening 
today should think somehow a republican Congress took any step forward 
to protect their rights. We passed the patient protection Bill. You 
pass add weaker Bill in the house and killed in in the Senate. Is 
it true we have two houses of Congress? We're going to call an end 
to this. Thank you both very much for coming on the air tonight. We 
will have more news later. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>