<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981028.2100.0303 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We are joined tonight by another man whose career has included both 
the space program and the U.S. Senate, Jake garn. He was a mission 
specialist on discovery in 1984 while serving as senator from the 
state of Utah. He is with us here at the Kennedy space center. Senator? 
Hi, Brian. Senator, I want to begin with sadly what's been the criticism 
of one of your former teammates, Mr. Glenn. Do you believe there is 
room in the space program in this country for someone we can fairly 
say is a nonessential passenger? It wasn't absolutely critical because 
his role is not pilot on this flight? Absolutely, Brian. John Glenn 
is a national hero. I had the privilege of serving with him for 18 
years in the United States senate, and I am so excited that he is 
being able to go. He is qualified. He has the experience and he proves 
that age isn't a limitation on anything. So I am here to support him. 
He supported me when I flew in 1985 and I could not be more excited 
unless i was with him holding his hand on launch. Senator, you've 
heard the criticism, let's take T worst case. What if we find out 
there's little or no science on this mission? How about the other 
side of the argument, does John Glenn deserve a victory lap? Well, 
first of all, I think the science wil work out for him, but the answer 
to your second question, absolutely. This man is a national hero. 
I think he will do a great deal to rejuvinate the space program and 
national interest in it and prove the senior citizens that age is 
not a Limitation. You can do anything if you really want to do it 
badly enough. You're one of very few people who can answer this question. 
What's going on in his heart and in his mind tonight and in the hearts 
and minds of the six others who will be with him on that spacecraft? 
Incredible excitement. We were talking a few minutes ago about night 
viewing. That is incredibly exciting when you go out there and see 
discovery bathed in light. That was the same shuttle that I flew on. 
And then you go back and it is very difficult to sleep. I would sleep 
a half hour, wake up a half hour, sleep a half hour, could not wait 
for that knock on my door at 3:44 in the morning. I am sure John is 
going to feel the same way, particularly when he's had the experience 
and knows what it is like. He will have a hard time sleeping tonight, 
but tremendously excited when he kes up in the morning knowing that 
he's going to fly again. Oddly, of all people to have this happen 
to him, I understand where he's going to be seated in this cockpit 
is a heck of a lot different from mercury, he's not going to have 
a window to look out, at least initially for takeoff? That's true. 
He'll be sitting in the same position I was. There is a small window 
to the FT on the port side he'll be able to turn his head and look 
out briefly. But once you're into orbit, he will be able to release 
from his seat and float and move around like he never could in McUry. 
He will see the magnificent view of this earth through the cockpit 
windows and overhead windows on the flight deck. It's a view that 
you feel like your heart and lungs are going to stop, you're not going 
to be able to breathe anymore. It is impossible to describe how magnificently 
beautifuthis planet is from space. I know you will be here on the 
ground tomorrow, but be with him in spirit as he reenters space. Senator, 
astrout, Jake garn. It's been a pleasure having you here tonight. 
Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>