<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981028.2100.0066 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good Wednesday evening to you from cape Canaveral where toght the 
countdown clock begins to tick down. The scaffolding swings away from 
the shuttle, revealing the enormous rocket that will lift the discovery 
into orbit if all goes well at 2:00 tomorrow. On board, John Glenn. 
The last time he did this it was just him on board on a mission with 
a one in three chance of failure. The odds have improved since then. 
The Rockets have improved as well. This one is 21 times more powerful 
than the glorified missile he went up in. One thing will be the same. 
Tomorrow night at about this time, the people of Australia will be 
flashing the lights in town just as they did during Glenn's orbit 
in 1962, a signal from earth that all is well and that all thoughts 
are with John Glenn and his six co-travelers. The man who wished John 
Glenn "godspeed, John Glenn" this day in 1962 astronaut Scott Carpenter 
will be with us tonight. A lot to tell you about as the minutes tick 
down. To start us off, Robert Hager. Brian, the countdown clock is 
poised over my shoulder at 11 hours, T-11 hours. That's a long planned 
preprogram hold. It will pick up again at midnight and we have a couple 
other holds built in before the scheduled 278 blastoff. The weather 
is great here dafment the astronauts went out to the launch pad earlier 
this day to get a last look at that spaceship that will be their home 
for the coming nine days. It's their only public moment today. Anwhile 
there, they're cheered by relatives and guests. By design, the shuttle 
crew keeps some distance back from the crowd to prevent them from 
picking up any cold or flu bugs before flight. A different trip this 
time. 70 members of Congress commected here along with thousands of 
other spectators pouring into Florida. Security at the space center 
beefed up. Guards carry extra weapons. Cars scanned for explosives. 
Othe arrive by bus or mobile homes and campers setting up near the 
beach, prime viewing ground. Edward Cooper from Arizona. It's exciting. 
Bob and Carol cooney. It's wonderful. I think it's the greatest things 
there is. But some others are apprehensive, including John enn's daughter 
Lyn who remembers the shuttle accident. My brother and I both agree 
we saw the challenger in our minds hundreds of times. I would prefer 
that he wasn't doing this, but he is the man he is, and I love him. 
And this is what he needs to do in his life and this is what makes 
him happier than I've ever seen him. And at age 77, less than 24 hours 
from becoming the most senior astronaut ever to soar into orbit. And 
tonight there's a good moment out there. That is the shuttle right 
over the T-11 hours clock, and you can see the big search lights beaming 
up in the air. They pulled back that scaffolding showing the full 
shuttle, and Glenn and the other crewmates and their families will 
be out there at the pad tonight for one final look. They sort of stand 
there separated because they're secluded so they don't big up a bug. 
They'll gaze at the shuttle for about Hal an hour. And one NasA official 
who has seen this this before describes that as an amazing thing. 
Bob Hager. We are miles away from the pad and it is an absolutely 
extraordinary sight lit up as it is tonight by the spot lights. And 
as Bob Hager points out with the scaffolding taken away, the rocket 
will stand from alone tomorrow until the silence here is shattered 
by the roar of that shuttle taking off. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>