<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981028.1830.1549 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Americans first started going into space led by John Glenn, they 
were taking great risks on live television. It was the highest form 
of human drama, and there were no guarantees of a Happy ending. They 
became extraordinarily well known and so did the men and women who 
told their stories, especially one man. He'll be back here tomorrow. 
When John Glenn lifted off into space, he was not alone. He carried 
with him the pride of all Americans. In one moment, an entire nation 
would come to believe that anything is possible. On February 20th, 
1962, television would take us to a place no American had ever been 
before outer space, and we trusted one man, to guide us there. Hello, 
I'm Walter cronkite. Recently, he wrote -- Of all humankind's achievements 
in the 20th century, the one event that will dominate the history 
books a half a millennium from now will be our escape from our earthly 
environment and landing on the Moon. Cronkite brought us Glenn's first 
historic flight. Now, 36 years later, they'll team up again. Cronkite 
says it's not all that different. His hair's turned white, and that's 
about the only change. From paper boy to high school newspaper editor, 
to the most trusted man in America, many thought this was cronkite's 
most emotional moment. From Dallas, Texas, the flash apparently official. 
President Kennedy died at 1:00 P.M. But cronkite will tell you America's 
space program has most captivated his personal emotions. What are 
our scientists doing to ensure safety in the hostile environment of 
outer space? Cronkite reminds us that Glenn was a true hero and remains 
one today. Do you think that this nation, at this time particularly, 
needs to have a Hero like John Glenn again? yes. We desperately need 
a hero. And here, space may be the saving grace for at least from 
our concerns and worries, proving again that we can do these things. 
He tells us never to take for granted what Glenn is doing, what nASA 
is capable of doing. And as always, he wishes he could tag along for 
the ride. What is so appealing about a space flight for you? Oh, come 
on. Same thing appeals to you, climbing mountains or any other challenge. 
Everything about it -- looking at earth from a couple hundred miles 
up. When John Glenn lifts off from cape Canaveral, will you be thinking 
in your mind, "godspeed, John Glenn, and I wish I were with you"? 
Yes, I'll be thinking that. And I'll be saying, "go, baby, go." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>