<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981028.1830.0072 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. The weather's great. The systems are working. The countdown 
is on. And the anticipation is high that by tomorrow at this time, 
John Glenn will give new meaning to the phrase "active senior citizen." 
He should be in orbit on board the shuttle "discovery," America's 
first astronaut to orbit the earth, now the oldest astronaut to go 
into space. The shuttle is on the launchpad, and the fueling will 
begin early tomorrow morning. Then, the heart-stopping final countdown 
and liftoff. NASA insists Glenn is on board to perform serious and 
worthwhile scientific experiments. He will be busy, and he'll have 
lots of company. NBC's Robert Hager tonight on the final preparations. 
Tom, the countdown clock is poised in a long, preplanned hold at "T" 
minus 11 hours and counting. Weather still looks great and the astronauts 
went out to the launch pad to get a close look at the spaceship that 
will be their home for the next nine days. It's their only public 
moment. Today, and while there, they are cheered by relatives, guests, 
and some lucky tourists. By design, the shuttle crew keeps some distance 
back from the crowd to prevent them from picking up any cold or flu 
bugs before flight. A little different trip this time. 70 members 
of Congress expected here, along with hundreds of thousands of other 
spectators already pouring into Florida. Security at the space center, 
beefed up. Guards carry extra weapons. Cars scanned for explosives. 
Others arrive by bus or mobile homes and campers. Setting up near 
the beach, prime viewing ground. Edward Cooper, all the way from Arizona. 
It's exciting. Bob and Carol cooney. I think it's wonderful. I think 
it's great. I think it's one of the greatest things there is. I wish 
it were me. But some others are apprehensive, including John Glenn's 
daughter lyn, who remembers the 1986 shuttle accident. My brother 
and I both agreed that we saw the "challenger" in our minds hundreds 
of times. I would prefer that he wasn't doing this. But he is the 
man he is, and I love him. And this is what he needs to do in his 
life. And this is what makes him happier than I've ever seen him. 
And at age 77, less than 24 hours from becoming the most senior astronaut 
ever to soar into orbit, tonight, a big moment. As the scaffolding 
is finally pulled back at the launch pad, for the first time, there 
will be a clear view of the shuttle standing tall in bright floodlights. 
The astronauts and their immediate families will return to spend time 
gazing at it. What a NASA official tonight, calls an awesome sight. 
tom? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>