<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0555 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's that time of year in New York. Fashion designers parade their 
new spring lines down the runway for review and college athletic conferences 
give the news media a look at their starting lineups for the coming 
basketball season. In both cases, no matter how hyped the collection 
or the team, no one really knows who's going to be this year's success. 
The buzz Wednesday at the Big East Conference's media day at the New 
York Hilton Hotel was the University of Connecticut's men's team, 
which was the unanimous choice of the league's head coaches to win 
the 1998-99 Big East regular-season title. The Huskies exceeded expectations 
last year by making it to the regional final of the National Collegiate 
Athletic Association tournament, where they lost to North Carolina. 
The coaches picked Syracuse for second place, followed by Miami and 
St. John's, Georgetown, Villanova, Pittsburgh, Rutgers, Seton Hall, 
Providence, West Virginia, Notre Dame and Boston College. UConn coach 
Jim Calhoun sounded cautiously optimistic about the team's chances 
of withstanding the pressure that comes with a No. 1 ranking. ``We're 
deep and we have enough talent to be a great basketball team,'' Calhoun 
said. ``But our kids have to understand that a win over us this season 
will be considered a big win. If we start to assume we're the best 
and teams will roll over for us, then we're in trouble. I think this 
team understands that.'' Connecticut's Richard Hamilton, the 1997-98 
player of the year in the Big East, and Khalid El-Amin, last year's 
Big East rookie of the year, were selected to the preseason all-conference 
team. Also named to the squad were Providence forward Jamel Thomas, 
Miami's Tim James and Pittsburgh's Vonteego Cummings. Georgetown guard 
Anthony Perry and St. John's guard Erick Barkley were chosen preseason 
co-rookies of the year. Unlike the scrappy, self-effacing Metro Atlantic 
Athletic Conference, which introduced members of this year's men's 
and women's basketball teams to the news media on Tuesday, the Big 
East has long been a perennial leader of the NCAA pack. This year 
marks the league's 20th anniversary and the league continues to go 
through some changes. This will be the last season the league will 
play 18 conference games, a format that began in 1995-96. Next season, 
the league will go back to 16 conference games. Commissioner Michael 
Tranghese, in justifying the switch, said playing less conference 
games improves the league's chances of sending teams to the NCAA tournament, 
and at higher seeds. Tranghese said he was proud of the accomplishments 
the league has made over the past 19 years. He pointed to 1985, when 
the Big East placed three teams in the Final Four, and 1996, when 
the league produced three first-team all-Americans _ a first for any 
conference _ as two of the most memorable moments in the league's 
history. Thursday, the Big East will offer up its women's basketball 
programs for the news media's scrutiny. The dazzling styles of both 
the men's and women's games will be available to the public next week 
when the Big East officially kicks off its season. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>