<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0227 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was a humbling sight: a silvery cloud of hover jets descending 
upon my fortress cluster of laser towers, armament factories and rocket 
launchers to reduce it all to smoldering rumble. It had taken just 
more than an hour for someone who called himself Hefty Lefty to vanquish 
me at Total Annihilation, a computer strategy game at which I had 
long considered myself a resourceful player. But I had played TA, 
as devotees call it, only as a single player. Until a couple of weeks 
ago, the game for me was a contest with only the game's _ and I say 
this loosely _ artificial intelligence. Using the Internet to go nose 
to nose, mano a mano, with another player _ unseen and, in the end, 
unstoppable _ was exhilarating and sobering. Most humbling of all, 
however, was just managing to get into the game, a process that can 
be daunting. The first step is to choose a game. It is rare to find 
a state-of-the-art computer game that does not have multiplayer features. 
Some even have ``Internet Ready'' stickers right on their boxes. Some 
games are offered for downloading over the Internet. Other games, 
like Ultima Online, are sold in stores but can be played only on the 
Internet. Next, you choose a game center, a kind of cyberarcade that 
matches up players. The most simple and popular is America Online's 
Games Channel. But play is limited to the games available on the channel, 
ranging from Spades to Starcraft II (more advanced games can cost 
$1.99 an hour), and it is limited to AOL members. Game centers that 
are independent of Internet service providers like AOL and Microsoft 
Network, which also has a game service, tend to offer a much broader 
range of popular computer games. Some of the hottest games on the 
market are offered in centers like Game Storm. But these kinds of 
centers require users to pay a monthly fee, usually about $10, to 
play. And first, of course, you must have a regular Internet provider 
to get you to the Game Storm Web site. Using AOL as my Internet provider, 
joining Game Storm was routine. It required by name, address, credit 
card number and only a few minutes of downloading time with a 28.8 
modem. But downloading one of the center's most popular games, Air 
Warrior III, a World War II fight and flight simulation game, was 
not. It took more than two hours to download the 23 megabytes (the 
minimum installation) of the program. The game can be installed much 
faster from a CD-ROM. Eventually, I found myself in the cockpit of 
a Mustang high over Europe tangling with enemy planes, each piloted 
by some other computer user also on line. But Game Storm only offers 
Total Annihilation through its link to HEAT.Net, also a play-for-pay 
site. But HEAT will not work if players are using AOL or Prodigy as 
Internet providers. So, using AOL, I turned to Mpath Interactive's 
Mplayer.com. I suddenly felt that I was getting closer to actually 
playing the game on the Net. But I soon discovered that Mplayer.com, 
a free service (although its new Plus features cost $3.95 a month), 
involved a long downloading time for its proprietary software. To 
get the center's Mplayer and Gizmo software, essential to using Mplayer.com, 
I needed more than an hour for downloading with a 28.8 modem. Once 
the downloading was complete, the game center searched my Total Annihilation 
software and found that it was inadequate for playing on the Internet. 
Mpath then upgraded the game, which took another 30 minutes. (Mplayer 
Interactive is testing new software that promises downloading in less 
than 10 minutes.) Finally, the computer was ready. Almost. When you 
sign in with a player name and password, Mplayer.com routinely takes 
a few more minutes to verify the account and then download last-minute 
upgrades. Then, after clicking through advertisements for a computer 
game magazine and waiting through a brief commercial for a new game 
from Red Storm, I was, at last, facing a series of rooms where people 
were actually playing Total Annihilation. Much like trying to get 
into a game of pickup basketball, I would visit various sites trying 
to persuade someone _ through a text chat box _ to let me play. Minutes 
later, I met Hefty Lefty and hurried down the road to my dazzling 
defeat. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>