<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0353 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Perhaps nothing epitomizes the Wonderland-like quality of the Japanese 
recession like the giant orange Hermes box in the heart of Ginza, 
Tokyo's most exclusive shopping district. For Hermes International, 
the building-sized box, complete with signature orange packaging and 
brown ``ribbon,'' is not merely a marketing tool but a reflection 
of the company's confidence that even in bad times, there will be 
plenty of Japanese willing to pay hundreds of thousand of yen for 
one of its handbags. Such confidence is hardly misplaced. Sure, unemployment 
is at record levels, corporate earnings are sinking, bankruptcies 
are at a record high, investment is down and the banking system is 
at the brink of disaster. But luxury-goods retailers in Japan are 
thriving, even as overall consumer spending has continued to fall. 
And while luxury sales in Hong Kong, Singapore and other Asian markets 
that were once promising engines of growth have stalled _ partly because 
of their own economic traumas and partly because of a decline in Japanese 
tourism _ many luxury-goods companies continue to post solid gains 
in Japan. ``The economy is not so good, but still people want to buy 
nice things,'' said Hideko Isono, a 30-year-old manicurist who lives 
with her parents in a suburb north of Tokyo and runs her own business. 
Indeed, it is young working women like Miss Isono, and even high school 
students, who live at home and have a penchant for expensive brand 
names, who are chiefly fueling the growth of luxury-goods sales here. 
Sales have also been helped by lower prices, made possible by a slowing 
economy that has reduced business costs like rent and real estate. 
And, of course, a lot of the wealthy are immune to hard times. Even 
in recession, Japan continues to be the most important market in Asia 
for luxury goods companies. Just look at sales figures for Tiffany 
&AMP; Co. Sales in Japan rose 21 percent in the first half of the 
year in yen terms from a year earlier, while sales in the rest of 
Asia fell 16 percent in local currencies for the same period. And 
earlier this month, Tiffany said it expected to meet earnings estimates 
for the third quarter, in large part because robust sales in Japan 
would offset weak sales in the United States. There are other measures 
of the staying power of luxury goods here. Gucci Group NV, for instance, 
has opened seven stores in Japan since the beginning of the year and 
will open a flagship store in the chic Aoyama neighborhood next spring. 
``Japanese consumers are continuing to perceive great value in luxury 
brands,'' said Domenico De Sole, president of Gucci. Hermes has a 
three-year backlog of orders in Japan for Kelly bags, made famous 
by the actress Grace Kelly. The least expensive model sells for 430,000 
yen, or about $3,645 at current exchange rates. The Hermes box in 
Ginza sits on property reportedly bought for $84 million. The company 
plans to open a flagship store on the site in 2000. Louis Vuitton, 
a unit of LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton SA, expects a 7 percent 
to 8 percent increase in sales this year. Prada, however, is the luxury 
brand for Miss Isono, whose most recent purchase was a leather wallet. 
She carries the wallet in a nylon Prada handbag, which she bought 
at a ``brand store'' in Roppongi, a neighborhood popular with foreign 
residents and for its night life. ``I like Prada because of its good 
quality and because it is attractive,'' she said, adding that she 
found the same characteristics in Gucci and Hermes _ although Hermes 
was a bit too expensive for her. Brand stores specialize in selling 
luxury goods obtained outside authorized channels of distribution 
that are sold for prices similar to prices charged in luxury-goods 
boutiques in the United States. That is a bargain here compared with 
Japanese department stores and the official branches of those same 
boutiques. The merchandise may not be the latest design, but in handbags, 
wallets and scarves, that hardly matters. As deregulation has eroded 
the rigid distribution system here, more and more brand-name goods 
have found their way to such shops, which are proliferating. ``Before, 
everything was really expensive: food, housing, clothes,'' Miss Isono 
said, providing a firsthand account of a deflationary cycle that many 
economists, rather than celebrating, actually fear is harming Japan. 
But consumers seem pleased. ``Now everything is a very good price,'' 
Miss Isono added, ``so it's easier to buy nice things even if people 
don't get a bonus or have a lower salary.'' Because Miss Isono lives 
at home, she incurs none of the standard living expenses _ rent, food, 
utilities _ that eat into the incomes of most women like her in Europe 
or the United States. That is why Gucci's average customer in Japan 
is between 24 and 35, compared with 35 and 55 in Europe. Luxury-goods 
executives estimate that these young women's incomes range from 4 
million yen to 6 million yen annually, or $33,900 to $50,800. At the 
low end of the range, that income would not go far enough to cover 
a Vuitton bag or Gucci loafers in the United States and pay for rent 
and groceries, too. ``The key difference between our business here 
and in other countries are these young women and the way they live,'' 
said Kyojiro Hata, the president of Louis Vuitton Japan KK. There 
are some signs that even those free-spending young women are becoming 
more cautious, however. A poll of consumers in August by the Nippon 
Research Institute showed that consumer confidence had wilted most 
among 20-to-29-year- olds, the group that has thus far buoyed overall 
spending statistics. But Hata sees women in their 20s as fairly impervious 
to the recession, at least in the short term. ``Restructuring is taking 
place here, but at higher levels than these women work at,'' he said. 
``Current cuts are aimed at higher income, older workers.'' It is 
not just young women, though, who are helping luxury-goods makers 
weather the economic fallout here. The cost of business is also declining. 
``Rents are lower and floor space is easier to obtain than ever before,'' 
said Michiko Shimizu, president of SAI, a marketing consulting firm. 
``Their cost performance is much better, so why not open a few more 
shops?'' Hata, of Louis Vuitton, is interested in a parking lot in 
Aoyama. It is one of the holdings of Japan Leasing, a financing company 
that recently went bankrupt, and Hata has visions of a new store on 
the site. He figures the parking lot, which has remained undeveloped 
despite its prime location because Japan Leasing was seeking an unrealistically 
high price, will soon come up for sale at a more reasonable price. 
``Real estate prices are still high, but they're being forced down,'' 
he said. Lower real estate prices and distribution costs have enabled 
sellers of luxury goods to push prices lower in their Japanese outposts 
so that they are more in line with what Japanese shoppers find in 
Hawaii or Hong Kong. Prices that were once 50 percent higher here 
than in Hong Kong are now only 20 percent higher and falling. As distribution 
has become more deregulated here, some brand-name merchandise is now 
showing up in mass merchandising stores like Ito-Yokado and Daiei, 
as well as the smaller brand stores, where they can sell for 60 percent 
of department store prices. Prices may also be driven lower if a 16 
percent import tax on luxury goods is reduced, which is expected as 
deregulation increases. And over the last decade, luxury goods companies 
have developed strategies for coping with economic downturns, offering 
expanded product lines that include lower-priced products like key 
chains, scarves and wallets and the use of cheaper materials like 
vinyl and fabric instead of leather. That does not mean they are ignoring 
the wealthy, of course. These bedrock customers for luxury-goods makers 
usually are affected far less by an economic downturn than the aspiring 
upper-middle class. ``We probably benefit less from a boom than some 
of the other luxury companies, but we also don't feel the recession,'' 
said Mineaki Saito, president of Hermes Japon Co., which gets less 
of a boost from younger women because its prices are somewhat higher 
than those of other luxury-goods companies. ``Recession, no recession, 
our sales have been going up every year since we opened.'' Junko Kosuge 
is one of those customers who keeps Hermes' business growing whatever 
the economic climate. The wife of a doctor, she has a passion for 
expensive scarves, which she keeps in a glass-fronted antique chest 
so that she can look at them. Mrs. Kosuge is awaiting the arrival 
of a pale pink crocodile skin bag from Italy to add to her collection 
of Chanel, Gucci and Hermes handbags. She said that she did not expect 
the bag to cost more than 500,000 yen, or about $4,237 at current 
exchange rates. (She likes Louis Vuitton bags as well but, she says, 
``many, many young women carry them, and at my age, I don't want to 
bump into them on the train with the same bag.'') She insists that 
she does feel the recession, although she could not really supply 
an example of its effect on her family. ``People aren't spending money 
on things they think are wasteful,'' Mrs. Kosuge said. ``I myself 
feel that way.'' Isn't a pale pink crocodile bag wasteful? ``No, I 
don't think so because I was overwhelmed by its attractiveness,'' 
she said. ``So even if I can only buy one thing like it instead of 
several, I do because it makes my life fun.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>