<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0314 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Little girls, especially those inclined to kill people, should learn 
to keep their footwear clean. It was, after all, a pair of bloodstained 
Mary Janes that got Rhoda, the piano-playing, angel-faced murderess, 
into such trouble in ``The Bad Seed,'' the popular 1950s melodrama 
by Maxwell Anderson. Now Lizzie Gael, the 9-year-old in Hilary Bell's 
``Wolf Lullaby'' at the Atlantic Theater Company, is arousing suspicions 
by wearing a pair of sneakers spattered in red. What IS a mother to 
do? The chilling fascination with children who kill obviously hasn't 
waned in the four decades since Patty McCormack, as Rhoda, became 
a star playing ``Clair de Lune'' over the screams of a man burning 
to death offstage. The differences that separate Rhoda and Lizzie, 
however, are more than a matter of shoe styles. Say what you will 
about Rhoda, she was clearheaded: she knew what she wanted and how 
to get it, even if it involved homicide. Things aren't so easy for 
Lizzie, whose sense of self and reality are on the slippery side. 
Similarly, the play in which she figures is far more reluctant to 
categorize its anti-heroine than Anderson's was. Rhoda was simply 
a monster, the bad seed of the title; no one in ``Wolf Lullaby'' is 
quite sure what to make of Lizzie. Ms. Bell's 75-minute play, set 
in a town in Tasmania, is more intriguing for questions it raises 
than for how it embodies them dramatically. Although performed with 
the care and conviction that is the hallmark of the Atlantic, which 
gave us ``Mojo'' and ``The Beauty Queen of Leenane,'' ``Wolf Lullaby'' 
never quite catches fire. The production, directed in a terse, elliptical 
style by Neil Pepe, does have its genuinely disturbing moments, more 
effective for the quietness with which they are executed. Yet there's 
an overall feeling of dispassion and self-consciousness that keeps 
you at a distance, letting you pick at the holes in the work's narrative 
logic. Lizzie (played by Kate Blumberg, an adult) is the daughter 
of parents who live apart. She is by no means the suave pretender 
that Rhoda was. She has troubled dreams, a dark fantasy life and a 
slightly hysterical manner. Her mother, Angela (Mary McCann), and 
father, Warren (Jordan Lage), see her behavior as part of the usual 
growing pains, even when she is picked up for shoplifting by a policeman 
(Larry Bryggman), who points out that she has also strangled a classmate's 
canary. Their dismissive attitude changes after a local 2-year-old 
is strangled to death. The questions the parents ask of themselves 
in the murder's aftermath (Why me? What did I do?) are standard in 
dramas of kids gone bad. The play's more provocative elements come 
from Ms. Bell's suggestions that mother love has its limits and, even 
more daringly, that what Lizzie did (if she did it) falls within the 
realm of a bullying and sadism common among children. Ms. McCann and 
Bryggman are especially good at tracing their characters' respective 
paths away from and toward affection for the child. And Ms. Blumberg 
really does seem to inhabit the tortured little girl she plays, rather 
than talking down to her. The actors do not, however, disguise the 
structural limpness of ``Wolf Lullaby,'' which includes a climactic 
scene in which Angela is asked to betray her daughter in a way that 
has occurred already. It's as if the deliberate fuzziness of the work's 
moral stance had somehow seeped into its technique. The production's 
most sensational (and effective) touches are its sound effects, created 
by Donald DiNicola, which include macabre rhymes chanted by a chorus 
of children. That juxtaposition of ghoulishness and guilelessness 
is perfect for the Halloween season, which somehow seems scarier than 
it used to. As ``Wolf Lullaby'' and the increasing number of reports 
of homicides by children remind us, there's a slender line between 
innocence and amorality. PRODUCTION NOTES: `WOLF LULLABY' By Hilary 
Bell; directed by Neil Pepe; sets by Walt Spangler; costumes by Linda 
Cho; lighting by Howard Werner; original music and sound by Donald 
DiNicola; production stage manager, Thomas Borchard; production manager, 
Richard Burgess; general manager, Bardo S. Ramirez. Presented by the 
Atlantic Theater Company, Pepe, artistic director; Hilary Hinckle, 
managing director. At 336 W. 20th St. With: Kate Blumberg (Lizzie 
Gael), Mary McCann (Angela Gael), Jordan Lage (Warren Gael) and Larry 
Bryggman (Sgt. Ray Armstrong). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>