<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0551 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
People usually do not die here, 24 floors up. When a maid at the luxurious 
Atlanta Hilton and Towers used her pass key to open room 2417 on the 
morning of Oct. 18, she found three men lying in a pool of blood. 
The city police said the men appeared to have been forced to the floor, 
then shot in the head, execution-style. Immediately, the police and 
tourism officials in this very public- relations savvy city speculated 
that the killings were drug-related and probably not random acts of 
violence. The Hilton is a jewel in Atlanta's tourism crown, after 
all, a big, glittering downtown hotel that is often aswarm with conventioneers 
and foreign visitors. So the possibility of random killings is a potential 
public relations nightmare. Family and friends of the three victims 
have become increasingly incensed by the suggestion of a drug connection, 
saying the only reason for it seemed to be the notion that tourists 
in Atlanta do not die in nice, big hotels unless they do something 
to deserve it. Nor have they been assuaged by the fact that the police 
have recently backed away from that notion, apparently unable to find 
evidence to support it. The three men, friends from Florida and Georgia 
who came to Atlanta to see the Falcons play the New Orleans Saints, 
eat a fancy, expense account meal and sleep in a $180-a-night hotel, 
did not deserve what happened to them, people who knew them said. 
And, they said, the men did not deserve what happened to them after 
the Atlanta public relations forces went to work. ``They seemed to 
be more concerned about tourism than they were about the lives of 
my husband and these men,'' said Alice Gutkowski, whose husband, Ronnie 
Gutkowski, 51, had no history of drug activity or any other crime 
and had moved with his wife from Long Island to Leesburg, Fla., in 
1994. Family members and friends of the other two men _ Gerrold Shropshire, 
50, who had helped found a church in Altamonte Springs, Fla., and 
Phillip Dover, 31, a dispatcher for a Gainesville, Ga., shipping company 
who, friends said, lived from paycheck to paycheck _ said those men, 
too, were just in Atlanta for a big weekend out and had nothing to 
do with drugs. ``Before you say that, have the facts,'' said Scott 
Shope, who worked with Dover as a dispatcher at GTO 2000 of Gainesville 
and was his roommate for two years. Shope had obtained four free tickets 
to the Falcons game and invited Dover and Shropshire, telling Shropshire 
to bring a friend. Shropshire asked his friend Gutkowski, who also 
worked in shipping in the Orlando, Fla., area. ``They were just guys, 
going to a game,'' Shope said. The killings, he and others said, were 
random. ``My husband was a hard-working, good, honest Christian,'' 
Mrs. Gutkowski said. ``They were meeting there to see the ballgame, 
and to do some sightseeing.'' Now, the Atlanta police and tourism 
officials seem to agree. The unthinkable did, apparently, happen. 
Three tourists were shot to death in the heart of Atlanta's convention 
district, and no one seems to know why. Officials of the Police Department 
said they do not know what motivated the shootings. The drug angle, 
which crept into newspaper and television accounts and lingered for 
days resulted from several misunderstandings, the police said. Officer 
John P. Quigley, a spokesman for the Police Department, said a police 
spokesman's response to reporters' questions about whether drugs had 
anything to do with the killings led to one misunderstanding. The 
spokesman had answered that question with, ``Yes, we're looking into 
that,'' but continued to say that it was just one angle investigators 
were pursuing, Quigley noted. The way the men had been killed, as 
if executed, seemed to hint at something other than a random robbery, 
the police investigators said after the bodies were found. Quigley 
said reporters interpreted that into articles about a possible drug-related 
motive. The drug theory, Quigley said Wednesday afternoon, ``led nowhere.'' 
Tourism officials, too, had said the killings appeared to be drug-related 
and not random. After the killings, Spurgeon Richardson, president 
of the Atlanta Convention and Visitors Bureau, told the Atlanta Journal-Constitution 
that tourism would probably not be affected if the victims were involved 
in drug dealing or some other illegal activity. ``Meeting planners 
understand that while it's unfortunate, drug-related crime can happen 
anywhere in the country,'' Richardson told the newspaper. Bill Howard, 
the vice president for public relations and tourism of the Convention 
and Visitors Bureau, said those comments were a ``reaction to the 
early statements by police.'' Atlanta is one of the country's most 
popular convention destinations, and it grooms that image constantly. 
Meanwhile, friends and relatives of the three dead men remained disappointed 
over how the city was handling the memory of the victims, and puzzled 
at how it could be considered even plausible that three ordinary men 
were linked to drugs. The three men gathered in Atlanta on Oct. 17. 
They toured the headquarters of CNN and the World of Coke museum, 
``doing some sight-seeing,'' Mrs. Gutkowski said. The police are not 
saying much about what information they have on what happened later 
that night or early the next morning. A hotel video camera recorded 
Dover talking to another man in the hotel lobby on Saturday night, 
then the two men stepped into the elevator. Hunter George, an editor 
with The Birmingham News in Alabama, was staying near room 2417. Late 
on Saturday night, he and his wife heard laughter and music from the 
vicinity of room 2417 _ George said he was not certain that the noise 
came from 2417 _ but never heard gunshots or other suspicious noises, 
he said. The victims' friends and relatives have no theories beyond, 
as one of them said, ``cold-blooded murder.'' Mrs. Gutkowski said 
her husband had planned to retire in the next few years. ``He liked 
to play golf,'' she said. ``We thought maybe we'd get a boat again.'' 
Shope described Dover as a young man who liked to drink a few beers 
and ``just have a good time.'' Shropshire, who also worked in a shipping 
business outside Orlando, was a churchgoer and was engaged to be married, 
said Shope, who knew him through business contacts. Like the others, 
Shope said, he had no history beyond that of an ordinary man who had 
been looking forward to a night on the town, and a football game on 
Sunday. ``It's a mystery,'' Shope said. The only thing that seems 
to make sense is that the three men met someone who pretended to be 
a friend, he said, and killed them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>