<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0425 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two new studies undercut scientists' hopes that people infected with 
HIV would be able to avoid a lifelong regimen of taking a drug ``cocktail'' 
of 20 to 30 pills a day, a regimen that can cost $15,000 a year and 
cause a variety of side effects. The studies, being published Thursday 
in the New England Journal of Medicine, found that attempts to reduce 
the number of medications failed, allowing the resurgence of the virus. 
But scientists say that the disappointing results should not discourage 
badly needed efforts to find better strategies for controlling HIV, 
the virus that causes AIDS. Patients who are taking the AIDS cocktail 
of antiviral drugs have been told that they may require that treatment 
indefinitely, perhaps for life. The two new studies were designed 
to test another idea, on which many scientists and patients had pinned 
their hopes: that the drug cocktail might reduce HIV infection to 
such a low level that some of the drugs could be stopped, and the 
virus kept in check by the body's immune system and a ``maintenance 
therapy'' consisting of fewer drugs. That way, patients might be able 
to escape some of the adverse effects of medication. A similar approach 
has been used successfully in treating tuberculosis and leukemia. 
The disease is initially hit hard with heavy doses of medication, 
a treatment known as induction therapy, and then kept at bay with 
a milder drug regimen. But for HIV, induction followed by maintenance 
therapy did not work. In both studies, patients initially took three 
drugs, achieved suppression of the virus, and then, after three or 
six months, stopped one or two of the drugs. Virus levels rebounded 
quickly in a significant number of patients, and the studies had to 
be halted so that the drug cocktail could be reinstated. ``These are 
truly important and informative studies,'' said Dr. Jerome Groopman, 
an AIDS expert at the Harvard Medical School, who was not involved 
in the research. ``They're sobering, because they demonstrate that 
the virus is an aggressive foe, and once the most intensive pressures 
are relieved, even partially, it has a tremendous capacity to spring 
back.'' The director of one of the studies, Dr. Diane Havlir, an associate 
professor of medicine at the University of California at San Diego, 
said that although the results were disappointing, they were not unexpected. 
Researchers have seen viral levels rebound dramatically in some patients 
who have quit the drug cocktail or tried taking a ``drug holiday.'' 
Dr. Havlir said that patients in her study were closely monitored 
for signs of relapse, which sometimes occurred within weeks of switching 
treatments. When that happened, she said, they were urged to resume 
the triple combination. Preliminary data on a small number of those 
patients, Dr. Havlir said, suggest that the virus was re-suppressed 
when the more powerful treatment was resumed. Dr. Havlir and her colleagues 
said that their findings underscored warnings already given to patients: 
that combination therapy is a long-term proposition, and breaking 
the regimen may allow the virus to rebound and evolve resistant strains 
that defy treatment. Even so, the experiment had to be done, Dr. Havlir 
said, because doctors and patients alike want to know whether there 
is any end in sight to use of the cocktail. She said that she and 
her colleagues had no trouble finding patients eager to enter the 
study. ``Despite how these drugs have completely changed the face 
of the HIV epidemic in the United States, we're realizing that there 
are limitations,'' she said, citing side effects and a strict, difficult 
schedule of doses. One of the pills in the cocktail must be taken 
precisely every eight hours, at least one hour before or two hours 
after a meal. Side effects can include vomiting and diarrhea, and 
certain drugs, the protease inhibitors, are causing high levels of 
cholesterol and triglycerides in some patients, increasing their risk 
of heart attack. Some patients also develop ``protease paunches'' 
_ a shift of body fat to the abdomen _ or ``buffalo humps'' _ fat 
deposits on the back of the neck that can grow so large and disfiguring 
that patients have them surgically removed. ``Side effects are catching 
up with large numbers of patients,'' Groopman said. He estimated that 
20 percent to 25 percent of patients on protease inhibitors for two 
or three years have ``significant fat redistribution and, importantly, 
sky high triglycerides and high cholesterol.'' He has seen patients 
with cholesterol levels driven over 700, and triglycerides over 1,000, 
he said. If people stay on the drugs for decades, Groopman asked, 
``Will it happen to everyone?'' Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said that, 
in addition to the physical side effects, patients are finding it 
hard to tolerate the endless disruption of their lives. ``Their whole 
day is dominated by the schedule of taking drugs,'' Fauci said. ``After 
six months to a year they say, `God, I can't take this any more.''' 
Dr. Jay Levy, a professor of medicine at the University of California 
at San Francisco, said that the studies revealed the need for new 
treatments, particularly vaccines and drugs that would boost the immune 
system and help it fight the infection. The current antiviral drugs 
fall short, Levy said, because they cannot reach viruses hiding within 
the patient's cells that can re-emerge when the drugs are stopped. 
In the study led by Dr. Havlir, patients took three antiviral drugs 
for six months: the protease inhibitor indinavir, and two reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors, lamivudine and zidovudine, or AZT. Then, 
one-third of the patients continued the three drugs, one-third took 
indinavir alone, and one-third took AZT and lamivudine. Among patients 
who continued taking the drug cocktail, only 4 percent had loss of 
viral suppression. But in each of the other two groups, within two 
months or less, 23 percent of the patients relapsed. Those who had 
taken AZT before the study began were especially vulnerable to relapse. 
The second study reported similar results. Directed by Dr. Gilles 
Pialoux of the Rothschild hospital in Paris, patients initially took 
the same three drugs as in Dr. Havlir's study, but for only three 
months instead of six. Then, they stayed with that regimen, or switched 
to a combination of either AZT and lamivudine, or AZT and indinavir. 
In the French study, 8.6 percent of the patients who continued taking 
the drug cocktail lost viral suppression. But in the other two groups, 
31 percent and 22 percent of the patients relapsed. Both groups of 
scientists said that despite the failure of maintenance therapy in 
their studies, researchers should keep trying to find alternatives 
to the current regimen, perhaps involving longer periods on the full 
cocktail or different drug combinations in the second phase. Fauci 
said that his research team is planning such a study, to begin within 
the next few weeks. Fifty patients taking the drug cocktail whose 
virus levels have been undetectable for a year or more will stop all 
three medications, to see if their immune systems have recovered enough 
to control the infection. Patients will be tested every one or two 
weeks to measure their viral levels and counts of CD4 cells, Fauci 
said, and if virus levels come up, the patients will be treated immediately. 
``We don't have overwhelming confidence that we'll succeed,'' Fauci 
said, ``but we have to do the study. We're all appreciating that it's 
not feasible to say that patients are going to be on these regimens 
for 30 years.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>