<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0466 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was the most indelible image of the 1994 gubernatorial campaign: 
a newspaper photograph of George Pataki being led, literally by the 
hand, through a crowded fund-raising dinner by his political patron, 
Sen. Alfonse D'Amato. Pataki's opponent, Gov. Mario Cuomo, seized 
on the picture, using it in television ads, as Democrats derided the 
Republican candidate as ``an empty suit,'' the puppet on D'Amato's 
string. Pataki contributed to the image of himself as a cipher, running 
on a rail-thin platform of cutting taxes and restoring the death penalty, 
assiduously avoiding saying what else he would do if elected. Critics 
in both parties predicted that he would not amount to much. They were 
wrong. The candidate may have seemed like little more than the anti-Cuomo, 
but he was being quintessentially himself. Pataki has made a career 
of being underestimated, and a habit of defying expectations. And 
in the four years since that day, he has done just that, with considerable 
success. Helped substantially by a cooperating economy, he has emerged 
as a shrewd political operator. He grappled successfully with the 
Legislature on issues like crime and spending, and now is expected 
to win re-election easily _ no small feat for a Republican in a heavily 
Democratic state. He is even mentioned as a possible candidate for 
national office in 2000. ``He is a far, far better politician than 
people expected,'' said Gerald Benjamin, dean of the College of Liberal 
Arts and Sciences at the State University of New York at New Paltz, 
who closely studies state government. In large measure, the governor 
has surprised people by giving them very little idea of what he aims 
to do, beyond one or two themes of his choosing. Keeping expectations 
at a minimum consistently allows him to defy or exceed them. And as 
with another Republican, Ronald Reagan, the fuzziness in Pataki's 
public positions, once seen as a great weakness, has made him adept 
at getting his way on some issues, while continually repositioning 
himself to his advantage on others. Four years ago, Pataki was widely 
painted as an arch-conservative _ a view that helped prompt his fellow 
Republican, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, to endorse Cuomo. But he has since 
crafted a more moderate image, especially in the second half of his 
term. He healed the political wounds he suffered from his early budget 
cuts with later spending increases. His 1996 environmental bond act 
seized the initiative on an issue that Democrats had long thought 
of as theirs alone. And he has cultivated at least a tenuous alliance 
with the mercurial Giuliani. To his allies, that adaptability is the 
governor's wily way of getting what he wants. To Democrats, it proves 
that he lacks any real convictions beyond his own political advancement. 
But these days, even those Democrats will admit with frustration that 
there is something, however opaque, inside that gray flannel suit. 
``People badly underestimated him all around,'' said state Sen. Martin 
Connor of Brooklyn, leader of the Senate's Democratic minority. ``But 
I don't think anyone does still.'' By 1994, New Yorkers had wearied 
of Cuomo, the protean figure with the mile-wide agenda. Pataki made 
the shrewd calculation that not being Mario Cuomo was enough to get 
elected, and that the less he signaled of his views the better. That 
strategy of sticking to a few simple themes is a trademark of Pataki's 
campaign consultant, Arthur Finkelstein, and the candidate was seen 
as following someone else's script. But he has governed in much the 
same way. He has taken positions on a wide range of issues, but often 
quietly, and often only when he had to. He changes positions and adopts 
his adversaries' ideas as his own. And he has made a virtue of evading 
questions and issues, sticking to his chosen answers _ or nonanswers 
_ with the discipline of a monk. It seems as if he sees any strong 
stance as a threat to distract and entangle him. Even as he campaigns 
for re-election, he says almost nothing about his plans for a second 
term. ``It's conscious in the sense that I want to be free to look 
at those issues that are critical in January of 1999, as opposed to 
saying, in October of `98, that X, Y or Z is going to happen, because 
I'm very, very committed to doing what I said,'' Pataki said. It is 
his history of elusive adaptability that leads Pataki's detractors 
to say he makes his decisions based primarily on political gain. ``He 
sees the future very well in political terms, which is why he's been 
all over the lot, from moderate to hard-right-winger,'' said Assemblyman 
Richard Brodsky, a Westchester County Democrat. ``What was it Gertrude 
Stein said? `There's no there there.''' When the people closest to 
him are asked what matters most to the governor, though, they give 
remarkably similar answers. ``There is a core group of issues,'' said 
Zenia Mucha, Pataki's campaign manager. ``Reducing taxes, preserving 
the environment, fighting crime, allowing business to flourish. And 
he knows that if you focus on a few things, you can get them done.'' 
In 1995, he pushed through a 25 percent income tax cut that he had 
promised as a candidate, despite a $5 billion deficit that would have 
provided ample cover for delay. To balance the budget, he cut spending 
on health care, mass transit and education, over fierce protests. 
When the economy rebounded, he was able to reverse many of his earlier 
budget cuts, even as he basked in the popularity of the tax cuts. 
The governor has also shown a talent for casting issues to his advantage. 
This year, he seized on the case of a young woman who was murdered, 
Jenna Grieshaber, to give emotional resonance to his call to end parole 
for violent felons. He used the pulpit of the State of the State message 
to promote the idea, and enlisted Ms. Grieshaber's parents as allies. 
He kept up a relentless drumbeat until Assembly Democrats succumbed 
and passed it in July. If Pataki's tenacity on issues like crime and 
taxes has been striking, so has his flexibility on nearly everything 
else. Four years ago, he attacked Cuomo for proposing a state takeover 
of the troubled Long Island Lighting Company. This year, Pataki completed 
a state takeover of the company, cutting electric rates on the island 
by 20 percent. And as part of the deal, every residence and business 
received a rebate check of $101 to $232, just in time for the coming 
election. Pataki made deep spending cuts his first two years in office, 
then allowed spending to grow rapidly the next two years. The turnabout 
was made possible by a growing economy and a roaring stock market, 
but it has helped him remake his image as a moderate. There is a string 
of issues on which Pataki decided that his goal was not important 
enough to wage a serious fight, or that the political price would 
be too high. The governor favors legalization of casino gambling, 
a ban on discrimination against lesbians and gay men, and softening 
of the state's harsh drug-possession laws, but he has not worked at 
getting them past a resistant Senate. Democrats note that if he pushed 
harder on such issues, he would incur the wrath of Republican conservatives 
around the country as he considers a run for national office in 2000. 
``I think he tries to have it both ways on issues, and he does it 
fairly skillfully,'' said Judith Hope, chairwoman of the state Democratic 
Party. ``He robes himself in moderate positions but doesn't lift a 
finger to advance them.'' The governor argues that there is a philosophical 
constant running through his policies, one that explains positions 
as diverse as his support for abortion rights and his insistence that 
welfare recipients work for benefits. ``Giving people more opportunity, 
more freedom, more confidence in the future, and at the same time, 
requiring responsibility of people,'' is the way he puts it. Those 
views, he says, are the self-reliant legacy of his father, Louis, 
the son of Hungarian immigrants who worked as a mailman and operated 
a small fruit and vegetable farm in Peekskill. Recalling his undergraduate 
days as a small-town boy at Yale, the governor said that too many 
people believe wrongly that government makes better decisions for 
people than they make for themselves. ``You'd meet people who would 
look down on the average worker, those on the right and those on the 
left who would look down on the average worker,'' he said. ``And I 
would sit there and think that average worker is my father.'' The 
opacity that makes the governor hard to pin down politically applies 
to him personally, too. Pataki is an avid reader, mostly of history 
and other nonfiction, who has a taste for fine food and French wine. 
He can be an energetic storyteller, and occasionally gives vent to 
a serious temper. A fervent outdoorsman, he can wax rhapsodic on hiking 
and snowshoeing, avocations that animate his desire to preserve wild 
lands. Most New Yorkers, though, see none of this. In public, his 
enthusiasm, sophistication, ambition and intelligence are shrouded 
behind a bland, plain-spoken manner. Privately, he is a sharp political 
analyst, but when asked to share such insights for the record _ Does 
talk of impeaching President Clinton hurt D'Amato's chances for re-election? 
How does the 2000 presidential race shape up? _ he likes to say, ``You'll 
have to ask the political people,'' as if he is not one. He and his 
wife, Libby, have been careful to shield their private lives and those 
of their four children, ages 11 to 19, from public scrutiny. They 
did not move into the governor's mansion in Albany, opting to remain 
in their home in Garrison, a couple of hours south. And reporters 
who cover the governor's doings every day were unaware until recently 
that his mother, Margaret, had moved in with the family after the 
death of his father, Louis, two and a half years ago. Pataki's demeanor 
is relaxed and genial, yet his resume is studded with bold, successful 
challenges to incumbents _ for mayor of Peekskill, for Assembly, for 
state Senate, and for governor. ``Here's a guy who'd like to give 
the image he's sort of listless, and yet he went from being an assemblyman 
in the minority party to being governor in a little over two years,'' 
said one of his top aides. Some of his closest advisers say they have 
urged him, at times, to loosen up in public, to no avail. Said one: 
``I'm not sure he's a guy that thinks it's to his advantage to have 
people know him too much. He never tips his hand.'' In 1994 and 1995, 
many Democrats questioned the governor's intelligence. It was always 
an odd view to have of a graduate of Yale, who made law review at 
Columbia and worked for a prestigious Wall Street firm. No one in 
Albany doubts Pataki's intellect any longer, but some Democrats still 
question his work habits, noting that unlike Cuomo, he does not routinely 
work marathon days, or feel compelled to master every issue. Sheldon 
Silver, the Democratic Assembly Speaker _ who declined to be interviewed 
for this article _ once described the governor as ``lazy.'' But people 
in and out of government often describe him as a quick study who is 
better-informed than they expected. Kenneth Raske, president of the 
Greater New York Hospital Association, clashed with the governor early 
in his term, and thought then that Pataki did not know or care about 
health care policy. ``Now, you can have a serious conversation with 
him on all these issues,'' he said. Pataki adds to the impression 
that he is not breaking a sweat by placing great faith and authority 
in his top advisers. ``He's very good at determining who can do what, 
and he's secure enough to let them go and do it,'' said one of those 
aides, Louis R. Tomson, the secretary for public authorities. ``He 
doesn't mind if delegating authority means people still underestimate 
him. They do it at their peril.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>