<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0351 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Festive banners fluttered from lampposts and windows as a troupe of 
young folk dancers prepared to mount a makeshift stage here on Saturday 
morning. Like tens of millions of Turks across the country this week, 
they were joining in celebrations of their country's 75th birthday. 
One dancer, Gulcan Eran, 16, seemed a symbol of Turkey itself. She 
is thoroughly modern and Western-oriented, vibrant, self-confident 
and ambitious for a career as an engineer. But as Ms. Eran adjusted 
her resplendent costume, two young women wearing traditional headscarfs 
walked across the plaza nearby. She turned serious. ``I wouldn't object 
if the scarf was just about religion, but it isn't anymore,'' she 
said. ``It's a political uniform. It's a way of saying that you want 
to get rid of the secular republic. I think it's very dangerous.'' 
Turks who are gathering this week for festivities ranging from poetry 
recitals to kick-boxing matches have much reason for self-congratulation. 
Their country has made a giant leap from backwardness to modernity 
in 75 years, and the nearly two dozen foreign leaders who are due 
at the central commemoration in Ankara on Thursday reflect its role 
as a regional power. But as Turkey seeks to establish a stable democracy 
for its 65 million people, it also confronts several persistent problems. 
Defining the role of religion in public life is only the most visible. 
Both Turkey's achievements and its looming challenges are clearly 
visible here in Safranbolu, a pleasant town of 20,000 nestled in the 
rocky Anatolian plateau. Safranbolu is known for its 19th-century 
Ottoman buildings, and attracts a modest stream of tourists. Some 
residents till small farms on outlying hills. Others work at a steel 
mill in nearby Karabuk that offers employment to thousands but also 
casts a rancid cloud over the town. The streets here are tree-shaded, 
houses are sturdy and well kept, schools are full and clinics modern. 
Shops offer all manner of domestic and imported goods. ``We've made 
a lot of progress in 75 years,'' said Ozcan Cakir, 45, manager of 
a small candy factory in Safranbolu. ``This will never be a backward 
or Middle East-type country again. But I worry about the future. There's 
hunger in Turkey. I can afford to send my kids to college, but people 
who work for me can't. That produces resentment, and in 10 or 15 years 
that resentment could bring trouble.'' Several portraits of Mustafa 
Kemal Ataturk, who proclaimed the Turkish Republic on Oct. 29, 1923, 
decorate Cakir's salesroom. They mark him as a dedicated supporter 
of the secular order. But at the jewelry store next door, there is 
no Ataturk portrait. ``Twenty-five percent of our people don't support 
this kind of secularism,'' said the jeweler, Ahmet Pulcu, suggesting 
that he is among them. ``The rest have no idea what religion is. They 
don't want our women to wear headscarfs. But why shouldn't they? Isn't 
that democracy?'' In Safranbolu, as in many Turkish cities and towns, 
measurably more women wear headscarfs than wore them only a couple 
of years ago. It is a sign of growing religiosity that the Islamic 
movement welcomes and encourages. But it disturbs some secularists, 
among them military officers. Turkish universities have imposed a 
ban on the wearing of headscarfs by female students. The ban has given 
Islamic politicians a vivid political issue, and they have seized 
on it. They are crisscrossing the country telling voters that their 
daughters are being excluded from tax-supported universities simply 
because they are devout Muslims. The air force commander, Gen. Ilhan 
Kilic, vowed in a recent speech that the military would fight every 
effort aimed at ``undermining this system and turning the country 
into an anachronism.'' Many Turks say that this uncompromising attitude 
guarantees the survival of the secular republic. But others fear that 
it is polarizing the nation and perhaps setting the stage for confrontation. 
Alongside the issues of social justice and religious fundamentalism, 
Turkey also confronts the question of how to deal with its large Kurdish 
minority. That issue, like the others, is palpable here in Safranbolu. 
On a hillside just a few minutes' walk from the town center is Safranbolu's 
Kurdish quarter. To enter it is to pass from the developed world into 
poverty. The town's 700 Kurds live in ramshackle cabins without running 
water. Many are dirty, poorly dressed and have open sores on their 
faces or arms. Almost all are unemployed. They live on what little 
they can grow in gardens, and on cow intestines and other cuts of 
meat that the town butcher can't sell anywhere else. ``We're Turks, 
but second-class,'' said Bilal Cetinceviz, 65, a community leader. 
``People don't like us or don't trust us. When we apply for jobs, 
we don't get hired. Our kids don't go to school because we can't afford 
to buy them books and clothes. ``When you have no work, you have nothing 
to lose,'' Cetinceviz continued. ``Every once in a while some radical 
Kurd shows up here and tries to turn us into militants. We throw them 
out, but if we didn't, in six months everyone here would be a militant.'' 
The divide between Kurds and non-Kurds in Safranbolu reflects the 
gap in Turkey as a whole. Many Kurds have risen to leading positions 
in every walk of life, but many others have been left behind by Turkey's 
economic boom. While coastal regions thrive, the mainly Kurdish southeast 
is impoverished and unhappy. Kurdish guerrillas have been fighting 
a separatist war in southeastern provinces for 14 years. Thirty thousand 
people have been killed in the conflict. It costs an estimated $8 
billion a year to wage, and ties down more than 200,000 Turkish soldiers. 
Urging the army to try negotiating a peace settlement is considered 
close to treasonous. The questions of poverty, fundamentalism and 
Kurdish identity hang over Safranbolu just as they do over the rest 
of Turkey. Over the last two years, however, a new topic has emerged 
at cafes and teahouses. Spectacular disclosures about ties between 
gangsters and the government have shaken public faith in the political 
system. Phrases like ``black money'' and ``state gangs'' are now part 
of everyday conversation. The spreading scandal has produced grave 
allegations against several of the country's past and present leaders, 
but investigations have been limited. Turkey's judiciary is not fully 
independent, and magistrates do not have unfettered freedom to pursue 
cases against political figures. Cynicism is growing, even among many 
who until recently refused to believe that agencies of their government 
could ever have sponsored death squads or tolerated drug smuggling 
or other crimes. ``All you read every day is mafia, crime and gangs,'' 
said Aybar Toker, the local soft drink bottler. ``People think all 
the established parties are involved, so they vote for the Islamic 
party as a protest.'' If Turkey's greatest challenge in the years 
ahead is to forge a national consensus over how to establish full 
democracy here, it must have political leaders who can lead the way. 
Yet many Turks believe that the political system is closed to them. 
Parties are run by bosses who tolerate little dissent, and as a result 
many talented men and women shun politics in favor of business, academia 
or journalism. ``It's true that our political system is very closed, 
but business people are beginning to take a much greater role in society, 
and they aren't bound by all these taboos,'' said Yuksel Oktay, 61, 
an American-educated engineer who grew up in Safranbolu and visits 
periodically. ``I also see a great potential in our youth. They understand 
what is at stake here, and they won't let Turkey slip backward. ``We 
have problems, but I think most Turks would be optimistic about our 
chances of solving them,'' Oktay said. ``I certainly am.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>