<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0407 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The austerity plan spelled out Wednesday by Brazil will not solve 
its financial crisis. Nor will a $30 billion to $35 billion bailout 
package, including several billion from American taxpayers, that the 
International Monetary Fund is expected to offer to sustain Brazil's 
commitment to a fixed exchange rate to the dollar. The economic masterminds 
of the Brazilian bailout, Lawrence Summers at the Treasury Department 
and Stanley Fischer at the IMF, will argue that their plan will prevent 
devaluation and shelter Latin America from the financial turmoil that 
has wrecked parts of Asia and Russia. But their optimism will almost 
certainly be short-lived. If, as expected, their plan tosses a few 
billion dollars into a bailout fund in exchange for fiscal tightening, 
it might smother financial crisis for two months or even two years. 
But, most economists predict, crisis will return because the plan 
leaves Brazil's irreconcilable financial policies largely in place. 
And in the meantime, the IMF's piecemeal approach will almost certainly 
throw Brazil's economy into a recession that may improve the current-account 
imbalance but will certainly further brutalize the poor and dampen 
the aspirations of the middle class. The plan relies on spending cuts 
and tax increases to cut the deficit and on high interest rates to 
preserve a bloated currency-exchange rate. The prospect that this 
will work, says Morris Goldstein of the Institute for International 
Economics, ``rests on little more than a wing and a prayer.'' Brazil's 
financial predicament flows from an incendiary combination of policies. 
It fixes its currency, the real, at a rate that is at least 15 percent, 
and perhaps 40 percent, too high. That makes exports expensive, imports 
cheap and encourages more dollars to flow out than in. Second, Brazil, 
in part because of its budget deficit, has racked up huge short-term 
foreign debts _ more than $50 billion, according to Lawrence Krohn 
of Donaldson, Lufkin &AMP; Jenrette Securities. Total short-term debt 
is widely believed to exceed $150 billion. Third, the real is convertible, 
meaning that investors can force the government to exchange it for 
dollars any time they want. The combination of an overvalued currency, 
high debt and convertibility creates a financial environment in which 
calamity is always one crisis of confidence away. Policy-makers, so 
far, seem paralyzed by the prospect of devaluation. Citing chilling 
evidence from Asia last year and Russia this year, they fear that 
devaluation will overshoot, sending the real much lower than needed 
in calmer times and causing needless price increases for imports. 
The chance of devaluation would also threaten foreign investors, who 
might grab their dollars and run, rather than wait for the dollar 
value of their investments to sink. That could send the economy reeling. 
So, the Treasury and the fund have decided to settle for an attack 
on Brazil's budget deficit and the creation of the multibillion-dollar 
reserve fund to reassure investors that the nation has plenty to spare. 
But critics stress the huge short-term debt. Beside it, a $30 billion 
bailout looks puny. There are two prominent alternatives to the expected 
Treasury-IMF plan. Jeffrey Sachs of the Harvard Institute for International 
Development pushes for Brazil to drop its fixed rate, allowing the 
real to float on currency markets. That way, Brazil would no longer 
need to drive up interest rates to preserve the exchange rate. In 
answer to Summers and Fischer, he argues that countries cannot save 
overvalued currencies. In Brazil, as in Asia, an attempt to defend 
a currency will only serve to deplete dollar reserves. ``Once reserves 
are gone,'' Sachs says, ``investors panic. The worst mistake is for 
countries to wait too long to float their currencies.'' Rudiger Dornbusch 
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology offers a nearly opposite 
solution. He calls on Brazil to adopt a currency board like that in 
Argentina. Brazil would tie the real to the dollar at a fixed rate. 
But under this system, devaluation would no longer be an option. Brazil 
would be legally bound to keep enough dollars on hand to redeem all 
its currency in circulation. Dornbusch points to Argentina as proof 
that a currency board can reassure foreign investors and bring down 
interest rates close to levels in the United States. Goldstein argues 
that for any rescue plan to work, it ``must be comprehensive _ convince 
Brazil's creditors to convert short-term loans to long-term loans, 
reset the real at a lower rate, substantially cut the fiscal deficit 
_ and only then include modest aid from outside.'' Some economists 
predict that if dollars are thrown into Brazil, they will wind up 
in the Swiss bank accounts of foreign investors, much like the dollars 
the IMF put into Russia earlier this year. The only enthusiastic embrace 
of the expected Treasury-IMF plan comes from Wall Street. Under the 
plan, foreign investors could continue to collect interest rates of 
20 percent or more with a pledge backed by the fund that Brazil will 
not devalue soon. No wonder they love it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>