<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0115 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After spending nearly two years interviewing consumers about their 
computing desires and habits, IBM has created a very impressive new 
line of notebooks designed for people who spend their own money on 
computers. Best known for selling hardware to the expense-account 
crowd, International Business Machines has learned that individual 
consumers have different desires than corporate customers. Consumers, 
IBM discovered, wanted a high-quality notebook not so much as a traveling 
companion but as a substitute for a desktop computer at home. And 
by the way, it had to cost less than $2,500. IBM's response is a trio 
of Thinkpad notebooks _ called the i Series _ that will have base 
prices of $1,499, $1,999 and $2,499 when they arrive in stores next 
month. I've been testing the momma-bear version, the $1,999 Thinkpad 
1450. It is about twice the size of the older Thinkpad 560X, the slim 
four-pound model that I carry on business trips, but it is also half 
the cost, and it outperforms the smaller machine. For a desktop substitute, 
the added heft is actually an advantage. (But when I carry the external 
disk drive, CD-ROM drive, AC power adapters, port replicator and other 
attachments, the 560X actually weighs eight pounds, slightly more 
than the Thinkpad 1450.) The new Thinkpad has a big, bright display 
that outshines anything offered by competitors in the price range, 
respectable performance from its 266-megahertz Pentium MMX processor 
and lots of features that make it more friendly to consumers. The 
new Thinkpads arrive in what has already been a delightful season 
for portable PCs. Earlier this year, a resurgent Apple Computer Corp. 
introduced the impressive line of powerful G3 Powerbooks. Dell Computer 
offered a high-end Inspiron notebook featuring a Texas-sized 15-inch 
active-matrix display. Sony broke new ground with a powerful yet super-skinny 
subnotebook computer, its magnesium-hulled Vaio 505. And we are just 
beginning to see a new crop of ultraportable computers that weigh 
a couple of pounds and cost less than $1,000. Either because of price 
or features, however, none of these computers seemed ideal for consumers 
who wanted an all-in-one portable PC that could serve as a replacement 
for a desktop computer at a reasonable price. (An all-in-one portable 
includes a floppy drive and a CD-ROM drive in the main body along 
with the hard disk, instead of forcing them onto the desktop as tethered 
external devices, octopus style.) Two years ago, prices for Pentium-class 
notebooks with active-matrix thin-film transistor color displays _ 
the best in terms of brightness and sharpness _ were above $5,000. 
Expense-account customers quickly made Thinkpads the most desired 
Windows notebooks in the airlines' first-class sections. But when 
it came to buying a computer for personal use, even corporate executives 
had to think twice about Thinkpads. With prices for desktop computers 
dropping every week, in some cases below $1,000, it did not take a 
chief financial officer to figure out that one could buy two, three 
or more desktop computers for the price of one high-end Thinkpad. 
The i-Series Thinkpads narrow the price gap between desktop and portable 
computers. The one I've been using has the characteristic solid feel 
and finish of a Thinkpad. In performance, it is still at least two 
generations behind comparably priced Windows-based desktop machines, 
but it holds its own with other laptop competitors in its class. It 
wins hands down for cachet. ``When I get on a plane, it's still a 
status symbol to pull out a big black IBM computer,'' said Andrew 
M. Seybold, editor-in-chief of Andrew Seybold's Outlook, a newsletter 
about mobile and wireless technologies. He forecasts success for the 
lower-cost i-Series Thinkpads. ``It's like when BMW or Mercedes came 
out with lower-priced models,'' he said. ``People are waiting to buy 
them when you drop the price.'' There are three new i-Series Thinkpads. 
The least expensive is the model 1410, which comes with an Intel Pentium 
MMX processor humming at 266 megahertz, 32 megabytes of system memory, 
a 3.2-gigabyte hard disk, a 20-speed CD-ROM drive, and a 12.1-inch 
thin-film transistor screen. The cost is $1,499. The model 1450, which 
I tested, will have an estimated street price of $1,999. It also had 
a 266-MHz Intel Pentium MMX processor, but it came with 64 megabytes 
of RAM, a 4.3-gigabyte hard disk and a 13.3-inch screen that was exceptionally 
good. The poppa bear is the 1710 model, which steps up to a more powerful 
Intel Pentium II processor, a 24X CD-ROM drive and an extra bay that 
allows the use of a second battery or some sort of removable data 
storage. Based on specifications alone, the 1710 model appears to 
make the most sense as a desktop replacement, worth the extra money. 
The new consumer notebooks share several new features, including at 
least 2 megabytes of video memory and a 56K modem. Most impressive 
is that they all sport thin-film transistor displays, which yield 
brighter and sharper images than the lower-cost passive displays found 
most often on low-cost portables. IBM said it had decided to use the 
costlier but superior displays as a result of ``exit poll'' interviews 
with recent notebook purchasers. The most common regret among people 
who had already bought notebook computers, IBM found, was that they 
did not get a bigger or better display, despite the higher cost. In 
the category of little things that make life better, IBM made the 
new notebooks much better suited to playing audio compact disks. Working 
with the audio company Altec Lansing, it created a speaker system 
that fits in the left and right margins of the computer's display, 
creating a wider than normal notebook with a bit of an overbite on 
the lid. Other laptops, like the Compaq Presarios, sometimes place 
the speakers where they can be muffled by the palms of the user. The 
i-Series Thinkpads have the CD controls _ including a liquid-crystal 
display, a volume control dial, forward and reverse track selection, 
and eject buttons _ on the outside of the computer, so a person can 
play music disks without having to boot up the computer. For those 
who resist headphones and think that their mission in life is to share 
their musical taste with the folks in adjoining seats, the speakers 
in the lid are cleverly positioned to pump out decibels to either 
side when the case is closed. There are cheaper alternatives if a 
consumer simply wants a portable audio CD player, of course. IBM also 
clearly listened to people who wanted to become productive with their 
laptops without having to get a degree in computer science. The company's 
research revealed a list of questions that new users often have, including 
such common stumpers as these: How do I send a fax from my computer? 
How do I send and receive electronic mail? How do I download files 
from the Internet? What the heck is power management, and how do I 
do it? How do I write a letter or make a business presentation? So 
IBM has answered the questions by creating shortcut instructions for 
each task (available on the 1410 and 1450 models). IBM also added 
four color-coded function keys to the keyboard that can be set up 
to perform common tasks, like connecting to the Internet (the computer 
comes with an offer of 100 free hours of Internet time through American 
Online), gathering e-mail and so on. What don't I like? It seems a 
shame not to show off such beautiful screens with a DVD drive, which 
would let travelers watch movies as well as play audio CDs. An external 
DVD add-on is the only option. The new Thinkpads are too big to use 
on airline seat-back trays. The Pentium MMX processor poses a dilemma 
for students: It keeps the cost down and is fine for e-mail, Web browsing 
and term papers, but it is a lousy chip for serious game players. 
But the bottom line is that the i-Series Thinkpads are a good value, 
and the only question is whether IBM can produce them fast enough. 
NYT-10-21-98 1615EDT 
</TEXT>
</DOC>