<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0223 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many homeowners become complacent about home security because they 
think they have nothing worth stealing. What these homeowners fail 
to realize is that a majority of burglars have no way of knowing what 
is inside a home. Most break in hoping to get lucky. Given enough 
time, a burglar will try to make his own luck by tearing into a house, 
ripping apart upholstery, breaking up cabinets and tearing pictures 
from the walls looking for salable items. Only a small percentage 
of burglaries are the result of careful planning and execution by 
seasoned professionals. Most are done by a lone individual in need 
of money who drives around looking for likely targets. What makes 
any house a good target? A number of groups have done studies on the 
subject, usually based on interviews with actual burglars. Since many 
burglars have their own individual methods and preferences, the results 
are far from conclusive, but a number of important factors are evident. 
One factor that influences many burglars is location. They usually 
operate within 5 to 10 miles of their homes. When scouting out neighborhoods 
for possible targets, they look for areas near major traffic arteries, 
expressways or throughfares that may offer a quick getaway. Usually 
they avoid houses on dead-end streets, cul-de-sacs or circles. There 
is some debate on the effectiveness of street lighting in deterring 
break-ins. Most law enforcement agencies maintain that homes on well-lighted 
streets are less likely to be burglarized than those on dark streets. 
Some studies have shown that street lights are not a significant factor 
because a surprising number of break-ins occur during the daytime, 
when the occupants are at work and in school. When discussing potential 
targets, some burglars indicated a preference for corner houses, while 
others liked homes in the middle of the street. Some picked secluded 
houses, and some preferred houses on busy streets. All burglars, however, 
agreed that unoccupied houses were prime targets. Thus it behooves 
any homeowner to make the house look occupied even when he is out. 
If you are away from home for long periods, you can make it look as 
if your house is occupied by having a housesitter drop by at different 
times. It may also be possible to prevail on a trusted neighbor who 
spends most of the time at home to come over during the day to open 
the curtains, draw the blinds or raise a few window shades. You can 
also set up props to create the illusion of activity around the house. 
Positioned on the front porch, things like a child's tricycle, a snow 
shovel in the winter or a garden rake suggest that someone is in the 
house and make come out to retrieve them at any moment. When choosing 
props, select items that are not so valuable or attractive as to invite 
theft themselves. Remember to stop all deliveries if you intend to 
be away for long. Have a neighbor pick up the mail every day, and 
arrange to have someone mow the lawn in the summer and shovel the 
walk in the winter. Your home should never be totally dark at night. 
It's best to install timers to turn interior lights on and off periodically. 
Exterior lights should also be regulated by timers or photosensitive 
activators. All exterior lights should be protected by wire guards 
so they cannot be smashed, and thus disabled, by burglars or vandals. 
The effectiveness of home burglar alarms is still open to debate. 
It largely depends on the system itself. It seems that an alarm system 
with lights and sirens may not be so effective as a system that is 
connected to a law enforcement agency. Burglars themselves give alarms 
mixed reviews. Most say they may enter a house with an alarm, but 
they will retreat if they trip it. Another deterrent strategy involves 
marking valuable items by engraving an identification number on them. 
Often, local police stations will lend the homeowner an electric engraving 
tool. This effectiveness of this ploy, however, draws mixed reactions. 
Most insurance companies, for example, point out that the engraved 
items are no more likely to be recovered after a burglary. Perhaps 
the best deterrent against burglary is a network of watchful neighbors. 
Unfortunately, most people, particularly in large cities, feel that 
it is in their best interest to mind their own business. Hence they 
often ignore strangers and suspicious vehicles in the area. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>