<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0548 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The trial of the former student accused of killing Jonathan Levin 
turned to the intricacies of scientific evidence Wednesday as a forensic 
expert testified that DNA evidence linked the student to the knife 
used in the attack and showed that his clothes had been stained with 
his former teacher's blood. But defense lawyers for the former student, 
Corey Arthur, 20, seized on another piece of the expert's testimony: 
that some of the DNA found on the knife could not have come from their 
client, another man charged in the attack or the victim. The defense 
has contended that other unknown people took part in the attack and 
shot Levin. Arthur and the other man charged, Montoun Hart, are accused 
of torturing Levin in his apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan 
on May 30, 1997, to force him to divulge the access code to his bank 
card so they could withdraw money from his account. Then, prosecutors 
said, Arthur shot and killed Levin, his former English teacher. Arthur 
is facing first-degree murder charges. Levin, who was 31 when he was 
killed, was the son of Gerald Levin, chairman of Time Warner Inc. 
The younger Levin taught English at William Howard Taft High School 
in the Bronx, where he met Arthur. Lawrence Quarino, a forensic scientist 
at the office of the chief medical examiner, testified that Arthur's 
clothes were stained with his own blood and with blood that contained 
DNA that matched Levin's. Only one in 3,600,000 white men have that 
precise DNA, he testified. Then, after putting on latex gloves, Quarino 
held up the knife that prosecutors say was used to torture Levin and 
explained that Levin's DNA was found in the blood that stained both 
sides of the blade. But there was a mixture of DNA on the handle of 
the knife, he said. Some matched Levin's and some matched Arthur's, 
but other samples of DNA found on the knife handle could not have 
come from either man or from Hart, Quarino testified. On Tuesday, 
one of Arthur's former girlfriends, Carlethia Weeks, testified that 
he had told her he shot Levin but that ``Monty tied the guy up and 
stabbed him.'' The trial of Hart, 26, on second-degree murder charges 
is set to begin on Jan 18. Quarino also testified that unidentified 
DNA found on a cigarette butt in Levin's apartment was also mixed 
with DNA consistent with Arthur's and Levin's. On cross-examination, 
George Goltzer, a defense lawyer, asked Quarino if it was possible 
that a fourth person had been in the apartment and left traces of 
DNA on the cigarette butt and the knife. ``It is possible,'' Quarino 
answered, adding that while the unidentified DNA found on the cigarette 
is consistent with the unidentified DNA found on the knife, it is 
not rare and could come from two different people. Bloodstains found 
on one of Arthur's black Timberland boots and on the left sleeve and 
right elbow of his Yankee jacket contained DNA consistent with Levin's, 
Quarino testified. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>