<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0418 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Carol Rama's remarkable paintings were last seen here in 1996, in 
``Inside the Visible,'' a sprawling group show of 36 female artists. 
Featuring such subject matter as masturbation and bestiality, Ms. 
Rama's small, delicate watercolors from the 1930s and 1940s were displayed 
in quaint, old-fashioned frames. Now, a comprehensive retrospective 
called ``Carolrama'' (she prefers the conjoined version of her name) 
is on view here through Jan. 3 at the Institute of Contemporary Art. 
Of the nearly 100 works from 1936 to 1997 in the show, roughly half 
are the early watercolors. Ms. Rama, self-taught and a cult figure 
in Italy, has lived nearly all her 80 years in the northern city of 
Turin. This rootedness did not keep her from encountering major avant-garde 
artists. She was photographed by Man Ray, who became her close, much-admired 
friend. Andy Warhol wanted to put her in one of his films when she 
was briefly in New York in 1974. Though Ms. Rama has explored many 
styles, often switching off neatly at each decade mark, she has remained 
true to her psychosexual sources and to an unusual sensibility toward 
certain objects and materials. A group of large minimal abstractions 
from the 1970s of patched, varicolored inner tubes collaged onto black 
canvas are particularly beautiful. Sensual yet formal, and very much 
in step with the decade's Arte Povera movement, they remain, to Ms. 
Rama, a simple homage to her father who owned a tire company. The 
early erotic watercolors continue to fascinate everyone, even the 
artist. In a recent interview, Ms. Rama spoke of them (through a translator) 
as if they had just left her studio. A sort of visual diary of erotic 
fantasies overlaid by vivid memories, the watercolors are done in 
a blithely innocent style. Colorful, translucent imagery shows naked 
women and men doing outrageous things to themselves, each other and 
animals (dogs and snakes) and clearly enjoying it. It's not surprising 
that in 1945 the Fascist Christian Democratic Party shut down the 
gallery show in Turin, where these works were first exhibited. Consequently, 
there has been a tendency to see the works as pointed political statements 
meant to rile the right wing. But Ms. Rama is not a political artist. 
The images come from intense sadness and exquisite passions, all potently 
mixed together. She says these are ``extraordinary sensations I've 
experienced all my life.'' ``This is a kind of madness,'' she continues, 
calling herself a ``premeditated lunatic'' and her art-making a ``trained 
folly.'' In spirit if not in subject matter, these watercolors bring 
to mind the delicacy, intimate quirkiness and intuitive probings of 
Paul Klee. An even closer parallel is the life and work of Louise 
Bourgeois, who, making no claims to feminist causes, has nonetheless 
become a feminist archetype. ``Like Bourgeois,'' says Christoph Grunenberg, 
the curator at ICA, ``Rama doesn't really care about feminism, but 
on the other hand both women are precursors to today's feminist art. 
They are incredibly independent women who have long been dealing with 
subjects and issues _ the body, sexuality, gender, disease and questions 
of power _ that artists like Nancy Spero, Nicole Eisenman, Kara Walker, 
Ellen Gallagher or Sue Williams are now articulating in formal and 
conceptually thematic ways.'' In Ms. Rama's early watercolors, the 
figures are cheerful, rosy fleshed and often crowned with flower wreathes. 
The women wear nothing but attractive makeup and high heels; even 
nudes confined to wheelchairs, or strapped in iron beds, sport a nice 
pair of pumps. A prominent feature of most figures _ human or animal 
_ is a red pointy tongue, indicating, perhaps, how little they care 
what people think. Some paintings are floating arrangements of fetishized 
objects: more women's shoes, dentures, shaving brushes, shovels, artificial 
limbs and crescent-shaped things that turn out to be urinals. The 
shoes often have crimson, fleshy interiors that shift their shape 
slyly from negative space into florid phalluses. In these, Ms. Rama 
plays with sexuality, just as she plays with her alleged insanity 
and exploits her self-professed lack of education and social class. 
The exhibition's organizer, Cristina Mundici, an independent Italian 
curator, says that the artist is in fact remarkably intelligent, sophisticated 
and insightful. The critic Ingrid Schaffner compares Ms. Rama's highly 
eccentric life, art-making and brush with mental illness to those 
of the Swiss artist Meret Oppenheim and the Japanese artist Yayoi 
Kusama, both of whom also enjoyed career re-evaluations late in life. 
Ms. Rama herself says: ``I've always felt extraordinary, different. 
I could never be with normal people, was never at home with the middle 
classes.'' She sees this as a blessing. ``I am so lucky to declare 
this kind of madness. It means I can shift my moods. I have been tortured 
because I had always painted subjects or things, like naked women, 
or my father with shaving blades, or flower crowns, like the kind 
my mother used to make picking up the leaves from the garden of the 
psychiatric clinic. I don't come from educated painting, I come from 
feeling.'' Ms. Rama's industrialist father committed suicide when 
she was a child, plunging her family into poverty. Her mother had 
to go to work as a milliner, and later entered a psychiatric clinic 
for two years. These experiences imparted to Ms. Rama a direct, unmitigated, 
visceral connection to everyday happenings, objects, gestures, even 
smells. They also account for certain objects, like shoes and urinals, 
that she uses repeatedly in her early work and that remain, like Proust's 
madeleine, highly evocative to her. Speaking of a 1941 painting titled 
``Appassionata,'' in which an armless, legless woman lies on a metal 
bed, Ms. Rama recounts: ``I was in Paris and there was this girl found 
in the Seine, a prostitute, with no arms or legs. She was very beautiful 
and the portrait of her face was posted all over Paris. I have always 
put together this story with the story of my mother, and moreover, 
I overlay these two stories with my personal experience, so that I 
am these stories.'' Pointing to a red pair of heels under the bed 
of a legless woman, she says: ``And this is me. I have always loved 
shoes; I do not have beautiful legs, but I can have beautiful shoes.'' 
As for urinals, they're not about Duchamp, though she knew his work. 
Instead, she tells of visiting her mother at work soon after her father's 
death: ``There was a courtyard where there were some urinals. I remember 
very well the smell of urine, and that smell was happiness. But at 
the same time it was sadness, because it reminded me of that very 
sad time.'' The relationship between suffering and beauty, pleasure 
and pain, is key to understanding Ms. Rama's work. It links the earliest 
painting, ``Nonna Carolina,'' 1936, to the latest series, ``La Mucca 
Pazza'' (``The Mad Cow'') 1996-97. The former is a faint watercolor 
of a supine woman surrounded by wooden shoe lasts. She wears a fringed, 
black necklace _ actually leeches. ``I went to see my beautiful grandmother,'' 
Ms. Rama recalls. ``She was ill, in bed, with these leeches on her 
neck. The shoe lasts were around her because a relative was a cobbler 
and used these beautiful things. I put together the beauty and the 
torture.'' The ``Mad Cow'' painting-collages are semi-abstractions 
done on pieces of canvas mailbags, with bits of rubber, lead and painted 
imagery conjuring bulging udders and dentures _ now fragmented and 
looking long in the tooth. Inspired by the recent mad cow epidemic 
in Europe _ specifically a television news clip of a convulsive animal 
_ these are yet another version of Ms. Rama's composite self-portrait, 
integrating aging, disease and madness. ``The death shudder has become 
an echo of the orgiastic one,'' she explains. ``I've had a wonderful 
life because I do not have common feelings,'' she concludes. ``If 
everyone could have these feelings toward objects, toward events, 
where things could talk directly to them without ideology, maybe they 
would be happier.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>