<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0225 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Daniel Shiffman, a lanky 25-year-old who is a self-proclaimed computer 
geek, was never an athletic powerhouse. At the small private high 
school he attended in his native Baltimore, he was often ``well down 
near the bottom of gym class,'' he recalled with a chuckle. But when 
he is playing games on line, sitting in a loft apartment in downtown 
Manhattan that he shares with three Net-smart roommates and 16 computers, 
Shiffman, a financial planner and freelance computer consultant, is 
a nimble giant of a competitor. His opponents, all sitting at their 
own computers somewhere (anywhere, as long as they are connected to 
the Internet), know only that he is a master player, capable of wielding 
a computer joystick with the alacrity of Wayne Gretzky on the ice 
and pounding his keyboard with speed and accuracy that might make 
boxing champ Evander Holyfield wince. His game is Myth: The Fallen 
Lords, a world of magical characters, intricate strategies and sudden 
death. Each player can play against all the other players or in teams. 
As many as 16 can participate in a game session. The manufacturer 
of this wildly popular game, Bungie Software, offers advice that gives 
a glimpse into the game's free-for-all: ``Kill your enemies. Kill 
your friends' enemies. Kill your friends.'' ``It's become an obsession 
of mine,'' Shiffman said happily earlier this month in an interview 
at the Internet World conference in New York. ``The novelty is that 
you are not playing yourself in a dark corner of a room somewhere, 
but you are interacting with actual people.'' Shiffman has joined 
the swelling ranks of people who are finding greater challenges and 
just more downright fun by using their computers to play the cagiest 
opponents of them all: other people. They are using the sophistication 
of Internet connections to play opponents all over the world in games 
like Myth and Ultima Online or to go full throttle in the cockpit 
of a MiG-29 fighter jet, matching wits and heat-seeking missiles against 
scores of other chairbound fighter pilots _ in Manhattan, Denver or 
anywhere _ all in the same virtual space that appears on the computer 
screen as the airspace over central Africa. In what might seem an 
odd turn, high-powered computers are also being called upon by people 
who want to play only old favorites, like Checkers, Scrabble and Spades, 
with distant opponents. Internet game players can, for example, fly 
World War II-era sorties over wartorn Europe, then reminisce later 
with fellow cyberaces in virtual lounges _ if they survive their missions. 
Depending on the game, the talking is done in text-based chat or with 
full telephony that allows players to speak to one another as if they 
were on a conference call. All of that tends to make the games even 
more addictive, players, and people who criticize the games, say. 
Over all, computer-based games, including television-console games 
like Nintendo and Sony Playstation, amounted to a $5 billion industry 
last year, according to Forrester Research in Cambridge, Mass., which 
studies Internet use and trends. Only 3 percent of that revenue is 
attributed specifically to computer games played over the Internet. 
But by 2002, Forrester forecasts, online gaming will account for close 
to a quarter of an estimated $8 billion computer game industry. Last 
year, a Forrester report noted that a poll of a wide variety of game 
developers found that 76 percent had Internet games under development. 
``People are becoming more familiar with PCs,'' said Seema Williams, 
a research analyst at Forrester. ``More and more consumers have six 
months to two years of experience with them. They are more open now 
to playing games on line.'' In a report in April, Ms. Williams noted 
that more than a million users of Microsoft's online Internet Gaming 
Zone had registered to play its most popular game, Spades. America 
Online, which recently announced a redesign of its popular Games Channel, 
noted that more than 3.4 million individuals visited the channel in 
August, logging more than six million hours of play. America Online 
_ the world's largest online service, with more than 13 million members 
_ also discovered that who is actually playing its online games defies 
widely accepted stereotypes. For example, 76 percent of AOL's players 
are 18 or older, 51 percent of them are 35 or older and most surprisingly, 
given the commonly held conventions about computer gamers, slightly 
more than half of the gamers between 25 and 49 years old) were women. 
``Playing games on line is one of the hottest new forms of entertainment,'' 
said Lawrence Schick, executive director of interactive entertainment 
for AOL. ``It's not just the kids who are playing. Mom and Dad are, 
too.'' Ultimately, it is the human-to-human interaction that makes 
Internet games especially enticing, players say. IBM's silicon chess 
whiz, Big Blue, notwithstanding, playing against a computer simply 
cannot compare with using a computer to play against real people, 
Internet game makers say. The makers of television-console game systems, 
like Nintendo and Sony Playstation, have long known this. Many computer 
game experts said console games, a $2.6 billion industry, owes much 
of its success to the fact that people play such games against other 
people. But people play console games with people in the same room; 
none in the United States are capable of linking players across the 
vastness of the Internet. Even in the quicksilver world of computer 
innovation, the world of multiplayer Internet games is relatively 
new. The sonic boom in online gaming occurred only a couple of years 
ago, when smarter computers, programs and fundamental improvements 
in the Internet itself made online games seem to come to life with 
dazzling graphics and blazing speed, explained John R. Taylor III, 
vice president for strategic development at the Kesmai Corp. ``It 
is satisfying to see where things have evolved,'' said Taylor, who 
co-founded Kesmai, one of the oldest companies specializing in online 
multiplayer games, in 1982. The early Internet games took shape in 
a text-defined computer world of MUDs _ Multi User Dungeons, relatively 
primitive multiplayer programs _ and Unix operating systems. Since 
then, games have progressed to the point of evoking convincing 3-D 
environments that offer movie-quality visuals with CD-quality soundtracks 
and sound effects. But oddly enough, with all the technology, what 
is most important is that they deliver real people as opponents. ``Even 
with all the sophistication that computers have, there is a trick 
or pattern to the way computers play,'' said David Campana, 30, an 
engineering manager. He said he much preferred playing the personal 
computer version of the action game Quake II against people rather 
than against his computer's integrated circuits. ``When you play against 
people, all bets are off,'' Campana said. ``You never know how people 
are going to react. It's much better.'' Actually, the Internet is 
not the only game in town. Many of the most advanced CD-ROM computer 
games can be played with multiple players on a local area network, 
or LAN, an in-house network in which the computers are wired to one 
another, as well as with players on the Internet. On a LAN, any computer 
on the local network that meets the game's minimal speed, space and 
power requirements can usually be used to join the action. David Campana, 
who works for a technology company in Princeton, N.J., said that while 
he enjoyed playing action games on line, he preferred to play his 
favorite game, Quake II, on a LAN at his office after office hours. 
Sometimes more than a dozen of his co-workers stay late to play the 
game. On a LAN, all the players have identical connections to the 
in-house network, which is generally not true for players competing 
over the Internet. Connections vary wildly on the Net, depending on 
modem speed, the computer's location service provider, and whether 
some players have superfast connections like cable and T-1 lines. 
Invariably, players with slow connections are at a disadvantage when 
drawing their weapons against players with faster connections. In 
the lexicon of online game players, slow players are often victims 
of what is called ``latency.'' In Quake II, a game that can be won 
or lost on a hundredths-of-a-second response, a player with slow connections 
can appear practically arthritic. But setting up and maintaining a 
LAN to play games is expensive and cumbersome. And some players can 
run into the same problem with LAN games that they run into in real-life 
games: finding someone to play with when you are ready to play. On 
the Internet, that's is seldom a problem. At any given time, millions 
are bustling from Web site to Web site, looking for someone to play. 
And the Web also offers the ancillary benefits of chat rooms, rankings 
and message boards to compare strategy notes. But to play on the Internet, 
players need an intermediary, what Ms. Williams at Forrester calls 
a ``cyberrec room.'' These services, called game centers, are proprietary 
online services, with names like Kesmai's Game Storm and Mplayer.com, 
that allow two or more players to compete electronically. Many of 
these centers also offer chat rooms and message boards to help players 
of similar interests and skill levels find one another for online 
games. No two game centers are exactly alike. Some, like Mplayer, 
are free. Others charge a fee, like Game Storm, which costs $9.99 
a month (but games are free and can be downloaded from the Internet 
or from a disk that is mailed to members), and some, like America 
Online's Games Channel, which is exclusively for AOL members, has 
two rates for its more advanced games. On AOL, for example, Blackjack 
and Virtual Pool each cost 99 cents an hour to play, and Air Warrior 
II is $1.99 an hour. Another major distinction among game centers 
is whether they provide something called a ``persistent universe'' 
or ``massively multiplayer gaming. In a persistent universe, the computer-generated 
world is changed continuously as players enter, affect it in various 
ways, and exit. Such environments _ like the mysterious medieval land 
of dragons and sorcerers of Ultima Online, a pay-for-play game _ exist, 
almost organically, whether 5,000 people are playing or no one is 
playing. ``The characters' attributes are stored in the database,'' 
said Chris Holden, chief executive of Kesmai, based in Charlottesville, 
Va., explaining persistent-universe gaming. ``So when a player comes 
back, he can pick up right where he left off.'' Left the game and 
forgot to put your sword away? Ask another player still on line to 
put it back in your castle for you. That is possible in persistent-universe 
gaming, which tends to be very expensive to maintain and support. 
Other online games are in the peer-to-peer category. Devotees of persistent-universe 
games refer to these game centers disparagingly as ``dating services.'' 
Services like TEN and Mpath are peer-to-peer, which means that they 
match up players for games that last only as long as the competitors 
are playing. When players lose or quit, ending the game, that particular 
computer world also dies. Many of these companies, Ms. Williams said, 
are supported by advertisers that pitch anything from new computer 
games and computer-game magazines to M &AMP; M candies between matches 
to a mostly male audience of young adults. Both kinds of online games 
have indirectly created an often unexpectedly strong sense of community, 
players and game makers say. ``It's all about social interaction,'' 
Holden said, ``people talking and making friends _ and enemies, for 
that matter. Anything that happens in real life when people gather 
can happen on line.'' Regular online players often organize themselves 
into teams, squadrons or guilds, depending on the game. Some players 
meet off line to discuss the game or deepen friendships made on line. 
Holden's colleague, Taylor, said he had met his wife while playing 
one of his company's Internet games. Ms. Williams said the emerging 
Internet game world was ``a new community and a new way to interact 
with that community.'' Yet for Daniel Shiffman in his Manhattan apartment, 
his online Myth game is mostly just that: a game. ``But a really amazing 
one, a perfect combination of strategy and fighting,'' he said with 
a chuckle. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>