<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0518 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Jeffrey Blake went to prison for murder in 1991 on the weight of one 
man's word. Thursday, after spending more than a quarter of his life 
behind bars, Blake will go free because, officials now concede, that 
man's word was a lie. ``This is a case of a lifetime,'' exclaimed 
Michelle Fox, the Legal Aid Society lawyer who handled the six-year 
appeal. Late Tuesday night, Ms. Fox delivered the stunning news to 
her client: Brooklyn District Attorney Charles Hynes had agreed to 
ask that the guilty verdict be set aside and that the indictment against 
Blake be dismissed. Thursday, Blake, 29, will leave his Dutchess County 
prison cell and appear before Acting State Supreme Court Justice Robert 
Kreindler, who is expected to grant the requests and make him a free 
man. Hynes spokesman Patrick Clark credited Ms. Fox and Bob Herbert, 
a columnist for The New York Times, for setting in motion the events 
that led to Blake's exoneration. During the summer, Herbert wrote 
two columns revealing critical weaknesses in the case against Blake, 
most notably that the only witness, Dana Garner, had passed a polygraph 
test admitting that his original testimony was a lie. The columns 
and a later meeting with Ms. Fox prompted Hynes to order the case 
re-examined. Hynes was the Brooklyn district attorney during the 1990 
trial, which was prosecuted by an assistant district attorney, Anthony 
Catalano. Wednesday, Deputy District Attorney Dennis Hawkins, who 
led the re-examination of the case, defended the handling of the trial. 
``We live by an adversarial system,'' he said. ``Our job is to present 
evidence we believe is credible. The defense's job is to poke holes 
in it. In a sense, the system worked, although it took some time.'' 
Ms. Fox was less forgiving, particularly since her client had spent 
a little more seven years in prison and about a year in jail for the 
crime. She said investigators should have taken a harder look at Garner's 
credibility, particularly because he also claimed to be a witness 
to a second double shooting two weeks later. The 13th of 14 children, 
Blake will be greeted Thursday by a joyous family. ``We're planning 
a big party for him,'' his sister, Denise Blake, said. ``Everybody 
is happy. Every time I went to visit him, all he could say was that 
he would be glad when he gets out of there. He said he was in there 
for something he didn't do.'' But Blake seemed to have little hope 
of an early release. By this summer, Ms. Fox said she had exhausted 
her appeals, when she happened to read a July 12 column by Herbert 
titled, ``Wrong Man at Rikers,'' about a different case in which Hynes' 
office put the wrong man in Rikers Island. In the column, Herbert 
quoted Hynes as saying, ``I'm the last person in the world who wants 
the wrong person in jail.'' So Ms. Fox picked up the telephone. ``I 
got a call from her,'' Herbert said Thursday. ``She said the appeals 
process had been exhausted. She wanted to know if I was interested 
in writing about the case. I said I was interested only if I could 
be fully convinced that the guy was innocent.'' Herbert said he reviewed 
trial transcripts and appeal records and interviewed prosecutors. 
The killings happened on June 18, 1990, when two men, Everton Denny 
and Kenneth Felix, were killed by dozens of bullets fired from an 
automatic weapon into their car in East New York, Brooklyn. Police 
canvassed the area, but found no one willing to testify, Hawkins said. 
A few days later, Dana Garner told the police that he saw Blake firing 
into the passenger side of the car. The Garner and Blake families 
lived a block apart in East New York and often socialized together. 
But Garner's credibility was suspect even at the time of the trial. 
Ms. Fox said his cousin testified that Garner was not in the city 
at the time of the shootings. Blake had no record of violent criminal 
offenses, though in 1986 he had been sentenced to five years' probation 
after being convicted of possessing a small quantity of cocaine. At 
the time of the shootings, Blake worked at a religious-supplies store 
in Bedford-Stuyvesant about five miles away. His co-workers testified 
that on the day of the killings, he had been on the job. But prosecutors 
established that Blake had taken his lunch break between 1:15 p.m. 
and 2 p.m. The murder occurred at 1:45 p.m. His sister testified that 
Blake ate lunch at her apartment, not far from his job. But Blake 
was convicted in May 1991 and sentenced to 36 years to life in prison. 
In 1993, Ms. Fox had reason to hope: Garner recanted his testimony 
on videotape and agreed to testify at Blake's appeal. Upon taking 
the stand, though, Garner refused to testify. But Garner passed a 
recent polygraph test in which he again recanted his testimony. ``I 
think he likes the attention,'' Ms. Fox said, trying to explain Garner's 
motivation in lying. ``He enjoys thinking of himself as being at the 
center of attention of things and helping police solve crimes.'' Garner 
will not be charged with perjury because the five-year statute of 
limitations on the charge has expired. Hawkins said a new investigation 
has begun in the search for the real killer. ``We are continuing to 
pursue that as well,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>