<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0447 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Brazilian government Wednesday unveiled a three-year, $80 billion 
package of spending cuts and tax increases in a bid to restore the 
country's flagging credibility in world markets and prepare the way 
for a rescue program led by the International Monetary Fund. The blueprint 
calls for $23 billion in savings for 1999, with about $11 billion 
of that amount coming from tax increases. The federal government has 
promised to cut spending by $7 billion next year, and is proposing 
controversial legal mechanisms, called ``triggers,'' to force states 
and municipalities to come up with the remaining $5 billion in either 
tax increases or spending cuts. ''The time has come for us to make 
government live within its limits, with clarity, conscience and determination,'' 
Finance Minister Pedro Malan said Wednesday, elaborating on themes 
President Fernando Henrique Cardoso raised in a televised speech Tuesday 
night, bracing Brazilians for the austerity measures announced Wednesday. 
``The time for gradualism is over.'' Brazil, the giant of South America, 
with half the continent's population and the world's ninth-largest 
economy, became the focus of world attention after the collapse of 
Russia two months ago. Almost instantly, interest rates for Brazilian 
debt doubled, and the country began sweating away some $30 billion 
in foreign reserves. With Brazil's economy crashing into recession, 
fears grew that the country's collapse could trigger devaluations 
and defaults across Latin America, and heighten the risks to the U.S. 
economy. The International Monetary Fund, along with other multilateral 
lending agencies, and the U.S. government have been preparing a safety 
net for Brazil of at least $30 billion, with President Clinton prepared 
to commit U.S. taxpayer dollars as part of a package of direct aid 
from the G-7 industrialized nations to Brazil. Washington's response 
to Brazil's action Wednesday was both congratulatory and cautionary. 
``It is essential that Brazil implement its program promptly and convincingly,'' 
Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin said in a statement, reflecting Washington's 
fears that Cardoso's plan could flounder when it reaches the Brazilian 
congress. That message was reinforced, a White House official said, 
in a brief conversation between Clinton and Cardoso. Clinton, the 
official said, was returning a call Cardoso placed several days ago 
to congratulate Clinton on the Middle East accord, but Clinton's underlying 
message was that Brazil had to act quickly. American officials have 
made no secret of their exasperation at Brazil's slowness to act, 
leaving the country vulnerable to another mishap in the markets. Clinton, 
however, reportedly made no reference to the American contribution 
to an IMF-led rescue package. Brazilian officials said they would 
be traveling to Washington to discuss the plan with IMF officials 
by next week. Investors reacted warily, and said the measures did 
not go as far as they hoped in making structural changes to permanently 
reduce Brazil's burgeoning budget deficit, now running at 7 percent 
of its gross national product. ``It's a step in the right direction, 
but if you think of Brazil climbing a wall of disbelief, this is just 
a few inches up,'' said Jorge Mariscal, chief investment strategist 
for Latin America for Goldman Sachs. Party leaders of the president's 
governing coalition, who learned details of the plan over breakfast 
with Cardoso and Malan Wednesday, did not rule out tinkering with 
some of the more controversial elements of the austerity program, 
but pledged to maintain the savings targets the government would pledge 
to the IMF. ''The measures are bitter measures, but in our view they're 
extremely necessary,'' said Aecio Neves, congressional party leader 
of the president's Brazilian Social Democracy Party, which relies 
on five allied parties to form its majority base. ``The governing 
coalition has an enormous responsibility to overcome this moment of 
instability,'' said Neves. With the sudden sense of urgency and national 
mission, few in the president's governing coalition were willing to 
openly challenge the austerity package outright. But many raised objections 
to specific elements of the program, and said there could be alternatives 
thrown up for debate in the coming weeks. Among the most difficult 
items to pass, said congressional leaders, would be a requirement 
that retired public-sector workers contribute to the Social Security 
coffers, with contributions of 11 to 20 percent of their benefits. 
The austerity package also increases the contribution of public sector 
workers to Social Security, and would introduce a minimum age for 
retirement of civil servants, which does not currently exist. The 
Social Security System for public workers in Brazil is far more generous 
than that in the United States. Civil servants here retire with full 
salaries, according to time served, without regard to their age. ''Reduction 
of expenses and the increase of tax collection, it's an indigestible 
cocktail for any Congress in the world,'' said Geddel Vieira Lima, 
party leader of the government-allied Brazilian Democratic Movement 
Party. ``But we know the moment we're living through, and that we 
have to show the world we're capable of doing what's necessary to 
address our problems.'' The package also calls for the extension of 
several taxes that were originally passed as temporary measures several 
years ago. Under one, the emergency stabilization fund, the federal 
government impounds 20 percent of all taxes destined for state and 
local governments. The austerity package proposes doubling the amount 
impounded to 40 percent and extending the fund, which was to have 
expired in 1999, to 2006. The package also calls on Congress to legally 
oblige states to limit spending on active and retired employees to 
60 percent of their budgets, at the same time cutting the resources 
available by impounding taxes. It is by no means sure, however, that 
fiscal discipline can successfully be imposed on state and city governments 
by fiat. Anthony Garotinho, elected governor of Rio de Janeiro in 
last Sunday's elections, said Wednesday, ``Does the government expect 
us to make miracles?'' He noted that Rio, which is seeking a $300 
million loan from the federal government, is responsible like other 
states for providing basic services including education, health and 
security. ``I was elected to be a governor, not a magician,'' Garotinho 
said. Mariscal of Goldman Sachs also called the impoundment fund's 
extension ``another negative,'' and said, ``Brazil is in the mess 
it's in is because it has to much debt, too many employees and too 
high a Social Security deficit. It's an issue of spending too much 
and lowering the debt, and everything else is peripheral.'' Lawrence 
Goodman, chief economist at Santander Investment Securities, called 
the package ``mildly favorable regarding the potential for an ongoing 
`muddling through' scenario.'' This week marks the one-year anniversary 
of the last package Cardoso announced, with much fanfare, just after 
Thailand's collapse. That package to raise $18 billion, hailed as 
a great show of decisiveness, was largely passed by Congress. But 
the only measures that were implemented involved raising taxes, not 
cutting costs. ``Brazil will remain captive to a $300 billion domestic 
debt that is extraordinarily short-term in nature, which is one of 
the paramount issues coming out of the Asia crisis,'' Goodman said. 
On Thursday, Malan and other government officials are to testify about 
the austerity package before Congress, which is scheduled to begin 
action, starting with Social Security reform, next week. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>