<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0211 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Once considered an engineering folly in a world of film and video 
cameras, digital still cameras have become a booming industry in the 
last decade. Kodak introduced its first digital camera in 1991, an 
expensive model bought mostly by photojournalists _ and well-heeled 
photojournalists at that, because it cost more than $20,000. Four 
years later, Kodak offered the first digital camera it marketed to 
less affluent consumers: the DC40, which cost less than $800. Now 
Kodak, just one of many camera companies going digital, sells a complete 
line of digital cameras. The industry is growing so fast that sales 
revenue is increasing about 30 percent to 40 percent a year. Digital 
cameras come in four varieties and two price ranges: expensive and 
``if you need to ask. ...'' They cost a lot because of the complexity 
of manufacturing the charge-coupled devices, or CCDs, at the heart 
of nearly all digital cameras. The CCDs take the place of film in 
these cameras. A photographer who wants a larger or better photograph 
needs a camera with a larger CCD for greater resolution. Larger CCDs 
cost more money, and the largest cost a lot. In the merely expensive 
range is the basic consumer model, which usually costs a few hundred 
dollars and is almost always less than $1,000. This is the basic point-and-shoot 
type of camera many people might take on vacation. Its resolution 
_ 640 by 480 pixels, for a total of 307,200 _ is adequate for small 
prints and most computer applications, like sending family snapshots 
on the Internet and illustrating Web pages. For more resolution or 
larger prints, the next level up is the 35-mm single-lens-reflex camera. 
Cameras like these are used by professional photographers like photojournalists 
and are made by many of the major camera companies: Kodak, Leica, 
Canon, Nikon and others. But you may need a friend at the bank to 
get one. They range in cost from a few thousand dollars to about $30,000. 
The next two types are for professional photographers who need even 
higher-quality photographs. The third type has a removable back that 
attaches to either medium-format or 4-by-5 cameras and is typically 
used where extreme definition is needed for things like brochures 
or magazines. The fourth is a camera that is really a scanner in a 
camera's body; it registers an image pixel by pixel in such detail 
that it is used for poster-size reproductions of stationary objects. 
But even though much attention has been paid to digital cameras with 
CCDs, breakthroughs in a related technology could revolutionize cameras 
as we know them. CCDs deliver enough pixel density to make a good 
photograph look good. But an improved chip called CMOS (pronounced 
SEA-moss), for complementary metal oxide semiconductor, is expected 
to be the next big step for digital imaging. The pixels in both CCD 
and CMOS chips convert photons into electrons, but they differ in 
how information moves off the chip. CMOS chips are much cheaper to 
manufacture, and there is room on CMOS chips to include circuits for 
things like image stabilization. CMOS chips have been around for about 
30 years, but they have needed to be extremely large to deliver the 
same pixel density as a CCD chip. So that has slowed the pace of their 
adoption by manufacturers, even though they can operate with much 
less power than CCD chips. Peter M. Davies, director of Kodak's marketing 
program for digital and applied imaging, predicted that CMOS chips 
would eventually be capable of images with the same clarity as CCDs 
and be much cheaper. CMOS cameras will be able to operate much longer 
without changing batteries. Kodak recently signed agreements with 
both Motorola and Intel to develop a high-density CMOS chip, but Davies 
said that effort would probably not lead to CMOS cameras by Kodak 
for another year or 18 months. Marc J. Loinaz, a researcher at Bell 
Labs, part of Lucent Technologies, said that as CMOS chips became 
smaller, digital cameras would eventually be limited in size only 
by lens sizes. ``If there ever is a Dick Tracy video watch,'' he said, 
``it'll use CMOS chips.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>