<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0535 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Thursday, Oct. 29: It is 
hard to recapture, so long after the event, what a galvanizing effect 
John Glenn's first ride into orbit had on an apprehensive nation. 
In the years before that triumph, Americans had been plunged into 
self-doubt by the Soviet Union's success in orbiting an unmanned Sputnik 
satellite and then two Russian cosmonauts while a succession of American 
rockets exploded on the pad. Then, on Feb. 20, 1962, the freckle-faced, 
square-jawed Marine flier got America back in the space race with 
the nation's first manned orbital flight. A delirious public honored 
him with a tumultuous ticker-tape parade and canonized him as a genuine 
American hero whose exploits owed much to his unswerving patriotism, 
his enduring marriage, his deep roots in Presbyterianism and small-town 
America. Now Glenn, retiring from the Senate at the age of 77, is 
poised to mount again into the heavens, this time as a lowly payload 
specialist on Wednesday's scheduled flight of the space shuttle Discovery. 
Instead of piloting the spaceship, he will serve as a guinea pig for 
medical tests to determine the effects of weightlessness on an aging 
body. But neither his duties nor his low crew ranking will have much 
to do with how anyone views a flight that long ago became known as 
The John Glenn Flight, a testament more to past eminence than present 
value. There is something a little sad _ even desperate _ about all 
the hoopla surrounding this otherwise unremarkable flight. It is as 
if a nation that no longer has Mark McGwire and Sammy Sosa to cheer 
on seems determined to wallow in nostalgia while Glenn and NASA try 
to rekindle past glories. But this is a flight that will not probe 
much further into the unknown than Glenn did the first time around 
36 years ago. The spacecraft he will ride in is bigger and a lot more 
complex technologically. But it will still be flying in low Earth 
orbit, the cheaper arena to which the space agency repaired after 
the successful moon landings vanquished the Soviet space program once 
and for all. Most conspicuously missing this time around will be that 
galvanizing sense of mission. NASA's truly riveting explorations these 
days are its unmanned probes of other planets. But its troubled manned 
space program is now remembered less for the image of American astronauts 
planting a flag on the moon than for a teacher and her fellow crew 
members perishing in the Challenger explosion. The centerpiece of 
today's manned program, the international space station, is behind 
schedule and over budget, its progress threatened by Russia's economic 
troubles. Meanwhile, the space shuttles have flown intermittently, 
raising concerns that safety margins are eroding. No wonder the space 
agency, and presumably the White House as well, were willing to let 
Glenn cap his career with one last victory lap. To be sure, officials 
have clapped a veneer of scientific justification on his participation, 
but that veneer is looking even thinner now that he has failed to 
qualify for what was billed as one of the more important tests to 
be performed on him. The greater meaning of this flight has nothing 
to do with research or even with space. Rather it is the dramatic 
symbolism of a robust, healthy senior citizen shaping his own destiny. 
This old space warrior refused to exit quietly. Instead he kept nagging 
and nagging until he bent the space bureaucracy, and his own family, 
to acquiesce in his dream for one more flight. Few senior citizens 
can exert the political clout of a John Glenn to achieve their goals, 
but the relaunching of this space-age icon is being taken _ indeed, 
seized upon _ as a symbol of what a growing cohort of energetic seniors 
can achieve if their aspirations and capabilities are honored. The 
irony of this much-ballyhooed flight is that it may do more to combat 
ageism on the ground than to register new triumphs in space. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>