<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0173 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
How unfortunate that 96 out of 100 personal computer buyers might 
not care that Mac OS 8.5, Apple Computer Inc.'s new operating system 
software for Macintosh computers, is easier to use, more elegant, 
more innovative and more reliable than Windows 98. But for the 4 percent 
_ Apple's current share of new computer sales _ who do care, and for 
the unknown percentage of computer owners who may be frustrated with 
the industry-standard Windows operating system, the happy news is 
that Mac OS 8.5 is now available, either as a $99 upgrade package 
for Macs of recent vintage, or as the default system software on new 
Apple computers. Mac OS 8.5 is certainly a better operating system 
than earlier versions of the Mac OS, and, in some ways, for some users, 
better than Windows. It is not free of headaches, of course, and an 
operating system upgrade should never, ever be taken lightly. Several 
of my favorite older applications crashed when introduced to the new 
OS. Mac OS 8.5 was written specifically for the PowerPC chip, which 
means it cannot be installed on older Macintoshes based on the Motorola 
68000 series microprocessors, including the popular Quadras that preceded 
the current Power Macintosh line. Nor will it work on older Macs even 
if they have a PowerPC upgrade card. This is a disappointment of high 
magnitude, especially for those of us who own an assortment of older 
Macs and PowerBooks. It signals that Apple has cut loose those older 
Macs, sending them adrift just as it did the Apple II. For those who 
have a PowerPC Macintosh, however, and a minimum 24 megabytes of RAM 
and 155 megabytes of vacant hard disk space needed for the upgrade, 
the main advantages of upgrading to the new Mac OS can be summarized 
in a few points: _ Version 8.5 is more stable and reliable than earlier 
versions. In other words, it does not crash as often. _ It has some 
new tricks that are useful for people who spend time connected to 
the Internet. These days, that means nearly everyone. _ It has a Sherlock, 
a search engine that alone is worth the upgrade fee. Sherlock makes 
it easier to find files and information, whether the information is 
on the user's computer, on a local network, or on the World Wide Web. 
_ It is faster. Mac OS 8.5 has been written to take specific advantage 
of the PowerPC chip, leading to quicker execution of operations ranging 
from automated AppleScript tasks to transferring files over a local 
network. _ It isn't Windows. Windows 98 has many fine qualities, and 
is itself a great improvement over Windows 95, but its most compelling 
feature, let's be honest, is that it is the industry standard. That 
fact alone means that most computer users will choose a Windows computer 
over a Macintosh computer, and it is hard to argue against the logic. 
There is more software available for Windows. New products almost 
always come out for Windows ahead of the Mac _ if they come out for 
the Mac at all. More support is available for Windows machines. And 
Windows machines are cheaper. In other words, the Mac is surrounded 
on all sides, and outnumbered 24 to 1. That is precisely the kind 
of situation that invigorates Macintosh users, and now they have a 
new operating system to cheer about. The real question is not whether 
Mac OS 8.5 is a worthy operating system upgrade _ that is an easy 
call _ but whether it is safe, and smart, to buy a Macintosh today. 
Six months ago, even some of Apple's most loyal supporters struggled 
with those questions. But the company that once did almost everything 
wrong now seems to be doing almost everything right. Apple just reported 
its first profitable year since 1995. At this point there is little 
fear for Apple's survival. Under the leadership of Steve Jobs, Apple's 
co-founder and interim chief executive, the company has demonstrated 
that it can survive and prosper. The next test is whether it can increase 
revenues and regain lost market share. It seems to be on the right 
track. Apple introduced a series of popular and innovative products 
this year, including the flat-panel Studio Display, the G3 PowerBooks, 
and the funky iMac, which has been wildly popular despite its flaws. 
If you are shopping for an iMac today, be sure to get the ``Revision 
B'' model. Apple asserts that the recent success of its iMac has persuaded 
a number of software developers to create programs for the Macintosh 
platform. Apple also contends that a substantial percentage of its 
iMac customers are either first-time computer buyers or born-again 
Macintosh users who lost faith and joined the Windows camp, and who 
are coming home. And now comes Mac OS 8.5, which demonstrates that 
Apple managed to salvage something good from the ``Copland'' operating 
system debacle, in which Apple squandered a huge head start in operating 
system design and allowed Microsoft Windows to catch up to the Mac. 
Is it smart to choose a Macintosh today? Perhaps not in the corporate 
world, where Windows has won almost all the desktops, except in traditional 
Apple strongholds like graphics and publishing. Apple's real strength 
_ and its best hope for the future _ is in the consumer market. Apple's 
``Think Different'' advertising campaign would lead one to believe 
that Macs are popular chiefly among dead people. From my observations, 
however, Mac users include some of the liveliest and most creative 
individuals around. The key word is ``individual.'' For those who 
find safety in numbers, Windows is the safe, smart choice. For those 
who simply want the best tool for the job, the Mac is certainly worth 
consideration. A few cautions: _ Before attempting any OS upgrade 
_ Mac, Windows, Linux, Be, or whatever _ back up your hard disk. _ 
If you have favorite applications that you depend on for your productivity 
and sanity, check with the software makers to make sure your versions 
are compatible with Mac OS 8.5. An upgrade to a newer version, typically 
at some expense and loss of time, may be needed to avoid system crashes. 
In my case, older versions of the Norton Utilities, Now Contact and 
Now Up-To-Date, and Microsoft Word all had to be replaced after they 
got the heebie-jeebies from Mac OS 8.5. _ If your Macintosh has been 
well-behaved, Mac OS 8.5's automated installation process should be 
a breeze. It overlays the new system file on top of the old and saves 
all the old preferences and other bureaucratic settings, including 
Internet connection settings that were probably no fun to create in 
the first place. But if you have endured occasional problems with 
balky system extensions or other technical goblins and gremlins, consider 
performing a clean install. A clean install, made easier with a utility 
like Cassidy &AMP; Greene's Conflict Catcher, creates an entirely 
new system file and requires the user to re-install every extension, 
font, control panel and setting. It is a more grueling process, but 
doing so sweeps away the virtual cobwebs that build up over time and 
cause internal conflicts. _ Finally, consider getting a Mac OS 8.5 
help manual like ``Mac OS 8.5 for Dummies'' by Bob Le Vitus (IDG Books, 
$19.95). Apple is so proud of its online help system that it has reduced 
the printed documentation for this upgrade to just a few pages. Some 
of us are old-fashioned enough to get comfort from a book. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>