<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0549 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When asked to assess George Pataki's record as governor, Tom Carroll, 
president of the conservative group Change-NY, asked: ``Which one? 
The Pataki of the first two years or the Pataki of the second two 
years?'' On a host of issues, like state spending, education and health 
care, there is a sharp difference between the conservative Republican 
governor who took office promising to shrink government, and the moderate 
Pataki now running for re-election. But on what his aides say are 
his core issues, like tax cuts and crime, the governor has been fairly 
consistent. Here is a look at Pataki's record on key issues. TAXES, 
SPENDING AND THE ECONOMY The signal claim of this administration is, 
as Pataki puts it, that ``we have led the nation in cutting taxes 
every single year.'' In this respect, the governor has been a striking 
success. He cut the state income tax 25 percent, though his original 
plan favored the wealthy much more than the one eventually agreed 
to by Democrats in the legislature. He won a 27 percent reduction 
by 2002 in property taxes charged by local school districts. Again, 
Democrats forced changes in his plan, which did not benefit New York 
City, securing a 10 percent cut in the city income tax. In the last 
two years, the governor signed into law cuts including those in estate 
taxes, business taxes and the sales tax on clothing. All told, he 
has enacted $12 billion a year in tax cuts. But despite the cuts and 
Pataki's reputation as a fiscal conservative, he has increased state 
spending at double the rate of inflation. In his first two years, 
he held spending nearly flat, eliminating 20,000 state jobs, to close 
a $5 billion projected deficit, and to pay for the income tax cuts. 
But state revenues soared, thanks to the booming financial markets, 
and over the ensuing two years the governor increased spending. The 
current $71.4 billion budget is 15 percent larger than the $62 billion 
one he inherited. The state's debts have grown rapidly, continuing 
a trend that began in the mid-1980s. Debt repaid out of the budget 
rose from $28 billion to $35 billion under Pataki, and debts incurred 
by the state's public authorities climbed even faster. Independent 
monitors have expressed alarm, saying that rising spending and debt, 
plus promised tax cuts, are bound to produce a crisis within a few 
years. The governor has done a great deal to improve conditions for 
business _ including cutting business taxes, granting tax breaks and 
cutting unemployment and workers' compensation premiums more than 
30 percent. But it is not clear what effect that has had on the state's 
economy. CRIME Pataki has been more consistent _ and consistently 
conservative _ on crime than on any other major issue. In 1995, he 
signed a law reinstating the death penalty and creating a sentence 
of life in prison without parole. He won longer sentences and strict 
limits on parole for violent felons, and construction of a maximum-security 
prison. The only major change he sought without success was tougher 
penalties for juveniles. The governor ended college-level classes 
for prison inmates and curtailed work-release programs. And his administration 
began housing inmates two to a cell. Prison reform groups contend 
such changes make prisons more dangerous and leave inmates less prepared 
for release. Pataki has made treatment available as an alternative 
to prison for some drug crimes, though the program is small in scope. 
But while he has talked about easing the state's harsh drug-possession 
laws, he has not made a proposal. He claims some of the credit for 
the steep drop in crime, though it began before he took office and 
is concentrated in New York City, where most experts credit changes 
in police strategy. WELFARE On welfare, Pataki has moved from the 
political fringe to the center, without changing his basic views. 
For two years, he tried unsuccessfully to force dramatic changes in 
the system, and Democrats attacked him as a right-wing ideologue. 
But the new federal welfare law enacted many of the changes he had 
sought, like time limits and work requirements for benefits. At the 
same time, Pataki retreated from the more draconian aspects of his 
plan. Instead of simply abolishing Home Relief, the welfare program 
for childless adults, he replaced it with a less-generous Safety Net 
program. He also changed the law to allow recipients to earn some 
money without losing benefits. But Pataki saw to it that unlike many 
states, New York does not apply college or job-training classes toward 
work requirements. Since Pataki took office, New York's welfare rolls 
have shrunk by 570,000 people. Much of the drop has occurred because 
local governments, armed with changes the governor made in state policy, 
have become more aggressive about cutting off benefits and denying 
new benefits. EDUCATION No area offers a sharper contrast between 
the two halves of Pataki's term. In 1995 and 1996, he attempted to 
cut state aid to schools, but in the last two years, following the 
legislature's lead, he agreed to increases. He also agreed to Democrats' 
plans to sharply increase spending on school construction, expand 
kindergarten and pre-kindergarten programs, and reduce elementary 
class sizes. At the college level, Pataki raised tuition at the State 
and City Universities by 30 percent in 1995, and lowered financial 
aid. He proposed further tuition increases in 1996 and 1997, which 
were beaten back by the legislature. And he sharply cut aid to public 
colleges, forcing them to cut teaching staffs. But this year, the 
governor embarked on a $3 billion, six-year capital program for public 
colleges. He also played a major role in the City University's decision 
this year to end open admissions. HEALTH CARE Pataki's term began 
with pitched battles with health care advocates, but he has won over 
many of them as his policies have evolved. In his first three years, 
he proposed sharp reductions in Medicaid, the health insurance program 
for the poor, cuts that health care advocates said would bankrupt 
hospitals. He also tried, without success, to eliminate the state's 
AIDS research institute. The legislature refused most of the cuts, 
but there were significant reductions in Medicaid. This year, for 
the first time, Pataki did not propose serious cuts in health care. 
The governor says his proudest achievement in health care was ending 
state regulation of hospital prices, which he says will promote competition 
and innovation. Again, opponents in the hospital industry predicted 
chaos from his original plan. So Pataki agreed to maintain financing 
for medical schools and care for the poor, and to include money for 
retraining thousands of laid-off hospital workers. Advocates who criticize 
some of the governor's moves praise others, like the enactment of 
one of the nation's most comprehensive ``bill of rights'' for patients 
of health maintenance organizations. In 1996, Pataki greatly expanded 
the state's health care program for poor children. This year, with 
more federal money forthcoming, he initially proposed a bare-bones 
package of benefits, but eventually agreed to a program that children's 
advocates called the most generous in the nation. ENVIRONMENT More 
than any other group of issue advocates, environmentalists are torn 
over Pataki's record. Some praise him, others berate him and others 
do both, often in the same breath. The governor is committed to preserving 
wild lands, and much of his $1.75 billion environmental bond act in 
1996 went to buy wilderness acreage. Pataki has fought for some clean-air 
causes, as well. He has pushed a recalcitrant Metropolitan Transportation 
Authority into buying natural gas-powered buses. And this year he 
signed a law making heavy trucks subject to annual inspections and 
maintenance. He has done significant work on preserving water quality, 
with money from the bond act going to clean lakes and rivers and improve 
sewage treatment. But critics say that when environmental goals run 
up against corporate interests, Pataki goes soft. In policing corporate 
polluters, the Department of Environmental Conservation has cut enforcement 
actions, clean-up orders and fines by about half in the last four 
years. In 1995 and 1996, the Environmental Protection Agency repeatedly 
criticized the department's enforcement of clean-air laws on smokestack 
industry. The administration sharply reduced the much-lauded energy 
conservation program after industries protested helping pay for it. 
And while Pataki has taken steps to develop parks along the Hudson 
River, environmentalists complain that he has not tried to force General 
Electric to remove PCB's it dumped there. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>