<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0109 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sun Microsystems plans to unveil a new version of its Solaris operating 
system Tuesday in an effort to capitalize on Microsoft's delays on 
its newest version of its NT operating system. The new Solaris program, 
which is Sun's version of the Unix operating system for its Sparc-based 
systems and Intel-based servers, has gained increasing market share 
in the Unix world in the last year largely based on the growth of 
the Internet server and enterprise computing market. A number of companies 
are competing for the rapidly growing high-end corporate computing 
market, including I.B.M., Hewlett Packard and Compaq Computer. Microsoft 
is also trying to enter the high-end market with a new version of 
its Windows NT operating system. But Microsoft has been delayed by 
more than a year and there are industry reports that the system continues 
to have problems. Indeed, several analysts said an announcement by 
I.B.M. on Monday that it planned to join forces with Sequent Computer 
and the Santa Cruz Operation, a Unix software company, indicateed 
that the market was moving back toward Unix because of Microsoft's 
delays. ``Clearly the Microsoft marketing machine has made NT a contender,'' 
said Andrew Allison, an industry analyst, ``but nobody in their right 
mind would use NT for critical applications at this point.'' Sun executives 
said they planned to name the newest version of Solaris, which features 
64-bit addressing and as a result can handle vast data sets, Solaris 
7. Acknowledging that this is a significant jump in the company's 
numbering scheme _ the last version was 2.6 _ Sun's officials disputed 
the obvious marketing connotation of the number 7 with respect to 
the next version of Microsoft's Windows NT, which is scheduled to 
be 5.0. Ed Zander, president of Sun Microsystems, said, ``We believe 
we have a three year lead on Microsoft.'' Most industry analysts contend 
that such a figure is optimistic. Yet there is evidence that Sun is 
continuing to pick up market share against all three of its closest 
Unix competitors for large enterprise computer operating systems. 
In the second quarter, Sun grew faster, at 37 percent, than all other 
server vendors except Dell Computer. Sun passed Hewlett-Packard in 
the second quarter to lead the industry in Unix revenues for the first 
time. Zander also said he believed that Microsoft would have significant 
difficulties meeting stability goals necessary for corporate use. 
The current version of NT is reported to have more than 35 million 
lines of code, increasing the chances of software errors that will 
plague developers. By contrast, the version of Solaris scheduled to 
begin shipping on Tuesday will have between 12 million and 13 million 
lines of code. Separately I.B.M., Sequent and the Santa Cruz Operation 
agreed to develop a single software operating system that will control 
computers running both Intel computer chips and I.B.M.'s own non-Intel 
based microprocessors. In addition, the partners said a variety of 
other computer makers will use the new Unix system in their own machines, 
including Unisys, Groupe Bull, Thomson-CSF, Acer and Fujitsu's ICL 
unit. NYT-10-26-98 2314EST 
</TEXT>
</DOC>