<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0553 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Brazilian government introduced a three-year, $80 billion package 
of spending cuts and tax increases Wednesday in an effort to restore 
the country's flagging credibility in world markets and prepare the 
way for a rescue program led by the International Monetary Fund. The 
plan calls for $23.5 billion in savings in 1999, with about $11 billion 
of that coming from tax increases and $7 billion from spending cuts. 
The rest is to come from pension and fundamental financial changes. 
Part of the plan sets up controversial mechanisms to force states 
and municipalities to limit spending. ``The time has come for us to 
make government live within its limits _ with clarity, conscience 
and determination,'' Finance Minister Pedro Malan said Wednesday, 
elaborating on themes that President Fernando Henrique Cardoso raised 
in a televised speech on Tuesday night, bracing Brazilians for the 
austerity measures. ``The time for gradualism is over.'' The blueprint 
was anxiously awaited by investors and U.S. policy-makers who fear 
that the collapse of the country's financial system could set off 
defaults and devaluations across Latin America, worsening a broader 
crisis and threatening stronger economies. Washington's response to 
Brazil's action Wednesday was congratulatory but also cautionary, 
reflecting concerns that the program could flounder when it reaches 
the Brazilian Congress, and some economists said the austerity plan 
and the IMF bailout package might not be sufficient to pull Brazil 
out of its financial crisis. Investors reacted warily, and said the 
measures did not go as far as they hoped in making structural changes 
to permanently reduce Brazil's burgeoning budget deficit, which is 
now running at 7 percent of the gross national product. In Sao Paulo, 
Brazil's financial center, the benchmark stock index fell 42.63 points, 
or five-eighths of a percent, to 6,826.51. Jorge Mariscal, chief investment 
strategist for Latin America of Goldman, Sachs &AMP; Co., said, ``It's 
a step in the right direction, but if you think of Brazil climbing 
a wall of disbelief, this is just a few inches up.'' Brazil, the giant 
of South America, with half the continent's population and the world's 
ninth-largest economy, has been the focus of world attention since 
the collapse in Russian finances two months ago. Interest rates for 
Brazilian debt doubled, and the country began using up roughly $30 
billion in foreign reserves. As the country moved into recession, 
fears have grown of a financial collapse here, setting off devaluations 
and defaults elsewhere in Latin America and heightening risks to the 
U.S. economy. The International Monetary Fund, along with other lending 
agencies, and officials in Washington have been preparing a safety 
net for Brazil of at least $30 billion, with President Clinton prepared 
to commit American taxpayer dollars as part of a package of direct 
aid from the Group of Seven industrial nations. In a statement after 
the plan was detailed Wednesday, Secretary of the Treasury Robert 
Rubin said, ``It is essential that Brazil implement its program promptly 
and convincingly.'' That message was reinforced, a White House official 
said, in a brief conversation between Clinton and Cardoso. Clinton, 
the official said, was returning a call Cardoso placed several days 
ago to congratulate the American president on the Middle East agreement, 
but Clinton's underlying message was that Brazil had to act quickly. 
U.S. officials have made no secret of their exasperation at Brazil's 
slowness to act, leaving the country vulnerable, in their view, to 
another market upheaval. Clinton, though, reportedly made no reference 
to an American contribution to an IMF-led rescue package. Brazilian 
officials said they would travel to Washington to discuss the plan 
with IMF officials by next week. On Wednesday, a spokesman for the 
fund said the plan represented ``important progress in the implementation 
of Brazil's stabilization and reform program, which will be supported 
by the IMF and other members of the international community.'' Party 
leaders of Cardoso's governing coalition, who learned details of the 
plan over breakfast with Cardoso and Finance Minister Pedro Malan 
Wednesday, did not rule out tinkering with some of the more controversial 
elements of the austerity program, but pledged to maintain the savings 
targets the government would pledge to the IMF. ``The measures are 
bitter measures, but in our view they're extremely necessary,'' said 
Aecio Neves, congressional party leader of the president's Brazilian 
Social Democracy Party, which relies on five allied parties to form 
its majority base. ``The governing coalition has an enormous responsibility 
to overcome this moment of instability,'' said Neves. With the sudden 
sense of urgency and national mission, few in the president's governing 
coalition were willing to openly challenge the austerity package outright. 
But many raised objections to specific elements of the program, and 
said there could be alternatives thrown up for debate in the coming 
weeks. Among the most difficult items to pass, said congressional 
leaders, would be a requirement that retired public-sector workers 
contribute to the social security coffers, with contributions of 11 
to 20 percent of their benefits. The austerity package also increases 
the contribution of public-sector workers to social security, and 
would introduce a minimum age for retirement of civil servants, which 
does not currently exist. The social security system for public workers 
in Brazil is far more generous than that in the United States. Civil 
servants here retire with full salaries, according to time served, 
without regard to their age. ``Reduction of expenses and the increase 
of tax collection, it's an indigestible cocktail for any Congress 
in the world,'' said Geddel Vieira Lima, party leader of the government-allied 
Brazilian Democratic Movement Party. ``But we know the moment we're 
living through, and that we have to show the world we're capable of 
doing what's necessary to address our problems.'' The package also 
calls for the extension of several taxes that were originally passed 
as temporary measures several years ago. Under one, the emergency 
stabilization fund, the federal government impounds 20 percent of 
all taxes destined for state and local governments. The austerity 
package proposes doubling the amount impounded to 40 percent and extending 
the fund, which was to have expired in 1999, to 2006. It will also 
raise the tax on financial transfers to .38 percent from .2 percent. 
Sen. Fernando Bezerra, president of Brazil's National Confederation 
of Industry, said Wednesday that the tax increases would have ``a 
very negative impact on national production.'' But the government 
justified the measures as necessary to relieve a credit crunch and 
bring down interest rates, now running over 40 percent. The austerity 
package also calls on Congress to legally oblige states to limit spending 
on active and retired employees to 60 percent of their budgets, at 
the same time cutting the resources available by impounding taxes. 
It is by no means sure, however, that fiscal discipline can successfully 
be imposed on state and city governments by fiat. Anthony Garotinho, 
elected governor of Rio de Janeiro province in last Sunday's elections, 
said Wednesday, ``Does the government expect us to make miracles?'' 
He noted that Rio, which is seeking a $300 million loan from the federal 
government, is responsible like other states for providing basic services 
including education, health and security. ``I was elected to be a 
governor, not a magician,'' Garotinho said. Mariscal, of Goldman Sachs, 
also called the impoundment fund's extension ``another negative,'' 
and said, ``Brazil is in the mess it's in because it has too much 
debt, too many employees and too high a social security deficit. It's 
an issue of spending too much and lowering the debt, and everything 
else is peripheral.'' Lawrence Goodman, chief economist at Santander 
Investment Securities, called the package ``mildly favorable regarding 
the potential for an ongoing `muddling through' scenario.'' This week 
marks the one-year anniversary of the last package Cardoso announced, 
with much fanfare, just after Thailand's collapse. That package to 
raise $18 billion, hailed as a great show of decisiveness, was largely 
passed by Congress. But the only measures that were implemented involved 
raising taxes, not cutting costs. ``Brazil will remain captive to 
a $300 billion domestic debt that is extraordinarily short-term in 
nature, which is one of the paramount issues coming out of the Asia 
crisis,'' Goodman said. On Thursday, Malan and other government officials 
are to testify about the austerity package before Congress, which 
is scheduled to begin action, starting with social security reform, 
next week. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>