<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
England's High Court on Wednesday ruled in favor of Gen. Augusto Pinochet's 
claim against his arrest here and possible extradition to Spain on 
charges of murder, kidnapping and torture. But the justices ordered 
him detained pending appeals, which are expected next week. The court 
held that the 82-year-old former Chilean president was immune from 
arrest because he was head of state at the time the crimes cited were 
committed. ``The applicant is entitled to immunity as a former sovereign 
from criminal and civil process in the English courts,'' said Lord 
Chief Justice Bingham. Pinochet's supporters viewed Wednesday's decision 
as a significant victory in his battle to escape charges and return 
to Chile, and his opponents reacted to the verdict with tears and 
expressions of dismay and condemnation. Pinochet has been under police 
guard in a London hospital, where he is recovering from back surgery, 
since Oct. 16 on an extradition request from a Spanish judge who wants 
him to try him for the deaths and torture of Spanish citizens during 
the years he ruled Chile. ``The Chilean government is very happy and 
satisfied that the British High Court has recognized Senator Pinochet's 
immunity,'' Deputy Foreign Minister Mariano Fernandez said at Chile's 
embassy in London. Pinochet, the military ruler of Chile from 1973 
to 1990 and commander in chief of its army until earlier this year, 
is a senator for life. Amnesty International issued a statement saying, 
``The High Court has made England a safe haven for dictators and former 
dictators acting in their official capacity as heads of state, undermining 
the absolute nature of the prohibition against torture in international 
law.'' The organization's director, Helen Bamber, said, ``Does this 
mean that men like Saddam Hussein and Slobodan Milosevic are safe 
to swan around the globe in the knowledge that legally they are untouchable 
?'' Crown prosecutors said they would file an appeal by the close 
of business Monday. It will most likely be heard by a panel of senior 
judges, known as law lords, of the House of Lords, and a spokesman 
there promised swift action, because it involves somebody's personal 
liberty, a judicial official in the House of Lords told Reuters. ``We 
can hear that very quickly.'' In the ruling, Lord Bingham said, ``It 
is of course a matter for acute public concern that those who abuse 
sovereign power to commit crimes against humanity should not escape 
trial and appropriate punishment.'' But he said that not even the 
charter establishing the International War Crimes Tribunal at Nuremberg 
in 1945 invalidated the principle ``that one sovereign state will 
not impugn another in relation to its sovereign acts.'' He said he 
was quashing the arrest warrants under which Pinochet had been held 
for the last 12 days, but ``staying'' the order pending appeal. During 
the two days of hearings before the High Court, lawyers for the Crown 
Prosecution Service argued that the general was involved in the deaths 
of ``at least 4,000 people'' and had sent agents to Spain to ``seek 
out and kill'' political opponents. His lawyers countered that if 
the extradition bid succeeded, Queen Elizabeth II could theoretically 
be arrested abroad to face trial for alleged crimes by Britain. A 
bail hearing has been scheduled for Friday that could allow Pinochet 
to move out of the clinic to another location in London. Since the 
general's arrest, Chilean exiles around Europe have moved to bring 
additional murder and rights charges against him. But Wednesday the 
attorney general's office in London said it was turning down applications 
for trials that came from two lawyers representing alleged victims 
of the dictator's regime. The action effectively bars any prosecution 
of Pinochet in Britain. French, Swedish and Swiss judicial authorities 
have said in recent days that they intend to join Spain in pressing 
for Gen. Pinochet's extradition, but there was no word in London on 
the status of those petitions or any reaction from British judicial 
officials. Geneva's public prosecutor, Bernard Bertossa, said Wednesday 
night that he was ``shocked'' by the British ruling and added, ``If 
we want to fight sincerely against genocidal behavior, one cannot 
invoke the immunity of heads of state.'' Under those terms, he contended, 
``Hitler would get immunity.'' There was no immediate reaction from 
Judge Baltasar Garzon, the Spanish investigating magistrate who is 
looking into atrocities committed during Latin America's ``dirty wars'' 
of the 1970s and 1980s and who first obtained Pinochet's arrest in 
Britain. The judge is trying to establish an important legal precedent, 
and in the past decade a growing body of international law has made 
it somewhat easier to reach across borders to try people accused of 
``crimes against humanity.'' There is a war crimes tribunal in The 
Hague especially for the former Yugoslavia. And a number of countries 
have established laws giving them jurisdiction to prosecute war criminals. 
These include Germany, Canada, Sweden, the Netherlands and Spain. 
Some countries have used such laws for crimes committed in Rwanda 
and Bosnia. The British have said from the outset said the matter 
was one for the judiciary and not the government, and Prime Minister 
Tony Blair on Wednesday faced down criticism from opposition Conservatives 
during question time in the House of Commons. ``The judicial process 
has not involved the government issuing warrants for arrest,'' he 
said. ``That is done by the Spanish authorities through Interpol to 
the British magistrates, who then take it from there.'' Last week, 
former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher protested the arrest and said 
Britain should let Pinochet return to Chile. Wednesday, Sir Norman 
Fowler, the Conservative home affairs spokesman, told the Commons 
that ``The government is entirely responsible for the mess it has 
created. The Lord Chief Justice of England has now found that the 
government did not even know the meaning of diplomatic immunity.'' 
Ramon de Miguel, Spain's secretary of state for foreign affairs, told 
reporters at the parliament building in Madrid that his government 
would honor the ruling. It was one, he said, ``that was made by the 
British judges. The government has profound respect for the institutions 
and we have nothing more to say.'' There were scuffles outside the 
London Clinic when, shortly after the decision, the general's wife, 
Lucia, his two daughters, a son and a group of right-wing Chilean 
legislators arrived to visit. Since the arrest, the street outside 
the building has often been filled with demonstrators, many of them 
Chilean exiles who say that relatives and friends died because of 
government oppression during the Pinochet years. A self-declared Anglophile 
who supported the British in their 1982 war against Argentina in the 
Falkland Islands, Pinochet has made a number of visits to Britain 
in recent years without incident. He arrived this time Sept. 21 and 
was treated as a VIP by the Foreign Office. He had drinks with Baroness 
Thatcher at her Belgravia home Oct. 5 and gave a long interview to 
The New Yorker magazine in which he talked of his love of Britain. 
Pinochet had suffered back pains during the `17-hour flight from Santiago 
and a doctor he consulted recommended urgent surgery. He had the operation 
Oct. 9. A Chilean air force ambulance plane is at the ready at a Royal 
Air Force base in Oxfordshire to transport Pinochet home. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>