<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0534 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Thursday, Oct. 29: The 
race for New York state attorney general this year involves two flawed 
candidates, and the temptation is to skip an endorsement for either 
the incumbent Republican, Dennis Vacco, or his Democratic opponent, 
Eliot Spitzer. Spitzer has misled the public about how his father's 
wealth was used to support $8.9 million in loans that financed his 
campaigns in 1994 and 1998. His conduct may not be illegal, but it 
was clearly designed to circumvent laws that would have limited his 
father's direct contributions to the campaign. In normal circumstances, 
Spitzer's evasions would have made it impossible to endorse him for 
the state's top legal position. But the voters must choose, and so 
must we. We endorse Spitzer because Vacco's performance and his key 
policy positions make him an even worse choice. In only four years 
Vacco has turned an important office with a distinguished public-service 
tradition into a patronage mill known for taking suspect contributions 
and for his mixed record on such key issues as women's right to abortion. 
From the start Vacco sent a message of intolerance by rescinding a 
longstanding executive order banning discrimination against gay and 
lesbian workers in his office. As his chief lieutenant he installed 
someone who had repeatedly failed the bar examination and then purged 
scores of experienced attorneys to make way for politically connected 
new hires. Spitzer, for all his dishonesty on campaign funding, does 
offer the prospect of an attorney general who will not be hobbled 
by ideology. That has been a problem in Vacco's career. As a U.S. 
attorney in Buffalo, Vacco, who is personally opposed to abortion, 
resisted enforcing a court order against abortion protesters blocking 
a clinic entrance. This led a federal judge to remove him from the 
case. As attorney general, Vacco did pursue a case brought by his 
predecessor and won a Supreme Court ruling upholding a new Federal 
law protecting clinic access. But he can hardly be relied upon to 
defend abortion rights in the future, having dismantled the team of 
senior attorneys who worked on the issue under his predecessors. Moreover, 
he has not been vigorous about pursuing litigation to protect the 
environment or civil rights. His late entry into the states' lawsuit 
against the tobacco industry cannot erase his embarrassing comment 
two years earlier likening such an action to suing the dairy industry 
to get money to treat people with high cholesterol. By contrast, Spitzer 
has promised a politically moderate approach that puts the public 
interest ahead of rigid philosophy and special-interest contributors. 
Vacco's acceptance of suspiciously timed contributions from people 
and companies his office is investigating, and his bad habit of raising 
money from those working in his office, shows a broad disdain for 
ethics. He has not been a force for reforming the New York campaign 
finance laws that encourage the rewarding of regulatory breaks to 
political contributors. None of that, however, can excuse Spitzer's 
deception about his father's role in an ostensibly self-financed campaign. 
Our endorsement goes to him with the expectation that he will return 
the attorney general's office to a tradition of professionalism and 
bipartisanship and that he will be driven to make amends for his campaign 
trickery by leading the fight for new campaign finance legislation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>