<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0280 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A top Chinese missile scientist who has lived in the United States 
since 1989 is in prison in China awaiting trial on a charge of revealing 
state secrets, say colleagues at Stanford University, where he was 
a research associate. The scientist, Hua Di, 62, was arrested in January 
during his first trip home in nine years. Earlier this decade, he 
was charged in absentia with divulging secrets in some of his writings 
in the United States on Chinese military issues. But in a meeting 
in Hong Kong last October, Chinese security officials assured him 
that if he visited China he would not face arrest, Hua told friends 
before he left for Beijing on Dec. 31. On Jan. 6 he was arrested, 
and in February he was charged with divulging state secrets. The American 
Embassy in Beijing said Wednesday that it had raised the issue with 
China on behalf of Hua, who is a permanent resident of the United 
States and is seeking citizenship but remains a Chinese citizen. Stanford 
officials have also argued on Hua's behalf in letters to President 
Jiang Zemin. Colleagues at the university's Center for International 
Security and Cooperation, where Hua worked, say they are deeply concerned 
about his health. Shortly before leaving for Beijing he had surgery 
for a rare form of male breast cancer, and he was to receive chemotherapy 
on his return to California last winter. The Chinese government has 
not commented publicly on the case. Until recently not even relatives 
were allowed to see him, and family members who have since had contact 
are not speaking to the press. He has a lawyer, who has also declined 
to speak to the press. Some people familiar with the case expect it 
to go to trial in the coming weeks. Officials at Stanford pressed 
his case quietly in hopes that he would be released. But this week, 
newspapers in Hong Kong and Taiwan reported on his arrest. A child 
of China's Communist elite, Hua was educated in Moscow, spent decades 
as a leading military scientist and in 1978 was given a national prize 
for his contributions to China's ballistic missile and satellite programs. 
To an unusual degree, Hua was allowed to maintain contacts with experts 
abroad, and in 1980 and 1981 he spent more than a year in the United 
States at the University of Washington and then at Stanford. In 1986, 
senior Chinese officials authorized Hua to provide advice to an American 
researcher on Chinese defense, John W. Lewis, who was writing books 
on China's nuclear and missile programs, Lewis said in an interview 
Wednesday. Lewis is the former director of the Center for International 
Security and Cooperation and has worked closely with Hua for the last 
nine years. The center has often served as an unofficial conduit for 
sharing information between the Chinese and American militaries. In 
this shadowy world of trading in semipublic defense information, Hua 
became a major player, often saying he had special contacts and information 
on Chinese programs, American defense experts said. In June 1989, 
during China's crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen 
Square, Hua was attending a conference in the Soviet Union. He decided 
not to return to China _ he later said he had played a role in the 
democracy movement and feared arrest _ and moved to California when 
offered a position at the Stanford research center. In the early 1990s 
at Stanford, Hua wrote or was co-author of articles on the development 
of China's ballistic missiles and other sensitive topics. He collaborated 
with Lewis, for example, on an unusually detailed account of China's 
submarine nuclear missile program, said to be one of the items now 
held against him. Lewis said Wednesday that Hua had never provided 
vital information that was not already in the public domain or that 
he had not been previously authorized to share. At two international 
conferences in 1993, Hua had friendly meetings with top officials 
from China's military industries, Lewis said. ``There was no sense 
that he'd done anything wrong,'' he said. For personal reasons, Hua 
wanted to return home, and late last year he sought the October meeting 
in Hong Kong with Chinese officials to see what his prospects were. 
He returned to Stanford confident that he would have no problem, say 
friends who spoke with him before his departure for Beijing. Hua's 
arrest comes at a time when the Chinese military establishment is 
in some turmoil, with Jiang forcing out formerly powerful officers 
and attacking high-level corruption and outside business activities. 
It could be, speculated one American defense expert who spoke on condition 
of anonymity, that Hua's former contacts or protectors in the military 
or defense industry here have lost power. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>