<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0451 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hundreds of constitutional scholars and historians, and the man who 
presided over the Watergate impeachment proceedings, on Thursday criticized 
the inquiry into President Clinton, as House Democrats and Republicans 
became entangled in a request for more documents. Democrats asked 
Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr for material they said could shed 
light on Starr's decision to expand his inquiry to Clinton's affair 
with Monica Lewinsky, and on whether audiotapes that Linda Tripp provided 
to Starr had been altered. But one of Starr's top aides rebuffed them, 
Democrats said, because House Judiciary Committee Chairman Henry Hyde 
had refused to sign the request, a prerequisite for the independent 
counsel to consider the matter. Wednesday's tempest was probably rendered 
moot by late afternoon, however, when Hyde reversed course and agreed 
to cooperate with the panel's ranking Democrat, Rep. John Conyers 
of Michigan. ``In light of Judge Starr's response to Mr. Conyers, 
Chairman Hyde will work with Mr. Conyers to submit a bipartisan request,'' 
said committee spokeswoman Nicole Nason. By Wednesday evening, Starr's 
office had released a letter it sent to Conyers late Wednesday. Signed 
by Deputy Independent Counsel Robert Bittman, the letter disputed 
the Democrats' account. It stated that the office had not had enough 
time to respond to Conyers' request, and was continuing to evaluate 
the possible release of materials to the committee. Bittman asked 
to have until Monday to respond, although he cautioned that many of 
the materials requested were sensitive or still under active investigation. 
Nevertheless, for insurance, Conyers asked Attorney General Janet 
Reno to provide the committee with ``any motion, supporting materials, 
evidentiary materials or notes'' that Starr submitted to Reno on Jan. 
16 to support his request to broaden his investigation. With elections 
that could fuel or dampen Republicans' appetite for impeachment less 
than a week away, the maneuvering by Republicans and Democrats reflected 
how they are gearing up for the end game. The confusing and contentious 
exchange came as more than 200 constitutional scholars said the accusations 
against Clinton did not warrant impeachment. Among those signing a 
petition circulated on the Internet were well-known legal experts 
like Ronald Dworkin of New York University and Laurence Tribe of Harvard 
University, as well as conservative-leaning academics like Stephen 
Macedo of Syracuse University and Douglas Laycock of the University 
of Texas. The scholars' sentiment was echoed by former Rep. Peter 
Rodino, D-N.J., who as chairman of the House Judiciary Committee in 
1974 presided over the impeachment proceedings against President Richard 
M. Nixon. Rodino, who has said little about the current scandal, told 
a New Jersey television program this week that if no new evidence 
emerged, ``I would say that this does not rise to that level where 
we have to consider it to be a ground to remove from office the president 
of the United States.'' Hyde has repeatedly invoked Rodino, who is 
now 89, as a paragon of fairness, and intentionally patterned the 
committee's procedures after those the House Judiciary Committee adopted 
for the Watergate proceedings. In other academic quarters, more than 
400 historians, including Stephen Ambrose and Arthur M. Schlesinger 
Jr., released a statement Wednesday calling on the public to oppose 
the impeachment process. ``If carried forward, they will leave the 
presidency permanently disfigured and diminished, at the mercy as 
never before of the caprices of any Congress,'' the statement said. 
Republicans have rescheduled a hearing for Nov. 9 to discuss the history 
of impeachment. But Democrats want the hearing to focus on what constitutes 
an impeachable offense. While lawmakers were home campaigning, that 
did not stop their aides on Capitol Hill from quarreling over details 
about hearings and document requests. Wednesday's disputes stemmed 
from Conyers' request for information that Starr possesses, which 
Democrats say might offer new insights into Starr's inquiry into the 
president's relationship with Ms. Lewinsky. Republicans, however, 
suspect a Democratic fishing expedition. Democrats, for example, want 
the supporting materials that Starr submitted to the three-judge panel 
that oversees the independent counsel, seeking permission to send 
grand jury material to Congress. These applications were made around 
July 2, before it was clear that Clinton or Ms. Lewinsky would testify 
before a grand jury. The request also sought ``rough notes'' from 
any interview of a witness whose testimony was included in Starr's 
report. It asked for FBI reports relating to the independent counsel's 
conclusion that some of the audiotapes Ms. Tripp made of conversations 
between her and Ms. Lewinsky were doctored. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>