<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0332 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A senior adviser to Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi said in an interview 
Wednesday that the government was highly likely to adopt a plan to 
issue gift certificates in an effort to spur consumer spending. Although 
widely regarded here as little more than a gimmick, the plan is being 
closely watched as a measure of the Obuchi administration's political 
desperation. Despite opposition from the Finance Ministry, corporate 
executives and economists, the government may well agree to it as 
the price for bolstering its shaky support in Parliament. Obuchi's 
Liberal Democratic Party lacks a majority in the Upper House, a deficit 
that the opposition used skillfully to shape major sections of banking 
legislation to its liking and otherwise make trouble for the governing 
party. The gift certificates are a brainchild of Komeito and Heiwa 
Keikaku, opposition parties heavily influenced by a lay Buddhist organization, 
Soka Gakkai. The parties have been flirting with an alliance with 
the Liberal Democrats for a few weeks. Komeito has 24 members in the 
Upper House, which would give Obuchi the minimum number of votes, 
127, needed to secure a majority there. The government has been urgently 
seeking a way to beef up its parliamentary power before the beginning 
of the next session, which could start at the end of next month. The 
governing party, riven with dissension after its embarrassing failure 
to secure a majority in the Upper House elections in July, is concerned 
that it might be unable to derail a motion of no-confidence in the 
next session. Komeito and Heiwa Keikaku, effectively the Upper and 
Lower House branches of the same party, contend that the gift certificates 
would be more effective than tax cuts in having consumers spend, because 
they could not tuck the vouchers into savings accounts. ``I think 
probably the government will have to do it as a matter of political 
agreement, although I'm not really for the idea,'' Obuchi's chief 
adviser on taxes, Hiroshi Kato, said. Kato said he had advised Obuchi 
against the plan, but did not give his opinion much chance of swaying 
the prime minister. ``In order to pass legislation, if they ally with 
the parties that have proposed this plan, then it will be easier to 
pass bills,'' he said. ``So in order to gain an ally in the Upper 
House it's possible the party will do this.'' A spokesman for the 
prime minister, Akitaka Saiki, said any speculation about a deal between 
the Liberal Democrats and Komeito was premature, although he conceded 
that the plan was under ``very serious consideration.'' Saiki said 
that there were numerous logistical and practical question marks hanging 
over the gift-certificate plan and that although a political agreement 
to support the plan might be reached, it might prove to be impossible 
to put into effect. In addition to ``making nice'' to Komeito, the 
Liberal Democrats have been seeking to repair relations with Ichiro 
Ozawa, a former party member who leads the opposition Liberal Party. 
Ozawa's career seemed over last year, when the opposition party he 
had previously led disbanded in a flurry of name-calling and acrimony. 
But he now finds himself in the catbird seat, being wooed most assiduously 
by senior Liberal Democrats, including the powerful chief cabinet 
secretary, Hiromi Nonaka. Nonaka recently met with senior Liberal 
Party members and announced that he had ``started to feel that we 
have the same hometown and the same viewpoint.'' The gift certificates 
would be part of a $169 billion package, the second this fiscal year. 
Komeito says that the previous plan proved useless in provoking increased 
spending despite $34 billion in tax cuts because taxpayers merely 
put away the additional money. Komeito has suggested that each certificate 
have a value of $254. Economists have estimated that if the consumers 
spent the certificates as they are supposed to, it would give an increase 
to the economy of less than 1 percent. The Finance Ministry, which 
strongly opposes the Komeito proposal, contends that consumers can 
also pocket the value of the gift certificates by using them to buy 
things like food and putting the cash that they would have otherwise 
spent into savings. ``We cannot measure or foresee the effect of this 
voucher,'' an official in the ministry's budget bureau said Wednesday. 
``People will use this voucher. But it's not at all clear whether 
it will lead to more spending.'' The ministry has also raised questions 
about the potential for forgery, who will receive the certificates, 
where they can be spent and how much the program would cost. The government 
would have to pay for printing, distribution and redemption at the 
very least, the budget official said. ``If it can only be used in 
a limited number or category of shops, then it raises constitutional 
issues of the violation of equality,'' he said. ``But if it can be 
used for anything any place, then it becomes just like money and has 
no significance.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>