<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981028.0216 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite recent stock market fluctuations _ or maybe because of them 
_ investments remain hot cocktail chatter as boomers fret about how 
to swing a comfy retirement. The money has to go somewhere, and under 
the mattress won't do. So how much do you need, and what investments 
should you choose to be able to retire to that cottage on Martha's 
Vineyard? While a whole industry of investment firms and financial 
planners is ready to counsel you, often for a hefty fee, budget-minded 
do-it-yourselfers are turning to inexpensive software that assesses 
their investments, tell them how much money they will need in retirement 
and give guidelines on investing to meet that goal. At their best, 
these programs are simple, harvesting data from an electronic checkbook 
to give you an accurate thumbnail appraisal of saving and spending 
habits that will put you on track for that beach house. At their worst, 
they resemble an Internal Revenue Service audit. Your experience with 
them depends largely on your record keeping and financial acumen. 
If you already have a program like Quicken or Microsoft Money and 
keep detailed records, projecting your future is a snap. If you keep 
old bills in a shoebox, you're in for many hours of data entry. If 
you let your records pile up because you don't know how to organize 
your finances, however, you might consider using these programs to 
help you turn that pile of receipts into a sensible balance sheet. 
I looked at the 20 best-selling financial-planning CD-ROMs and found 
three comprehensive planners. These programs prod you through a detailed 
questionnaire to determine your long-term financial status. They were 
Quicken Financial Planner, which can be purchased separately or as 
part of the popular Quicken Suite (Quicken products are the top-selling 
planners); Microsoft's Lifetime Planner, which is integrated in the 
MS Money Financial Suite, and Plan Retirement Quick &AMP; Easy from 
Individual Software, which also makes Retire Ready Deluxe, which has 
more features but was not a top 20 seller. And T.Rowe Price offers 
a planner you can get by mail on CD-ROM or download. The plans all 
forecast and suggest investments based on several factors, like how 
fast you want your money to grow, how much risk you want to take and 
how various investments (stocks, bonds, funds) have performed over 
time. Their pie charts telling you how to divide your investments 
can be found in any personal finance book, and even in many financial 
firms' brochures. These cyberplanners will not replace a flesh-and-blood 
financial planner completely, and most offer a disclaimer saying so. 
To test these programs, I asked Kevin Condon, a partner in Baltimore-Washington 
Financial Advisors Inc., which offers traditional financial planning 
services, to feed the real financial dossier of a family his company 
advises into these programs and compare the results. Condon renamed 
the family members John, Jane and Lisa Doe. John, 56, an engineer, 
earns $51,000 a year and plans to retire in seven years. Jane, 50, 
makes $65,000. She retires in eight years with a pension of $38,000 
a year and no Social Security because she's a federal employee. Lisa, 
15, is in a private school that costs $16,500 a year and plans to 
attend a private college costing about $30,000 a year. The Does are 
very good savers and have invested $360,000 in 401(k) plans and about 
$267,000 in mutual funds, individual stocks and bonds and a thrift 
savings plan. They would like to spend $50,000 next year on a wish 
list of items. Expenses are low, they carry little debt, and they 
put aside more than $10,000 a year. Their planners say the Does will 
be able to pay for Lisa's education and manage a very comfortable 
retirement. Condon's calculations assume a assuming 3 percent inflation, 
an 8 percent return on investments before retirement and a 6 percent 
return after retirement, and adjust the tax each year as income changes 
(the overall average tax is 25 percent). When Ms. Doe dies, (statistics 
say that she will outlive her husband), she will leave Lisa an investment 
portfolio of $3.79 million. Ah, but what do the cyberplanners say? 
QUICKEN FINANCIAL PLANNER (Intuit, $39.95 for Planner alone or $89.95 
for Quicken Suite 99 after $20 upgrade rebate; Windows 95, 98 and 
NT.) Part of the power of Quicken's planner is how well it takes information 
from your checkbook to determine your spending and saving habits _ 
provided you already use Quicken's software. The planner will not 
work with other companies' checkbook files, unless you have a full-featured 
Quicken program, which will convert them to a Quicken file first. 
Quicken's financial planner is a straightforward workbook with a lot 
of text that is not always easy to follow. The printed 34-page users' 
guide is clearer, telling you what to enter at each step, as well 
as what items should wait for later steps. We entered some income 
too early and had to go back and take it out. For those curious about 
things like why inflation is set at 3 percent, an Expert Advise button 
leads you to information from the financial columnist Jane Bryant 
Quinn. To understand how changing your inflation number will affect 
your outcome, there is a help button. Of all of the planners, this 
one moves along the most methodically. It specifically asked about 
a pension, which Jane Doe will receive. But it stumbled over the fact 
that Ms. Doe, who does not pay Social Security tax, is ineligible 
for Social Security benefits at retirement. The program insisted on 
automatically calculating a Social Security benefit for her. We had 
to split John Doe's benefit between and Ms. Doe and reduce the amount 
by 33 percent to get the numbers right. ``You have to jury rig it 
to take out her Social Security,'' said Kevin Condon, our adviser 
for this project. ``No government employees need apply.'' In planning 
college for Lisa, Quicken offers detailed expenses for more than 5,000 
schools, using data provided by the College Board, a nonprofit education 
association. We clicked on a school and got the costs for tuition, 
books and living expenses. Condon liked the program's ``what if'' 
capability, watching how the charts in the final report changed when 
we fine-tuned the information entered. ``That's a great one, it modifies 
the whole thing,'' he said. How did the Does make out? Quicken assumes 
3 percent inflation (the long-term historical average), an 8 percent 
return on investments before retirement and 6 percent after retirement, 
with a 17 percent tax rate. (We did change one assumption by lengthening 
Ms. Doe's life span by 10 years, to 95 years from 85.) When Ms. Doe, 
the surviving spouse, dies, she leaves $10.66 million. Congratulations, 
Lisa, you're rich. But is she that rich? Quicken's (and the other 
cyberplanners') calculation was $7 million higher than that of the 
flesh-and-blood planners. The discrepancy, Condon's company said, 
stems from a couple of assumptions these electronic planners make. 
One is that all cash left after expenses will be reinvested. Condon's 
group assumes that some of that will be spent and some invested. (They 
use a modest growth rate of 4 percent.) Second, Condon's plan reduces 
the size of investment accounts in the Does' later years so Lisa will 
not get socked by estate taxes, a problem that electronic planners 
didn't take into account. MICROSOFT MONEY FINANCIAL SUITE 99 (Microsoft, 
$64.95 (with $25 rebate through Nov. 30, 1999); Windows 95, 98 or 
NT.) Microsoft has harnessed the power of multimedia for its financial 
planner, which is an annoyance. Actors woodenly talk you through the 
planner features on a ``movie'' tour that is worth skipping. There 
are enough clear prompts as you go through the program itself to help 
you fill out the forms properly. It takes a little time to grasp the 
control button layout on the attractively designed page, but it soon 
becomes clear. Although data entry was clearly explained, the process 
was not very thorough. It never asked about Jane Doe's pension, and 
we had to hunt around to find the right area (``other income'') in 
which to list it. Asking the Help feature, ``Where do I file my pension?'' 
sent us to a different program, the budget planner. But using ``pension'' 
in the keyword search sent us to Other Income, right on target. The 
program also stumbled over a $19,000 revolving loan. It wanted to 
reduce the amount of available principle, even though it should not 
for that type of loan. ``It's trying to amortize your loan and give 
you a tax break you aren't due,'' noted Kevin Condon, our planning 
adviser. MS Money also could not accept the idea that Ms. Doe would 
get no Social Security at retirement, but a Microsoft representative 
said that if we had imported her paycheck information from its checking 
program, it would have spotted the zero contribution and entered it 
accurately. It will also handle Quicken files. The program has a college 
cost estimator that used the same database as Quicken, and it has 
similarly impressive ``what if'' capabilities. In addition, it has 
some nice drop-down work sheets and calculators for tallying costs 
on the spot, and a quiz that determines your risk tolerance to see 
if your expected returns are in line with how much risk you can stand. 
MS Money _ assuming 3 percent inflation, an aggressive 9 percent return 
on investments before retirement and 7 percent after, and a tax rate 
of 19.05 _ says Lisa will be left a whopping $10.69 million. That's 
ahead of the human planners by about the same amount as the other 
cyberplanners. Some glitches we hit in this program might have been 
avoided if we had first used the Microsoft checkbook program and the 
budget planner, which would have spotted, for example, our surplus 
cash and asked us what we wanted to do with it. As it was, we would 
have had to have gone into Tools, then Options, then picked Stop Saving, 
all of which would have required more knowledge than a reporter and 
two professional planners could muster. T.ROWE PRICE RETIREMENT PLANNING 
ANALYZER (T.Rowe Price, $19.95 on CD-ROM or $9.95 downloaded from 
www.troweprice.com; Windows 3.1 or later.) The T.Rowe planner starts 
with a tutorial on why you save, how money grows and how time and 
risk affect investments. A swift tutorial demonstrates how to enter 
numbers and use the controls so you don't need a manual, which is 
a good thing because if you download the software from the Web, there 
isn't one. The program then moves speedily through personal information 
in a simple yet comprehensive way. But even though the planner starts 
out assuming that you don't know what risk is, in the data entry section, 
it expects you to have an understanding of asset classes and know 
an annuity from a 401(k). The program's no-nonsense design is underscored 
by the comments of its expert, Lynn Hopewell, the editor of The Journal 
of Financial Planning. Clicking on advice about choosing life expectancy 
numbers elicits this from Hopewell: ``We could give you fancy charts 
to show your probability of living past various ages. But a simple 
approach will do the job. Just choose 90. There is only a 10 percent 
chance any of us will make it beyond that age.'' That kind of blunt 
commentary has led to the description of the white-bearded Hopewell 
as ``Burl Ives with an attitude.'' This planner did not stumble on 
Jane Doe's lack of Social Security benefits, and it did about as well 
in most other areas as the more complex planners. But it cannot import 
data from your computerized checking files. And even though its price 
is a bargain, you pay for it with a word-from-our-sponsor conclusion 
that divvies your money among T.Rowe Price funds that it recommends. 
The result: T.Rowe assumes a conservative 4 percent inflation but 
an aggressive 9 percent return on investments before retirement and 
a hefty 8 percent return after. The tax rate is 28 percent. But the 
analysis shows that Ms. Doe still leaves a tidy sum to her daughter: 
$10.17 million. PLAN RETIREMENT QUICK AND EASY (Individual Software 
Inc., $19.95, Windows 3.1 and 95) Plan Retirement Quick and Easy lives 
up to its name fairly well, but this no-frills program leaves little 
latitude for temporary but large expenses _ like college costs _ that 
people may need to figure in, even if they mainly have retirement 
on their minds. This program was organized differently than the others. 
It asks you to lump investments into taxable and tax deferred, and 
it expects you to know the difference. It does offer work sheets at 
the click of a button, but while they will help you get organized, 
they still don't help with the taxable vs. tax-deferred question. 
While the program will track two people, presumably married, it will 
not let them retire in different years. Romantic _ but impractical. 
It did not have a provision for insurance, and it was the only program 
whose charts did not register a financial blip (to account for insurance 
benefits and lowered living expenses) at the death of one spouse. 
That said, the results were not very far off of the other planning 
programs. The final $4 million difference is probably the effect of 
the $170,000 for Lisa Doe's tuition, which was not removed from the 
investment kitty. (It would have been possible to remove it as a lump 
sum in the form of a loan. But there was no neat way of deducting 
it year by year. A new version set for release by December will have 
this feature.) The program assumes 4 percent inflation, a 7.5 percent 
return on investments before and after retirement, and an 18 percent 
tax rate before retirement and 14 percent after. Lisa Doe apparently 
had to skip college, but her mom leaves her $14.92 million, a nice 
consolation prize. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>