<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981028.2000.2026 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bumps in the road, that's how a state department spokesman, today 
described the setbacks to implementing last Friday's land-for-peace 
accord between the Israelis and the Palestinians. That agreement committed 
Israel to relinquish another 13% of the West Bank, and the Palestinians 
to come up with a plan to counter terrorism. The latest bump in the 
road is Israeli Benjamin Netanyahu's decision to delay submitting 
the agreement to his cabinet, until the Palestinians submit their 
plan. We go to Jerusalem now for the latest from The World's Richard 
Myron. Outside the Prime Minister's office, right-wing demonstrators 
call for Benjamin Netanyahu to resign. Some of them call Netanyahu 
a traitor for agreeing to give up another 13% of the West Bank to 
the Palestinian authority. Just three years after the assassination 
of Yizhak Rabin, by a right wing Israeli fanatic, these scenes are 
frightening many Israelis. But Netanyahu says that he doesn't feel 
threatened. The people who are actually talking about violence are 
a handful. And I don't really address those kinds of threats. I don't 
take them and consider them. Because, once the leader of a country 
begins to determine his policy based on personal threats, he shouldn't 
lead. Before Yizhak Rabin's murder, some say that extreme right wing 
religious leaders and politicians created an atmosphere of hatred, 
which allowed the assassination to happen. The reactions that I have 
seen are almost identical to those of three years, before the gun 
shots rang out. David Horrowitz the editor of the Jerusalem Reports 
Magazine. I think there is actually an added two elements of exacerbation. 
The first is, that this prime minister, Netanyahu, is the prime minister 
who the right-wing voted into power, to stop the land hand-overs to 
the Palestinians. And therefore the sense of bitterness and betrayal 
is greater. And also, as a consequence of that, I think the sense 
of despair is greater. The extremists among the extreme really know 
that if even Netanyahu is going down that path, then really how are 
they supposed to stop it. And my concern is, it only takes one person 
with a gun. The land-for-peace-deal that Netanyahu agreed to has hit 
its first obstacle. The Prime Minister's delay in calling his cabinet 
together to vote on the accord, because the Palestinians haven't submitted 
a security plan to the Israelis. A senior Israeli official David Bar 
Elan says the Palestinians aren't fulfilling their side of the agreement. 
For us this is one of the most, if not the most important component 
of the agreement. They have not done that. They were supposed to do 
it within a week of the signing. Now, without that, it would be extremely 
difficult to convince the cabinet to pass a decision approving an 
agreement, without knowing that the most important component is indeed 
in. Today, the US State Department said the Palestinians will submit 
that plan by Friday. Marlon Califani is spokesman for Palestinian 
leader Yassar Arafat, blames the Israelis for using delaying tactics. 
PALESTINIAN SPOKESMAN: What we have agreed in Wye was clear, and it 
has been published, and we are planning to deliver what responsibilities 
we have claimed. And we are saying that, this time, we have a witness. 
We have the United States of America, we have the President of the 
United States, we have the Secretary of State, we have all the team, 
the American team. They were there. In the face of strong domestic 
opposition, Jerusalem journalist David Horowitz believes that Israeli 
Prime Minister's tough talk on the Palestinians is motivated by political 
necessity. Well, I think he has been surprise by the extent of the 
opposition, left-wing and right-wing. The people are saying, let's 
do this - in fact, possibly worse than the ones that Rabin in Paris 
were working towards. So, yes, he does have to be seen as standing 
by the terms of even this less rigid deal. He has certainly got to 
look like he's tough, like he is holding Arrafat to his commitments. 
And that, I think, is what we are seeing now. The Wye Plantation Agreement 
comes into force next week. That's when both sides formally begin 
the processes of fulfilling their obligations under the accord. But, 
as the last couple of days have shown. It is not going to be a straight 
forward, or a painless process for the Israelis or the Palestinians. 
For The World, this is Richard Myron reporting, from Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>