<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981028.2000.2410 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If as has been said, you can tell the ideals of a nation by its advertisements, 
then the ideals of America have had a lot to do with getting white 
people to buy lots of stuff. Now-a-days, though, the messages from 
Madison Ave. are changing along with America's ethnic makeup. Marketers 
are working especially hard to woo Hispanic customers. You can see 
their handiwork in Spanish language versions of magazines such as 
People and Glamour. And in the ad campaigns of the big three automakers. 
The World's Jeb Sharpe reports. Sosa's selling power is also visible 
at the tropical markets, where a large red and white Budweiser banner 
flaps outside, congratulating the Dominican slugger in English and 
Spanish. Manager, Maryanne Gallino says the Bud ad makes Spanish speakers 
feel welcome. If you have somebody that doesn't speak English, then 
they see that you speak Spanish. Then it makes a big difference because 
they'll, you know, feel more comfortable to come into your store, 
or to any other store up and down the street, as long as they know 
that they'll be able to communicate. Somebody doesn't know what they're 
talking about, or they don't think that people speak their language, 
then they are just going to just feel a little more shy, probably. 
Up and down the street, it is the same. If you look closely, or if 
you live here, you notice many of the signs are in English and Spanish, 
not only in the small bodegas, but also in the chain stores like Payless 
Shoes, where the new fall styles are touted in both languages. In 
one small shop, big cardboard Cellular-One ads in Spanish only, hang 
from the ceiling. At Mr. V's Discount Auto Parts, manager Eddie Vasayo 
says he is noticing more and more advertising, geared specifically 
to Latino customers, including local car dealers who have been doing 
ads in Spanish. I've seen them starting to advertise with Spanish 
papers, and Spanish radio stations, to get that end of the business. 
Which, you know, Spanish people love to buy cars. They love to dress 
up their cars, like, in my business. So, if you want part of that 
little niche, that little market, you better target them, you know. 
Demographic change is driving the trend toward ethnic marketing. Hispanics 
now make up 11 percent of the US population. Early in the next century, 
they are expected to overtake African-Americans as the country's largest 
minority. That's why national companies, like McDonald's are going 
after Hispanic customers so aggressively. Other national companies 
targeting the Hispanic market with millions of advertising dollars 
include Sears, ATT, MCI, Avon, and the Big three automakers. The operations 
manager of Boston-based Radio Landia is Alberto Vasayo III. His family 
also owns El Mundo, a regional Spanish language newspaper. Vasayo 
says, American companies are just now learning how to tap into the 
lucrative Hispanic market. They are finally realizing that the way 
to reach this market is in its own language. They cannot reach this 
market using main stream and general media. They've got to use specialized 
marketplace, and specialized marketing, and ethnic marketing tactics 
that sometimes are totally different from their general game plan. 
Ethnic marketing means finding out what people are reading, watching, 
and listening to, what they drive, eat, and wear. Where they come 
from, what languages they speak, what images, voices and products 
make them feel at home. Collette Phillips, a native of Antigua who 
runs a Boston-based marketing and consulting company that specializes 
in ethnic advertising, says it's essential to appreciate and play 
to the many different groups of Hispanic consumers. You have to use 
certain pictures with your ads that are representative. Mexicans have 
a distinct look, to people who come from Sante Domingo. People who 
are from Cuba have a different look from people who come from Puerto 
Rico. And within the Hispanic culture, you can have white Hispanics, 
and black Hispanics. But they are all Hispanics. And you have to understand 
region, and the nuance of the language. Phillips says advertisers 
who just simply translate slogans from English will get into trouble. 
Sometimes the literal translation can be offensive to the very people 
you are trying to reach out to. Like Frank Perdue found out when he 
had his, "It takes a tough man to make a tender chicken." And it was 
literally translated into Spanish. And it says it takes a sexually 
aroused man to make a chicken affectionate. So... One of Collette 
Phillips is the super market chain, Stop and Shop. Phillips helps 
Stop and Shop with advertising. But she also stresses the company 
should educate employees about how to market items with special appeal 
to Hispanic customers. In this new Shop and Stop in Jamaica Plain, 
store manager Bill Sumner clearly caters to the neighborhood. We expand 
on items, such as the Maridolfa Pie because it does sell so well in 
this area, because that's what our customers are really looking for. 
Things like that, mangos sell very well here, water coconuts sell 
well, here. Figs, guava sells very well here, tamarillos another Hispanic 
item. The swizzle stick with sugar cane sells well here, people use 
that. It used to be that ethnic advertising expertise was the sole 
realm of independent consultants such as Collette Phillips. Now, even 
traditional big name ad agencies are creating special departments 
to handle the growing demand. But the strategies of ethnic marketing 
are not exactly new. In fact, tobacco companies mastered the art a 
long time ago, according to Collette Phillips. Virginia Slims was 
created for women, the Marlboro man was for the rugged kind of macho 
kind of man. The Joe Camel was definitely targeted to its teenage, 
and the Salem and cool were targeted toward urban, African-American 
people. Here in Jamaica Plain, Alberto Vasayo of Radio Landio thinks 
Boston area companies still have a way to go before they catch up 
to the big national companies that already advertise on his radio 
station. If they don't, he says, they'll pay the price. In the long 
run, it's going to catch up to them, because Hispanics have shown 
to be very loyal. So, who ever usually jumps in first, usually enjoys 
and reaps the benefit. For The World, I'm Jeb Sharpe. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>