<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981028.2000.0640 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well before today's developments, many South African blacks were already 
somewhat skeptical about the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. 
The World's Greg Barrow tells us why, in this report from Suweto. 
Antoinette Sitolea selects a fragrant bunch of whit chrosanthimums 
from the florist at the corner of her street in Soweto. Thank you. 
She is on her way to the cemetery again, to pay her respects at the 
grave of her brother, Hector Peterson, who was shot by police in 1976. 
The name, Hector Peterson, became famous the world over. He was the 
first black student to be killed at the start of what is known as 
the Suweto Uprising. But the truth, about what happened on that fateful 
day, remains untold. And Antoinette is bitter about the lack of progress 
made by the commission set up to uncover the sins of the past. You 
know I really don't know, really why was there a Truth Commission. 
Maybe that is why most of the people are not really happy about the 
Truth Commission. Because I think some of the answers are not there. 
And some, I think it was available for them, but for others, I don't 
think so. The Suweto uprising began as a protest against the implementation 
of Apartheid Education Laws. The divide between black and white communities 
had become a chasm. 20 years later, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
was set up in an attempt to heal such divisions. It demanded cooperation 
from all sections of society. But, according to Antoinnette, as with 
many other things in South Africa, cooperation varied depending on 
the color of your skin. There's something about this reconciliation, 
you know. I don't know how you reconciliate. Because, actually, most 
of the black, really, they are people who can reconcile easily. And 
I think they have already reconciled. Only the white people are not 
interested in us. Mundi Shabeen is a Suweto institution. The bar that 
stayed open even while the black townships burned during the riots 
of the apartheid era. Today it is the haunt of the new black middle 
class, a place where successful businessmen can enjoy a cold beer 
in familiar surroundings. As they reflect on the achievements of the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, a picture emerges of a society 
still divided by race. A lot of people haven't gone into that platform 
to tell the truth. The idea is good, the intention is good, but people, 
most of them, are not telling the truth. You know why it's in South 
Africa today, they think that they are doing blacks a favor by standing 
up and saying, "I killed 10, 20 people." But they are not remorseful. 
They are not feeling any guilt, still about it. They say it with pride, 
and with no conscience at all. There is a perception that the black 
community which suffered most under apartheid has been far more supportive 
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, and that whites have generally 
evaded or obstructed its work. Truth Commissioner Dr. Fasil Rendera 
reluctantly accepts that this has been disappointing. For all this 
two and a half-year period we did get that sense of generosity period 
from the black community. And there wasn't a reciprocal movement from 
the white community to bring about this interaction that we need to 
see in South Africa. Those who have been judged by the Truth Commission 
will soon face the verdict. The commission aimed to lay to rest the 
ghosts of the apartheid past and heal the wounds of a divided nation. 
No one ever expected that to happen over night. And it may still be 
many years before South Africa is truly reconciled with a dark era 
of its history. For The World, this is Greg Barrow, in Suweto. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>