<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981028.2000.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the world. I'm Tony Conn. As its name suggests, the Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission was created to promote justice and harmony, 
in a post-apartheid South Africa. But just one day before the commission, 
known as the TRC, was set to publish a report on all it's finding, 
the talk is more of litigation than reconciliation. This morning, 
it emerged that under threat of legal action, the panel was removing 
parts of the report, alleging that former President F. W. DeKlerk 
new about bombings carried out by security forces during his rule. 
This afternoon, the African National Congress, or ANC, announced that 
it too was threatening court action against the TRC, taking issue 
with certain sections of the report about it. Less than an hour before 
news broke of the ANC's move, Dunnar Ohmar, South Africa's justice 
minister, said there was no question of his party, the ANC, trying 
to bar the report. The difference between DeKlerk on the one hand, 
and the ANC on the other is of course that the ANC has always fought 
for democracy, and will never take the TRC to court. The ANC does 
criticize the commission, but it also respects the commission and 
its independence. And welcomes the report of the BTRC. Joining us 
this now is Mundalae Maccaniow, news editor of the Johannesburg Star. 
Mr. Maccaniow, this is a sorry development it would seem. Why this 
sudden change of heart by the ANC? Well I think the ANC realized, 
after deKlerk was given a repeal by the Truth Commission that, it 
was now going to be the sole focus of the commission. And the sins 
of the other side were not going to be given as much prominence as 
itself. And they could have felt that deKlerk was being given special 
treatment. But, also the ANC -- there is very strong pressure in the 
ANC, and the anger has been building up over the past two or three 
weeks since people in the ANC got to see the report. Basically around 
the fact that the Truth Commission was equating the struggle against 
apartheid to the implementation of apartheid by the old government. 
And they think this is not morally equitable. Are you suggesting that 
if Mr. DeKlerk had not gotten his way, that the ANC would have been 
willing to have had these allegations and charges published? I think 
that people such as Mr. Ohmar, who, I believe, was opposed to this 
move that the ANC had taken, would had probably had the upper hand, 
had deKlerk not received the reprieve that he got today. Now you say 
that this was basically to keep the public from reading about the 
allegations, maybe you could go through them quickly for us. What 
was it that the commission was going to say against Mr. DeKlerk, and 
then against the ANC? The thing about Mr. DeKlerk, that he knew about 
certain bombings of public buildings, which had offices of anti-apartheid 
movements and of trade unions in the 1980's. And on the side of the 
ANC, the report talks about the atrocities committed by the ANC against 
people suspected of being agents of the apartheid government in the 
liberation army camps in exile. It's not so much that that it is concerned 
about, it is the judgment that the Truth Commission has put upon it. 
The ANC believes that these were justifiable acts, in a time of war 
against an evil system. What does this mean, ultimately, do you think 
for the work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission itself, and 
let me put the emphasis here on "Reconciliation". Well it really taints 
the whole process now. Because the ANC was the champion of this whole 
process, and the ANC was very prepared to go along with the process 
and actually subject itself to the same kind of scrutiny as the government. 
Now, at the final hour, really discovers that the TLC has actually 
done exactly that. Then it takes a different view of it. Hopefully, 
people will work through it. And, as Bishop Tutu was saying, that 
we should not get away, as well as President Mandella's office have 
been saying. That we should not get away from the fact that this whole 
process is a reconciliation and nation-building process. And they 
are pressuring all the parties to see it in that way, and not as a 
vindictive process. Mundelae Maccaniow, News Editor of the Johannesburg 
Star in South Africa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>