<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981028.2000.0915 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The saga of former Chilean ruler, Augusto Pinochet took a dramatic 
and perhaps decisive turn, today. 12 days after British police arrested 
Pinochet in his bed at a London hospital, the high court ruled that 
as a former head of state, he is entitled to immunity. A Spanish magistrate 
is seeking Pinochet's extradition to face charges of murder, kidnapping, 
and torturing political opponents during his 17-year rule. The World's 
Allen Dow has the latest. I believe he is not going on a plane today, 
yes. One day more for him being arrested, is one day more victory 
for democracy, is one day more victory for his victims. That is why 
we are so pleased, today, that he is not going to take a plane today. 
He might take a plane one of these days, but at least one more hour 
is ours. The reality is, this is a victory for Augusto Pinochet. Three 
judges at Britain's highest court ruled, unanimously, that British 
police should never have arrested the former dictator. Chile's Deputy 
Foreign Minister, Marianno Fernandez welcomed the ruling. The Chilean 
government is very satisfied with the unanimous decision issued today 
by the high court of London. We have a democracy in full development, 
we have many problems, we have solved a lot of problems. But we like 
very much to finish in our territory, in our country, with our own 
problem. The British government has tried to keep its distance during 
this affair, preferring to leave Pinochet's fate to the courts. But, 
now the government is involved, because British prosecutors are asking 
the House of Lords to overturn the court's ruling. I must say, I find 
the judgment rather interesting, in some ways bazarre. Jeremy Corbin 
is a British member of Parliament, in the ruling Labor Party. He says 
the judges have made a bad call. Well if they are saying that Pinochet 
must not answer in British courts for crimes committed during his 
time as president, because he was a sovereign head of state, then 
does that also apply to Sadaam Hussein, does it apply to Pol Pot? 
Who does it not apply to. It seems to me that there is a rather dangerous 
road being traveled here. Pinochet's opponents, like Vincenzo Allegrio 
Chairman of the National Association of Chileans in exile agrees. 
He says, the will of the international community is being ignored. 
There aren't international conventions against mass murderers, against 
crimes against humanity, when those conventions have priority. It 
should have priority and will overrule other considerations. But when 
there is mass murder, when there is a policy of torture, then, I don't 
think that is guilty, is it? But, even Allegrio admits that under 
British law, the court's decision was probably sound. Mark Weller, 
a specialist in international law at Cambridge University, says, to 
allow the extradition would have set a dangerous precedent. Well, 
it is the right and a good thing that all states should in principle 
have the right, say, to try someone, like the late Pol Pot, to try 
people like Carrotage and so forth. But these relate to crimes which 
are so grave and outrageous that it is uncontested that all states 
should exercise such powers, in order to dissuade such violations 
in the future. But there are others, which allegedly of similar states, 
say the launching of an aggressive war. The United States President 
or the British Prime Minister might find themselves indicted by a 
Libyan court, or perhaps by Yugoslavian court for such activities. 
The British House of Lords could deliver its ruling as early as next 
week. If it upholds the high court's decision, General Pinochet could 
soon be winging his way home on board a Chilean military jet. For 
the World, I'm Allen Dow in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>