<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981028.2000.1257 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the world, I'm Tony Conn. In an interview being broadcast 
on Cuban state television, this week, President Fidel Castro took 
a caution approach with relations with the United States. When asked 
if he would consider allowing more US media into Cuba permanently, 
Castro said, "we prefer to go bit by bit. You do not create a climate 
of trust in a day." The Cuban ruler continued to bristle at the American 
embargo against his country, which has been in effect now for 36 years. 
But, recently more cultural exchanges between the two nations have 
been allowed. This month, the New York based Reportorio Espanol traveled 
to Cuba to stage a play written and performed by Cuban-Americans. 
The World's Marriausa Arrias reports from Havana on the play, and 
two of its stars. On a recent hot night, at the Ober de Blanc theater 
in Havana, hundreds of people waited to take their seats, and watch 
the performance of "Reportio", a play about a Cuban family who immigrated 
to the US shortly after the revolution. Actress Anna Margarita Martinez-Casado 
comes from a well known artistic family in Cuba. She began her career 
as a singer on Cuban television. In "Reportio" she plays the character 
of Sonia, one of the women in the family who is being longing for 
Cuba, ever since she left the island in the 1960's, to live in California. 
Anna Margarita, herself, had also longed for Cuba. This is her first 
time here in 38 years. This is really my only opportunity to come 
and see my brothers, which are the only people that is still living 
from a very, very large family that I left here. I have been fighting 
the emotions, controlling them. Because if I let them express what 
they want to express, I cannot work. I cannot step on a stage and 
do a performance. For other actors in the Reportorio Espanol company, 
Cuba is a completely new experience. Roxi Fant is a young actress 
who was born in the US of Cuban parents. She had never been to Cuba 
before. All she knew about this country was what her parents had told 
her. It's difficult, because they left at a time when it was different, 
you know. We're talking, 30 years ago. So, their memories of it are 
not necessarily of the current Cuba. Obviously, they miss it intensely. 
I called my mother the first night, and said, "Mom, it's so beautiful." 
She said, "Yes, it is." In "Reportio", Roxie Fant plays Elysette, 
Sonia's daughter, a young Cuban-American girl who is getting married 
into a Jewish family. Her wedding day ends up being a chaotic family 
reunion, in which Cuba, and the nostalgia they all feel for it, is 
the main theme of conversation. I think the character of Elysette 
is very interesting, because on the outside, she looks like she is 
trying to escape. She is marrying into a Jewish family. In a way that 
is a whole other culture in itself. But, I think the really deepest 
moment for that character is when she says to her brother, "don't 
be jealous of me," after he says, "you're escaping." And she says, 
"I've got everything up here." And she's saying, in her mind, that 
you don't lose those things, you remember the stories, and that is 
a gift. During their performances in Havana, and in the provinces, 
the cast of Reportorio Hispanol have gotten a mixed reception from 
their audiences. I think it is written by somebody who doesn't know 
much about our daily problems here in Cuba. I think it is written 
for an audience in the US. Undoubtedly, people living in exile, always 
miss their homeland and their customs. I like the way the play portrays 
the feelings of those who have been away from their country for so 
long. While is Cuba, both Anna Margarita Martinez and Roxie Fant have 
walked through the streets of Havana many times. One, trying to recapture 
the city she lived and worked in, as an artist. The other, wanting 
to have some sense of her parents homeland. I can hardly recognize 
the place. I mean, the beauty of my country, the smell, the sea, the 
sky. I mean, I have been looking for that for many, many years. This 
trip has been, it has just gone by so fast. That it's hard for me 
to make the connection. I know that I need a personal trip, and I 
need to see my parents home land. That's a whole other trip in itself. 
So there is little doubt in my mind that I will be back soon. The 
opportunity for both Roxie, and Anna Margarita to come back to Cuba 
may arrive soon. The New York based Reportorio Espanol plans to bring 
more productions to Cuba in the near future. For The World, I'm Maria 
Arrias, in Havana. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>