<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981028.2000.2997 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is The World, I'm Tony Conn. We return now to the skies over 
southern France, where you may recall we were looking for clues to 
today's Geography Quiz. It was flying that most inspired French author 
Antoine de Saint-Exupery. His flights inspired nearly all of his books, 
including his most famous story, "The Little Prince". In 1940, Saint-Exupery 
decided to enlist his piloting skill in the allied war effort, and 
signed on as a pilot during World War II. Four years later, during 
a reconnaissance mission, his plane mysteriously disappeared. Now 
the exact location of his death has up until now been a mystery. But, 
perhaps no longer. Recently in the French city of Marseilles -- which 
is by the way, today's Geography Quiz answer -- a fisherman recently 
discovered a bracelet belonging to the French writer, inscribed with 
his name and his wife's name. Phillipe Shatone of the French weekly, 
"Le Vemwa, de Jude" says that the bracelet has been verified to have 
belonged to the author. Apparently, it's believed that Saint-Exupery 
had been given this bracelet by his American publishers. And that 
this is pretty good proof that, yes, somewhere around that area of 
the French coast, we should be able to find the wreckage of his plane. 
Well Phillipe, the French are known for many things, among them a 
certain skepticism. Is there a feeling that this is just too good 
to be true? I think not, basically because one of the most well-known 
underwater exploration companies in the world, Komex believes quite 
seriously that they will be able to find the wreckage of the plane. 
They have dedicated an exploration submarine to look around for the 
wreckage of the plane. They believe they have managed to narrow the 
area down to about 400 square kilometers of sea bed. Which means it 
will probably take some time to cover all that area. But, apparently 
these people are confident that if there is indeed wreckage of an 
American World War II fighter plane down there, they will find it. 
This is very exciting. Do they think that if they do find the plane, 
they might be able to confirm one of the theories. Which was, that 
he was at the time flying a mission against German forces as part 
of an Allied advance. Speculation is that he was shot down, either 
by a German plane, or by German anti-aircraft batteries. But, if you 
wish, there has always been a lot of mystery around his disappearance. 
He was quite a major figure of French literature in the 20th century. 
And so, I think, that many people who enjoyed reading Saint-Exupery's 
books would like to know would like to know what is the final word 
on his disappearance. And I think that if, indeed, they are able to 
discover the wreckage of the plane. And who knows, perhaps some remains 
of his body, then that will bring a final point to that incredible 
adventure that was his life. You know, Phillipe, as part of our quiz 
we have been quoting Antoine de Saint-Exupery. And I certainly was 
very influenced by him, when I read him as a younger fellow. Tell 
me, any lines of his, in particular, stayed with you in your heart? 
Well, I know that I have been reading "The Little Prince" to my son 
for the past two or three weeks. And the line that he prefers is, 
"Draw me a sheep?" And I know that I do not draw very well, but I 
have been trying. And my sheep are getting better, obviously thanks 
to Saint-Exupery. Right, you don't have to clone him either. You can 
just draw them. Although, if you remember the tale, you have got to 
get rid of the horns, because the Little Prince wants a lamb and not 
a ram. And that he also wants the lamb to be happy, and stuff like 
that. It's really a wonderful tale. Phillipe Shatone, editor of in 
Paris. Thanks again. Always a pleasure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>