<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981028.0500.0592 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The general election in the United States is less than a week away. 
And we've been looking at some of the significant races before the 
voters this week on "VOA News Now." Today, a look at the midterm elections 
in the Southeastern United States -- an area that is expected to be 
one of the nation's major battlegrounds, as a weakened Democratic 
Party tries to score some major victories in several key races. VOA's 
Michael Bowman reports from Miami on some of the races, including 
a hotly contested Senate election in North Carolina, where Democrats 
are pinning their hopes on an upset. The Southeast, stretching from 
the Carolinas to Arkansas, and Louisiana to Florida, features six 
governors' races, six U.S. Senate contests, and 84 U.S. House races. 
Although registered Democrats outnumber Republicans, the region is 
considered politically and socially conservative. Sometimes referred 
to as the Bible Belt, the Southeast has a large number of conservative 
Evangelical Christians, many of whom are highly politically active. 
Richard Scherr, a professor of political science at the University 
of Florida says this conservative tendency has turned the region into 
a Republican Party bastion over the last 25 years. The South is now 
the most Republican region in the United States -- I mean, without 
exception. But I think the most important reason, though, is the -- 
were changes in the national Democratic Party. As it became very liberal, 
as it lost its homebase in the South, the Republicans, in the `70s 
and `80s, were very smart in terms of organizing traditional white, 
southern Democrats -- appealing to them very strongly. Professor Scherr 
says the Republican Party is likely to maintain its dominance of the 
Southeast in this year's elections. But he points to North Carolina's 
Senate race as a possible trouble spot for the party. There, opinion 
polls show 45-year-old Democrat John Edwards in a dead heat against 
70-year-old incumbent Republican Lauch Faircloth. Mr. Edwards has 
campaigned on issues such as education reform, protecting the environment, 
and safe-guarding the Social Security system for senior citizens. 
Mr. Faircloth has focused his campaign on trying to link his opponent 
to President Clinton. The President's popularity has never been high 
in North Carolina, and fell even lower in the wake of the sex-and-perjury 
scandal involving former White House Internet Monica Lewinskey. In 
particular, Senator Faircloth accuses John Edwards of supporting a 
Clinton administration proposal that would raise the federal tax on 
tobacco, a major crop in North Carolina. Mr. Edwards denies this, 
while proudly touting his refusal to accept money from out-of-state 
political interests. Political observers say Mr. Edwards presents 
a youthful, energetic image tailor-made for television. Richard Scherr 
of the University of Florida says an Edward victory may revive the 
Democratic Party in the South. In general, incumbents are doing pretty 
well, and especially Republican incumbents. Mr. Faircloth is the -- 
is the exception to that, and he could very well lose this thing. 
If that one goes Democratic, that would be a strong signal to the 
Democrats that they're not as dead as everybody says they are. Elsewhere, 
South Carolina features a hard-fought Senate race between incumbent 
Democrat Ernest Hollings and Republican challenger Bob Englis. Polls 
show that race to be a tossup. The Southeast has two governors races 
of note, In Alabama, polls show incumbent Republican Fobb James trailing 
a Democratic challenger Don Seagalman. In Florid, Republican Jeb Bush 
is favored to beat Democrat Kenneth "Buddy" McKay. One question mark 
in this year's election concerns voter turnout. For months, the conventional 
wisdom has been that Republicans are energized and eager to vote, 
while Democrats are not -- due, in large part, to fallout from the 
Clinton scandal. But political scientist Richard Scherr says the impact 
of the Clinton-Lewinskey affair is far from certain. It's not necessarily 
clear that, you know, it's going to rub off on either Democrats or 
Republicans at the state and local level. This is still a bit of a 
mystery. Political observers say a light voter turnout on November 
3 would help Republicans in most races. On the other hand, a heavy 
turnout is seen as favoring Democrats, signaling success in the party's 
efforts to get their core voters to the polls. Michael Bowman, VOA 
News, Miami. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>