<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981028.1600.1345 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The growth of American suburbs started about 50 years ago and it hasn't 
stopped yet. expansion of the countryside and farmland, many central 
cities and older suburbs are losing both population and business. 
But some cities are fighting back, revitalizing their downtown areas 
and luring people back. Slozi DaHoke discusses these and other urban 
trend with three experts. A preliminary survey of 21 cities around 
the country conducted by the Brookings Institution and the Fanny Mae 
Foundation shows that all but one of them expect their downtown population 
to grow during the next decade. For example, the city of Houston, 
Texas expects its downtown population to quadruple by the year 2010. 
In the same period, Memphis, Tennessee, and Seattle, Washington anticipates 
twice as many downtown residents as they now have. But Robert Lang, 
director of urban and metropolitan research at the Fanny Mae Foundation, 
thinks this trend is relatively limited -- although, he says, a number 
of cities have stopped losing population. There are very few older 
central cities where you can say, "They now have more people than 
they did 10 years ago." There are a few exceptions to this New York 
City, because of immigration, and Los Angeles, because of immigration, 
are growing. Chicago's still declining -- again, albeit slower than 
it might otherwise. Were it not for immigration, some of these cities 
would be suffering some real losses. Robert Lang of the Fanny Mae 
Foundation predicts that even though American cities in general probably 
won't gain population, they will continue to improve the quality of 
life for the people who choose to stay. Places like Cleveland, Ohio 
actually have less people today than they did in 1970. But if you 
go to Cleveland, I think, it's a better city. Philadelphia will never 
be as big as it was in its peak. Certainly, you know, St. Louis, Missouri, 
or Newark, New Jersey really don't need to have the populations they 
did in 1950 or 1960. Those are just historical peaks. And the issues: 
what are you going to do for residents that are going to live there 
now and in the next 10 and 20 years? Bruce Katz, director of the Center 
on Urban and Metropolitan Policy at the Brookings Institution, says 
older suburbs have also lost population to new developments. And retail 
businesses, schools, and entertainment have followed. Part of it has 
to do with the restructuring of the economy. I think part of it has 
to do with consumer preference. Part of it has to do with the push 
factors of failing schools and relatively higher crime within central 
cities and older suburbs. Though a lot of it has to do with our policies 
at the federal and state levels. Transportation spending, which continues 
to build new roads out into the countryside. Home ownership subsidies, 
which, again, encourage people to build bigger and bigger homes on 
bigger and bigger lots and be subsidized for it. The Brookings Institution 
urban specialist says, like the central cities, older suburbs also 
have become pockets of poverty, as the middle-class population has 
left for the outer suburbs. But he says the older suburbs lag behind 
many cities in revitalization efforts. And the remake of these suburbs 
will have to be a major American project in the 21st Century. The 
survey also shows that many people are leaving large cities and their 
suburbs to live in small cities with less crime, less traffic, less 
pollution, and better schools. Denver, Colorado is often cited as 
one of the five best American cities to live in. Denver Mayor Wellington 
Webb says his city is a good place to live because it welcomes families 
with children. If a city doesn't have families with kids, the city's 
going to decline. It's going to decline in population; we've already 
seen that in most of the cities across America. Mayor Webb says families 
with children want safe neighborhoods and good schools. So his policies 
are aimed at cutting down crime rates and improving education. Another 
priority is providing adequate housing in the city. We have a lot 
of additional housing being built. But we also have a lot of new loft-condo 
development downtown, where we've taken a lot of empty building that 
used to house banks. And, because of the bank mergers, many of these 
bank buildings are now vacant. And we've taken our urban renewal subsidy 
money and, as opposed to putting it on one or two large projects, 
we've put it into housing, with the belief that if people live downtown 
-- that housing will increase the population; the housing would drive 
the retail. Mayor Webb says Denver's downtown population has increased 
by some 50,000 since he was first elected in 1991. And he predicts 
this demographic trend of moving to smaller cities with a better quality 
of life will continue. Urban specialists say governments must work 
with developers to try to prevent unhealthy... ... growth and improve 
quality of life in cities as well as in suburbs. I'm Slozi DaHoke. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>