<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981028.1600.3162 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Americans across the country will go to the polls November 3 and, 
along with candidates, they will find a wide variety of issues on 
the ballot: educational initiatives, tax questions, even animal rights. 
For example, Californians are being asked to ban animal poisons and 
body-gripping traps. The Arizona ballot includes an initiative to 
prohibit cock fighting. And a dove hunting repeal issue is before 
the issues in Ohio. Four years ago, Ohio became one of thirty-eight 
states to allow the hunting of Morning Doves. It was a close vote 
in the legislature though, and now, as Bill Cohen reports from the 
state capital, Columbus animal protection groups are trying to end 
the practice. It's a crisp fall day. It's almost dusk. And Nat Voltalini 
tried to hide himself and his shotgun as he sits in a farm field in 
central Ohio. NAT VOLTALINI, buckwheat is what's planted in here. 
They come in here in the mornings and evenings to feed and then we 
just -- hopefully, if we catch the right day, especially this time 
of year, if you catch the right day you'll get some doves coming in 
here. And you get some shots. Voltalini is one of about 50,000 Ohio 
hunters taking advantage of the state's fourth season on Morning Doves. 
An estimated four million of the small gray birds live in Ohio. vvv 
There they go -- right there. Yeah. Voltalini insists he and the dozen 
dove hunters he knows eat the doves that they kill. Usually you'd 
cook them, maybe, like you cook a chicken breast -- something like 
that. I usually saute them in gravy and put them over wild rice. Perhaps 
Mat Voltalini doesn't hunt just for sport, but many other hunters 
do, according to animal rights groups. That's why they gathered thousands 
of petition signatures to put a dove-hunting repeal plan on to the 
ballot. Steve Loy is a former hunter whose campaigning for its passage. 
Many hunters are going out and using this as target practice for duck 
season. Thousands of doves are wounded and not retrieved by hunters. 
And activists claim the birds suffer a horrible death. Tammy Shear 
is a veterinarian. They die from starvation because they can't search 
for food. They die from dehydration because of lack of water. And 
they also die from infection. And I think we need to remember they 
do feel real pain. ANGRY MAN TALKING Tell the extremists it's a bad 
plan. Vote no on Issue 1. This is the official hunter response: eight 
different TV ads running statewide at a cost of nearly two-million 
dollars. They charge that animal rights groups have a radical agenda, 
extending far beyond outlawing dove hunting. One ad warns all hunting 
could eventually be banned, with the state losing two-billion dollars 
in economic activity. Another ad says limits on farms could be next. 
CALM-SOUND MAN SPEAKING Out-of-state extremists want to close down 
our cattle, chicken, and hog farms and close down your right to eat 
meat. Their plan destroys farms and sends food prices through the 
roof. Still another vote no TV commercial predicts if the activists 
win on doves, they'll try to outlaw medical research on animals. But 
animal rights activists say that's nonsense While acknowledging some 
do have a broader animal rights agenda, they stress that's not on 
the ballot. Repeal activist Richie Layman says the fact that the vote 
no ads don't even mention doves proves to her the hunters are worried. 
I'm sure their pollsters told them that if you mention shooting little 
birds, you will lose this campaign. So you better to the scare tactic 
position and throw everything up there and see what sticks -- see 
what frightens people. Rob Saxton heads the hunters group running 
the ads. He says people are too easily swayed by emotional arguments 
over doves. So his side needs to shift the debate to portray animal 
rights groups as extreme. But those animal rights groups charge the 
hunters are extremists, noting there are already nearly 50 other animals 
that can be legally shot. The outcome of this battle is in the hands 
of Ohio voters. Even though repeal backers are being outspent eight-to-one, 
they led by nine points in a recent poll. Meanwhile, hunters groups 
and animal rights groups nationwide are watching this fight closely, 
as similar battles over hunting heat up in other states. I'm Bill 
Cohen in Columbus. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>