<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981028.1600.0567 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And there's another scare regarding Mad Cow Disease in Europe. The 
European Commission is responding by proposing a ban on the export 
of beef from Portugal. VOA's Ron Pimpstein reports from Brussels. 
Portugal is the second country to experience a ban on its beef products 
after British beef was banned from the continent in 1996. The action 
against Britain was taken after experts linked Mad Cow Disease to 
a fatal brain disease in humans. The European Commission says 67 cases 
of Mad Cow Disease have been identified in Portugal this year, including 
two cases of animals born after changes were made in the way the cows 
were fed. The use of animal brain and spinal cords in the feed appeared 
to spread Mad Cow Disease. The European Commission is proposing to 
ban exports of Portuguese beef for nine months and exports of live 
cattle for 18 months. European Union spokesman Jerry Keeli says the 
ban will be lifted after Portuguese authorities make the required 
changes. The Portuguese got -- Look, the Portuguese government, the 
Portuguese authorities, have the primary responsibility to protect 
the hand of the Portuguese consumers. If all of the measures they 
have told you that they're going to put in place, are put in place 
-- and some of them are already in place -- if those are applied effectively, 
then Portuguese meat is safe. But don't ask me to say whether or not 
Portuguese beef is safe, because I won't answer that question because 
I can't answer the question. The Portuguese government has reacted 
with anger at the European Union ban. Agriculture minister Louise 
Capuuo Santosh tells reporters in Lisbon the proposed ban is unfair, 
excessive, and inappropriate. The minister insists it is just as safe 
to eat meat in Portugal as any other country in the European Union. 
He contends failing to discover it in animal feed in Portugal can 
be found in 13 of the Union's 15 states. Portugal's beef exports are 
worth a little short of $10 million and are mostly sent to Spain. 
Britain is still trying to get the European Union to lift the ban 
on its beef exports. A second case in Portugal may make it more difficult 
for British beef producers to get relief. Mr. Keeli says the trend 
makes a ban necessary for nine months. At the time we did the mission 
in May, I think there might have been 30 cases or something. By the 
time the actual report was written up in June, there were almost 60 
cases. I think the figure now is something of the order of 67 cases. 
It's-- the figure is in the notes --- 67 cases to date, which, if 
you extrapolate that on, you're looking at 100 cases this year. So 
the incidence -- the trend in the incidence is bad. Portugal's Azorz 
Islands are excluded from the ban, but the European Commission says 
if the ban is approved on Friday, Portugal will have to treat the 
Azorz as if it was another member state of the European Union when 
it comes to beef and cattle. Ron Pimpstein, VOA news, Brussels. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>