<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981028.0500.0357 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Russian President Boris Yeltsin checked into a Moscow sanitarium 
Monday after canceling a trip to a summit of European Union foreign 
ministers, the president's need for medical attention once again raised 
the question of who's in charge. VOA's Moscow correspondent, Peter 
Hyline, reports while Boris Yeltsin still holds the title of president, 
Prime Minister Yavgeney Primakov has the power and has become Russia's 
defacto leader. It is Yavgeney Primakov traveling to Vienna; Yavgeney 
Primakov going to Washington; Yavgeney Primakov meeting world leaders; 
and, essentially, governing Russia. This is quite a turnabout for 
Mr. Primakov -- an assuming, Soviet-era bureaucrat who, until last 
month, was in charge of Russia's foreign affairs. It is also a marked 
change for President Yeltsin, who, as always, kept a tight grip on 
power and has shown little inclination to share the spotlight during 
his years in the Kremlin. Many Moscow political observers say cancellation 
of Mr. Yeltsin's trip to Vienna signals his effective retirement from 
politics. Analyst Andrey Piankovsky calls it a soft resignation. I 
think that, finally, the Yeltsin entourage, including members of his 
family, reconciled themselves to the inevitable -- to admitting the 
fact that Yelstin can't operate as president fully, and he can't make 
foreign trips. And the best strategy for him now is so-called soft 
resignation -- not to intervene into day-to-day running of the government. 
And let Mr. Primakov to play, practically, the role of vice president. 
It was not an easy decision for President Yeltsin or his family. Kremlin 
sources say his daughter, Tatiana Derachenka, who is also one of his 
closest aides, argued that her father should try to keep up the appearance 
of a healthy and vigorous leader. But on the eve of his Vienna trip, 
it was clear even to his loved ones that Mr. Yeltsin was not up for 
it. The Kremlin's confusion was evident from the fact that first word 
of the cancellation came not from Moscow, but from an Austrian news 
agency. In a revealing statement, Kremlin spokesman D'Mitri Yakushkin 
said, "The President was finally forced to realize his physical weakness 
was detracting from his effectiveness as a leader." Mr. Yakushkin 
said, "The President well understood that everyone would be watching 
how he walks and talks and not on the real meaning of negotiations." 
The spokesman said Mr. Yeltsin had been angry at media coverage of 
his near-collapse earlier this month during a visit to central Asia 
and decided not to risk a similar incident. Analyst Andrey Piankovsky, 
however, says Mr. Yeltsin will probably stay on as president, even 
if only as a figurehead; because his presence suits Russia's political 
establishment. The prevailing feeling is -- feeling already -- of 
compassion for old sick man. Nobody questions the fact that Yeltsin 
can't operate as a president. But most of the people, I think, would 
prefer now this soft resignation. A senior Yeltsin aide, in a television 
interview this week, as much admitted the president's virtual abdication 
of power. Deputy Kremlin Chief of Staff Aliet SooSuyev said, "We have 
arrived at a time of joint responsibility." So with Mr. Yeltsin increasingly 
sick -- he has missed 47 days of work already this year by one count 
-- real power in the Kremlin has effectively shifted to his trusted 
friend, Prime Minister Primakov. Peter Hyline, VOA News, Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>