<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981028.0500.3192 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, growing up in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania composer-performer 
Jeff Luabur absorbed the city's vintage jazz, pop, and soul music. 
Trained on piano, bass, and guitar, Luabur took an interest in electronic 
jazz, rock, and blues. After his first album about 20 years ago, he 
worked with Herb Albert, the Manhattan Transfer, Paula Abdul, U2, 
and many others. As Doug Levine tells us, Jeff Luabur is back in the 
solo spotlight with some smooth jazz on a new album called "Midnight." 
Has Jeff Luabur mellowed? Well, mellow may be too mild a word for 
the music by the man who was once considered one of jazz's funkiest 
players. While his new album "Midnight" will no doubt satisfy smooth 
jazz fans, there are signs that the so-called fusion master still 
has a burning passion for rhythm and soul. The term fusion is such 
a loaded term; it can mean a lot of different things. But I think 
in the `70s, there was amazingly exciting music happening -- between 
groups like, you know, the early things that Herbie was doing, that 
Miles was doing -- Tony Williams "Lifetime,", the West Coast stuff 
with "Tower Power," Matrice Rushin. And I guess, you know, "Tower 
Power" doesn't quite enter into it; they weren't really a fusion band. 
And I think they had an influence -- that kind of -- you know, taking 
the James Brown sort of drum grooves and incorporating it into that 
sort of Oakland rhythmic concept. No ultimate blends of the styles 
of music were more recognizable. And then, eventually, you know, groups 
like mine, Spyra Gyra, and Pat McTheney kind of, like, blended it 
in a different way that was sort of more -- just in a different direction 
than I guess has become the precursor to what now is known as new 
adult contemporary. It's a radio format that's all over the country. 
Forty-six year old Jeff Luabur is a native of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 
a hotbed for other great jazz musicians, pianists McKoy Tiner and 
Bud Powell and legendary blues organist Jimmy Smith. Luabur says it 
was Smith's swirling blues rifts on the organic that probably had 
the most impact on his own music. He was the sort of icon, you know, 
the standard -- the industry standard -- for organ playing. I mean, 
if you're -- if you play any organic, which I do, and I really enjoy 
playing it,... especially on the last few records Ive been playing 
it more and more Its like you said you sort of have to pay homage 
to Jimmy Smith. Jeff Luabur produced and arranged the 11 tracks on 
his new CD, "Midnight." On it he pays tribute to another one of his 
favorite groups, the Beetles, on this version of "Dear Prudence," 
written by John Lennon and Paul McCartney. I'm Doug Levine. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>