<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981028.0500.2457 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here in the United States, President Clinton's political and legal 
troubles stemming from his affair with former White House intern Monica 
Lewinskey may not have much of an impact on the upcoming Congressional 
elections. Only a few candidates for the House of Representative are 
even mentioning the impeachment process in their campaigns. And many 
voters say they just don't want to hear about it. VOA"s Paula Wolfson 
takes us to the small towns and rural communities of the state of 
Ohio for a view from the heartland. In southeastern Ohio, it seems 
everyone has something to say about the President's problems -- from 
a high school teacher in a rural area... ... People are just -- they 
just want it over with. And it's becoming difficult to make decisions, 
because we have this fear that he's become ineffective. ... to the 
chief fire fighter in the town of Bel Air... ... Too much money was 
spent on an investigation. It appears to be an illicit affair -- $40 
million or more. People have strong opinions about the Presidential 
scandal. But when it comes to the Congressional election campaign, 
voters don't make a connection. We're voting for a Congressman, not 
for President. I don't think that -- I'm not considering that at all. 
Vickie Hall works with high-school students in Woodsville, Ohio, a 
community with high unemployment and a school system in financial 
trouble. I always vote for a person. I don't really attach a political 
party. I vote for what the person -- the issues that the person stands 
for. At campaign events in southeastern Ohio, the Monica Lewinskey 
case is rarely if ever mentioned. At debates and town meetings, the 
issues that dominate are those that directly affect the lives of voters: 
jobs, education, and the fate of government programs that help the 
elderly. It is an area with a strong Democratic Party base and a Republican 
Congressman. Bob Ney is leading in his race for re-election. He says 
he is living proof that hometown issues and not national party politics 
are driving the electorate. Out here, people are frustrated with their 
situation with the White House. But they are going to vote local. 
Mr. Ney says his concern is that some voters will be so disillusioned 
by all the talk of scandal in Washington that they just stay home 
on election day. He says that is the worry for both political worries 
across the country. But in southeastern Ohio turnout usually runs 
above the national norm. Voters like Jeane Samuels say they have plenty 
to ponder as they prepare to cast ballots. I think each voter should 
vote the way they feel for the candidate, not by what's going on in 
Washington. It is said, "As Ohio goes, so goes the nation." Here in 
the heartland it appears this will be a status-quo election. There 
is little talk of change, lots of talk about local issues, and an 
attitude that any discussion of presidential impeachment is a matter 
best left for another day. Paula Wolfson, VOA News, Bel Air, Ohio. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>