<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981028.0500.1835 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The people of Serbia may be breathing a little easier this morning. 
Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevich has withdrawn enough police 
and troops from their largely Albanian province of Kosovo for NATO 
to cancel any immediate air raids. But as John Frazer reports from 
Brussels, NATO forces will remain ready to take action if progress 
for peace does not continue. The meeting of NATO ambassadors in Brussels 
ran right up to the deadline for Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevich 
to bow to the whim of the international community and end his oppression 
in Kosovo. NATO ambassadors were briefed that the threat of air strikes 
had brought an important climb-down by the Serbian leadership, with 
a major withdrawal of troops and special police units from Kosovo. 
Those remaining have largely returned to their barracks. Refugees 
have been flooding into villages where, previously, they had been 
too scared to stay in. NATO ambassadors are satisfied that this amounts 
to substantial compliance with the demands of the international community. 
So they have decided to lift the threat of immediate military action, 
while warning that NATO remains ready and willing to use force if 
the Serbs send fresh forces into Kosovo. Alliance Secretary-General 
Havia Salana says that if there is evidence of substantive non-compliance, 
NATO will be ready to use force. The ambassadors have requested their 
military authorities to remain prepared to carry out military operations 
if necessary. And the hundreds of aircraft and warships within striking 
distance of Yugoslav targets remain on a state of alert. Mr. Salana 
claims that President Milosevich only moves when he is presented with 
a credible threat of force. And he adds that despite the progress 
that has been made, the crisis is still far from over. NATO is still 
determined to see successful negotiations on a permanent political 
solution to the crisis in Kosovo. The Secretary-General warns that 
the authorization for NATO air strikes remains active -- although 
a further meeting of NATO ambassadors will be needed for military 
action to go ahead. Officials say NATO has some sympathy for arguments 
by the Yugoslavian leadership that a total withdrawal of their forces 
from Kosovo would effectively hand control of the province over to 
the rebel Kosovo Liberation Army, which wants independence for Kosovo. 
The situation in Kosovo will be kept under regular review by NATO 
-- although officials say that if there is no reversal of the recent 
withdrawal of forces, there is little prospect of air strikes going 
ahead. John Frazer for VOA News at NATO headquarters in Brussels. 
President Clinton welcomed the reduction of tensions, but said much 
remains to be done to bring lasting peace to Kosovo and the Balkans. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>