<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981028.1600.2148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "VOA News Now." I'm Susan Yackie along with Tom Crosby broadcasting 
from Washington. Latin America may be half-a-world away from the nations 
of South Asia, but international trade and investment have made the 
world a much smaller economic entity in recent years. One year after 
Thailand was forced by a lack of foreign exchange to devalue its currency, 
the financial crisis that began there has swept through the smaller 
nations of Asia and into emerging markets the world over. In today's 
part III of a five-part series on the effects of the Asian crisis, 
"Dateline" looks at how the financial troubles spread to Latin America. 
Here's Linda Cashtan. It started with trade flows. As economic growth 
slowed dramatically in Asia, construction and industrial production 
slowed. That created a sharp drop in energy demand at a time when 
global production was continuing at past levels. The result was a 
drop in global oil prices, which caused serious earnings cuts for 
Latin American oil producers Mexico and Venezuela. Next came a fall 
in demand for agricultural commodities in Asia, with similar results. 
Global grain prices fell, depriving Latin American commodity exporters 
like Argentina, Brazil, and Chile, and Peru a vital income. Then came 
investor skittishness. When the crisis spread to Russia, and the Russian 
ruble collapsed, some local investors moved to cover their Russian 
losses by pulling money out of other emerging markets. Others became 
fearful of emerging market investments in general and withdrew more 
money. Peter Hakim, president of InterAmerican Dialogue, a Washington-based 
center for policy analysis, says that as a result, Latin America has 
found itself investment starved through no fault of its own. Most 
Latin American countries have really done the right thing: They've 
opened up their markets; they've brought inflation under control. 
They've privatized. Democratically elected governments did all this. 
There were constitutions in place. And yet, they see themselves under 
an assault from Wall Street, international financial markets, what 
have you. Peter Hakim says the hardest-hit economy has been Latin 
America's largest: Brazil. Riordan Roet, a Latin American expert at 
the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies here in 
Washington, contends, however, that is partly Brazil's own fault. 
Mr. Roet says Brazil has never been able to bring public spending 
under control. That, he says, has made Brazil especially dependent 
upon foreign investment and vulnerable to the whims of foreign investors. 
When the began leaving last August, Mr. Roet says, Brazil found itself 
in an untenable situation. It's clear that the Brazilians thought 
they were going to be able to coast through 1998 until after the elections, 
and then put into effect some fiscal reforms in 1999. The panic of 
the last two or three months has made it clear to them in Brazil, 
as well as in the IMF -- and then to investors -- that Brazil doesn't 
have the luxury to coast, and is going to have to start making very 
tough measures in 1998. Brazil has always had a terrible problem, 
whether under democratic or military governments, of controlling public 
spending -- -- in part because of the complex federal system ; in 
part because of the tradition of logrolling and exchanging favors 
for votes in Congress, which is always expensive -- -- and in part 
because Brazil's government, while big, is not particularly efficient 
and not particularly competent, given the years of payroll overloading, 
tremendously beneficial retirement benefits for those who are in the 
social security system, and a general laxity in financial accountability. 
How has President Cardozo's free market reforms produced positive 
economic results in Brazil? And what is the attitude toward this massive 
privatization? Mr. Cardozo was re-elected because he did what no other 
president has been able to do, and that was to lower inflation to 
single digits for four years. As with all old populist governments 
in Latin America, the first wave of privatizations in 1995 and `96 
was met with a great deal of skepticism. Over time, though, privatization 
has become widely accepted in Brazil. Polls show that there is widespread 
for the privatization process now. Is it, `As goes Brazil, so goes 
the rest of Latin America?' How important is Brazil's economy to other 
countries in Latin America and to the region as a whole? Well, it's 
the largest country. It's a major industrial country. It is half the 
continent. It is the eighth largest economy in the world. It is intimately 
linked to the Argentine economy. Argentina now sends 35, 36, 37 percent 
of its exports to Brazil. It is the engine of Mercosurd. And, in that 
sense -- in an emerging market point of view -- investors look to 
Mexico and Brazil as the two bellwethers for the health of the Latin 
American economies. Riordan Roet of the Johns Hopkins School for Advanced 
International Studies here in Washington. In the long-run, Mr. Roes 
says, the Asian crisis may prove beneficial to Brazil -- because the 
scare will prompt it to make the fiscal reforms it had been putting 
off. As for Latin America's other bellwether indicator, VOA correspondent 
Greg Flakes says Mexico is also working to build investor confidence. 
Well, I think the main thing Mexico has done is to shore up, if you 
will, the confidence in the economy in terms of what they've already 
been doing -- in terms of the growth that's already there. Now, the 
growth has been cut back a little bit from what they've been projecting 
earlier in the year. There had been some really rosy projections of 
more than seven percent growth. Of course, now they're -- you're talking, 
you know, much lower than that -- probably less than half that. But 
still, it's a country that does have a lot of growth potential. And 
there are a lot of things that are going well in the economy, and 
they're emphasizing them. Have there been cuts in government spending? 
Yes, there have been four cuts in government spending this year. And 
that is, of course, a major problem for them, because some of the 
programs that have been cut are programs that help the poor. And recent 
figures show that 26% of Mexicans live in poverty. That there are 
-- there's a fairly large percentage, a much larger percentage, actually, 
than that in some of the southern states. It can be up as much as 
30-40% of the people in the Indian communities, who live in extreme 
poverty -- meaning that they're actually malnourished because of their 
poverty. These were rather shocking statistics that came out in the 
last week or so. And food drives have been undertaken, and a lot of 
things are being done now to try to counter that. But definitely Mexico 
is paying the cost. I mean, they can only cut so much. How vulnerable 
does Mexico feel right now to the international economy? Is there 
this feeling that even by adopting the right policies oneself, a country 
can be in terrible vulnerability in today's international or global 
economy? Well, yes, as a matter of fact, the Treasury-Secretary here, 
Jose HaneKorea has been talking about this for some time -- that the 
problem he sees is that there's this world-wide crisis is affecting 
emerging economies in an uneven way. In other words, some economies 
that perhaps deserve to have capital taken out are suffering naturally 
from this, but there are other economies like Mexico that are suffering 
along with this. And what he's saying, and what you're going to hear, 
I think, from officials from other countries as well as Mexico is 
that perhaps there needs to be something done, dome mechanism created 
to protect countries from these kinds of things. VOA correspondent 
Greg Flakes speaking to us from Mexico. Where does Latin America go 
from here? Peter Hakim of the InterAmerican Dialogue uses an airplane 
analogy. When you hit a patch of turbulence on an airplane flight, 
he says, you get so nervous you forget your schedule and all your 
previous goals. All you care about is getting to your destination 
without crashing. Right now I think that Latin America is basically 
headed in the right direction. But when you get into this turbulence, 
you forget about the direction and the time and you worry about how 
do you get out of it. And that's going to be the problem for at least 
the next three-to-six months I think. Peter Hakim of the InterAmerican 
Dialogue, a Washington center for policy analysis. The Asian crisis 
in Latin America was the subject of today's "Dateline." Tomorrow we'll 
look at the impact the crisis has had on Russia. I'm Linda Cashtan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>