<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981028.0500.1368 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The state of Montana and the Western United States contains one of 
the richest troves of dinosaur remains anywhere in the world. For 
this report, VOA's Andam Phillips paid a visit to David and Laurie 
Trexler, a famous paleontologist couple, whose family has discovered 
the remains of several of these terrible lizards. He visited them 
at the landscapes where they died. Shotow, Montana, where the Trexlers 
live, sits in a rugged landscape, where the vast flattens of the high 
prairie meets the Rocky Mountains. It seems like the perfect place 
to find a dinosaur -- which is what Laurie and David Trexler do -- 
often. In fact, David Trexler wishes everyone else would do so, too. 
There's only 80 of us or so professional paleontologists that work 
on dinosaurs in the entire United States. And there's tens of millions 
of acres out there of potentially dinosaur-burying sediments. We lose 
more dinosaurs to erosion each year than we ever find. And I would 
like to see a system where, instead of just the 80 of us or so looking 
-- that there would be several million people looking. The couple 
has made quite a start with Time Scale Adventures, their non-profit 
educational organization. Hundreds of dinosaur enthusiasts participate 
in Time Scale's workshops every summer. In the 10-day program I teach 
how to properly discover, document, preserve, and, you know, collect 
a specimen from the field, and tell whether what they find out there 
is something that needs to be preserved for science -- or whether 
it's something that they can collect themselves and set on their mantelpiece 
without it damaging science. When her husband, David, packs a replica 
of a Sezmasore skeleton over 45 meters long for transport, Ms. Trexler 
goes to work on one of the finds the workshop has yielded. She is 
using a device that looks a lot like a dentist's drill. It helps to 
separate the backbone of a plant-eating, duck-billed dinosaur from 
the sandstone where its 65-million-year-old body was found. This is 
a Habersore Cottle vertebrae. Adult Habersore has... ... 55, 65 -- 
not just the tail. No one could every accuse them of being spineless. 
no. Ms. Trexler walks over to another animal, which she then begins 
to scrape with a simple blade. When they put this together, in order 
to hold it in the field, they had to put glue on it -- so they didn't 
lose all the little pieces. Now, I have to take all the glue off. 
And I do that with a very sharp razor knife -- so that I don't take 
extra bone with me. When you're doing prep work you want to leave 
the natural markings on the bone -- because that's what tells us muscle 
attachments. If you find such a rare thing as a tooth mark or a clawed 
impression you don't want to lose that. And you don't want to make 
a false one by scratching the bone with your tools. So you have to 
have a light touch to not scratch the bone, but heavy enough to get 
glue and sand and things off of the bone. Laurie Trexler says that, 
over the past 40 or so years, these modern preparation techniques 
have changed theories about how dinosaurs looked. If you look at modern 
pictures of dinosaurs and compare them with the pictures we had in 
the fifties -- the dinosaurs are much more slender. They used be just 
big, dumb, fat dinosaurs. Now they're -- they're all buff, been-to-the-gym, 
working-out kind of dinosaurs. We know this because we have the muscle 
attachments. We can do the reconstruction. I have to catch myself. 
There is no fact dealing with dinosaurs, because we don't have live 
dinosaurs. Some theories are very sound. And other theories are way 
out there. David Trexler admits that some people question the relevance 
of dinosaurs to everyday life, but says many once-out theories about 
the giant beasts and how they lived and died have proved useful in 
unexpected ways. He points to evidence, now widely accepted, that 
the dinosaurs were forced into extinction by a giant meteor. And because 
of that discovery, we are to the point now where scientists are actually 
looking at the heavens with telescopes saying, "Wait a second. You 
know, maybe one of these things can actually hit us again." It may 
be millions or billions of years before another giant meteor strikes 
our planet, if one every does. Still, it is reassuring to know that 
until then, Laurie and David Trexler of Time Scale Adventures will 
be doing whatever they can to pick up the pieces from the last time. 
This is Adam Phillips reporting. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>