<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981028.0500.2668 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cancer of the colon is one of the top cancer killers. It is usually 
a silent, symptomless disease that's often discovered too late for 
a cure. But, as Jane Hughes reports, this does not always have to 
be the case. Early detection is the key to curing cancer of the colon 
and rectum, jointly referred to as colo-rectal cancer. Sometimes there 
are symptoms such as bleeding and cramps. Sometimes there are no indications 
of disease at all, even when the cancer has been growing silently 
for a decade or longer. Because colon cancer can be cured, if detected 
early, Dr. Randall Byrd of the University of Utah says people at high-risk 
for the disease should be checked at an early age -- as early as age 
fifteen. The most important point is to get colon cancer screening. 
It works. And one should get screening before symptoms develop. Once 
symptoms occur, colon cancer may often not be curable. Secondly, know 
your family history. If your family has a history of colon cancer 
or other glandular cancers such as prostate, breast, uterine, and 
ovarian -- or if you have a prior history of polyps, or benign growths 
in the colon -- then you are at increased risk of colo-rectal cancer. 
Researchers are working to develop new cancer drugs. But no matter 
how good they be, they will never be better than preventing cancer 
in the first place. if this advice from Dr. Bernard Levine of Houston's 
MD Anderson Cancer Center sounds familiar, it should. It's the best 
way to stave off a wide array of deadly diseases. A healthy lifestyle 
will reduce the risk of colo-rectal cancer. And that includes diet; 
it includes regular exercise; avoidance of tobacco entirely; and maintenance 
of healthy body weight -- avoidance of obesity. Dr. LaSalle LaFalle 
and his fellow surgeons at Howard University in Washington offer this 
advice. We like to say this: If you make the diagnosis early, cancer 
of the large intestine and rectum, the colon and rectum, can be cured, 
and patients can have normal bowel function -- because the cancer 
can be removed and the ends of the intestine joined together. Patients 
have normal function without a collastamey. Cancer of the colon and 
rectum can be cured when the diagnosis is made early. And we can't 
emphasize that too much. According to the University of California 
at Berkeley, if detected early, colo-rectal cancer is 90 percent curable. 
If the cancer has spread beyond the colon wall, however, the chance 
of a cure drops to 10 percent. For detection of colon cancer, the 
colonoscapy is the most accurate diagnostic tool. It's an examination 
of the entire colon, using a flexible lighted tube. It is reliable, 
but also very expensive. Sigmoad oscapy, a visual exam of the lower 
portion of the colon with a lighted tube, detects slightly over half 
of colo-rectal cancers. X-rays with barion enema are used when people 
are at high-risk. The colon is bathed and then inflated with air, 
so x-rays can show the polyps. It is not a comfortable test. There 
are also inexpensive, but not very accurate test kits to detect hidden 
blood in stools. These can be performed at home. The Mayo Clinic estimates 
that annual stool blood testing lowers by about one-third the risk 
of dying from colo-rectal cancer. And the American Cancer Society 
recommends that everyone over 50 take the test each year. Despite 
the drawbacks of all of these tests, they greatly increase your odds 
of staying healthy. I'm Jane Hughes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>