<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981028.1600.0000 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> MISCELLANEOUS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
... one hours Universal Time. This is the Voice of America carrying 
live coverage of a presidential news conference at the White House 
with President Clinton and Colombian President Andre Spastrata. We 
can't hear him at all and we're very sorry. Just like you had Arafat 
in the United States here in the White House, do you think at some 
point it would be possible to have one of our guerrilla leaders here? 
Could you repeat his question? And if you could repeat his question 
in English, then you can answer in Spanish, and the interpreter will 
describe it to the president. For 36 years we've had an internal conflict 
in the country. And what we hope for is precisely to be able to achieve 
a peace process that will allow us to put an end to the violence that 
Colombia has lived through in the last few years. As I was able to 
explain to the president and to the press, for the first time as well, 
we have an historic opportunity. The guerrillas have agreed to eradicate 
illicit crops. For the first time the Farch has made a commitment. 
In fact, they have set that forth in the document they've given to 
the government, which the public knows of. For the first time, they're 
willing to work on eradicating crops. So I think it's an historic 
opportunity for the country. If we're able to make peace in Colombia 
-- this is the first major battle in which we will defeat the Narco-traffickers. 
The major enemy in Colombia is drug trafficking -- drug traffickers. 
Therefore, we understand and we know that we will win that battle. 
And by winning that battle, we will begin to do away with the global 
problems the government -- the entire world is suffering from today. 
That's why I think it's a situation in which our country knows we're 
already dealing with it. We've initiated our dialogue with the ELN. 
And we hope, after November 7, to begin the dialogue with the Farch. 
And, in this way, we'll put an end to this process and clearly achieve 
the great wish of our people, which is to have a country at peace. 
The question you asked me about the immigration -- the Colombians 
who are here: I don't know enough about the facts to answer the question. 
We did make it, I tried to make good decisions regarding the Nicaraguans, 
the Salvadorans, and the Haitians. We have tried to be sensitive to 
the real facts of the individuals' lives who are here. What were the 
circumstances under which they came to our country, and under which 
they stayed -- consistent with our other immigration laws, which are 
pretty -- pretty open and broad, I think. But I would -- before I 
could give you an answer, I would have to know more than I do now. 
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much. You've been listening to 
a presidential news conference involving President Bill Clinton and 
the newly elected Colombian President Andre Spastrata coming to us 
live from the White House Rose Garden. The two presidents met throughout 
the day. During the course of this meeting and the news conference, 
President Clinton praised President Spastrata for his efforts on behalf 
of the Colombian people and his efforts to open dialogue with the 
insurgents in his country. It's 21 hours 4 Universal Time. From Washington, 
this is "VOA News Now." A court in London overturns the arrest of 
former Chilean leader Augusto Piniche, saying the action by British 
police was illegal. And in Slovokia, the four-party coalition that 
ousted long-time Prime Minister Guadme Messier in elections last month 
finally agrees on a government. Five-thousand students demonstrate 
around Gircada in anti-government protests. And the Clinton administration 
says IBM has developed a new super computer capable of working twice 
as fast as its predecessors. I'm Tom Crosby. And I'm Susan Yackie. 
We'll have those stories, sports, business news, and a discussion 
of the population trends in American cities -- all ahead on "VOA News 
Now." This is "VOA News Now" coming to you from Washington. I'm Tom 
Crosby along with Susan Yackie. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>