<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981028.0500.0860 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You're listening to "VOA News Now" broadcasting live from Washington. 
There was a tense and a very unusual standoff in Taiwan earlier today. 
A Chinese airliner pilot hijacked his own plane and went to Tibay. 
On the phone with us now is James Mitchell in Tibay. James, what can 
you tell us about how this thing came to an end? Well, the plane just, 
in fact, left the ground here at Tibay's international airport about 
10 minutes ago. There was no struggle, really, from the beginning. 
When the plane landed, the pilot -- chief pilot Mr. U.N. Ding -- he 
gave himself up to police. He told them that he had been dissatisfied 
with his job with his salary and with a number of other details about 
the company that he worked for. And he and his wife -- and his wife 
was on the plane as well -- The difficulty really came after he gave 
himself up, and they realized first, that they didn't have enough 
pilots to fly the plane back. Or they were worried that they didn't 
have enough pilots on the plane. The second thing, of course, is that 
Taiwan and China have no direct ties. So it's not really legally possible 
to fly a plane directly back to the mainland from Taiwan. Why? They 
-- it seems easy enough. Well, they -- there has been -- there has 
been a ban on direct -- on direct flights and direct mail and direct 
contact between the two sides of the strait since 1949. So it has 
not been possible to fly or to sail ships, or even to send mail directly 
across the strait. It's always been done through Hong Kong. And what 
the two sides of the strait -- what negotiators been doing -- and 
by fax and phone all afternoon -- is trying to find a way to get the 
plane back to the mainland with as little trouble as possible. What 
they decided in the end, of course, was to send the plane through 
Hong Kong. So one wrong turn by a pilot turns into a serious diplomatic 
incident involving all of these countries and these estranged relations 
between Taiwan and China? That is true. It's -- although -- it appears, 
at this point, that the incident is not politically motivated. It 
seems to have come from a grip by the pilot. But, of course, when 
you're talking about across-strait incidents of any kind, it's very 
difficult to avoid politics in the -- you know, in a general sense 
of the word, because you're having to deal with two regimes who are 
still, in many ways, at complete odds with each other. So even though 
it was an administrative case, there was a lot of shuffling back and 
forth, a lot of phone calls and faxes -- a lot of panicking -- as 
they tried to sort themselves out of this situation. Now what happens 
to the pilot and his wife? They have been taken into custody by local 
authorities here. The local prosecutor's office took them into custody 
shortly after the plane landed. They have detained them. And, of course, 
you have to remember that, during 1993 and 1994, there were a rash 
of these kinds of incidents -- pilots flying across the strait hoping 
for a better life. They have all been jailed. Sixteen of them, in 
fact, were jailed between 1993 and 1994. Just two of those have been 
paroled; the rest are still in jail. We expect the same thing will 
happen to Mr. U. N. and his wife. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>