<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981019.1830.0049 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We begin tonight with the government versus Microsoft. 
There is a great deal at stake. The government accuses Microsoft of 
illegally abusing its position in the marketplace to drive out its 
competitors. The justice department said as the case was getting under 
way today that the antitrust laws of the nation were designed to prevent 
such a thing. ABC's Terry Moran is covering the trial for us. He beings 
with the straight-ahead attack by the government on Mr. Microsoft 
himself, Bill Gates. As Microsoft and justice department lawyers came 
to do battle, a Bill Gates impersonator showed up. Inside the courtroom, 
the real Bill Gates, on videotape, under oath, in a Deposition taken 
in August. Gates was asked about his role in a critical 1995 meeting 
between Microsoft and its rival, Netscape. The justice department 
says Microsoft in that meeting tried to bribe and bully Netscape into 
not competing. "I wasn't involved in setting up the meeting," Gates 
says on the tape. Then government lawyer David boies revealed an internal 
Microsoft memorandum, written by Gates three weeks before that meeting. 
"I think there is a very powerful deal of some kind we can do with 
netscape," Gates wrote. "I would really like to see something like 
this happen." On videotape he claims a proposal to invest in Netscape 
to sweeten the deal didn't make sense to 34e. We could even pay them 
money as part of the deal buying some piece of them or something. 
A Microsoft executive defended Gates on the courthouse steps. You 
just heard an opening statement that was based entirely on loose and 
unreliable rhetoric and on snippets that were not in any sort of responsible 
context. Assistant attorney general Joel Klein defended the justice 
department. What this case has always been about is to make sure that 
there's competition in this critical American industry. That's precisely 
what Microsoft says it wants too and they accused the justice department 
of threatening the thriving computer industry by targeting one of 
its creators. We know this case will be with us for a while. Microsoft 
will have its first word tomorrow. Take us back to where it began 
and how it began. The federal government has been investigating Microsoft 
for years on a Variety of fronts. But this case begins and it will 
turn on, a single meeting, on June 21st, 1995. At that meeting, Microsoft 
executives confronted the founders of Netscape, a company which had 
taken the lead in the Internet browser business. Microsoft allegedly 
offered to carve up that booming business with Netscape or else. Microsoft 
came to us and they basically said, you know, basically sat us down 
and in their best Don corleon accent, they said, we're going to make 
you an offer you can't refuse. But Netscape says it did refuse. And 
what Microsoft did next is the crux of this trial. The government 
will try to prove that Microsoft tried to crush Netscape. August 2nd, 
1995, Microsoft chairman Bill Gates visits Intel, the dominant chipmaker 
and a close Microsoft partner. According to an Intel memo, Gates is 
"livid" that Intel was developing software which could help Netscape. 
Gates allegedly made "vague threats" about Intel's "investments in 
the internet and wanted them stopped." September 1995 -- a Microsoft 
executive says in a speech about Netscape, "We are going to cut off 
their air supply. Everything they're selling, we are going to give 
away for free." And in fact, three months later, in December 1995, 
with Netscape's browser still far ahead, and selling at $59 a copy, 
Microsoft announces it will give away its browser for free, by building 
it into Windows 95. June 1996 -- computermaker Compaq plans to offer 
Netscape's browser, and remove Microsoft's from the desktop screen. 
Microsoft responds by threatening to take away windows altogether, 
a death sentence for any PC maker. Compaq gives in. The government 
paints a vivid picture of a big company, bullying and threatening 
an entire industry. But Microsoft says it will be able to prove that 
account is pure fiction, beginning with that first meeting with Netscape. 
Well, we don't agree with that portrayal of that meeting. We have 
those meeting all the time, with literally hundreds of software companies 
every quarter. At times, those do get contentious. Was it Microsoft's 
plan and policy to give the browser capabilities away for free, and 
thus kill Netscape? The intent was to improve our products based on 
what we heard consumers telling us they wanted. Microsoft will produce 
its own witnesses and experts to back up its story -- that Netscape 
made crucial mistakes and that Microsoft just made a better product. 
Our market share started to increase related to browsing capabilities 
in windows, and that's just the way the industry operates. The people 
with the best products win. So the case boils down to the government's 
claim that Microsoft won't obey the laws. Microsoft's claim that the 
government doesn't understand the industry. Enormous legal ramifications 
what about for the millions of people who use microsoft? Microsoft 
will say what's at stake is the company's right to offer those features 
in the windows operating system whenever the consumers want it. The 
government says if it wins, there will be more choices and not just 
microsoft choices. It will take several weeks for this case to get 
undone. Six to eight weeks is the hope right now. Many thanks. Clear 
explanation of where we're going with that one. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>