<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981019.0514 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After years of political turmoil and economic chaos, Bulgaria now 
enjoys a strong currency, low inflation, healthy budget and stable 
government committed to market reforms. The Bulgarians are still poor 
by European standards with a dlrs 100 average monthly salary. But 
poverty has not driven angry crowds into the streets as it did almost 
two years ago when a government of former communists collapsed. For 
the first time since communism fell in 1989, the 8.5 million Bulgarians 
believe they can safely plan their future. ``I am absolutely sure 
that we'll have 4.5-5 percent growth of the (economy) this year,'' 
Prime Minister Ivan Kostov told a recent meeting of 1,200 foreign 
investors in Sofia. It would be the first growth after eight years 
of steady decline. Last year the economy contracted by 6.9 percent. 
Antoine Iskander, a Lebanese businessman, and Kristina Dimitrova, 
a Bulgarian businesswoman who run together a croissant factory in 
Sofia, share this optimism. ``Bulgaria is stable and is improving. 
It is on the right track,'' Iskander said. ``Now there are good opportunities 
to invest here, but if you asked me this question in early 1997, I 
would have definitely answered `no.''' Bulgaria's upbeat performance 
is in sharp contrast to many developing countries, whose economies 
have been buffeted by the financial turmoil that began in Southeast 
Asia more than a year ago. It has since swamped Russia and is threatening 
Latin America. Many developing economies are in recession or on the 
brink of a downturn. International lenders and investors have also 
described Bulgaria's performance in positive terms. ``In contrast 
to many other transition economies, Bulgaria has now been able to 
produce robust macroeconomic performance ... Inflation is down to 
European Union levels, fiscal performance is sound, the tax regime 
is stable,'' said Andrew Vorkink, the World Bank director for Bulgaria. 
The anchor of Bulgaria's stability is the currency board, a panel 
within the central bank. Enacted on July 1, 1997, the board bars the 
central bank from printing large amounts of new money to cover deficits 
and bail out insolvent companies and banks. Under the board's oversight, 
the long-ailing national currency, the lev, is tied to the German 
mark by a fixed exchange rate of 1,000 leva to one mark. Domestic 
money supply is backed by foreign currency reserves of the central 
bank. The International Monetary Fund advised Bulgaria to endorse 
the board in late 1996 as the previous government of Socialists, the 
renamed communists, plunged the country into a financial tailspin 
similar to the current one in Russia. Hong Kong and Argentina also 
have currency boards. The Socialists balked at privatization and ran 
up huge fiscal deficits to keep inefficient state companies going. 
They tried to bail out banks from which their political allies siphoned 
money through a series of bad loans. Inflation soared to over 300 
percent in 1996 and to 577 percent in 1997. The average monthly salary 
fell to some dlrs 10 as the lev slumped from 500 to some 3,000 to 
the dollar in January last year. That sent crowds into the streets 
for a month, forcing the Socialists agree to early elections. Kostov's 
Union of Democratic Forces won and pursued new policies which have 
brought about the economic turnaround. The new government tightened 
financial discipline, improved tax collection and speeded long-stalled 
privatization programs to sell state companies which were draining 
the treasury. From a three-digit monthly level in February 1997, Bulgaria's 
inflation slowed to an average of 2.9 percent in the first nine months 
of this year. Foreign currency reserves grew to some dlrs 3 billion 
from dlrs 500 million. Next year Bulgaria plans to balance its budget. 
The improved economic climate has allowed Iskander and Dimitrova to 
increase the output of their ``Pain D'Or,'' or Golden Bread, line 
by 30 percent. The two entrepreneurs now employ about 100 workers. 
They started in 1994 with just 11. ``We had almost ground to a halt 
in early 1997,'' Dimitrova said. ``We stopped producing our main staple, 
the croissants, and switched just to bread, because that's what people 
could only afford to buy. Now domestic consumption is stabilized and 
people are again looking for quality products.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>