<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981019.0313 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rebellious soldiers surrendered to government troops after a one-day 
revolt Monday and agreed to return to their garrison after clashes 
near the country's second-largest city that killed at least one soldier 
and four mutineers. The rebel troops released two government officials 
they had taken hostage and gave up control of a village they had seized 
in this mountainous former Soviet republic, according to Teimuraz 
Shashiashvili, governor of the region. The leaders of the mutiny were 
charged with treason. More than 200 soldiers fiercely opposed to President 
Eduard Shevardnadze took over their garrison in the western town of 
Senaki on Monday and advanced toward the heart of Georgia, blocking 
roads with stolen tanks, trucks and machine guns. Government troops 
poured into the area to defend it. Shevardnadze, who has survived 
assassination attempts and several rebellions, put Georgian troops 
on combat readiness, said presidential spokesman Vakhtang Abashidze. 
Shevardnadze demanded that the mutinous soldiers lay down their weapons 
and return to their barracks, and he threatened force if they refused. 
Troops were sent to intercept rebels on the road to Georgia's second-largest 
city, Kutaisi, but were forced to retreat. Rebels seized the village 
of Gubi, just 10 kilometers (6 miles) from Kutaisi, police said. About 
50 civilians joined the rebels in Gubi, police said. Small groups 
of civilians were also fleeing villages and towns taken over by rebels. 
After talks with government negotiators, the rebel troops agreed to 
return to their garrison at Senaki, Shashiashvili said. ``Georgia 
today has escaped civil war,'' he said. One government soldier was 
killed in fighting around the town of Khoni, 30 kilometers (18 miles) 
west of Khutaisi, and two were wounded, said Health Minister Avtandil 
Dzhorbenadze. At least four rogue troops were killed when government 
troops destroyed a tank they had been driving, military officials 
said. It was unclear whether the rebels suffered any other casualties. 
Another group of mutinous soldiers blocked two roads leading westward 
to the Black Sea port city of Poti with seven of the stolen tanks, 
but they also surrendered, Shashiashvili said. ``It would be unjustified 
irresponsibility on the part of Georgia's president and the defense 
minister if we allowed that heavy machinery and vehicles with armed 
adventurers into Georgia's second-largest city,'' Shevardnadze said 
in a national television address. Security was tightened around key 
buildings in Tbilisi, the capital, including the government headquarters, 
parliament and broadcasting center. The soldiers stole 10 tanks, two 
armored personnel carriers, and more than 50 machine guns from their 
garrison, Abashidze said. The soldiers shot at the car of a government 
official coming to talk to them, but no one was wounded, the Interfax 
news agency said. Georgian Defense Minister Maj. Gen. David Tevzadze 
and the Minister of State Security, Lt. Gen. Dzhemal Gakhokidze, were 
both sent to the scene. Shashiashvili, who also took part in the talks, 
said he was briefly detained by rebels, but then allowed to leave. 
The leader of the mutiny, Akakiy Eliava, and several of his men were 
charged with treason, the Prosecutor General's office said. It was 
not immediately clear what sentence they face if convicted. Eliava 
is a military commander who is also a supporter of the late president 
Zviad Gamsakhurdia. Gamsakhurdia, Georgia's leader when it became 
independent in 1991, was ousted in early 1992 and fought a short war 
in a bid to return to power. He died in mysterious circumstances in 
1994. His followers remain bitterly opposed to Shevardnadze. Shevardnadze 
blames Gamsakhurdia's supporters for the Feb. 9 attack on his motorcade 
that left two of Shevardnadze's bodyguards dead. At least eight suspects 
have been arrested. The speaker of the Georgian parliament, Zurab 
Zhvaniya, said the rebels were demanding the restoration of Gamsakhurdia's 
parliament. He said the rebels issued a statement warning Russian 
troops not to intervene. Several foreign leaders have telephoned Shevardnadze 
to express support, the ITAR-Tass news agency reported. Russia's Foreign 
Ministry issued a statement appealing for settling the conflict peacefully. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>