<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981019.1600.1511 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Actress Nicole Kidman is having a very good year. Her new film "practical 
magic" opened number one at the box office this weekend. And she's 
proving her star power reaches beyond the big screen. Ron tank has 
the story. She's one of Hollywood's hottest actresses, with a brand 
new movie in theaters. Yep, that's right, I'm back. Whew! Hang on 
to your husbands, girls. And lots of buzz about one starring her and 
her husband due next summer. But Nicole Kidman's biggest coup seems 
to be a little play in London called "The blue room." I mean, I thought 
I was doing a small play in an experimental theater, and i couldn't 
believe the reaction it got. I was so nervous the opening night. And 
then once the play started, I thought, "just go for it." Critics really 
went for it. Reviews have been so good the play is going to Broadway. 
Kidman told us from London that theater was her first job. Yeah, that's 
how I started when I was 14. But I hadn't done a lot of theater in 
Australia. I did two plays. And so this was the first time I'd been 
on the stage in 11 years. No, don't say that. He's gonna drown Huey. 
Americans first noticed Kidman in the Australian film "dead calm" 
ten years ago. But it's a film she and husband Tom cruise made for 
director Stanley kubrick that has everyone talking. Kubrick, who made 
"spartacus" with Kirk Douglas, and became a legend with "2001: a space 
Odyssey," hasn't directed a film in more than ten years. So Kidman 
and cruise eagerly signed on, reportedly without seeing the script, 
for "eyes wide shut," a kinky sex story that took nearly a year and 
a half to shoot and won't be out until next summer. It was far more 
complex than I thought it was going to be -- in terms of the duration 
it was shot for, but also in terms of the characters and working with 
my husband and dealing with the subject matter we were dealing with. 
It was difficult at times, but it was incredibly rewarding, and I'd 
do it again in a heartbeat. In the meantime, Kidman is starring with 
Sandra Bullock in "Practical magic," about two sisters who happen 
to be witches. Sometimes you work with people that you wouldn't want 
to Hang out with off the set. Sandy and I genuinely enjoyed each other. 
She just came over recently to see me in the play here in London just 
for one night. She came all that way, so she's a really good friend. 
She'd have to be, just to get a ticket. Ron tank, "CNN Entertainment 
News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>