<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981019.2100.2540 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From "dateline NBC" tonight we're happy to bring you this look at 
Betty ford a woman who has always been ahead of her time. In the 1940's 
she was a dancer with the then revolutionary Martha Graham company. 
She married and divorced before marrying Gerald Rudolph Ford. When 
he became president, she was soon under fire for speaking out in favor 
of things like abortion rights and the equal rights amendment known 
as e.R.A. at the time. Betty Ford's outspokenness, her directness, 
incredible openness probably meant the most to the nearly 180,000 
women diagnosed with breast cancer in this country every calendar 
year. Say nothing to all those battling substance abuse, an effort 
with which her name has become sew none muss. Maria shriver in an 
exclusive. Anybody in life that's all they have is today. Yesterday 
is gone. Tomorrow hasn't come yet. So you live in the now. And you 
make the most of what you have today. Beautiful. That's beautiful. 
As a woman diagnosed with breast cancer, Betty Ford will tell you 
it's easier to appreciate today when there was a time you weren't 
sure you'd see it. You can be a survivor of breast cancer. It will 
be 24 years for me later this week. They say five years if you can 
get through the first five years, you have a Very good chance of more 
survival. So that first five years is very tenuous for every woman. 
Does your family feel secure that that part of your life is over? 
yes. But I always seem to be having something. The next thing was 
quadruple bypass or something else. So life is going to have its UPS 
and Downs. You have to be prepared to accept them and do the best 
you can in those hurdles we go over. We're very proud of the progress. 
The hurdles have included heart problems and arthritis. But true to 
form, they haven't stopped this former first lady from her many projects 
like establishing the Betty Ford Alpine guardens in the veil, colorado 
mountains where she and her husband spend their Summers or counselling 
people at the renowned Betty Ford center in Palm Springs, california 
where they winter. Betty Ford commands the Devotion and respect of 
millions of people around the world who have been inspired by her 
journey to good health and sobriety. If I can be an inspiration for 
someone to take that first step step, then they can do it if they 
work at it. And until they're ready to take that first step, I can 
be of no use to them whatsoever other than a role model. Mr. vice 
president, are you prepared to take the oath? Mrs. Ford says that 
has a mother she had always expected to be a role mod toll her four 
children. So help me God. But that it was her husband's unexpected 
rise to the presidency in 1974 that forced her activism into a larger 
stage. My husband had only been in office for about six weeks when 
my cancer was diagnosed. At that time, and when he was sworn into 
office, as he made his statement, he said, there will be no more cover-up. 
There will be no more camouflage. We discussed it as a family that 
maybe the best thing to do was be slulet -- Absolutely forthcoming 
and say my wife has had a mastectomy. We'll have faith that everything's 
OK. Overnight breast cancer became world news. Not just because it 
was the wife of a president who had it, but because that woman chose 
to share it in an inusually open and personal way. Up until then people 
didn't even say breast cancer. If somebody had breast cancer, they 
took their friend in the other room and whispered about it. So it 
was a total turn yarn. She felt and I concurred it might save many, 
many lives of other women who would then have mammograms, etc. Which 
is exactly what happened. Within three days clinics across the country 
were swamped with women coming in for mammograms. Mrs. Ford's illness 
reminded me that I should go for another checkup. Women were taught 
how to do breast self-examinations and given a way to approach anywhere 
families about their own operations. The loss of a part of your body 
is a tragic thing. It's like the loss of a child almost. We put such 
focus today on breasts as sexual connotation that women do lose some 
of their, you know, feeling of glamour and feeling of appeal. Did 
you have these issues of self-esteem like, I'm not good enough anymore, 
i won't be attractive anymore, I can't make it looking this way? no. 
Because I had a wonderful husband who was absolutely devoted to me. 
Did you ever worry he's not going to be able to handle this, he's 
not going to stay with me, this is going to be too much for him? S 
this a concern so many women have. I wasn't concerned about the fact 
that he would be turn add with a totally. However, I wanted him to 
know what it was all about before I ever left the hospital. So I arranged 
to have him come when the nurse was bathing me and changing my bandages, 
which was very tough on him. But he had to have that realization of 
what it was all about before we went home. There are many, many people 
who are so shocked by the surgery that results in the loss of a breast, 
who don't seem to handle it too well. I can only speak for myself. 
That never entered our mind. In no way were we going to have that 
in any way interfere with our marriage or the future of our relationship. 
I would say it's one of the few times I've ever seen my father cry. 
The Ford's daughter Suzanne remembers those as tough times. But she 
says her mother's braveness inspired the entire family. In fact, for 
the past 13 years Suzanne has been the spokesperson for national breast 
cancer awareness month. It brought women out of the closet. Women 
undressed in front of their husbands in the light that they had not 
done before. You could talk about it at the dinner table. And mother 
and daughter have been talking about breast cancer ever since. Urging 
women to do monthly self-examinations, to get annual mammograms after 
age 40, teen inform themselves of the many medical options available 
to them today. And while much of the country hailed the outspoken 
first lady as a hero, the difficult times were far from over. Two 
years after leaving the White House the family had to confront another 
wrenching problem. Betty Ford's addiction to alcohol and prescription 
drugs. Those that loved me most and cared the most about me were the 
ones to confront me and say, we love you too much to lose you. We 
just went one bione around the circle. She just sat there and balled. 
She didn't fight us. She didn't call us names. She didn't kick us 
out. She said, what do you want me to do? Mrs. Ford, how are you? 
They wanted her to get treatment. Which she did. And then Betty Ford 
made her family very proud by going public again. This time about 
her addictions. If you are on prescriptions or drugs of any kind that 
are medically necessary, I think you should take a long look at it 
and discuss it with your doctors. Present this award to you Mrs. Betty 
Ford. Once again Betty Ford brought a social taboo out of the closet. 
Now she shared a sisterhood not just with breast cancer survivors 
but with millions of Americans whose family felt stigmatized by alcohol 
and drug abuse. I tried to be around nem recovery. When I see new 
people coming in to the Betty Ford center, it reminds me of how difficult 
it was for me in the very beginning to accept the fact that I had 
a problem. Today she credits those problems with providing her her 
life's work. Speaking out on breast cancer and meeting with many of 
the 33,000 people who have come to the Betty Ford center since 1982. 
You were so credited when you were in the White House for speaking 
out on issues that everybody was afraid to ask a first lady about. 
Do you look at what's going on in Washington today and say, this has 
gone in a whole other direction from when I was there? I think it's 
gone way too far. We certainly need to regain the White House and 
the dignity that belongs in the White House. The people that are in 
it should treat it as the house of the people. Have you ever spoken 
to Mrs. Clinton? Ornings, yes. We worked together on legislation. 
We're friends. I admire her. I think she's a very bright woman, very 
talented woman. I think she probably is an enabler as we refered to 
when somebody haze problem. I feel very sorry for her. But I know 
she has all kinds of close friends who are trying to support her in 
this time. We're approaching the serenity garden. While Mrs. Ford 
is proof of the power of family and friends to help see someone through 
tough times, she says there has been an even more powerful source 
of her strength. I had a God I believed in. It was the God I turned 
to I knew he was going to be there for me. As you look back at working 
to survive breast cancer and working to survive alcohol and drug addiction, 
which journey was tougher? I think the journey probably for the alcohol 
and the addiction was tougher. But it was so much help by my experience 
of turning it over -- to god. Yeah. If you have a problem and you 
can't control it, then you've got to give it to somebody else. You 
have to reach for that higher power. In your life that's going to 
help you. Do you feel you're finally over alcohol and drug addiction? 
Is that something that's in the past? I work on that on a daily basis. 
Alcoholism is a chronic disease. A chronic disease is like any disease 
that you are never cured of. All you can do is treat it you treat 
it with your program of recovery. A 12-step program that relies on 
daily meditation and which she says is useful in dealing with every 
part of life. Managing her alcoholism, her family life, and her 50-year 
marriage. There we go. Betty Ford is honored this month for breaking 
the deadly silence on breast cancer. But she know that's for millions 
of Americans breast cancer survivors and people in addiction recovery, 
her sobriety and life themselves are enormous symbols of hope. For 
that, says Betty Ford, she is grateful. I feel wonderful about myself 
at 80. I think I'm very lucky to have lived this long. 80-year-old 
Betty Ford as interviewed for NBC news by Maria shriver as it originally 
aired on "dateline NBC." We should also adhere that October is breast 
cans area wariness month. In the 24 years since Betty Ford was diagnosed, 
there have been vast improvements in the awareness, detection and 
treatment of breast cancer translating to higher survival rates. Betty 
Ford continues to speak her mind in the current issue of "people" 
magazine. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>