<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981019.2100.1557 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With apologies for cutting off Alan Simpson of the we're also joined 
by congressman Lee Hamilton. Senator Simpson I want to go back to 
something you said. It's all local when talking about elections like 
the one we're about to see. Yet why is it and how is it that some 
of these people you hear in the media keep saying they're sending 
the President a message? It sure looked that way in 1994 when everything 
went republican against bill Clinton. Have there been any studies 
of what goes through voters' minds as they head for their local member 
of Congress that they are sending some kind of message to the guy 
in power? They're not sending any mess kwladge at all. I'll never 
forget my old man, ran for governor, was elected, ran again, was defeated. 
Annie and I, my wife, sitting in a little restaurant. Some guy next 
to us says, hey, we got rid that have guy Simpson finally. The other 
guy said, who had we get? The other guy said, who cares. Now, don't 
look into it too deeply. There are too many experts in politics, I 
can tell you that. People vote against. That's what they do. They'll 
vote against. They'll vote for. But all of this mystery, the pundits, 
you got to understand how the american people look. At these political 
shows. These grave looking guys, they don't give a wit. And they're 
not right anyway. They're off the wall. They overthink stuff. Lee, 
do you think no one has ever voted for Lee Hamilton, just against 
the other guy? I'm hesitant to contradict Al Simpson. He's one of 
the most colorful and likeable men in American politics. I think elections 
vary. I think there are elections when the people send a message. 
1994 was one of them. They said to the democrats we don't want you 
fellows running this place. We think Bill Clinton stands for big government. 
They really did send a message. But I think Al is basically correct. 
In most elections people are very much concentrated on their home 
situation, the local school, can I get affordable health care down 
at the local hospital, how's my retirement shaping up? These are the 
issue that's really count for them. They look upon members of the 
house. I'm not so sure about the Senate. But they look upon members 
of the house as local officials. And they want you to help them and 
to represent them against that big -- great big government. They want 
to know that you, as a candidate, as a representative are on their 
side. And since you brought up the word local, it's our local station 
that's need to take a break. Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>