<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981019.2100.1943 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> MISCELLANEOUS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A lot more to tell you about. Weighs come back, our first look at 
the big three weekly newsmagazines. It was one of those moments in 
life you want to keep. My husband thought he was getting dinner. My 
daughter...A new friend. Time to cook the lobster! When the moment 
came, I didn't have to worry about the light being low hey! That's 
my lobster! Or them turning out blurry because they were moving. With 
Kodak Max, I knew I'd get my picture. Low light, sunlight, action 
or still Kodak Max is all you need to know about film. Monday night. 
Time for our look at the big three weekly newsmagazines just now hitting 
newspaper news stands, we should say, around the country. "Time," 
while teasing a story about Vegas and Steve winn's new casino, talks 
about the war over gays in light of the horrible story out of the 
state of Wyoming. "Newsweek," given tonight's preview at tomorrow 
morning's "New York Times" story this may take on a new meaning. They 
promote the flight back into space, says the cover. And U.S. news, 
some things never change. Best jobs for the future issue. Also 20 
hot career tracks inside "U.S. news." Also this, Washington whispers. 
They call it Tipper Gore's turn to step out. They say "she's beginning 
to raise her political profile Sean set to burst on to the campaign 
trail in Ohio, California, and Alabama later this month to push an 
agenda of family values and meant ahealth. She had planned to start 
earlier. Aides say she's rested enough and wants to hit the campaign 
trail even if she has to use crutches. Katarina witt decided to accept 
that offer from "Playboy." Coming soon to a newsstand near you. That 
is a peak as offered by "time" magazine. 10-page pictoral in the December 
issue. "Newsweek" -- a sad good-bye from the staff of "Newsweek" a 
long article of their beloved editor, died at the age of 58 after 
a long bout with leukemia. Died of pneumonia. And a note to parents, 
just when you're trying to teach sportsmanship and respect a magazine 
like "sports illustrated" comes out with a cover story that says "kill 
the umps." Some would say exactly the wrong spirit for the sporting 
journal of record in this country. But there you have it. The cover 
of "sports illustrated" this week as well. When we come back, a woman 
whose name is now synonymous with recovery. Ere are certain things... 
your body is going through-- that the chemo is doing to you. I was 
tired. Very, very tired. One time, my grandchildren were all over, 
and they all went out and got ice cream. And they're all lined up 
on the Porch-- all with ice cream. They start from the age of three... 
all the way up to 18 years of age. What a photograph that had to be. 
I did not have the energy... to go upstairs to grab the camera. I 
missed the photograph-- to me, a once in a lifetime opportunity. Go 
out. Live your life. That's what I'm doing now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>