<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981019.2100.0684 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tomorrow a federal appeals court is scheduled to consider whether 
or not to reinstate Paula Jones' sexual harassment lawsuit against 
the president. The judge today released hundred of pages from the 
case including papers that show Mr. Clinton's legal team was ready 
to make an issue out of Paula jones' sexual history personally. All 
of this amid continuing talk about the president's other domestic 
problems. We are joined tonight by presidential biographer David maraniss, 
his new book "the Clinton enigma" has just been publish and is going 
to book stores now. David Jones us from our NBC news Washington bureau. 
Here we are talking about the Middle East peace talks going on in 
Maryland. The president feeling enough confidence about it to cancell 
a fundraiser in california. The irony of which Andrea Mitchell already 
pointed out. Yet this huge preoccupation. He must be getting briefings 
on the status of this case, of the House of Representatives. Is this 
vintage compartmentization? He's capable of dealing with both of those 
issues and many others at the same time. Sometimes I think that normal 
things like trying to bring peace to the Middle East is the distraction 
for Bill Clinton and the routine is dealing with the personal crisis. 
And some say, in almost sad terms, the poor man is torn, distracted 
by his personal case while trying to deal in the Middle East. The 
sinics among politicalcoes in Washington say what he needs is to get 
involved in a case like the Middle East, and emerge a hero for trying. 
Slightly. The last two or three weeks, as I sort of would predict, 
because it's always the case with Bill Clinton, have been very good 
for him. Right when everybody was starting to write him off again. 
Both dealing with the Middle East whether it succeeds or not, the 
way he helped negotiate the budget agreement. Bill Clinton at his 
strongest. That's part of the enigma of this man, that dueality of 
his character why he shows the bever side but disappoints his friends 
with the other side and always disappointing his enany mies because 
they think they got him and they never do We have another glimpse 
of the now familiar wording that he's fond of, the construction of 
which can be intricate, though it seems off the cuff. David, the gist 
of your book is taking apart a very brief speech and finding awfully 
its sentences the genesis in his personality. I want to replay for 
you a very short portion of the speech and have you give us your read 
ton as did you in the book. Here it is. I told the grand jury today, 
and I say to you now, that at no time did I ask anyone to lie to hide 
or destroy evidence, or to take any other unlawfully action. The significance 
of what we have just seen? To me what that evoked was Watergate, actually. 
The infamous line from Richard Nixon, "I am not a crook," Bill Clinton 
saying he was not a crook and didn't tell anybody to lie. The tremendous 
irony of that, because of the way that in 1974 in that summer the 
political lives of Bill Clinton and his future wife Hillary rodham 
were forthed by Watergate. It was Bill Clinton running for Congress 
in northwest, Arkansas that summer who said that he was disappointed 
that the republicans were being dishonest and that it wasn't that 
they didn't know the difference between right and wronbut that they 
didn't care. He called for nix dwron resign if he lied. While Hillary 
Rodham was working on the house impeachment inquiry staff that very 
summer, analyzing what the constitutional grounds would be for impeachment 
and listening to the tapes of Richard Nixon talking about to his aides, 
plotting the sprs. Here we are 25 years later nearly, Watergate being 
the mountain to everyone of our generation of the abusive power. Yet 
the symbols are unfortunately Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton dealing 
with the impeachment hearings. The book is out. David, we'll continue 
to call upon you to walk us through this. Thank you very much for 
coming in tonight. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>