<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981019.2100.0085 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
First tonight, tomorrow morning's "New York Times" will break a story 
that will likely have a huge impacts. It says, in effect, that safety 
experts are now concerned about the safety of the shuttle mission 
that is a week away from sending John Glenn back into space it quotes 
sources as saying the program is in effect, Rusty. It's bane long 
time between flights. The mission is, as a result, unusually risky. 
As it a quote. The story reports there is real apprehension about 
the dangers of this mission by this shuttle, discovery, and the risk 
of a real disaster. The story appears on the front page of tomorrow 
morning's "New York Times" national section as written by William 
J. broad. Bill broad is with us tonight by telephone after filing 
his story for the morning edition of the paper. Why don't you talk 
us through your findings? I've read what you've submitted. It's an 
explosive story. So to speak. Brian, as you know, the space shuttle 
is a hot Rod. It has to run regularly or else it becomes unpredictable. 
As you know, we've fallen into a weird situation here where there's 
been a Fife-month gap that suddenly loomed up. There had been no shuttle 
missions for five months because of problems that russia's having 
with its contradiction to the international space station. As a result, 
people are worried about unusual risks with this hot Rod rite now. 
NASA is extremely aware of this. They've been exercising the team's 
extra hard. They've been holding three times as many mock launchings 
and four times as many mock fuelings. But there's a -- still is a 
strong undercurrent of worery. There is no substitute, as you know, 
better than most, for the real thing. But is there anything preemptive, 
that is to say, corrective in advance, that they can do beyond three 
times as many, four times as many mock launches and mock trainings? 
One of the things that impressed me ways guy at the NASA's safety 
advisory panel. He -- the thing he hit hardest is the thing that they're 
doing the most. Which is, be aware. Understand that this is an unusual 
situation. And if you keep your eyes open and if you practice hard 
and you know that it's a little bit different, you should be home 
free. That's the message they've had special safety days down at the 
cape. They're working real hard on raising people's consciousness 
and trying to make them aware of this. As a result, they all say the 
team is extra sharp, and everybody's raring to go. Bill, safety wasn't 
ever, again, supposed to be an outstanding issue after challenger. 
The last time we heard concerns like this was around about the time 
all americans learned formerly Morton thicall. This was supposed to 
be a new era of redundancies. Are these people raising flags doing 
so on background with you? This story is going to have a big impact 
and probably cause a huge reaction with NASA tomorrow. They're doing 
it because they're worried. I talked to a guy who knows the shuttle 
intimately Sean hain. He says this is a hairy situation. But the thing 
that makes me -- give me a good feeling is that NASA takes it seriously. 
Unlike Martin and the challenger where they were fighting the bad 
news, they're embracing this problem. They're saying, look, this is 
an unusual situation wex know it's different. We know there's been 
this big gap here that's developed in our schedule. For reasons we 
can't control so I detect nowhere a sense that NASA's trying to hide 
from it. They're confronting it head on. That makes -- gives me a 
feeling that they're going to succeed in hand 1-2-3 inning just fine. 
The storyal peer in the morning paper. Thank you very much. It's an 
important story. Days away from the United States sending one of the 
few genuine living heroes back into space. Thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>