<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981019.1830.0896 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth." Tonight, the latest complication in health care 
for older Americans -- HMOs dumping Medicare patients. Nearly 39 million 
older Americans are Medicare recipients. Of that number, 32 million 
are covered by the traditional plan. 6.5 million belong to an alternative 
plans called HMOs. But now, those alternative plans are dumping older 
clients, leaving seniors and their children wondering how just they'll 
cope with hefty medical costs. NBC's Fred Francis tonight, "in depth." 
Tammy zigenfus of Texas looks happy picking the family's halloween 
pumpkin, but she says she's very worried about her parents retired 
in Florida who have just learned, along with over 400,000 older americans, 
that they have been dropped by their Medicare HMO. What I'm afraid 
of is my parents won't -- and other seniors will put off getting medical 
care because they feel they can't afford it. Tammy's parents Mel and 
Gayle breitner cannot afford it. They were paying a small fee to the 
HMO for full medical care, after agreeing to give up their personal 
doctor. Medicare HMOs launched in 1985 were designed to provide cheaper 
care with the federal government subsidizing private insurance companies. 
By contrast, traditional Medicare is more expensive for the patient 
because it lets you choose your own doctor and makes you pay for prescriptions. 
The breitners retired to Florida, hoping to stretch their savings 
and expecting that their HMO health insurance would still cover them. 
I never dreamed that there would be areas, counties, states where 
Medicare paid so little that insurance companies could not afford 
to give insurance. But many of the HMO insurance companies, have complained 
that they are losing money and the federal Medicare payments to them 
are not enough. So far, Congress has refused even to negotiate a raise. 
And some in the HMO industry predict that what many thought was the 
health care program of the future for older Americans is near collapse. 
We believe that this is, in fact, just the tip of the iceberg. And 
unless these midcourse corrections are made, more seniors will be 
in jeopardy. In Florida and 28 other states, where Medicare HMOs are 
quitting the business, many older Americans are confused about what 
to do. Experts say sign with another Medicare HMO staying in business 
if one is available. If you can't, you'll automatically be placed 
back into the more costly, traditional Medicare plan. And what about 
those free services Medicare HMOs provided? You'll have to buy a so-called 
"medigap policy" to cover those extras. For the breitners, who have 
no other HMO nearby, paying for that supplemental medigap policy will 
soon cut into their nest egg by more than $2,000 a year. Daughter 
Tammy in Texas is ready to help but knows her parents are too proud 
to ask. I think there's an element of fear in it, also, of becoming 
a Burden to their family. And those who don't have family, just a 
fear of, "what am I going to do I if I become ill?" a real fear for 
400,000 older Americans and perhaps many, many more if changes are 
not made. Fred Francis, NBC news, Polk county, Florida. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>