<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0378 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the aftermath of Ricky Ledee's weekend World Series ascent, a soda 
can was hanging from the fingertips of his left hand, the chain holding 
his crucifix was drooping out one side of his shirt, and a most interesting 
hypothetical was dangling in front of his face. What if? What if Bernie 
Williams had just played his last game in center field at Yankee Stadium, 
and the most famous of all New York City baseball positions was soon 
to have a vacancy sign? Could Ledee fill it? Would he campaign for 
the chance? He said, in a voice so soft you moved closer to hear him: 
``This is not a franchise that says, `Let the rookies play.' They 
want to win every year, so maybe I just have to come and play and 
be quiet.'' Which, in a manner of speaking, was Ledee's way of asserting 
that he has every intention of following the quiet example set by 
Williams, mentor and friend. Ledee was saying, yes, he could be another 
strong, introspective presence, another home-grown Yankee who fits 
this most egalitarian team like a glove. He could just as well do 
it in left field, where he's played flawlessly in Games 1 and 2, in 
addition to reaching base in six of eight times at bat. ``Myself, 
I wouldn't like to see him go, even if it means more playing time 
for me,'' said Ledee, who turns 25 next month. ``He's too good a player, 
too good a person. I'd rather keep Bernie Williams and stay in left.'' 
This will all play itself out in due time, but there is more Yankee 
business with the Padres in San Diego starting Tuesday night before 
the Williams Watch can officially begin. First things first, as Williams 
told Ledee after Williams' two-run, second-inning homer plated the 
fifth and sixth Yankee runs in their 9-3 Game 2 rout Sunday night. 
``Take a curtain call,'' Ledee told Williams. Forget the crowd, Williams 
told the rookie. Just stay focused on the game. Williams did tip his 
cap to the outfield fans before the following inning, but more than 
typically reserved, his postseason demeanor has been mysteriously 
detached, the symptom of a man in emotional retreat. Vague references 
to ``personal problems'' have crept into articles, and regardless 
of what that means, most people around the Yankees more than suspect 
that following the World Series, Williams is as good as gone. As much 
a loss as that would be, I generally do not make it my business to 
tell athletes where they should play. Williams has labored under a 
string of one-year contracts, on the way to unfettered and well-earned 
free agency. Under the financial gun this season, he was the American 
League's batting champion. He is 30 and will never have better negotiating 
leverage in his life. Patience has been a staple Williams virtue, 
one he has preached to Ledee, who has found himself stuck at various 
levels of the Yankee system. Stuck in A ball, in Class AAA, behind 
veterans Tim Raines, Darryl Strawberry and Chad Curtis. Stuck, what 
seems like just a few minutes ago, behind his comrade rookie, Shane 
Spencer. Williams, from Bayamon, Puerto Rico, has told Ledee, from 
Salinas, Puerto Rico, to consider where Williams was five years ago, 
when he was exactly Ledee's age and still struggling for permanent 
Bronx residency. Jorge Posada, out of Santurce, Puerto Rico, is the 
Yankees' everyday catcher of the future, and he recently turned 27. 
The point is that baseball, thankfully, has not been taken over by 
kids not old enough to drink, drive or deliver in the clutch. As much 
as baseball is a sport, it's a craft. Ledee's quick lefty swing was 
not developed overnight. ``There have been times when I felt like 
I wanted to quit,'' Ledee said. ``Bernie's helped me through it. He's 
always talking to me about the game, about personal things. He's that 
way as a person.'' Friend. Mentor. Big brother. Father figure. Maybe 
Williams has been a little bit of everything. Ledee was 12 when his 
father, Omar, a well-known salsa singer, fell asleep at the wheel 
late one night and died in a crash. His mother, Ana, was pregnant 
at the time with the second of his two younger brothers. Ledee wanted 
to say that one matures rapidly as a 16-year-old professional ball 
player who happens to be the family's primary wage earner. Every year 
for a long time, he has finished his minor-league chores and gone 
straight home to supplement his income in the Puerto Rican leagues, 
where he plays center. ``Oh, sure,'' he said when asked if he had 
the range to play the position every day in the Bronx. But why dwell 
on that? First things first. There's a World Series to be won, Bernie's 
still here, and maybe, just maybe, he'll stay. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>