<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0352 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the biggest rebellion yet against a health insurance company, more 
than 400 doctors in Dallas have terminated their contracts with Aetna 
Inc.'s health maintenance organization, and Aetna has retaliated by 
cutting off their access to all its Dallas patients. As a result, 
nearly 30,000 patients covered by Aetna must accept other doctors 
who remain under contract to the company. Or the patients face paying 
the insurgent doctors cash for their care if they choose to remain 
with them, at least for the three or four months it will take the 
patients to sign up with other companies. The patients are caught 
in the crossfire over disputes between the nation's fourth-largest 
health insurance company and one of the numerous doctors associations 
that have sprung up around the nation to help doctors build contracting 
influence against the insurance companies. In Dallas and in many other 
cities, doctors bristle most about Aetna and its health care company, 
Aetna U.S. Healthcare, with 16 million subscribers to its HMOs and 
other types of health plans. ``Aetna's perceived as the worst kid 
on the block,'' said Dr. Phil Berry, an orthopedic surgeon in Dallas. 
But Dr. Arthur Leibowitz, Aetna U.S. Healthcare's chief medical officer, 
said that in Dallas, as in the rest of the country, Aetna was enrolling 
physicians far faster than it was losing them. ``Overwhelmingly we 
have been successful in negotiating with doctors,'' he said. ``But 
we won't agree with everybody, every time.'' Aetna, like most managed 
care companies, has been struggling with three years of sagging profits 
and pressure from the investors to control costs. Among the leading 
companies, physicians say, Aetna is the most aggressive in negotiating 
contracts. Physicians have quit Aetna HMOs in Ohio, too, and the Georgia 
Medical Association says that disgruntled doctors in Atlanta are threatening 
to follow. In Florida last summer, Aetna averted a rebellion only 
after the state ordered changes in physician contracts that it found 
were illegal. ``Over the course of this past year, their posture was 
one of `we don't have to talk to you,' '' said Nancy Gillette, a lawyer 
for the Ohio State Medical Association, which sought to intervene 
for doctors. Paul Shanor, executive director of the Georgia association, 
said, ``What I'm hearing is take-it-or-leave-it negotiating.'' Aetna 
executives attribute some of the tension to cultural changes at the 
company that began only a few years ago. Aetna Inc., of Hartford, 
Conn., once a sedate, old-line insurance company, has refashioned 
itself as a managed health care company and is digesting two big HMO 
company acquisitions, U.S. Healthcare two years ago and NYLCare this 
year. ``We're large,'' Leibowitz said. ``We're prominent. We went 
through a transformation of our business.'' He said the mergers ``contribute 
to a sense of change and difficulty on the part of physicians.'' In 
Dallas, where several big groups of physicians have been feuding with 
Aetna for more than a year, this month's rebellion involves the Genesis 
Physicians' Practice Association, which negotiates and manages group 
contracts with scores of insurers that provide health care for the 
employees of Dallas businesses. Aetna U.S. Healthcare's contract with 
Genesis covered 562 physicians who collectively assumed the risk for 
treating Aetna HMO subscribers. Genesis physicians said that to monitor 
the cost of care and avoid losing money under the contract, especially 
for the HMO members, they needed prompt access to the information 
that Aetna gathers about the treatments, medications and trips to 
the hospital that patients receive. Yet the data would take weeks 
and months to obtain, doctors said, and it was rarely satisfactory. 
Aetna has also been chronically slow in paying doctors' claims, a 
charge supported by the high numbers of complaints against Aetna that 
the Texas Insurance Commission reports. ``They're the most difficult 
payer for us to work with,'' said Dr. Evan Bates, an ear, nose and 
throat surgeon who is one of the rebels. Leibowitz attributed problems 
with information flow to an intermediary that participated in the 
Aetna-Genesis contract and said that the flow is being restored. He 
said the company has superb data processing technology. ``There isn't 
anybody that can give the information that we can,'' he said. Disputes 
have also arisen over language in contracts that managed care physicians 
must sign with Aetna. The Texas Medical Association cites Aetna Health 
Plans of Texas' standard, 17-page ``Specialist Physician Agreement'' 
in which the association has identified 17 provisions that it finds 
confusing, offensive, misleading or legally questionable. Among the 
provisions is one requiring physicians to accept contract terms, including 
those covering fees, that Aetna could subsequently change. Another 
says physicians must abide by the company's review decisions to approve 
or deny a procedure for a patient; yet another declares that patient 
care is the ``sole responsibility'' of the physician. The most contentious, 
however, is a passage that physicians call a ``gag clause'' because, 
they say, it discourages them from telling a patient of all treatment 
options for a disease, whether or not the insurer approves of them. 
The industry says the clauses are very rare, a view that the General 
Accounting Office has confirmed. Nevertheless, section 1.3 of the 
Aetna Texas contract says physicians shall not ``imply to members 
that their care or access to care will be inferior due to the source 
of payment.'' The medical association's analysis of the provision 
says, ``The language would stop the physician from honestly dealing 
with the patient if it will harm the plan.'' Leibowitz did not defend 
the provision. ``We do not intend any part of the contract to be construed 
as a gag clause,'' he said. Asked why the contract included the provision, 
he said, ``It's a fair point.'' For all these reasons and after months 
of negotiations, the Genesis group broke its contract to treat Aetna's 
8,000 HMO patients. Then Aetna invoked an ``all products'' policy, 
rare among managed care companies, that meant Genesis doctors who 
refused HMO patients would be denied access to patients in all Aetna 
plans. As a result, close to 30,000 Genesis patients are losing their 
Aetna coverage. Faced with losing all their Aetna patients, some of 
the doctors (140 according to Aetna, fewer than 100, according to 
Genesis) have signed individual contracts with Aetna and are keeping 
their patients. The other doctors are armed with contracts with as 
many as 60 other plans, and they are betting that since they have 
left Aetna, their patients will leave, too, join another plan and 
stick with their doctors. But doctors say their rebellion against 
Aetna poses a test for patients of their loyalty to the doctors. For 
those patients whose employers permit it, a switch to another plan 
will not take effect until Jan. 1 or later, so in the interim the 
patients will have to find some other way to pay for their care. ``We 
do risk losing somewhere between 8 and 15 percent of the market, and 
we do risk breaking the physician-patient relationship'' said Dr. 
Ralph Turner, a gynecologist and president of Genesis. ``We're counting 
on patients to be more loyal to their doctors than to an insurance 
company.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>