<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0082 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Democrats are salivating over the prospect of making Independent Counsel 
Kenneth Starr their star witness in next month's House impeachment 
hearings. They hope that by criticizing the special prosecutor and 
putting his tactics in the spotlight, they may deflect some attention 
from President Clinton's legal problems. But would Starr accept an 
invitation, or a summons, to appear before the Judiciary Committee? 
It is not clear that he has to, but he almost certainly would. ``Judge 
Starr will continue to cooperate with and respond to the Congress,'' 
said Charles Bakaly, a spokesman for the independent counsel's office. 
There is precedent for having an independent counsel testify before 
Congress. In 1997 Donald Smaltz, the independent counsel who has been 
investigating former Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy, appeared before 
the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee to complain that 
the Justice Department had undermined his investigation by opposing 
its expansion. After complaining about White House delaying tactics 
and stonewalling, it would be difficult for Starr to avoid testifying. 
And after more than four years of keeping largely mum as he investigated 
President Clinton and faced mounting attacks from White House allies, 
Starr might actually welcome the opportunity to introduce himself 
to the American public in his own words. Even some Democrats are worried 
that Starr, a former federal judge and solicitor general, might give 
a strong performance as a witness. As Democrats planned an expansive 
inquisition of Starr, House Judiciary Chairman Henry Hyde was talking 
of streamlining the 15 separate impeachment charges outlined by his 
committee's chief counsel, David Schippers, and of trying to wrap 
up the proceedings by the end of the year. But Hyde and his Republican 
colleagues would be hard-pressed to oppose Democratic moves to put 
Starr on the witness stand, even if they had the votes to do so. (The 
21 Republicans on the committee can overrule the 16 Democrats, but 
Hyde has said he hopes there can be bipartisan agreement on witnesses.) 
``The reality is that they'd be clobbered politically if they didn't 
call Kenneth Starr,'' said Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass. Apparently recognizing 
that reality, Hyde has said that an appearance by Starr is fine with 
him. Clinton's Judiciary Committee allies have put Starr at the top 
of their wish list of witnesses. ``Kenneth Starr deserves to be before 
the Judiciary Committee for many, many things,'' said Rep. John Conyers 
Jr., the panel's senior Democrat, who also served during the Watergate 
hearings two decades ago. Other Democrats on the committee have said 
they may also want to summon some of Starr's deputies, as well as 
a group of conservative lawyers, including a one-time law partner 
of Starr. These lawyers advised the legal team working on Paula Corbin 
Jones' sexual harassment lawsuit against the president and helped 
steer Linda Tripp to Starr last January, launching the sex-and-perjury 
probe of Clinton. Although the first meeting between White House lawyers 
and the committee lawyers will not begin until later this week, the 
president's allies are already mapping out the areas on which they 
would like to grill Starr. A major focus for the Democrats will be 
to pursue allegations of collusion between the Jones lawyers and Starr's 
office. Democrats have reviewed an Oct. 5 letter from David Kendall, 
one of Clinton's private attorneys, to Attorney General Janet Reno 
in which Kendall raised questions about communications between Starr's 
office and the Jones team. One issue raised in the letter is a report 
in The New York Times about Starr's office having received, through 
intermediaries, a tip about Ms. Tripp before she contacted the independent 
counsel's office. Democrats have also seized on a National Public 
Radio report about Starr's conversations with one of Ms. Jones' former 
lawyers before he was appointed independent counsel. Starr did not 
disclose these consultations to the Justice Department before requesting 
an expansion of the investigation into matters relating to Monica 
Lewinsky and the Jones case, lawyers familiar with the discussions 
said. Democrats may also question Starr about whether his office leaked 
confidential information to the news media, a matter that is already 
under investigation on the orders of a federal judge in Washington. 
Starr has denied any improper contacts with reporters. Other areas 
the Democrats plan to pursue, according to several committee aides, 
include the grounds on which Starr sought to expand his Whitewater 
inquiry into the Lewinsky case; his office's treatment of Ms. Lewinsky 
during early immunity talks last January, and the independent counsel's 
dealings with Ms. Tripp in the days before he received permission 
to expand his investigation. ``The idea is to show that Starr is the 
most overzealous prosecutor ever,'' said a strategist with close ties 
to the White House. But the potential for such a strategy to backfire 
is not insignificant. The fanatical prosecutor Democrats hope to introduce 
in televised hearings is a polished lawyer whose testimony could deflate 
the caricature of a pursed-lipped chief of the nation's sex police. 
Though his White House critics have portrayed him as having a tin 
ear when it comes to public relations, Starr could use his turn as 
a witness to lay out a compelling case against the president. ``He's 
not going to come off the way James Carville portrays him,'' said 
Theodore Olson, a Washington lawyer and friend of Starr. ``He doesn't 
drool. He doesn't have two heads or pointed teeth.'' Olson said he 
expected Starr to be a sympathetic witness who would not lose his 
cool no matter how hostile the questions get. ``I don't think I've 
ever seen Ken get mad,'' he said. Some Democrats are so nervous that 
Starr's appearance could boomerang that they want to take his deposition 
behind closed doors, a proposal Republicans would probably reject. 
One Democratic strategist fretted that a Starr appearance at impeachment 
hearings might wind up like Clinton's videotaped testimony before 
Starr's grand jury. ``The Republicans kept saying how devastating 
the tape would be,'' said the Democrat, ``but the public sympathized 
with him. It's natural to sympathize with the person in the hot seat.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>