<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0468 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A 20-year-old man accused in the torture and killing of his former 
high school English teacher was in the victim's apartment the day 
of the crime, his lawyers said Monday, but they argued that the killing 
was done by a second defendant and that others involved in the case 
might still be free. But the prosecution countered in its opening 
statement that the defendant in this trial, Corey Arthur, was the 
gunman who fired a single shot into the head of Jonathan Levin on 
May 30, 1997, after torturing him for his automated banking card. 
The contrasting arguments came on the first day of the first-degree 
murder trial in a case that stunned the city and led some teachers 
to question how accessible they should make themselves to their students 
outside school. During opening arguments, a defense lawyer, Anthony 
Ricco, suggested that Arthur had been taken advantage of by his co-defendant, 
Montoun Hart, 26, and other accomplices who Ricco said are still at 
large in the killing of Levin, a popular teacher at William Howard 
Taft High School in the South Bronx and the son of Gerald Levin, the 
chairman of Time Warner Inc. ``The evidence is going to show that 
Montoun Hart and others took advantage of this young man for their 
own murderous purposes,'' Ricco told jurors in state Supreme Court 
in Manhattan. Eugene Hurley, an assistant district attorney, told 
jurors in his opening statement that Arthur had a motive to kill Levin 
that Hart did not have _ to eliminate the one witness who could positively 
identify him. ``Jonathan Levin did not know Montoun Hart,'' Hurley 
said. ``But he was Corey Arthur's former teacher.'' Arthur and Hart 
are being tried separately on charges of carrying out the killing 
of Levin, 31. The police have said they believe there are no other 
accomplices. Hart's lawyer, David Stern, said in a telephone interview 
Monday that his client did not kill Levin. ``I don't believe that 
what he's saying is true,'' he said, referring to the argument made 
by Ricco. Hart's trial is to begin on Jan. 18. New details of the 
crime's brutality emerged as testimony began in Arthur's trial. Dr. 
John Hayes, a senior New York City medical examiner, testified that 
a knife or sharp object was apparently drawn across Levin's throat 
three times as his head was being held back. The wounds were not deep 
enough to kill Levin, but one was 4 inches long, Hayes said. Hayes' 
dry, technical descriptions of the wounds drew rapt attention. He 
said that Levin also had been stabbed in the chest and the back of 
the neck before being shot point-blank. Other prosecution witnesses 
included friends of Levin who broke down on the stand as they recounted 
their frantic efforts to find him. Georgia Williams, a friend of Levin 
who is also an English teacher at Taft, said she and other teachers 
knew something was wrong when he did not show up for a gathering on 
May 31, a Saturday, and then did not arrive at school the following 
Monday. She testified that she and another teacher went to Levin's 
apartment and called the police after frantically asking neighbors 
if they had seen Levin. A neighbor with a key let them and police 
officers inside, she said. ``I stepped inside the door and probably 
took two or three steps,'' she said. ``Then somebody screamed.'' More 
than 30 relatives, friends and former students of Levin attended the 
opening statements. In a reflection of the disparate worlds Levin 
lived in, men and women in business suits commiserated with his former 
students from Taft during breaks. ``He was a really nice teacher,'' 
said Annie Cabrera, 21, a former pupil of Levin. ``He taught me a 
lot. I'm here to support him.'' On the opposite side of the courtroom, 
four members of Arthur's family sat behind defense lawyers. In his 
opening argument, Ricco said Arthur had not named all his accomplices 
and had been made a scapegoat by a police department under intense 
pressure to find Levin's killer. He said that the police pressured 
people into making false statements against Arthur and that he would 
attack the credibility of Carlethia Weeks, a former girlfriend of 
Arthur who is to testify that he told her of shooting Levin. But prosecutors 
on Monday painted a chilling portrait of Arthur, who left Taft after 
a drug conviction in 1994. They said that he got Levin to open the 
door by misleading him. An answering machine recorded Arthur's asking 
Levin to pick up when he called at 4:55 p.m., saying, ``It's important.'' 
Hurley, the prosecutor, said the two suspects then quickly attacked 
Levin. He apparently gave up his bank code quickly, with Hart withdrawing 
the money at 5:15 p.m. A witness testified Monday that he saw Hart 
withdraw money from a nearby bank machine at the time. And Hurley 
said that DNA tests showed that Levin's blood was on a pair of jeans 
found in Hart's apartment. The issue of who fired the fatal shot could 
prove to be the difference between a conviction on first-degree murder 
and one on second-degree murder. A first-degree murder conviction 
carries a sentence of life in prison without parole. A conviction 
for second-degree murder carries a sentence of 25 years to life, with 
a possibility of parole. The Manhattan district attorney, Robert Morgenthau, 
could have sought the death penalty against Arthur, but chose not 
to. At the end of Monday's session, members of the jury were shown 
a series of photos of the crime scene. The graphic pictures showed 
Levin's one-bedroom apartment, and, in its kitchen, his prone body. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>