<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0076 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A good portion of the financial system was buried under a mountain 
of bad debts that was growing bigger with each passing day. Yet politicians, 
pressed by powerful interests and afraid of committing huge sums of 
taxpayer money to the problem, were dithering about how to respond. 
Other nations looked on with concern and disdain. There are striking 
parallels between the United States in 1988 as it struggled to address 
its savings and loan crisis and Japan in 1998 as it grapples with 
a banking system so burdened with sour loans that it has virtually 
stopped lending. In those similarities are many lessons about mistakes 
to be avoided. And given that the United States eventually dealt with 
the near-collapse of its savings and loan industry _ decisively if 
belatedly _ there may also be a road map in the American experience 
toward a solution for Japan and other nations where a recovery from 
the global economic crisis depends on resuscitating their enfeebled 
banking systems. Japan is still in the process of recognizing the 
severity of its banking problems and that any solution will be expensive 
and painful. It took a big step down that path Friday when the Parliament 
agreed on major elements of a plan to spend around $500 billion of 
taxpayer money to shore up ailing banks and make it easier for the 
government to take over insolvent ones. Now the Japanese government, 
which has allowed the problem to fester for years, has to prove to 
a skeptical world that it has the resolve to use those tools. The 
Clinton administration, in particular, is convinced that Japan cannot 
pull itself out of recession and help address the rest of Asia's woes 
until it has dealt with the problem. It has grown increasingly impatient 
with Tokyo for not moving more aggressively. It maybe worth remembering, 
however, that it took the United States years to face up to the damage 
done to the economy by the wholesale failures that swept the savings 
and loan industry during the late 1980s. Much like their Japanese 
counterparts now, U.S. regulators and industry executives initially 
bet that they could wait out the problem, that depressed prices for 
the real estate they had foreclosed on would bounce back, that a stronger 
economy would eventually strengthen their borrowers and enable them 
to pay up. ``The hardest thing is getting a consensus that you have 
a problem that can't be solved by conventional means,'' said John 
Ryan, a former head of the Resolution Trust Corp., the agency set 
up to sell off real estate and other assets of failed savings institutions. 
``It's a very difficult consensus to achieve and we were a long time 
in achieving it. You can remember the time we spent in this country 
kidding ourselves and believing that the markets would bail us out.'' 
Indeed, it was only in 1989, after hundreds of savings institutions 
had failed and economists began frightening politicians into action 
by estimating that the problems would cost hundreds of billions of 
dollars to fix, that Congress and the Bush administration became serious 
about dealing with the crisis. In August 1989, Congress passed legislation 
intended to make it easier for regulators to seize control of insolvent 
or failing savings institutions and sell off their component parts. 
The idea was that the financial system's problems and the depressive 
effect they were having on the real estate market and the general 
economy were best solved by taking a painful hit in a concentrated 
period. The key to making it work was the RTC, which quickly became 
the repository of all the repossessed office buildings, strip malls 
and houses accumulated by unwise or unlucky or crooked savings and 
loan managers around the country, as well as their money-losing portfolios 
of high-risk junk bonds and other questionable assets. There was not 
much of a market for many of the properties. To get things moving, 
the agency sold some real estate and other assets for bargain prices. 
The sales drew more buyers for other properties, generating more competition 
and higher prices. The agency packaged some properties together to 
make them more attractive to investors, and spruced up others. From 
1989 through the early 1990s, the government shut down 747 savings 
institutions with assets of $455 billion. By the time they had all 
been picked apart and sold off by the RTC, the gap between what they 
owed depositors and what all their assets were worth was $84.7 billion. 
Combined with the $70 billion in losses run up by the several hundred 
additional savings institutions that had failed between 1986 and 1989, 
the total bill to the taxpayer and the industry-financed deposit insurance 
program was nearly $155 billion. But the problem was dealt with in 
just a few years _ the agency, its job completed, was disbanded in 
1995 _ and the country and the economy could move on. Now governments 
in Thailand, Indonesia, South Korea and Japan, among other countries, 
are trying to adopt big portions of the U.S. approach. Officials from 
Japan in particular have spent considerable time with officials at 
the Office of Thrift Supervision and other regulatory agencies in 
Washington. The main message they hear from the United States is the 
necessity of moving quickly. ``The RTC made the very tough decision 
just to sell at market regardless of what market was,'' said Jonathan 
Fiechter, the former top savings and loan regulator in America, who 
now works for the World Bank advising developing nations how to clean 
up financial messes. ``In Asia they're running into great trouble 
with criticism about fire sale prices, since you're often selling 
assets of people who are friends of very senior people,'' he said. 
``The lesson of the RTC was that eventually you get through it.'' 
But it is by no means clear that Japan, whose problems dwarf those 
of other nations, has accepted that lesson. Banks are reluctant to 
seek help from the government voluntarily, since doing so involves 
a loss of face for the managers, if not the loss of their jobs. Big 
borrowers, especially construction companies that are major contributors 
to the governing Liberal Democratic Party, are pressing the government 
to give banks more time. Troubled banks continue to hide their losses 
from regulators. Japan has cleared a big hurdle in proving willing 
in principle to spend huge sums of money on the problem. But Bert 
Ely, a consultant who tracked the savings and loan crisis here, said 
the Japanese plan so far has been nothing more than a facade, since 
the government has been unwilling to force banks to prove they can 
survive or shut them down. ``It looks almost entirely like what we 
were doing before 1989 in the sense of delaying the inevitable, postponing 
a resolution of the banking problems and of the bad loans,'' Ely said. 
``We learned that the hole in fact kept getting deeper,'' he added. 
``It's like a credit card balance. It doesn't peak and then subside, 
the problem just keeps getting bigger.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>