<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0492 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the Islanders play Edmonton Wednesday night, it should be televised 
on Cablevision-controlled Fox Sports New York. But you never know. 
Cablevision has refused to show three of four Islanders game this 
season on FSNY because ... well, we actually don't know why. Executives 
of Cablevision and its subsidiary, Madison Square Garden, have balked 
at answering any questions. What we know is that Cablevision-run FSNY 
refuses to carry Islanders games when they conflict with Devils games. 
Thus, viewers have seen only the Islanders-Boston telecast, not the 
Pittsburgh, Tampa Bay and St. Louis games. With no conflict, Wednesday's 
game will be on, but Cablevision-ruled FSNY could pull it for any 
reason, like maybe the team owners' refusing to sell big-screen televisions 
at a Cablevision-owned Nobody Beats the Wiz store. On Thursday, when 
the Islanders play the Rangers, it will be carried on MSG Network. 
Don't expect FSNY to carry it, even if Howie Rose needs to work a 
game or two with his new announcing partner, Joe Micheletti. On Saturday, 
the cycle will begin anew; The Islanders-Buffalo game conflicts with 
the Devils-Boston game. Guess which one isn't likely to be televised? 
This is what happens when too much power rests in one place. Through 
FSNY and MSG Network, Charles F. Dolan, chairman of Cablevision, controls 
the cable telecasts of the Islanders, Devils, Nets, Mets, Yankees, 
Knicks and Rangers. Since 1991, MSG has controlled the local broadcast 
rights of the Yankees (which were sold to Channel 5 last month) and 
recently bought the local broadcast rights of the Mets, which he will 
hawk to Channel 9 or 11. It may not be a legal monopoly, as defined 
by the Sherman Antitrust Act, or as interpreted by the U.S. Justice 
Department. But what Cablevision has built is a de facto sports monopoly, 
and it is acting as if there is no countervailing market power. It 
banned Islanders games without a proper explanation or promise to 
rebate even a teensy portion of subscriber fees. Think of it this 
way, but it will make you seethe: Cablevision, which owns the Rangers, 
is determining what Islanders fans can or cannot watch. ``We're going 
to demand that Cablevision provide justification for what they're 
doing and stop the discrimination against the Islanders,'' said David 
Seldin, the Islanders' president. ``Their silence is deafening.'' 
Cablevision is letting Joe Cohen, the Garden's executive vice president, 
who is responsible for FSNY, act as its front man. Unfortunately, 
Cohen isn't talking. Monday, however, he issued a five- paragraph 
statement icily discussing viewer confusion and low ratings when FSNY 
has added ``overflow'' channels to carry second games when two teams 
play simultaneously. Islanders ratings, he said, fell 35 percent on 
a second FSNY channel compared with ratings on FSNY Rangers, and Nets 
ratings fell 50 percent. We can't wait to see the news release when 
there is a conflict on MSG, and Cohen declares it ``uneconomic'' to 
show the Rangers on MSG2. Cohen may be right that cable systems inconsistently 
place FSNY and MSG's ``overflow'' channels, making it ``impossible 
to promote and publicize the games.'' True, but why take it out on 
the fans for a situation they can't change? Cohen failed to address 
why Cablevision made its decision and hid in a cave, why the Islanders' 
underachieving advertising suddenly irks FSNY, and why he rejected 
the Islanders' offer to pay the cost of putting the opening-night 
game on an overflow channel. It expressed no regret to irate fans. 
``It's strange,'' said Bob Gutkowski, president of the Marquee Group, 
a sports marketing firm, and the former Garden president. ``It's not 
what it appears to be. It's not Islanders' sales. They've always been 
a tough sell.'' Gutkowski said the Islanders could be the focus of 
Dolan's plan to re-price his sports empire into various tiers, selling 
games on basic, premium or pay-per-view levels, or in team-by-team 
plans. Making the Islanders a test case would be wickedly perfect 
because it would exploit a team at its weakest moment. And where is 
the Fox in Fox Sports New York? When the Fox/Liberty Networks paid 
$850 million for 40 percent of Rainbow Sports, the Cablevision-controlled 
entity that owns the Garden and eight regional sports channels, it 
did not buy the right to run FSNY and MSG. Yet they are parts of Fox 
Sports Net, which preaches the power of local sports as its mantra 
through its array of sports channels. FSNY's Islander strategy is 
mighty antithetical to the Fox credo. Dolan can do what he pleases 
with the Islanders. He doesn't have to show any games. Perhaps limiting 
Islanders telecasts will scare away potential buyers and lower the 
price tag for himself. It's smarter to buy on the cheap than pay $13 
million for the team's cable rights into the next millennium. Heck, 
why not bargain-hunt when he may end up buying the Yankees for a half-billion 
dollars or more? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>