<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0402 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As a Spanish judge broadened genocide charges against him, Gen. Augusto 
Pinochet, the former Chilean dictator detained here for extradition 
hearings, indicated Monday that he would resolutely oppose any attempt 
to try him in Madrid. Pinochet's statement, made through his British 
lawyer, is the first response since his arrest on Friday. It raised 
the question of the length of the extradition hearings if the general's 
lawyers use every possible form of appeal, up to the House of Lords, 
to extend and challenge a process that in other recent cases has continued 
for up to two years. The surprising arrest, which came as Pinochet 
was recovering from back surgery in a London clinic, has stoked a 
feud between the government and opposition Conservatives. Prime Minister 
Tony Blair's office insists that the detention was not a political 
act and the Conservatives accuse the government of misusing the law 
to political ends. Most of all, the case underscores the remarkable 
sea change in political culture after last year's election, when the 
Labor Party succeeded a Tory government that took no action against 
the general on many previous visits here. For Pinochet, who once described 
Britain as ``the ideal place to live'' and who provided the nation 
with one of its few allies in the Falklands war, Friday's late-night 
arrest represented an equally abrupt turnaround in the manner of the 
British authorities. ``General Pinochet entered the United Kingdom 
with the full prior knowledge of Her Majesty's government and with 
the approval of the Foreign Office,'' his lawyer, Michael Caplan, 
said in the statement. ``Upon his arrival he was treated as a VIP. 
Permission for him to enter and stay in this country was stamped in 
his diplomatic passport. Over recent years Pinochet has traveled without 
hindrance to the U.K. on several occasions with the approval of Her 
Majesty's government. ``Any attempt to extradite him from the United 
Kingdom will be resolutely opposed. Both he and his family are confident 
of success.'' Caplan would not answer a reporter's questions about 
whether Pinochet would seek bail in the hearings or where he might 
be held. He has been under police guard in the London Clinic. The 
Spanish judges who are seeking his extradition have 40 days from the 
time of his arrest to complete their formal request for the transfer. 
Britain rejects the argument that Pinochet is protected by diplomatic 
immunity because he carries a diplomatic passport and is a senator 
for life, a position he created, in Chile. British officials also 
said weighing extradition would not be clouded by memories of the 
general's 17-year rule, during which his regime shot on the streets 
or abducted an estimated 3,000 people. Pinochet came to power in the 
blood-stained takeover that toppled Dr. Salvador Allende Gossens, 
the left-wing leader who died in the coup. Pinochet relinquished power 
in 1990, and is shielded from prosecution in his own country. Home 
Secretary Jack Straw, who will ultimately make the decision on extradition, 
said Monday in a radio interview: ``Gen. Pinochet's record is well 
known. But so far as my position is concerned, I will treat this extradition 
request by Spain in the same way as I treat any other extradition 
request.'' Pinochet was initially detained on an international warrant 
that alleged that he had been involved in the murder, torture and 
genocide of 79 people. The Spanish judge who led the campaign for 
arrest, Baltasar Garzon, said initially the victims whom he enumerated 
were all Spaniards whose cases fell under Spanish jurisdiction because 
of that country's genocide laws. Garzon widened the accusation Monday, 
seeking Pinochet's detention on charges of genocide, torture and terrorism 
relating to 94 people, including citizens of Argentina, Britain, Chile 
and the United States. ``This widens the request for provisional unconditional 
imprisonment of Augusto Pinochet Ugarte for the reasons described 
in this resolution on crimes of genocide, terrorism and torture,'' 
the expanded warrant said. It accused Pinochet of having ordered the 
``physical elimination, torture, kidnapping and disappearances'' of 
citizens of other Latin American countries who were reported to have 
been handed over to the Chilean secret police from 1976 to 1983. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>