<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0360 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Reflecting the unstable situation in Kosovo, the Yugoslav army deployed 
two battalions of soldiers, tanks and artillery in the province in 
the last 24 hours, Western diplomats said Monday. The soldiers were 
sent out of their barracks after the Serb authorities had said three 
of their police officers were killed on Saturday night by guerrillas 
of the ethnic Albanian Kosovo Liberation Army. Western diplomatic 
monitors in Kosovo were showing increasing concern that the guerrillas 
were taking advantage of an agreement that demands that the Yugoslav 
leader, Slobodan Milosevic, reduce his force levels in the province 
or face NATO air strikes. A Western diplomatic monitor in Pristina, 
capital of Kosovo, said the Yugoslav army and the Serbian police ``were 
fed up'' with the guerrillas' sniper attacks over the weekend. The 
three officers were killed in one such attack. ``The Serbs felt their 
police were too exposed,'' the monitor said. Western officials said 
the two battalions, around Kisna Reka, where a large number of ethnic 
Albanians are camped in the hills, and Podujevo, north of Pristina, 
were not among those that were required to leave Kosovo under the 
terms of an accord between NATO and the Serbian authorities. On Friday, 
NATO extended its deadline, giving Milosevic until Oct. 27 to withdraw 
seven battalions of the Serbian police and the Yugoslav army. Milosevic 
is being required to pull back forces that he dispatched specially 
to Kosovo in February to fight the guerrillas. The Clinton administration 
says he has removed two battalions from Kosovo and returned them to 
Serbia, the republic that dominates Yugoslavia. The supreme commander 
of NATO, Gen. Wesley Clark, was due here on Tuesday to tell Milosevic 
that he had to step up the withdrawals. Clark would remind the Yugoslav 
leader that the ``use of force still looms large,'' a spokesman for 
the National Security Council, David Leavy, said. On the question 
of deploying the two battalions in the last 24 hours, Leavy said that 
the administration drew a distinction between the use of troops against 
``external threats'' and troops used to ``repress their own people.'' 
Leavy said the deployment ``only further deepens the level of noncompliance.'' 
Despite Clark's scheduled visit the threat of air strikes appeared, 
as a practical matter, to have almost evaporated. Dozens of officials 
from Washington, the United Nations and other organizations poured 
into Belgrade and Pristina on Monday to start organizing a force of 
up to 2,000 international monitors and to set up offices and housing 
for the operation. It was becoming clearer, Western diplomats said, 
that the original vision of 2,000 that was agreed to in talks between 
Milosevic and the U.S. envoy, Richard Holbrooke, was too ambitious 
and that a more realistic number was fewer than 1,000. But it was 
still not clear where the U.S. component of the group, which is supposed 
to verify troop levels and the storage of weapons, would come from. 
The vice president for international operations at Military Professional 
Resources Inc., Ed Soyster, said his company, which has trained and 
helped equip military units in Bosnia, was discussing with the State 
Department sending a team to Kosovo. But Soyster said that the group 
in Alexandria, Va., staffed by former U.S. military officers, had 
not been hired and that the Clinton administration had apparently 
made no decision on whom to recruit for the mission. The diplomatic 
monitors who were keeping a close watch on the freshly deployed Yugoslav 
army units said the soldiers had exercised some restraint. There were 
reports of shelling around 5 a.m. on Monday near Kisna Reka, the monitors 
said. But the question was whether the battalion there would continue 
to be fairly restrained and whether the guerrillas would provoke them. 
Officials also worried about the size of the deployment. ``It's a 
lot of firepower to remove a few snipers,'' said one diplomat. The 
deployment near Kisna Reka was the most serious, because 2,000 refugees 
are camping nearby in the open, despite the increasingly cold weather. 
It was becoming more obvious, diplomats said, that the guerrillas 
were encouraging the refugees, who are camping about a mile or so 
in the hills above their village, to stay outdoors. The diplomats 
added that the families in the camp, where handfuls of armed guerrillas 
are visible during the day on the entry road, provide good cover for 
the guerrillas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>