<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0285 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a sign that Germany's new government may be willing to set up a 
fund to compensate people forced into slave labor under Hitler, Gerhard 
Schroeder, the chancellor-elect, plans to meet with top industrial 
executives to discuss options for resolving the growing number of 
lawsuits over the issue. Several German companies said Monday that 
they had received invitations for a meeting on the issue with Schroeder 
in the next several days. The companies are believed to range from 
automakers like Daimler-Benz and BMW to chemical companies like Hoechst 
and BASF and the giant electronics company Siemens. The meeting comes 
at a time when German industrial companies are increasingly worried 
about a spate of new class-action suits brought by American lawyers 
on behalf of former factory workers during World War II. German companies 
increasingly fear that the lawsuits could cost them billions of dollars 
and would expose them to torrents of horrifying publicity. Some companies 
are also worried about boycotts of their products, particularly in 
the United States, if the disputes fester. Many industrial companies 
named in the lawsuits admit they used forced laborers, but insisted 
the Nazis forced them to do so. Several companies, including Daimler-Benz 
and BMW, have argued for some time that the German government needed 
to take the lead in creating a fund to compensate former workers and 
have volunteered to contribute toward it. Volkswagen, which is also 
being sued, recently announced plans to set up its own $20-million 
fund to compensate claims by former slave workers. But Chancellor 
Helmut Kohl, who was defeated for re-election last month and hands 
power over to Schroeder on Oct. 27, adamantly rejected proposals for 
a government fund. Kohl said the German government had already paid 
out tens of billions of dollars in various forms of compensation for 
the Holocaust, and did not want to pay more. But pressure has been 
building to work out some kind of agreement. ``The government needs 
to seriously recognize the pressure on German companies, which could 
find themselves abandoned in the USA as a result of the class-action 
suits,'' said Manfred Gentz, Daimler-Benz's chief financial officer, 
in a recent interview with the German Press Agency. Several months 
ago, Switzerland's biggest banks agreed to pay $1.25 billion to settle 
a class-action suit over unreturned money and property that belonged 
to Holocaust victims. That suit was brought by the same lawyers, led 
by Edward Fagan in New York City, who are now suing the industrial 
companies over compensation for slave labor. John Gilardi, a spokesman 
for the chemical company BASF A.G., said it had received an invitation 
to the meeting with Schroeder. BASF, one of three companies spun off 
from the old I.G. Farben chemical conglomerate, contended that its 
portion of the old company never used slave labor but was willing 
to take part in the discussions. Schroeder has not yet defined his 
position on the issue. Executives familiar with his invitation say 
the meeting is intended only to be a chance to exchange ideas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>