<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0369 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Arthur Levitt Jr., the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, 
said on Monday that proposals to help shore up Social Security by 
looking for higher returns in the financial markets risked leaving 
inexperienced investors vulnerable to fraud. Wading into what is likely 
to be one of the most intensely debated issues of the coming year, 
Levitt emphasized that he was not endorsing any of the options for 
shoring up Social Security in advance of the baby boomer generation's 
retirement. But he noted that nearly all of the plans involve allowing 
individuals to invest part of their payroll taxes in stocks and bonds 
or permitting the federal government itself more latitude to invest 
the retirement system's trust funds, which are now held in special 
Treasury bonds. Both approaches hold considerable implications for 
oversight of the markets, and Levitt said that the SEC intended to 
play a role as Congress and the Clinton administration work on a plan. 
Earlier this year, President Clinton said that he would convene a 
White House conference on Social Security in December and that he 
would like to send a proposal to Congress early next year. That debate 
will play out against a background of extraordinary volatility and 
uncertainty in the global financial system and the markets. The effects 
of the market's gyrations on public acceptance of any option for Social 
Security are not yet clear, and Levitt noted the development only 
in passing. Instead, he focused on broader long-range issues. Giving 
140 million working Americans the right and responsibility to invest 
part of their Social Security payroll taxes on their own would require 
increased vigilance against fraud, he said. It would also require 
vastly increased education for investors about how the markets operate 
and about the risks and costs of investing, he said. And permitting 
the government to invest the trust funds, he said, would require careful 
consideration of Washington's role as a shareholder and the potential 
for political interference in corporate governance, investment selection 
and the operation of the markets. ``We have an obligation to think 
long and hard about the implications of Social Security reform,'' 
Levitt said in the prepared text of a speech at the John F. Kennedy 
School of Government at Harvard University. ``Investing Social Security 
in the stock market, by its very nature, involves heightened obligations, 
difficult questions and new challenges.'' Concerned that opponents 
of such individual accounts will try to make the possible greed of 
brokers and fund managers the issue, Wall Street has remained mostly 
on the sidelines as the nation has begun debating what changes to 
make in Social Security, which is projected to run short of money 
to pay retirement benefits in 2032. Moving toward individual accounts, 
however, could create a huge new business for financial-services firms 
and set off intense competition for the right to help manage the retirement 
finances of nearly every working person. As a result, Levitt said, 
any move to give individuals a broad choice of options in how to invest 
their Social Security contributions would require regulators to step 
up efforts at investor protection. ``If we are to have self-directed 
individual accounts, we must be ready to undertake an unprecedented 
level of broad-scale policing of the equity markets,'' Levitt said. 
``Without such policies, fraud and sales-practice abuses may be perpetrated 
against an army of novice investors. And many of those novice investors 
are our society's most vulnerable citizens.'' He recalled the experience 
in Britain, where the government gave individuals considerable freedom 
a decade ago to choose how to handle their pensions. Some workers 
were besieged with sales pitches for annuities and other products 
that proved riskier than advertised, and when those investments went 
wrong they caused billions of dollars in losses. Should the United 
States move toward individual accounts, Levitt said, he would be concerned 
about people being confronted with advertising infused with ``performance 
hype'' that could create unrealistic expectations about returns. ``We 
simply cannot afford to instill in millions of new investors a culture 
of seeking short-term gain at the expense of long-term solid results,'' 
he said. ``That is not what Social Security is about.'' Levitt said 
that more than half of Americans do not know the difference between 
a stock and a bond, and that only 16 percent say they have a clear 
understanding of what an individual retirement account is. Privatizing 
Social Security would put a premium on investor education because 
it would require people to deal with issues like management fees and 
annuities, under which a lump sum is traded for guaranteed monthly 
payments for life. ``There is an unacceptably wide gap between financial 
knowledge and financial responsibilities,'' Levitt said. ``Closing 
this knowledge gap is among the most important problems we face today. 
It becomes even more of an imperative if Social Security is privatized.'' 
Levitt also said that the idea of the federal government owning stock 
in publicly traded companies is rife with potential conflicts. ``Could 
the government invest in a tobacco company?'' he asked. ``What about 
a company that was a toxic polluter a decade ago? More broadly, assuming 
the government invests in individual equities as opposed to market 
indexes, would it be able to vote its shares? If so, how?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>