<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0454 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Senate has effectively killed the nomination of James Hormel to 
be ambassador to Luxembourg, an appointment that would have made him 
the first openly gay U.S. ambassador, congressional officials said 
Monday. The officials said the Senate's Republican leadership had 
decided not to act on the nomination of Hormel, 65, a San Francisco 
philanthropist, before adjourning for the year. They said his nomination 
would be allowed to die in the Senate along with those of Kent Wiedemann 
to be ambassador to Cambodia and Diane Watson as ambassador to the 
Federated States of Micronesia. Twenty-seven of President Clinton's 
other nominees for ambassadorships or for the federal bench are expected 
to be approved by the Senate before lawmakers leave Washington for 
the year. Hormel, an heir to the Hormel meat-packing fortune and a 
former dean at the University of Chicago Law School, had received 
broad bipartisan support in the Senate, and congressional officials 
agreed that he might well have been confirmed for the ambassador's 
post in Luxembourg had there been a Senate vote. But Sen. Trent Lott, 
the Senate majority leader, refused to allow a vote by the full Senate. 
Earlier this year, Lott captured headlines when in an interview he 
described homosexuals as sinners who, like alcoholics and kleptomaniacs, 
could overcome their afflictions. ``This shows that anti-gay bias 
continues in the United States Senate,'' said Winnie Stachelberg, 
a lobbyist for the Human Rights Campaign, the nation's largest gay-rights 
group. ``A small minority of senators have taken away the opportunity 
for an up-or-down vote on Jim Hormel, which is all that people were 
asking for.'' Barry Toiv, a White House spokesman, said that it was 
``extraordinary that the Republican leadership refuses to move a nomination 
that a strong majority of senators support just because the nominee 
is gay.'' He said the president ``will consider all of his options,'' 
including possibly renominating Hormel next year. Hormel's nomination 
was aggressively opposed by a conservative organization, the Traditional 
Values Coalition, that provided senators with copies of sexually explicit 
material available in a special gay-research center named for Hormel 
at the San Francisco Public Library. Hormel has long provided financial 
support to gay-rights causes. Congressional officials said they did 
not know exactly why the Senate Republican leadership had decided 
not to act on the nominations of Wiedemann as ambassador to Cambodia 
and Ms. Watson as ambassador to the Federated States of Micronesia, 
a group of tiny islands in the Western Pacific. One Senate aide speculated 
that Wiedemann's nomination had been sacrificed as a protest at the 
government of Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia, who seized full 
control in a violent coup last year. ``Since we don't have a legal 
government, why should we honor Hun Sen with an ambassador,'' the 
aide said. Wiedemann, a career diplomat who speaks four foreign languages, 
had served must recently as the senior diplomat in the U.S. Embassy 
in Myanmar, formerly known as Burma. Ms. Watson, a veteran Democratic 
state legislator in California and the first African-American woman 
elected to the state Senate, was one of the state's most vociferously 
liberal lawmakers, and congressional aides said she may have simply 
proved too liberal to be acceptable to the Senate's Republican leaders. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>