<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0320 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After haggling for four days over last-minute additions and deletions 
to the federal spending package, the House completed action Monday 
night on the $500 billion spending bill needed to keep the government 
open. Even though the final vote is set for Tuesday, Congress bought 
itself extra time Monday by passing _ for the sixth time since the 
Oct. 1 start of the fiscal year _ another measure to keep the government 
running until midnight Wednesday night. Since Congress and the White 
House announced a general agreement Thursday and their aides sat down 
to write that agreement into specific language, the written length 
of the spending package has ballooned from an estimated 3,000 pages 
to more than 4,000 pages, and the cost appears to have bulked up by 
millions as aides uncovered the actual expense of many of the provisions 
in the deal. The result is an unusually disparate, catch-all package 
that contains a third of the entire $1.7-trillion federal budget and 
an array of policy decisions that most members of Congress will not 
have a chance to read, let alone digest, until they vote on it, perhaps 
Tuesday night. Among the last-minute additions are such items as $325 
million to buy enriched uranium from Russia and the $1 million reward 
in the Unabomber case, which will go to David Kaczinski for turning 
in his brother, Ted. David Kaczinski has said he would give the money 
to his brother's victims and their families. The major issues that 
congressional Republicans negotiated Monday included home-health care, 
the regulation of truckers, a provision over scrap metal and details 
of the 1997 Chemical Weapons Convention. In a sign of the intense 
last-minute pressures being applied, Republican leaders actually reversed 
a bill involving the Tennessee Valley Authority _ a bill that both 
houses had passed and that President Clinton had already signed into 
law. The bill had eliminated the public subsidy for the sprawling 
authority, which was created in 1933 by President Franklin D. Roosevelt 
to tame the Tennessee River, provide power and spur development in 
the region. But several Republicans from the area protested the loss 
of money in the last few days and managed to overturn the law. They 
have now secured more than $1 billion over five years to help the 
TVA refinance its high-interest debt and obtain a $50 million subsidy 
for flood control and recreational purposes. The new-found money for 
the TVA is part of the omnibus spending package that Congress must 
pass to keep the government running. The omnibus package is Congress' 
last, must-pass bill for the session, and as such, it has become the 
last-chance vehicle for multiple special interests that could not 
get their way otherwise. The final draft of the bill was filed Monday 
night with the House, which is mandated by the Constitution to originate 
all spending bills. The House is tentatively set for one hour of debate 
on the bill Tuesday night before voting. Adhering to that schedule 
would mean that most members would have virtually no time to absorb 
the elements of the bill before they vote. Once the House passes the 
bill, it moves to the Senate. Sen. Trent Lott of Mississippi, the 
Republican leader, has indicated that the Senate may not insist on 
a roll-call vote. This means the Senate would probably have no debate 
on the bill and senators would not have to return to Washington, leaving 
passage of the bill to a voice vote by those who chose to return. 
The prospect of a voice vote on such a huge package with so many elements 
has raised the ire even of some Republicans. Perhaps the harshest 
criticism came from Sen. Chuck Hagel, R-Neb., who has excoriated the 
Republican leadership as secret deal-makers and said he would vote 
against the bill. ``I don't believe the founding fathers ever intended 
for a few members and staff to make closed-door, arbitrary decisions 
on almost one-third of the federal budget and then sneak it through 
on a voice vote,'' he wrote in a letter to his colleagues Monday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>