<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0322 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Kenneth Starr is criticized, those who want President Clinton 
out of office tend to respond with two sorts of questions. What exactly 
has Starr done that was wrong? And in any event, since the charges 
against the president are on the table now, why should we care what 
Starr did? One answer to the first question is that Starr broke the 
rules: the rules governing the conduct of federal prosecutors. For 
example, Title 28 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Section 77.8, 
says that a government lawyer may not propose or discuss an immunity 
agreement with someone who he knows has an attorney ``without the 
consent of the attorney.'' Starr's deputies and agents did exactly 
what that rule forbids when they confronted Monica Lewinsky at the 
Ritz-Carlton Hotel on Jan. 16. They knew she had a lawyer, Francis 
Carter. They denigrated his ability and discouraged her from calling 
him. They pressed her to make an immunity agreement and said that, 
in her words, ``if I called Carter, I wouldn't necessarily still be 
offered an immunity agreement.'' When the Supreme Court upheld the 
constitutionality of the Independent Counsel Act in 1988, it did so 
on the specific understanding that independent counsels were obliged 
to comply with the Justice Department's rules. What Starr's people 
did to Monica Lewinsky was a crude violation of that understanding. 
Or think about the flood of illegal leaks from Starr's office. This 
was not a small-bore prosecutor leaking to gloss his fame. This was 
a prosecutor investigating the president of the United States: a role 
that surely requires special dignity and confidentiality. Starr's 
leaks were so flagrant that they are, most unusually, the subject 
of a formal judicial inquiry. That leads to something even more profoundly 
wrong with Starr's behavior. His abuses were driven by an obsessive 
_ and, for a prosecutor, entirely inappropriate _ determination to 
force President Clinton from office by any means available. That was 
the purpose of the leaks and of his grossly salacious impeachment 
report to the House. The passion to destroy Bill Clinton was evident 
in the way Starr got into the Lewinsky business in the first place. 
He heard from Linda Tripp on Jan. 12 _ or earlier from right-wing 
lawyers helping her _ that on Jan. 17 President Clinton, in a deposition 
in the Paula Jones case, would falsely deny a sexual relationship 
with Ms. Lewinsky. What would a prosecutor of good judgment _ say 
the universally respected Robert Morgenthau, District Attorney of 
New York County _ have done with Mrs. Tripp's story? I am confident 
that he would have considered it none of his business. But Starr, 
having failed to find any other prosecutable offense by the president 
in years of investigation, leapt at the story of sex and lying. He 
told Attorney General Janet Reno that he urgently needed to have his 
jurisdiction expanded to cover that matter. Thanks to the reporting 
of Nina Totenberg on National Public Radio, we know that Starr had 
had several conversations with Paula Jones' lawyers years before about 
their strategy. Legal ethics required him to disclose that fact to 
Attorney General Reno. If he had, she would very likely have thought 
it best to keep him out of the Lewinsky matter. But he wanted in badly, 
and he did not tell her. Then the second question: Does it matter? 
Yes it does, enormously. What Starr has done, if accepted as legitimate, 
will set precedents for abuse of power by other prosecutors. No future 
president will be safe from an invasive, overweening investigator. 
Nor will the rest of us. Robert H. Jackson, a great attorney general 
and Supreme Court justice, warned in 1940 that ``the prosecutor has 
more control over life, liberty and reputation than any other person 
in America.'' And so, he told a meeting of U.S. attorneys, ``The spirit 
of fair play and decency should animate the federal prosecutor.'' 
The greatest danger of prosecutorial abuse, Jackson said, comes when 
``the prosecutor picks some person whom he dislikes. ... The citizen's 
safety lies in the prosecutor who tempers zeal with human kindness 
... who serves the law and not factional purposes.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>