<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0259 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was a sweltering recent autumn afternoon and F. Story Musgrave, 
63, physician, poet, sky diver and now former astronaut, was sitting 
in a Florida hotel room and fiddling with a recalcitrant air-conditioner. 
``I'll get this going in a flash,'' declared Musgrave, the former 
space walker. ``I'm real good at fixing things.'' Indeed, he is. In 
1993, when the National Aeronautics and Space Administration needed 
someone to fix the nearsighted Hubble Space Telescope, Musgrave was 
the successful mission commander. Three years later, he was back in 
space, deploying and retrieving satellites for the study of the origin 
and composition of stars. In all, he has flown on the shuttle six 
times, more than anyone else. Last year, under conditions not entirely 
of his choosing, Musgrave retired from the space program. In his hotel 
room, after the air-conditioner kicked on, he explained why he left 
his ``calling'' last September. Q. Why did you leave the space program? 
A. They told me in the most unambiguous terms that they weren't going 
to fly me anymore. I could have fought it. Lots of people urged me 
to. But I just figured that space flight is a huge privilege, and 
I've had an incredible career. Q. Do you think you were eased out 
because of your age? You were 62. A. I don't know. I do think NASA 
is uncomfortable with people who make a career of being an astronaut. 
For most astronauts, NASA is a stepping stone to other things. I think 
they get uncomfortable with someone who believes, ``Space is it and 
I put it ahead of institutions.'' I had done that. I always said, 
``Space is my calling.'' My own guess is that this was as important 
as my age. Q. You were the oldest of the astronauts. Were you a good 
subject for experiments on aging and space? A. Oh, yeah. Agewise, 
you can't miss with me. If you want to make some conclusions about 
age and space, there are decades worth of scientific data on me in 
NASA's own format. Also, I can fly as a full-fledged crew member who 
does everything, not just a body they are using for study. The thing 
I learned about aging and space is that the more I did, the easier 
it got. Whatever functions you lose because of aging, you gain in 
terms of experience. I remember that after landing from the Hubble 
repair mission, I did five hours of medical exams, got on an airplane, 
flew home and went to work the next day at 8 a.m. I made the circadian 
shift in one night. My last shuttle flight was even easier. I walked 
off and was steady as a rock. Q. NASA will be flying John Glenn, 77, 
into space soon. Are you feeling a twinge of envy about his being 
given the mission? A. I feel we should fly him. He was the first American 
into orbit. It's probably the right thing to do in terms of historic 
closure. And I feel that the reason he is flying, and I'm not, are 
probably not related. The real reason he's going up is because he's 
John Glenn, and he's a senator, and he convinced them to fly him. 
After they made that decision, science _ looking at issues of aging 
in space _ became the rationale for justifying it. Actually, I think 
it will be difficult to make many scientific conclusions from Sen. 
Glenn's flight. What they are doing is taking a John Glenn, who has 
led the life of a senator for decades, and all of a sudden, switching 
his life to that of an astronaut. Now, what effect does that have? 
Are you really studying space flight? Due to the multiple factors 
involved, such as the total change in the man's lifestyle, it will 
be very difficult to attribute any observed changes to age alone. 
The other thing that bothers me about the Glenn flight is that he's 
chosen to do his space part time, while still a senator, while still 
living in Washington. We all know that you get out of a space flight 
what you put into it. I do wonder if he'll have much of a space experience, 
other than just the survival training. Q. What's a ``space experience?'' 
A. Two principal things: what you see out the window and also your 
cognitive sense of your mind and body in terms of the free-fall condition. 
When I go up, I give myself over to the space experience, surrender 
to it, let it touch me. I'm always saying to myself: ``Story, look 
around. Don't just go out there and fix the Hubble, look around.'' 
Q. A more earthbound question: Are you critical of the way the space 
program has been administered? A. Listen, NASA's a magnificent organization 
at the technical level. I have such an incredible pride and love for 
the people who work space _ not so much for the leadership. We need 
to assume that ``the Big We'' _ the president, the Congress, the NASA, 
the aerospace industry, the public _ right now cannot manage any space 
program. Think about it: We have spent $20 billion over 14 years for 
a space station and we do not yet have a screw in orbit! Another serious 
problem is that launch costs are too high. The most important priority 
should be to have low-cost reliable access to space, and we seem to 
have no interest in that. I worry that we have not developed a new 
launch vehicle in over 40 years. We're still flying Atlases and Titans 
and Deltas from the '50s. Q. Do you think the space station will actually 
happen? A. I believe so. We are into it for $20 billion and 14 years. 
It would be extraordinarily difficult to turn away from that kind 
of investment. The current posture we are in, however, is absolutely 
desperate. The posture that bothers me with the shuttle costing more 
than $600 million a flight and with our flying this very old, very 
fragile technology, is an accident could happen and the whole deck 
of cards will come down. You can't do the space station without the 
shuttle, and the shuttle is old and fragile. Another problem with 
the current posture is that the space station will dictate resources 
and make them dedicated to Earth orbit activities for the next 10 
or 15 years. Also, I worry that it's all going to be so expensive, 
so bureaucracy-bound, that we won't be doing cutting-edge projects 
anymore. With this current posture, we may not pursue that science 
which bridges cosmology and philosophy _ the science that gets at 
who am I and what is the meaning of all this. We must do science that 
touches to the core _ which means science that asks, ``Who am I?'' 
Anything less does not excite the public. Q. A more earthbound question: 
You've recently moved your home base from Texas to Orlando. Why? A. 
I had a vision for decades that when something brought an end to my 
calling I would get into a car and drive to Hobby Airport and go to 
Orlando. That's as far as the vision went. I never saw anything else. 
Then, when I decided to leave NASA, Disney asked me to be involved 
in their work. So the vision kind of came true. Right now, I'm a consultant 
to Disney's various projects. I work on creative ideas for new resorts, 
new parks, new pavilions. I'm consulting on movies. One of my own 
personal goals here, is to find ways to communicate the experience 
of space to people without their actually having been there. Without 
being specific, there are a lot of possibilities at Disney for doing 
that. In Orlando, there's a lot of interesting work going on in virtual 
reality. I also like Orlando. It's an esthetic place and the beach, 
and what happens at the Kennedy Space Center, is not very far away. 
Q. How are you adjusting to your new status as an ex-astronaut? A. 
Who's ``ex?'' Q. You are. A. I'm not sure how it is. Do I miss it? 
I've got to. But I can go into space any time I want to. Q. Through 
meditation? A. Well, through imagination. I put myself there. I do 
that. Listen, I got dealt a card, and went forward with it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>