<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0410 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nothing else matters. Nothing else, it seems, is permitted to matter: 
only the nine-inning tallies and intervening dramas of a handful of 
baseball games. Face it, either you're into baseball these days or 
you're totally out of it. Over the last few weeks, and especially 
over the weekend when the reality of the World Series finally manifested 
itself on the field of Yankee Stadium, disparate strands of New York 
have been transformed into that idiosyncratic and much-studied taxonomic 
group known as the fan. Suddenly the most important thing in the world 
seems to be whether a team that has already won a preposterous 23 
championships in 75 years will insist on one more. As the Yankees 
prepare for Game 3 on Tuesday night against the Padres in San Diego, 
with New York ahead two games to none and the scent of sweep in the 
air, people who all year long have paid incidental attention to batters 
swatting balls and pitchers throwing smoke have become caught up in 
mass homage to a team that is nothing less than a victory machine. 
It is something that baseball does, especially in New York, where 
a sense of entitlement to baseball sovereignty is almost primal, and 
especially in this magical year enlivened by the enthralling pursuit 
of a ghost's home run record and the voracious accumulation of victories 
by a Yankee team striving to be engilded as the greatest of all. People 
in the area have been absorbed into this deliberate, elegant, endlessly 
complex pastime almost against their will, unable to resist the ceaseless 
murmurings about the Series and the mighty Yankees. That is how it 
unfolded for Marla Rodriguez, who up until now has unapologetically 
loathed baseball. She is 32 and works in sports media relations at 
Rutgers University. Football is her abiding passion, entranced as 
she is by its savage aggression and that ``people are always hitting 
each other.'' ``I normally hate baseball,'' she said. ``It's very 
boring. Nothing ever happens. It's too slow.'' Whenever someone turned 
a baseball game on the television, she became angry. But every day 
in the last few weeks, wherever she went, the banter was incessantly 
about the Yankees and the Series. Almost hypnotically, she has become 
a full-throated Yankee rooter. Now she turns the baseball games on. 
When she speaks about the team, she refers to it as ``we.'' ``I don't 
know what it is,'' she said, perplexed herself. ``It's exciting now. 
It's close to home. I'm starting to relate, wow, what it's like playing 
for the World Series. Until a few weeks ago, I didn't know who David 
Wells was. Now I know he's a big guy and he throws a mean fastball.'' 
In part, the consuming and comforting divertissement of baseball has 
been seen as something of a mercy gift. So many people are by now 
fully spent from hearing salacious tales of misbehavior in Washington 
and hyperventilating about the capricious stock market. They would 
rather dwell on who is batting .401 than their own 401. By now, it 
seems, people have grown somewhat more accustomed to players who perpetually 
put on new uniforms in pursuit of Gross National Product-like salaries. 
It is hard not to adore a team of so much harmony and so little swagger, 
with frolicsome players named Boomer and El Duque. Baseball and the 
World Series have this consciousness-altering effect in a way that 
other sports do not. The Super Bowl is big, but it is a solitary game, 
not the elastic, emotional unfolding that the World Series is, and 
it is not local. There is no home team. ``Baseball's older,'' said 
Roger Angell, the New Yorker editor who often writes about the sport. 
``It has an echo, a ring to it. It's a series. It's not one game.'' 
Most of the October idolators are of this distinctly different subspecies 
from the true fan, the highly emotive, coarse-talking enthusiast who 
ingests the sport on a daily basis. The true fan knows the players, 
knows their averages, knows who hits in the clutch and who chokes. 
Most of all, of course, the true fan knows much more than the manager 
does. But come World Series time, anybody and everybody puts on the 
cap and talks the talk. Anybody can give advice to Joe Torre and expect 
him to take it. Even Pablo Oviedo, 33, of Kings Park, N.Y. He came 
to the United States a few years ago from Colombia. He found out who 
Jackie Robinson was only when the Interboro Parkway changed its name 
in his honor. No matter. Though he continues to feel the World Cup 
is more exciting, Oviedo is on the Yankee express these days. He's 
talking the plays, getting his grounding. He needs Torre's phone number. 
Darren Clay, the manager of the Lids baseball cap store in the Poughkeepsie 
Galleria Mall, was deluged with business for Yankee headgear during 
the weekend. ``It's crazy,'' he said. ``We get people who didn't watch 
a ballgame all year coming in here now and they know the exact rotation 
of the players and the time of each game.'' Jennifer Dwork, 33, lives 
in Manhattan and is the senior brand manager for Tic-Tac breath mints 
at Ferrero USA. ``I've been to two baseball games in my life and they 
were corporate functions, which means I didn't watch,'' she said. 
She doesn't have an inkling of what or who a designated hitter is. 
Details, details. She has been swept up by the mania and is watching 
the games, gaining an education along with enjoyment. ``The whole 
city is buzzing about this,'' she said. On Saturday night, a friend 
of hers who is a portfolio manager shrugged off her investment doldrums 
and gave a World Series party for about 50 people, Ms. Dwork included, 
in the rooftop common room of her Manhattan high rise. The innings, 
in their slow and ordered fashion, crept by. And, oh, the taut drama 
of it all. The Yankees led, the Padres led, the Yankees led. Ms. Dwork 
sort of gave up with the Yankees down 5-2. Then she was introduced 
to the grand slam. ``I didn't realize that games could have such high 
scores,'' she said. Life was good. Runs were up, what matter if stocks 
were down. There is no escaping, though, that the swelling ranks of 
Yankee fans in October is not easy on the adherents who follow the 
team with an intensity all season long. While perhaps they welcome 
the magnified support that arrives this time of year, they also resent 
that so many of the latecomers get the box seats to the Series games 
while they are stuck on their couch at the biggest moment of all. 
Marisa Levine's friends worry about her mental health, her fealty 
to the Yankees is so complete. She is 20, a senior at Columbia University, 
studying psychology. She makes it to virtually every home game, settling 
into the harsh discomfort of the bleachers. ``I'm a bleacher creature,'' 
she said proudly. She checks into the Yankee Web site at least 10 
times a day, seeing what's up. ``When the Yankees lose, I cry,'' she 
said. ``I'm not kidding.'' Her room is a shrine to the Yankees. Its 
walls are adorned with Yankee posters. Its shelves are crammed with 
Yankee souvenirs. She is nourished by the numbers and exploits of 
one baseball team. ``You should see my credit card bills,'' she said. 
``It's all Yankee tickets, Yankee food, Yankee tickets, Yankee food, 
maybe a Love's drugstore.'' Last week, she skipped classes for three 
days and spent 30 hours outside Yankee Stadium in the hope of acquiring 
World Series tickets, but got none. She is bitter about the interlopers 
who will be there. ``I think it's awful,'' she said. ``I know the 
players, I know their wives' names, I know their kids' names. Tino's 
wife is Marie. Andy's wife is Laura. They have a son Josh.'' She sighed. 
``It takes a lot of work not to have a life,'' she said. ``It's an 
everyday thing.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>