<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0361 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Throughout his campaign for chancellor, Gerhard Schroeder portrayed 
himself as a pragmatic ``new'' Social Democrat who would promote economic 
growth while strengthening Germany's generous social welfare system. 
But hopes for that kind of happy balance collided with reality Monday, 
when Schroeder's candidate for economics minister turned down the 
job on the grounds that the ministry was being eviscerated. The exit 
of Jost Stollmann, a self-made millionaire who started a computer 
company, is the strongest sign that the new government will be more 
left-wing than pragmatic. The move also suggested that much of the 
political power in the government lies with Oskar Lafontaine, the 
more left-leaning chairman of the Social Democratic Party who will 
head the Finance Ministry, which is acquiring new responsibilities 
from the Economics Ministry. Schroeder tapped Stollmann in the summer 
as his Economics Minister, hoping to demonstrate his commitment to 
business, high technology and ``modern'' policies. But Stollman, 43, 
quickly infuriated many party members by criticizing the country's 
high taxes and ``encrusted'' economic structure. Schroeder hastily 
announced that Stollman's place would be taken by Werner Muller, a 
former executive at Veba AG, the huge industrial conglomerate. Muller 
told reporters Monday that he had been surprised when Schroeder called 
him that morning to offer the job. Stollman said, ``A balanced supply 
and demand policy must be the basis for a turnaround on the jobs market.'' 
But he added that with the coalition government that is being formed 
with the Green Party ``the conditions under which the government will 
have to start work are not conducive to the real goals of the government.'' 
In the three weeks since Schroeder trounced Helmut Kohl at the polls, 
Lafontaine has dominated economic policy, while reformers like Stollmann 
have become all but invisible. It was Lafontaine who hammered out 
tax-reform plans that would slightly reduce the sky-high tax rates 
but would substantially increase the burden on businesses and wealthy 
individuals. The plan infuriated business leaders. The Federation 
of German Industry called it ``worse than everything we had feared.'' 
It was also Lafontaine who committed the party to reversing laws that 
had chipped at job protection and sick leaves. And dispensing with 
the traditional German reverence for its conservative central bank, 
he repeatedly attacked the bank's hard-money policies as a principal 
reason for the high unemployment rate. Officially, Stollmann ran afoul 
of Lafontaine's desire to take over important departments in the Economics 
Ministry that deal with structural economic analysis and European 
affairs. Economists said Stollmann's departure reflected the extent 
to which the new government has marginalized pro-business pragmatists. 
``This confirms what quite a lot of people suspected from the beginning, 
which is that the Social Democratic Party is not a reform party but 
rather a traditional left-wing party,'' said Thomas Mayer, who tracks 
the German economy for Goldman, Sachs in Frankfurt. ``They are picking 
up right where they left off in the 1970s.'' Stollmann was not the 
only economics reformer in Schroeder's camp. Another potentially important 
player is the man who will oversee the chancellor's office, Bodo Hombach. 
Previously the state Economics Minister in North Rhine Westphalia, 
Hombach has spoken out strongly for market-oriented changes and issued 
a startling call this month for what he called ``left-wing supply-side 
economics.'' In an interview with the magazine Der Spiegel, Hombach 
said the country needed to reform its welfare system and, perhaps, 
take some lessons from the United States. ``America is a model, not 
for its rigid deregulation of the labor market, but for its active 
employment policy,'' Hombach said, adding that even jobs at McDonald's 
could give people a second chance for a career. ``We can no longer 
afford to finance long-term unemployment instead of work.'' In practice 
nobody seems to be listening. Schroeder has said almost nothing about 
deregulating labor markets or pushing through broad welfare reforms. 
Among the few concrete proposals to promote jobs are expanding training 
programs and increasing incentives for older workers to retire early. 
``So far the proposals have been to redistribute the supply of work, 
but we've had programs to redistribute work for twenty years and all 
we have is higher unemployment,'' said Kurt Vogler-Ludwig, a labor 
economist with the Institute for Economic Research, a nonpartisan 
organization in Munich that advises the government on economic policy. 
``What we should be doing is increasing the demand for new workers.'' 
Business leaders have become increasingly hostile to Schroeder and 
threatened to boycott the chancellor-elect's call for roundtable discussions 
among government, industry and the unions on reducing unemployment. 
Though Schroeder won the election, Lafontaine still controls the party 
machinery. When he appeared on the stage with Schroeder in the campaign 
he often received more enthusiastic applause than Schroeder. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>