<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0286 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the welter of events unfolding here, one remarkable episode stands 
out: After the chief of the powerful Pakistani army got in hot water 
for publicly criticizing the prime minister and proposing a stronger 
military role in making policy, it was the general who lost his job, 
not the prime minister. There was no coup, although generals have 
ruled Pakistan for almost half of its 51-year history. And prime ministers 
have been dismissed in earlier clashes with the army. Instead, Gen. 
Jehangir Karamat quietly resigned on Oct. 7, and Prime Minister Nawaz 
Sharif immediately replaced him with another army commander, Pervez 
Musharraf. Last week, in a smooth transition, the new chief of the 
army staff installed his own team of top officers. Many in the opposition 
parties bemoan the loss of Karamat, a popular figure who was widely 
regarded as a thoughtful, cautious democrat, and accuse the prime 
minister of being a power-hungry politician eager to dominate yet 
another arm of the government. But personalities aside, the elected 
government was able to exercise its authority over the military with 
no dire consequences _ at least not yet. And that is a marker of sorts 
in a country whose modern history has been dominated by the struggle 
between military and civilian leaders. ``In a democratic society, 
would an army chief talk about the government like that?'' said Mushahid 
Hussain, a Cabinet member in charge of Pakistan's Ministry of Information. 
``What happened to General MacArthur? Truman did not waste much time. 
Pakistan is finally becoming a normal democratic society.'' Hussain 
probably overstates the case for normalcy here. After all, Pakistan 
is still a country where less than 1 percent of the population bothers 
to pay taxes, where corruption is endemic and sectarian violence rages. 
On Saturday, hit squads gunned down a former governor of Sindh province 
in Karachi and a Muslim leader in Islamabad. Still, Pakistan's political 
structure has changed profoundly in the year and a half since Sharif 
was elected by a landslide _ changed in ways that have clearly strengthened 
the prime minister, even as they weakened the army. Under constitutional 
amendments passed by a consensus vote of all parties after his election, 
the prime minister can dismiss any legislator in his party who votes 
against him, and he selects the army's chief of staff. One of the 
two amendments ended a crucial vestige of military rule that had allowed 
an appointed president to choose the army chief and to dismiss the 
elected prime minister, a power that was used three times in the last 
decade to oust Sharif and his archrival, Benazir Bhutto. The world's 
newest nuclear power, the host to archrival India for talks here over 
the last week, seems to be turning into a more stable democracy, Western 
diplomats say. But paradoxically, although Sharif has acted decisively 
to consolidate his political power, he has been reluctant to use it 
to tackle the country's deep-seated problems, many political experts 
here say. ``He's a very powerful prime minister with no power at all,'' 
said Samina Ahmed, a political scientist and consultant to private 
foundations. ``Power is tangible when you can exercise it. In Pakistan 
today, the government doesn't seem capable of exercising it.'' His 
action on utility rates is a case in point. Last year, the two biggest 
electrical utilities _ which members of his own government describe 
as bloated, corrupt and inefficient _ lost $1.6 billion. But instead 
of reining in the bureaucracy and raising rates as international lenders 
requested, he announced last week that he was cutting electricity 
rates 30 percent, a move sure to spill more red ink. Pakistan is desperately 
trying to persuade the International Monetary Fund to give it a financial 
bailout to forestall defaulting on $30 billion in foreign debt _ a 
financial crisis badly worsened by sanctions imposed after Pakistan 
conducted the nuclear tests. But Sharif missed no opportunity last 
week to express defiance to reporters following him, saying he would 
not bow to the fiscal conditions the IMF was setting, like higher 
electricity rates. ``I cannot make anti-people decisions that might 
burden the lives of common people,'' he said. Nor has Sharif moved 
to collect taxes from the feudal landlords who have never paid anything 
to the cash-poor government, which has such limited resources for 
education that most of its people cannot read and write. And when 
the prime minister, himself a millionaire industrialist who pays very 
little personal income tax, sought to impose a sales tax and shopkeepers 
responded with a general strike, Sharif quickly backed off. Sharif 
has proposed another constitutional amendment that is widely seen 
as an attempt to increase his power as well as to steal the thunder 
of militant Islamic groups, which have little influence at the polls 
but can turn out angry crowds in the streets. The amendment would 
give the federal government the duty to enforce an Islamic legal system 
based on the Koran. As originally written, the bill said its provisions 
would apply ``notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, 
any law or judgment of any court.'' The National Assembly passed a 
diluted version of the bill, but officials in the Sharif administration 
concede that they do not have the votes to get the measure through 
the Senate, where his party does not have the requisite two-thirds 
majority. While it is difficult to measure Sharif's popularity with 
the overwhelming majority of Pakistanis, who are rural people unable 
to read or write, he is clearly a disappointment to many of the educated 
elite who are often quoted in the feisty, no-holds-barred press. And 
the discontent with Sharif's leadership clearly extends to the military. 
Scholars who have studied Pakistan's army, generally considered the 
country's most professional and competent institution, say Karamat 
would never have publicly assailed the prime minister's government 
for its political failings unless his views were widely shared by 
the top command. His proposal for a national security council that 
would involve the army and technocrats in making policy was seen by 
some as a benign attempt to improve the quality of government. But 
others said the idea had a history that gives it more sinister overtones. 
When the military dictator Mohammad Zia ul-Haq floated the idea of 
such a council in the 1970s and 1980s, he intended it to be an institutional 
means for the military to veto national policies it disliked. ``General 
Karamat's proposal would have ended the unfettered civilian authority 
that Nawaz Sharif has tried to exercise,'' said Selig Harrison, an 
expert on South Asia. While some experts say they believe that the 
army may yet step in if conditions in Pakistan worsen seriously, most 
seem to agree that a military takeover is far less appetizing to the 
generals themselves than in the past. The economy here is in such 
a mess that military men with no particular expertise in managing 
the country's finances are unlikely to leap at the chance to run the 
show. With the end of the appointed president's power to dismiss the 
prime minister, the army would have little option but a naked coup 
without the facade of constitutionality that the presidential system 
allowed. Also, the generals are keenly aware that a military coup 
would further isolate Pakistan internationally at a time when it needs 
help from abroad. Gone are the Cold War days when the United States 
supported a Pakistani dictator as part of a proxy war to parry the 
Soviet Union's influence in Afghanistan. Still, those who know Pakistan's 
modern history do not rule out a reassertion of the army's power. 
What if the IMF does not give Pakistan a bailout package? What if 
the economy crumbles and social order disintegrates? ``Not one elected 
government has managed to complete its full term of office in Pakistan, 
ever,'' said Ms. Ahmed, the political scientist. ``So there you are. 
These are still early days.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>