<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0448 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Tuesday, Oct. 20: In a 
development sure to bring shivers to the world's dictators, Gen. Augusto 
Pinochet is under arrest in a London clinic where he went for surgery. 
He is held at the request of a Spanish court, accused of genocide 
and the murder and torture of dozens of Spanish and other citizens 
in Chile after his 1973 military coup. His detention and possible 
prosecution are warranted under international law. Not every dictator's 
crimes bear international prosecution. There can be no place in international 
law for rogue nations like Iraq or North Korea to seek the politically 
motivated prosecution of current or former foreign leaders who opposed 
them. But the arrest of Pinochet is based on credible allegations 
and evidence. He has sufficiently intimidated Chile's civilian authorities 
to escape prosecution there for the crimes of his security forces, 
which murdered or caused the disappearance of more than 2,000 people. 
International law recognizes widespread murder, torture and forced 
disappearance as crimes against humanity that any state can prosecute. 
American courts have permitted lawsuits by foreign citizens against 
foreign leaders, such as the Bosnian Serb Radovan Karadzic, for such 
crimes. Last year Washington tried to persuade Canada to prosecute 
the genocidal Cambodian leader Pol Pot. Given that the world does 
not yet have a functioning international criminal court, which will 
have broad international support and safeguards against frivolous 
prosecutions, such third-country prosecutions must continue. Pinochet's 
amnesty in Chile should not stand in the way of his arrest. He issued 
himself the amnesty in 1978. His democratic successors as president 
have not challenged it, partly out of fear and partly because they 
lack the power to do so. The Chilean Constitution, which Pinochet 
devised, allows him to maintain control of the Senate. Chile's government 
argues that Pinochet should be protected by diplomatic immunity, as 
he carries a diplomatic passport. The relevant international convention, 
however, reserves such immunity for those on diplomatic missions. 
Pinochet, who made himself a Senator for Life after he stepped down 
as Chile's military commander in March, traveled for medical reasons. 
Despite the claims of both Spain and Britain that the arrest was purely 
a judicial matter, political considerations certainly weighed in _ 
just as the desire to avoid a diplomatic fuss kept nations from capturing 
Pinochet in the past. Spain's Cabinet must now decide whether to request 
his extradition, and Britain's Home Secretary must decide whether 
to approve it. Both should look only at the evidence. If it is lacking, 
Pinochet should go home in peace. But that would be the only legitimate 
reason not to try him. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>