<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981019.2000.2022 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today's grenade attack in the southern Israeli town of Bersheba comes 
at a critical time in talks between Palestinian and Israeli leaders 
at Wye Mills in Maryland. While President Clinton and Vice President 
Gore have tried to move the negotiations forward, wide gaps have remained 
between the two sides on the issue of security. Those gaps will most 
likely widen, judging from the mood in the middle east following today's 
attack. The World's Richard Myron has this report from Jerusalem. 
the minister for internal security and a moderate within the government, 
said he conferred with prime Minister Netanyahu this morning. I talked 
with the prime minister and I convinced him to continue but for sure, 
those people that tried to break the conversation between the Palestinian 
authority and Israel, they will not have any success. But other members 
within Prime Minister Netanyahu's party as well as far right political 
parties, have called for an end to the talks in Maryland. The government 
said that they will continue. Marcia Fogel, the head of the government 
press office, says today's grenade attack legitimizes Israel's demand 
that the Palestinians do more to counter violence. We would expect 
the Palestinian authority to reveal the entire infrastructure which 
enabled this terrorist attack and we would expect them to do that, 
not on the individual basis, but on an all-encompassing daily basis 
every hour and every minute of the day, in order to undermine the 
terrorist infrastructure and they're simply not doing it. So you're 
saying this increases your demands for the Palestinians at this point. 
What does it do? It doesn't really change our demands. It just underscores 
the reasons why we focus on the security-related issues. Themes also 
running high among Palestinians. In the west bank town of Hebron today, 
during a rally organized by one of the political factions allied to 
Yassar Arafat, hundreds of people gathered to chant slogans against 
Benyamin Netanyahu and to watch as the Israel flag was burned. Hamas, 
which opposes the peace process and which has carried out bomb attacks 
in Israel, said today's attack in Bersheba was justified. Sheik Akmed 
Yasheen, the spiritual leader of Hamas, made this statement from his 
home in Gaza. Yasheen said that as long as Israel continues to occupy 
Arab land in the west bank, the Palestinians have the natural right 
to oppose and to resist the occupation. In Wye Mills, Maryland, the 
Palestinian delegation condemned the attack and said it underscored 
the need to reach an agreement. Mustafa, commentator on Palestinian 
affairs, says that greater Palestinian control over the west bank, 
is the best way to prevent further violence. These incidents are very 
strong indicators that you cannot really achieve peace in this area 
without dealing with the causes of the problem and the roots of the 
problem and the main cause and root of the problem is the fact that 
Israel is still occupying the Palestinian territories and depriving 
the Palestinians from their basic rights. I do hope that Mr. Netanyahu 
will not use these attacks as an excuse to run away again from the 
fact that there is a need for proper negotiations and for proper peace 
settlement. How can Palestinians ensure security and control the security 
matters if they are not in charge of the land? Today's attack has 
not only raised the tension in Israel and the west bank, it clearly 
makes the Maryland negotiations between the two sides much harder. 
For the World, this is Richard Myron reporting from Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>