<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981019.2000.0369 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the World. I'm Lisa Mullins. In Spain, he's known as the super 
judge for his triumphs against drug rings and corruption. Now Baltisar 
Garzon is going after the men one of his associates has called the 
Hitler of the latter part of this century. Judge Garzon wants to put 
Chile's former dictator General Augusto Pinochet on trial for genocide. 
The request to extradite Pinochet prompted British authorities on 
Friday to arrest the general, who's recovering from back surgery in 
a London hospital. Today Judge Garzon has broadened his arrest warrant 
to include torture and terrorism. Relations between Spain and Chile 
are strained now, to say the least. And the possible extradition of 
Pinochet from London to Madrid has also got Britain into a diplomatic 
row with Chile. From London, the World's Steven Beard reports. Hundreds 
of Chilean exiles have been demonstrating today outside the clinic 
where General Pinochet remains under armed police guard. He was arrested 
in the clinic on Friday, following a request for his extradition to 
Spain, to face charges of genocide, torture and terrorism. Demonstrators 
like Miriam Thompson say they're overjoyed that Pinochet could finally 
be brought to justice. After 25 years, since the military coup in 
Chile, and all the crimes against humanity and all the injustice that 
this regime has committed, you start believing that justice will never 
happen. And I'm just static; I feel very emotional about it and it 
gives me back my faith in justice and humanity. British human rights 
groups had protested last week when Pinochet was allowed to come here 
for medical treatment. But now Richard Bunting of Amnesty International 
says, he's pleased because Pinochet may not have to pay for his many 
crimes. The Pinochet government in Chile was responsible for countless 
thousands of deaths. Others disappeared. Many, many of those people 
remain disappeared. Their families, their loved ones, do not know 
where they are. And a majority of the people involved in the state 
apparatus remain unpunished. Pinochet has been a frequent visitor 
to Britain in the past. He's only been arrested now because two Spanish 
judges investigating the disappearance of a number of Spaniards in 
Chile during the Pinochet era, have called for the general's extradition. 
But there may be another factor at work. Pinochet is a hate figure 
for the British left. Many current members of the Labor government 
spent their student years demonstrating against his regime. One Cabinet 
minister spoke this weekend of his disgust for the general. But Jack 
Straw, the home secretary, says he will deal with the extradition 
request on a strictly legal basis. secretaries have to make a large 
number of quasi-judicial decisions and I think each of us who've held 
this office have done so on the basis that the only way to make these 
decisions is on the facts of the case in front of you, rather than 
any other extraneous considerations. And that's the approach that 
I shall adopt if this extradition matter reaches my desk. The Chilean 
government insists that since Pinochet was traveling on a diplomatic 
passport, he has immunity from prosecution. But Britain rejects that 
claim. According to the British foreign office, only an accredited 
diplomat receives that kind of protection. While Pinochet's arrest 
has been widely applauded in Britain and in Spain, there have been 
some dissident voices. I think it's absolutely monstrous. Former British 
conservative defense minister Alan Clark. Spain of all places is absolutely 
crawling with drug smugglers, murderers, gangster bosses and so on 
they live a merry life and so on. We can't extradite them because 
the Spanish won't allow it. And here we are letting someone who has 
never committed a crime in this country, permitting him to be extradited 
to a country where he has not, as far as I can make out, committed 
a crime. And the whole thing is total gesture politics and looks dreadful 
really. Another senior Kenneth Clark is concerned that putting General 
Pinochet on trial could upset the delicate political balance achieved 
in Chile between the extreme right and extreme left. But the wheels 
of justice are now turning. The two investigating judges from Spain 
are preparing to travel to Britain and Pinochet has vowed to fight 
the charges. Speaking through his London lawyers he pledged not to 
submit to extradition from Britain, a country which he holds in deep 
affection. He told New Yorker magazine in a recent interview that 
he's always been particularly impressed by Britain's respect for the 
law. For the World, this is Stephen Beard in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>