<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981019.2000.0904 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.S. district court in Washington, D.C. today started to hear 
proceedings in what experts describe as one of the most important 
antitrust cases in recent times. The computer giant Microsoft stands 
accused by the Federal government in 20 states of using its market 
dominance to stamp out competitors and capture other software business. 
Microsoft says it's been acting legally in merely offering consumers 
better software at lower prices. And as the World's Alan Dow has been 
finding out, there is no shortage of competitors eager to take a jewel 
from Bill Gates' crown. These days people could be forgiven for thinking 
that all computer software was made by Microsoft. After all, the vast 
majority of new home PCs use Windows-based operating systems developed 
by Microsoft. But there are other systems out there. I thought it 
basically reproduced an article for a magazine here. From his office 
in London's media district Soho, graphic designer Mark McCormack moves 
magazine ads around a computer screen. His computer doesn't use Microsoft 
Windows because it's an Apple Mac. On screen it looks similar to Windows, 
but McCormack says in his business at least, the Apple Mac is king. 
The Apple Mac interface here consists of icons that you click on and 
boxes open up and you double click on those and other folders and 
things open up. So it's a very easy interface to use and the Mac has 
always been the prime computer to use in the creative industry. But 
outside of the specialized world of design and publishing, Microsoft's 
Windows seems to be the only real choice available, whether we like 
it or not. Ken Young is the Internet editor at the magazine IT Week. 
Consumers are already affected by the fact that if they want to buy 
a computer without Windows on it, it's extremely hard to do or practically 
impossible. So choice is already limited on the desktop. They're probably 
now getting to the point where they may have to look hard to find 
a computer with Netscape's browser on it as most are preloaded with 
Microsoft. But, despite what must seem like insurmountable odds, there 
are other software companies out there trying to get a piece of the 
pie so neatly carved up between Microsoft and Apple. Scott Richardson 
is the director of server marketing at the IT company Intel. He says 
although Microsoft will continue to capture most of the basic home 
software market, the battle is heating up for systems that make it 
easier to use the Internet. One of those systems is called Linux. 
We've done quite a bit of research at Intel on the need for a growing 
customer base, specifically the growing customer base around Internet 
service providers and we found that quite a few of these customers 
are deploying the Linux operating system for web serving applications. 
It's a fast operating system. It runs great on Intel-based servers 
and this audience, this customer base is typically a technical customer 
base and they enjoy the flexibility of tuning the operating system 
and adding features for their own environment. The Linux system was 
designed by a young programmer from Finland. Microsoft may be in the 
lead, but there are others definitely in the race. Shawn Apen is the 
marketing director for Microsoft in Britain. He says Microsoft is 
very aware of the competition. APEN: Success is a lousy teacher in 
our industry. If I go back and look at who was leading the way 10 
years ago, you look at IBM. You look at Lotus. Very good companies 
and their success wasn't guaranteed 10 years down the track. Today 
we are fortunate we have been successful, but that is no way, does 
that determine or future success. The Microsoft case is expected to 
last six to eight weeks and while Microsoft's founder Bill Gates faces 
the possibility of an imposed carve up of his company, there are many 
competitors waiting in the wings. For the World, I'm Alan Dow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>