<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981019.2000.2993 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the World. I'm Lisa Mullins. Chinese citizens in the '90s 
are more likely to be wielding their checkbook than they are Chairman 
Mao's little red book. That change has occurred in the past 20 years 
since China launched the reforms that moved the country out of the 
Mao years and into the days of Adam Smith and the invisible hand. 
Most Chinese have welcomed those reforms. But one recalcitrant village 
in central China has actually banned private enterprise and diehard 
Maoists are now holding up the town as a standard bearer of their 
ideology. The BBC's James Miles reports. It's around half past five 
in the morning and the children of Nanja village are off for a couple 
of laps around the school sports ground. In military formation, three 
abreast, into the predawn gloom. This is the start of a 15-hour school 
day in this extraordinary community, whose 3,000 permanent inhabitants 
are racing to establish what they call a little communist enclave 
in the plains of central China. The children of Nanja undergo rigorous 
ideological training of a kind long since abandoned elsewhere in China. 
These 12-year-olds are taught to recite Chairman Mao's essays by heart. 
The school teacher asks her class whether there's anyone in Nanja 
to compare with the heroic soldiers who rescued people during China's 
recent floods. Yes chant the children. The answer of course is Nanja's 
communist party boss Wong Hung Bin who enjoys a personality cult here 
not dissimilar to that once enjoyed by Chairman Mao. Wong admits he's 
ridiculed by some outside the village, but says that doesn't deter 
him. WONG Of course, it's impossible for the country to become communist 
at once overnight. It'll be a gradual process, but just like comrade 
Dun Chao Ping said, some people can become rich before others. I think 
as long as communist party members strive for communism, it's possible 
that some people, possibly even many people, will achieve communism 
before the rest. In Nanja discipline is considered vital in the quest 
for communism. Everyone must undergo at least a month of full time 
training in the militia before they can work in the village factories. 
This training is supposed to instill devotion to the collective. Private 
enterprise has been banished here. Before the start of their shift, 
workers spend 20 minutes singing old revolutionary songs. Socialism 
is good, goes this one. In socialist countries, the people enjoy high 
status. The collective provides free housing in smart apartment blocks, 
free furniture and basic food. In return it expects conformity. Every 
two months, each household is visited by a squad of half a dozen inspectors. 
They check whether the flat is clean. Any family found wanting in 
hygiene or indeed in political enthusiasm can lose certain benefits 
such as free eggs or flour. The Be family keeps birds on the balcony, 
one of their few private indulgences. 76-year-old Be Cho May has seen 
the village emerge from dire poverty 20 years ago to today's relative 
prosperity. Like every villager I spoke to here, she had not a dissenting 
word. BE CHO MAY If Chairman Mao could see how well we do things here 
in Nanja, he's be extremely happy. We've got a good team of leaders 
here. Chairman Mao would like it. These are happy days. The village 
public address system broadcasts news of sloppy management at one 
of the factories. Some workers have been caught napping. Public shaming 
like this is a way of ensuring control, but the party boss clearly 
doesn't like to come across as a dictator. China now enjoys economic 
and cultural pluralism. They allow the existence of a private economy 
and they allow us to have our collective economy. They allow people 
not to believe in communism and they allow us to believe in communism. 
Nobody can oppose anyone else. That's the way China is now. Many Chinese 
would laugh at this seemingly quixotic attempt to revive Maoism, but 
the fact that it exists at all suggests that within the Chinese leadership, 
there are some whose thinking is not entirely in harmony with the 
capitalist style reforms sweeping the rest of the country. The BBC's 
James Miles reporting from Nanja in central China. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>