<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981019.2000.0679 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many Chileans associate General Pinochet with nothing but bitter and 
violent memories. Others are showing their support for the former 
dictator and protesting his arrest. Raoul Saur is a political analyst 
in Santiego. Mr. Sauer, can you tell us what the immediate reaction 
has been there to the rather spectacular news of Pinochet's arrest 
in London? How visible does the reaction on the streets of Santiego? 
Well, in the streets there have been demonstrations by a small core 
of Pinochet supporters which have been quite hysteric, quite aggressive, 
but also there have been demonstrations in favor of these arrests. 
There has been a demonstration in front of the British embassy supporting 
the fact that Pinochet will have to answer at least some questions 
about his deeds in the past. Certainly nobody knows more about the 
repression and the brutal treatment that was unleashed by Pinochet 
on Chileans than Chileans themselves. Can you explain how those who 
do support him, could do so to the extent of one group staging a demonstration 
and throwing eggs at the British ambassador's home after Pinochet's 
arrest in Britain. How, where does that kind of support come from? 
Well, I mean there are a number of retired military who are very prominent 
in the demonstrations and there are groups of extreme right which 
were very active during the Pinochet regime which obviously are loyal 
and like the general and I would say even nostalgic of his regime. 
So there is, I mean the demonstration where a few hundred peoples 
and these people are still very keen on General Pinochet, but a very 
small group of people. I mean polls show that Pinochet, the leader, 
has 3 or 4 percent support in the population. So it's really a tiny 
minority of nostalgic people who benefited during his dictatorship. 
And why hasn't then the news spurred on a bigger anti-Pinochet reaction? 
Is it possible that many Chileans would rather just put the era or 
radical politics and repression behind them? The majority of Chileans 
have heard with amazement what is going on in England. I think by 
and large Chileans came to accept the fact that there was an amnesty 
and that it was impossible to judge the crimes that had been committed 
during the Pinochet dictatorship. And the might of the army, the influence 
of the army is such that it would be very risky to try to judge him 
here. I mean that's impossible. So Chileans came to accept that. Hence 
there is this kind of smile and amazement that in England, I mean, 
a court has arrested Pinochet. And certainly people have been expressing 
their pleasure at this situation. But I mean it's a party attitude. 
It's not that people go out in the street demonstrating in the way, 
the hysteric way that Pinochet supporters have. And why is that? Do 
Chileans still feel threatened if they speak out against him as they 
were in the past? Well, yes, they still fear in Chile. I mean the 
army is very powerful. The armed forces are powerful and people fear 
that reprisals can be taken at one point or another. I mean it's not 
just fear of the police or the army as such. But also the economic 
groups here. I mean people fear for their employment. During the dictatorship 
they were black lists and you could, if you got into one of those 
black lists, it was very difficult to get employment. There still, 
there is an informal situation where people, whether it's real or 
not, is to be seen, but people still deep in their mind do have fear. 
I mean 17 years of dictatorship left very deep scars among Chileans. 
Political analyst Raoul Sauer speaking to us from Santiago, Chile. 
Thank you very much. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>