<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981019.1700.3053 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The much anticipated antitrust file between the U.S. government and 
that computer giant Microsoft is now underway here in Washington. 
Observers say the crowd could determine the course of the software 
industry for years to come. We have more from VOA's Rick Nunez. In 
one corner is the Department of Justice. In the other corner is Microsoft, 
a mammoth software maker that generates $14 billion a year in revenue. 
The Justice Department says Microsoft has abused its position as the 
world's preeminent maker of computer software to cut off business 
to potential rivals. The legal proceedings could take up to eight 
weeks. Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates, one of the richest men in the 
world, is not expected to take the stand in person. But in a videotaped 
statement played in court, he denied his firm tried to suppress its 
competitors. Microsoft General Counsel, William Newcomb told reporters 
outside the courthouse he is confident the company will prevail. The 
relevant evidence, the admissible evidence will show that Microsoft 
is a vigorous but a very fair competitor and that as a result of our 
competition and our innovation, customers have benefited. Mr. Newcomb 
considers the lawsuit an example of excessive government regulation 
which he says could jeopardize the stability of the computer industry. 
A spokeswoman for the Justice Department refused to comment on the 
trial. Prosecutors accused Microsoft of illegally exploiting its dominance 
of computer operating systems to seize control of the Internet browser 
market. Browser software allows computer users to access text, pictures 
and sound from the worldwide web. The Justice Department complaint 
centers around the Microsoft software known as Windows. The software 
helps computers run different programs and 80 to 90 percent of all 
computers use Windows. Microsoft allegedly tried to monopolize the 
Internet browser market by including its own browser in the Windows 
system. Prosecutors say the move gave the company an unfair advantage 
over competing Internet software made by Netscape. Computer systems 
analyst Jeff Sachs says many consumers are not aware they can choose 
from different browsers, sometimes free of charge. Most people at 
home, if they just bought a computer, are not immediately going to 
try to go download something else. They're just getting used to the 
computer in the first place, so which browser is built into the computer 
as they bought it is pretty important. Mr. Sachs says the trial could 
have a major effect on software competition and the availability of 
quality programs on the computer market. Rick Nunez, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>