<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981019.0600.2122 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
New Serbian troop movements are reported in Kosovo and U.S. envoy 
Richard Holbrooke warns that NATO is not backing down from its threat 
to strike Serbian forces. Serbian tank and infantry convoys were reported 
on the move in the province yesterday, apparently, against ethnic 
Albanian separatists. Mr. Holbrooke says NATO is not satisfied with 
the extent of the withdrawal of Serbian troops from Kosovo and reaffirmed 
NATO's threat to use force to ensure compliance with a UN ordered 
withdrawal from Kosovo. Mr. Holbrooke, who brokered the agreement, 
also defended NATO's decision to give Yugoslav President Slobodan 
Milosevic more time to comply. Correspondent David Gullest has details. 
Mr. Holbrooke, who hammered out the deal in weeks of Balkan shuttle 
diplomacy says Mr. Milosevic has made a huge set of concessions. And 
he says that while the Yugoslav president was given ten more days 
until October 27th to withdraw security forces and meet other terms 
of the accord, NATO is not backing down in its threat to use force 
against him. Questioned on the ABC television network, Mr. Holbrooke 
said NATO's activation order for military action is not being rescinded. 
And he likened it to a loaded gun being held against the Yugoslav 
leadership. NATO didn't blink. Milosevic and the Serbs have been desperate 
to get this activation order, which is only the second in NATO's 50 
year history, lifted. We refused to lift it. The planes remain on 
the runways, including the B-52s in Britain and the fighters in Italy. 
They're ready to go. The targets have been picked. General Clark, 
the NATO supreme commander, is returning to Belgrade on Tuesday to 
go over the further withdrawals. Mr. Holbrooke said about one-third 
of Yugoslav's regular forces had been withdrawn as of Sunday but that 
this was not sufficient. The U.S. envoy, who was also instrumental 
in reaching the Bosnia peace accords, said Mr. Milosevic knows the 
NATO threat is credible since his forces were the target of NATO's 
wide ranging bombing campaign in Bosnia in 1995. Under questioning, 
Mr. Holbrooke said the mandate to the Organization for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe to raise a 2,000 member civilian force to verify 
the Kosovo agreement is a milestone in the development of the OSCE 
as a factor in the post-Cold War structure of Europe. He said President 
Milosevic has given absolute assurances for the safety of the OSCE 
personnel. And he said members of the Albanian Separatist Kosovo Liberation 
Army should understand that they too, in his words, must not fool 
around with the verification mission. An advance team from the OSCE 
arrived in Kosovo Saturday, while NATO began aerial surveillance by 
sending American U-2 spy planes over the Yugoslav province. David 
Gullest, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>