<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981019.1700.1359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Since 1984, Cirque du Soleil has been entertaining audiences worldwide 
with its unique performances combining acrobatics with fanciful costumes, 
dramatic lighting and original music. Today the company will open 
a new water show in Las Vegas. VOA's Susan Loeb reports "O" will open 
nearly five years after Cirque du Soleil opened its first resident 
show just down in the street in the same city. Since it opened in 
Las Vegas in December 1993, Mystere has been playing to full houses 
at the Treasure Island Hotel, twice a day, five days a week. It's 
72 artists, clowns, acrobats, dancers and musicians come from 14 different 
countries. But as publicist Peen Kootman points out, the creative 
team behind Mystere is the same as that behind all of the Cirque du 
Soleil shows -- a team of eight very talented French Canadians. So 
we have the same choreographer, the same lighting designer, the same 
set designer, the same composers. Because of that, you can see that 
the shows are Cirque du Soleil shows, where there's a great mixture 
of acrobatics, lighting, music, costumes, all that comes together. 
LOEB More than 17 million people have seen one of Cirque du Soleil's 
productions which have been staged in over 120 cities worldwide. And 
while the shows continue to tour the world under the big top, the 
company is opening more permanent productions. The aquatic show in 
Las Vegas, a resident show at Walt Disney World resort in Orlando 
Florida in December and perhaps, most surprisingly, Alegria which 
is currently touring Europe will make a permanent home in Biloxi, 
Mississippi next year. Guy Laliberte, president of Cirque de Soleil 
says the theater in Biloxi, like those in Las Vegas, would be in partnership 
with entrepreneur Steve Wynn who is building a new casino resort there. 
Our first reaction was Biloxi, why? Will it work for a Cirque du Soleil 
show? And we sat down and talked together and because of our past 
relationship we decided to go for it. But, of course, we will be part 
of probably a current of change in the Biloxi activities. LOEB Much 
the same way that Cirque du Soleil changed Las Vegas. While the main 
reason tourists go to Vegas is to gamble, since Cirque du Soleil arrived 
in town, more and more casinos have realized that they offer to family 
entertainment as well. Guy Laliberte believes there is enough of a 
demand for entertainment in the city, that the new Cirq show "O" will 
not hurt ticket sales to Mystere. Because the two shows are very distinctive 
from each other -- also because we have a repeat attendancy which 
is very, very strong in Las Vegas. And because Cirq is presenting 
a new original water show in Vegas, I think it should not hurt. But 
we'll see in the future. So far all the information we have from pre-sales 
and public reaction is going in the right direction. LOEB And as long 
as the audience is there, Guy Laliberte says he and his colleagues 
in Montreal will continue to come up with new and even more imaginative 
ideas per shows. As for the talent to cast those shows, he says it's 
out there and Cirque du Soleil has scouts looking for it all over 
the world, in circus schools, theater companies and gymnastic competitions. 
LOEB Paul Cameron was a trampolinist with the Canadian Gymnastic team 
for 12 years before he joined Cirque du Soleil. He says it's probably 
the best company to work for if you're an acrobat but it isn't for 
everyone. You can be a great acrobat and you might not be the best 
performer here for Cirq. Actually, we've had some people come in that 
aren't very good acrobats and turn out to be a lot better than the 
better gymnasts or the better trampolinists just because there's so 
much more involved. LOEB Paul Cameron's colleague, Lorenzo Pizonni 
who plays the ringmaster in Mystere has some advice for anyone who 
would like a career with Cirque du Soleil. Well, if you're an athlete 
I would say, enroll in an acting class and a dance class. And for 
the actors I'd say, you know, start going to the gym and take some 
dance classes and -- I mean, it's -- because everybody here has to 
do more than what they come with. LOEB By next year, founding president 
Guy Laliberte says nearly 2,500 people will be working for Cirque 
du Soleil. Nevertheless, he says, the spirit of Cirq is as much as 
it was 15 years ago when they first began. Everyone, he says, is considered 
part of the Cirq family no matter what their role and all make an 
important contribution to its success. I'm Susan Loeb 
</TEXT>
</DOC>