<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981019.0600.0350 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is VOA News Now coming to your from Washington. I'm Elizabeth 
Tharat along with Steve Norman. Serbian troops are reported to be 
on the move in the Kosovo province despite last week's assurances 
of a military stand-down from the Yugoslav president. Slobodan Milosevic 
agreed to allow international inspectors and spy planes to verify 
compliance with United Nations demands on Kosovo. Mr. Milosevic's 
action is seen by some observers as a major concession, giving up 
some of his country's sovereignty. Elsewhere, leaders could be worried 
about possible political consequences. But as Art Chimes reports from 
Belgrade, President Milosevic could actually benefit politically. 
Political observers here in Belgrade believe that the concessions 
granted by President Milosevic will not hurt him politically and they 
say paradoxically that the worst thing seen for him, the firmer his 
hold on power. Belgrade University analyst Onyon Prevachavitz predicts 
there will be little domestic political fallout from the Milosevic 
concessions on Kosovo. First of all, the impact will be very, very 
small. You can see this according to the first reaction of people, 
of Serbian people. The majority of them will be and is very happy 
because of they are saved from Western bond. So I think that this 
situation will not cut his support. President Milosevic is helped 
by increasing government control of the news media. Authorities are 
closing independent newspapers and radio stations and taxing satellite 
receivers. There are fewer and fewer places where residents can get 
news that does not come through an official filter. This obviously 
helps Mr. Milosevic by limiting the amount of embarrassing information 
the public gets to know. For example, details of the 2,000 person 
international verification team in Kosovo and the agreement to allow 
spy planes to fly over Serbian territory have been largely absent 
from the official media. So for most residents here, Mr. Milosevic 
is a hero for his last minute deal to avert NATO bombs and missiles. 
What he gave up in return may only vaguely understand. The attacks 
on the media have been led by Deputy Prime Minister Vorisof Chessel 
of the Serbian Radical Party. In advance of the Holbrooke agreement 
on Kosovo, Mr. Chessel voiced a hard line view, stronger than even 
Mr. Milosevic, and he said he would not stay in the government if 
President Milosevic backed down. Now however, he says he supports 
the deal as the least possible concession to avoid the bombing and 
he says his place in the government is assured. Mr. Chessel says his 
position in the government was never stronger and he says President 
Milosevic consulted him before final approval of the Kosovo deal. 
Students of President Milosevic, even the most critical, have a certain 
admiration for him as a political operator. And Serberan Rankovitch 
of Belgrade's Institute for Political Studies says the key to understanding 
Mr. Milosevic is his ideology. The only Milosevic ideology is how 
to maintain power, how to stay in power and he changes many ideologies. 
He was very he started to be very strong nationalist. He was the populist 
ideology so let me repeat, the only ideal -- Milosevic ideology is 
ideology how to maintain the power. Even though President Milosevic 
is claiming victory by avoiding NATO bombs so far, there is a view 
in Belgrade that if NATO does attack, it could actually be to his 
political advantage. This is the leader of an opposition party called 
Democratic Alternative, Neboysha Chovitch. "It would be better for 
him," he says. "President Miloseivc would certainly survive." Mr. 
Chovitch goes on to say that the result of a NATO attack to enforce 
the West's demands on Kosovo would be to further isolate Yugoslavia 
from the international community, destroy democracy and opposition 
forces and solidify what he calls the dictatorship here. Art Chimes, 
VOA News, Belgrade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>