<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981019.1700.0353 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As we've been reporting, Israel says it is suspending negotiations 
on all subjects except security following the grenade attack in the 
Israeli town of Beresheba which left at least 64 people wounded. The 
Israeli side stopped just short of breaking off the talks but has 
said, time is limited. A short while ago we spoke we Melvin Friedlander 
who from 1969 to '78 briefed both the White House and National Security 
County on the Mid East and who has written extensively about the Middle 
East peace process. We asked him how critical the success of these 
talks is to the individual leaders involved. Well, I think they're 
crucial in the sense of forward motion. Should there be a rupture 
in the talks or a result without any conclusion, then I would expect 
that things will get a good deal worse from here on. I wonder, too, 
particularly about Yasser Arafat. He's an aging warrior. His Palestinians 
that he's been leading are a very fractious group as was demonstrated 
by this grenade attack in Israel. What does this do to his leadership 
at this point? Well, his leadership has been under attack for some 
time. On the one hand, his media followers prospered as a result of 
being in -- or being accused of being involved in all sorts of corruption, 
building lavish homes on the sea, doing quite a lot to enhance their 
own acquisitions. And so, the PLO leadership, as you may recall some 
months ago. By the same token, if he is not able to deliver, he's 
going to be seen as an empty leader or a leader without a large following. 
And of course, that's what Hamas expects to and hopes to benefit from 
and that is to demonstrate that he cannot deliver and that they are 
the only ones that can deliver and that should the peace process rupture, 
they will be looked to as the only solid leadership among the Palestinian 
people. In point of fact, if he fails to deliver, if these talks do 
in fact break down, there's no guarantee from his side that the Palestinian 
people will follow him anyway, is there? No, there isn't. He has not 
been able to -- as I say, he was seen as having benefited his his 
immediate leaders and also he has shown not to have been able to deliver 
very much on the peace process. Palestinian people are still suffering. 
They get placed in jail. They're rounded up. They're unable to benefit 
from any aspect of the peace process. It is entirely an imponderable 
question to ask whether or not a Hamas representative could have been 
included in these talks or should have been included? Well, not at 
this stage. They're not far enough along. A Hamas representative could 
be included only when they get to the final status negotiations of 
representation in order to carry out whatever expectations they have 
on the future of Jerusalem and other major issues. We're still a long 
way from that. We're still dealing with the impact of how to get to 
the final status. And of course, the interim steps, withdrawal of 
forces from the territory that Israel has occupied, these are all 
issues that, in many ways, the leadership wants to get beyond, the 
Israeli leadership as well as the Palestinian leadership, so they 
concentrate on final status negotiations. You mentioned the Israeli 
leadership. Let's talk for a moment, if we can, about Benjamin Netanyahu. 
What's at stake for him here? Well, he's in a peculiarly good position, 
strange as that may seem, from his domestic situation. He presides 
over a government which he has merely one or two vote majority and 
that would indicate that it is quite fragile. On the other hand, when 
he deals with issues such as the peace process, in order to move the 
process forward, he has, in terms of labor, a ready constituency to 
support almost anything that he wants to accomplish in moving toward 
a real final status negotiation. That is, either to provide the Palestinians 
with more territory or more -- or the ability to have a better hold 
on their lives. Melvin Friedlander who in years gone by briefed both 
the White House and the National Security Council on Middle East affairs. 
Incidentally, Melvin Friedlander says, whether the Mid East talks 
succeed or fail, President Clinton can emerge from them looking very 
presidential and can come out ahead in the public's mind simply because 
he tried. This, in spite of problems he has at home. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>