<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981019.0600.0850 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Doctors, health officials and activists involved in the fight against 
AIDS say more must be done to reach out to Hispanic communities in 
the United States. VOA's Michael Bowman reports from Miami where the 
effort is underway. The good news is that overall, the rate of HIV 
transmission is not as high in the United States as it was ten years 
ago. The bad news is that immigrant communities continue to be at 
greater risk with the spread of the virus showing no sign of leveling 
off among Hispanics. The educational director at the Florida based 
Community AIDS Resource Organization, Angela Giatono says there are 
many barriers to effectively informing native Spanish speakers about 
AIDS. For the Hispanic community, at least here in the United States, 
there's a lot of fear. So, the information might be there but people 
might not go and access it. Ms. Giatono says many Hispanics fear the 
social stigmas associated with AIDS and as a result do not get tested 
for the HIV virus. She adds that Hispanics who know they are HIV positive 
often do not pursue medical treatment or make use of social services, 
fearing that doing so might jeopardize their legal status in the United 
States. Ms. Giatono was one of more than 200 participants at a Hispanic 
conference on AIDS in Miami. Sponsored by several pharmaceutical companies, 
the two day event featured discussion of HIV transmission rates, the 
latest antiviral drugs and therapies and ways to improve the mental 
and spiritual health of those battling AIDS. Ms. Giatono says the 
goal is to promote the flow of information to Spanish speakers in 
the United States and abroad. We bring in people from Latin America. 
We've been able to offer scholarships this year to folks from Mexico, 
Peru, Dominican Republic so that they can come, get some of the information 
and share with their community back in their countries. One of the 
organizations that took part in the conference, Unyon Positiva collects 
articles by leading scientists and experts on a variety of AIDS related 
topics. The articles are translated into Spanish and reprinted in 
a monthly newsletter, distributed to AIDS organizations in the United 
States and throughout the hemisphere. A co-founder of Unyon Positivia, 
Eduardo Lopez says, despite the emergence of new antiviral therapies, 
AIDS activist should focus their efforts on AIDS prevention. Now that 
the illness can be controlled or can be managed, it's time then to 
put all the energy into definitely caring the people in the ways that 
the HIV is transmitted and how to avoid transmission of HIV and so 
on. The Miami AIDS Conference was the fourth such gathering targeting 
the Hispanic community. Participants note each conference has been 
better attended than the one preceding it, a sign they hope their 
quest to raise AIDS awareness amongst Spanish speakers is succeeding. 
Michael Bowman, VOA News, Miami. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>