<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981019.1700.3216 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Elections for the U.S. Senate generally include an expensive media 
campaign but the current race in Vermont is an exception. The Republican 
Party nominee is an elderly dairy farmer who spent just $200 to win 
the primary election. And his own party supported a more traditional 
candidate, a Harvard educated millionaire who lost anyway. Reporter 
Pat Dawson of NBC television's Today Show introduces us to Fred Tuttle. 
How are you? Good. Good luck. Yeah. He's hard of hearing, never got 
beyond the tenth grade and doesn't get around as well as he used to. 
But don't tell anyone in Vermont that Fred Tuttle lacks charisma. 
Good luck to you. Thank you. You're doing a great job. In an era when 
candidates are often defined by their own ambition, this 79 year old 
retired dairy farmer, now the Green Mountain state's Republican Senate 
nominee, seems genuinely astounded at his own success. I was really 
surprised and my wife was surprised. Everybody was. It was a shock 
to me. And an even bigger shock to the State's Republican party and 
its preferred candidate, Jack McMullen. It's not like you're running 
against another normal political figure. So how did he do it? Hi Fred. 
Hiya. He may be the best known man in Vermont, a leading man, not 
in Hollywood -- a home grown star. John O'Brien is Fred's neighbor 
and a film maker. At the time, I think Ross Perot was running for 
president and I said, if he can be taken seriously, why not Fred Tuttle? 
In 1996, O'Brien directed a lightweight spoof of politics about an 
old dairy farmer who decides that being in Congress would be easier 
than working for a living. I spend all my life in a band; now I just 
want to spend a little in the House. The simple hero, part Charlie 
Chaplin, all Vermonter, starts with nothing and finally triumphs over 
spin doctors and big money. The political fable became a cult hit 
in the State. Hi Fred. How's everything going? All right. Then before 
you can say life imitates art, O'Brien and Fred Tuttle decided to 
try politics for real. It seems the Republican candidate with charisma 
and cash was missing something. McMullen's not a Vermonter. This man 
is. While he vacationed in the State for the sometime, candidate McMullen 
lived in Massachusetts until a year ago. Fred, who's as richly Vermont 
as the brilliant fall foliage, well, his family has been farming here 
since 1832. He's a Yankee, Vermonter. He's not from out of state coming 
in and wanting to run. I'm so sick of flatlanders. It would be easy 
to dismiss this as the parochial bias of a small rural state, but 
that might be missing the real story. We're a tiny little state and 
in this last primary we had what? 50,000 voters. We practice the politics 
of human scale. With his high powered television fueled campaign, 
voters here thought McMullen was missing something about the political 
character of the State. Fred's primary opponent didn't take him too 
seriously which is easy to understand since Fred doesn't take himself 
too seriously, a trait he shares with a lot of Vermonters, and that 
may be at the heart of his appeal. In the small towns of America's 
most rural state, Fred struck a cord, winning by 5,000 votes. Thanks 
for sticking up for us Vermonters. Okay. I'm sticking up for Vermonters. 
The experts say he has absolutely no chance of beating veteran Democratic 
incumbent Pat Leahy. In fact, forget the experts. Fred says he'd just 
as soon not win. Who are you going to vote for? I'm going to vote 
for Leahy. He's a good man. I've known him a long time and he's an 
honest man. But even if Mr. Tuttle doesn't go to Washington, in a 
season of political scandal, this very unlikely Senate candidate has 
given Vermonters something to smile about. He's a good guy. Who's 
a good guy? You are good. Thank you. Thank you. For today, Pat Dawson, 
NBC News, Tunbridge, Vermont. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>