<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981019.0237 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While hundreds of people cheered, 24 army officers convicted of participating 
in last year's bloody coup were hooded, tied to poles and executed 
by soldiers shooting volleys of machine-gun fire. Repeated rounds 
of gunfire were needed to kill some of those executed, who included 
two former chiefs of defense staff and Col. F.Y. Koroma, the brother 
of former junta leader Lt. Col. Johnny Paul Koroma, who has gone into 
hiding with the remnants of his ousted forces. The former soldiers 
were dressed in black shorts and black short-sleeved shirts _ except 
for the one woman, Major Kula Samba, who wore a green checked dress. 
A hood was placed on each person's head as they stepped out of an 
armored vehicle at a military barracks a few miles (kilometers) west 
of Freetown, then each was walked to one of the 24 poles, set in large 
drums and lined up on a rifle range. The group was shot together. 
Hundreds of local residents cheered as the shots rang out, and some 
shouted ``well done and thank you!'' Journalists were also allowed 
to witness the executions, which took place at the Juba 7th Battalion 
military barracks. Later, hundreds of civilians lined the streets 
of Freetown to try to catch a glimpse of trucks carrying the corpses 
to a cemetery. Those executed were among 34 officers sentenced to 
die by a military court last week for crimes linked to the May 25, 
1997 coup that toppled President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah. The remaining 
10 officers had their death sentences commuted to prison terms, an 
official said on condition of anonymity. The punishments were carried 
out despite international appeals for clemency by human rights groups 
and foreign governments. ``We understand the demand within Sierra 
Leone for justice to be seen to be done following the appalling and 
brutal butchery carried out under the junta,'' Foreign Office minister 
Tony Lloyd said in a statement, noting his telephone appeals for clemency 
had been rejected. ``But the country needs to embark on a proper process 
of reconciliation.'' England, the former colonial ruler of Sierra 
Leone, became embroiled in a dispute earlier this year over the extent 
to which official assistance had been given to the Sandline International 
British military consulting group, which helped restore Kabbah to 
power. Sierra Leonean law does not allow convicted military officers 
a chance to appeal and only the president can overturn their sentences. 
The development came as another 16 civilians were convicted Monday 
in a Freetown High Court on treason, murder and arson charges linked 
to the coup. Three people were found not guilty in the case. Sentencing 
was postponed until Tuesday. The latest ruling brings the number of 
convicted junta collaborators to 34 civilians and 34 military officers 
_ who face likely execution by firing squad or hanging. A number of 
other suspects remain on trial and hundreds languish in prison without 
being charged. The most prominent treason accused is former rebel 
leader Foday Sankoh, who was allied with the junta and appeared in 
court last week facing charges including crimes against humanity. 
Although the elected president's return to power early this year was 
hailed as a victory for democracy in West Africa, fighting between 
Kabbah's forces and ousted junta fighters and their rebel allies continues 
in the east of the country. Kabbah was returned to power by a Nigerian-led 
West African intervention force. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>