<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981019.0192 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A week after a political agreement intended to stop Kosovo's fighting, 
a central region resembled a war zone on Monday with tanks positioned 
openly and a U.N. relief agency postponing two convoys. A surge of 
weekend violence brought more Serbian army troops to the area southwest 
of Pristina that was the front line of fighting before the agreement 
between Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic and Western powers. 
Reports of shelling and shooting, along with the Serbian army deployment 
along the road from Komorane to Malisevo, caused the U.N. High Commissioner 
for Refugees to call off two convoys of relief supplies headed to 
western Kosovo on a route through Komorane. The agency also sent a 
team to Kisna Reka, a village in the area with 3,000 Albanian refugees 
living in the nearby woods, to see whether the Serbian army was approaching 
the makeshift refugee camp. Reporters traveling outside Pristina heard 
the thud of mortars on Monday. In Geneva, agency spokeswoman Judith 
Kumin said the team saw many displaced people who told of shooting 
during the night. The team has no comment on military matters, she 
said, but added the UNHCR planned to send out the two convoys on Tuesday 
along with two others already scheduled for that day. In the mountains 
above Kisna Reka, ethnic Albanian guerrillas of the Kosovo Liberation 
Army showed journalists what they said were newly deployed Serbian 
tanks and other armored vehicles. Since the agreement, the Serbs have 
been entering villages and taking civilians, said a KLA officer who 
gave his name as Shaban. ``We respect the agreement, but they are 
provoking us all the time,'' he said. ``Despite any agreement, we 
have a right to defend ourselves and our people.'' Ninety percent 
of Kosovo's 2 million inhabitants are ethnic Albanians, and most want 
independence from Serbia, Yugoslavia's dominant republic. Hundreds 
of people have been killed this year in Milosevic's crackdown on separatists, 
and hundreds of thousands more have fled their homes to escape the 
violence. Milosevic agreed last week to reduce his forces in Kosovo 
to the levels before the February offensive he launched against ethnic 
Albanian separatists. NATO has given him until Oct. 27 to comply. 
The troops who moved out of Pristina to the southwest on Sunday are 
normally stationed in the capital, and therefore could remain in the 
province under the withdrawal plan. Three Serb policemen died last 
weekend and two others were badly wounded by a grenade in the worst 
of what officials said were more than a dozen attacks around Kosovo. 
Serb officials on Monday again blamed the violence on the KLA, saying 
the guerrillas want to provoke a fight that would bring NATO intervention. 
``Remnants of the destroyed Albanian terrorist gangs in the last few 
days have conducted armed attacks and provocations in order to jeopardize 
the realization of the agreement,'' Serbia's Information Ministry 
said. NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana mentioned the attacks on 
Serbs in Paris on Monday after meeting with French Foreign Minister 
Hubert Vedrine. ``I think there are provocateurs and provocations, 
but we must continue to hold the line'' and carry out the accord, 
he said. A 2,000-member international verification force is being 
organized by the 54-nation Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe to ensure that Yugoslavia is keeping its word. About 25 
members of an advance team for the monitors were in Kosovo on Monday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>