<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981019.0202 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An opposition coalition claimed victory Monday in Macedonia's parliamentary 
elections, but the ex-communist incumbents disputed the claim and 
appeared to be backed by electoral officials. The two rival camps, 
ruling Social Democrats and a reformist opposition coalition, both 
claimed their tally of the votes was correct under Macedonia's complicated 
counting system. But the state electoral officials hinted late Monday 
they would side with the incumbents' interpretation. The dispute could 
lead to political tension in Macedonia, the only former Yugoslav republic 
which gained independence without bloodshed in 1992. The opposition 
_ the ultranationalist VMRO-DPMNE and The Democratic Alternative _ 
indicated it would not give up their proclaimed triumph. Official 
results are required by law to be released by Tuesday, but delays 
were feared. Under the complex procedure, only about a third of the 
120 legislative seats were up for grabs in Sunday's vote. The rest 
will be determined in a second round of voting Nov. 1. The opposition, 
led by former top Yugoslav official Vasil Tupurkovski, said it had 
secured 44 seats in the assembly. But the ruling Social Democrats 
contended the opposition total was only 15 _ the same as their own. 
They cited a requirement that turnout in each municipality must be 
at least a third of registered voters. State electoral officials did 
not announce any results, but commission chief Ljiljana Ristova appeared 
briefly before reporters to offer the commission's interpretation 
of the dispute, which supported the incumbents'. Ethnic Albanian parties 
said they had won 22 seats. The incumbents led the country peacefully 
to independence from Yugoslavia. But the opposition coalition, comprised 
of younger politicians, is striving for radical political and economic 
reforms. ``This is a great victory and we hope for an even better 
outcome in the second round,'' Ljuben Paunovski, the opposition coalition's 
spokesman told Macedonian television. Media reported that the latest 
unofficial turnout figure was as high as 70 percent. The Macedonian 
election commission reported no serious irregularities at the polls. 
The representative of the Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe, which monitored the vote, reported a ``significant improvement'' 
compared to the previous election in 1994. Mark Power Stevens, head 
of the 180-person mission, said his teams noted some problems and 
incidents in the election campaign, but that the overall atmosphere 
was satisfactory. After the second round, parliament seats are to 
be distributed according to a combined system _ 85 seats are to follow 
a majority model while the remaining 35 would be distributed on a 
proportional basis among parties whose candidates have won at least 
5 percent of the votes. A total of 38 parties contested the elections, 
all focusing on the country's economic woes during the campaign. Macedonia, 
with a population of about 2 million, was the poorest of all six republics 
in the former Yugoslav federation and its economy remains feeble with 
30 percent unemployment and an average salary of dlrs 210 a month. 
Situated near the volatile Serbian province of Kosovo in Yugoslavia, 
Macedonia has disputes with all of its neighbors, and a restive ethnic 
Albanian minority. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>