<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981019.0194 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Massimo D'Alema, the first ex-Communist to be tapped to form a postwar 
government in Italy, was steeped in Communist dogma and backroom politics 
from childhood. When he was 13, his father, Giuseppe D'Alema, a longtime 
Communist lawmaker and hardliner, brought him to a party congress. 
Young D'Alema gave flowers to Palmiro Togliatti and got a pat on the 
cheek in return. Togliatti was one of the founders of the largest 
Communist party in the West and served as a Cabinet minister in 1947, 
the last time the Communists entered a government in Italy before 
Cold War politics banished them to the opposition benches. After the 
fall of the Berlin Wall it was D'Alema who helped guide the party's 
transformation. It changed its name in 1991 to the Democratic Party 
of the Left, relegated the hammer-and-sickle to the edge of the new 
party flag, accepted privatization of state industry and other free-market 
ideas. A dry wit with a sharp tongue, the 49-year-old D'Alema is prone 
to unusually frank words for an Italian politician, but he also can 
clear the air when backrooms gets thick with tension, a trait that 
wins praises even from rivals. ``He has the tendency to know how to 
reconcile the irreconcilable, to put together the devil and holy water,'' 
was the recent assessment by Luciano Sardelli, a conservative who 
lost to D'Alema in 1996 parliamentary elections in their district 
in Gallipoli, southeastern Italy. The key to D'Alema's success in 
forming a government lay in his ability to get former Christian Democrats 
together in the political bed with a group of hard-line Communists 
who stuck to a Marxist line when the new leftist party was formed 
in 1991. Born in Rome in 1949, D'Alema joined in the youth protests 
of the late 60s while a philosophy student at Pisa University. His 
father was a rival in the Communist youth federation, a training ground 
for future party leaders, of Enrico Berlinguer, who went on to bring 
the party to the brink of power in the late 1970s. In 1975, Berlinguer 
tapped the young D'Alema to lead the federation, his first prominent 
party post. From there, D'Alema's rise was steady. In 1986, he became 
part of the secretariat and the next year was elected to his first 
seat in the Chamber of Deputies. He directed the party's newspaper, 
L'Unita, raising Marxist eyebrows when he began publishing stock tables. 
Re-elected to Parliament in 1992, he became the Democratic Party of 
the Left's Chamber whip and two years later captured the party's No. 
1 post, secretary. But D'Alema was frustrated in another prestigious 
position -- head of Parliament's joint commission for institutional 
reforms. Even D'Alema's skills of persuasion couldn't stem bickering 
from the right to the left over how to modernize Italy's political 
and bureaucratic system. A widower, he married Linda Giuva, who works 
in the state archives. The D'Alema's have two children. After politics, 
perhaps D'Alema's next passion is sailing his 16-meter (52-foot) boat 
Ikarus. Pasta and fish lunches at a seaside trattoria have been a 
favorite setting for political chats. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>