<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981019.2100.0344 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There has been news on another front as well. The peace talks continuing 
on the eastern shore of Maryland with the president once again today 
personally involved shuttling back and forth between sides. At least 
verbally if not physically. In the midst of the talks today, a grenade 
in Israel almost stopped everything cold. We have a late update from 
chief foreign affairs correspondent Andrea mitchell in our Washington 
bureau. You might call in a last-minute shuttle rescue mission. They 
have just decided that the president will cancell his fundraising 
trip to California. You know how important, Brian, those political 
fundraising trips are a week and a half from the election. But he's 
cancelling that to stay with the summit and has persuaded netanyahu 
not to go back to Israel for the opening of the Israeli parliament. 
So the summit is not going to collapse earlier today they were real 
strong suggestions from Israel that they would walk away from it or 
insist on restricting the discussions to such a degree that the Palestinians 
would be forced to walk out. But now they are going to continue tomorrow 
with full meetings tomorrow. The president will attend. As you know, 
there's been no more trouble the region on the planet over the past 
several years. And to ask a politically cynical question. What is 
in it for Bill Clinton in this case? Points for trying and at best 
long-shot victory? You've got it. No one is going to fault him for 
trying this hard. In fact, even if they do not succeed, he will be 
given I think, a lot of credit for giving it his best effort. In fact, 
bringing the vice president along over the weekend, secretary of state 
Albright has been there since last Thursday. No one will be blaming 
Bill Clinton. I think the only political risk, frankly this close 
to an election is if he pressures Israel too lard, as you've seen 
in the past. There has been a reaction in some very important constituencies. 
He has to avoid pressing either side too hard. Most of the blame here 
in the United States would probably be directed more towards either 
Benjamin Netanyahu or Yasser Arafat. But certainly there's a lot at 
stake. You know, even though this is largely ignored here in the United 
States, a Majority of Israelis want a peace deal so it is Netanyahu's 
interest to try to come back with something if he can sell it to the 
hard-liners. He is up for re-election in the year 2000 as well. Yasser 
Arafat ailing, elderlyy, he sees this as his last opportunity to be 
a great figure in the Middle East. Tough story to cover with still 
photos allowed. Thank you very much. Sure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>