<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981019.2100.1090 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're joined tonight by two long-time members of Congress, over half 
a Century combined service among them. Alan Simpson, former senator 
from the state of Wyoming, republican who serve Ford 17 years, director 
of the institute of politics at Harvard's j.F.K. school of government. 
And representative Lee Hamilton, democrat from Indiana. He's retiring 
this year. With us from Capitol Hill. Gentlemen, welcome to you and 
congressmen Hamilton, let's begin with you. Creeteek the current republican 
leadership if you would and tell me whether or not the outcome of 
this election is being overrated in the public mind. It's being called 
a referendum on this president's popularity. Some say it could control 
what goes on in the house by way of impeachment proceedings. First 
I think the republican leadership has really not had much of an agenda 
in this Congress. Certainly in 1998. It seems to me that the difference 
in the republican Congress have been very strong. There has not been 
a concerted push behind a specific agenda. I think the election coming 
up is less about impeachment and the president's personal problems 
than most people think. My experience is that they are still very 
much focused on those items closest to them, health care, education, 
retirement and social security. Certainly the impeachment matter is 
relevant. But I don't think it's going to control this election. When 
it shakes through my guess is you'll see a Congress very much like 
the one you have now. Either with a few seats for the majority in 
the republican side or possibly a few seats in the majority for the 
democratic side. But not a huge shift. Senator Simpson we talk about 
what if you had to put tooth a modern day list of the not just wise 
men, of course, but to be gender neutral, wise people in Washington, 
whether or not they're called upon on national emergency tore have 
a chat with the president. Who would be on Alan Simpson's bipartisan 
all-star team if you had to choose up sides? There's a difference 
between the wise people and the wiseguys. But one of the good guys 
is Lee Hamilton. I enjoyed working with him. If you're looking for 
the all-star team, it would have to be, you know, currently or in 
the past it would have to be Howard Baker. And Bob Dole. People who 
people trust. Sam Nunn. There are a lot of good people in both parties. 
But they don't -- they're not -- they're not pressed before the American 
people. And they're not there now. But that doesn't mean there aren't 
people there who could do this. But the house is just a different 
-- it's just like swinging a rack -- wrecking ball. As I said before, 
if Henry Hyde and John Conyers can stick together and somehow tell 
the speaker and Gephardt and bonilla and army to just lay low even 
kind of sleepoff under the bushes during the warfare, it will work. 
If it doesn't, it's going to be chaos. As to what happens November 
third, I'm like Lee, it's all local. I'm in the land of tip O'Neill 
I knew him well. He was helpful to me many times. All politics is 
local. So you can play the violin and all the rest of it about impeachment 
and monica and this and that, it's not going to make a whip in my 
mind. Congressman Hamilton, the house is without gentlemen like Bob 
Michel of the state of Michigan who couldn't be in his temperament 
more unlike the current leadership in the house. Do you miss that 
style of leadership? Sure, I do. Tip O'Neill from Massachusetts, Bob 
Michel from Illinois -- I'm sorry. Were very good friends. I've sat 
in scores of meetings between those two gentlemen. Very difficult 
subjects brought up. Very civil all the way. I think today the leaders 
in the house both on the republican and the democratic side are under 
a lot more pressure. Our politics is a lot more intense. Partisans 
more active. And the house is a very difficult institution to govern, 
as Al said. Al knows a lot about this place. What's your biggest regret 
as you prepare to depart officially? I don't have any huge regret 
on the legislative side. I will regret that we didn't pass things 
like campaign finance reform. My largest regret, of course, will be 
that I miss the people. This is a tremendous institution. The people 
who make it up I have the enormous affection for. I will miss the 
daily contact and the camaraderie of the house. And senator Simpson, 
as you look back at the Senate -- we have to take a Break in about 
45 seconds -- how has that institution changed? Well, you you have 
people who have replaced reasonableness with zelotry. How many times 
do you need to vote on abortion? Once doll it. That will do it. Then 
maybe eight months later. How many times do you want to revisit the 
issues? The pressure comes from outside. Zell I don't think so are 
ones who have forgotten their purposery or efforts. Bring it up, let's 
have a debate. Let's do that. All the social issues. But instead of 
this tacking on to I.M.F. and the U.N. -- I'm receiving pressure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>