<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981019.1830.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. It is possible that the goal of the peace in the Middle 
East will never be realized. That there are too many forces too determined 
to keep it from happening, despite the best efforts of Arab and Israeli 
leaders and the sponsorship of the United States? Today, as the Israeli 
prime minister and the Palestinian leader struggled to make some progress, 
a grenade thrown by a terrorist in Israel almost stopped the meeting 
cold. But tonight, there is renewed determination. We begin with NBC's 
Andrea Mitchell. Tom, five years of hard work toward peace may be 
at stake tonight, all hinging on how Israel responds to the latest 
terror attack. This morning's grenade attack on a crowded bus station 
injured at least 60 people in southern Israel, but the shock waves 
were felt as far as eastern maryland. At the Middle East summit, Israel 
abruptly canceled all talks, saying it would only discuss its central 
demand. We don't feel that this is satisfactory behavior on their 
part, regarding terrorism, and that is why we are concentrating on 
nothing else at this point. Today, Yasser Arafat called Israel's prime 
minister Netanyahu to denounce the attack and promise swift arrests, 
while the White House scrambled to keep the summit from falling apart. 
But the parties must consider the consequences of failure and also 
the benefits of progress. The president flew back to the talks, his 
fourth day of trying to broker a deal after a weekend when Israeli 
and Palestinian leaders refused to even meet face-to-face. In sessions 
that lasted virtually all night, Clinton shuttled between the two 
sides, unable to reach agreements on exchanging land for security 
guarantees. After today's terror incident, U.S. officials hinted for 
the first time they might support a limited agreement, in which Israel 
would give even less land back. But Arab groups believe Israel is 
using today's attack as an excuse to scuttle the summit. The way it 
has been used is to divert attention from the real focus of what thees 
peace talks are. In fact, independent analysts say Israel should not 
reward terrorists by giving them control over the outcome of the summit. 
You never want the bomb throwers to conclude that they can kill these 
negotiations by throwing bombs. Tonight, the president is bringing 
Arafat and Netanyahu together for the first time in three days. And 
NBC news has learned Jordan's king Hussein, undergoing cancer treatments 
in the U.S., has told the U.S. he is also willing to join the talks 
if it would help save the summit. tom? Andrea Mitchell at the state 
department. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>