<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0409 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The supposedly defunct Paula Jones lawsuit produced another burst 
of documentation on Monday detailing the visceral nature of a confrontation 
that President Clinton said allowed Mrs. Jones to ``rummage'' through 
the intimate life of the nation's chief executive. Before the civil 
suit was dismissed as without merit on April 1, the president faced 
sweeping demands from Mrs. Jones' lawyers for information about his 
sexual conduct over a 20-year period. The demands included the names 
of women with whom he had had sexual relations, consensual or not, 
as well as the names of people who had arranged private meetings between 
Clinton and any female outside his office. Mrs. Jones' lawyers, who 
narrowed their requests after Clinton's lawyers objected, also demanded 
the names of doctors ``who performed surgery or other procedures on 
the president's genitalia.'' The hundreds of pages of sealed documents 
made public Monday by Judge Susan Webber Wright of U.S. District Court 
in Little Rock, Ark., provided little substantive news, particularly 
since excerpts of the depositions of Clinton, Mrs. Jones and others 
were released last March. But the material offered a further measure 
of the heated struggle at the heart of the lawsuit that ignited the 
impeachment threat the president is now facing. The documents, released 
on the eve of the Jones lawyers' effort to revive the suit before 
a federal appeals court in St. Paul, Minn., served as a reminder of 
the continuing power of the Jones accusations to haunt the president. 
His sworn testimony in the Jones suit denying an intimate relationship 
with Monica Lewinsky, a White House intern, became the root of perjury 
charges recommended to Congress last month by Kenneth Starr, the independent 
counsel. As lawyers for both sides headed to the appeals court, Mrs. 
Jones' representatives continued to insist that a last-minute cash 
settlement with the president was possible. But over the weekend, 
the White House rejected as impractical a $2 million proposal that 
demanded $1 million of the president and relied on another $1 million 
from Abe Hirschfeld, a New York real-estate magnate. It is not clear 
whether the appeals court will issue a decision before Congress completes 
its impeachment inquiry. The president's defenders have emphasized 
that the Jones lawsuit underlying the proposed perjury allegations 
was dismissed. The suit's reinstatement presumably might weaken that 
argument, although Congress is not bound by any court proceedings. 
Much of the newly released documentation focused on the effort by 
Judge Wright to determine which side was leaking information in violation 
of her order not to do so. In a series of affidavits, no principal 
on either side admitted to being the source for any of the sensational 
revelations fed to journalists during the four-year-long litigation 
process. For example, the court curtailed the Jones team's requests 
about the president's genitalia but not before reports of ``distinguishing 
characteristics'' surfaced and were denied by Clinton's lawyers. In 
hindsight, some of the documents are steeped in irony, if not prophecy, 
as when Ms. Lewinsky's lawyers, moving last Jan. 12 to quash her subpoena 
from the Jones lawyers, said, ``Merely being associated with this 
case, in any fashion, will leave an indelible mark upon her.'' In 
an affidavit in which she was then publicly identified only as ``Jane 
Doe No. 6,'' Ms. Lewinsky denied having a sexual relationship with 
Clinton, a denial she later recanted after Starr targeted Clinton 
and granted her immunity from prosecution. Mrs. Jones, a state employee 
when Clinton was governor of Arkansas, claimed that she was sexually 
accosted by Clinton in a hotel room in Little Rock in 1991 and rebuffed 
him, and as a result suffered job discrimination and harassment. Saying 
he could not recollect meeting Mrs. Jones, Clinton denied the incident 
and rejected her subsequent demand for an apology in settlement negotiations. 
Danny Ferguson, a former Arkansas state trooper and co-defendant in 
the suit, testified that he did take Mrs. Jones to meet Clinton, but 
at her request, not his. In dismissing the case, Judge Wright ruled 
that there was no evidence that Mrs. Jones suffered any damages even 
if her accusations were presumed to be true. By then, Starr was already 
conducting a separate criminal inquiry into possible perjury and witness 
tampering, focusing on the president's Jan. 17 deposition in the Jones 
case denying an affair with Ms. Lewinsky. In August, after seven months 
of flat denials, the president reversed himself before the nation, 
admitting that he had been misleading in his testimony but insisting 
that he was legally correct under the narrow terms of the Jones deposition 
because he had had oral sex, not intercourse, with Ms. Lewinsky. In 
the skirmishing before Judge Wright, the president's legal team objected 
that he was being asked broadly worded questions about all women he 
had known socially or professionally across a 20-year span. This was 
denounced as an ``unbridled discovery into a defendant's private consensual 
activities.'' The judge eventually narrowed this to the question of 
whether he had had any sexual relations with women who were government 
employees after 1986. ``None,'' Clinton answered. The new documents 
also detail the fruitless efforts by the president's lawyers to obtain 
detailed information about Mrs. Jones' legal defense fund _ a drive 
that Clinton supporters contended could supply evidence that Mrs. 
Jones was pressing the suit for financial gain and political vindictiveness 
against the president. In the litigation, the president's lawyers 
noted that Mrs. Jones had never sought any psychological counseling 
or other professional help after the alleged incident, despite her 
claims of severe emotional distress. Mrs. Jones countered in a deposition: 
``My only counselors are the Lord, my husband and mother. (The Lord 
is helpful but my husband can talk back.)'' The president's lawyers 
contended that her husband, Steve, was a driving force in the suit 
out of personal and political animus toward the president. ``We're 
going to find out everything,'' they quoted Jones as vowing in one 
news interview after the U.S. Supreme Court unanimously ruled that 
the lawsuit could go forward without damaging the nation's business. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>