<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0326 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Behind the excitement of the coming spaceflight of Sen. John Glenn 
is quiet apprehension about hidden dangers. Safety experts agree that 
the space shuttles, like temperamental hot rods, must run regularly 
or become balky and their launching crews rusty. But the shuttles 
have flown little of late. So Glenn's flight is seen, at least in 
theory, as unusually risky. In response, the space agency is taking 
precautions like having ground crews do many more dry runs meant to 
sharpen their skills. It says these rehearsals will offset any dangers, 
though some private experts say the odds of disaster still might be 
unusually high. ``We've been concerned,'' Dr. Seymour C. Himmel, a 
senior member of NASA's Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, said in an 
interview. ``When you have a hiatus like this you have to keep your 
skills honed.'' Dr. M. Granger Morgan, head of engineering and public 
policy at Carnegie Mellon University, agreed. ``There are concerns 
whenever an organization that has to perform a high-reliability job 
stops engaging in continual practice,'' he said. The thunder of Glenn's 
blastoff aboard the shuttle Discovery, set for Oct. 29, is to occur 
after an unexpected silence of nearly five months at the Kennedy Space 
Center in Florida. This is the longest time between shuttle launching 
attempts since the recovery from the 1986 Challenger disaster, when 
the spaceships were grounded for more than two years. The first crew 
to fly after that, in 1988, consisted of all shuttle veterans, mostly 
former military test pilots used to putting their lives on the line. 
The current gap in flights was caused by unforeseen delays in building 
the international space station, a global effort whose payloads are 
to dominate the shuttle agenda for years. The delays stem from Russia's 
financial woes and have raised concerns among federal and private 
safety experts, especially given the high visibility of Glenn's flight. 
The space agency itself has changed its public stance on the dangers 
posed by a flight slowdown. A year ago, before the gap opened up, 
Wilbur C. Trafton, then head of space flight at the National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration, told Congress that inactivity was dangerous. 
If work on the station is delayed, he warned, then ``the shuttle quickly 
drops below what we think is a safe flight rate, which is about five 
flights a year.'' That problem has come to pass in that the five-month 
gap, if repeated over the course of a year, would amount to an annual 
rate of fewer than three flights. Even so, NASA officials dismiss 
it as minor. They say that better analyses show that the shuttle can 
safely fly fewer times a year and that the rigorous exercise of ground 
crews and managers is removing any possible peril. ``We normally launch 
every six to eight weeks,'' said Dave King, a shuttle official at 
the Kennedy center at Cape Canaveral, Fla. ``But when summer brought 
a five-month pause between launches, we went to work developing a 
practice schedule that would keep the team fresh.'' Robert B. Sieck, 
head of shuttle operations in Florida, said that he had talked with 
Glenn about the slowdown and that the senator, a veteran of the astronaut 
corps, was unruffled by it. ``We're going to be just as safe as ever 
because we have the rules and requirements and procedures that protect 
us,'' Sieck said in an interview. ``The teams are going to make sure 
that nothing bad happens.'' Glenn himself has repeatedly played down 
the shuttle risks. ``Of course there is a small danger,'' he said 
when his flight was announced in January, but he added, ``NASA's done 
an outstanding job'' of keeping the risks as low as possible. On his 
nine-day flight, Glenn, 77, and six other astronauts are to conduct 
more than 80 scientific experiments. The senator's are to center on 
the aging process. The shuttle is, by far, the most complicated machine 
ever to fly into space, and therein lies the danger _ there are more 
things to go wrong. It has 230 miles of wiring, 417 circuit breakers, 
600 fuses, 950 switches and 2 million parts, half of which are meant 
to move. The shuttle's three main engines release energy equal to 
23 Hoover Dams and loom as a safety factor because they work at dangerously 
high heats, pressures and speeds. Its twin booster rockets are a special 
worry because one of their kind leaked blistering hot flames that 
touched off the Challenger explosion, which killed six astronauts 
and a high school teacher. Fueling and launching the fleet of four 
winged spaceships and refurbishing them between flights takes a standing 
army at the Florida spaceport, which employs about 14,000 people and 
pumps a billion dollars into the state's economy every year. The current 
break in the rhythm of shuttle flights came about as the space station 
project fell on hard times. Originally, orbital construction of the 
big outpost was to have started in November 1997. But as that date 
neared, and as Russia's problems multiplied, NASA pushed back the 
launching of the first station component. The flight of Glenn was 
announced on Jan. 16 of this year, as the space agency was struggling 
to reduce the repercussions from the station's delay on the shuttle, 
which is to be the main transporter into orbit of the outpost's many 
parts. Among other things, the agency was planning hundreds of layoffs 
at the Florida spaceport. Things got worse. On May 31, NASA announced 
that the start of the station's orbital construction would be postponed 
even further, from June to November, making the orbital outpost overdue 
by a full year. That schedule still holds, barely. And it has thrown 
planning for all shuttle flights into disarray. As silence at the 
launching pads was forecast to last for five months, NASA analysts 
got edgy, as did the agency's overseers. So a wide program of safeguards 
was undertaken in Florida. For instance, on Aug. 20, some 150 launching 
team members labored through a mock countdown bedeviled by troubles 
like false sensor readings, system failures and bad weather. ``The 
test plan and problem scenarios are kept secret,'' Debbie Frostrom, 
a shuttle expert who helped draw up the drill with senior engineers 
known as gremlins, said in a statement. During the overall slowdown, 
the spaceport is doing three times as many mock launchings and four 
times as many fueling simulations as normal, said Sieck, the head 
of shuttle operations. It is also conducting its first comprehensive 
assessment of all procedures and systems since the restart of shuttle 
flights a decade ago. Astronauts, the ultimate beneficiaries of such 
care, have made their presence felt in Florida in the slowdown. On 
July 16, C. Gordon Fullerton, a former shuttle commander, gave the 
keynote address when the entire center stopped regular work for a 
day to focus exclusively on heightening safety. And on Aug. 27, Heidemarie 
Stefanyshyn-Piper, a newcomer to the corps, gave out a coveted award 
to a worker who had helped improve payload handling. Private experts 
said it was conceivable that all the extra practice and precautions 
would actually make the Glenn flight safer. ``They've had time to 
fix all the small things,'' said Dr. Elizabeth Pate-Cornell, head 
of industrial engineering and engineering management at Stanford University. 
But Dr. Charles Perrow, a Yale sociologist and author of ``Normal 
Accidents,'' a study of high-technology risk, said the slowdown and 
all the attendant changes could add complexity to an already complex 
equation, undercutting safety. ``It's certainly going to heighten 
the difficulty,'' he said. ``Whether that means new danger, nobody 
probably knows.'' Himmel of NASA's Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, 
a team of independent experts, said he was confident that the heightened 
precautions were sufficient to ward off unusual perils. ``The important 
thing is to realize that when you get into something that is extraordinary, 
everybody has to be made aware of that fact and to do the job right,'' 
he said. The lull is to ease up a bit after Glenn's flight. The first 
space station launching is set for Nov. 20 when a Russian rocket is 
to lift the initial element of the outpost into orbit. The shuttle 
Endeavour is to carry aloft the shuttles' first space station payload 
on Dec. 3, in theory paving the way for dozens of other shuttle trips 
in service of the space station over the years, helping to keep launching 
teams sharp and the fleet safe. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>