<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0262 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the endless battle between farmers and insects, the bugs have won 
another round. A big change in the behavior of the western corn rootworm 
beetle is threatening one of the great success stories in American 
agriculture, the use of crop rotation instead of pesticides on millions 
of acres of Midwestern corn. The larva of the beetle, first documented 
in the United States in 1867, can devastate corn by eating away the 
roots of the young plants, causing them to keel over in a strong wind. 
Forty years ago, the beetle became resistant to the insecticides used 
then. But farmers, in turn, learned to control the pest by rotating 
corn and soybean crops in the same field. This was the strategy: The 
adult beetles, which eat corn silks and pollen, would lay their eggs 
in a cornfield in midsummer. Their larvae, the rootworms, would emerge 
in late May and early June of the following year. When they found 
themselves among soybeans instead of corn, they starved to death because 
they could not develop on soybean roots. By the following spring, 
the soil would be free of rootworms, ready for a new crop of corn. 
But now, in a shift that has shocked farmers and surprised entomologists, 
adult western corn rootworm beetles have developed a taste for soybeans 
and have added soybean fields to their egg-laying destinations. When 
corn is rotated onto these fields the following spring, the western 
corn rootworms are waiting. Farmers first discovered the rootworms 
in rotated fields in 1986 near Piper City, Ill. ``This was unheard 
of,'' said Dr. Eli Levine, a research entomologist at the University 
of Illinois, who was called to take a look. He thought he might see 
northern corn rootworms, found in relatively small numbers here. In 
a better-known shift in behavior, its beetle had begun laying eggs 
that took two or more years to hatch, allowing some of its offspring 
to bypass crop rotation and show up in young corn. But instead it 
was the western corn rootworm. Levine theorized that the pyrethroid 
insecticides used in seed corn had simply forced the beetles into 
nearby soybeans at egg-laying time. For six years, the problem stayed 
in an area less than three miles square. Then in 1992, there were 
reports of infestations in commercial cornfields that were far from 
any pyrethroid-treated areas, including Lake County, Ind., south of 
Gary. Now, the pests are found in more than 10 counties in Illinois, 
the northern half of Indiana, some counties in western Ohio and lower 
Michigan, and they are expected to reach southern Wisconsin in five 
years. Their spread west is much slower, but scientists expect them 
to reach Iowa in 10 years. The use of soil insecticides has soared 
from 13 percent of farms to more than 90 percent in some affected 
counties in Illinois. Nationally these pesticides, widely used in 
agriculture and the home, are the subject of scrutiny by federal officials 
concerned about water runoff and health. If the problem spreads to 
all the state's 7.9 million acres of rotated corn, the additional 
cost of soil insecticides could reach $104 million a year, crop scientists 
say. Yield losses in untreated corn could reach $132 million a year 
in Illinois alone. ``A mere curiosity has emerged into a huge problem,'' 
Levine said. The problem, however, has been shaped in part by human 
actions and agricultural practices. The western corn rootworm beetle, 
whose scientific name is Diabrotica virgifera virgifera LeConte, originated 
in the tropics and was only found in the southwestern United States 
as a pest on buffalo gourds. In 1909, it was found attacking corn 
on a farm near Greeley, Colo. The beetle got its path east to the 
corn belt when irrigation made continuous corn crops possible in Kansas 
and Nebraska, said Dr. Robert Metcalf, a professor emeritus of entomology 
and environmental studies at the University of Illinois. In 1961, 
the beetle became resistant to chlorinated hydrocarbon insecticides 
in southeastern Nebraska, Metcalf said, ``and it immediately migrated.'' 
By 1964, it reached Illinois. ``It took a long time to get growers 
off pesticides,'' said Dr. Joseph Spencer, an expert on insect behavior 
who has been studying the beetles for the Illinois Natural History 
Survey. Once farmers realized crop rotation would control the rootworms, 
pesticide use plummeted. But crop rotation, despite its benefits in 
restoring nutrients to soil, has limitations as a pest-control tool. 
In the spring of 1996, Spencer took a lawn chair and went out into 
the soybean fields to watch rootworm beetles. In the nearby cornfields, 
they were yellow, but ``the further I went into the soybeans, more 
and more females were green,'' he said. The yellow beetles were full 
of corn, the green ones full of soybean leaves. Many beetles had eaten 
some of each, cycling between the fields. Laboratory tests have since 
shown that ``if they just eat soybeans, they'll die,'' Spencer said, 
but if they are given a choice between the two, they will eat some 
of each. Larry Bledsoe, an entomologist with the Purdue University 
extension service, said the beetles had, in a way become resistant 
to crop rotation. ``Planting a soybean field where rootworm eggs were 
laid is similar to putting on a powerful insecticide,'' he said. Faced 
with insecticides, almost all the insects die, but a few of the very 
resistant will not. By killing all but the resistant ones, ``we have 
changed the distribution,'' Bledsoe said. The insects left to reproduce 
are the ones that are insecticide-resistant _ or, in this case, the 
insects that are less choosy about laying their eggs only in corn. 
The exact cause of the behavior shift is not known, Spencer said. 
It may be that the changes can be attributed to weather or some environmental 
factor. But he considers it more likely that there has been a genetic 
change in the beetle. Dr. Robert Novak, a professor of medical entomology 
at the University of Illinois, who has started studying the DNA of 
the beetles, said he had seen ``a marker that looks very good'' for 
differentiating between the beetles that like soybeans and the ones 
that do not. Dr. John Thompson, an evolutionary biologist at Washington 
State University in Pullman, pointed out that, ``Every time a genetically 
based shift is found, it's always a situation where a local plant 
or an introduced plant has gotten very abundant relative to the usual 
host plant. That's the situation you have with corn and soybeans. 
Every other year, you have a tremendous universe of food to be used.'' 
Farmers in the affected region got a respite last summer, a tenfold 
decrease in the number of rootworms, Levine said. He believes they 
were drowned by heavy rains that caused flooding just as they emerged. 
But this development ``in no way diminishes the long-term seriousness 
of the problem,'' he said. Fifteen miles south of Piper City, where 
it all began, Greg Pool said he did not intend to take any chances. 
He farms nearly 1,400 acres in Melvin, Ill., and still rotates soybeans 
with corn. Only now he spends $16 to $17 an acre for insecticides. 
For three years Pool has set aside a 10-acre plot to participate in 
a University of Illinois study, leaving untreated corn in scattered 
patches. The scientists are watching the damage to the corn roots. 
He is watching the effect on his yield per acre. ``The damage is still 
on the way up,'' Pool said. ``In the first year, there was a two-bushel 
difference. Last year, we were in the 8-to-10-bushel difference. This 
year, it was 17 bushels. ``I guess I've learned my lesson,'' Pool 
added ``Next year I won't have the plot, and I'll treat all my acres.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>