<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0357 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a contrite and emotional appearance before the Nevada State Athletic 
Commission, Mike Tyson Monday won back the right to return to the 
ring. After a three-hour hearing at the Clark County Government Center 
here, the commissioners voted, 4-1, to restore Tyson's license, 15 
months after they revoked it because he bit both of Evander Holyfield's 
ears in a heavyweight title bout. Appearing relieved that the ordeal 
was over, Tyson hugged his wife, Monica Turner. ``It's just great,'' 
Tyson said at a news conference shortly after the hearing. ``I'd like 
to thank the Nevada commission for allowing me to be able to display 
my skills again. I'd like to thank everyone that's supported me.'' 
Among those who supported the 32-year-old boxer in his quest to resume 
boxing were two legendary athletes, Muhammad Ali and Earvin (Magic) 
Johnson, the former Los Angeles Lakers star. Ali, suffering from Parkinson's 
syndrome, had a prepared statement read to the committee by his wife, 
Lonnie, in which he said he thought Tyson should get his license back. 
``I have made many mistakes in my lifetime that cost me dearly,'' 
the statement read. ``Let this young man earn a living.'' Ali also 
said that he would be available to offer Tyson advice whenever he 
seeks it. Johnson made an impassioned plea with the committee to give 
Tyson his license back and insured the committee that he will personally 
take a role in helping Tyson manage his finances and become Tyson's 
mentor. Johnson said he and Jim Jimmerson, Tyson's Las Vegas-based 
lawyer, will always be there for Tyson. ''If the decision hadn't gone 
his way today, me and this gentleman would have still been here for 
Mike,'' Johnson said motioning toward Jimmerson who was standing beside 
him. ``We'll be there long after his career is over.'' Tyson still 
must officially apply for his boxing license. According to Marc Ratner, 
the Nevada Athletic Commission executive director, Tyson must take 
an HIV test and a boxing physical and pay $25 for his license. He 
has to do that 30 days before he fights. When he returns to the ring, 
Tyson has little or no margin for error in Nevada. In granting Tyson 
his license, Dr. Elias Ghanem, the commission chairman, issued Tyson 
a stern warning. ``If Mike Tyson has any more problems in the ring 
that he is responsible for, he'll never fight in Nevada again,'' Ghanem 
said. Tyson needs to fight before the end of the year in order to 
settle a $13 million lien the Internal Revenue Service has placed 
against his three homes. A Dec. 5 date has been set aside for Tyson 
to return to the ring, but Tyson isn't so sure he'll make that date. 
``I don't know if I'm prepared to fight by the end of the year,'' 
Tyson said. ``I've been going through a lot psychologically.'' Johnson, 
who has a promoter's license in California and New Jersey and is close 
to getting one in Nevada, said he will not be acting as Tyson's promoter. 
But he certainly sounded like one Monday. ``We haven't selected any 
opponents yet,'' Johnson said. ``I know you guys think he's going 
to go out and fight the best. I don't care what you guys say in the 
press, we're not going to rush Mike on this. Whoever it's going to 
be, it's going to be the best opponent for Mike.'' This was Tyson's 
second hearing before the Nevada commission. The first one on Sept. 
19 was continued, because the commission wanted Tyson to undergo a 
battery of psychological test by independent psychologist and psychiatrists. 
Those test were conducted by six psychologists and psychiatrists at 
Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston from Sept. 21-26. Five of 
the doctors who performed the test were on hand Monday to answer the 
commissions questions. And as they had in their report, they re-affirmed 
that Tyson was psychologically fit to return to the ring. Many of 
the questions from the commissioners to the psychologists centered 
on whether Tyson would be likely to repeat the foul that he committed 
against Holyfield. Dr. Ronald Schouten, the Director of Law and Psychiatry 
at Massachusetts General, said the doctors didn't have ``crystal balls'' 
and could not foresee what would happen in the future. But they believe 
with continued psychotherapy, Tyson could manage and control his anger. 
Monica Turner said her husband has already set up a weekly schedule 
with Dr. Richard Goldberg, a psychiatrist at Georgetown University 
Hospital whom Tyson has been seeing off and on since last December. 
Tyson, dressed in a black sports coat, white shirt and black and white 
checked slacks, was not grilled extensively by the commission members 
on any of the hot button issues that had followed him into this second 
hearing. Sitting between his wife and Jimmerson, Tyson was relaxed 
for most of the hearing, often reaching over to whisper in his wife's 
ear. Tyson planted a loud kiss on her forehead when she was talking 
about the incident in Maryland where he allegedly kicked one man in 
the groin and punched another in the chest following an automobile 
accident. Tyson said he doesn't recall hitting anyone. From his recollection 
one of the men went and lay down in the median after Tyson had been 
screaming obscenities at him. Tyson said he has met with both men 
and they have made their peace with each other. Still, a Dec. 1 hearing 
in a Montgomery County court has been set in the matter. ``I was irate, 
crazy, mad,'' Tyson said. ``I really said some bad things to those 
people. They were afraid of this big, black guy using street vernacular. 
It was a big ugly scene. If he says I did it, maybe I was unconscious 
of doing it. I'm sorry.'' Nave, who had gall bladder surgery on Saturday, 
left his hospital bed Monday morning to attend the hearing and returned 
immediately afterwards, didn't think that Tyson had taken full blame 
for his actions. Nave kept hammering Tyson about various comments 
he had read where he said Tyson blamed referee Miles Lane and Holyfield 
for leading to the biting incident. He said he thought Tyson's actions 
were premeditated because the second bite occurred some time after 
the first. Tyson said he has never blamed anyone but himself. ``I 
was messed up,'' Tyson said, using an expletive. ``It's no one's fault 
but mine. Some people are sheltered and protected, born with a silver 
spoon in their mouth. They don't know what it's like to be hungry 
and scared and have to have courage. They know who they are. I am 
no schizophrenic and no manic depressant. I'm just me. I represent 
people, pimps, whores, prostitutes. I always have to be strong, because 
I never know who's looking at me.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>