<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0188 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fred Kovaleski, a former State Department official, stares across 
the net at Jason Morton in the thick of their fight for the title 
of No. 1 tennis player in the world. Kovaleski is losing, something 
he has not had much experience with during the past 60 years, and 
he is not delighted. But in a corner of his brain is lodged a thought 
that is becoming more and more common in a rapidly expanding segment 
of the American population: ``I can't wait to get older.'' They are 
actually battling to become world champion in the over-70 division 
at the International Tennis Federation World Championships in Palm 
Beach Gardens, Fla. But at the moment there is no other division and 
no other world. Kovaleski, of New York City, knows that Jan. 1 starts 
the year he turns 75. The odds will then suddenly shift in his favor, 
putting him in line to become No. 1 among the over-75's. And he can 
expect to hold that title for some time _ at least until that young 
pup Jason Morton, a teaching pro at Sun Lakes, Ariz., joins the over-75 
age group in five years. These senior warriors are part of a powerful 
new development among an elderly population that is becoming far more 
physically active. Many start lifting weights after they retire and 
continue well into their 90s. They participate in an explosion of 
organized games and health-club activities. The physical activity 
is, in turn, demonstrably improving their health and the quality and 
grace of their lives. A number of recent studies show that nutrition 
and aerobic exercise are no longer sufficient _ apart from the wisdom 
of sidestepping things like illness and moving freight trains _ to 
protect the aging body. The research has made clear that working to 
restore muscle strength and bone density is crucial in realizing the 
potential for a healthy old age. Although they cannot turn back the 
clock, elderly athletes are finding that they can take part in sports 
requiring strong arms, legs and shoulders much longer and more successfully 
by using resistance-weight machines to restore muscle lost through 
aging. Morton and Kovaleski provide a case in point. Morton won the 
over-70 competition and will try next year to win what might be called 
American's first Granddad Slam _ national singles and doubles titles 
on four surfaces, the indoor, clay, grass and hard courts. Morton 
lifts weights. Kovaleski does not. Whether that matters when it comes 
to a specific tennis match is debatable, but in day-to-day living 
among an older population, the value of strength-training exercise 
is virtually indisputable. For the very old and frail the simple act 
of crossing a room can become something of a high-wire balancing act. 
But with strengthened leg muscles, the endeavor becomes more routine 
and the risk of serious injury from a fall decreases. The American 
College of Sports Medicine recently released a study analyzing some 
250 original research projects, most completed in the past five years. 
The director of the study, Dr. Robert Mazzeo, a professor of exercise 
physiology at the University of Colorado in Boulder, said the work 
showed the aging process was far more complex than once thought, involving 
a complicated interaction of genetics, life style, disease and other 
factors. In one of two startling studies, by Dr. Maria Fiatarone, 
Dr. William Evans and others at the Tufts University Research Center, 
nine women and men, ages 87 to 101, strengthened their arms and legs 
by exercising with resistance weights, which, as part of a controllable 
system of pulleys and cables, are safer than free weights. In eight 
weeks, they increased the strength in the front thigh muscles by an 
average of almost 175 percent. Dr. Abraham Datch, a 101-year-old retired 
dentist, increased his strength by 200 percent over what it was at 
95. The second study, by Evans and Dr. Miriam Nelson, divided 40 postmenopausal 
women, none of whom were on hormone replacement therapy, into two 
groups, one that lifted weights and one that did not. The group that 
did not lift lost bone and muscle mass, but the other group increased 
its average strength to the equivalent of women 15 to 20 years younger. 
Mazzeo said he was surprised to see how quickly the elderly benefited 
from training with resistance weights. ``They build muscle strength,'' 
Mazzeo said, ``and this then allows them to do other things, like 
aerobic exercises, that they had not been able to do, and that improves 
their cardiovascular systems.'' Norman Fitz is a retired meteorologist 
from Silver Spring, Md., and a tennis player who has been in the top 
20 of his age division for 30 years. Last December, after years of 
hard use, his shoulder broke down with a tear in the rotator cuff 
and damage in eight other areas. The injury should have put him out 
of commission for at least a year. But after surgery, he started an 
elaborate program of stretching, aerobic exercise and strength-building, 
lifting weights for the first time in his life. His first exercise 
of the day, prescribed by his physical therapist, Peter Boyle, director 
of Sports and Spinal Physical Therapy in Washington, is simply to 
lie on his back on a rolling pin for five minutes, and do nothing. 
The rolling pin, wrapped in two towels and placed under the small 
of his back, helped stretch and gradually correct Fitz's posture, 
which had become bent from long hours at a desk, Boyle said. ``With 
Norman we were also able to restrengthen his shoulder muscles with 
weight lifting and other exercise,'' he added. Within six months, 
half the time expected, Fitz was back on the courts and soon at the 
top of the tennis ladder in the Mid-Atlantic over-60 division. Last 
month, he made a credible showing in the national grass-court championships 
in his division in Cedarhurst, N.Y. Without exercise, Mazzeo's study 
concluded, total muscle mass decreases by nearly 50 percent between 
ages 20 and 90. Computer tomography of individual muscles shows that 
after age 30 there is a decrease in cross-sectional areas of the thigh, 
decreased muscle density and increased intramuscle fat. Loss of muscle 
mass, or atrophy, occurs notably in Type 2 muscle fibers _ the fast-twitch 
muscles used in high-intensity activities. Atrophy, a normal response 
to lack of use, appears to be accentuated in older people if dietary 
protein is not increased. Typically, researchers say, people lose 
about 30 percent of their strength between 50 and 70, and another 
30 per cent per decade after that. At the same time, fat-free body 
mass declines 15 percent, which in turn slows the body's metabolism 
_ the rate at which it converts food to energy. To make matters worse, 
the loss of lean body mass makes people lose energy and become more 
sedentary, continuing the unhealthy cycle by contributing to loss 
of lean body mass. But increased physical activity can reverse that 
cycle. ``A number of studies have demonstrated that, given adequate 
training stimulus, older men and women show similar or greater strength 
gains compared with young individuals as a result of resistance training,'' 
the researchers said. Still, because the aging process is so complex, 
getting and staying in shape and competing becomes more complicated 
as the body ages. Dr. Gary I. Wadler, a sports medicine-expert at 
New York University School of Medicine, said in an interview: ``After 
30, reaction time slows, as information processing in the brain slows 
and nerves conduct impulses more slowly. The heart no longer pumps 
at the same maximal rate it once did. The arteries begin to stiffen, 
and oxygen is transported less efficiently. Finally, recovery time 
slows.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>