<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good news from England: Statistical criteria may make it easier for 
a man with stunted perceptual ability to decide whether a woman is 
sexually attractive, unattractive or just so-so. This breakthrough 
in sexiness assessment was reported in a renowned British journal, 
The Lancet, in two papers by Dr. Martin Tovee, a psychologist, and 
his colleagues at Newcastle University. The gist of the two reports, 
one published in November and the other in August, was that sexual 
attractiveness in women was a function of body weight compared with 
height. Naturally, working this out requires some arithmetic. The 
sexiness quotient proposed by the Newcastle group, called the body-mass 
index, is calculated by measuring a woman's weight in kilograms and 
dividing it by the square of her height in meters. Got that? For Americans, 
this means we must divide a woman's weight in pounds by 2.205 to get 
the kilograms, and multiply her height in inches times 0.0254 to get 
the meters. Then we multiply that number times itself and divide the 
result into the weight. Simplicity itself. After culling various journals 
(including Playboy, which the authors cited as ``a source which has 
been used by previous researchers and which is judged reliable''), 
they compiled a table of average body-mass indices as follows: fashion 
models, 17.57; other models (including centerfolds), 18.09; anorexic 
women, 14.72; bulimic women, 23.66; normal women, 21.86. Investigators 
in the past had theorized that feminine attractiveness was best gauged 
by a woman's hip-to-waist ratio, on the grounds that a nice big ratio 
supposedly signaled fecundity, a quality these scientists equated 
with sexual attraction. But the Newcastle team tested this hypothesis 
and found it wanting. Forty male undergraduates at the university 
served as a panel rating the sexiness of full frontal color pictures 
of 50 naked women of assorted shapes and sizes, depicted without faces. 
A graph representing the students' rankings was compared with graphs 
of the women's body-mass indices and with their waist-hip ratios, 
and it was found that the students' perceptions matched the body-mass 
ratios much more closely than the waist-hip ratios. Science marches 
on. Not to be outdone, the University of Liverpool reported that women 
who need anthropometric help in picking sexy mates should look above 
the belt, at their prospects' hands. This conclusion, reported by 
the magazine New Scientist, came from a study by Dr. John Manning 
and his associates, who focused on male patients in a fertility clinic. 
It turned out, he reported, that the men with the lowest sperm counts 
and poorest sperm motility also had the least symmetrical hands. Manning's 
group also discovered that men whose ring fingers were longer than 
their index fingers often had elevated levels of testosterone, and 
we all know what that means. Despite the scorn that has been heaped 
on ``anthropometrics'' by Dr. Stephen Jay Gould (author of ``The Mismeasure 
of Man'') and scores of other leading scientists, the urge to learn 
about people by measuring them seems to be a deep-seated human impulse. 
From the phrenologists of the 19th century to the heat-sensitive ``mood 
rings'' of the 1960s, measurement systems fascinate and entertain 
even skeptics. But while anthropometric systems are harmless fun for 
some, they have also kindled bitter disputes. Sir Francis Galton, 
a cousin of Charles Darwin, was a pioneer in the field of measuring 
people. Sir Francis might have avoided intense criticism if he had 
restricted his studies to sexual attractiveness, but he took a different 
line, seeking to measure intelligence. Having concluded that intelligence 
was a hereditary trait and that the breeding of stupid people should 
be discouraged, Sir Francis threw the fat into a sociological fire 
that still blazes intensely. Despite the bad name anthropometric systems 
have in some circles, they are sometimes useful to forensic scientists. 
Alphonse Bertillon, a 19th-century French anthropometrist, devised 
a system of forensic identification based on the dimensions of parts 
of a body, especially the head, left arm and left foot. His method 
impressed Arthur Conan Doyle so much that in ``The Hound of the Baskervilles,'' 
Sherlock Holmes exhibited jealousy of the famous French scientist. 
Although most of Bertillon's techniques eventually proved unreliable, 
the field of forensic anthropology that developed from his ideas still 
thrives, with varying degrees of success. Still, even the modern version 
can yield false conclusions. Among the body parts found in the aftermath 
of the Oklahoma City bombing was a leg whose owner could not be identified. 
Forensic anthropologists measured and studied the leg and finally 
concluded it was probably the leg of a white man. But another and 
more reliable method was available: DNA analysis. To the embarrassment 
of the anthropometrists, DNA showed that the leg probably came from 
a black woman. So, dear reader, if your body-mass index or finger-length 
ratio is less than ideal, do not despair. Anthropometrists have been 
known to err. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>