<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0079 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The concept of a trillion has shifted in recent weeks from a fuzzy, 
imprecise and somewhat abstract notion into a hard-edged number like, 
say, 47 or 254 or 7,453. Indeed, because of the Long-Term Capital 
Management fiasco, trillion has become the next big thing. (Of course, 
the federal budget passed $1 trillion several years ago, but nobody 
pays attention to it.) Before this recent shift in consciousness, 
a trillion, at least in everyday usage, was an expression more akin 
to zillion, gazillion and jillion. It was a way of connoting scads, 
heaps, plenitude and humongosity. In this it was like a light year. 
No one ever experienced a light year and no one ever saw a trillion 
anything. It was a poetic concept like all the stars in the heavens 
and all the grains of sand on the beaches. But when Long-Term Capital 
Management's troubles became newsworthy in early October, it was reported 
that the firm had entered into ``exotic financial transactions'' valued 
at $1.25 trillion. Derivatives and forward contracts might not be 
universally comprehensible, but the basic image conveyed by the news 
stories was not at all meant as an abstract concept, like stars in 
the Milky Way. Anyone who plays poker could understand it; a group 
of people, a very finite group of people, were sitting around a table 
and making bets trying to win a pot worth $1.25 trillion, a figure 
even more impressive when it is represented like this: $1,250,000,000,000. 
That is quite real. It is so real it is scary. For perspective, it 
may be useful to note that if somebody wanted to distribute $1 trillion 
equally among all 240 million Americans, he would have to dispense 
more than $4,000 to every man, woman and child. Putting a dollar sign 
in front of very big numbers tends to make them real, though this 
does not always work for other units of wealth. For example, one can 
go to the Numismatic Museum in New York and gaze at the quintillion 
pengo note that circulated in Hungary during a period of hyperinflation 
after World War II. Despite its 18 zeros, six more than those of a 
trillion, it is not really awe-inspiring. Even in the heyday of the 
pengo, one probably couldn't get much for a trillion, or quartillion 
or quintillion of them. But there is a lesson here. Dollars, like 
pengos, fluctuate over time. And just as there are forces of inflation 
and devaluation affecting currencies, so there are semantic shifts 
in the numbers that come to be associated with money. Take millions 
and billions, which were as mythical as trillions were before Long-Term 
Capital helped make them a household concept. There was a time when 
a million dollars was a pretty high standard. Telling somebody they 
looked like a million was considered a high compliment. Similarly, 
a millionaire was a rare species, generally depicted in cartoons as 
a cigar-smoking person in a top hat. Now, according to ``The Millionaire 
Next Door,'' a best seller since it appeared in 1997, there are 3.5 
million of them. That's 3,500,000, households. Though this is not 
exactly a dime a dozen, it is not one in a million either. And within 
the last decade, some people began to be designated as billionaires. 
This has led to some confusion between the categories, notably the 
assumption that millionaires and billionaires are related subspecies 
who graze together. This is a fallacy that may be made clear by the 
following facts: A person with the net worth of $1 is closer in wealth 
to a person with a net worth of $50 million than the person with $50 
million is to the person with $1 billion. Much, much closer. After 
all, the person with $1 is only $49,999,999 behind the millionaire, 
while the millionaire is $950,000,000 behind the billionaire. This 
co-mingling of truly fat cats and the merely plump has long bothered 
John Allen Paulos, a Temple University mathematician who has written 
entertainingly about mathematics in everyday life. He advocates using 
scientific notation to describe the rich instead of the indistinct 
millionaire or multimillionaire, which could mean anyone who possessed 
more than a million or less than a billion (which the British refer 
to quite correctly as a thousand million). Paulos thinks exponents 
would help put the very rich in their appropriate places. For example, 
if one were to read about a 6 x 107 centerfielder, one could immediately 
determine that this was a $60 million variety of millionaire. A 3 
x 106 adolescent baby sitter would be established as a $3-million 
member of the phylum. And so forth. Greater precision could also be 
achieved by borrowing from Indian usage. Indians, who number at least 
8 x 108, have an increasingly useful word _ crore _ which means 10 
million. And should the time come when the currently awesome trillion 
turns out to be small potatoes, there is the googol, which is the 
number 1 followed by 100 zeros, or 10100. And if that's not enough, 
there is the googolplex which is 10 to the power googol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>