<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the beginning, there was light, the bursting dawn of cosmic creation. 
As the fireball of the Big Bang expanded and cooled, though, the light 
faded away and darkness fell on the young universe, by then little 
more than a formless sea of dark matter flecked with traces of primordial 
hydrogen and helium and broken only by scattered but fateful ripples. 
The universe had entered what astronomers characterize as its dark 
age. Over a period from 300,000 years to about half a billion years 
after the Big Bang the darkness persisted, denying to astronomers 
any direct evidence of this time of momentous transformation. Somehow 
this epoch gave birth to the architecture of the modern universe and 
conditions that would eventually lead to planets and life. But what 
happened in the dark age and how the light came on again is an enduring 
and frustrating mystery. If there was no light or other detectable 
radiation from the dark age, what was there to see? Besides, no telescope 
could see back that far. Sir Martin Rees, a cosmologist at Cambridge 
University in England, calls this the ``most important unsolved problem 
in astronomy.'' In spite of the obstacles, by looking deeper and deeper 
into space and thus into time with new telescopes in Earth orbit and 
on the ground, astronomers are making progress in their search for 
the first light. They are at last catching sight of some of the earlier, 
if not necessarily the first, galaxies _ each observation seems to 
put their formation back earlier in time. Astronomers are also gathering 
clues to what makes up most of the universe, the mysterious dark matter, 
and how it and other dark-age conditions gave birth to the first stars 
and the first galaxies. The new knowledge is enabling scientists to 
test their theories and conduct increasingly detailed computer simulations 
of cosmic history, including the dark age. The dark age ended when 
light returned to the firmament with the emergence of the first stars 
and then vast communities of stars gravitationally bound in galaxies. 
``Suddenly, the universe lit up like a Christmas tree,'' said Dr. 
Abraham Loeb, a theoretical astrophysicist at the Harvard-Smithsonian 
Center for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Mass. ``Somewhere in the dark 
age, the transition from the universe's initial simple state to its 
current complex state occurred,'' Loeb said. ``It would be philosophically 
exciting to glimpse that moment.'' A few years ago, Loeb recalled, 
he was one of a handful of scientists studying the dark age and early 
star formation. But a workshop on the subject at the University of 
Maryland last week drew several dozen of the top observational and 
theoretical astronomers. ``Now this has become a very hot topic,'' 
he said. Two weeks ago, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
released pictures taken by the Hubble Space Telescope of what astronomers 
think are the most distant galaxies ever studied. These galaxies probably 
formed in the first billion years of cosmic history, or more than 
12 billion years ago. Such estimates are rough because they depend 
on cosmological models and chronological yardsticks based on the universe's 
being about 13 billion years old, which is controversial and subject 
to revision. ``We have really made a step into new territory,'' said 
Dr. Rodger I. Thompson, a University of Arizona astronomer who directed 
the observations with the Earth-orbiting Hubble telescope's near-infrared 
camera and spectrometer. Only an infrared camera can detect the faintest, 
most distant galaxies. Dust in deep space obscures most visible light, 
more so than radiation in the longer infrared wavelengths. And it 
is a phenomenon of the expanding universe that the light emitted by 
a galaxy gets stretched out to the redder and even near-infrared wavelengths. 
At distances of vanishing visibility, the infrared galactic light 
becomes the cosmic version of the Cheshire cat's grin. The more distant 
galaxies have a higher expansion velocity and thus a higher redshift. 
Since the age of the universe is still uncertain, astronomers express 
cosmic distance, and thus age, in terms of an object's redshift. Not 
so long ago, it was all astronomers could do to see objects at distances 
at a redshift of 1, encompassing vistas extending the recent half 
of the age of the universe. When they picked up some redshift-3 sightings, 
it was the equivalent of aviation's breaking the sound barrier. In 
recent months, astronomers have broken the redshift-5 barrier, when 
the universe was only one-tenth its present age. ``We are seeing things 
at much higher redshifts than we once thought possible,'' said Dr. 
John C. Mather, an astronomer at the Goddard Space Flight Center in 
Greenbelt, Md. Focused on a tiny patch of sky, the Hubble's infrared 
camera made a 36-hour exposure and saw more than 100 extremely faint 
galaxies that were absent in previous visible-light pictures. At least 
some of these galaxies are thought to have the highest redshifts ever 
measured. Precise measurements may have to await the development of 
more powerful telescopes. ``This is an exciting step into the infrared 
view of the universe,'' said Dr. Alan M. Dressler, an astronomer at 
the Carnegie Observatories in Pasadena, Calif. ``That's where we're 
going to be looking for galaxy formation.'' The first big break in 
distant observations came in 1995. That was when Dr. Robert Williams, 
director of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, did 
what astronomers always do with a new telescope: take the deepest 
picture they can. He directed astronomers to concentrate the Hubble 
telescope on a single narrow sector of the sky, a region virtually 
devoid of light as seen from the ground. The telescope's visible-light 
camera took a 10-day-long exposure, long enough to resolve objects 
at then-record distances. The Hubble Deep Field, as the resulting 
multicolor picture is called, gave astronomers a remarkable view of 
more than 3,000 galaxies, some at distances beyond redshift 4. They 
were astonished to find such a dense population of galaxies so far 
away and so early in time. It meant that astronomers had a way to 
go to reach the time of galactic genesis, the frontier to the dark 
age. At about the same time, a team of astronomers led by Dr. Charles 
C. Steidel of the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena developed 
a novel technique for detecting faraway galaxies using the world's 
most powerful telescopes at Keck Observatory in Hawaii. By now, the 
astronomers have confirmed the presence of 440 high-redshift galaxies 
existing just a few billion years after the Big Bang. No objects at 
such distances had ever been examined in such close detail. Steidel's 
observations are made by the ultraviolet ``dropout'' technique. Ultraviolet 
light from a remote galaxy tends to be absorbed by hydrogen within 
the galaxy itself and between there and Earth. The more distant a 
galaxy, the more hydrogen its light encounters in the intervening 
space, and thus the more its ultraviolet emissions are dimmed. By 
seeking objects that show up in green and red filters but not in ultraviolet, 
the astronomers detected galaxies with redshifts from 2.2 to 4. The 
Hubble Deep Field and Steidel's snapshots have given theorists much 
to think about. The early galaxies appear to be smaller, more concentrated 
and less regular than today's galaxies. And they are ``as strongly 
clustered in the early universe as they are today,'' Steidel said. 
Small, irregular galaxies, cosmologists say, fit their models in which 
structure in the universe evolved from the bottom up, and not from 
the top down. That is, galaxies presumably started as small collections 
of stars and these merged to form much larger objects, instead of 
stars starting out in extraordinarily vast congregations and then 
fragmenting into galaxies. ``The small, young objects we find are 
still in the process of formation,'' Loeb said, explaining why the 
findings seem to support a growing consensus in favor of the bottom-up 
interpretation. The observations also suggest that cosmologists are 
on the right track with their ideas about the nature and amount of 
cosmic mass. Years of studying the rotations of galaxies near and 
far have convinced scientists that there is much more to the universe 
than what they can see. Galaxies would have disintegrated long ago 
if they were not held together by more gravity than ordinary matter 
can account for. Most of the universe's mass, maybe as much as 99 
percent, must be in some mysterious ``dark'' form. In ``Before the 
Beginning,'' published this year by Perseus Books, Rees of Cambridge 
writes, ``Clearly we will never understand galaxies properly until 
we understand the dominant stuff whose gravity binds them together.'' 
The favored hypothesis predicts the existence of cold dark matter, 
exotic and as yet unknown subatomic elementary particles that emerged 
from the Big Bang. They are so small and slow that they virtually 
never interact with each other or with ordinary matter except through 
gravity and thus produce no detectable radiations. Yet they could 
have supplied the decisive gravitational force to marshal ordinary 
matter into galaxies and clusters of galaxies. It all began, according 
to theory, with tiny ripples in the cosmic microwave background radiation, 
the detectable afterglow of the Big Bang that is the source of much 
knowledge about the universe's first 300,000 years. These slight fluctuations 
in radiation, confirmed and plotted by COBE, the Cosmic Background 
Explorer spacecraft, in the early 1990s, are caused by irregularities 
in the density of matter in the Big Bang. Such clumps of dark matter 
would have attracted ordinary matter to create larger clumps and set 
in motion agglomerations leading to stars and galaxies. Computer-generated 
simulations based on the COBE findings and many other physical data 
and assumptions have showed that a universe dominated by hot dark 
matter, an alternative idea invoking known fast-moving particles called 
neutrinos, should have resulted in a top-down creation in which much 
larger conglomerations of matter would form first and then break up 
into galaxies. This scenario, however would result in a much longer 
dark age than now appears to be the case. Cold dark matter, on the 
other hand, should have formed galaxies on small scales and at a relatively 
early time. Which is just what the new observations are revealing. 
In February, astronomers announced the first detection of a redshift-5 
object, a young galaxy that existed when the universe was only 8 percent 
of its present age. They had crossed the frontier into the first billion 
years of the universe, with the boundary to the dark age still not 
in sight. Working at Keck Observatory, a team led by Dr. Arjun Dey 
of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore measured a redshift of 5.34 
for the early galaxy, meaning that it was shining 820 million years 
after the Big Bang (also assuming an age of 13 billion years for the 
universe). ``Now that we know what to look for, I'm sure this record 
will be broken in a matter of months,'' Dey remarked at the time. 
Sure enough, in May astronomers at the University of Hawaii and Cambridge 
University reported sighting a more distant galaxy with a 5.64 redshift. 
This pushed back galactic discovery about 60 million years. One of 
the discoverers, Dr. Esther M. Hu, said astronomers were on the verge 
of seeing galaxies back to about 500 million years after the Big Bang. 
Loeb noted two intriguing clues that light had returned to the universe 
at least that early, perhaps at redshifts beyond 10. Both came from 
observations of light from quasars, cores of distant galaxies and 
the brightest objects in the universe. Because the quasar light passes 
through clouds of hydrogen gas before it reaches Earth, it serves 
as a probe of the cosmic environment out to great distances. The fact 
that the quasar light is not absorbed by the gas, Loeb said, is evidence 
that nearly all of the hydrogen atoms in deep cosmic space have been 
ionized, their electrons stripped away by ultraviolet radiation. Such 
radiation could have come only from a large population of stars at 
redshifts beyond that of the quasars. Other quasar studies yielded 
the second clue: some of the distant gas clouds contained not only 
hydrogen but heavy elements like carbon, which are produced only by 
the nuclear furnaces inside stars and scattered through space when 
stars explode at the end of their lives. So there had been stars living 
and dying long before these early galaxies. ``We are going to fainter 
and fainter objects and getting smarter and smarter each month,'' 
said Dressler of the Carnegie Observatories. ``But we've pushed just 
about as far as we can expect from today's telescopes, even the Keck 
or the Hubble.'' Astronomers are in the early stages of planning a 
more powerful replacement for the orbiting Hubble telescope. Called 
the Next Generation Space Telescope, it is expected to be launched 
a million miles into space in 2007 and be able to detect infrared 
emissions from objects 400 times fainter than those being studied 
with any of today's ground-based and orbiting infrared telescopes. 
Its mirror will be nearly three times larger than Hubble's. With the 
new telescope thus able to gather so much more light, Mather of the 
Goddard space center said, astronomers in exposure times as short 
as two weeks should ``see as far as you can imagine seeing.'' They 
should be able to make out galaxies with redshifts of 10 or more. 
That might be just enough to observe the first stars and galaxies 
and understand more about how the early universe passed its long night 
of darkness organizing itself to bring form and light everywhere. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>