<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0458 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Struggling to comply with federal fuel-economy and emissions regulations 
even as Americans buy ever bigger family vehicles, automakers have 
quietly begun experiments with oil companies to develop new and potentially 
cleaner fuels. Ford and General Motors have already entered long-term 
partnerships with oil companies, while Chrysler plans to announce 
on Wednesday a program with immediate goals: testing vehicles over 
the next two years that will burn a promising type of synthetic fuel 
made from natural gas instead of crude oil. The synthetic fuel is 
similar to diesel and can be burned in diesel engines. Chrysler's 
goal is to develop a new generation of diesel engines that, using 
the synthetic fuel, will burn as cleanly as the cleanest gasoline 
engines, said Loren Beard, Chrysler's manager of fuels technology. 
Many automakers are planning to replace some of their gasoline engines 
with more fuel-efficient diesel engines. For one thing, this would 
allow them to build ever bigger sport utility vehicles and pickup 
trucks without violating federal fuel-efficiency rules. But obstacles 
remain. The Syntroleum Corp., which has a small factory that will 
supply synthetic fuel for the tests, estimates that mass production 
will push the fuel's cost down to $1.50 or less a gallon. Still, even 
reducing the cost to that level will require considerable investments 
in new equipment at natural gas fields, as well as persuading service 
stations to set aside pumps and tanks for the new fuel. One of the 
main experiments with Chrysler will involve a blend of only 20 or 
30 percent synthetic fuel with the rest as regular diesel, said Mark 
Agee, president and chief operating officer of Syntroleum, based in 
Tulsa, Okla. The blend may then be competitive in price with premium 
grades of gasoline. Bernard Robertson, Chrysler's vice president for 
engineering technologies, predicted that premium grades of diesel, 
consisting of a blend with synthetic fuel, would become available 
within five years. Future diesel cars and light trucks will likely 
require the premium grades, much as current models require unleaded 
gasoline to reduce pollution, he said. Diesel engines produce up to 
30 percent better fuel economy than gasoline engines. But they emit 
more air pollution, although the latest models are far cleaner than 
the sooty diesels of the 1980s. The domestic automakers are all developing 
diesel engines now for large sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks, 
which earn the highest profits per vehicle. So-called light trucks 
_ a category including vans as well as sport utility vehicles and 
pickup trucks _ are allowed to meet a lower average fuel economy than 
cars. But automakers have had trouble meeting even this standard with 
the recent popularity of such models as the Dodge Ram full-size pickup 
and the huge Ford Expedition and Chevrolet Suburban sport utility 
vehicles. Federal and California regulators are drafting new, tougher 
emissions regulations that may be hard for diesel engines to meet. 
In response, automakers have been working on cleaner engines and cleaner 
fuels. The process for making the synthetic diesel from natural gas 
is loosely based on a technique first developed in the 1920s. But 
tighter air quality standards and automakers' difficulties with fuel-economy 
standards are forcing a reconsideration of the technology. Ford has 
already begun experimenting with the synthetic substitutes for diesel, 
while GM plans to do so in the coming months, as part of their efforts 
to produce an extremely high-mileage car in cooperation with the federal 
government. Because the fuel burns so cleanly, it may have applications 
in cars as well as light trucks, said Sara Tatchio, a Ford spokesman. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>