<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0336 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Call them the realists, the ones who acknowledge that the clothes 
they design are destined actually to be worn by women in real life, 
not just by models on the runway or in magazines. Their challenge 
is in a way stiffer than that faced by the dreamers who envision a 
fantasy world where clothes exist merely to be and not to serve a 
particular function. The collections these realists produce are often 
dismissed as ``commercial,'' one of the most dismissive words in the 
fashion lexicon. But a designer who isn't commercial often has trouble 
surviving, much less thriving, in the harsh global market. Look at 
Isaac Mizrahi, the most recent casualty. Yet there are designers who 
manage to combine creativity with a sense of what women want to wear 
and can deliver the goods. Americans, in particular, have this knack, 
which is what has made them so attractive to European houses anxious 
to reach a new audience. Marc Jacobs' highly praised spring show for 
Vuitton last Monday set the pace, and the designers who showed at 
the end of the week didn't disappoint. Michael Kors for Celine, Narciso 
Rodriguez for Loewe, and Peter Speliopoulos for Cerruti all produced 
worthy collections. It was Kors who scored the highest with sportswear 
that transcended the genre. His colors were the height of sophistication, 
tending to ivory, sand, sea foam and the blue of an evening sky. His 
fabrics were superluxurious, including cashmere as fine as chiffon, 
silk organza, chamois and paper taffeta, sometimes used in unexpected 
ways. For example, he took woven taffetas, muslins, denims and voiles, 
cut them into strips and had them hand-knitted into easy sweaters 
with hoods, separate cowls or mufflers. These were teamed with knee-length 
skirts, cropped pants or shorts in canvas or ostrich for day and with 
long skirts of ribbon-embroidered cotton or jewel-studded organza 
for evening. The cardigans of twin sets were long and loosely belted. 
Coats were cut with small shoulders and high waists. Dresses and skirts 
moved slightly away from the body into the modified A-line that is 
the silhouette of the season. Jewels were as discreet as beading can 
ever be, used tone-on-tone: jade on green, blue topaz on sky blue, 
and amethyst on the palest purple. It was a faultless performance, 
one that should please the powers at Celine and win them many new 
customers. Loewe is known for the quality of its leathers, and Rodriguez 
is using them in hip new ways. His spring show on Saturday featured 
slinky jump suits in white or banana yellow leather with low-riding 
tan belts; perforated shells combined with crinkled gauzy pants; shift 
dresses with a smudged-looking pattern, and double-faced suedes paired 
with glossy leathers for an interesting play of textures. He also 
showed loose sweaters with a crunchy tweed texture, matte sequins 
in silver or gold, and just a touch of Lurex or beading for a hint 
of glamour. His was a quiet take on luxury, always tasteful. But a 
bit more pizazz wouldn't hurt. While Rodriguez favored a lean line, 
Speliopoulos went from narrow shifts to A-line and full-skirted looks 
for Cerruti in a collection that mixed tradition with technology. 
There were dresses with little-girl flounces or gathers at a slightly 
raised waistline. And then there were suede shifts decorated with 
shiny plastic strips resembling computer graphics, and knits with 
reflective glass adding glints of light. Sporty jackets with industrial 
zippers were shown with shorts or skinny pants, sometimes decorated 
with round silver studs, and leathers had perforated edges or whip-stitched 
seams. Cotton and canvas fabrics were mainly in neutrals like beige, 
khaki and gray, while suedes and leathers came in colors like royal 
blue, butterscotch and burnt orange. Perhaps with the influence of 
so many Americans on the Paris scene, European designers are going 
for a somewhat more casual approach with a less put-together, sportier 
feel. Instead of suits, Valentino showed unstructured cardigan jackets 
over shirts and low-slung pants or skirts with movement. He feminized 
the man's shirt of white cotton or taffeta with embroidery, lace or 
openwork, sometimes tucking it in and sometimes leaving it outside 
and worn with a heavily jeweled belt. He also took the off-the-shoulder 
gypsy blouse and transformed it into the garb of royalty in fine tulle 
with embroidery, openwork or lace inserts and then paired it with 
full skirts of printed silk or organza decorated with top stitching. 
Because Valentino is a couturier, there were also glamorous evening 
dresses with crystal sequins, satin latticework embroidery, abstract 
splashes of coral or red on white, or encrustations of lace. Yet, 
the collection was refreshingly youthful in spirit and filled with 
beautiful clothes that should make the transition easily from runway 
to reality. Christian Lacroix is another couturier who has simplified 
his ready-to-wear collection for spring, toning down the pattern mixes 
and muting the decorative elements. But it would never be mistaken 
for sportswear or for anything other than French. Capri pants were 
topped with a brocade jacket. Floral-print dresses had off-the-shoulder 
necklines or tulle ruffles outlining a bare armhole. A short shaped 
jacket and full skirt worn over petticoats had a retro, '50s air. 
Another short jacket was worn with an A-line skirt of lace. A pale 
blue leather jacket went over a metallic lace dress. There were halter 
necklines and bustle-back ballgowns, pointed hems that fell like ponchos, 
and long lace dresses in pretty colors. Lacroix is a designer with 
a fertile imagination who doesn't limit himself to one theme but tosses 
in a bit of this and a bit of that and then adds a bit more. So even 
when he doesn't let loose, he serves up a rich stew. Herve Leger has 
loosened up considerably, all but abandoning the bandage dresses that 
have been his trademark. Each season, he has broadened his range, 
and now he has taken on a whole new attitude. In fact, there were 
times when it was difficult to remember that this was a Leger collection. 
There were men's-wear pinstripes and rainbows of color; calf-length 
skirts with fullness in back; silk shirts with rolled-up sleeves; 
Nehru jackets worn with cropped pants; and patterns inspired by artists 
like Chagall, Kandinsky, Pollock and Hockney. Leger also showed sexy, 
skin-baring swimsuits in orange, yellow and emerald green, along with 
full-sleeved, loose coverups and some in openwork ladder effects that 
bared even more than they covered. This was the one segment of the 
shows that embodied the signature look the designer seems to be evolving 
away from, but it is the segment where that look is still valid. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>