<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0313 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now that Hyundai Motor Co. has won the auction to take a controlling 
stake in bankrupt Kia Motors Corp. and its Asia Motors subsidiary, 
it remains to be seen whether Kia's creditors will agree to the bid. 
Two previous auctions failed after the creditors, mainly large banks, 
rejected the demands of the bidders to write off large chunks of the 
two manufacturers' combined 16 trillion won, or $12.1 billion, of 
debt. A spokesman for the Korea Development Bank, Kia's largest creditor, 
said creditors would meet as soon as possible to discuss the results 
of the latest auction, which were announced Monday morning. In addition, 
Hyundai Motor's final plan for taking control of Kia and Asia Motors, 
its commercial vehicles unit, will depend on what it finds out during 
an audit of the two companies over the next month. ``I wouldn't be 
surprised to see the outcome change,'' said Jeffrey D. Jones, president 
of the American Chamber of Commerce in Korea. ``Hyundai has to come 
up with terms and conditions that are supported by the government, 
by the creditors, by parts suppliers and by the unions.'' Frank Shin, 
a spokesman for Hyundai, South Korea's largest car manufacturer and 
the crown jewel of the Hyundai Group, said the car company was confident 
it could satisfy all those constituents with its bid, which includes 
writing off 7.3 trillion won, or $5.5 billion, of debt owed by Kia 
and Asia Motors. ``We are the winner,'' Shin said. ``I think there 
is no doubt that our terms and conditions are the best.'' In addition 
to assuming 9 trillion won of debt, or $6.8 billion, that would be 
left if the creditor banks agree to Hyundai Motor's proposed write-offs, 
Hyundai will put up at least 1.07 trillion won, or $808 million, to 
buy 51 percent of the companies. The sale of Kia has become a litmus 
test of the South Korean government's ability to push the recalcitrant 
corporate sector to change and to lure foreign investment, which is 
considered crucial to the recovery of the economy. Thus far, though, 
the banks that are Kia's creditors have successfully thwarted the 
government, setting a minimum level of debt forgiveness as the most 
important factor in deciding the winning bid. ``I think the government 
has lost some credibility in this whole thing,'' said Richard Samuelson, 
executive director of SBC Warburg Dillon Read in Seoul. ``What hasn't 
arisen from this is a minimum set of terms and conditions that were 
set from the start and led to a reasonably rapid conclusion. Instead, 
certainly from a foreign investor's perspective, it must appear to 
be something of a circus.'' But Jones, who represented Ford Motor 
Co. in the auction, said foreign investors should be encouraged by 
the fairness of the process. ``Clearly, there was no prejudice against 
foreign participants,'' he said. ``In fact, they were encouraged to 
join the process and noisily encouraged.'' The government had clearly 
expressed its preference that Ford win the auction, which would further 
its aims of consolidating the domestic auto manufacturing business 
and be a potent symbol of foreign confidence in South Korea. But Kia 
said Ford, which together with its Mazda Motors Corp. affiliate holds 
17 percent of Kia's stock, refused to bid even the minimum price set 
for shares of Asia Motors and was thus disqualified. Many analysts 
have questioned the wisdom of packaging Kia and Asia Motors in a single 
sale because they appeal to different types of buyers. Daewoo Motor 
Co., South Korea's second-largest car manufacturer, was the runner-up, 
followed by Samsung Motors Co. Samsung Motors' loss is likely to increase 
speculation that the fledgling car maker will have to shut its doors. 
Samsung Motors rolled out its first car at the height of the Korean 
economic crisis last February, and although it has a backlog of orders 
through this December, the company does not plan to sell more than 
80,000 cars in its first year of operation. It must produce and sell 
300,000 cars to break even, and South Korea's domestic car market 
has shrunk to less than 50 percent of its size in the year before 
the economic crisis hit. A spokesman for Samsung Motors said it had 
no plans to stop operations. For Hyundai Motor, an acquisition of 
Kia represents a chance to step into the automotive big leagues, and 
it boasted Monday that such a deal would make it one of the world's 
10 largest car manufacturers. The company will spend the next month 
doing an audit of Kia and Asia Motors, after which it will come up 
with a plan for reorganizing the companies to present to creditors, 
giving the banks another opportunity to scuttle the deal. At a news 
conference in Seoul Monday, Chung Mong Kyu, chairman of Hyundai Motor, 
said his company would seek foreign capital for its acquisition if 
needed and even mentioned Ford as a possible co-investor. He said 
other Hyundai Group companies might also take part in the acquisition 
financing in exchange for a stake in Kia. Shin said it was possible 
but unlikely that Hyundai Motor's plans to overhaul Kia would include 
layoffs. Kia employs about 18,000 workers. ``Basically, Kia and Hyundai 
have been restructuring already for a long time, so we don't see so 
many redundancies,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>