<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0491 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Tuesday, Oct. 20: In the 
weeks since campaign finance reform was killed in Washington, it has 
been fashionable to say that the issue never had much popular support. 
But that cynical view is belied by the momentum behind two important 
initiatives this fall, in Massachusetts and Arizona, where voters 
are being asked to create publicly financed campaign systems that 
would free politicians of their dependence on money from special interests. 
Approval of these measures would provide a model for how to clean 
up local political races and send a strong signal to Washington to 
enact reform legislation next year. Both initiatives call for extensive 
public money to pay for political campaigns, to be awarded after the 
candidates have raised modest sums on their own. Many state and local 
governments, including New York City, have provisions for public financing. 
The post-Watergate laws governing national elections also provide 
for public subsidies. But in these cases, the money kicks in only 
when the candidates themselves have raised large sums. As the last 
round of scandals shows, candidates have also circumvented the law 
by accepting public money and then using unregulated ``soft money'' 
contributions for their campaigns. Even though it will cost them money, 
the voters in both states are responding positively. In Massachusetts, 
the money would come in part from taxpayers checking off a box on 
their income-tax returns, and in part from legislative appropriations. 
In Arizona, the money would be raised by increasing the fee for lobbyists, 
a voluntary tax checkoff and a surcharge on criminal and civil fines. 
Another encouraging sign is that these reforms are occurring in one 
of the most conservative states in the country as well as in one of 
the most liberal. It is perhaps no accident that the main sponsors 
of campaign reform in Washington include Sen. John McCain of Arizona 
and Rep. Martin Meehan of Massachusetts. Nor is it surprising that 
two of the seven Senate Republicans who challenged their leadership 
on the issue this year came from Maine, where similar public financing 
legislation was enacted in 1996. Success in Arizona, Massachusetts 
and other states with more limited campaign reform measures on their 
ballots could build momentum for change in Washington next year. Many 
incumbent lawmakers have long argued that the public will not tolerate 
public financing, by which they usually mean that they do not want 
to give their challengers an equal chance. They need only be reminded 
that voters can speak even more loudly than campaign donations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>