<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0473 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The key figure at the Middle East talks on Maryland's Eastern Shore 
is probably not the president, or the prime Minister, or even the 
chairman, but a veteran of the Arab-Israeli frays who only recently 
became Israel's foreign minister and showed up at the talks two days 
late. The feelings toward Ariel Sharon, the veteran soldier and politician 
who was named foreign minister and chief negotiator on the eve of 
the Wye talks, are distinctly ambivalent. His appointment has raised 
hopes even among the most skeptical Israeli liberals that he may become 
the tough pragmatist with sufficient credibility among settlers and 
sufficient trust among Arabs to deliver what the younger and more 
ideological Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has not _ a functioning 
deal with the Palestinians. The hopes have been tempered by the awareness 
that Sharon is also a hard nationalist who was at the forefront of 
creating West Bank settlements in the 1970s and 1980s, who voted against 
his government's decision to withdraw from most of Hebron, who has 
opposed any withdrawal from more than 9 percent of West Bank territory 
and who still regards Yasser Arafat as a terrorist whose hand he will 
not shake. What is universally accepted is that Sharon, 70, is the 
man who can make or break the Wye talks. His importance was confirmed 
as soon as he arrived at the conference center, which stretches among 
the branches of the Wye River. Immediately Netanyahu took him off 
for a walk in the woods, presumably to get out of the range of American 
listening devices. That same evening, President Clinton spent 75 minutes 
alone with Sharon. Such clout is a remarkable tribute to a man held 
responsible for Israel's unpopular invasion of Lebanon in 1982, and 
who is still condemned by some as the defense minister who did nothing 
to block a massacre in the Sabra and Shatila refugee camps by Phalangist 
Lebanese Christians. It is all the more remarkable because Sharon 
does not have a real political constituency in Israel. He barely made 
it into Netanyahu's Cabinet, and he has been publicly at odds with 
the prime minister. What Sharon does carry is the aura of a charter 
member of the ``generation of giants,'' warrior-politicians like Moshe 
Dayan and Yitzhak Rabin who led Israel through its first 50 years 
in war and in peace with the same toughness, determination and fearlessness. 
In the endless ensuing disputes, Sharon has never concealed his opinions, 
whether of Netanyahu or the negotiations set in motion by the Oslo 
accords of 1993 and 1995. At the same time, he gained the respect 
of all sides by backing his arguments with detailed maps and experience 
that couched any concession in terms of Jewish safety, and not simply 
ideology. Typically, Sharon was late to Wye because of another engagement, 
the 25th anniversary of the Israeli crossing of the Suez Canal in 
the 1973 war, which he commanded, and because his first call in the 
United States was on King Hussein of Jordan, who is s undergoing treatment 
for cancer at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota.. The delay was said to 
have irritated the Americans, given the amount of time President Clinton, 
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, and Vice President Al Gore 
were investing in the meeting. But the show of respect for King Hussein 
also demonstrated Sharon's ties with a leader who could be instrumental 
in nudging Arafat to an agreement. Possibly as a result, King Hussein 
arrived in Washington on Monday to be near the talks. Eitan Haber, 
a close friend and the last chief of staff of the late Prime Minister 
Rabin, was among the first in the Labor opposition to hail Sharon's 
appointment, which he described in an article in the Israeli newspaper 
Yediot Ahronot as a ``brilliant move.'' Other Israelis likened Sharon's 
appointment to that of Moshe Dayan when he was brought into Prime 
Minister Menachem Begin's government in 1977 and played a major role 
in achieving the peace with Egypt. It was Sharon, Israelis noted further, 
who as defense minister was responsible for clearing Israeli settlements 
from the Sinai peninsula despite violent resistance from settlers. 
If an agreement is reached on withdrawals from the West Bank, many 
Israelis believe that Sharon is the only member of the government 
who has a chance of getting it accepted by nationalist and religious 
Israelis. Yet even if Sharon's directness offered relief, there was 
no evidence that he would use it to advance the American agenda. The 
comparison with Dayan, commentators noted, overlooked the fact that 
Dayan was a dovish moderate brought into a rightist government, while 
Sharon is a hawk whose positions have usually been to the right of 
Netanyahu's. Among those who saw Sharon's ascendance as a recipe for 
failure was the commentator Sever Plotzer in Yediot Ahronot. ``It 
doesn't really matter what agreements Netanyahu, Arafat and Clinton 
hope to achieve at Wye Plantation,'' he wrote. ``From today, all that 
matters is what Sharon wants.'' He continued, ``And Sharon, so I assume, 
wants to return from America in one of two situations: either empty-handed 
(`We didn't capitulate to the Palestinians') or in a fit of rage (`Netanyahu 
capitulated to the Palestinians'). In both of these situations, he 
will be the winner.'' The far-right newspaper Hatzofe summed up the 
sentiments of Jewish settlers toward a man who was their hero and 
their potential scourge _ ``respect him and suspect him.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>