<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0071 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The crime was horrific enough; cunningly cruel, brutal and utterly 
senseless. But it was the way the victim was chosen _ singled out 
because he was part of a despised minority _ that aroused the nation. 
The murder in June of James Byrd Jr., a black man torn to pieces when 
he was dragged behind a pickup truck in Jasper, Texas, spurred demands 
for toughening the state's broadly worded hate-crime law and for passage 
of federal hate-crime legislation. And now, the brutal and equally 
senseless death last week of Matthew Shepard, slashed, bludgeoned 
and tied to a fence post in rural Wyoming, apparently because he was 
homosexual, is spurring new demands for a hate-crime law in Wyoming, 
one of 10 states that has none, and for passage of federal hate-crime 
legislation. But the argument for hate-crime laws, especially as they 
relate to capital crimes like the murders of Byrd and Shepard, is 
not so clear, prosecutors and others say. In the case of Byrd, for 
example, the prosecutor does not intend to invoke the Texas hate-crime 
law against the three white men charged with the murder. He says it 
would be pointless. ``In Texas, our hate-crimes statute works by elevating 
the punishment,'' said Jasper County District Attorney Guy James Gray. 
``But this one is already as high as you can go. It's a capital case. 
There's no room to elevate it any higher.'' The same would probably 
be true in the Shepard case if Wyoming had a hate-crime law. And that's 
the paradox: The very cases that cause a national outcry for hate-crime 
laws are cases in which the laws are unnecessary. ``These hate-crime 
laws make a statement about how we feel about hate crimes and, in 
some respects, it will probably help,'' said Kelly Anders, a policy 
associate for the National Conference of State Legislatures in Denver. 
``Unfortunately, for the worst of these crimes, the kind that we all 
hear about, it probably wouldn't have any effect. If something is 
egregious enough, like what happened to that poor guy in Wyoming, 
that surpasses any kind of penalty on the books. That's the death 
penalty right there.'' Still, an argument can be made that such laws 
are valuable. They probably have some deterrent effect, Ms. Anders 
said. And there are certainly some cases involving misdemeanors or 
other lesser crimes, she added, where those convicted have faced harsher 
penalties. Attempts to determine the effectiveness of hate-crime laws 
are hampered by the lack of statistics. The Hate Crime Statistics 
Act, enacted in 1990, called on the FBI to compile data from local 
law-enforcement agencies about crimes that ``manifest prejudice based 
on race, religious, sexual orientation or ethnicity.'' The FBI reported 
4,558 hate crimes in 1991 and 7,587 in 1993, for example. But the 
accuracy of those numbers is in doubt because the number of agencies 
reporting hate crimes has fluctuated from year to year. Only about 
60 percent of the 16,000 law-enforcement agencies in the country regularly 
report hate crimes to the agency. Organizations like the Anti-Defamation 
League and the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force say the laws are 
valuable because they shape the way society thinks about itself and 
draw boundaries of what society will tolerate. And advocates argue 
that society's speaking out, clearly and specifically, against crimes 
directed at members of a minority group can make the members of that 
group feel less isolated and threatened. Also, they argue, people 
convicted of hate crimes, especially the young, could be helped if 
they are given counseling. And, they say, police officers might become 
more vigilant about such crimes if the laws require training on the 
issue, as the laws in eight states do. But critics of these laws say 
they are a sneaky way of restricting political speech. ``The law historically 
has gone against punishing people for their thoughts, and that is 
what hate-crimes laws do,'' Ms. Anders said. ``That's what makes it 
so delicate. You have to make sure when you're drafting legislation 
that you're not punishing people for their thoughts. And that's a 
very difficult thing, because that's what it is.'' There have been 
two significant legal challenges to hate-crimes laws, both involving 
free-speech issues. In 1992, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled on a case 
involving a Minnesota statute used in the case of a white man who 
burned a cross in a black family's back yard. Minnesota's highest 
court had ruled that the statute was constitutional because it was 
proper to criminalize ``fighting words,'' or speech that would almost 
inevitably result in a violent response. But the Supreme Court disagreed, 
saying that Minnesota had not criminalized all such ``fighting words,'' 
and to single out only some for special treatment was improper. The 
next year, however, the Supreme Court upheld a Wisconsin statute that 
imposed higher penalties for hate crimes. This approach has since 
been adopted by all but 10 states, to varying degrees and in accordance 
with the Supreme Court's view that it is proper to add penalties for 
existing crimes, but not to create a new category of crime. Some states, 
including Texas, aren't explicit about which groups are covered by 
their hate-crimes statutes. Of those that do specify, 20 states mention 
race, religion or ethnicity, 11 mention sexual orientation, 11 mention 
gender and 12 mention other categories, like mental or physical disability. 
And some states have penalties that vary with the severity of the 
crime. In Wisconsin, for instance, a simple fine might be added to 
the penalty for a misdemeanor conviction, while five years could be 
added to a felony sentence. Gray, the prosecutor in Texas, said his 
decision not to use a hate-crime law in the murder of Byrd should 
not be viewed as a lack of support for such laws. ``It does have an 
impact,'' he said. ``It's one more tool that a prosecutor can use.'' 
There is another case underway in Jasper County, he said, a case involving 
the firing of a weapon in which no one was injured. It happened for 
racial reasons, he said, and the use of the hate-crime law led to 
tougher punishment. ``When you present hate-crime evidence in a courtroom, 
the jury normally becomes angry over some offense that is, in effect, 
senseless and they impose a stronger punishment,'' he said. ``What 
the legislation does is give the jury the opportunity to increase 
the level of punishment, and they do take advantage of it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>