<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0253 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In spite of past problems, NASA engineers say they are optimistic 
about plans to have two satellites make joint observations of the 
sun during the next space shuttle mission. Engineers working to reactivate 
a troubled solar observatory say the craft will probably be ready 
for mutual studies of the sun with a satellite carried aloft by the 
shuttle Discovery, scheduled to take off with a crew of seven on Oct. 
29. From the beginning, a major scientific objective of the Discovery 
mission _ which includes studies of the aging process in space with 
77-year-old John Glenn, the once-and-future astronaut and U.S. senator 
_ was to conduct the joint solar studies involving the Spartan satellite, 
taken up by the shuttle, and the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory, 
or SOHO. SOHO, a $1 billion joint project of the European Space Agency 
and the United States, is painstakingly being brought back into service 
after it spun out of control and lost communications with Earth on 
June 24. Engineers eventually located and regained control of the 
errant satellite, which is stationed about a million miles out in 
space on the sunward side of Earth, where it can make uninterrupted 
observations of the sun. The space agencies announced last week that 
the spacecraft, designed to study sunlight at different wavelengths 
and analyze particles and magnetic fields generated by the sun, had 
taken test images and soon would return to full operation. Engineers 
have successfully reactivated nine of the 12 instruments aboard SOHO, 
they said, including two that are critical to the joint observations 
planned with Spartan. Four of the recovered instruments are fully 
functional and the other five are undergoing careful recommissioning, 
they said. ``We hope to resume normal scientific operations with SOHO 
in the near future,'' Joseph Gurman, U.S. project scientist for SOHO 
said Friday. ``But we have recovered enough of its operations to expect 
full cooperation with Spartan when the time comes. We should make 
it just under the wire.'' Gurman said technicians could delay some 
of SOHO's other recommissioning activities to concentrate on the joint 
operation with Spartan during its mission. SOHO will probably not 
resume all of its normal operations until December, he said, because 
it will take that long to make some changes in operating the spacecraft 
recommended by a review board that examined the near-loss of the craft. 
That board concluded that SOHO went out of control because of ground 
control errors and the failure to adequately monitor the spacecraft. 
The Spartan, being carried by Discovery, is a 3,000-pound, battery-powered 
satellite that has been flown on four previous shuttle missions. The 
satellite, which is deployed from the shuttle's cargo bay by an astronaut 
using the orbiter's 50-foot robot arm, flies free of the shuttle at 
a distance of 70 to 100 miles to conduct its operations. At the end 
of two days, the shuttle retrieves the satellite using the arm and 
returns it to Earth so that scientists can retrieve its data from 
tape recorders. The Discovery crew is to release Spartan on the second 
day of their nine-day mission, leaving the satellite to turn itself 
on, point its telescopes toward the sun and conduct a programmed series 
of observations, some in conjunction with SOHO and other spacecraft. 
``I'm very optimistic that we will have a joint operation with SOHO,'' 
said Richard Fisher, a Spartan project scientist from NASA's Goddard 
Space Flight Center. Fisher said observations of the same solar areas 
by different spacecraft can come hours or days apart, since many of 
the sun's features do not change very rapidly. Joint observations 
are important because instruments differ in their sensitivity, field 
of view and what part of the electromagnetic spectrum they measure. 
SOHO, for example, views more of the sun's outer layer than Spartan, 
but instruments on Spartan are more effective in studying the lower 
part of this layer. Fisher said the instruments also help verify each 
other's measurements. For example, the Spartan instruments, just tested 
on the ground, will help engineers recalibrate the SOHO instruments, 
he said. The multiple observations will concentrate on the sun's corona 
and the high-speed solar wind of charged particles it generates that 
bathe the solar system. The corona is the thin, upper layer of the 
solar atmosphere that reaches temperatures exceeding 2 million degrees 
Fahrenheit, compared with surface temperatures of about 10,000 degrees. 
To observe this region, the spacecraft use special telescopes called 
coronagraphs, which let in only the extremely faint illumination from 
the corona region. Spartan carries two complementary telescopes: a 
white light coronagraph to measure the density of electrons in the 
relatively dim coronal luminance and an ultraviolet coronal spectrometer 
to measure the velocities, temperatures and densities of plasmas _ 
streams of charged particles _ from the corona. SOHO, a European-built 
craft launched in December 1995, carries similar instruments. Its 
ultraviolet coronagraph measures densities, temperatures and elemental 
constituents of mass ejections from the corona, as well as other features. 
Engineers said last week that this instrument was working. A second 
instrument, the large-angle and spectrographic coronagraph, or LASCO, 
is a set of three coronagraphs that measure the corona at different 
altitudes. Two of the LASCO components were working last week and 
engineers were optimistic about recovering the third. Fisher also 
said Spartan is to make cooperative observations with instruments 
sent on short flights by sounding rockets and will do joint studies 
with NASA's new Transition Region and Coronal Explorer spacecraft, 
launched last April. The Spartan program has had problems. Its upcoming 
mission, designed to conduct solar observations for about 43 hours, 
repeats one flown from the shuttle Columbia in November 1987 that 
did not record data. A NASA inquiry found that the fourth Spartan 
flight failed because astronauts aboard the shuttle did not send a 
crucial command to activate the craft's control system and then accidentally 
struck the satellite with the robot arm, sending it tumbling out of 
control. Two astronauts made an emergency spacewalk three days later 
and caught the satellite. This is the last scheduled flight of Spartan, 
but Fisher said NASA engineers were studying advanced models of the 
craft that might be flown after 2000. Such spacecraft, run by solar 
power instead of batteries, could operate longer and relay data directly 
to the ground. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>