<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0081 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hey, does this ring a bell? Dogged by an aggressive prosecution, a 
political leader denies an illicit affair _ ``I did not have sex with 
her!'' _ although one of his own associates swears to it. In addition, 
the leader is accused of hitting up constituents for illicit contributions, 
of using government employees and resources for his own purposes and 
even of sending operatives out to threaten people. Washington, 1998? 
Try Mesopotamia, circa 1400 B.C. In a coincidence confirming that 
sex in politics is truly ancient news, the Semitic Museum of Harvard 
University is exhibiting cuneiform tablets from a corruption-and-sex 
investigation about as old as Moses. You might even call these tablets 
the original Starr transcripts. They were unearthed in northern Iraq 
in the late 1920s thanks largely to years of digging by Richard F.S. 
Starr, an archaeologist from the Fogg Art Museum at Harvard. Could 
he and Kenneth, the independent counsel, be related? The exhibition, 
``Nuzi and the Hurrians: Fragments From a Forgotten Past,'' opened 
in April. Curator James Armstrong said it was planned well before 
the news broke in January of the presidential sex scandal involving 
President Clinton and Monica Lewinsky. But the parallels soon became 
clear. The tablets, from the museum's collection, record a judicial 
panel's impeachment proceedings against Mayor Kushshiharbe of Nuzi, 
a regional center of the ancient Mittani empire, near present-day 
Kirkuk in Iraq. Alas, not all of the impeachment tablets are on display, 
since some were left behind in Baghdad _ including the testimony covering 
the illicit affair. But not to worry: Those and others, many having 
a lot to do with sheep, were previously translated, and are excerpted 
here. _ TOM KUNTZ BEGIN ITALICS HERE) The judges took testimony that 
the mayor and his henchmen took bribes:(END ITALICS HERE) Naniya, 
a witness: Peshkilishu (a mayoral crony) released my brother from 
his feudal work, taking one maid, one complete oxhide and wood for 
two yokes as a bribe. (BEGIN ITALICS HERE) The mayor was also accused 
of abducting people for ransom:(END ITALICS HERE) Ninuari, a farmer: 
Kushshiharbe removed me from my threshing floor. Two shekels of gold, 
one ox and two male sheep I gave to Kushshiharbe and he allowed me 
to return. (BEGIN ITALICS HERE)The mayor and his band also allegedly 
stole at will:(END ITALICS HERE) Shukriteshup, a villager: Peshkilishu 
took one ass for a price, but the price he did not pay, and verily 
he has not returned it. Zikanta, another witness: I was coming back 
from the land of Hanigalbat, when Kipiya (a mayoral henchman) took 
away my clothes. Two (measures) of barley I had to give him, and my 
clothes he released. (BEGIN ITALICS HERE)The mayor was even accused 
of expropriating manure to fertilize his gardens:(END ITALICS HERE) 
Mar-Ishtar, a farmer: The manure for (one plot) of land the gardener 
of Kushshiharbe took away from me. So I said, ``Why did you take away 
my manure?'' and thus he spoke, ``As for you, he (the mayor) has ordered 
you to be flogged, and your district he has ordered to be devastated.'' 
(BEGIN ITALICS HERE)The case against the mayor was expanded to include 
charges that he had committed adultery with a woman named Humerelli. 
The mayor vehemently denied the charge. But even one of his agents, 
Ziliptilla, became an accuser:(END ITALICS HERE) Ziliptilla: Last 
year Pizatu made Humerelli stay with her. Shimitilla and I went over 
at night, we called to her and brought her to the place of Kushshiharbe; 
and he had sex with her. Mayor Kushshiharbe: No! Emphatically no! 
Not a word of it is true! I did not have sex with her! Palteya: I 
called to Humerelli and took her over to the brothel of Tilunnaya, 
and Kushshiharbe had sex with her. Mayor Kushshiharbe: May I perish 
if Palteya did bring Humerelli over to the brothel of Tilunnaya that 
I might have sex with her! (BEGIN ITALICS HERE)The scandal produced 
evidence of a wider conspiracy involving the mayor of a nearby town. 
It even had its own gate. But in this case the gate was not a suffix. 
It seems that Mayor Kushshiharbe was accused of adorning his private 
home with a gate fashioned from wood taken from the palace. Shades 
of Oliver North's security fence in the Iran-contra affair:(END ITALICS 
HERE) Turari, a witness: Thirty pieces of wood were placed in the 
[palace) gate, and Kushshiharbe took them away. Mayor Kushshiharbe: 
I did not take them! Palteya, another witness: Forty pieces of wood 
belonging to the palace Hutiya the carpenter took away and made into 
a door for Kushshiharbe . . . and I transported the wood. Mayor Kushshiharbe: 
The wood was mine, so I had it made into a door. And wood belonging 
to the palace for the making of a door I did not take! (BEGIN ITALICS 
HERE)But the carpenter, one of several John Deans to turn against 
the mayor in the scandal, finally 'fesses up:(END ITALICS HERE) Hatiya, 
the carpenter: I made the door. . . . and as for that wood, I knew 
that it belonged to the palace, but I made it into a door for Kushshiharbe. 
(BEGIN ITALICS HERE)Postscript: In another twist with echoes in modernity, 
this scandal has no clear resolution _ not, however, because the investigation 
continued interminably. Rather, because the records of the final verdict 
on Nuzi's infamous mayor have never been found.(END ITALICS HERE) 
</TEXT>
</DOC>