<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0464 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two years after California voters abolished most affirmative action 
programs and a year after Houston's residents chose to retain them, 
the fight has shifted to the Northwest, where voters in Washington 
state are facing the only ballot initiative in the country this year 
on the issue. Known as Initiative 200, the measure would outlaw any 
preferences in state decisions on hiring, school admissions or contracting 
based on race or gender. If it passes, Washington would become only 
the second state to enact such a measure, perhaps giving impetus to 
similar efforts around the country. But as they listen to the two 
sides wage a fierce debate over the measure, voters here could be 
forgiven for being confused about exactly what is at stake on Nov. 
3. A blitz of advertisements in the last two weeks of the campaign 
shows why: In one radio advertisement being aired by those who want 
to ban preferences, a classroom of children is heard reciting the 
Pledge of Allegiance as a little girl asks: ``Does it matter what 
color someone is? Should it matter?'' A man explains that under current 
state policies, someone can get a job or a contract or a spot in school 
``based on the color of that person's skin.'' But in a television 
advertisement being run by opponents of the measure, Gov. Gary Locke 
stares into the camera and casts the initiative in a very different 
light. The governor, a Democrat, never even uses the words ``race'' 
or ``color,'' ``black'' or ``white,'' talking only about gender. ``It 
will roll back the progress women have made,'' Locke says, ``in getting 
equal pay for equal work.'' Another advertisement shows women in the 
workplace _ at computers, wearing lab coats or in hard hats _ and 
offers a similar warning. In a state that is 86 percent white, and 
where the biggest ethnic minority is Asian Americans, who are not 
in many of the state's main affirmative action programs, the two sides 
are employing sharply contrasting strategies in their effort to win 
on Election Day. And both because women can benefit from affirmative 
action and because polls suggest that they are less likely than men 
to think that such programs are unnecessary, opponents are focusing 
their efforts on women. Supporters of the measure angrily denounce 
the appeal to women as a distortion of what I-200 is all about, while 
the opponents, just as angrily, say the emphasis on race represents 
an effort to inflame racial discord in a state where affirmative action 
has never been a contentious issue. The only point on which both camps 
agree is that the outcome is enormously important to their cause. 
With their only electoral victory so far in California, proponents 
of eliminating most affirmative action programs hope to carry momentum 
from a victory here to other states, including Florida, where efforts 
to get a similar measure on the ballot this year stalled. But opponents 
say that if they can stop the measure in a state like Washington, 
where affirmative action is not in general a hugely divisive issue, 
their victory may further dampen efforts in other states to bring 
the matter before voters. Under the measure's wording, the state ``shall 
not discriminate against, or grant preferential treatment to, any 
individual or group on the basis of race, sex, color, ethnicity, or 
national origin'' in education, employment or contracting. Opponents, 
backed by contributions from some of the state's biggest corporations, 
including Microsoft, Boeing and the Starbucks coffee chain, are mounting 
a big advertising drive in the final weeks. With polls having shown 
all along that voters are generally inclined to say ``yes'' when the 
measure's wording is read to them, the opponents say they are trying 
to warn Washingtonians of what Locke calls ``hidden consequences'' 
of the measure. Supporters of the initiative say the new advertisements 
are an outrageous effort to confuse the issue. ``They are trying to 
make this a gender issue, rather than an issue of racial preferences, 
which is most of what is encompassed by 200,'' said John Carlson, 
host of a talk show on an Internet broadcast network and leader of 
the drive for the initiative. ``They cannot win this campaign by honestly 
debating the merits and the current system of affirmative action. 
And so they are flailing about like a prizefighter in the 13th round, 
who's lost every round, and is now beginning to swing wildly.'' But 
No!200, the main group organized to fight the measure, accuses Carlson 
and Ward Connerly, the leader of the California initiative drive and 
the head of a Sacramento-based group that has paid for pro-initiative 
ads, of bringing needlessly divisive politics here and ignoring the 
initiative's effects on women. ``They're using the same rhetoric as 
in California, which has a completely different demographic picture,'' 
said Michelle Ackermann, spokeswoman for No!200, who added that it 
was proper for the group's ads to focus on women. ``The fact is, this 
is primarily a gender issue in this state. It is a woman's issue. 
The primary beneficiaries of affirmative action in this state are 
white women. So that is what we should be discussing.'' The opponents 
point to women such as Anne Symonds, president of Seattle-based Symonds 
Consulting Engineers, a 42-employee company here that is one of about 
4,000 in the state registered as women- or minority-owned and thus 
targeted in programs aimed at making sure that such companies are 
represented in government contracting. ``What these programs have 
done is allowed us to get our foot in the door with certain clients,'' 
said Ms. Symonds, who said it was very difficult to do so when government 
agencies were dealing with an established ``old-boy network'' of firms 
and had no obligation to look elsewhere. She estimated that about 
90 percent of her $3.5 million in billings involves government work 
in civil and structural engineering. And, reflecting some of the more 
general opposition to I-200, Ms. Symonds said, ``I'm very concerned 
that we're seeing a backlash against what we have gained in the last 
30 years. When you think back to what it was like 30 years ago, we 
really don't want to go there, both on women's issues and race issues.'' 
The opponents' strategy of emphasizing women's issues could well backfire 
in some respects, since women's grades are better than men's at many 
state universities, and opponents question whether there is any basis 
to the notion that they need special consideration in university admissions 
or government hiring. But Connerly, whose Sacramento-based American 
Civil Rights Institute paid for much of the signature drive that got 
Initiative 200 on the ballot, said in a telephone interview that the 
opponents' argument was a red herring. ``They've decided that the 
only way you're going to defeat this thing is to put a white woman's 
face on it,'' said Connerly. ``They're trying to frighten women so 
enough women will vote against it, but I personally don't think it 
will work. They say, `Oh, this will endanger equal pay for equal work.' 
But that's totally ridiculous _ it would seem to me that that would 
be blatant discrimination, and Proposition 200 says there would be 
no discrimination against women. ``It's the big lie,'' added Connerly. 
``But just read the language. There is no way you can read that and 
say it's somehow going to disadvantage women.'' ``It's the big lie,'' 
added Connerly. ``But just read the language. There is no way you 
can read that and say it's somehow going to disadvantage women.'' 
The debate in Washington comes against a backdrop of repeated polls 
here and elsewhere that show people inclined to support measures with 
the language used in California, specifically the requirement that 
government ``shall not discriminate against, or grant preferential 
treatment,'' but less inclined to support the measures when simply 
described as banning affirmative-action programs. The language was 
a critical factor in the success of California's Proposition 209 two 
years ago, while in Houston, when the City Council changed the language 
to make it essentially a referendum on ending affirmative action, 
the voters said no. (The city's programs are still being challenged 
in a court case.) In a statewide poll taken two weeks ago by Mason-Dixon 
Political/Media Research Inc. for several news organizations, 55 percent 
of Washingtonians surveyed said they would support the measure when 
a summary text was read to them, and 35 percent said they were against. 
When told the measure would end many affirmative-action programs, 
the margin dropped to 46 percent in favor and 40 percent opposed. 
While the measure has consistently had wide support in the polls, 
opponents say they can turn the tide in the final weeks through heavy 
television advertising, which is being paid for by contributions from 
businesses as well as individuals, and through campaigning by a large 
roster of elected officials. These include Locke, the state's first 
Chinese-American governor, whose stance in the advertisements makes 
for a stark contrast to Gov. Pete Wilson of California, a Republican 
who campaigned vigorously for the measure two years ago to ban preferences 
there. There are plenty of other contentious issues swirling around 
the fight over I-200, which would be officially known as the Washington 
State Civil Rights Act. And even if it is passed, it is likely, as 
happened with California's measure, to result in a blitz of lawsuits 
intended to test how its provisions are to be enacted. For one thing, 
opponents say the measure is so broadly written that a large number 
of recruitment programs could come under attack, even possibly ones 
that are intended to help women get services like breast-cancer screening, 
a claim that the measure's supporters dismiss as ludicrous. Another 
question surrounding a ``yes'' vote is the status of other programs 
in Washington's affirmative action policies, which in some cases give 
preferences to white men. That is because state and local governments 
may extend preferences to war veterans, disabled people and low-income 
residents of any race, all categories that are not covered in the 
language of Initiative 200. ``That's something else they won't tell 
you about a `yes' vote,'' said Ms. Ackermann of No!200. ``Those programs 
are not affected by the initiative, so we could end up with those 
quote-unquote preferences for white men still in place.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>