<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0446 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Shrieking triumphantly and waving bloody sickles and knives, about 
30 motorcyclists drove slowly through town in a victory celebration. 
Onlookers cheered and the atmosphere was half-exultant, like that 
of a carnival. But it was also half-terrified, because one of the 
motorcyclists was waving a bamboo stake on which was impaled the head 
of a young man. ``Allahu akbar!'' the motorcyclists shouted, waving 
their sickles in celebration at having killed a man they regarded 
as a sorcerer. ``God is great!'' The parade here in this remote farm 
town, 400 miles southeast of the capital, Jakarta, was part of a ferocious 
hysteria that is sweeping some remote parts of Indonesia. Communities 
are so terrified of black magic that vigilante groups are forming 
daily to seize, torture and execute anyone suspected of being a sorcerer. 
Suspicions are easily aroused, and people are attacked because they 
are outsiders, lack identification or cannot quickly convince a mob 
that they have business in the area. At least 150 people, and perhaps 
many more, have died so far in the frenzy, and law and order have 
broken down almost completely in some areas. The convulsions have 
disrupted commerce, paralyzed travel in places and underscored the 
risks of social upheaval as Indonesia grapples with economic depression 
and a transition away from political dictatorship. The upheavals are 
a challenge to the fragile government of President B.J. Habibie, who 
took office in May when the country's longtime dictator, Suharto, 
stepped down. Indonesian democracy is still in its infancy, and many 
people point to the latest killings as an ominous reminder that the 
last political transition here, in 1965 and '66, was accompanied by 
violence that cost hundreds of thousands of lives. The cycle of killings 
began with the slayings of dozens of Muslim leaders, for reasons that 
are probably political but remain unclear. These killings are attributed 
to people with supernatural powers, and now the villagers' efforts 
to avenge the deaths with retaliatory murders have been exploding 
out of control. And in an echo of 1965, the chaos has also stirred 
the occasional revenge murder by people taking advantage of the unrest 
to settle a score. The turmoil is on a far smaller scale than in the 
1960s but it is just as difficult to comprehend. The epicenter has 
moved to the Turen area, where five people accused of sorcery were 
executed by mobs on Sunday. One was beaten to death, one was burned 
and three were beheaded, with the severed heads paraded along a 40-mile 
route. Again on Monday at least three people in the area were killed. 
Two had been seized from a police car by vigilantes who reportedly 
slit their throats, and the third was the man whose head was paraded 
on a stake. An hour after that parade, another group of motorcyclists 
drove by slowly, cheering lustily and dragging the man's naked, headless 
corpse behind them. ``The ninja is dead!'' the lead motorcyclist shouted 
exuberantly, as passers-by waved and shouted encouragement. ``Ninja'' 
is the word given here to secret assassins who are believed to be 
trying to kill Muslim leaders. The original ninja were secret Japanese 
fighters hundreds of years ago, and Indonesia's ninja apparently got 
the name because they are feared for their stealth and strength. But 
they also are believed to be sorcerers who can vanish or turn into 
animals. The atmosphere is so tense and fearful that even the police 
stay out of sight and let the mobs rampage. Anyone who seems out of 
place risks instant execution at the hands of angry crowds. ``It begins 
when people try to chase someone suspicious,'' explained Sukiando, 
a 42-year-old rickshaw driver who said he was in the mob that beheaded 
one suspect on Sunday. ``Sometimes the ninja turns into a cat, and 
sometimes he stays human. If he stays human, then they cut off his 
head.'' ``There are going to be more heads chopped off,'' added Sukiando, 
who like many Indonesians uses just one name. ``Because in every little 
area, there are seven or eight ninja who go out every night, and they've 
got to be stopped.'' It is difficult to gather reliable information 
about the killings, because the authorities and villagers alike are 
often close-lipped about them. But interviews in several areas of 
the eastern part of the main Indonesian island of Java suggest that 
the situation is becoming tenser almost daily. In a vivid demonstration 
of the new lawlessness, young men in many towns and villages in eastern 
Java have organized themselves into armed patrols, especially at night, 
to catch ninja and kill them. Senior police officials in this area 
said that they could not comment, but one officer in the town of Kepanjen 
said nervously that the situation was extremely dangerous. ``Every 
night it's like a curfew,'' he said, referring to the area around 
his town. ``No one goes out and there are patrols every 20 meters. 
Last night I had to go out for a drive, and I was stopped and checked 
every 20 meters by crowds of people. Even though I'm a policeman, 
some guys asked for some cigarettes that they saw I had, and I had 
to hand them over. They could do anything.'' The officer said that 
residents had turned in eight suspected ninja to the police, who were 
holding them in jail. But he said that the eight were simply mentally 
disturbed and did not possess supernatural powers. ``There are no 
ninja here,'' he said. ``There is no such thing here.'' Many people, 
however, believe the killings confirm the existence of ninja and the 
need for extreme caution. ``When they parade the head around, it's 
not meant to threaten people,'' said Mohammed Soleh, a 34-year-old 
vigilante who was cheering the procession. ``It's just meant to show 
everyone that ninja do exist and that we must be on alert.'' The unrest 
began slowly a few months ago in the area around Banyuwangi, on the 
eastern tip of Java near the resort island of Bali. Well-organized 
groups of assassins dressed in black _ the ninja _ began attacking 
particular targets, often Muslim leaders affiliated with the country's 
largest Islamic organization, Nahdlatul Ulama. Indonesia is an overwhelmingly 
Muslim country, and there is no obvious reason that Nahdlatul Ulama, 
primarily a religious organization, would be a target. Still, some 
political motive is widely suspected, although there is great debate 
and uncertainty about what it might be. The organization's leader, 
Gus Dur, who is widely venerated in Indonesia, said over the weekend 
that top politicians _ including Cabinet members _ were behind the 
attacks on Muslims leaders, although he did not say whom he meant 
or how he had come to that conclusion. Gen. Wiranto, the army commander 
and perhaps the most powerful person in Indonesia today, visited eastern 
Java on Sunday and pledged to curb the killings. But he declined to 
comment on the accusation that senior politicians were involved. ``I 
do not want to send the country toward disintegration,'' The Jakarta 
Post quoted Wiranto as saying. The army has sent some patrols into 
the area, and in daytime there is nervous traffic that evaporates 
at dusk. The government says that about 150 people have been killed 
so far, but unofficial estimates are higher and some of the killings 
go unreported. The ruling political apparatus sometimes engaged in 
extrajudicial killings during Suharto's days, and many believe that 
some political or military forces are continuing the tradition, either 
to eliminate Muslim critics or to sow chaos and create the conditions 
for a coup. In the last couple of weeks, the killings have spread 
to encompass most of East Java, and scattered attacks have been reported 
in other parts of Java as well. But the pattern has changed, so that 
often those doing the killing now are the mobs trying to find the 
ninja. ``Everybody now is committed to the search for ninja,'' said 
Warsidi, a 55-year-old man who was eating soup and noodles from an 
outdoor stall, and who took a break to watch the severed-head parade 
go by before resuming his meal. ``The ninja are trying to kill the 
Muslim leaders, so before the ninja can do harm, local people are 
fighting back.'' Warsidi and other vigilantes were only slightly suspicious 
of a foreign reporter, apparently the first foreigner to visit the 
area since the mob killings, and they were generally courteous and 
mild-mannered. Their politeness seemed incongruous, considering that 
they were describing their plans to behead anyone who could not satisfactorily 
explain himself. No foreigners are known to have encountered difficulties 
in East Java, and most of the killings have been in rural areas that 
foreigners do not usually visit. Places like Bali and Jakarta have 
not been affected. However, one suspected sorcerer was attacked and 
beaten by a huge mob in Surabaya, the hub of the region and Indonesia's 
second-largest city. Local people became suspicious of the man, rumors 
started, and he was chased down, tortured, and killed by garroting. 
A few days earlier in Surabaya, an undercover policeman who was wearing 
black was saved from a lynching only by running into a police station. 
A mob attacked and damaged the police station, but the man was saved. 
So how does one tell who is a ninja? ``They look like crazy men, and 
we also look to see if they have any holy writing on them, because 
that would mean that they practice black magic,'' said Bantur, a vigilante 
rickshaw driver. Bantur and his friends, who said that they had all 
been in the mob that beheaded a sorcerer a day earlier, clustered 
around to offer a few other telltale signs. One, they said, is a reluctance 
to explain one's identity or an inability to explain one's purpose 
in visiting the area. Belief in magical powers has always been fairly 
widespread among Javanese living in small towns and villages, but 
with the decline of strongman rule, there seems to be an increasing 
willingness to attribute problems to a sorcerer's magic _ and to settle 
the problem immediately by picking up a sickle. Few people doubt that 
the ninja must be dispatched quickly, because of their ability to 
disappear. ``Last night, I saw it with my own eyes,'' said Sutaryona, 
a 27-year-old member of a vigilante patrol. ``There were three ninja, 
and when we shone a flashlight at them, they vanished.'' Of course, 
vanishing is what anyone might try to do when approached by a mob 
of angry men with sickles. But fleeing is considered proof that one 
is a ninja. Asked whether the failure of the dead men to vanish in 
time meant that they were not ninja after all, a group of vigilantes 
took the question gracefully. They carefully explained that when a 
Muslim leader is present and knows about the magic, the sorcerer cannot 
use it. So, they concluded, a suspect's failure to disappear is also 
proof that he is a sorcerer. In the 1960s, the main victims of the 
violence were leftists and ethnic Chinese, but that seems not to have 
been repeated here. The government has suggested that communists _ 
the perennial targets of Indonesian repression _ are responsible for 
the ninja killings, but nobody seems to take that very seriously, 
and Chinese appear to have been spared so far. There are constant 
sightings of ninja. Near the city of Pandaan, for example, villagers 
claimed they saw two ninja who, when chased, turned themselves into 
cats. ``So they killed the cats, but there was no blood at all,'' 
whispered Tantri Irawati, a 21-year-old woman wearing a Mickey Mouse 
shirt and red polish on her fingernails and toenails. ``Every night 
people are so scared! I used to go to the toilet outside at night 
without any fear, but now I'm too terrified. I get someone to walk 
me to the outhouse.'' One person in the area, Choirul, a 19-year-old 
man who is mentally retarded, supposedly was accosted by a ninja. 
His speech is barely understandable, but he sat on his porch and _ 
helped by his more voluble mother _ told how a man in black had grabbed 
his arm and asked him a question. What question? Choirul will not 
tell anyone, even his mother, and that is taken as further proof that 
the ninja must have been particularly devilish. So the neighbors have 
stepped up patrols. ``If we catch a ninja, we'll beat him,'' said 
Hadi, a 25-year-old neighbor who said he arms himself with a sickle 
each evening. ``People don't want the ninja arrested. They want us 
to kill him right away.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>