<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0180 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Photos of famous men and women sporting mustaches of milk have become 
familiar advertisements for a calcium-rich food that has fallen on 
hard times. Milk consumption has been dropping for the last three 
decades, and calcium nutrition among both young and old has collapsed 
with it. Some experts predict an epidemic of osteoporosis because 
today's children and teen-agers, who guzzle sodas and juice drinks 
instead of milk, are consuming about half the amount of calcium from 
foods that youngsters did in 1950. Peak bone mass, the single best 
predictor of osteoporosis, is largely achieved by age 20, so most 
of these young people will enter the years of gradual bone loss in 
their 30s with a glass that is already only half-full. Now, as new 
evidence points to the ever-widening role of calcium in preventing 
disease, it is even more important to be sure that everyone gets enough 
of this vital nutrient each day. Achieving the recommended daily amounts 
of calcium is not difficult for people whose diets are rich in dairy 
products. Children who drink three or four glasses of milk a day, 
for example, would easily meet their needs. But there is much confusion 
about other food sources of calcium and the ability of calcium supplements 
to compensate for a dietary deficiency. Facts About Foods Food is 
nearly always a better source of calcium than supplements, if for 
no other reason than food provides more nutritional benefits than 
just calcium, including nutrients that help the body use calcium. 
A consensus conference convened by the National Institutes of Health 
concluded in 1994 that ``to attain optimal calcium levels, a change 
in dietary habits, including increased consumption of dairy products 
and/or calcium-rich vegetable sources, is needed.'' The experts might 
have also cautioned Americans about eating too much salt and protein, 
especially animal protein, which increases the loss of calcium in 
urine. Eating just one fast-food hamburger leads to a net loss of 
23 milligrams of calcium, according to Dr. Robert Heaney, a calcium 
expert at Creighton University in Omaha. However, despite earlier 
concerns about caffeine, it only minimally increases calcium loss, 
by about 2 or 3 milligrams for a cup of coffee, Heaney said. DAIRY 
PRODUCTS _ Milk remains the best dietary source of calcium for two 
reasons: the lactose (milk sugar) naturally in milk and the vitamin 
D added to it enhance calcium absorption through the gut. (For those 
who have trouble digesting lactose, ample calcium is absorbed from 
lactose-reduced milk and from yogurt with active cultures, which is 
also low in lactose.) Ounce for ounce, nonfat plain yogurt has more 
calcium than milk, although it contains no vitamin D. Among frozen 
dairy desserts, nonfat frozen yogurt is a much better source of calcium 
than ice cream or ice milk. Hard cheese, whether high or low in fat, 
is quite rich in calcium. Ricotta cheese is also an excellent source, 
but cottage cheese, creamed or otherwise, is not nearly as good a 
source as milk and yogurt unless calcium is added by the maker. Using 
less water when reconstituting dry milk and adding nonfat dry milk 
powder to other drinks and foods are excellent ways to increase calcium 
intake. For children allergic to cow's milk or who become constipated 
when consuming it , soy milk fortified with calcium or a daily calcium 
supplement may be substituted. VEGETABLES _ Some of the best vegetable 
sources of calcium include kale, collard greens, turnip greens, mustard 
greens, Chinese cabbage, chicory and bok choy. Broccoli, chard and 
acorn squash, though not as rich in calcium, are more common sources. 
Although spinach has a lot of calcium, it also contains a substance 
_ oxalic acid _ that binds up its calcium and prevents absorption 
of all but about 5 percent of it. However, the oxalic acid in spinach 
and foods like rhubarb does not interfere with absorption of calcium 
from other foods eaten at the same time. Phytic acid, another substance 
in foods like dried beans and peas, also depresses calcium absorption 
somewhat, but less than oxalic acid. Most forms of fiber have little 
or no effect on calcium absorption. Wheat bran, though, can partly 
block absorption of calcium from other foods, for example, the milk 
in a bowl of bran cereal. OTHER FOOD _ Canned sardines with their 
bones included are especially rich in calcium _ 3 ounces of sardines 
have more calcium than 8 ounces of milk. Canned salmon, also with 
bones, is about half as good. Other sources include dry-roasted soybeans, 
blackstrap molasses, figs, some beans and peas (black-eyed peas, white 
beans, great northern beans, navy beans and soybeans, although the 
calcium in beans is only about half as available to the body as that 
in milk), poppy and sesame seeds, tahini, almonds, oranges and calcium-fortified 
orange juice. The acid in the juice enhances calcium absorption, and 
is especially good for older people short on stomach acid. Facts About 
Supplements For those who cannot or do not get enough calcium from 
foods to meet the recommended intake for their age and sex, calcium 
supplements are the next best option. As long as the maximum does 
not exceed a total of 2,000 milligrams a day from foods and pills, 
calcium supplementation appears to be safe, except perhaps for people 
who tend to form calcium-containing kidney stones. As for how well 
a calcium tablet is absorbed, there is no predictable relationship 
between a supplement's ability to dissolve in vinegar water and its 
usefulness to the body. Calcium carbonate (as in Tums and Rolaids 
as well as various supplements) is least expensive and as good a source 
when taken with meals as, say, calcium citrate, which can be taken 
between meals and is the preferred supplement for older people who 
are deficient in stomach acid. Avoid natural sources of calcium like 
bone meal, oyster shell or dolomite, since they may contain harmful 
contaminants. Bedtime is another good time to take calcium, since 
it will remain in the stomach longer. If possible, avoid taking calcium 
with meals that contain a lot of wheat fiber. Also, if taking iron 
or a multivitamin with iron, take calcium at a different time since 
it interferes with iron absorption. When buying a calcium supplement, 
check the label for the amount of elemental calcium in each tablet, 
not the total weight, to calculate the amount of calcium being consumed. 
Calcium supplements are best used by the body when taken in doses 
of 500 milligrams or less. Chewable and effervescent supplements are 
available for those who have trouble swallowing tablets. And don't 
forget about vitamin D. A large proportion of Americans do not get 
enough of this vitamin to assure optimal absorption of calcium. And 
the latest studies suggest that adults need 800 International Units 
a day, not 400 as is now recommended. Although milk is supposed to 
be fortified with vitamin D (400 units per quart), the actual amount 
in milk is highly variable. About 90 percent of the vitamin D people 
get is made in skin exposed to the sun's ultraviolet-B rays. Try to 
expose some part of your body (without sunscreen) to the sun for 10 
or 15 minutes a day year-round. Alternatively, eat fatty fish or take 
cod-liver oil or a supplement with D. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>