<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981019.0457 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Kroger Co. said Monday that it would acquire Fred Meyer Inc. in 
a deal that would create a supermarket giant with $43 billion in annual 
revenue and 2,200 stores in 31 states. Kroger will pay about $8 billion 
in stock for Fred Meyer and assume $4.8 billion of the company's debt, 
further consolidating the grocery business and creating the largest 
supermarket chain in the country. With the latest transaction, Kroger 
regains the spot it lost to Albertson's Inc. as the nation's largest 
supplier of eggs and milk. With the acquisition, Kroger will stretch 
from the fast-growing Western markets, where Portland-based Fred Meyer 
is strong, to the Midwest and the Southeast, where the Cincinnati-based 
company has many stores and much visibility. The move also gives Kroger 
even greater purchasing power and substantial economies of scale. 
The combined company will retain the Kroger name and continue to be 
run from Cincinnati. Both chains' stores will retain their names and 
local management teams. Fred Meyer shareholders will receive one newly 
issued share of Kroger stock for each Fred Meyer share, which puts 
the value of the shares, based on Friday's closing price, at $48.75. 
After the stock swap, Fred Meyer shareholders will own 38 percent 
of the combined company. Fred Meyer shares declined $4.8125 Monday, 
to $44.1875, and Kroger shares closed at $45.4375, down $3.3125. The 
market's initial reaction indicated that investors might have concerns 
about the logistics of integrating the companies, while some might 
have expected Kroger to acquire the much larger Safeway Inc. Still, 
managements of both companies called the transaction a ``powerful 
strategic combination.'' Joseph A. Pichler, chairman and chief executive 
of Kroger, said, ``Together, we will have the No. 1 or No. 2 market 
share in 33 of the nation's largest markets.'' The acquisition is 
not expected to affect Kroger's earnings per share in the 1999 fiscal 
year and is expected to contribute substantially to earnings thereafter, 
though the companies did not say by how much. Kroger said it expected 
to save about $225 million within three years, with approximately 
$75 million of that in the first year. ``We will achieve economies 
of scale by leveraging purchasing, information technology, manufacturing 
and distribution across a much larger store base,'' Pichler said. 
Some of the cost cuts will come from laying off an undisclosed number 
of office workers, but not from job cuts at stores _ now about 90 
percent of the companies' combined work force of 300,000. Pichler 
will continue to run the combined company while Ronald W. Burkle, 
chairman of Fred Meyer, will become chairman of the executive committee 
of Kroger's board. Robert G. Miller, vice chairman and chief executive 
of Fred Meyer, will become vice chairman and chief operating officer 
of Kroger. In addition to Burkle and Miller, four other Fred Meyer 
nominees will join the Kroger board, which will be expanded to 19 
directors from 13. ``I have been a longtime believer in consolidation 
in the supermarket industry,'' Burkle said, adding that teaming up 
with Kroger helps both companies because it creates a national powerhouse. 
The deal was approved by both companies' boards and is subject to 
shareholder and regulatory approval. Antitrust problems are not expected. 
Where there is overlap, as in Arizona, the stores operate different 
formats. For instance, Fred Meyer operates drugstores as well as superstores 
that sell everything from jewelry to Jello, while Kroger sticks mainly 
to bread-and-butter items. Even so, government regulators may require 
the company to sell some stores before the deal is approved, but that 
is not likely to derail the acquisition. In all, Fred Meyer, which 
has annual revenue around $15 billion, operates 800 food and general 
merchandise stores in 12 states from Alaska to Texas. Kroger, with 
revenue of $28 billion, operates 1,398 food stores and 802 convenience 
stores, most of them in the Midwest and the Southeast, as well as 
34 manufacturing plants. Analysts said the combined businesses will 
create an industry leader with strong management, substantial potential 
for earnings growth and the store formats and locations to compete 
with nontraditional food retailers, like Wal-Mart, that now sell a 
range of grocery items, from lettuce to soup. They added that one 
concern was whether management would be able to integrate the combined 
company's far-flung operations, especially when Fred Meyer is still 
trying to digest the businesses of other chains it recently acquired. 
Last year, the company acquired Quality Food Centers and Ralphs Grocery 
Co. in separate deals worth about $2 billion. It also purchased Smith's 
Food and Drug Centers for $1.96 billion. ``They operate different 
types of formats and Fred Meyer has different operations in different 
markets,'' said George E. Thompson, an analyst who follows the industry 
for Prudential Securities. ``That is going to make it complicated, 
there is no question about that.'' Still, he and other analysts said 
the benefits of the deal outweighed the potential pitfalls. ``Kroger 
has made investments in technology and systems, and they have done 
a lot of cost-cutting and elimination of replicated functions throughout 
the organization from a systems standpoint,'' said Bonni Z. Bleustein 
of Credit Suisse First Boston. ``They also get an excellent management 
team in the Fred Meyer group.'' In purchasing Fred Meyer, Kroger also 
regains its long-held bragging rights as the largest industry competitor 
ranked by revenue. The distinction was grabbed in August by Albertson's 
when it announced that it would acquire American Stores Co. for $8.3 
billion, creating a chain with $36 billion in revenue and 2,500 stores 
in 37 states. Some other recent deals include Safeway's announcement 
last week that it would acquire the Dominick's supermarket chain for 
$1.85 billion, and the acquisition in May by Royal Ahold of Giant 
Food Inc. for $2.6 billion. Such combinations, which spread a company's 
costs over a much larger store base, are expected to continue and 
to make it increasingly difficult for small, independent grocers to 
compete on price, marketing and store location terms. ``The independents 
clearly have more and more of a competitive disadvantage,'' Ms. Bleustein 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>