<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981019.2000.1253 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the World. I'm Lisa Mullins. Today, South Africa's ruling 
party, the African National Congress, pointed a finger at itself. 
In the current world economic climate, the government, ANC members 
said, has to do more to deal with the country's own problems. But 
while 30 percent of blacks do lack steady work four years after the 
end of apartheid, there is another front where the nation is breaking 
new ground, hiring the disabled. As the World's Mohammed Ali reports 
from Capetown, it's a policy that makes some South Africans very proud. 
When South Africa's parliament opened last year, the guard of honor 
was not a group of soldiers normally assigned to the task. It was 
a group of disabled persons, including Mary Ronto. The wheelchair-bound 
member of parliament and chairwoman of the lobby group Disabled People 
South Africa. Ronto says when she helped open parliament, she did 
it before an international audience. It was televised. People saw 
it all over the world anyway and for me that was one of the proudest, 
proudest, proudest moment of seeing what is contained in the constitution 
is becoming a reality. That for me was one of the proudest moments 
of my life to say, yes. It's better to be disabled in South Africa. 
Disability's on the agenda in our country now and as much as race 
and class and gender. Cindy Barry lobbies parliament on behalf of 
Disabled People South Africa. People are starting to think about disability 
as an issue too and starting to look at people with disabilities as 
not just welfare cases. Barry was paralyzed two years ago after being 
caught in the crossfire between two rival taxi groups while on her 
way to a job interview. It was really difficult for all my family 
and friends. But peoples' attitudes do change. People don't discriminate. 
People do look at your differently, often with pity which is very 
irritating. Sometimes, you know, one can cope with it. Sometimes you 
can't. I have had some friends who, when I bump into them or see them 
in the streets these days, they turn the other way. But that's more 
than the norm. But it happens. Barry says the government has moved 
quickly to alter its approach to disability. It's a change from a 
welfare approach to a more developmental and human rights approach. 
In our constitution, discrimination's outlawed on the basis of disability. 
Last month, the South African parliament passed the employment equity 
bill which prevents discrimination against the disabled in hiring. 
the status of disabled persons in the office of the deputy president 
said the legislation is already showing results. disabled. These are 
the kinds of things people are grappling with and it's beginning to 
show that we are transforming the workplace and there's been a fair 
amount of success. Swing doors are the bane of my life, because I 
had to learn to open it with one hand while swinging my chair with 
the other. While legislation is improving the lot of the disabled 
in South Africa, getting around is still difficult for wheel-chair 
bound people like Cindy Barry. The environment in our country is very 
hostile, very, very hostile. It's difficult to get around. Not many 
places are accessible. But if I look around the city in the past year, 
there have been quite a few structural adjustments made. People are 
becoming more aware of accessibility. It's an actual law which doesn't 
have enforcement mechanisms, but there is a law that buildings should 
be made accessible. Nevertheless, getting around in the rural areas 
of the country is still a major struggle for wheelchair-bound people. 
One of the main obstacles in the government's efforts to improve conditions 
for the disabled is the competition for funding from other sectors 
like health, housing and education. And while the government has outlawed 
discrimination against the disabled, more needs to be done to change 
the discriminatory attitudes still prevalent here. The government 
has already started a publicity campaign in the broadcast and print 
media. Perhaps more important for the future of this country's disabled 
is an educational process underway in the homes and schools of the 
next generation of South African citizens. For the World, this is 
Mohammed Ali in Capetown, South Africa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>