<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981019.2000.2332 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight and for the following three nights, public television will 
air Africans in America. America's journey through slavery. This week, 
the World will also be examining the legacy of slavery in the Americas 
with reports from Jamaica, Cuba and Martinique. But we begin today 
in Brazil, the last country in the Americas to abolish slavery in 
1888. Brazil also took in more African slaves than any other country, 
some 10 million in all. After emancipation, Brazil promoted mixing 
between the races not segregation. The result is that today, 80 million 
Brazilians or about half the population, is black or of mixed race. 
The World's Paula Gobi has this report from Rio de Janiero. In the 
working class neighborhood of Ramos, neighbors gathered to chat after 
a lazy Saturday lunch. Here as in other poor communities, interracial 
couples are common. Couples like Josada who is black and who is white, 
don't attract anyone's attention. Josada says they are the norm, not 
the exception. JOSADA The races are so mixed today that no one cares. 
No one's worried about it. Black and white together is normal. I think 
the mixture is so great, that it can put an end to whatever discrimination 
there is. 34-year-old Adilson says he did face discrimination in his 
family when he told them five years ago he was moving in with Josada. 
They weren't surprised, he says. His brother and sister had also married 
black people. ADILSON They said I had found a nice pretty black girl. 
I said I was lucky to find a black girl because I like darker women. 
I've dated mulattos and whites but when it comes to marriage, I prefer 
a black woman. The black grandmother Jurama, who also married a white 
man, says there's nothing better than racial blending. JURAMA While 
my aunt also used to say, blacks should marry whites and whites should 
marry blacks because it improves the color. What Jurama may not know, 
is that is exactly the way race relations were treated historically 
in Brazil. Unlike the United States, after the abolition of slavery, 
in Brazil there was no legal segregation. Instead, interracial mixing 
and marriages were promoted. Since the blacks were a majority, millions 
of white Europeans were brought to the country at the turn of the 
century to try to whiten out the Brazilian population. Marcialema 
is a young black sociologist at the center of Afro-Asiatic studies 
in Rio. MARCIALEMA The migration policy of the beginning of the century 
used to say that white immigrants should be encouraged to come in 
order to whiten out the black race. And since the white race was considered 
superior, it was believed that the negative characteristics of the 
inferior race would eventually disappear and with time you'd have 
a white population. They even had timetables to calculate how long 
it would take to whiten out Brazil. The disappearance of the black 
race of course did not happen. But the force of a black militancy 
was weakened. Centuries of miscegenation led to a rainbow of different 
skin colors and the result of this mix in Brazil, the mulattos, don't 
define themselves as black or white, nor do they have to. When filling 
out ID applications or government forms, Brazilians are not asked 
to state their race. But that doesn't mean that racism does not exist 
in Brazil, according to Marcialema. MARCIALEMA In Brazil, racial integration 
is different than in the United States or South Africa. Race relations 
here have not been marked by laws that determined where a black person 
could or could not go. But a black person's place is dictated by his 
economic status. So in socio-economic terms, there is no racial democracy 
in Brazil. While in Brazil, a black middle class is slowly growing, 
the vast majority of blacks are still at the bottom of the social 
and economic ladder dominated by a white elite. Many argue that the 
racial blending makes affirmative action policies in Brazil almost 
impossible since many times it's hard to draw a color line. So inequality 
is perpetuated by the limited social opportunities afforded to non-whites. 
Back at Josada Adileson's home, the conversation has turned to Martin 
Luther King and Nelson Mandela. Adilosen says Brazil is different. 
Here the poor mix without racial discrimination. Josada says the problem 
lies when you cross the line and look for a better job. JOSADA I think 
there is some discrimination. When an ad says they're looking for 
someone with a good appearance, we know they mean white. And that's 
how they get around discrimination. You'll see a well-educated black 
person that doesn't get the job and then a less qualified white person 
gets it. It's difficult to reconcile Brazil's economic reality with 
its image as a racial democracy. Yet some people like Josada believe 
that the race mix can only help Brazil become a more just society. 
It is true that the number of interracial marriages in Brazil is increasing 
every day. And not only is Brazil moving in the direction of creating 
its own race, but the country as a whole is becoming more and more 
proud of this mixed race identity. For the World, this is Paul Gobi 
in Rio de Janiero. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>