<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981019.2000.2717 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Time now for the answer to today's geography quiz. Remember, we were 
looking for the highest point on earth, a mountain peak in the Himalayas 
that shared by Tibetans, Nepalese and some would say a man-like beast 
that the locals call the Yetti. Well, the answer to our geography 
quiz is of course Mount Everest and as the World's Clark Boyd tells 
us, the Yetti has once again reared its fuzzy head on top of the world. 
We know it as big foot, Sasquash, the abominable snow man, a 6 to 
8 foot tall ape-like hulk covered in fur, arms dangling almost to 
the ground, lumbering through the back woods or along snow-covered 
slope. Well, around Mount Everest, he's called the Yetti, which means 
that thing in Sherpa. Actually Sherpas prefer to call the creature 
Maytay or the man-like thing that is not a man. But whatever the Yetti 
is or isn't, rumor has it that he's back. I saw these two things with 
very thick fur walking in front of me for three or four minutes. American 
mountain climber Greg Kalonika. I got about 30 meters away and up 
stood this creature that stood erect, walked like a human, except 
it had thick black fur. It was about six feet tall and hunched over 
shoulders, very long arms and extremely large hands. And just shortly 
afterwards, the second one jumped up except it wasn't holding anything 
and it was noticeably smaller. Kalonika says he saw the creatures 
during a recent descent of Mount Everest. Such sightings are nothing 
new to the locals. Tales of the Yetti go back thousands of years in 
Nepalese and Tibetan folklore. But what do they make of this latest 
claim? Nepalese conservationist Carna Sackia weighs in with cautious 
optimism. I've never seen a Yetti myself. I don't know whether, you 
know, his claim is genuine or not. But I strongly believe that the 
consideration of the vastness of our Himalayan region, I just can't 
say that there is no Yetti in our country. Of course as the BBC's 
own science man Toby Murdock points out, we have to ask some tough 
questions about the sighting and Kalonika's condition. Did he really 
see two Yetti's or did he see perhaps two bears? Was he for example 
suffering from altitude sickness and seeing hallucinations? It's always 
very, very difficult in a one off situation like this to prove that 
what somebody says they saw, is really what they saw. But Craig Kalonika 
thinks that what he saw was vaguely familiar. Many people call them 
different things. I kind of have a feeling they're an ancestor of 
ours. So there's your whole new reason for forking out big bucks to 
climb to the top of the world. You just might find a long-lost relative 
on the way up or down. For the World, this is Clark Boyd. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>