<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981019.1700.2359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In another report released last week, the National Network for Immigrants 
and Refugee Rights accused U.S. authorities of committing human rights 
abuses when conducting raids against suspected undocumented workers. 
The head of the immigration rights group, Cathy Kactoquin says the 
human impact of these raids is devastating. Immigration raids threaten 
the rights of citizens and noncitizens, violating constitutional protections, 
destabilizing families and hampering workers efforts to organize for 
fair wages and safe working conditions. We want these raids to end. 
Cathy Kactoquin of the National Network for Immigrant and Refugee 
Rights. Another participant at the news conference, Katalina Volez, 
a convenience store clerk from Chandler, Arizona, gave a personal 
account of her treatment by immigration agents. She said they pulled 
her over only because they thought she was an illegal immigrant. I, 
a native of Arizona, a citizen of the United States, was being deported. 
When I asked again, what is going on, in English this time, the officer 
turned to me and said, "Oh, you speak English?" He then took off the 
handcuffs and told me to go, I could go now, just like that, to forget 
that I was treated like an animal, a criminal. I went to school here. 
I raised -- I am raising my four kids here. Do I have to have tattooed 
on my forehead U.S. citizen? Katalina Volez' story was one of many 
cited by the immigration activists. Cecelia Munoz, Vice President 
of the National Council of Larasa said that discrimination against 
immigrants also affects the rights of U.S. citizens. CECELIA MUNOZ 
Immigration raids obviously affect immigrants in our communities, 
but it should also be clear to you that it affects everyone in our 
communities, not just those who are immigrants and I want to use myself 
as an example. I was also born and raised in this country, but I'm 
part of an immigrant family. My children go to school with immigrants. 
I live in an immigrant community. I eat in some of the restaurants 
that are cited in this report as having been subjected to raids simply 
because of who owns the restaurant, what kind of food they serve, 
what their staff looks like and what their patrons look like and they 
have been -- they have names like mine and that is the reason that 
they're subject to harassment and abuse. Cecelia Munoz reminds that 
the majority of Americans come from immigrant origins. Others point 
out that U.S. law does not allow INS agents to question people solely 
on the basis of skin color or accent. The use and misuse of immigrant 
labor in low wage industries also troubled the immigration activists. 
Ann Hoffman of the Unite Union said some employers actually encourage 
INS raids. We have learned that unscrupulous employers do not hesitate 
to use INS raids as a highly effective tool against workers involved 
in a union organizing drive or seeking to negotiate a first union 
contract. This inevitably chills the ability of workers to form a 
union and to try to improve their working conditions. We've learned 
that the mere threat of a raid is a powerful weapon in the hands of 
an employer. Such threats are used by employers to depress the wages 
and erode the working conditions of workers, especially undocumented 
workers, and have led to the reemergence of the sweat shop as a modern 
day reality. Ann Hoffman gave the example of a New York garment factory 
using the INS to break up union negotiations over pay. Unite organized 
the workers at a company called STC Knitting in Long Island city Queens, 
New York. The union was successful in gaining bargaining rights, was 
in the course of negotiating a first contract and the company called 
in Immigration to raid. The company gave Immigration a list of the 
workers to target. They were the members of the union's negotiating 
committee and the people who had been active in the organizing campaign. 
The company warned some of the undocumented workers who had supported 
the company in the organizing drive to stay home from work that day. 
So the company had advanced notice of the day of the raid. Ann Hoffman 
of the Unite Union which represents immigrant workers in the United 
States. As the reports on human rights abuses of immigrants were issued, 
the U.S. Congress was debating which immigrant measures should be 
included in the budget to be presented to President Clinton. In the 
end, they agreed to several which will benefit thousands of immigrants 
around the country. Some 50,000 Haitian asylum seekers already in 
the United States will be granted legal permanent residence. More 
than 140,000 visas will be granted over the next three years to foreign 
computer workers and others with high technology skills. And finally, 
the Congress approved a 30 month delay in implementing a law that 
would enforce border patrol officers to track every person entering 
and leaving the United States from Mexico and Canada. Immigrant and 
human rights was the topic of today's Dateline. I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>