<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981019.1700.0844 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And now to another president with problems. Russian President Boris 
Yeltsin canceled meetings Monday with senior government officials, 
fueling more fears about the exact state of his health. In this report 
from Moscow, VOA correspondent Andre Deneshna looks at the emerging 
political battle surrounding Mr. Yeltsin's succession. A spokesman 
for Mr. Yeltsin said the Russian president is feeling the lingering 
effects of a respiratory infection but his health is generally satisfactory. 
The state of President Yeltsin's health made headlines last week after 
he cut short a trip to central Asia. During a ceremony in Uzbekistan, 
Mr. Yeltsin almost fell and had to be supported by Uzbek President 
Islam Karimov. At times, he seemed disoriented and difficult signing 
his name to documents. The official explanation from the Kremlin is 
that the president has bronchitis and is being treated with antibiotics, 
but the embarrassing moments in Uzbekistan have fueled speculation 
among the Russian news media and political analysts here that Mr. 
Yeltsin's health is worse than acknowledged by his entourage. The 
Director of Moscow's Political Science Foundation, Andre Katinov, 
says Mr. Yeltsin's health should be a source of concern to many people. 
He is definitely not capable of running the country on the day-to-day 
basis. And there is not much hope that his state of health will change 
for the better. His health might get somewhat stabilized but I think 
that he's exhausted and that's what we see. DENESHNA The man who is 
in effect running the country is Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov. 
His government has been given the task of coming up with policies 
to bring Russia out of its present economic and financial crisis. 
Mr. Primakov says he has no presidential ambitions, but others are 
already positioning themselves for a presidential campaign should 
Mr. Yeltsin be forced to resign before his term expires in June 2000. 
These include Communist Party leader Ynani Zugotov, Moscow Mayor Yuli 
Leuskof and the Governor of Siberia's Cresneuf region, former General 
Alexander Liebitz. Mr. Zugotov and General Liebitz have openly called 
for Mr. Yeltsin's resignation. Mr. Yeltsin says he has no intention 
of resigning and will serve out his full term. Analyst Katinov believes 
Mr. Yeltsin will stay in office for the foreseeable future. KATINOV 
No one among major herowets, political herowets is ready or willing 
to challenge Yeltsin right now. No one wants to do the dirty job for 
Mr. Primakov and the most serious contenders like Mr. Leuskof or Mr. 
Liebitz think that they need more time in order to get better certain 
conditions. Therefore, I don't think that they will be pushing for 
early elections and Yeltsin must stay in office for quite a time. 
DENESHNA Mr. Katinov says while everyone focuses on Mr. Yeltsin's 
health and political alliances are made in advance of presidential 
elections whenever they may be held. Russia will continue to, in his 
word, drift. He believes the essential task now facing Prime Minister 
Yevgeny Primakov's government is not political but economy, namely 
come up with a plan to resurrect Russia's economy and finances. But 
as of now, Mr. Katinov says he does not see any such strategy emerging. 
Andre Deneshna of VOA News, Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>