<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981019.0600.1326 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If you go by the news headlines, you'd think it would be a pretty 
tough job being a teacher in an American high school, where according 
to media reports, many students have drug problems, bring guns to 
school, disrupt class, or are just simply inattentive. But one commentator 
says those reports are blown way out of proportion and he should know. 
Patrick Welsh writes on education issues for USA Today newspaper based 
on his firsthand knowledge. Mr. Welsh is in his 30th year of teaching 
English literature at T. C. Williams High School in Alexandria, Virginia. 
The 57 year old instructor says he has always tried hard to get to 
know his students. As you get older, that challenge -- keep hitting 
the younger generation and to keep relating to them and I think as 
I get older I even try harder because I'm not going to let either 
younger teachers get ahead of me or I'm not just going to go into 
a class and bore kids. You know, that's the worst thing. If I felt 
I really bored kids, I just would leave, do something else. Mr. Welsh 
talked with VOA's Andrew Barrick about his concern for students who 
do not perform well academically and they're placed in his regular 
class as opposed to the honors or advanced class. Many of the regular 
class students are poor and come from broken homes. So many kids don't 
have adults in their lives. They're going through those teenage years 
where they don't really connect with their parents and a lot of them 
do connect with teachers who care, whether they're old or young. But 
there's a large number of low income black children here who live 
in housing projects. And there's also -- there's been an enormous 
influx of students from Central America. The Hispanic population has 
gone up almost 20 percent over a 15 year period. And many of those 
kids, because of their backgrounds, have not been doing well academically. 
Now you have people outraged at the schools because of that but it's 
not like schools are not trying. But you're one person? You're in 
front of the class. You teach the mix you just described. How do you 
teach them? What I find really satisfying teaching the regular classes 
is, there's always kids in there who are very bright and who are kind 
of hiding and often they're poor kids who come from a culture where 
to be good academically, it's not cool. Very often with the boys in 
this culture, the whole thing is to act hard and part of the hard 
look and that whole hard facade is not doing well in school. There's 
still the confusion among a lot of these kids that's -- especially 
the boys -- that doing well academically is acting white or doing 
well academically is not being a man. But in all of those classes, 
you find several kids that you know have, you know, great talent and 
are kind of hiding that talent and the job as a teacher is to get 
to those kids and keep encouraging them and then try to follow them 
in the future as they're going through school. These are 10th graders 
that I teach and that's -- that is one of the most satisfying things, 
to me, about teaching. A lot of the kids in the so-called honors course, 
they're going to learn one way or the other. But these other kids 
need that somebody to grab them and to tell them they're bright and 
to encourage them to, you know, get out of that self destructive pattern 
that they're in. What are you reading these days in the regular class 
and how are you getting the students to maintain their interest? I 
think my daughter helped me with this. I brought in -- there's a new 
CD by a woman, Lauren Hill, who I never heard of until a month ago 
and we listened to one of her songs and I had them write on that. 
But, this woman used to be with a group called the Foogees who I don't 
know anything about either. But my daughter helped me with this and 
by just using Lauren Hill and talking about what she was saying in 
her song and talking about, you know, what was the theme of the song 
and what was the character conflict in the song, that kind of really 
went over well. I mean, much to my surprise and my feeling, you know, 
why wasn't I doing that before? Why wasn't I more plugged into the 
music that they're listening to? And I think, having teenagers myself, 
that helps me to get plugged in better. But I think of all those years 
when I was in class, playing Bob Dylan and kids would say, to put 
it charitably, were not horribly interested. That was high school 
teacher and education analyst Patrick Welsh. He spoke with VOA's Andrew 
Barrick. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>