<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981019.1700.2178 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A report by Amnesty International earlier this month sent shock waves 
among those in the United States and elsewhere who saw America as 
the standard bearer on human rights issues. The report was not only 
harsh in its condemnation, but was published to mark the start of 
a year long campaign to focus attention on what the group considers 
America's human rights problems. VOA correspondent Douglas Roberts 
has more on that Amnesty report. Amnesty's new 153 page report slams 
the U.S. human rights record in a number of areas, including the continued 
resort to the death penalty, widespread police brutally and violence 
and inhumane treatment of detainees in American prisons. Amnesty's 
Secretary General, Pierre Sane of Senegal says the mistreatment of 
detainees extends increasingly even to asylum seekers, those drawn 
by what he termed the myth that the United States is a human rights 
paradise. For them, the harsh reality of the way asylum seekers is 
treated -- are treated in the United States continues to put a discredit 
on the claim of the United States government that it is a champion 
for human rights. That was the dominant theme of Mr. Sane's presentation 
here Tuesday, that on the question of human rights, the United States 
is guilty of employing a double standard. The irony, even, all of 
this, is that one, the United States regularly judges other countries, 
using international human rights standards that the international 
community has developed. It goes to apply at home. Initial U.S. reaction 
to the report has been mild. The State Department praises Amnesty's 
work and says it welcomes the organization's scrutiny. But State Department 
officials say they believe the U.S. political and judicial systems 
remain the envy of the world. Mr. Sane says he expects to hear much 
harsher criticism of amnesty as the organization pushes ahead with 
its year long campaign to promote greater U.S. respect for human rights. 
This is not a U.S. bashing company. It is not a company against the 
United States. It is a company for human rights in the United States. 
We believe that improving human rights protection in the United States 
can only help strengthen our hand as human rights competing organization 
in improving human rights everywhere. Mr. Sane is planning to travel 
around the country, promoting the amnesty campaign and the organization 
will be issuing a series of in-depth reports over the next 12 months 
examining what it sees as America's major human rights problems. VOA 
correspondent Douglas Roberts in Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>