<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981019.0600.0647 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Also in India, Hindus celebrate the festival of Duwali, traditionally 
marked by shooting firecrackers to commemorate the victory of good 
over evil. However, this year, hundreds of school children in the 
nation's two largest cities have pledged to stay away from firecrackers 
to protest the use of child workers in India's fireworks industry. 
From New Delhi, Andinaj Pasritcha has a report. As Duwali comes, it's 
time to rejoice in Indian homes. Customary festivities include lighting 
candles and setting off firecrackers in the evening. This Duwali, 
millions of Hindu families are observing the festival in the same 
manner. But for many schoolchildren in New Delhi and Bombay, the celebrations 
will be quieter. Students from more than 100 schools in the two cities 
are spearheading a campaign against the use of firecrackers saying 
many of these are manufactured by child workers. The focus of their 
concern is the south Indian town, Chevakosi, an important center of 
India's firecracker industry. Here, an estimated 100,000 children, 
mostly girls, are employed in workshops for wages up to fifty cents 
a day. Child labor activists say, every year scores of children suffer 
burns and other injures in accidents as they work under hazardous 
conditions. The boycotting schoolchildren are participating in workshops, 
theater and film shows to spread awareness about their campaign. Hundreds 
of students are writing letters to the prime minister to express their 
views on child labor. Two 13 year old boys explain why they joined 
the campaign. and ruin the lives of others -- children. I decided 
not to burn firecrackers this year because the firecrackers are made 
by children just like me and I feel that they should also get a chance 
to go to school like me. Social activist, Agne Veich has been campaigning 
for more than a decade to end child labor in India. He says the student 
initiative is a significant step. These children, they take it as 
all. They pledge that they will not buy and burn firecrackers. Instead, 
save that money and reach out to those who are poor in modern life. 
Reach out to those other children as their own brothers and sisters 
and maybe it'll create that critical awareness which is so much lacking 
in this country. Child labor is banned in India but the law is seldom 
enforced. Activists hope social awareness campaigns such as the one 
started by the students can help generate a movement to end the practice. 
Andjina Patrticha for VOA News, New Delhi. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>