<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981019.1700.2695 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You may think you're an open minded person who does not judge others 
on the basis of their race, their age or their nationality. A new 
test available on the Internet is designed to measure the unconscious 
roots of prejudice. VOA's science correspondent, Jessica Berman, reports. 
The Implicit Association Test is designed to measure individuals' 
automatic and unconscious levels of race and age prejudice as well 
as gender stereotyping. There's even a test to gauge the test taker's 
self esteem. The IAT, for short, is the creation of psychology professors 
Mojaran Benaji of Yale University in Connecticut and Anthony Greenwald 
of the University of Washington in Seattle. Professor Greenwald says 
there are four quick tests that visitors to this site can take to 
see whether they have automatic preferences in the areas of age, race 
and gender. And we selected these particular versions of the Implicit 
Association Test because they are ones on which the great majority 
of people tend to show the same patterns which are racial preference 
for white on the black/white test, age preference for young on the 
old/young test, female association more with family than with career 
on the gender test and positively on the self esteem test. BERMAN 
While whites and Asians who take the IAT for race overwhelmingly prefer 
white to black, Professor Greenwald says the results of black test 
takers are more mixed, with most having a strong automatic preference 
for black but a significant number preferring white. And on the age 
test, there's generally a preference toward youth over age and maturity 
and wisdom? Well yes, the way you put it -- one would wonder why. 
But in fact, when we do this test in which we ask people to group 
young names and pleasant words, they do that very easily and rapidly. 
But when they have to group old names and pleasant words, they go 
much slower. BERMAN Test takers place their index fingers on two keys 
on opposite sides of the computer keyboard. They first must decide 
whether names that flash on the screen in front of them are old or 
young or black or white and strike the key that corresponds to the 
label. In the case of the race test, the names are considered typically 
African American such as Lashonda or white, such as Tiffany. Next, 
the test taker is asked to classify a list of words, either as pleasant 
such as love and baby, or unpleasant, such as war and vomit. Then 
randomly ordered names and pleasant and unpleasant words flash on 
the screen. In the race test, the test taker must classify the words 
and names as either black bad or white good. Then the label switches 
to black good and white bad. The test measures how fast the test taker 
classifies the names and words. Faster responses are recorded as a 
preference. In case you were wondering, I took the age test. I was 
surprised to learn that I, along with 90 to 95 percent of those who 
take that particular IAT prefer young to old. Professor Greenwald 
says those who take the test are often surprised by the results. But 
he says having an automatic preference for one race over another does 
not make one a racist. But he says the goal of the Implicit Association 
Test is to make people aware of their unconscious prejudices so that 
they might do something about them. The test has been adapted for 
different cultures and Professor Greenwald says it has yielded similar 
results in other countries. If you'd like to check out the Implicit 
Association Test, the address is www.yale.edu\implicit, i-m-p-l-i-c-i-t, 
and the word implicit is in lower caps. Jessica Berman, VOA News, 
Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>