<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981022.1830.1229 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Our report on the '98 vote tonight is about political survival -- 
maybe political suicide. Once again, Congress has gone home without 
passing campaign finance reform. Once again, millions of dollars from 
special interests are pouring into campaigns. Senator Russ Feingold 
from Wisconsin was the co-sponsor of a Senate Bill aimed at really 
reforming the system. The Bill did not survive. And now the question 
is, will Feingold? Here's ABC's dean Reynolds. They're bringing in 
the harvest in Wisconsin now. The landscape is humming to the rhythm 
of the season. But this October, another increasingly urgent sound 
can be heard across the state. Russ Feingold. How are you doing? hi. 
I'm senator Feingold. Hope you'll vote for me on November 3rd. I will. 
Thank you. Democrat Russ Feingold is in a surprisingly close race 
against republican congressman Mark Neumann. Some time between mid-August 
and now, it went from an 18-point race to a Virtual dead heat. Almost 
everyone agrees this is why. You got to watch that old Russ Feingold. 
He's slippery. Anti-Feingold TV ads are saturating Wisconsin, for 
a time running 20 to 1 over pro-Feingold commercials. You may not 
be amused to know that Russ Feingold voted to keep the cow gas study 
while voting to raise your taxes. These are ads bought and produced 
by the Neumann campaign itself, and those bankrolled independently 
by the national republican party that paint Feingold as a tax-happy 
liberal. We have seen more national republican party advertising in 
Wisconsin than ever before. Feingold is responding with his own ads. 
The ads backing my opponents don't tell the truth. But he has a problem 
-- he is a champion of campaign finance reform. It is a system that 
is corrupt, and we have to do something about it now. So what Feingold 
has done, at great risk to himself, is refuse almost all outside financial 
help and limit his own spending, even though his opponent is accepting 
all the outside help he can get. What I want to show is that you can 
risk your Senate seat in the name of trying to have the people of 
your own state control the political process. Hi, Feingold Senate 
committee. But the reality on the ground is that he's being outspent 
with the very kind of money he's tried in the Senate to regulate. 
And with his self-imposed spending limit, Feingold lacks the funds 
to adequately rebut the attacks suggesting he favors things like, 
late-term abortions or flag burning. One of the things this campaign 
has not been about so far is the scandal in the White House. Whatever 
they may be elsewhere in the country, President Clinton's problems 
have not been a big issue in this race. In their most recent debate 
Friday night, the two men ignored Clinton. And without him as an issue, 
Feingold's self-imposed limit on political ads could be the deciding 
factor -- one reason why Feingold needs all the free help he can get. 
What he preached may be his own fire and brimstone. It really could 
damn him to the hell of losing a re-election race. That would say 
a lot about the way campaigns are run and whether fighting to change 
that way is political death. Dean Reynolds, ABC News, Madison, Wisconsin. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>