<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981022.1830.0866 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight we're going to take "A closer look" at some of the consequences 
for you if you choose or must take on the Burden of caring for someone 
who is chronically ill. An estimated 25 million Americans now care 
in person for a seriously ill relative or friend. These particular 
caregivers are usually not paid and they usually have limited experience, 
at least less than professionals. It's an enormous emotional investment. 
One study finds that 60% of them have bouts of depression. That's 
six times the national average. And now there is evidence of the physical 
toll that such caring may take on the giver. Here's ABC's John McKenzie. 
Rhona auster has a job as a high school guidance counselor in New 
York's south Bronx. It's when she arrives home that her real work 
begins. Rhona's husband, Doug, is a diabetic. He has lost his sight 
and both his legs. So Rhona must test his blood, and inject him with 
insulin. She must also clean him and dress him and wheel him everywhere 
he goes. The stress of living in this type of environment all the 
time has definitely changed me. I used to be much more easygoing. 
Caring for a chronically ill loved one, at times, can seem overwhelming. 
Caregivers report that they're often sleep-deprived, that they eat 
poorly, that they have little time to exercise or relax. And all of 
this magnifies the stress. I should have a section for you to look 
at soon. Jan kiecolt-Glaser, and her husband, Ronald Glaser, both 
researchers at Ohio state University, have now demonstrated how much 
this stress can actually affect the body. We have good evidence, I 
think at this point, that caregiving can be dangerous to your health. 
We found the immune system in the caregivers was significantly weakened. 
So weakened that caregivers given a common flu vaccine were only half 
as likely to be protected as noncaregivers, that the levels of antibodies 
and other immune markers were considerably lower in the caregivers. 
In another study, they inflicted small flesh wounds and found caregivers 
took, on average, 24% longer to heal than noncaregivers -- yet another 
sign of a weakened immune system. And that has implications for any 
disease that the immune system protects us from, including cancer, 
autoimmune diseases and so forth. But the glasers' research does suggest 
ways caregivers can help themselves. Caregivers who have better interpersonal 
support, more supportive friends and family, appear to do better immunologically, 
as well as psychologically. So the most important thing caregivers 
can do is seek support from others. And that's just what Rhona auster 
has done. She's joined a nationwide support group called the well 
spouse foundation. I felt I was at the point that I could take it 
no more. I could do no more. I was really burnt. Once a month, she 
shares her emotions with others who care for a Seriously ill husband 
or wife. I do feel very inadequate. I said, "he's my husband. I should 
be able to come up with something that's going to give him pleasure 
and I can't find it." It's a whole bunch of emotions together -- sadness, 
guilt and also terror. "What if it happens to me? Then who would take 
care of me?" And what's going to happen? That fear, "who will take 
care of me" may be the best reason yet for caregivers to take better 
care of themselves. John McKenzie, ABC News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>