<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981022.0130.1496 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Actor Kurt Russell is certainly no stranger to grueling film schedules. 
His latest project, "soldier," may have been the toughest. Bill Tush 
reports. Excuse me. I was supposed to meet my wife here. She has dark 
hair, about 5'5." Doesn't ring a bell. In films like 1997's "breakdown," 
Kurt Russell played an average guy who spends most of the movie searching 
for his wife who mysteriously disappears. Back in '96, he fought for 
his life in the futuristic tale, "escape from l.A." that same year, 
he was a brainy tough guy trying to rescue a hijacked airplane in 
"executive decision." Over the years, Russell has played any number 
of varied characters. I made decisions 20 years ago, 15 years ago, 
8 years ago to not repeat things that I -- that maybe could have taken 
me into a different category that could have catapulted me into a 
different -- onto a different level. This time out, Russell stars 
in "soldier," another science fiction yarn where certain men are chosen 
at birth and transformed into military machines. What are you gonna 
do? I'm going to kill them all, sir. Now talk about your strong, silent 
type. In the entire film, Russell does very, very little talking. 
He's not stupid. He's not incapable of speaking. It's none of that. 
He's not language challenged. He's just somebody who has never been 
asked an opinion. And playing a character that has to relate without 
much dialogue is another challenge in Kurt Russell's long career. 
But while keeping quiet was one thing, getting in shape to play the 
"Soldier" was another. He spent three to five hours a day in the gym. 
This one, I just knew -- I said, guys, I'm gonna need 18 months to 
get past the point of being in good shape. I've gotta be a guy who 
looks like he's been like that all his life." Kurt Russell, unlike 
some other action heroes, through the years has carved his own niche 
in the genre. I read about you one time, a quote, I think it was something 
that you're the average guy's hero. Well, I mean I think that that's 
been said. And I don't think it's untrue. I think I have that capability 
of -- of being someone that you can relate to and say, "yeah, you 
know I sort of recognize myself there as a matter of fact." "soldier" 
though might be a bit superhuman. And it's also a part this actor 
is glad is behind him. I don't want to do what I do in this ever again. 
I don't want to be in a -- in a jail for 18 months working out three 
to five hours a day, creating an illusion that -- I mean, that's a 
drag. That's a big drag. Bill Tush, "CNN Entertainment News," New 
York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>