<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981022.0130.0563 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The gubernatorial race in Georgia is coming down to one issue that 
has some people crying racism. Is it a case of crying foul? Brian 
Cabell examines the controversy. For weeks, republican gubernatorial 
candidate guy millner and democrat Roy Barnes have argued over who 
is more conservative and who is tougher on crime. Now, suddenly race 
has emerged as a central issue. Millner, a millionaire businessman, 
has attacked not only his opponent but also, on several occasions, 
Atlanta mayor Bill Campbell and other black politicians. He's referred 
to them as the "good Ole boys," but says his attack is political, 
not racial. I don't have one racist bone in my body. But a large group 
of black political and religious leaders, including mayor Campbell, 
called together on Wednesday, don't buy millner's explanation. We 
reject the mean-spirited attacks. We reject the thinly veiled racism. 
We reject the politics of division. I'm Roy Barnes, I'm running for 
governor. The possible beneficiary of the racial controversy is Roy 
Barnes, the democratic candidate who's served 22 years in the state 
legislature. He considers himself a conservative, a Zell Miller democrat, 
but he's eagerly joined the attack on millner over race. He's had 
some consultant that told him, "listen, there are more whites than 
there are blacks, so therefore you get all the whites, and to do that, 
you polarize." As polarizing as the governor's race has become, the 
lieutenant governor's is far worse, thanks to the aggressive tactics 
of republican mitch skandalakis. His ad campaign has targeted mayor 
Campbell. Bill Campbell -- incompetent boob. He should be fired. He 
should be run out of town. Skandalakis, the current Fulton county 
commission chairman, has no apologies. God forbid we get to a point 
in this country where we can't say anything about a black politician 
if he's doing as horrible a job as mayor Campbell is doing in the 
city of Atlanta. Thank you. Skandalakis has hired former Christian 
coalition leader Ralph reed as his campaign consultant. But skandalakis 
insists his campaign tactics are his own. He's also characterized 
Atlanta's transportation chief, a black woman, as a Welfare mother. 
She's received federal aid in the past. He's called Martin Luther 
king III a mamma's boy. And he once paid for a flyer that darkened 
the skin of a democratic county commissioner and exaggerated his African-American 
features. The racial controversy has certainly injected some life 
into a couple of state wide races that had not generated much excitement 
until now. The question for the candidates -- is this the kind of 
attention they wanted? Polls indicate both races are too close to 
call. Brian Cabell, CNN, Atlanta. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>