<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981022.2100.2899 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last night, the New York Yankees capped off a season that regardless 
of your stripe was nothing short of amazing, winning their 24th world 
series title. One person not on hand to share in the celebration was 
Yankee outfielder darryl Strawberry. He was diagnosed with colon cancer 
right before the start of the playoffs. He was the inspiration to 
a lot of them. Strawberry spoke about his illness with Katie couric 
this morning on "Today." The Yankee S have done it again. I was really 
looking forward to playing in the playoffs and going to the world 
series. That must be such a bummer for you. is it? It's not, because 
I've been there before. D I think when I sit back and watch the guys 
at home on television, I'm more excited because I know, you know, 
they're thinking about me and I'm thinking about them. So, it makes 
it a little more special to be able to relax and enjoy watching them. 
You have one limp node the cancer has spread to, so, as a result your 
going to undergo a six-month period of chemotherapy. I'm looking forward 
to it. You are? I have to. There's no other way you can look at it. 
I'm the type of person that deals with things head on. If you don't 
look at it in a very positive way, you can really put yourself in 
a Negative thinking, and that's what I'm trying to avoid in this situation. 
I think anyone that has ever been affected by cancer, we understand. 
I think, you know, no one understands until it happens to you, and, 
you know, I clearly can say it's been a life change for myself. How 
has it changed you, Darryl? Well, it made me understand that, you 
know, I am human, just like everybody else, and most people would 
put themselves in a situation of saying why me? And I basically say, 
why not me? It can happen to me just as well as anybody else, the 
next person walking down the street right now could be affected by 
the same disease. What kind of symptoms did you have? I probably had 
all that we talked about, you know, from the bowel movement, the bleeding, 
you know, the stomach cramps. I had cramps that were very painful. 
I basically tried to, you know, walk through them and just tried to 
pult it out of my mind. You kind of ignored your symptoms for a couple 
of months, didn't you? Yes, I did. I really did. But I'm a typical 
athlete. I'm very stubborn. I personally looked at it as it's not 
a major injury to me. Nothing's torn or anything to that nature, so 
why worry about it? And just basically deal with it. You were kind 
of being macho about it. A lot of men don't go to the doctor. Do you 
think one of the main messages here, Darryl, is if you're a man, even 
if you're young and healthy, you need to go to a doctor you can trust 
so that if something comes up, it can be caught erltly? There's no 
question about it, that you do need to go to a doctor and really get 
examined and find out what's going on with you. My focus was on the 
field, of playing, and it finally came a day where I just had enough 
of the pain. There are a lot of people out there who do get colon 
cancer before they turn 50. I'm sure you've heard from a lot of those 
people, haven't you? Yes, I have. I think, you know, with my situation, 
hopefully, will prepare other people to be aware. Darryl Strawberry 
talking with cay key couric. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>