<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981022.2100.0322 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And of all the unfolding aspects we've been talking about of the peace 
talks that have stopped and started, one thing that has scaut a lot 
of people by surprise is the open brokering on the part of the C.I.A. 
remember, not too long ago its very existence at such a bargaining 
table would have been officially denied. We are joined tonight by 
James Woolsey, who served as President Clinton's first director of 
central intelligence. Mr. Woolsey, we touched on this. Can you go 
back of it? What is the role of the C.I.A. in talks like this? Well, 
normally, the principal role of the C.I.A. is to collect intelligence 
and sometimes carry out covert action if it's pursuant to a presidential 
order. But the reality is that because the C.I.A. has excellent contacts 
around the world with all sorts of intelligence organizations and 
heads of state, it does quite frequently the director and lower level 
C.I.A. officials carry messages and even fulfill a kind of mediating 
function from time to time out of public view. What's different aut 
this is that it is being set out to -- in front of the public and 
also it's being focused in specific place and time. It sure is different. 
A lot of us just aren't used to hearing about their seat at the table. 
Do you think in a post cold war world this is a good thing? Ideally, 
I think the C.I.A. role ought to be as engaged as the president and 
secretary of state want it to be. But it should be quiet. It seems 
O me it's best if the secretary of state is the one out front. And 
there may be -- what may be going on here is that because the White 
House and the state department have taken some fairly public stands 
hostile to Israeli positions in these negotiations in the past, people 
in the government may have decided that it looked more evenhanded 
to have someone who has been able to keep his mouth shut, namely, 
George Tenet, as far as public statements are concerned, be put out 
front in a sense as having a Role. You do what you need to in order 
to help bring about an agreement, but I think as a general matter 
it's better for the C.I.A. role not to be a Public one. Did you think 
you would live to see the day when an administration official would 
leak to journalists, hey, you know who's in there, who brokered the 
deal, the head of the C.I.A. did you think when you'd live to see 
when it wasn't used as a pejorative? Well, these things come and go. 
The C.I.A. is having a good day today, and those who worked for it 
and with it and who value its contribution are happy about that. But 
there will be also bad days in which there's bad publicity, and tough 
take the sunshine and the rain. Now also what you have to take is 
the assumption they'll come to you. Once you've been a hero at the 
table, you've got to be one on the grourned. They're going to come 
to the C.I.A. and say there's a problem with imp lementation. You're 
going to help us with us, aren't you? That's one aspect of a potentially 
serious problem. One of the reasons the C.I.A. should not be involved 
in making policy or giving policy advice around the national security 
council table other than with respect to covert action, which is its 
province, and one of the reason why public roles like this are a problem, 
is that if you have been identified in the government and certainly 
in the public as espousing a Particular substantive view with respect 
to policy, people are going to be worried you may be tilting the intelligence 
in the future in order to make what you've done look reasonable. And 
that's a real danger because your first job is always to collect intelligence 
and to call it like you see it and sometimes to be the skunk at if 
garden party saying that a government policy is not working. And if 
you have been publicly identified with bringing about that policy, 
that can sometimes create serious strain and problems. One more question 
just for clarification for the people who might be wondering, tell 
me what is the C.I.A. role at the talks? What is their selling point? 
If I'm Netanyahu and you're George Tenet at the C.I.A., sell me what 
you can offer. I don't think it's necessarily the C.I.A. role. I think 
that probably what has happened is that George Tenet is an able individual, 
and he has not been publicly identified with taking a position on 
this as most of the people in the top levels of government have. So, 
he has been turned to, and the C.I.A. people who know the mideast 
well have been turned to as honest broke ers and mediators. And I 
think that's fine. As I say, I'd be more comfortable if the it was 
behind the scenes. Former director, James Woolsey. Thank you. Good 
to be with you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>