<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981022.2100.1976 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We are joined tonight from New York by Dr. IRA sacker, author of "dying 
to be thin: understanding and defeating anorexia nervosa and bulimia". 
He's also director of adolescent medicine at the brookdale University 
hospital and medical center. Doctor, let us first, before we say another 
word, forget the fact that we're talking about any single personality. 
Let's talk about this as a general issue, about role models, how young 
girls in this country see themselves, how they take in information, 
how they decide on their role models through the media and the danger 
when all that gets wrapped up with an eating disorder. Well, number 
one is that I think adolescents as a group look towards magazines 
and the media for an exafrpbl of what they are and as exact role models. 
And "Ally McBeal" is one of those mayor role models right now. And 
I think that my patients will call in, and they have called in when 
they saw these shows with her especially and mentioned she lost a 
Significant amount of weight, and they were worried about why she 
didn't come out and mention it. So, as far as young people, I think 
young people are very, very prone to look at celebrities in Hollywood 
as role models and allow hem to really kind of set a Tone for the 
way they should look. Unfortunately, we're into a body imagine society 
where the thin look is what's in. Of course we're also in a society 
in the 1990's in America where we are into everybody's business. Yesterday 
a health group in Washington told us not to drink so much soda. It's 
loaded with sugar. There is a bulletin. Now we may be dealing with 
a case where a woman in the public eye is just thin. And by covering 
the story, I realize we're taking a little bit of a risk. The insinuation 
is there is a problem there, we just don't know tonight. How can you 
get a message out that young people will embrace, young people will 
believe, something credible, a credible spokes person that perhaps 
this is a bad way to look when they look through have the vogue" and 
you can see rib cages in that magazine? Well, as a director of a large 
program, called heed, we're looking for that spokesperson to kind 
of step forward right now and talk about what it's like, OK, being 
in the media, maybe even going through an eating disorder, because 
what's really being shown in the media right now unfortunately are 
these movies which give a person that you can develop an eating disorder 
like anorexia and go through it and the next scene you're in a hospital, 
and five minutes later you're yeeting ice cream, MA'am burgers, and 
French fries, and everything's fine. And I think that's what becomes 
misleading, you can walk through it and there won't be anything residual 
So, whatever the personality, it is something that belongs as a national 
discussion and a warning in all American homes where they're trying 
to raise young girls. Dr. IRA sacker has been kind enough to join 
us tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>