<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0326 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
BYE WEEK: Giants, Arizona, Dallas, Philadelphia, Washington and Indianapolis 
GAME OF THE WEEK: Jacksonville (5-1) vs. Denver (6-0) (Sunday, 4 p.m.) 
KEY STAT: Jaguars (2) _ rushing ranking. Broncos (1) _ rushing ranking. 
COMMENT: These teams have met four times previously, all at Mile High 
Stadium. The last two were intriguing. In the '96 season's playoffs, 
Jacksonville strode into Denver and shocked the Broncos, 30-27. Then 
in last year's playoffs, Denver got its payback, crushing the Jaguars 
by 42-17. Terrell Davis (865 rushing yards, more than 22 National 
Football League teams) is pitted against the Jaguars rookie back Fred 
Taylor (5.7 yards a carry). That makes the running matchup fun. John 
Elway is penciled in against Mark Brunell. That makes the passing 
battle more fun. Because of a bye last weekend, Denver enjoyed two 
weeks of preparation. That is too much for the Jaguars to overcome. 
Broncos, 28-20. SUNDAY 1 P.M. GAMES Atlanta (5-1) vs. Jets (3-3) KEY 
STAT: Falcons (110-46) _ second-half scores. Jets (43.4 percent) _ 
third-down conversion rate. COMMENT: The Falcons have never been 6-1. 
There are reasons they are 5-1. Among them: they have won five of 
their last seven on the road, they lead the NFL in possession time 
(33:06), Jamal Anderson has rushed for 100 yards in four consecutive 
games, the defense has not allowed a 100-yard rusher in 14 straight 
games, and the team is on pace to score the most points in club history. 
Impressive stuff. Especially for the Falcons _ or for any team. The 
Jets would like to keep their momentum going after a thrilling victory 
at New England on Monday night. But the Falcons are too sound. They 
make it 2-0 at Giants Stadium this year, having beaten the Giants 
there. Falcons, 19-16. Baltimore (2-4) vs. Green Bay (4-2) KEY STAT: 
Ravens (22.7) _ Jermaine Lewis average yards a catch. Packers (minus-6) 
_ turnover differential. COMMENT: The Ravens are not finishing what 
they start and it is costing them. Their attention to detail and inability 
to make the big play on offense is preventing a talented team from 
soaring. Green Bay knows the feeling. It has dropped two straight, 
in its division no less, and returns home to Lambeau Field where it 
has not lost to an AFC team since 1990. Brett Favre has 12 touchdown 
passes and 10 interceptions. Not Favre-like. The Packers are down 
six in the turnover game. Not Packer-like. This game heals some of 
its wounds. Packers, 27-16. Minnesota (6-0) vs. Detroit (2-4) KEY 
STAT: Vikings (7-6) _ Green's record vs. Lions. Lions (319.8) _ Average 
ysrds allowed. COMMENT: Viking coach Dennis Green has had his share 
of problems with the Lions. Most teams do with this roller-coaster 
squad once it is in the noisy Pontiac Silverdome. And this is a surprise: 
the Lions allow fewer yards per game on defense than Minnesota does. 
What works in the Vikings favor this time is a league-best plus 9 
in turnover differential. And with a league-most 12 interceptions, 
maybe the Vikings can harass rookie quarterback Charlie Batch into 
mistakes. Don't count on it. Batch is for real and so are the Lions 
in these do-or-die conference games at home. They have toppled Tampa 
Bay and Green Bay in the Silverdome and now add the Vikings. Lions, 
20-17. New England (4-2) vs. Miami (4-2) KEY STAT: Patriots (3) _ 
`97 victories over Miami.; Dolphins (11.7) _ Average points. allowed 
per game. COMMENT: The Patriots were all over the Dolphins last year, 
beating them twice in the regular seasons, including the season finale. 
And then the following week they met again in the playoffs and Miami 
lost again. Well, Miami hasn't forgotten. And it has a defense to 
do something about it. It has two shutouts this year, best in the 
league, and has allowed the fewest points (70) in the league. Look 
for strong running from Miami back Karim Abdul-Jabbar. He has six 
TD runs vs. New England, his most against any team. Dolphins, 17-13. 
San Francisco (5-1) vs. St. Louis (2-4) KEY STAT: 49ERS (0) _ Turnover 
differential; Rams (0) _ Turnover differential. COMMENT: Well, the 
Rams and 49ers are evenly matched; they are equal in turnover differential. 
Yeah, right. This series is so lopsided that the 49ers are on a cliff 
and the Rams are in a dungeon and guess who is looking down? San Francisco 
has won 15 straight in this series. One would think a blocked kick 
or fumbled ball or wide field goal, something would have gone the 
Rams' way at the end to win one of those 15. Oh, well. Make it 16. 
And in the process watch Jerry Rice become the NFL's all-time leader 
in consecutive games with at least one catch. One catch and Rice will 
break Monk's mark of 183. 49ers 34-3. Tampa Bay (3-3) vs. New Orleans 
(3-3) KEY STAT: Buccaneers (2) _ Rushing TDs allowed. Saints (9) _ 
Interceptions. COMMENT: Saints coach Mike Ditka is 9-1 in home games 
vs. Tampa Bay and 17-3 overall. But that was when Ditka was coach 
of the Bears, when Tampa Bay was in his division and when the Bears 
were great and the Bucs were duds. Ditka will find a new blood with 
the Bucs, a fresher, faster team on defense. The offense remains stale 
but the defense will handle the Saints and win this game in dominating 
fashion. They make it tough on New Orleans on first downs and in the 
Red Zone, especially. Buccaneers, 16-10. SUNDAY 4 P.M. GAMES: Chicago 
(2-5) vs. Tennessee (3-3) KEY STAT: Bears (42) _ Rushing first downs. 
Oilers (4-0) _ Vs. NFC in `97. COMMENT: Both teams enter on high notes. 
The Bears upset Dallas at home by 13-12 and Tennessee smashed Cincinnati 
by 44-14. The Oilers' offense finally began to click and show in results 
what appears to be so much promise. With Steve McNair at quarterback 
and Eddie George in the backfield along with Yancey Thigpen at receiver, 
no defense should shut down the Oilers. That is simply too much talent 
not to move the football. And now the Oilers are doing it. George 
has three 100-yard rushing efforts in his last four games. Tennessee 
is 11-4 when George rushes for 100 yards. He will get that against 
the Bears and the Oilers prime themselves for a strong sprint in the 
season's second half. Oilers, 23-9. Cincinnati (2-4) vs. Oakland (4-2) 
KEY STAT: Bengals (2) _ Turnovers committed. Raiders (45.4) _ Donald 
Hollas' qb rating. COMMENT: The Bengals are a strange franchise and 
they are having a strange season. They have committed an NFL-low 2 
turnovers this season. They are plus 5 in turnover differential. Winning 
the turnover battle is supposed to mean victories. It is not that 
way for the Bengals. Too much shoddy play in other areas. Not enough 
big plays in big time. The Raiders are continuing to improve. Their 
defense is making wonderful strides. It allowed 381.3 yards per game 
in its first six games a year ago. The Raiders have shaved that to 
262.8 yards per game through six this season. That is a huge jump. 
Look for Oakland to keep trucking. Raiders, 17-11. Seattle (3-3) vs. 
San Diego (3-4) KEY STAT: Seahawks (13.2) _ Average. points. allowed. 
Chargers (72.0) _ Average. rushing yards. allowed. COMMENT: _ Seattle 
had a bye week to contemplate its furious start and then dismal skid. 
The thinking time was much needed. This is a group of players whose 
attention span has long been questioned. Talented, no question, but 
committed, focused, prepared? It's been hit or miss with this bunch. 
June Jones is the Chargers' new coach and as a result we should continue 
to see a more relaxed and improving Ryan Leaf at quarterback. But 
for Leaf, this game will provide more growing pains. The Seahawks 
will be hot. Seahawks, 31-10. SUNDAY NIGHT Buffalo (3-3) vs. Carolina 
(0-6) KEY STAT: Bills (10-5) _ Flutie's record as starter. Panthers 
(11) _ Kevin Greene sacks. COMMENT: Buffalo has won three straight 
and now looks like a contender in the AFC East. This is a small miracle. 
There were so many changes in Buffalo during the offseason _ coach, 
quarterback, running back _ that the Bills looked as if they would 
need a year just to settle down before being able to truly compete. 
But fresh from beating previously unbeaten Jacksonville and from quarterback 
Doug Flutie's heroics, Buffalo knows that it is quite capable of beating 
most AFC teams. We can't say that about Carolina. What can be said 
about the Panthers? High hopes mangled. A quarterback (Kerry Collins) 
who was the franchise who is now no longer in town. A winless team. 
It remains that way. Bills, 21-17. MONDAY NIGHT Pittsburgh (4-2) vs. 
Kansas City (4-2) KEY STAT: Steelers (14.5) _ Average. points. allowed. 
Chiefs (7-2) _ Record after byes. COMMENT: The Chiefs have not played 
since being punished by 40-10 at New England. That will be two weeks 
and one day by the time game time rolls around. The Chiefs will be 
flying around at home, spurred by the bright lights of Monday night 
and by the raucous Chiefs' home crowd. Pittsburgh usually has an answer. 
The Steelers are 10-3 under coach Bill Cowher on Monday nights and 
often respond when pushed by pushing back. Problem is the Steelers' 
offense remains too green to properly answer. This offense simply 
has not meshed but should in the weeks to come. Not against the Chiefs 
defense, however, which has allowed an average of 10.1 points per 
game at Arrowhead Stadium in its last 11 games there, all victories. 
Chiefs, 23-13. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>