<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0488 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Critical issues were apparently resolved Thursday at the Middle East 
peace talks as President Clinton pushed into the night to close a 
deal. Possible solutions emerged on issues that include a agreement 
by the Palestinians to revise their charter to remove clauses calling 
for the destruction of Israel and to arrest 30 of 36 Palestinians 
the Israelis want extradited. Officials also said a deal on a third 
withdrawal of Israeli troops from the West Bank, as the Palestinians 
demand, is near. ``There is a clear breakthrough,'' the Israeli industry 
minister, Natan Sharansky, said Thursday night. But the deal was not 
finished, and American officials sought to deflate expectations of 
a rapid settlement. Clinton's ``spirits are good _ he is determined 
to stick with this as long as it's a productive use of his time,'' 
Joe Lockhart, the White House spokesman, said Thursday night. He and 
James P. Rubin, the State Department spokesman, said advances but 
not resolutions were made on a number of issues. ``On the half dozen 
serious issues, there have been advances,'' Rubin said. ``But an advance 
doesn't mean that it's closed,'' Rubin said. ``I've seen them talk 
for hours over a few words.'' One critical issue apparently resolved 
Thursday night involved the Israel demand that the full Palestine 
National Council amend the Palestinian charter, formally removing 
26 clauses calling for the destruction of Israel. This issue was resolved, 
Israeli officials said, when the Palestinians agreed to convene the 
council along with all other relevant Palestinian institutions in 
the territories within days after this three-month deal concludes. 
But American officials say it is more complicated, involving a main 
decision by the Palestinian Central Council, to be ratified informally 
after thatby ``all relevant bodies.'' Both Palestinian and Israeli 
officials say Clinton will attend that larger meeting, presumably 
in Gaza, in person, but there was no immediate confirmation from the 
White House. Another issue was the Palestinian demand that the Israelis 
guarantee a separate troop withdrawal from the West Bank, the third 
called for under the 1993 and 1995 Oslo accords. The Palestinian do 
not want it to be simply wrapped into talks about a final settlement 
that would also settle the Palestinian Authority's final boundaries. 
Officials say language is being worked out on this issue. A commission 
of both sides working in parallel with the final peace talks will 
handle the timing and size of the third redeployment, essentially 
postponing the issue for now. American officials said that by being 
handled in that way, the issue should not block the peace process 
later, as the first two deployments have for 19 months now. The Israeli 
demand for the extradition of 36 Palestinians _ 31 of them wanted 
for capital offenses like murder _ was resolved with a Palestinian 
agreement to arrest 30 of the 31. The Palestinian demand that Israel 
release some 3,500 Palestinian prisoners arrested for security offenses, 
as called for under the Oslo accords, while Israel says it won't release 
those ``with blood on their hands.'' American officials say the Israelis 
have agreed to release ``several hundred'' prisoners, and that this 
may be enough for a deal. The exact method by which Israel will provide 
safe passage for Palestinians traveling between the West Bank and 
Gaza. Clinton, who arrived Thursday morning for his sixth day of intense 
personal involvement here, spent the evening talking first to Netanyahu 
while Secretary of State Madeleine Albright spoke with Arafat, and 
then vice-versa, in what the Americans called ``tag-team diplomacy.'' 
Jordan's King Hussein spoke to the leaders on the telephone from a 
nearby farm. The main discussions were taking place in a tent off 
the main dining room, to keep the numbers of participants small, officials 
said. Thursday night, Clinton reconvened a joint meeting of the key 
members of both delegations to try to finish off the deal. Earlier 
Thursday evening, the Israeli and the Palestinian delegations, of 
about 20 people each, were about 20 feet apart in the dining room, 
the Israelis gathered around a fireplace on couches and chairs and 
the Palestinians sitting at a table. The Americans were at the main 
dining table, with Clinton, Albright, Sandy Berger, the national security 
adviser, and special envoy Dennis Ross huddling over bridging proposals 
to bring to one side or another. Rubin compared the atmosphere to 
``a cloakroom, with the feeling and flavor of a legislative session 
drawing to a close,'' as final deals are being made. ``But that doesn't 
mean that they will draw to a close,'' Rubin hastened to add. ``But 
it certainly had that flavor of a lot of people standing in different 
parts of the same room, shuttling between one another.'' Rubin spoke 
over a speakerphone to a huddled mass of journalists crowded around 
a small table in the press center here, at Chesapeake College. The 
leaders were working with the text of an American plan given to them 
at dawn Thursday morning. After 19 months of stalemate, the American 
plan, a product of hundreds of conversations and many drafts, seeks 
to lay out a deal whereby Israel will redeploy from another 13 percent 
of the West Bank _ 3 percent to be a nature reserve _ in return for 
specific Palestinian steps to combat terrorism. While the Americans 
have been briefing both sides for months on drafts of the plan, this 
is the first time it has been physically handed to the parties. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>