<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0131 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
No one here seems to understand why Zippy Chippy cannot win a race. 
Zippy has pedigree: he's a grandson of Northern Dancer, who won the 
Kentucky Derby and Preakness in 1964. He has spirit: at the end of 
a losing race, he will prance cockily and spin around as if it were 
he who belonged in the winner's circle. He has drive: he has finished 
second 6 times and third 10 times. He just cannot win. Last month, 
at Finger Lakes Race Track here, he tied the American thoroughbred 
record for futility by losing his 85th race without ever having tasted 
the proverbial thrill of victory. Even that dubious feat has not deterred 
his owner and trainer, Felix Monserrate. As fervent as Mark McGwire 
was in his pursuit of a diametrically different record, Monserrate 
wants to try yet again, risking the possibility that Zippy Chippy 
could be crowned the losingest horse of all time. But during the last 
two weeks Monserrate has been unable to find a track willing to let 
Zippy Chippy race. Even Zippy's usual jockey, Benny Afanador, has 
told Monserrate he no longer wants to ride Zippy because the horse 
``is making me look bad.'' What has made Zippy particularly resistible 
of late is the embarrassing problem he has had in those last three 
races, a problem known as dwelling. When the starting gates have snapped 
open, Zippy has lingered for crucial seconds, letting the other horses 
get a jump on him before he takes off. In his last race, on Sept. 
8, he finished 37-and-a-half lengths behind the winner and so angered 
the stewards who police the track's racing integrity that they banned 
him from ever running at Finger Lakes again. ``It's for the protection 
of the public,'' said Rick Coyne, the Finger Lakes Racing Association 
steward. Monserrate is as baffled as anyone about why Zippy Chippy 
dawdles at the gate. ``It's hard for me to figure it out,'' said Monserrate, 
who has been in the horse racing business since he came to the United 
States from Puerto Rico in 1963. ``The horse likes to run. It's not 
a horse that's unhappy. It's happy all the time. He bites you. He 
plays around all the time. He's a regular horse like everybody else.'' 
Needless to say, Zippy is as much a topic of conversation at Finger 
Lakes Race Track as Monica Lewinsky is in Washington. He has cultivated 
a sentimental following of bettors who have thrown away their money 
in mankind's timeless romance with underdogs and lost causes. One 
member of this fan club wore a T-shirt that said ``Zippy Chippy My 
Favorite.'' Another asked Monserrate to sign a color newspaper picture 
of Zippy so she could give it to her grandson. ``Lots of people here 
wish he would keep running,'' said Bob O'Connor, a Brooklyn-bred lawyer 
who was drinking a glass of beer at the race track's lounge. ``There 
aren't many things of interest here, and Zippy is of interest.'' The 
Finger Lakes course, in the rolling countryside 20 miles southeast 
of Rochester, is an off-the-beaten-track kind of track, with far smaller 
purses than celebrated ovals like Belmont Park and far fewer noble 
steeds. Although it has held as many as 11,000 fans, Finger Lakes 
ekes by in the era of off-track betting with weekday crowds of a thousand 
or so, many of them retirees who watch the races on television sets 
in the smoky betting areas under the grandstand. It has a languid 
atmosphere perfectly suited to a hapless horse like Zippy. Many bettors, 
including people of moderate means like Priscilla Grabowski, a Cornell 
University receptionist, own a horse or two, knowing that their hobby 
is affordable as long as the horses win a few races a year to pay 
roughly $10,000 a year for training and upkeep. So it is understandable 
that fans have affection for a horse with heart. ``Horses are like 
people,'' said Ms. Grabowski, who has a 3-year-old filly, Go and Goodbye. 
``They don't feel like running all the time.'' Zippy is a homely 7-year-old 
gelding with dark bay coloring and a face as guileless as a toddler's 
who has just taken a bite out of the perfectly frosted cake meant 
for guests. He behaves well, Monserrate said, eats regularly and in 
recent workouts has run respectable times and has broken from the 
gate. But something seems to happen in actual races. ``The last three 
times, he wants to see the horses out in front and then he goes after 
them,'' Monserrate said. Like his horse, Monserrate is something of 
a race track character. A slightly built man of 53, he started work 
as an exercise hand at Belmont Park in Nassau County and at tracks 
in the Miami area. Monserrate came to Finger Lakes 15 years ago to 
work as a trainer for Scardino USA stables and acquired Zippy in 1995 
from a trainer who swapped the horse for Monserrate's battered white 
Ford van. Three years ago, he tried to sell Zippy but found no takers. 
Riding stables, he said, found Zippy too temperamental for handling 
children, and horse show organizers were put off by Zippy's looks, 
which Monserrate's wife, Emily, describes as ``drab and plain.'' Yet 
Monserrate has grown so fond of Zippy that he says, ``There is no 
money in the world to buy Zippy Chippy from me.'' Through second- 
and third-place finishes, Zippy has earned his owners a lifetime total 
of $28,157. Monserrate calculates that Zippy has paid for his feed 
and upkeep _ the owner does not pay himself trainer fees _ and has 
been to his family ``like a pet.'' ``Nobody can be a winner all the 
time,'' he said. ``I don't want somebody to kill him and take him 
to the glue factory. To me, a horse is like family.'' O'Connor, the 
Zippy Chippy fan, says that at tracks in and around New York City, 
a horse named The Boz'n has lost 66 races but has earned $118,353 
in second-, third- and fourth-place finishes. ``While it may not be 
a good idea to bet him,'' O'Connor said, ``it's not a bad idea to 
own him.'' Monserrate also knows something about the other two horses 
that lost 85 races in a row: Gussie Mae and Really a Tenor. Howard 
Bass, a manager at Thoroughbred Racing Communications, an industry 
information group, says that both horses won their 86th starts, Gussie 
Mae in 1995 at Atlantic City and Really a Tenor in 1990 at River Downs 
in Cincinnati. ``What are the odds of two horses winning their 86th 
races after losing 85?'' Bass said. Monserrate may be having trouble 
finding a track willing to let Zippy run because there has been some 
publicity, including a humorous spot on the Comedy Central cable channel. 
Monserrate is hoping there may be less reluctance out of state. Although 
Philadelphia Park has turned him down, racing officials at Penn National 
outside Harrisburg, Pa., have not given him a definite no. It seems 
likely, though, that Zippy will run _ eventually. Larry Swartzlander, 
the general manager of Eureka Downs in Eureka, Kan., has invited Monserrate 
to bring Zippy out for the 10-week season that starts next May. Swartzlander 
thinks Zippy could provide a challenge for older maidens _ horses 
that like Zippy have never won a race _ and he is not too worried 
about Zippy's dwelling. ``The horse could be a little rank,'' he said, 
explaining that some horses sour on racing and need to take a sabbatical. 
``If you do something routinely, you can get a little fed up with 
it.'' If Zippy does not succeed as a racer, Swartzlander is willing 
to buy him because he thinks he would make a good jumper for horse 
shows. He may also realize that a horse who holds the national record 
for losing races holds a kind of perverse public appeal. But Monserrate 
is not ready to part with Zippy, who, he says, continues to teach 
him some valuable horse sense. ``I learned that you can never be sure 
a horse is going to do exactly what you want it to do,'' he said. 
``By the time you think you're going to win a race, the horse goes 
bad. In the racing business, nothing is ever sure.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>