<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0268 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
That poor, tormented Reverend Moore. All that worry for so little 
reason, all that anguish over something so tame. In ``Footloose,'' 
the flavorless marshmallow of a musical that opened Thursday night 
at the Richard Rodgers Theater, this righteous minister of a small-town 
church spends most of the show fretting over the dangerous consequences 
of rock-and-roll, something he describes as ``an endless chant of 
pornography.'' Yet if only, early on, he could have shared the audience's 
perspective on the way his town's teen-agers dance to such music. 
Why, it's less erotic, and considerably less involving, than an introductory 
aerobics class. Of course, if the reverend had realized this in the 
production's first scene instead of its last, then there wouldn't 
be a show. That is not necessarily a bad thing. There have certainly 
been worse musicals on Broadway than ``Footloose,'' the $6.5 million 
adaptation of the hit 1984 movie that starred Kevin Bacon. Yet it's 
hard to think of one so totally unaffecting. The music in the show 
is loud, for sure, with a propulsive beat designed to set toes tapping 
and fingers snapping. The score is peppered with flashy dance tunes 
from the movie that have boomed over disco floors for years. And there's 
a young, eager, hard-working cast of dancers, somersaulting, back-flipping, 
wriggling to beat the band. But as directed by Walter Bobbie and choreographed 
by A.C. Ciulla, this production has a blurry, removed feeling, like 
a Xerox of a Polaroid. The show's creators seem to be aiming at teen-agers 
whose parents won't let them see the raunchier ``Rent,'' with a generation-crossing 
family entertainment that absolutely no one could object to. Any grit 
and spunk that belonged to ``Footloose,'' the movie, which was silly 
but kind of satisfying, has been bleached and sanitized out of existence. 
When a character sings about letting ``my mind take a small walk,'' 
when small-town life becomes too oppressive to bear, it's the only 
moment in the show when you fully identify with someone onstage. You 
have to question the wisdom of adapting a film whose charm was largely 
realized in the editing room. Directed by Herbert Ross, the original 
``Footloose'' arrived in the wake of the hugely successful ``Flashdance'' 
and made similar use of the kinetic crosscutting and camera work popularized 
by MTV. What most people still remember about the movie is its opening 
sequence, a series of close-ups of restless dancing feet that matched 
the percolating rhythms of Kenny Loggins' title song and was guaranteed 
to give anyone watching it a case of the St. Vitus twitches. In theory, 
live dancers should be just as (if not more) able to convey an infectious 
exuberance. But that never, ever happens here, despite the gymnastic 
agility of the cast. Ciulla's choreography is, while buzzing with 
busyness, peculiarly uncentered; it doesn't tell you what to focus 
on. It says everything about the show that in a number that is ostensibly 
about an awkward youth learning to dance (the rousing ``Let's Hear 
It for the Boy,'' a high point in the movie), we aren't allowed to 
see his evolution from klutziness to high-kicking assurance. The metamorphosis 
of this cartoon rube (played by Tom Plotkin) occurs mostly behind 
a curtain of other performers. The movie was also lively looking enough 
to keep you from thinking about its treacly formula plot. It's the 
story of young Ren McCormack (Jeremy Kushnier in the role played on 
screen by Bacon), who arrives in a heartland high school from Chicago 
and teaches a strait-laced town that young folks have just gotta dance. 
Ren's strongest opposition comes from the Rev. Shaw Moore (Stephen 
Lee Anderson), whose son was killed in a car accident after a party 
and who has since convinced the town council to make dancing illegal. 
Unfortunately, the Reverend also has a wild, dance-prone daughter, 
Ariel (Jennifer Laura Thompson), with eyes for Ren, and a wife, Vi 
(the ever-professional Dee Hoty), who has had about enough of her 
husband's sanctimoniousness. Dean Pitchford, who wrote the screenplay 
for ``Footloose'' as well as most of its songs' lyrics, is also the 
book author, with Bobbie, and lyricist for the stage version. (Tom 
Snow wrote most of the music, though there are numbers from the film 
by Loggins, Eric Carmen, Sammy Hagar and Jim Steinman.) The new script 
scales up the movie's most feeble aspect: its tale of reconciliation 
and domestic healing among people who have known loss and whose spoken 
and sung confrontations here take on the aspect of a particularly 
teary segment of ``Oprah.'' The characters have been built up but 
in the wrong ways, with the emphasis on insights out of pop psychology 
books and very little of the detail that defines personality. As played 
by Bacon and Lori Singer in the movie, Ren and Ariel projected a sullen, 
smoldering quality; you could imagine their exploding in dangerous 
ways. The film in which they appeared might have been on the square 
side, but its young stars were undeniably cool. This is not an adjective 
that fits their successors. The lean, rubber-jointed Kushnier is a 
likable presence and a limber dancer, but a brooding James Dean type 
he is not. His Ren registers as a genial, smart-aleck chorus boy who 
is a little too jittery (his character-defining solo is called ``I 
Can't Stand Still'') and could probably benefit from the occasional 
Valium. Ms. Thompson is a pretty, matronly young woman with nothing 
of the hellcat about her. It is worth noting that Ariel's most brazen 
bad-girl activities in the movie, like sleeping around and playing 
dangerous daredevil games with cars, have been eliminated. The many 
new songs Snow has composed range from the vaguely pleasant (a Sondheimesque 
duet about ``learning to be silent'' sung by Ms. Hoty and Catherine 
Cox as Ren's mother) to the unbearable (a long soul-searching soliloquy 
performed by the mild-mannered Anderson). Ms. Hoty and Ms. Cox come 
the closest to seeming like real people, and Stacy Francis, as Ariel's 
best friend, has a powerhouse voice, though it is hardly used to best 
advantage. For a musical that aspires to be a series of crowd-stirring 
show stoppers, ``Footloose'' has a perverse tendency to muffle the 
endings of its songs, as though it weren't really expecting much applause. 
John Lee Beatty's sets feature assorted generic moving scenery against 
sunny backdrops with crayonline streaks of yellows and blues, as though 
the world being summoned came out of a coloring book. This isn't inappropriate. 
The most impressive scenic effect involves a giant bridge over a river 
(prettily set off by the lighting designer Ken Billington's evocation 
of flowing water and starlight) that has little reason to be. Mostly, 
you keep wondering where that seven-figure budget was sunk. At the 
beginning of the second act of ``Footloose,'' Ren takes Ariel and 
some pals to a honky-tonk in a neighboring town. ``Isn't this worth 
fighting for?'' he asks, pointing to the dance floor. Yet what he 
is indicating is a group of couples in cowboy outfits doing a simple 
ballroom step with bovine serenity. If this is all the wide world 
has to offer, Reverend Moore should have no difficulty keeping his 
congregation down on the farm. PRODUCTION `FOOTLOOSE' Stage adaptation 
by Dean Pitchford and Walter Bobbie; based on the original screenplay 
by Pitchford; music by Tom Snow; lyrics by Pitchford; choreography 
by A.C. Ciulla; directed by Bobbie; sets by John Lee Beatty; costumes 
by Toni-Leslie James; lighting by Ken Billington; sound by Tony Meola; 
orchestrations by Danny Troob; music supervision and vocal arrangements, 
Doug Katsaros; dance music arrangements, Joe Baker; music coordinator, 
John Miller; hair by Ross Ringo; production supervisor, Steven Beckler; 
technical supervisor, Peter Fulbright; executive producers, Dodger 
Management Group and Tim Hawkins; associate producer, the John F. 
Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. Presented by Dodger Endemol 
Theatricals. At the Richard Rodgers Theater, 226 West 46th St., Manhattan. 
Cast: Stephen Lee Anderson (Rev. Shaw Moore), Dee Hoty (Vi Moore), 
Jeremy Kushnier (Ren McCormack), Jennifer Laura Thompson (Ariel Moore), 
Catherine Cox (Ethel McCormack), Stacy Francis (Rusty), Billy Hartung 
(Chuck Cranston) and Tom Plotkin (Willard Hewitt). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>