<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0484 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The global financial turmoil has jolted big banks across Europe and 
the United States, but few can match the woes in Switzerland. First 
came the agreement this summer by the biggest Swiss banks, led by 
Credit Suisse Group and UBS AG, to pay $1.25 billion to settle a suit 
brought by Holocaust survivors concerning plundered wealth that had 
been stored in Swiss banks. Then, in September, Credit Suisse acknowledged 
it had lost at least $500 million through its activities in Russia. 
Most analysts say the total losses could easily be twice that. And 
three weeks ago, the chairman of UBS abruptly resigned after the bank 
lost $780 million in connection with the near-collapse of Long-Term 
Capital Management, the hedge fund in Greenwich, Conn. More bad news 
is probably on the way. Most analysts say Credit Suisse will have 
to write off at least another $500 million in Russian debt, while 
UBS faces a mountain of potential trouble in Latin America _ not to 
mention the lingering possibility of more bombshells from wayward 
derivatives trading. All this has gravely undermined the elite mystique 
of Swiss bankers as being too stable and sure-footed to be tripped 
up by the lure of fast money. Such stumbling also carries international 
significance, given the global reach of both institutions. After its 
merger in January with Swiss Bank Corp., UBS is by some measures the 
world's biggest bank. And though both banks can easily handle their 
losses, their dignity and credibility will be far more difficult to 
repair. Indeed, the very notion of a ``Swiss'' bank is under strain. 
Two of UBS' top executives now are American, including the man who 
is charged with redefining ``risk'' for the entire institution: a 
33-year-old derivatives wizard from Chicago named David Solo. UBS 
is also still struggling with a sweeping reorganization in the wake 
of its merger with Swiss Bank and its trading catastrophe with Long-Term 
Capital. ``What we have had so far are only profit warnings,'' said 
George Koh, an analyst at Paribas Capital in London. ``But sooner 
or later they are going to have to take new provisions'' for expected 
losses. How much? UBS has not spelled out much about its exposure 
to risky loans; its looming losses are unclear but are expected to 
be big. At Credit Suisse, which has provided detailed information 
about its loan portfolios and trading activities, Koh and others are 
betting on $1 billion in additional losses just from Russia and Brazil. 
Amid the turmoil, the two banks appear to be responding in very different 
ways. Ever since UBS stunned the industry by announcing that its chairman 
would resign, the bank has hunkered down in silence to rethink its 
strategy toward higher-risk activities like proprietary securities 
trading and investment banking. UBS executives refused to be interviewed, 
but the bank told shareholders recently that it was re-evaluating 
its ``risk profile.'' Some industry experts speculate that UBS might 
go so far as to sell or spin off its investment bank, Warburg Dillon 
Read, though most analysts say it will simply hew to a far more conservative 
tack. At Credit Suisse and its investment bank, Credit Suisse First 
Boston, executives remain almost pugnaciously determined to stick 
to their strategy. ``Some European banks will decide this is a business 
they do not want to be in,'' said Richard Thornburgh, Credit Suisse's 
chief financial officer. ``It appears to us that there is an opportunity 
here to capitalize on the reduction in capacity.'' Though UBS and 
Credit Suisse face different problems, both have been expanding in 
more profitable but riskier areas. Because of Switzerland's historic 
role as an international financial center and the country's small 
domestic market, both banks are far more internationally minded than 
other European banks, and far less dependent on traditional commercial 
lending. UBS became one of the world's biggest banks when it merged 
with Swiss Bank Corp. early this year. But the giant new bank is now 
having intense heartburn because of its problems in Russia and Asia 
and its disastrous involvement with Long-Term Capital. The bank revealed 
last month that it had lost $780 million through a complex series 
of transactions with the American hedge fund, in part because top 
bank executives had failed to realize the extent of their exposure. 
Hoping to restore some of the bank's lost credibility, Matthis Cabiallavetta, 
the chairman, resigned along with other top executives on Oct. 2. 
Analysts say the problems appear to have originated at the old UBS, 
which lost more than $450 million on derivatives trading in 1997. 
Executives from the old Swiss Bank, which had a much bigger business 
in derivatives, are now largely in control of the combined operation. 
Marcel Ospel, who built up much of Swiss Bank's investment banking 
business, is UBS' chief executive. Solo, the 33-year-old chief operating 
officer of UBS' Warburg Dillon Read, has been named to the new job 
of ``chief risk officer.'' But UBS' problems extend beyond its adventures 
with hedge funds. Many were dismayed Sept. 24 when UBS announced a 
loss of $468 million in emerging markets, much of it in Russia. Just 
four weeks earlier, the bank had said its losses in Russia were only 
about $133 million. UBS also has a big exposure to Latin America, 
which has become infected by much of the currency turmoil that hit 
Asia and Russia. Total exposure in Latin America is about $3.56 billion, 
but the bank has taken provisions adding up to less than 10 percent 
of that amount. That percentage would be ``certainly too low,'' said 
Morgan Stanley in a recent report, should the region endure more financial 
turmoil. Credit Suisse's biggest problem is Russia. In a bold bid 
to capitalize on the reconstruction of Russia after the fall of communism, 
Credit Suisse First Boston became the dominant dealer in Russian government 
bonds, accounting for 40 percent of the trading activity. It also 
became a big lender to Russian companies and municipalities. All told, 
Credit Suisse has estimated its exposure in Russia _ through government 
bonds, currency contracts, loans and trading activities _ at about 
$3 billion. The bank has set aside about $1 billion in provisions, 
but most analysts now assume it will need to set aside far more. ``My 
assumption is they have another half-billion or billion to go,'' said 
John Leonard, an analyst at Salomon Smith Barney in London. Thornburgh 
of Credit Suisse conceded that more provisions may well be necessary, 
but said the ultimate extent of the losses will depend in large part 
on how the Russian government restructures its bonds and how Russian 
banks decide to meet their commitments. ``The mistake we made in Russia 
was that no one ever thought that you would get the combination of 
a devaluation, a default and a fall of the government _ and effectively 
the government has fallen,'' he said Thursday. Credit Suisse's Russia 
problems come in several flavors. As of early September, it had trading 
positions in Russian government and corporate bonds worth $147 million. 
It also had about $1 billion in loans to government agencies or big 
Russian companies, like the natural-gas conglomerate Gazprom, and 
about $571 million in loans to other corporations and banks. Many 
loans were made in the expectation of underwriting future bond offerings, 
whose proceeds would be used to pay off the loans. But bond offerings 
are now virtually impossible, and the bank is waiting to see what 
happens. One of the biggest dangers is in currency contracts, which 
are usually entered with Russian banks to hedge against a devaluation 
in the ruble. These contracts were crucial for investors buying up 
Russian bonds, which pay high interest rates _ but only in rubles. 
Credit Suisse said it has about $1.1 billion worth of these contracts 
on its books, money that Russian banks theoretically owe it in the 
wake of the ruble's plunge in value since the summer. But the Russian 
government has imposed a moratorium on paying off these contracts. 
``The criticism that everyone can make is that our concentration on 
Russia was too high,'' Thornburgh said. ``But there was nothing wrong 
about the activity in itself. This is what banks do.'' In the wake 
of Russia's economic collapse, Credit Suisse said last week it would 
eliminate about 100 jobs in that country. But in most parts of their 
business, bank executives say they have no intention of retrenching. 
To be sure, Switzerland's two big banks are hardly alone. Scores of 
other big American and European banks, from Deutsche Bank in Germany 
to BankAmerica, have taken big losses in Asia and Russia. Spain's 
biggest banks have huge exposure in Latin America, as do American 
and German institutions. Compared with Japan's big banks, many surviving 
only on life support, the giant Swiss institutions are bastions of 
robust health. For all the problems, some analysts argue that the 
Swiss banks retain important advantages over rivals like Deutsche 
Bank or ABN-Amro of the Netherlands. With the advent of the euro as 
a single European currency _ even though Switzerland will remain outside 
the new currency zone _ the overwhelming trend in Europe is toward 
a handful of money-center banks, said Hans Kaufmann, an analyst at 
Bank Julius Baer in Zurich. ``What will happen in the new euro area 
is that major companies will not need 11 different local banks,'' 
Kaufmann said. ``They will go for the major banks that are capable 
of organizing large-scale economies. At the end of the day, there 
is only one way you can survive and that is by being efficient.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>