<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0490 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Scott Brosius imagined all year that he would make the final play 
to end the World Series. A vision like that can be weird, the Yankees' 
third baseman said. ``You're playing a game and you think to yourself, 
`OK, this is the World Series, and you're going to make the last out.''' 
Brosius fielded the ground ball from San Diego's Mark Sweeney, threw 
to first base and clinched the World Series sweep for a team that 
could be remembered as the best ever, after 114 victories in the regular 
season and 11 more in the post-season _ more than any team in major 
league history. The Yankees celebrated late into Wednesday night, 
swigging from Champagne bottles and smoking cigars, and were sure 
to be drained Thursday, when they flew back to New York. They will 
be honored in a ticker-tape parade this morning through the Canyon 
of Heroes on lower Broadway and begin dispersing for the off season, 
left to savor their accomplishment, their memories, their feelings 
of pride. David Cone, the 20-game winner, deflected questions about 
whether the '98 Yankees are the best team ever. ``But,'' he added, 
``we deserve a lot of credit for playing hard.'' That intensity, that 
respect for the game, for their opponents and for each other was at 
the core of the 1998 Yankees. Veterans on the team trace the gene 
back to Don Mattingly, the first baseman, who retired after the 1995 
season. ``It was the way he treated everybody,'' Paul O'Neill said, 
``the way he played the game.'' O'Neill watched and learned from Mattingly 
and, Cone said, O'Neill set the competitive tone all year, with the 
rage he directs inward every time he doesn't succeed and the fight 
he wages in every at-bat. That was the first domino: Don't take any 
at-bats for granted, don't take any innings for granted, don't take 
any games for granted, don't take any opponents for granted. Derek 
Jeter, Tino Martinez, Chuck Knoblauch, Bernie Williams, they all played 
with that approach. The Yankees played as hard against the lowly Kansas 
City Royals this year as they did against the Padres in the World 
Series. All year, they ran hard and played harder, even on days when 
they didn't necessarily need to play hard. The Yankees, Manager Joe 
Torre said, ``had this inner conceit.'' ``They know they're good, 
but they don't really care about telling other people how good they 
are,'' he added. ``I knew in spring training we had quality people, 
quality players, but to be able to maintain a focus and determination 
all during the year, and then knowing the pressure going into the 
post-season _ that's unusual, in my experience.'' The Yankees lost 
four of their first five games before holding an angry team meeting 
in Seattle. That night, Knoblauch led off the game with a home run, 
and the Yankees proceeded to win 22 of their next 24 games. David 
Wells pitched his perfect game against Minnesota on May 17, seemingly 
his debut as a front-line ace. Two days later, the Yankees engaged 
in a nasty brawl with Baltimore that Torre believed galvanized the 
team even further. A mere two weeks after that, on June 3, came the 
much anticipated debut of Orlando Hernandez, the Cuban defector who 
had been rescued from a raft at sea in December and signed by the 
Yankees for $6.6 million. Known as El Duque, Hernandez had been dominating 
the minor leagues with a 7-1 record when a dog bite sustained by Cone 
disabled him and paved the way for Hernandez's first major league 
start. Hernandez was impressive in his seven-inning, seven-strikeout 
bow, and George Steinbrenner, the Yankees principal owner, forced 
his baseball people to keep El Duque in the starting rotation _ a 
decision that would pay off in the post-season. The Yankees finished 
the first half of the season with a 61-20 record. They held a lead 
in 48 consecutive games, a major league record. It became clear in 
August, after the Yankees blew through a West Coast trip with a 7-3 
record, that this team would challenge many records, and that anything 
less than a World Series title would be considered failure. They clinched 
a playoff spot Aug. 29, earlier than any other team in history. Without 
anything to chase but statistical goals, they finally slumped a bit 
in early September, losing five of six games in one stretch. Torre 
barked at them one day in Florida, where they were playing the Tampa 
Bay Devil Rays, for their lackluster effort, and they responded by 
winning their final seven games of the regular season, finishing with 
more victories than any team in American League history. Shane Spencer 
played with Class AAA Columbus in August, and after a home run binge 
in the majors in September, he wound up on the cover of Sports Illustrated. 
Cone earned his 20th victory, Williams won a batting title. Pitcher 
Andy Pettitte had said in spring training that the Yankees looked 
so good that it was sickening, and they looked extraordinary as the 
regular season closed. As the playoffs began, however, outfielder 
Darryl Strawberry felt continuing pain. In the midst of the division 
series with Texas, he received a diagnosis of colon cancer, and many 
of his teammates wept. (Other Yankees were dealing with personal strife 
in the post-season _ Brosius' father with cancer, Knoblauch's father 
with Alzheimer's disease, and Pettitte's father had heart surgery 
a week ago.) Still, the Yankees crushed the Rangers, came back from 
a two-games-to-one deficit to eliminate the Cleveland Indians in the 
league championship series, before sweeping the Padres. Dating to 
the last days of the regular season, the Yankees won 18 of their final 
20 games of the year. When is was all over, Jeter waved two fingers 
happily at Yankee fans screaming in the stands, and when Steinbrenner 
emerged from the clubhouse, the fans chanted his first name. But the 
greatest roar came with the appearance of the championship trophy, 
the 24th won by the Yankees. Brosius, who hit two home runs in Game 
3 and drove in a run in Game 4, was named the most valuable player. 
``There's been no one guy who's carried the load,'' Brosius said. 
``There's been 25 important players on the team. If we can go home 
and sit back and look at it, maybe we'll realize what an amazing team 
it has been.'' They probably already realize that, with that inner 
conceit Torre referred to, but now they may allow themselves a few 
moments of enjoyment. They will have a long time to consider their 
legacy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>