<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0555 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the race for Florida governor, Kenneth MacKay is the candidate 
with the record as state legislator, congressman and, most recently, 
lieutenant governor in an administration presiding over good times. 
He is the Democrat in a state where registered Democrats outnumber 
Republicans. He is the native Floridian, and the one invariably described 
as nice. He is also widely expected to lose. ``This is very unfair, 
but he's acquired the mantle of a loser,'' said Richard Scher, a political 
scientist at the University of Florida and a personal friend. If polls 
that have given MacKay's opponent, Jeb Bush, a consistent double-digit 
lead prove accurate, Florida is poised to come under the rule of a 
Republican governor and a state Legislature led by Republicans for 
the first time since Reconstruction. It is a changing of the guard 
happening across the South, but Florida Democrats say it is not inevitable 
in their state. Despite gains by Republicans over the last two decades, 
they note, Florida is still a two-party state where voters are prone 
to behave as independents regardless of party registration and are 
still electing Democrats in statewide elections. What has so drastically 
dimmed the prospects of a viable Democratic candidate can be better 
attributed to a confluence of troubles: a spectacular miscalculation 
by the state's Democratic legislators, the successful re-invention 
of an opponent and MacKay's failure to excite even his own supporters. 
``MacKay is a bland person, no charisma,'' said James Drayton, a bookstore 
owner in West Palm Beach and a supporter who attended a recent campaign 
appearance by MacKay. ``Bush is attractive, somewhat glib, has a good 
name. That's what's happening.'' Bush, 45, a son of former President 
George Bush, is a Miami businessman who is running for governor a 
second time after narrowly losing to the retiring Democratic governor, 
Lawton Chiles, in 1994. Bush has undergone a political transformation, 
having tempered his hard-edged conservative talk to present himself 
as someone who has ``listened and learned,'' and he has courted blacks, 
Jews and other traditional Democratic voters he once ignored. And 
while the 65-year-old MacKay, who is known as Buddy, focuses on qualifications 
and issues, Bush has contrasted leadership style and dynamism to capture 
people's imagination. ``Florida needs a governor with a new vision, 
new energy,'' Bush said in a radio debate last week. As recently as 
April, a group of prominent Democrats was looking for an alternative 
to MacKay, who started campaigning late, who has lost statewide elections 
before and who has been regarded by many as too much of a technocrat. 
The campaign also brought to the fore organizational problems in the 
state's Democratic Party that critics say account for a decline in 
its share of registered voters to 45 percent and its failure to revitalize 
as the Republicans gained dominance in Tallahassee, the state capital, 
in the '90s. But a more pressing problem was the party's disarray 
after Democrats in the Florida House this year rejected a black state 
representative who was next in line to become their leader, a snub 
that caused a rift that has yet to heal and has antagonized one of 
the party's most loyal and vital constituencies. Although MacKay, 
who calls Bush ``Jeb come lately'' on matters of concern to blacks, 
has held on to the endorsement of influential black political and 
religious leaders, the aggrieved representative, Willie Logan, and 
a few other black politicians endorsed Bush, who got only 6 percent 
of the black vote in 1994. While there have been other defections 
in the party. too, some Democrats say all these problems pale in comparison 
with that of finances. As of Oct. 9, MacKay's campaign had raised 
$3.9 million and spent all but $300,000. Bush's campaign had raised 
$7.1 million and still had $2.6 million to spend. Florida's Republican 
Party also has more to spend on campaign advertisements than does 
the Democratic Party. In an interview, MacKay said that his party 
had typically been less organized and well financed than its counterpart, 
but that its problems had subsided ``just in time.'' MacKay said a 
worse problem had been getting the public to focus on the race because 
``the noise level from Washington makes it more difficult for us to 
get our message out.'' Although President Clinton has helped with 
fund raising and does not appear to have become a liability for MacKay, 
a longtime ally who still stands by the president, neither has Clinton 
been able to provide the boost that MacKay needs. Asked whether his 
candidacy suffered from unfortunate timing, MacKay replied that ``not 
everything is bad.'' ``This is the best economy we've had in 20 years,'' 
he said. `` We've got a lot of good things going on this year, and 
I'm running in effect as the incumbent.'' MacKay indeed has been an 
active partner of Chiles during the last eight years, serving by most 
accounts as an able trouble-shooter in reorganizing state agencies, 
brokering deals and overseeing Miami during the city's financial crisis. 
But because he worked mostly behind the scenes, many voters may not 
have noticed him or become familiar with him. On the campaign trail 
and during debates, MacKay, a lawyer and citrus farmer from Central 
Florida, is prone to begin answers with ``the truth of the matter 
is,'' sometimes appearing passive next to the taller, more animated 
Bush. During the last televised debate of the campaign on Tuesday, 
MacKay came closer to matching the energy of Bush. There are substantive 
contrasts as well: MacKay differs from Bush in opposing school vouchers, 
supporting a woman's right to abortion and favoring a ballot measure 
that would allow counties to impose stricter gun control but that 
Bush argues would prevent uniform statewide regulation. And MacKay 
asks voters whether they can trust a candidate who has no government 
experience other than a brief stint as Florida's commerce secretary 
in the 1980s and who portrays himself as far more moderate than his 
party is and than he himself was four years ago. As Election Day nears, 
MacKay has concentrated his attacks on Bush's business background. 
In a radio debate last week, he brought up what he called Bush's record 
of ``questionable deals'' and ``mismanagement,'' including his tenure 
on the board of a company that collapsed and that was the subject 
of lawsuits alleging mismanagement and stock manipulation. Addressing 
the issue in debates, Bush responds that the press has examined his 
past thoroughly and found no wrongdoing. A millionaire who has staked 
his business reputation on a successful South Florida real-estate 
development firm that he joined in 1980, Bush has accused MacKay of 
``gross distortions.'' MacKay said he expected his gap in the polls 
to close _ it has, to 10 percentage points this month, down from 15 
to 17 points in September _ as people focus on the race in its last 
weeks. But polls have also shown that most voters are barely interested 
in the race. ``Issues and trust will decide the race,'' MacKay said 
moments before a waitress in a Fort Lauderdale restaurant stared at 
him as he got up to leave. ``I saw you on TV,'' she said. ``The Republican?'' 
``I'm the Democrat,'' MacKay answered with a smile. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>