<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0446 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Joe Torre was eating a late dinner with his wife, Ali, on a brisk 
night in San Diego last Tuesday when a question that he has occasionally 
pondered sneaked up on him again. Torre spoke the words softly and 
simply across the table: why me? Torre was trying to understand why 
he had been selected to manage the Yankees three years ago, when it 
looked as if his managerial career had died forever. He wanted to 
figure out why he had flourished under George Steinbrenner's regime 
to coolly chaperone the Yankees to greatness. He had to decipher what 
he had done to deserve this delightful opportunity and the even more 
delightful results. Why me? The same question nagged Torre after the 
Yankees silenced the Padres, 3-0, Wednesday night for their second 
World Series championship in three seasons, and he joined the giddy 
players in a celebration on the field. One by one, every player hugged 
Torre and thanked him. Torre was startled. That was supposed to be 
his line. Why were the players thanking him? Again, why me? Torre 
took in their gracious words and wept. ``Everyone seems to think that 
I've paid my dues and I have it coming, but I don't see it that way,'' 
he said. ``I've been really lucky. I wonder why it's happened to me. 
I feel very fortunate with all that's happened. People who know me 
don't give it a second thought. I'll rely on their opinions, but knowing 
that this is all the product of hard work keeps me working hard.'' 
He is the calm leader of the Yankees, the 58-year-old New Yorker who 
returned home in 1996 against the advice of his brother, Frank, to 
find his own version of baseball nirvana in the South Bronx. In a 
mature and simple way, Torre presided over a team that won an astounding 
125 games this season and nurtured his players so that every game 
was just as pivotal as the last game they played on Wednesday at Qualcomm 
Stadium. Sometimes, it sounds so easy. It only appears that way because 
Torre, his rugged face usually as expressionless as a mannequin's, 
makes it look that way. ``He's perfect for this city because he makes 
everything seem like it's not that big of a deal,'' General Manager 
Brian Cashman said. ``No matter how tough the situation is, he makes 
it seem like it's not that tough. Joe's done everything in this game. 
When you're looking for leadership, he's the guy you look at. He's 
been down every road, so everyone can relate to him because he's been 
everyone at some point.'' Is Torre really everyone? Steinbrenner, 
who barreled through a crowd of reporters in a soggy clubhouse Wednesday 
night to embrace Torre, believes so. With guile and guts, Torre has 
fostered a successful relationship with Steinbrenner, the team's principal 
owner, and will sign a contract extension soon. No publicized spats? 
Billy Martin would be bewildered. ``He's a New Yorker and he's a battler,'' 
Steinbrenner said. ``He understands New York and he understands people. 
He exudes that feeling. The players respect him. He's a great manager, 
the best I've ever had.'' There was always something comforting about 
the way Torre carried himself this season, from the first day of spring 
training when he called the Yankees ``a special team'' to the final 
out of Game 4 when he called them ``the best team in my lifetime.'' 
His players noticed Torre's demeanor and fed off of his tranquil disposition. 
If Joe looked relaxed, then everything must be copacetic, they figured. 
Usually, it was. ``He doesn't get rattled,'' Don Zimmer, the bench 
coach, said. ``If he has something to say, he'll say it. If you don't 
like playing for Joe Torre, you better get yourself checked out. That's 
the best way I can put it.'' Torre could have panicked when the Yankees 
started the season 1-4, but that did not happen and a team meeting 
followed by a 22-2 streak solved any woes. Torre had Tim Raines, Chad 
Curtis and Darryl Strawberry vying for at-bats in left field and at 
designated hitter, but he spread the playing time around and convinced 
each player of his importance to the team, so no one groused. Torre 
could have had a delicate time keeping the Yankees focused after they 
sprinted out to a 15-game lead by July, but they played with passion 
every day. The Yankees did it to chase history, but they also did 
it because of Torre. ``He's the epitome of what a manager should be,'' 
Chili Davis said. ``It's not about making moves, or running out there 
and being noticed, or saying I did this or did that. He took 25 players 
and, whatever he said to us, he made us all want to go out and bust 
our butts for him. To me, when you're going to manage a major league 
team, that's the key. You got to have 25 players who want to die for 
you. That's exactly what Joe did.'' The manager is no fool. Torre, 
who waited 4,268 games as a player and manager to get to his first 
World Series in 1996, knew what was unfolding, and he carefully watched 
the daily effort from a team that could have easily taken a vacation 
this September. It inspired him. ``To see that this has lasted for 
three years, for guys to play hard, sort of puts an exclamation point 
on what you think is the right thing to do,'' Torre said. ``No manager 
can feel any better than when he doesn't have to worry about if his 
ball club is going to be ready to play. These guys never took a day 
off.'' Torre would not let them. The intensity of trying to validate 
a 114-victory regular season placed tremendous pressure on the Yankees 
because they were expected to win, but Torre never let these concerns 
show. While he worried that people ``would look sideways'' at these 
special Yankees if they collapsed before a title, the always unflappable 
Torre remained always unflappable to his players. ``I show them honesty 
and I trust them, and I just ask the same in return,'' he said. ``It's 
not always going to be wonderful, but, this sounds pretty corny, it's 
togetherness. If we win, we win. If we lose, we lose.'' Torre abhors 
team meetings; he favors casual one-on-one sessions by the player 
lockers. The manager questioned David Wells' conditioning after a 
terrible start in May and then met with him to discuss the pitcher's 
approach. Wells tossed a perfect game two weeks later and was the 
Yankees' best pitcher for the rest of the season. ``He's a player's 
manager,'' Wells explained. ``We had two rules: play hard and be on 
time. You know what? He never said anything else. That's what makes 
him one heck of a manager.'' Tino Martinez, another sensitive sort, 
had his mind massaged by Torre, too. ``Joe is awesome, man,'' Martinez 
said. ``He knows how to handle guys for six months when you're struggling 
or playing well. He's a very calm manager who gets the most out of 
his players. He's the best manager I've ever played for.'' Even the 
rookie Ricky Ledee, who actually thanked the manager for starting 
him in the World Series, added: ``He doesn't say much, but, when he 
does, everyone listens. I've seen him for just two months, but he's 
the best manager I've ever seen.'' The best manager for the Yankees 
was thinking about that nagging question again: why me? Ali Torre 
finally responded to it in the restaurant on Tuesday. She told Joe 
that he was a true leader. She told him she was proud of him because 
he motivated his talented players and they needed that from him. She 
told him that was why he was picked to manage them. Why me? That is 
why. ``I've been with Joe for 17 years,'' she said. ``We've been on 
a lot of losing teams. It's kind of overwhelming. It's such an exciting 
time. You want to pinch yourself. That's why he asked himself that. 
You wonder why.'' Why me? The question still hounded Torre on Wednesday 
night. But it was late and the Champagne and cigars were waiting, 
so Torre poked at the simple yet complex question. Why me? ``Maybe 
the good Lord didn't think I could appreciate all of it before now,'' 
he said. ``I know one thing. After doing this the first time, you 
really want to do it again. This was even sweeter the second time. 
This was great.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>