<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0483 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In one of the largest recalls in the toy industry, Fisher-Price is 
pulling up to 10 million battery-driven Power Wheels cars and trucks 
off the market for repairs because they can catch fire or fail to 
stop while children are riding them. The products, which can also 
catch fire while not in use, contain electrical-component defects 
and faulty wiring that can cause them to overheat and catch fire or 
fail to stop, according to the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, 
which announced the recall Thursday. The problems have caused nine 
children to suffer minor burns to the hands, legs or feet, six others 
to suffer bruises and scrapes, and have resulted in up to $300,000 
in property damage to houses and garages, the commission said. In 
all, the safety commission and the company, a unit of Mattel, have 
received nearly 700 reports of electrical problems and about 150 involving 
fires. There have also been 71 reports of vehicles not stopping. The 
toys are intended for children 2 to 7 years old. They reach speeds 
of up to 5 miles per hour and sell for $70 to $300. Consumers can 
take the toys to Power Wheel service centers, whose locations can 
be obtained by calling the company at (800)-977-7800. The recall involves 
Power Wheels sold after 1984. The toys have been sold under nearly 
100 model names, like Jeep Adventure Team, Barbie Beach Buggie and 
My First Roadster. The Power Wheels logo is on all types, and the 
company said it would help consumers determine whether their Power 
Wheel model was part of the recall. Although the recall is considered 
voluntary because it did not require the safety commission to sue 
the company to bring it about, the agency's chairman said Thursday 
that the toys remained on the market two years longer than necessary 
because of the company's repeated lack of cooperation. ``We first 
learned in late 1996 and early 1997 of fires in these vehicles and 
we learned about it from consumers. We then had to go to Fisher-Price 
to get this recall. It took a long time; they were slow and difficult.'' 
In fact, the company and safety commission are still at odds about 
the action. The agency says it is investigating why Fisher-Price withheld 
information about potential problems with Power Wheels for two years, 
but the company maintains that it was under no obligation to provide 
the information even though, by law, manufacturers must report product 
defects as soon as they are aware of them. Fisher-Price insisted, 
however, that the problems stemmed from ``consumer tampering'' and 
not design defects. According to the company, consumers replaced burned-out 
fuses with incompatible ones or used metal objects such as paper clips 
to jump-start the cars. ``Those involved in fires we sent to independent 
fire forensic experts and what we found in virtually every single 
instance was that the fire was related to tampering,'' said Sean Fitzgerald, 
vice president of corporate communications for Mattel. The safety 
commission said the company's characterization of the problems was 
disingenuous at best. ``I think that is a totally irresponsible charge 
and one that is rather heartless,'' Ms. Brown said. ``Our engineers 
found an inherent design defect after extensive testing,'' adding 
that the problem was with the engineering system and ``if there was 
consumer tampering there would be no recall. The very fact that they 
are going along with this recall is an admission that there is a defect.'' 
She said the company also backed out of an agreement Thursday that 
required it to distribute a video news release containing footage 
of the products and urging consumers to return them for repairs. Such 
releases, which are a standard requirement in recall agreements and 
typically reach 20 million television viewers, are among the agency's 
most effective method of informing the public of such actions, said 
Ms. Brown, adding that the commission distributed the footage on its 
own, over Mattel's objection. Mattel also released third-quarter financial 
results Thursday and said it took a $270 million charge against profits 
in the period to pay for the recall and product modifications. And 
Toys R Us, the nation's largest toy retailer, said it was pulling 
the product off of shelves in its 700 stores. ``We have notified all 
of our stores to stop selling the item and they will not be sold until 
Fisher-Price makes the corrections,'' said Rebecca Caruso, vice president 
of corporate communications at Toys R Us. The recall is not expected 
to significantly impact Mattel's bottom line because the product line 
is a small contributor to the company's annual revenues of nearly 
$5 billion. ``It is a one-time item which has a cost attached to it 
but it's not part of the company's ongoing business,'' said David 
Leibowitz, an analyst who follows the company for Burnham Securities. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>