<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0434 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On a recent evening, a crowd of elegantly dressed people, many of 
them Democrats, gathered at the Hilton Hotel in Manhattan to honor 
a Brooklyn housing group founded by one of the state's most famous 
liberals, Sen. Robert Kennedy. And there, seated near the front, was 
an unlikely guest of honor: Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, the three-term Republican 
running hard for a fourth. D'Amato had just completed another day 
of attacking his Democratic challenger, Rep. Charles Schumer, as being 
a Brooklyn liberal. But this evening, the senator accepted an award 
for his work on behalf of the nonpartisan group, the Bedford Stuyvesant 
Restoration Corp., and then launched into a speech peppered with phrases 
Kennedy would have appreciated. ``This group is about investing back 
in people,'' D'Amato said, his voice rising in volume and pitch. ``It 
is about fighting to take back our communities and our homes and our 
schools, about empowering youngsters, empowering the community.'' 
To his critics and supporters alike, this was Alfonse D'Amato doing 
what he seems to do best these days: dancing away from a Republican 
Party that seems anathema to many New Yorkers, and surgically slicing 
at the grand coalition that has sustained New York's Democratic Party 
from the days of Franklin Roosevelt. But a review of D'Amato's most 
recent term shows that, for all his shifting on the edges, he remains 
a fundamentally conservative politician _ among the most conservative 
senators the state has had since World War II. He staunchly opposes 
abortion and gun control, regularly advocates tougher penalties for 
criminals and has rarely met a tax cut he did not like. He endorsed 
major portions of Newt Gingrich's Contract With America in 1995 and 
hailed the Republican takeover of Congress as a stinging repudiation 
of liberalism. And he continues to receive among the highest ratings 
in the Northeast from conservative groups like the Christian Coalition. 
It is a good bet, though, that many New Yorkers are not familiar with 
D'Amato's conservative credentials; a recent New York Times poll showed, 
for instance, that 71 percent of voters did not know his position 
on abortion and only 39 percent considered him a conservative. That 
is largely because for the last three years, facing what he expected 
to to be the most difficult re-election campaign of his career, and 
recognizing that the conservative revolution of 1994 had fallen precipitously 
from favor, D'Amato has worked harder than ever to clothe his conservative 
core in the gauzier attire of a moderate. One of the wiliest pragmatists 
in Congress, he has done this in signature D'Amato fashion: grabbing 
a few, high-profile, emotional and mostly non-ideological issues that 
appeal to targeted constituencies, and then fighting for them in as 
tenacious, and showy, a way as possible. He has championed the cause 
of breast cancer victims, repeatedly threatening to hold up legislation 
on the Senate floor to get what he wants. He has chided his own majority 
leader, Trent Lott, for equating homosexuality with a sin _ and has 
won the endorsement of a major gay and lesbian group for his troubles. 
He has demanded that Swiss banks release the stolen assets of Holocaust 
victims _ and has won accolades within a community that Democrats 
consider a fundamental part of their base. And he has been silent 
on President Clinton's problems in the Monica Lewinsky affair, just 
a few years after he grabbed headlines with his aggressive investigation 
of Clinton as chairman of the Senate Whitewater Committee. D'Amato's 
supporters say he has never been a rigid ideologue and has always 
been able to work with Democrats. Indeed, his advisers say what could 
make or break his re-election chances is that so many beneficiaries 
of his work as ``Senator Pothole'' have been Democrats. Even an old 
nemesis, former Gov. Mario Cuomo, who was ousted in 1994 by D'Amato's 
protege, George Pataki, acknowledged that ``when I asked for help 
as governor, he was there.'' But, Cuomo added in the next breath, 
``There is no question he will deliver little packages the way old 
politicians did with bags of coal in the winter. But we also need 
an intelligent position on gun control, on abortion, on helping with 
education and HMO's and all of this. And he's nowhere on that stuff.'' 
In his 1995 autobiography, ``Power, Pasta and Politics,'' D'Amato, 
61, talks of two major movements that shaped his political thinking: 
the rise of Barry Goldwater and the Republican Party's conservative 
wing in the early 1960s, and the emergence of the bloc of conservative 
working-class voters who became known as Reagan Democrats in the 1980s. 
Recalling how he gave out American flags during his 1970 campaign 
for receiver of taxes in the town of Hempstead in Nassau County, D'Amato 
described his attempts to reach those conservatives: ``I won because 
patriotism wasn't just a gimmick, it was something that my generation 
and my parents' generation knew to be fundamental about being an American.'' 
Ten years later, when he was presiding supervisor of Hempstead, D'Amato 
stunned the political world by handily defeating the state's liberal 
Republican senator, Jacob Javits, in the primary. With Javits drawing 
votes on the Liberal Party line from the Democratic candidate, Elizabeth 
Holtzman, D'Amato won the general election with just 45 percent of 
the vote, carried along on Ronald Reagan's coattails. Under D'Amato's 
leadership, the state Republican Party proceeded to oust the moderates 
who had dominated it for decades, refashioned itself in his hard-edged 
image and forged close alliances with the Conservative and Right to 
Life Parties, which have endorsed D'Amato in all his Senate races. 
In style, D'Amato is only slightly more buttoned down than he was 
in those early years. He still screams at aides in his office, particularly 
when guests are present, calls men he doesn't know ``buddy'' and ``big 
guy,'' and kisses women on the hand. The epithets flow as freely as 
ever, as evidenced in his calling Schumer ``putzhead'' during a meeting 
with Jewish leaders earlier this week. In public, he is a whirling 
dervish of energy, alternately overbearing and charming. ``Hey, Chollie,'' 
he bellowed at Rep. Charles Rangel, a Manhattan Democrat, before bear-hugging 
him outside the Senate chamber recently. But if D'Amato's style remains 
much the same, the political ground has shifted dramatically beneath 
him. Bill Clinton's election in 1992 gave new vitality to a more centrist 
wing of the Democratic Party. And the rise of the Christian right 
created unease among moderate New York Republicans, many of them suburban 
voters crucial to D'Amato's political calculus. The Republicans' midterm 
victory in 1994 seemed to vindicate D'Amato's more conservative positions, 
at least briefly. But by 1996, polls showed that Gingrich and his 
Contract with America were deeply unpopular in New York. Bill Clinton 
trounced D'Amato's candidate for president, Bob Dole. Mr. D'Amato's 
role as chairman of the Whitewater Committee was panned in New York. 
His approval ratings plummeted into the low 30s. By 1997, the repositioning 
of D'Amato was well underway. He stopped attacking the president _ 
a trend that continues today, with D'Amato refusing to condemn Clinton's 
relationship with Ms. Lewinsky or to take a public position on impeachment. 
And he seized on a host of traditionally Democratic issues, from the 
environment to reforming health insurance to restoring welfare benefits 
to immigrants. D'Amato's supporters argue that his work on many of 
those issues was not related to political trends. His efforts on breast 
cancer, for instance, began in 1990 when the group ``One in Nine'' 
approached him about getting federal funds to study the high incidence 
of the disease on Long Island. They also note that long before he 
began hectoring Swiss banks to release the assets of Holocaust victims, 
he was a strong supporter of Israel. And when D'Amato first announced 
to the world his support for civil rights for homosexuals _ a floor 
speech supporting homosexuals in the military in January 1993 _ he 
had just won re-election and was not under political pressure to adopt 
Democratic stances, his allies contend. ``That was a year he could 
have coasted,'' said an adviser. But to many Democrats, D'Amato's 
leftward march has been a cynical, poll-driven effort to rebuild his 
low approval ratings, and they contend that he has done the same thing 
before. They point to D'Amato's voting record in 1992, when he last 
ran for re-election and how then, as now, he often supported positions 
advocated by liberal interest groups. In 1992, for instance, the AFL-CIO 
gave D'Amato a relatively high 70 percent rating. Once re-elected, 
his labor rating fell to zero in 1995. In 1992, D'Amato received a 
58 percent score from the League of Conservation Voters, but got zeroes 
in 1994 and 1996. In 1992, his rating from the Consumer Federation 
of America was 67 percent. But in 1995, it had fallen to 13 percent. 
In most of those cases, D'Amato's low ratings were the result of votes 
in favor of portions of the Contract with America. Though such score 
cards rarely sway blocs of voters, they are used by interest groups 
to decide endorsements. That may be one reason, analysts say, that 
for the last three years D'Amato has been championing high profile 
issues and bucking his leadership more often. Indeed, the number of 
times he voted with the Republican majority fell from 90 percent in 
1995 to 67 percent last year. ``He has a real feel for how to capitalize 
on symbolically important issues to key constituencies,'' said Thomas 
Mann, director of governmental studies at the Brookings Institution, 
a policy research organization. This year, D'Amato voted with the 
minority to raise the minimum wage. The vote may have helped prevent 
the state AFL-CIO, usually a Democratic bastion, from endorsing Schumer 
this year, union officials said. He also sponsored legislation intended 
to reduce acid rain and testified at Senate hearings on the subject 
last month. The move won him accolades from a number of conservation 
groups in the Adirondacks at a time when other organizations, like 
the Sierra Club, were harshly criticizing D'Amato's lifetime environmental 
record. On the Banking Committee, D'Amato has pushed hard for a number 
of consumer rights measures, including legislation to prevent mortgage 
insurance companies from overcharging customers, and rules that require 
banks to make loans in their communities. Those efforts have helped 
counter Democratic assertions that he uses the committee to do favors 
for banks and securities firms that give him large campaign contributions, 
analysts say. ``He's much more pro-consumer than any other Republican 
on that committee,'' said Ed Mierzwinski, director of consumer programs 
for the U.S. Public Interest Research Group, an advocacy organization. 
Congressional experts say D'Amato has never had a major impact on 
domestic or foreign policy, or been known for his skills in writing 
legislation. But on one thing, many Democrats and Republicans agree: 
the senator is a master at getting things out of the Federal bureaucracy 
and bringing those things home. As soon as he arrived in Washington, 
D'Amato became a master of the appropriations process, which requires 
a horse trader's sense, good personal relations and a lot of badgering. 
He was soon dubbed Senator Pothole, a title of derision that he now 
wears as a badge of honor. This year, D'Amato helped lead a fight 
to prevent senators from the South and West from sharply reducing 
federal mass transit spending. Though he was slow to enter the battle, 
D'Amato's threats to block a huge highway spending bill and his influence 
with Sen. Pete Domenici, chairman of the Budget Committee, helped 
win a major increase in New York's transit funding, negotiators said. 
``There were a lot of senators from the Northeast who would stop by 
and say, 'D'Amato's told us to do this,''' said Domenici, R-N.M., 
who is one of D'Amato's closest friends in the Senate. ``D'Amato was 
ginning up all these guys to talk to me.'' D'Amato resourcefulness 
also led to one of his major legislative triumphs: using the Defense 
budget to finance breast cancer programs. D'Amato devised the financing 
scheme, which has provided $900 million since 1992, to get around 
the spending restrictions then in place on other federal departments. 
For politicians across the state, D'Amato has become known as the 
go-to senator. And in Congress, Democratic officials say D'Amato always 
returns their calls promptly. ``I would think a lot of Democrats would 
have a difficult time campaigning hard against D'Amato because of 
their good relations with him,'' said the chief of staff to a Democratic 
member of Congress. ``If you need anything done, you've got to go 
to D'Amato. Distasteful or not, you've got to do it.'' For a man who 
has spent much of the last six years attacking, investigating and 
trying to unseat the president, there is something oddly Clintonesque 
about D'Amato. Both men have been the subject of repeated inquiries 
by Congress and prosecutors. Both men are considered consummate politicians 
and deal makers. And both have had to use every ounce of their political 
skills to recover from lapses in judgment. And like Clinton's detractors, 
Schumer clearly believes that the weight of D'Amato's past will bring 
him down. Though Schumer has not made ethics a central campaign issue, 
his aides are not shy about recounting the senator's past problems. 
In 1991, the Senate Ethics Committee rebuked the D'Amato for allowing 
his brother Armand to write a letter on behalf of a law client on 
Senate stationery. In 1992, a Puerto Rican developer was charged with 
funneling $32,000 in illegal contributions to his campaign; the charge 
was the later dismissed. In 1993, he made a $37,125 profit in one 
day of stock trades with a firm that had been repeatedly investigated 
by securities regulators. In none of those cases was D'Amato found 
to have broken any laws. The Schumer camp also likes to suggest that 
New Yorkers are embarrassed by their junior senator, from his singing 
``Old MacDonald had some pork'' during a floor debate in 1994 to his 
heavily accented imitation of Lance Ito, the judge in the O.J. Simpson 
murder trial, on the Don Imus radio show in 1995. But what D'Amato 
may have going for him, some Democrats say, is precisely what Schumer 
is hoping will be his Achilles heel: people already know much about 
him. He has been thoroughly investigated. His Senate record has been 
pored over. And, D'Amato's handlers contend, just enough voters are 
comfortable with what they see, warts and all. For that reason, an 
embattled Alfonse D'Amato will still be tough to beat, many Democrats 
acknowledge. ``Clinton is not as good as D'Amato,'' said Cuomo. ''D'Amato 
swims at the tops of waves.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>