<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0447 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Do not be deceived by Priscilla Read Chenoweth's sweet manner, the 
dust on her resume, the spectacles on her nose or her matronly appearance. 
Do not dismiss this 68-year-old widow as some kind of amateur Angela 
Lansbury with a law degree. That is what prosecutors did seven years 
ago, Mrs. Chenoweth believes, when she decided to try and save a stranger 
who she believed had been wrongly convicted of murder. ``They thought, 
`Here's that old grandma and her bleeding heart,''' she recalled this 
week during an interview in her home here. But last week, Luis Kevin 
Rojas, Mrs. Chenoweth's cause and crusade since 1991, an aspiring 
engineer who had spent a third of his life in prison or on trial for 
a murder he swore he did not commit, was freed for good, in large 
part because of her singular persistence. After a two-week trial in 
state Supreme Court in New York City, a jury acquitted Rojas of charges 
that, at age 18, he provided the gun used in the 1990 shooting death 
of another teen-ager on the streets of Greenwich Village. Beginning 
in 1991, after reading an account of the case in a New Jersey newspaper, 
Mrs. Chenoweth spent much of her savings and many of her days, nights, 
weekends and vacations chugging up legal hills for Rojas. Mrs. Chenoweth, 
a lawyer who gave up her practice to become an editor at The New Jersey 
Law Journal, smelled injustice in a jury verdict that year that sent 
Rojas, a high school senior with no prior record, to prison. So from 
the tiny cluttered study of her red-brick home here, aided by her 
daughter, her sister and three retired detectives, she set out to 
reinvestigate the crime and prove it was a case of mistaken identity. 
She read transcripts, filed motions, interviewed witnesses, enlisted 
the help of three dozen lawyers and ultimately spent $50,000 of her 
own ``old age'' money _ more than a year's salary. Before she was 
through, Mrs. Chenoweth and her team of paid professionals and conscripted 
volunteers established an alibi for Rojas: He was half a mile away 
at the time of the shooting. In 1995, they succeeded in getting the 
original conviction overturned. And with the acquittal in the retrial 
state Supreme Court, they rolled back the rest of the stone. For this 
effort, Mrs. Chenoweth has received all the compensation she ever 
wanted _ thanks and affection from Rojas, flowers from his family, 
and, perhaps most important to her, the respect of all those high-priced 
lawyers she prodded into working with her. The lawyers said that, 
in this case, all those noble adages of American jurisprudence, like 
``justice will prevail,'' only proved true because of Mrs. Chenoweth. 
Without her, they said, Luis Rojas would still be working the sanitation 
detail at the Coxsackie Correctional Facility, near Albany, N.Y., 
just halfway through his 15-year-to-life sentence. ``Yes, the system 
worked,'' said Jethro Eisenstein, the lawyer who donated his services 
and won Rojas' acquittal. ``But it only worked because of Priscilla.'' 
Even her adversary, Peter Kougasian, an assistant district attorney, 
was impressed. ``I have never seen anyone pour their heart and soul 
into an effort like this for a stranger,'' Eisenstein said he told 
him. Mrs. Chenoweth said she became involved because it was obvious 
to her that Rojas, a stable student with no history of violence, was 
incapable of playing a role in a murder. Even though the murder victim's 
family still believes that Rojas played a part, Mrs. Chenoweth said 
his involvement just never made sense to her. ``He had no record, 
no gang, nice friends,'' she said. ``They were all going to college 
or were skilled technical workers. He had a reputation for peaceableness.'' 
The shooting occurred just after 2 a.m. on Nov. 18, 1990, when two 
groups of teen-agers tussled on lower Broadway, near Waverly Place. 
One teen-ager in a Day-Glo orange, reversible jacket pulled out a 
gun, shot into the air, then passed the weapon to another youth in 
a green jacket, who fired at the other teen-agers as they fled. Javier 
Bueno, a 19-year-old planning to attend New York University, was shot 
in the neck and died three weeks later. Rudy Quesada, 17, was shot 
in the leg. The shooter, the youth in the green jacket, has never 
been found. Rojas, from Union City, N.J., was spotted by police several 
minutes later in the nearby PATH station on West Ninth Street. He 
was wearing a similar Day-Glo jacket, but the orange side had been 
turned inside out. One of the friends of the youths who were shot 
was brought to the station and identified Rojas, now wearing the jacket 
orange side out, as the youth who had supplied the gun. Police then 
brought Rojas to the crime scene, where other friends of the victims 
identified him. The arrest shocked Rojas' friends at Emerson High 
School in Weehawken, N.J., where 150 students wrote letters to the 
judge in the case on his behalf. Though he had once taken a car without 
permission and had been caught hopping a turnstile, Rojas was viewed 
as a gentle soul, someone who counseled his peers on the dangers of 
drug abuse. Rojas told police that on the night of the shootings, 
he had been at a nearby restaurant with a friend and was returning 
home to New Jersey when he was arrested. He said he had reversed his 
jacket to wear the burgundy side out because he did not want it to 
get dirty. That was the way he usually wore it, he said. But police 
had seven witnesses who said Rojas was involved and they did not believe 
his account. Mrs. Chenoweth and her team would later undermine the 
reliability of those identifications. Several witnesses had been drinking 
or only picked out Rojas after seeing him in handcuffs. The defense 
team contended that since police had Rojas wear the jacket with the 
orange side out, the sight of him in custody, in the jacket, within 
minutes of the shootings, overpowered the ability of those distraught 
witnesses to make a reliable identification. One of the witnesses 
identified someone else in the PATH station that night as also having 
been involved in the shooting. But that person turned out to have 
an ironclad alibi. The police lineup the next morning was also stacked 
against Rojas, Mrs. Chenoweth's team asserted. The ``fillers'' in 
the lineup were well-rested, clean-shaven police cadets with crew 
cuts. Rojas had medium-length hair and had been up all night. Few 
of these apparent holes in the evidence were brought forward during 
Rojas' first trial, which ended in 1991 with a jury convicting him 
of second-degree murder. The defense mounted by his lawyer for that 
case, David Fronefield, was later derided by the Appellate Division. 
``It almost appears, at times, that Fronefield acted as a second prosecutor,'' 
the appellate panel wrote. At home in New Jersey, Mrs. Chenoweth read 
an article about the case in a local newspaper at her daughter's suggestion. 
She focused on a statement from one of Rojas' teachers, who said the 
teen-ager's involvement was simply impossible. Something moved her 
to speak to the teacher and members of Rojas' family. Within weeks, 
Mrs. Chenoweth was off to meet Rojas himself at Rikers Island. ``It 
was clear to me that it was a gross injustice,'' she said. ``The legal 
system had harmed this man, and the legal system should right the 
wrong.'' Mrs. Chenoweth had some history at trying to right wrongs. 
She had been involved in the civil rights movement for many years 
and was arrested in New Jersey in 1963 for sitting down in front of 
a truck to protest the lack of construction jobs for blacks. But it 
had been 17 years since the mother of three and grandmother of five 
had practiced law, a career she left because ``the money was a little 
erratic and I wasn't terribly good at business.'' While rusty, she 
did not lack for confidence. After all, she was the daughter of a 
Harvard-educated stockbroker so convinced of his abilities that he 
used to write corrections in the margins of the encyclopedia. Still, 
she had only practiced for six years _ 1968 to 1974 _ and in that 
time, she had done only a smattering of criminal cases, most of them 
misdemeanors. ``I'd had court experience,'' she recalled, ``but never 
a jury trial.'' Rojas, nonetheless, liked her from the very start. 
``She really believed in me,'' he said early this week in Eisenstein's 
Manhattan law office.. Rojas, whose mother had died while he was in 
prison, came to rely on Mrs. Chenoweth for emotional support. He sent 
her cards on Mother's Day. She told him to cut his hair. She carried 
a sport coat in her briefcase for him to wear in court and worked 
to persuade experienced lawyers to get involved in his case. ``Originally, 
I only saw myself as a conduit,'' she said, but she ended up doing 
a lot of the legal work herself. She also heard about a selfless retired 
New York City police detective who tried to crack unsolved murders. 
Soon, Denis O'Sullivan, was part of her team, putting up his own house 
to secure Rojas' $50,000 bail. Another retired police officer, Mike 
O'Connor, found a critical witness _ a PATH police sergeant, John 
Apel. The sergeant remembered that on the night of the crime, he had 
watched Rojas just miss a train as it left the station. Research showed 
that the train departed that night no later than 2:03 a.m. That meant 
Rojas could not have been involved in the dispute on Broadway, a half-mile 
away, at 2:07 a.m., when the shooting started. When Rojas' appeals 
lawyer, Tina Mazza, introduced this evidence to the Appellate Division 
in 1995, it overturned the conviction, citing as well ineffective 
counsel by his original lawyer and the tainted identifications. After 
more than four years in prison, Rojas was out on bail. But prosecutors 
decided to retry him. Their reasoning: The witnesses, a solid, stable 
group of college students, still believed Rojas was the man in the 
orange jacket who helped kill their friend. ``We also had circumstantial 
evidence,'' said Barbara Thompson, a spokeswoman for the district 
attorney's office, ``so we decided to let the jury decide.'' The decision 
made Mrs. Chenoweth's blood boil. ``They were not interested in justice. 
They were interested in securing and keeping a conviction,'' she said. 
``It's like a pride of lions giving up a kill.'' The families of the 
victims applauded the move, however. They still believe Rojas was 
involved. ``I think he got away with a big lie,'' said Jose Bueno, 
whose brother was killed. ``Seven people saw him pull out the gun. 
Luis Rojas will have to live with that for his whole life.'' For the 
retrial, Mrs. Chenoweth persuaded Eisenstein, a former criminal defense 
lawyer, to try the case for nothing. Their relationship was close 
but difficult. Mrs. Chenoweth liked to second-guess. ``She had some 
loony ideas about what the rules of evidence allowed,'' he said. But 
if he mentioned that, he remembered, ``she would say to me, `Well, 
it's my loony ideas that got Kevin this far.''' At that trial, Apel's 
alibi testimony was critical. Another witness, William Davis, said 
he had told the police on the night of the shootings that Rojas was 
the wrong man. The man in the orange jacket had had a ponytail and 
was built like a body builder. Rojas was 5-foot-7 and weighed all 
of 125 pounds. Jurors noted that there was no finding of gunpowder 
on Rojas' jacket, and the witnesses' accounts about who had done what 
during the shooting began to conflict on cross-examination. Still, 
the jury deliberated 24 hours before coming back with a verdict: Not 
guilty on all counts. Mrs. Chenoweth and Eisenstein wept. Rojas, who 
is now working as a construction laborer, smiled and began thinking 
about how to get his orange jacket back. He wants to wear it again, 
a final symbol of vindication. ``It's my jacket,'' he said plainly. 
``I didn't commit any crime in it.'' That night, Mrs. Chenoweth took 
the train home to New Jersey, by herself, had dinner with her daughter 
and started fielding phone calls. People have been asking her now 
to get involved in another case of someone they say was wrongly accused. 
But Mrs. Chenoweth has a heart condition, asthma and a family that 
believes she cannot handle the strain of another crusade. ``I have 
taken a blood oath,'' Mrs. Chenoweth said, with obvious reluctance, 
``that I will not get involved in any more.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>