<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0022 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Thursday, Oct. 22: While 
the West's attention is fixed on Kosovo, Slobodan Milosevic is stilling 
independent voices inside Serbia. On Tuesday Serbia's parliament passed 
a suffocating new law on the media, the latest in a series of threats 
and actions against dissenters there. As always, Milosevic's timing 
is diabolically clever. Western officials have not sufficiently criticized 
these attacks on Serbia's civil society, afraid to anger the leader 
they need to deliver a deal on Kosovo. Washington has not yet realized 
that these independent activists are essential to the development 
of a democratic Serbia, the best way to break Milosevic's power. The 
new media law bans the broadcast of Serbian-language foreign programs 
from services such as the Voice of America or BBC, which need local 
transmission to reach listeners without shortwave radios. It allows 
the government to level instant fines, minimum $40,000, on media that 
it decides have violated any of a long list of vague rules. One such 
fine would be enough to close any independent newspaper or radio station. 
The new law comes after Serbia's government closed three newspapers 
and two radio stations and stripped several broadcast stations of 
their frequencies earlier in the year. The media are the heart of 
Serbia's civil society, but other sectors have suffered as well. Another 
law took away the autonomy of Serbia's universities, allowing the 
government to appoint deans who control hiring and can dismiss any 
professor. The far-right nationalist who is deputy prime minister, 
Vojislav Seselj, has said that independent journalists, human rights 
workers and antiwar activists were spies for the West and would be 
taken as hostages if NATO carried out its bombing threats. Serbia's 
opposition political parties have been crippled and divided by Milosevic, 
but groups doing theater or journalism, creating Internet sites or 
working for civil rights proliferate. Although Milosevic has often 
imposed harsh restrictions on the groups he finds threatening, he 
has not eradicated them. The network of independent radio stations 
has 1.6 million listeners. These activists need more support from 
the West, both financial and moral. When American and European diplomats 
meet Milosevic, they should emphasize his suppression of dissent. 
Last week Serbia's most prominent independent journalist, Veran Matic 
of Radio B-92, said he had never met Washington's two top negotiators 
on Kosovo. On Tuesday one of them, Ambassador Christopher Hill, held 
a meeting with Matic and other journalists from the independent media. 
Kosovo talks would not suffer if such meetings were held frequently. 
Most high-level diplomats who visit Belgrade see only Milosevic and 
his men, which boosts his standing and sends the message that the 
West does not care about Serbia's dissenters. Independent groups are 
not the solution to the Kosovo problem, but they may be the start 
of a solution to the Milosevic problem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>