<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0024 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Thursday, Oct. 22: There 
are more members of Congress from New York City and its suburbs running 
uncontested this year than facing serious opposition. But an election 
still presents an opportunity to evaluate the incumbents. Here are 
our endorsements in some of the more interesting local races: Fourth 
District (Nassau County): Carolyn McCarthy's transformation from nurse-housewife 
to gun control advocate to member of Congress was one of the most 
dramatic stories of the 1996 political year. Now Mrs. McCarthy, a 
Democrat, is running for re-election and she has the right to boast 
that she has become more than a one-issue lawmaker. Mrs. McCarthy 
has worked hard on constituent services and broadened her concerns 
in Congress to education and health issues, while compiling an impressive 
record of support for the environment. Her opponent, Gregory Becker, 
is a longtime state Assemblyman whose main rationale for running seems 
simply to be that the district ought to be under the control of the 
Republican Party. We are impressed by the degree to which Mrs. McCarthy 
has grown in office, and we give her our enthusiastic endorsement. 
Sixth District (parts of Queens and the Bronx): Voters who feel that 
political power brokers are elbowing them out of the decision-making 
process have no farther to look than this district, where veteran 
incumbent Thomas Manton engineered a transfer of power to his chosen 
successor in the middle of the night, at a time when it was too late 
for other Democrats to file for a primary or for Republicans to nominate 
a serious opponent. The beneficiary of Manton's scheme, Joseph Crowley, 
is a 36-year-old member of the state Assembly whose main exertion 
seems to have been promoting the racing industry. Crowley, a personable 
Democrat with deep roots in Queens politics, will almost certainly 
be elected to Congress, since the Republican Party is giving no support 
to its nominee, James Dillon, a maverick. Dillon should be commended 
for his effort to give voters more of an option than the local political 
machines seem to have intended. But his positions on tax policy are 
extreme and his platform on foreign policy seems to call for American 
isolationism, except in regard to countries whose ethnic groups are 
represented in the district. Despite our reservations about the illegitimate 
way in which he obtained the nomination, we reluctantly endorse Crowley 
and hope Queens voters will get more respectful treatment in the future. 
Thirteenth District (part of Brooklyn and Staten Island): Freshman 
Republican Vito Fossella quickly established himself as a loyal foot 
soldier for Speaker Newt Gingrich. We have disagreed with Fossella 
on a number of fronts, including his extreme opposition to abortion 
rights and family planning. He also opposes requiring federal employee 
health plans to cover contraceptives for women, just as they cover 
other prescriptive drugs. But Fossella's most unforgivable failure 
was his persistent attempts to sabotage bipartisan efforts to pass 
a campaign finance reform bill. Eugene Prisco, a Democrat and Staten 
Island schoolteacher, is a long shot at best in this race. But he 
has been a lifelong fighter for reform and has a sensible list of 
priorities including school construction aid and environmental protection. 
He gets our strong endorsement. Twenty-Sixth District (Lower Hudson 
Valley to Ulster County, the Catskills and north to Ithaca): Incumbent 
Democrat Maurice Hinchey's district is larger than Connecticut, and 
includes both troubled industrial cities and tourist resorts. During 
his three terms in Congress, Hinchey has represented this diverse 
territory well with an agenda that combines economic development and 
a staunch support for the environment. Along with Sherwood Boehlert 
of Utica, a Republican, Hinchey has set the pace for environmentalism 
in the New York Congressional delegation. His Republican opponent, 
William Walker, an apple farmer who owns several upstate radio stations, 
has no real experience in government. Hinchey has served his district 
well and should be returned to Congress. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>