<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0349 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ronald Brown settled into a chair at a table in the crowded restaurant, 
his backpack and dance satchel on the floor beside him. It was lunchtime 
recently at Kelley &AMP; Ping, a popular Vietnamese cafeteria-style 
hangout in SoHo. Brown gazed into space, then broke into a slow, easy 
grin. ``I think I have a handle on this now,'' he said. It had been 
an unexpectedly dizzy race to this moment, only 10 days before Brown's 
modern-dance company, Evidence, was to open a three-week season at 
Dance Theater Workshop in Chelsea. Included are premieres of two full-evening 
works _ ``Incidents,'' which is being performed this weekend, and 
``Better Days,'' which follows next week. For a small company like 
Evidence, this season is major. And all Brown's meticulous planning 
was disrupted when, soon after rehearsals began, six of the company's 
10 members left to pursue other kinds of jobs and lives. The gods 
who rule dance favor chaos. But by the lunch in SoHo, the dances were 
pretty much set. Brown and his 14 company members, apprentice dancers 
and guest performers were ready to go. And their preparations offer 
a window into how dance is made. At 32, Brown has become known for 
a distinctive style of high-energy choreography that merges African 
dance, ballet, hip-hop and sensuous modern-dance movement. Implicit 
narratives, often addressing social and cultural themes, are folded 
into the mix to produce dance, Brown has said, that might be performed 
by a man walking down a street in sneakers and that would ``tell my 
grandmother's stories.'' A black choreographer, he is intent on bearing 
witness to the history of black Americans, training his performers 
to move in ways that embody ``evidence'' of their lives and times. 
``Few today can match the depth of his ability to marry message and 
medium,'' Anna Kisselgoff wrote of Brown in The New York Times in 
January. Brown's season is unusually long for Dance Theater Workshop, 
a center for nnovative new modern dance. ``The idea is to allow really 
significant artists to work in public a longer time, as in ballet 
and the theater,'' David White, the workshop's director, said. For 
Brown and Evidence, which he founded in 1986, the season will be the 
culmination of a year that began with their critically praised participation 
in the Altogether Different festival at the Joyce Theater. ``Incidents,'' 
a dance about black women and slavery, and ``Better Days,'' about 
life as a gay black man, grew out of short pieces performed at the 
Joyce. ``I always intended for them to be a whole evening,'' Brown 
said. ``I felt all the information was too much to fit into a 20-minute 
piece. The Joyce was my first stab at it.'' In April, Brown and his 
dancers took off for Abidjan, Ivory Coast, for an intense three weeks 
working with Rokya Kone and her Jeune Ballet d'Afrique Noire, which 
also fuses dance traditions and cultures. In May, Evidence began seven 
weeks of rehearsals in New York for the workshop season. Brown choreographs 
through the accretion of what he calls ``images,'' visions that settle 
into his mind and cannot be ignored, waiting to be translated into 
dance. ``Like a mourning choir,'' Brown explained, ``and the way the 
choir steps together.'' He records the images in notebooks that tend 
to cover six to nine months. Eventually, sometimes over a period of 
years, a few images nudge him to put them together in a dance. Often, 
those pieces become a suite of dances, performable on their own but 
adding up to a larger picture as a group. In the studio in May, the 
performers got the Joyce choreography back into their muscles, then 
moved on to a few new images, in no particular order, at the end of 
each rehearsal. In early June, Evidence performed with the African 
group in New York at Aaron Davis Hall. Soon after, the six dancers 
left Evidence. It is hard to keep dance companies together, particularly 
small, hard-working ones like Evidence. There is better money to be 
made on Broadway, for instance, and how can a dancer rehearsing all 
afternoon five days a week make it to auditions? Brown's dancers _ 
most of whom have additional jobs dancing with other companies, teaching 
and working in stores and restaurants _ earn $10 an hour fr rehearsals, 
which generally run from four to eight hours, four or five days a 
week, before a season. They are paid $500 a week for performing. Most 
of the $40,000 that Brown had to raise for the DTW season, though 
it was subsidized by the theater, went to rehearsal pay and studio 
rentals. The designer Wunmi Olaiya managed to spend only $300 on costumes. 
Brown continued to work sketchily on ``Incidents'' and ``Better Days'' 
through the summer. But only in mid-September, when he had found all 
his new dancers, could he begin to work in earnest over the mere five 
weeks before the workshop season. The last new dancer, Duane Holland, 
joined Evidence on Sept. 22. ``I'm pretty good at retaining information,'' 
Holland said. ``But sometimes I'd think, `Oh, goodness, could you 
please slow down?' But I think he demands a lot because he feels you 
are capable of doing it, and so you pick it up.'' Luckily, two of 
the remaining dancers, Angelica Patterson and Telly Fowler, were comparative 
veterans of Evidence and knew the work well. When Brown returned to 
the early choreography for ``Incidents'' in a rehearsal in late September, 
Ms. Patterson, the only woman who had performed it, joined him at 
the front like a lithe, long-bodied ghost, echoing his moves, filling 
them out a little and watching, with Brown, to see when it was time 
to move on. Sometimes Ms. Patterson gently (and worriedly) corrected 
him on a move or sequence. ``You don't want to disrespect him,'' she 
said later. ``And you never know. He may want to change it.'' Brown 
did not seem to mind her interruptions. ``He honestly has a respect 
for his dancers that a lot of choreographers may feel but don't always 
show,'' Ms. Patterson said. ``I think it has a lot to do with the 
fact that he dances with us.'' Indeed, there was a warmth that verged 
on affection in the rehearsal, in a studio on Wooster Street in SoHo. 
Brown smiled at times, often unseen by the dancers but drawing fleeting 
grins from them when they looked up and recognized approval and sometimes 
even delight. There were no reprimands, only one or two chilling stares, 
again unnoticed, when a dancer failed repeatedly to make it through 
a sequence. Dancers must learn more than the steps, of course, and 
as these grew more secure, they started to bring more of themselves 
into the choreography. A mercurial flea of a dancer began to jump 
higher and with more gusto. Another one, rising at the touch of an 
absent male partner, become a sensuous woman responding to a man. 
At the side, other dancers waited to be called, curled up on the floor 
and even catnapping amid the jumble of water bottles and dance bags. 
There was little air in the steaming studio. The smell of lunch cooking 
drifted from the kitchen through this combination living loft and 
rental studio. As the afternoon wound on, beads of sweat formed on 
foreheads and on the men's bare backs, and extra layers of dance clothes 
were peeled off and thrown to the side without a break in concentration. 
Once the women learned the completed passages from ``Incidents,'' 
it was time to begin work on new material. Brown changed tapes in 
the boombox in the corner, then returned to front and center. He waited 
several beats, the dancers facing him like a cluster of watchful deer, 
before diving into a new sequence. His body an explosion of gutsy, 
urgent movement, wondrous and impossible to copy, he darted into the 
dancers' midst, dipping and straightening, scrabbling and stretching 
powerfully. At one moment he danced like an African village woman 
padding across hot, flat earth. The next moment he was a little girl 
sashaying down a city block. It was a choreographing of extremes, 
dance that not only used every part of the body but also shifted from 
one emotion to another as quickly as the dancers responded to the 
shifting rhythms of disco music, a simple spiritual sung by a very 
young Aretha Franklin and the sudden sharp exhalations with which 
Brown counted the music's beat. The women looked on, hovering at the 
edge of motion before slipping, like swimmers, into this turbulent 
sea. Watching Brown from the corner of their eyes as they moved, the 
women picked up a step here, a gesture there, gradually adding flesh 
to the skeleton they were refashioning. Brown doubled back into the 
sequence without breaking the flow of movement. The women followed, 
and with each flowing repetition the steps gained color and substance, 
looking less like imitation and more like freewheeling dance. The 
dancers did not end up looking like Brown. No one in the room quite 
matched the juicy abandon of this new choreography as it welled up 
from his body. But now he had something to work with, and as he watched, 
he added a small spurting jump, an abrupt pivot, a glide that suddenly 
and unexpectedly became a lunge. Brown was still randomly ``adding 
on the next chunk'' at this point. The dancers grabbed hold of the 
vivid imagery with which he guided them. They were mumbling old women, 
tomato pickers, women holding their children's hands. ``You are just 
making sure ain't nobody getting into that dress,'' Brown called out 
over one youthful, warily flirty strut, the dancers' hands gathering 
invisible skirts around them. ``Down, down,'' he said a few moments 
later. ``Uh huh, like he hit you in the neck.'' There is an undercurrent 
of simultaneous power and helplessness to the dancing. Walk down the 
street of this town, Brown told Ms. Patterson in an early ``Incidents'' 
rehearsal, the air tight around you, but walk with the feeling of 
having to hide. ``I've always thought of my dances as being physical 
narratives or physical journeys,'' Brown said. ``Angelica would have 
a whole through-line here, but the choreography would probably look 
like a sequence of movements.'' ``Incidents'' was inspired by Brown's 
reading of several books on slavery, including Linda Brent's ``Incidents 
in the Life of a Slave Girl.'' ``I didn't want to stage the book.'' 
recalled Brown, an avid reader who once contemplated training in journalism. 
``That would be crazy. But images would come to mind.'' ``Better Days'' 
was largely inspired by the writing of Brown's favorite gay black 
poets, whose work will be spoken live and on tape during the dance. 
Another inspiration was the atmosphere of Better Days, a Manhattan 
club, now defunct, where gay men, Brown has said, ``could find love 
and sex and dance their hearts out.'' The slow, heavy house music 
he danced to at such clubs often touched him with its oddly spiritual 
quality. ``It was always `lift your spirit higher,' and I wanted this 
sense of the spiritual in this piece,'' he said. The same quality 
was part of what appealed to White, the workshop director. ``You see 
a joy of movement and a joyousness that comes from the movement,'' 
White said. ``Such a joy can't be underestimated in our time.'' Older 
and busier now, Brown does not go to clubs as often as he once did. 
His free nights are often spent catching up with the company's administrative 
chores. ``When I'm working on something like this, I begin teaching 
at 9:30 in the morning and have rehearsals to 9 p.m. or even midnight. 
Any computer work is done after rehearsal, with Mondays left for administrative 
work. My mom used to be my company manager until she passed away in 
1996.'' His sister Yasmin, now 15, took on some of the work until 
this summer, learning on the job from Renee Redding-Jones, Brown's 
assistant, and Celeste A-Re, his production manager. ``She'll start 
working again with me during the season. But she's a junior in high 
school, and I wanted her to get a good start on the school year.'' 
These days, ideas take hold of him in the hours after he shuts down 
his computer at night, generally around 2 a.m. ``I throw in a video 
of what I have so far, then things come to me.'' He laughed, a little 
grimly. ``I would like that to change.'' Fighting exhaustion, he found 
that the temper that lurks beneath his seemingly invincible calm and 
deliberateness began to make itself felt. ``My partner has been really 
understanding,'' Brown said of his companion, the writer G. Winston 
James. ``But as a really good girlfriend told me, I was being evil 
to him because I was so tired.'' Also exhausted, the dancers have 
begun to add soothing yoga sessions to their regular dance classes 
and warm-ups. But strangely enough, Brown said, with such tiredness 
came better work in the last days of rehearsal. ``There's something 
that happens the last week, when the energy comes down,'' he said. 
``I don't intend to tire people. I don't want to fry their brains. 
But I feel we all learn more and work better when we're tired. It 
kind of gets your ego out of the way. You end up working more deeply, 
getting to the essence.'' By the last week or so of rehearsal, Brown 
felt, the dancers were internalizing the dances' underlying stories 
and could rely on themselves to tell those stories. The ``stew'' of 
the dance was settling on the stove, he said, the flavors asserting 
themselves. The light was dimming outside at rehearsal on a chill 
mid-October afternoon as Brown and six of his male dancers worked 
on a new section of ``Better Days'' to the even, pounding beat of 
music by Stolen Moments. There was laughter at times, particularly 
as Brown handed out several pairs of flowing leopard-print pants that 
he admitted were ``scaring me to death.'' But weariness took over 
between the new sequences. Holland, who once was a gymnast, dropped 
to the floor to rest, unaffectedly spreadeagle in the center of the 
studio. The men milled dreamily in one brief passage, a crowd of lost 
souls seeking anonymous sexual partners at an imaginary club. Almost 
imperceptibly, they paired off and sank down together only to stand 
again, one man turning away to leave the other in a smooth completion 
of the dance phrase. There was a haunting sadness to the sequence. 
A dancer hung back a little, moving with his body but not his heart. 
``Straight boys do this, too,'' Brown called out, teasing him gently. 
The dance phrase grew slowly but steadily as the dancers continued 
to work. Then suddenly, the magic occurred. The men were no longer 
enacting a cool gesture of dismissal or simply learning to rise smoothly 
from the floor. All that had been replaced by a single long unbroken 
spiral thread of movement alive with love, disdain and exquisite physicality. 
Over the next three weeks, Ronald Brown and Evidence will present 
three programs at Dance Theater Workshop, 219 W. 19th St. ``Incidents'' 
will be performed Friday through Sunday at 8 p.m.; tickets are $12. 
``Better Days'' will be performed on Thursday through Nov. 1 at 8 
p.m., and a program of short pieces will be presented from Nov. 5 
through Nov. 8. Tickets for performances the second and third week 
are $15. Reservations: (212) 924-0077. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>