<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0386 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Forensic teams from three countries have tried to unravel the mystery, 
but have come to radically different conclusions. Nearly six months 
after Juan Gerardi, a Roman Catholic bishop and outspoken human rights 
advocate here, was bludgeoned to death, a solution to his slaying 
appears further away than ever, even as the political controversy 
surrounding the case continues to grow. Despite mounting evidence 
to the contrary, the Guatemalan government continues to maintain that 
the killing was a crime without a political motive, and imprisoned 
a dog that prosecutors say took part in it. But the Roman Catholic 
Church and human rights groups say elements of the Guatemalan armed 
forces were involved in the killing, and point to the increasingly 
bizarre turns the case has taken as proof of an official cover-up. 
As a result, Gerardi's death has become a major test of the 1996 peace 
accord that brought an end to 36 years of civil war here and was supposed 
to install the principle of civilian supremacy. With prosecutors now 
implying that the bishop was the victim of a homosexual ``crime of 
passion'' committed by a priest, many Guatemalans appear to be increasingly 
suspicious of the government. ``This is the most significant case 
of recent times, but what we have is an investigation designed to 
cover up, not reveal, the truth,'' said Frank LaRue, director of the 
Center for Legal Action in Human Rights, a leading human rights group 
here. ``If impunity is tolerated in this case, it will be an enormous 
step backward for Guatemala and for the rule of law in this country.'' 
At a news conference here last Friday, Jean Arnault, director of the 
U.N. mission that is monitoring the peace accord, called on the government 
to ``show bravery and determination'' in its investigation and ``not 
let a single clue go unexplored.'' Public suspicions of official involvement 
in the killing and of a cover-up are ``a perfectly reasonable hypothesis'' 
that ``in our judgment is fully justified,'' he said. ``If we think 
of the recent history of Guatemala, we know that groups exist that 
have both the capacity and the motive to carry out a political crime 
that has the appearance of a common crime,'' said Arnault, who under 
the terms of the peace agreement has the authority to investigate 
the case. ``The murder of Monsignor Gerardi,'' he added, ``continues 
as a shadow over the state of justice in Guatemala.'' Skepticism over 
the official version has taken root because on April 24 the bishop 
made public an exhaustive study of human rights violations conducted 
by a church group. Laying the groundwork for possible prosecutions, 
the report concluded that the Guatemalan armed forces and other official 
bodies were responsible for 80 percent of the 150,000 deaths and 50,000 
disappearances that occurred during the war. Two nights later, as 
he was returning from dinner with relatives, Gerardi, who was 75, 
was beaten to death in the garage of his residence. Mario Orantes 
Najera, a fellow priest and the bishop's housemate for the last eight 
years, reported finding his bloody and battered body that night. Almost 
immediately, police said the killing was a common crime with no political 
links and arrested Carlos Enrique Vielman, 24, a homeless man who 
often slept in a park across the street from the parish house. But 
he was released after it was established that his right arm had suffered 
injuries that made it impossible for him to wield the 8-pound concrete 
block that police say was the murder weapon. In July, the case took 
an even more surprising twist when the parish house was surrounded 
by 70 heavily armed police officers and Orantes was arrested, along 
with the parish cook, and accused of the killing. At that point, government 
officials began to describe the murder as a ``crime of passion,'' 
leading to news reports, which Orantes has repeatedly denied, that 
the clergymen may have been involved in some sort of secret homosexual 
group. On Wednesday, prosecutors formally charged Orantes with the 
killing. As proof of Orantes' supposed involvement in the killing, 
which he denies, prosecutors described bites on the bishop's body 
that they said came from a dog that is owned by Orantes and responds 
only to his commands. The dog, a crippled 11-year-old German shepherd 
named Baloo, was also taken into custody, and, like Orantes, is still 
being held. But the Baloo hypothesis now appears to have collapsed. 
Late last month, with a three-man team of American forensic experts 
looking on at the request of the Roman Catholic archdiocese, the bishop's 
body was exhumed and a new autopsy was performed by a Spanish coroner 
whom human rights advocates accuse of covering up military atrocities 
during El Salvador's civil war. In a report made public last week, 
the American experts concluded that Gerardi was assaulted by ``at 
least two attackers, if not more,'' and that he was struck by another 
weapon, probably a metal pipe, before his head was smashed with the 
concrete block. They also determined that the dog's involvement was 
``physically impossible,'' noting that ``none of the wounds on the 
bishop have the specific characteristics of a dog bite or tooth mark.'' 
The special prosecutor in the case, Otto Ardon Medina, a former legal 
adviser to the Guatemalan Air Force, did not respond to requests for 
an interview. But in recent remarks to the Guatemalan press, he and 
other government officials have questioned the patriotism of human 
rights leaders, deprecated evidence indicating military involvement 
in the killing and accused Arnault of ``conducting a parallel investigation, 
one that is beyond his jurisdiction.'' Complaining of a lack of cooperation, 
including the denial of access to investigative reports that are supposed 
to be public records, the church and human rights groups have conducted 
their own investigation of the killing. ``There are a lot of loose 
ends, and government prosecutors are simply refusing to look into 
them,'' said Helen Mack Chang, director of the Myrna Mack Foundation, 
a leading human rights group here. That unofficial inquiry has developed 
several leads that appear to fly in the face of government assurances 
that its security forces were not involved in the killing. For instance, 
a church report said that a telephone call made from the house after 
the killing but before the arrival of police was traced to a public 
telephone near a military base. In addition, church officials said, 
witnesses observed a car parked near the house at the time of the 
killing. The license plate was noted, and has been traced to a military 
garrison east of here. Religious and human rights groups have also 
called for an investigation into the actions of Capt. Byron Lima Oliva 
and his father, Col. Byron Lima Estrada, a former head of military 
intelligence, on the night of the killing. Citing what they call ``credible 
and confidential'' informants, the organizations now suggest that 
the two military officers ``were responsible for the murder.'' The 
two men have told prosecutors they had no involvement in the killing. 
A few days after the killing, Lima Oliva was reassigned to Cyprus 
as an observer to the U.N peacekeeping mission there. Because of the 
church's denunciation, he has since been recalled, but human rights 
groups complain that they have not been allowed to sit in on his interrogation, 
as is permitted by Guatemalan law. ``We are tired of tricks and tired 
of conspiracies,'' Ms. Mack said. ``It is time for the government 
to assume its responsibility and stop the manipulation and the threats, 
because if it does not, no one will ever dare to take a case to court 
and impunity will continue to reign in this country.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>