<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0553 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A season that began with an inauspicious West Coast crash and a scary 
South Bronx collapse played out in seamless, spectacular style. After 
stumbling out of the gate, the Yankees won 125 games. After being 
closed for repairs, Yankee Stadium held up to a record number of fans. 
More than ever, team and stadium stand tall and imperfectly proud. 
The Yanks-as-champs was a conclusion befitting a season of repentance, 
a season when the muscular new home run champ practically bragged 
of unburdening himself in psychotherapy, a season when even George 
Steinbrenner cried as he celebrated the ultra-achievement of his special 
and most human team. The Yankees in many ways were the reflection 
of their blemished owner, battle-worn manager and Bronx-scarred ball 
park. Almost to a man, they were never afraid to admit to their warts 
and how much they needed each other. ``You waiting for me?'' Chuck 
Knoblauch snapped as he stepped through the news media after his mental 
lapse lost Game 2 of the Cleveland series. Yes, we had been waiting 
for him to pick up the ball, and now were waiting for him to admit, 
in the spirit of Joe Torre's clubhouse, that he had done the inexcusable. 
Only when Knoblauch did fess up the following day did he seem to join 
his team's essential core. The true, modern-day Yankee does not wear 
a mask to cover his flaws. From Darryl Strawberry to Scott Brosius, 
Orlando Hernandez to David Wells, the roster was replete with tales 
of salvation and redemption, special cases who had the intangible 
experience of hardship to give. You always had the feeling that these 
superstar-less Yankees could appreciate more than most what it meant 
to be so much greater than the sum of their parts. Some teams are 
like that, and you can't measure their worth by what they hit or how 
much they make. Some ball parks are like that, too, and you can't 
expect some out-of-town aristocrat to understand why they just shouldn't 
be picked up and moved. What, for instance, would the San Diego Padres 
owner, John Moores, know about generations of fathers and mothers 
and sons and daughters who have strained their necks to glimpse the 
Stadium as the No. 4 train rumbled from the subway tunnel, and on 
into the 161st Street station? Moores probably thought he was doing 
Steinbrenner a public relations favor when, before Game 3 of the Yankees' 
four-game sweep, he compared the Stadium to a ``Little League park,'' 
said that he didn't ``know how they could be in a worse location'' 
and added that ``the city ought to do the right thing for the public.'' 
Instead, he came off like some pontificating, small-town dullard. 
Even before a 500-pound concrete and steel expansion joint from the 
upper deck became loose and crushed the empty seats below last April 
13, no one disputed that the Stadium, while still asymmetrically beautiful, 
was outdated. Wider corridors, bigger bathrooms? Obviously. More parking 
and a Metro North train stop? Absolutely. Luxury boxes so the Boss 
can keep up with the Joneses and the Jacobses? Aye, New York City 
loves a winner. The issue of location is only one to men like Moores, 
Steinbrenner and his spokesman, the mayor. Nearly three million fans 
rushed to the Bronx this season, coming on weekends and weekdays, 
for games against Baltimore and Tampa Bay, riding the trains and braving 
the traffic. Yes, as Moores said, the city ``ought to do the right 
thing for the public,'' but the public in this case is the Yankees 
fans who by and large want the Stadium to remain in the Bronx. New 
York is not Baltimore, Cleveland or San Diego, cities with comparatively 
small downtowns. What, exactly, is the most central location for the 
majority of Yankee fans, who come from upper Manhattan, the Bronx, 
Connecticut, Westchester and New Jersey? It is not East Rutherford, 
N.J., or the West Side of Manhattan. It's the South Bronx, where last 
week, before Game 2, I found more than few out-of-towners in Monument 
Park who seemed to be far more enlightened on this subject than Moores. 
I was especially impressed by two elderly sisters _ one from Portland, 
Ore., and the other from Moscow, Idaho _ who had taken the train up 
from Times Square, and were thrilled, not frightened. Beverly Schaffer 
said she loved being in the Bronx, in the ball park that had filled 
her television screen for so long. ``They're not going to tear this 
down, are they?'' she asked. Flaws and all, she said the Stadium was 
everything she imagined it would be. A sight and site to behold, and, 
for reasons you feel as much as see, so much greater than the sum 
of its parts. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>