<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0390 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Religion and politics, a combustible mix here, exploded Thursday in 
a furor over a proposal to make the study of sacred Hindu texts compulsory 
for all children in this vast country of many faiths. The government, 
which is led by Hindu nationalists, circulated the proposal to state 
education ministers before convening an official conference here Thursday. 
A result was a whirlwind of protest from opposition political parties 
and even some of the administration's allies. When the national education 
conference opened, officials from 10 of the 25 states stormed out 
over what they described as an assault on the secular fabric of India. 
They said they were outraged by the decision of the Hindu nationalist 
Bharatiya Janata Party to open the conference with the recitation 
of a hymn to a Hindu goddess, Saraswati. Even before the conference 
began, the party, which dominates the government, began distancing 
itself from the proposal, which advocated that curriculums be ``Indianized, 
nationalized and spiritualized'' and that the study of the Vedas and 
Upanishads, Hindu Scriptures, be compulsory. On Thursday the party 
withdrew the proposal entirely from official consideration. Prime 
Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee, who heads the party, said in his opening 
remarks that schools have to instill a respect for all faiths. ``There 
must be no place for religious bigotry or intolerance,'' he said. 
The minister for human resources development, Murli Manohar Joshi, 
said ``a group of experts'' had put together the proposal, which had 
been offered only for discussion. The main purpose of the conference, 
Joshi said, was to look for ways to improve education in a country 
where tens of millions of children simply do not go to school and 
where half the population is illiterate. The dispute over teaching 
Hindu philosophy almost completely diverted attention from the broader 
goals of the conference. Political analysts say the dispute has also 
exposed fissures in the Bharatiya Janata Party and highlighted the 
efforts of the rival Congress Party, which has governed India for 
most of the country's 51-year history, to rebuild its support among 
religious minorities, especially Muslims. Next month the Bharatiya 
Janata and Congress parties face each other in elections in New Delhi 
and in the states of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, the first since 
the new government came to power in March and Sonia Gandhi became 
head of the Congress Party. The Bharatiya Janata Party, in power in 
New Delhi and Rajasthan, has been seriously weakened by skyrocketing 
vegetable prices and shortages of electricity and water. It has been 
unable to pursue its agenda of Hindutva, a cultural nationalism, because 
of resistance from its partners in a shaky coalition. Increasingly 
the core supporters of the party have criticized the government their 
party leads for failing to push the construction of a temple to Rama, 
an incarnation of the Hindu god Vishnu, on the site of a demolished 
16th-century mosque in Ayodhya, among other points. Joshi, a member 
of Parliament from Uttar Pradesh, is generally seen as coming from 
the more militant wing of the party, and Vajpayee is its more pragmatic 
and moderate face. Some analysts speculate that Joshi made an ill-conceived 
attempt to satisfy his political base, leaving the party leaders little 
choice but to backtrack quickly when the political price grew too 
high. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>