<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981022.0449 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Johnny Manuel sat in the interview room at the Centro de Readaptacion 
Social Para Adultas, a dusty and sun-bleached prison at the foot of 
the Sierra de Juarez, telling his story in the bitter monotone of 
a man who has seen his nightmares grow bones. ``It's like you've been 
swallowed up by a big monster,'' said Manuel, a slight man in a loose-fitting 
hunting cap who drew hungrily on one menthol cigarette after another. 
``I made a bad, bad mistake. Ruined my whole damn life, I guess.'' 
Manuel said his mistake was inadvertently crossing an international 
bridge while looking for a parking space _ with three guns belonging 
to his fiancee, a prison guard, in his car. He has been in this Juarez 
prison for nearly eight months, barely cracking the five-year sentence 
he drew for arms smuggling. Manuel, a 49-year-old butcher from Lake 
Charles, La., is one of 78 U.S. citizens who are in Mexican jails 
after being arrested this year on arms charges. Seventy-two of them 
were arrested at or near the border and most, U.S. officials say, 
were apparently guilty of simple blunders. Joseph Albanese, 24, and 
William Patterson, 25, friends from Ohio who were on a rattlesnake 
and coyote hunting trip to West Texas, said they, too, found themselves 
on the Mexican side of the border, with their hunting guns, before 
they could turn around. Robert Brown, 48, was leading 15 members of 
his family in two rented vans from Birmingham, Ala., to Oakland, Calif., 
when he said he made a wrong turn and ended up on a bridge he did 
not intend to cross, with a shotgun and a World War II rifle. James 
Gray was taking his family camping in New Mexico when he decided to 
visit Juarez for a Mexican dinner, not thinking about the 9-mm pistol 
in his vehicle, he said. In the most recent case, five Louisiana men 
in their late teens and early 20s, including two members of the University 
of Southwestern Louisiana football team, were arrested at an international 
crossing in Nuevo Laredo on Oct. 10 while on a South Texas hunting 
trip. Officials on both sides of the border are debating the reasons 
_ from lenient gun laws in Texas to overzealousness by Mexican authorities 
_ but the arrests have caused enough concern that the issue was raised 
in talks in June between the U.S. secretary of state and her Mexican 
counterpart. In all, 135 Americans have been arrested this year on 
firearms charges. Fifty-seven were released on bond, had their charges 
dropped or were convicted and sent back to the United States as part 
of a prisoner-exchange program. The rest, like Manuel, sit in crowded 
Mexican jails and count the seconds. And it is not simply having guns. 
The same charges that apply to possession of a weapon also apply to 
possession of ammunition, and some U.S. citizens have been jailed 
for having anywhere from a box of bullets to a handful of shotgun 
shells in the car. The charge depends to some degree on the caliber 
of weapon involved. Anything more powerful than a .38-caliber gun 
is considered a military weapon. The number of Americans imprisoned 
on arms charges at the Mexican border has soared from just a handful 
of cases last year to scores this year, State Department officials 
said, not because more people have been arrested but because Mexican 
officials have been prosecuting more cases. ``There is not a heck 
of a lot of difference in the number of arrests,'' said a State Department 
official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. ``What is different 
is the outcome of the cases,'' the official said. ``Before, when someone 
inadvertently entered Mexico with a weapon, they were briefly detained 
and usually informally allowed to return to the U.S. with the weapon 
seized. Now, in the same situation, they could end up in jail a long, 
long time.'' Mexican customs and police officials deny this, and say 
they have no explanation for the increase in weapons prosecutions. 
``The policy in Mexico has not changed; it is the same,'' said Juan 
Manuel Rodriguez Cid, administrator of Mexican customs for the crossings 
in and near El Paso, Texas. ``We don't know what the reason is for 
this increase.'' James L. Ward, U.S. consul general in Juarez, said 
he was not sure why more weapons prosecutions have been occurring. 
It could be that the Mexican government had decided to crack down 
on weapons cases, Ward said, or simply that looser gun laws in Texas 
and other states, combined with eased travel restrictions, led to 
more people driving into Mexico with guns in their cars. Ward and 
State Department officials emphasized that the Mexicans had legitimate 
concerns about guns crossing their border. Mexico has seen an increase 
in the number of weapons coming south, partly because of the drug 
trade and partly because of arms-for-profit schemes involving criminal 
gangs or rebels. ``But the border officials tell us they don't have 
the discretion, or at least they perceive they don't have the discretion, 
to distinguish between cases that reach them,'' Ward said. ``Even 
when it's fairly clear that it is not an arms smuggler that they're 
dealing with, that it's a person who made a simple mistake, they often 
make no distinction. We're not saying Americans should get off scot-free. 
But to imagine that some guy would take two vans filled with 15 people 
in order to smuggle two weapons into Mexico just strains credulity.'' 
The U.S. citizens arrested at the border tend to fall into three categories, 
U.S. officials said: those who did not intend to enter Mexico, those 
who forgot they had firearms in their vehicles and those who were 
not aware they carried firearms. ``There are also genuine cases of 
arms smugglers,'' one U.S. official said, ``though in our experience 
these are few and far between.'' The issue was discussed in talks 
in June between Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and Mexican 
Foreign Secretary Rosario Green, and the U.S. State Department issued 
an announcement on Aug. 3 warning U.S. citizens against taking weapons 
or ammunition into Mexico. A bill is under consideration in the Mexican 
Congress that would give border officials more discretion in deciding 
which cases to pursue most vigorously. None of this does anything 
for those under arrest and in prison, and especially for the handful, 
like Manuel, who have been convicted and sentenced. Families of those 
in prison say they have spent thousands of dollars, sometimes tens 
of thousands, fighting weapons charges. Albanese and Patterson had 
their charges reduced from possession of military weapons _ a .22 
semiautomatic rifle, a 20-gauge bolt action and a 12-gauge pump shotgun 
_ to a lesser charge and were expecting to pay a bond and be released 
as early as Thursday night and then return home to Ohio. Albanese 
and Patterson were in high spirits recently when they returned from 
a hearing where they learned that the prosecutor's attempt to reinstate 
the harsher charges against them had failed. ``It's almost over, I 
can't believe it,'' Patterson said. ``It's like you fell into a big 
black hole and there's no way out.'' Manuel offered them one of his 
cigarettes, but his eyes clouded when he heard their good news. ``I 
wish I was going home with you guys,'' he said. In El Paso, where 
Interstate 10 runs less than a quarter-mile from the Rio Grande and 
a wrong exit can easily feed a driver onto a border bridge, U.S. officials 
say they have been improving the signs warning Americans about carrying 
firearms into Mexico. On the Mexican side of the bridge in Juarez, 
there are 10 lanes for those with nothing to declare and two lanes 
for those who have something to declare. ``If they come to us and 
declare that they have a firearm, we will allow them to leave it with 
us and pick it up on their way out of Mexico, no problem,'' said Rodriguez 
Cid, who added that no one has ever done this. ``But if they go through 
one of the other lanes and are pulled over and searched and we find 
firearms after that, even if they volunteer them to us, we must consider 
that they have intentionally not declared them and that they are being 
brought illegally into Mexico.'' The best idea, Rodriguez Cid said, 
is for Americans ``to leave their weapons at home.'' Brown, the man 
who was leading two vans of relatives to California and now is awaiting 
trial on weapons charges, said he wished he had done that. His wife 
died of breast cancer in July. The trip to California in August was, 
in part, an attempt to break out of the grief from that loss, he said. 
As he sat in a corner of the noisy prison yard, his eyes misted and 
he talked about his 16-year-old daughter and 14-year-old son, now 
left without their mother and him. ``I could go through anything myself, 
but when I think about those kids,'' he said, and then stopped and 
wiped his eyes. Brown, who like the other Americans in the jail in 
Juarez said he had been treated very well, recently started to work 
out and has asked permission to run laps on a jogging track. He has 
to toughen himself, he said, in case he ends up spending five years 
or more in the prison. He took another deep breath and looked through 
the bars toward the distant peaks of the Sierra de Juarez, leading 
back toward El Paso. ``I told the people I was sorry,'' he said. ``What 
else can I do?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>