<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981022.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. President Clinton returned to 
the trouble Middle East peace talks in Maryland today. Mr. Clinton 
had promised to do so if the Israeli and Palestinian leaders needed 
his help in reaching a land-for-peace agreement. And apparently Benjamin 
Netanyahu and Chairman Yasser Arafat need all the help they can get. 
In a moment, the view from Jerusalem. But first, THE WORLD's Andrew 
North reports on the summit. Like previous Middle East summits, the 
talks at the Y Plantation have appeared close to collapse over the 
last 24 hours. Last night, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, 
put his plane on standby ready to leave saying the Palestinians were 
not meeting his security concerns. The Palestinians dismissed Netanyahu's 
threat as a negotiating gambit, but this morning, before flying out 
again to meet both sides, President Clinton said an agreement was 
still possible. The hardest decisions now at last are on the table. 
Israel, the Palestinian, the region, and the world have very much 
at stake today. I hope the parties will seize this opportunity and 
not retreat from the clear moment to capture the momentum of peace 
and keep it moving forward. Clinton has spent over 60 hours in the 
past eight days at the Y Plantation trying to bridge the divisions 
between the two sides. But as at the beginning of the talks, security 
concerns remain the biggest divide, namely Israeli demands that the 
Palestinian authority bring to an end all attacks against its citizens. 
Dory Gold, Israel's ambassador to the United Nations, says his government 
cannot compromise on this issue. Peace to work has to be built on 
a detailed security plan, not on general principles, not on rehashing 
declarations that have been made before. But Affee Sophia, the senior 
Palestinian representative in Europe, accuses the Israeli prime minister 
of overplaying the country's security concerns. Netanyahu often presents 
the issue of security in a very erroneous manner giving the impression 
that it is not Israel that occupies Palestine, but it's as though 
we, the Palestinians, occupy Israel. For every Israeli casualty, we 
have ten Palestinian. And apparently, Mr. Netanyahu doesn't seem to 
care a lot according to principle of reciprocity about Palestinian 
losses and human losses. U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, 
who is chairing the talks, is now trying to limit discussions to a 
document of less than 20 pages, leaving out certain issues on which 
there's no sign of agreement. If the two sides can accept that document, 
it would result in the Israeli government handing over a further 13 
percent of the West Bank to Palestinian control of which three percent 
may be designated as a nature reserve. But such a deal could spell 
trouble for the Israeli prime minister back home. We already prepared 
the no-confidence phone that will be Monday. We'll wait for Mr. Netanyahu. 
Benny Elon, a member of the right-wing Moladet Party, which is part 
of Mr. Netanyahu's governing coalition We are very sorry that he brought 
us to this situation. We used to stand with him in the same demonstration, 
and to protest against the last - the late government, the late prime 
minister, Mr. Rabin, and Mr. Perez, and he went to the United States 
of America, in advance gave up our homeland. With his right-wing foreign 
minister, Ariel Sharone, acting as the chief Israeli negotiator, Netanyahu 
hopes he'll be able to sell any deal to his coalition partners. But 
even then, no one believes this will be the end of the Israeli/Palestinian 
dispute. It's still possible that Chairman Yasser Arafat will unilaterally 
declare a Palestinian state next may, and he wants the Israelis to 
hand over even more territory. For THE WORLD, I'm Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>