<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981022.2000.0838 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Spanish human rights lawyers say they will seek expanded charges against 
Augusto Pinochet, Chile's former dictator who was arrested in London 
last week. If a Spanish judge agrees with the lawyers, he'll be able 
to cite more than 200 murder charges as he tries to get Pinochet extradited 
to Madrid. The United States has been silent on the arrest saying 
it's a matter for Britain, Spain, and Chile to sort out. Former U.S. 
Under Secretary of State Joe Cisco says Washington is right to stand 
back from the controversy. From the point of view of the United States, 
we were concerned about the authoritative leadership, but on the other 
hand, we were concerned about where Chile was going. But if you look 
at historically now, I think that Chile has been a stellar light within 
all of Latin America so that I think one has to look at this in broader 
historical perspective. But human rights activists in Chile and Britain 
say there are other reasons the United States is not eager to see 
Pinochet stand trial. From Lond, the BBC's Michael Voss explains. 
There is now a permanent picket outside the clinic for General Pinochet 
who's being detained. Among those here are Chilean exiles who fled 
the country after the overthrow of President Allende. Many have relatives 
who were killed or disappeared. Other like Anna Maria Tachias were 
themselves victims. I was arrested and I was taken to the military 
barracks in San Bernardo, and I was tortured in Tulsha. And I was 
kept blindfolded all the time. So although I could hear the screams 
of other prisoners in Tulsha as well, I cannot say who was next to 
me or who was being tortured because I couldn't see, not even the 
people that was torturing me. As well as wanting to see General Pinochet 
brought to trial, Anna Maria Tachias is clear about who else she thinks 
is to blame. The USA, CIA, the government of the time must accept 
its blame, must accept its responsibility in the crimes committed 
in my country because those crimes were committed with money that 
they paid, the military in Chile. In the early 1970s, U.S. foreign 
policy was dominated by Vietnam, proxy wars between the super powers, 
and spheres of influence. The U.S. already had Communist Cuba in its 
backyard, so when Chileans democratically elected the Socialist Salvadore 
Allende as their president, the land of the free was more than ready 
to get its hands dirty. Journalist Hugh O'Shaughnessy is an expert 
on the period. I think the U.S. mind set was one of fear really. We 
were in the middle of Cold War, and the Americans were not happy with 
this government because they saw Chile as possibly a domino falling 
in the Cold War. The fact that the U.S. tried to destabilize the Allende 
government is well documented. But its exact role in General Pinochet's 
coup or the summary executions, disappearances, and murders that followed 
is less clear. Dr. Benny Pollack was a political adviser to the Allende 
government before it was overthrown. We know that there was quite 
clear American interference. We know that they organized an economic 
blockade that really strangulated the country. So really we know that 
they financed opposition strikes and opposition political parties. 
What we don't really know was the role of American intelligence agencies 
in the most unsavory aspects of the repression. So to understand the 
Americans knew what was going on, knew about people that were disappearing, 
knew about the people executed. When people say the Americans are 
worried, I think they should be worried because itm might very well 
be that General Pinochet will use his very personal knowledge of American 
participation in the coup. But even as the Cold War began to thaw, 
there was no hint of criticism of General Pinochet from Washington 
or London. With a booming economy, Chile was not being held up as 
an example of how the free market could work in Latin America. To 
this day, regional trade remains the top U.S. policy objective. Larry 
Burns is director of the Calsofa Hemispheric Affairs in Washington, 
a think tank specializing in Latin America. There's enormous inconsistency 
and hypocrisy in U.S. policy that has Secretary of State Albright 
grim-faced, announces to the world that the U.S. will track down, 
will not allow to escape no matter where they hide the international 
terrorists that blows up U.S. airplanes and U.S. embassies. Yet, when 
that experience is transposed to a Chile or to an Argentina, what 
the administration says is, "You know, we should have amnesia about 
this. Forget about it. Get on with life. Forget about the past. Let's 
think in terms of economic expansion and prosperity." What do we want? 
Justice. When do we want it? now. If General Pinochet is brought to 
trial, there are those who fear that embarrassing details of western 
involvement, not just in Chile but across Latin America, could come 
to light. That report from the BBC's Michael Voss. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>