<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981022.2000.0594 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Jerusalem, some Israelis and Palestinians are sitting on the edge 
of their proverbial seats. Others long ago gave up hope. ABC reporter 
Leese Toucet is there right now. Leese, can you tell us how the negotiations 
first are being received by the Israelis and the Palestinians? Well, 
you have to realize that Israelis and Palestinians who support this 
peace agreement - and I think there's a diminishing number who do 
- have waited a very long time indeed. They've seen the negotiators 
come and go and I think they have become quite cynical. Until the 
leaders emerge and say, "Yes, indeed, we have a deal" and provide 
the details, I think people here will continue to basically wait and 
get on with their lives. And what kind of information is being provided 
at this point? We understand that the first threatened Israeli walkout 
yesterday neatly coincided with some of the local primetime news coverage. 
If these messages are intended for an Israeli audience in particular, 
what kind of messages are they? Mr. Netanyahu wants to strike a very 
tough image outside Washington. He wants to show particularly right-wing, 
hard line Israelis who have been protesting against any deal that 
he's not as they would see it, giving up the land of Israel, that 
he's not simply caving in under American pressure to Palestinian demands. 
It's very important for Mr. Netanyahu that he look tough. And hence, 
when we have this image of all the suitcases being packed and ready 
to go on the lawn in the Y Plantation, it very much was an image that 
was meant to please Israelis. But I think we also have at look at 
the opinion polls who show that a broad majority of Israelis and Palestinians 
would simply like this peace process to finish with something which 
is of benefit to both sides. And therefore, this brinkmanship, while 
it's useful to send a message, at the end of the day, people want 
to see results. And therefore, they want their leaders to basically 
go through the negotiations and come up with something. Along those 
lines, we know that one hard-liner in the government that we heard 
from, in fact, in the report just a few minutes ago said that there 
is already a no-confidence vote being planned for Benjamin Netanyahu 
on Monday. How much do you think that kind of threat weighs on Netanyahu 
during these talks beyond the sort of imaging making? What we have 
seen of Netanyahu in the last few years that he has been in power 
is that he's not really a risk taker. He likes to try to keep as many 
people as possible on board. That's why he's always, as the Palestinians 
say, he gives on one hand to one side and the other hand to the other 
side. He will want to make sure that he's got as much of his own coalition 
and his right-wing allies with him. He knows that they will actually 
make good on their threat, but I think the numbers are such that if 
Mr. Netanyahu comes back with convincing security commitments from 
the Palestinians, that he will be able to sway enough members of his 
own right-wing coalition. And, of course, he also has the opposition 
Labor Party and some of the left wing and Arab parties who I think 
it has to be said, it would be a very cynical move if they didn't 
back him if he came home with a peace deal. Could you hone in on some 
of the specifics here? There are a few details that have leaked out 
of the talks including beefed up Palestinian security, more collaboration 
with Israeli law enforcement, security oversight from the CIA here 
in the United States. How are these items being received by people 
there? Well, I think as with all negotiations, certain issues matter 
more to certain people. I've just come back from the West Bank talking 
to Palestinians there, and one issue that is of great emotional and 
political importance to them is the release of some 3,000 Palestinian 
prisoners who are languishing in Israeli jails for security and political 
offenses. Palestinians believe that one of the benefits of the Oslo 
peace process would be that they would see their loved ones again. 
I think basically Palestinians want more land. They want to be able 
to govern within their own borders. They, in effect a state. Israelis 
want to feel at peace and security also within their own borders. 
These are very normal, human reactions. People want to get on with 
their lives. And there is this comment that they make in Israel. They 
say, "Look, we want to wake up and be like in New Zealand where the 
main item on the news is the weather or sports topic, not these continuing 
peace negotiations. The BBC's Leese Toucet speaking to us from Jerusalem. 
Thank you for the update. Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>