<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981022.0600.2228 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A powerful typhoon has clobbered the Philippines, killing at least 
five people and forcing more than 40,000 residents to flee their homes. 
VOA's Roone Youngblood reports from Manila victims are crowding into 
evacuation centers under the assault of torrential rains. One week 
after Typhoon Zeb left 83 people dead in the northern Philippines, 
Typhoon Babs belted the country with gusts up to 200 kilometers per 
hour and torrential rain. The winds tore roofs off houses, overturned 
vehicles, downed power communication lines, and toppled trees. Rivers 
took overflow of their banks, sending waters churning through streets. 
With most areas still recovering from Zeb, typhoon-weary residents 
of low-lying and coastal areas were advised even before the onslaught 
to seek shelter on higher ground. But Defense Secretary Orlando Mercado 
noted some are refusing to leave their flimsy residences even as the 
waters lap at their doors. He advised them to love people, not things. 
Disaster authorities say they expect the number of deaths to rise 
as reports trickle in from battered areas. One man died of hypertension, 
and a 28-year-old woman was killed when stabbed by the pointed metal 
post of her umbrella after slipping on the ground. Landslides inundated 
several areas in the provinces of southern Laitai, eastern Sumar, 
and Ackland, blocking roads. Katawandes and Au Bai, key coconut-growing 
areas, were the first to feel the full force of Zeb. Traders fear 
the strong winds knocked off the crowns of so many coconut trees, 
the export and domestic market will be drastically curtailed. The 
Philippines is the world's largest exporter of coconut oil. Thousands 
of commuters have been stranded when of public vehicles prevented 
them from traveling in several eastern provinces. The Philippine Coast 
Guard also stopped many ferry services from venturing out to sea. 
In Manila, all ships were prohibited from leaving the port, and most 
domestic flights were canceled. The National Power Corporation said 
power outages were widespread. Babs is moving west-northwest toward 
Manila Bay, and is expected to unleash heavy rains and blustery winds 
on the capital city and northern provinces. Government offices, banks, 
and the stock currency markets were closed Thursday. On Samar Island, 
evacuees taking shelter in classrooms included 1,000 participants 
in a gathering of Boy Scout supervisors. They were forced to flee 
from their tents. Meteorologists expect the typhoon to be followed 
by La Nina weather phenomena associated with flooding in Southeast 
Asia. Babs is the ninth typhoon to hit the Philippines this year. 
Roone Youngblood for VOA NEWS, Manila. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>