<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981022.1700.1369 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The approach of the Millennial Year 2000 has spawned a large number 
of organizations engaging in so-called millennial activities. Most 
of them advocating religious revival or social reform. VOA's Andrew 
Barrack reports on one group of scholars keeping track of this sort 
of social phenomenon. The term Millenium simply means 1000 years, 
but it carries an almost mystical connotation as a time of radical 
global change. The New Testament Book of Revelation in particular 
prophesized that the turn of the Millennium will usher in a Messianic 
Era, a 1000 year reign of Christ on Earth. According to Richard Landis, 
the director of the Center For Millennial Studies at Boston University, 
there's been a profusion of groups in recent years anticipating that 
the turn of the coming Millennium won't simply be another new year. 
You have Millennial movements that anticipate sort of a dramatic transformation 
of society into a much better place, sometimes preceded by catastrophe, 
sometimes not. Mr. Landis' research shows that in the period before 
the Year 1000, there were similar kinds of movements. Certainly around 
the Year 1000, you have a fair amount of evidence of that. And some 
of the things that you see are for example large gatherings of people 
engaged in sort of public collective penance. So, you'd have these 
processions that were called Rogations, where you'd take out the relics 
and people would follow behind and they would preaching and people 
would plead to God to spare them and confess their sins and forgive 
each other and so on. You also have waves of pilgrimage to Jerusalem, 
particularly in the Year 1000 and then in the Year 1033 which is 1000 
years from the passion and the creation of the church. Richard Landis 
says the Center for Millennial Studies was established two years ago 
to try to understand why people react in different ways to the Millennium. 
One string I think is something that is probably quite admirable which 
is that the Millennium is suppose be a period where justice finally 
prevails. Where people who do evil don't prosper. And people who do 
good, do prosper. And in many cases it leads to the kinds of reform 
movements that I think have made America a great place. For instance, 
in the early 20th Century, you have a whole series of social reform 
movements which were sort of disappointed Millenialist who have decided 
OK, if God's not going to do it, we'll do it obviously not as completely 
and as dramatically as he does, but you know it's a task that we have 
to set ourselves to. But, Mr. Landis says that in his words, "some 
Millennial movements are not so benign". The problem with Millenialism 
is that it also feeds the kind of egotism, kind of megalomania in 
which I have the right way and nobody else can possible understand 
unless they agree with me and there's the good and the bad and anybody 
who isn't with me is the bad. And that can lead to some pretty violent 
and self-destructive and what we're calling omincidal behavior in 
which there's going to be damage all around. An example of that, a 
cult known as Concerned Christians, headquartered in Denver, Colorado. 
Its leader Monty Kim Miller predicted the Apocalypse, the Biblically 
prophesized destruction of the world, would start earlier this month 
with an earthquake in Denver, which of course didn't happen. Mr. Miller 
and many of his 50 followers on now believed to be on their way to 
Jerusalem where their relatives fear they're planning a mass suicide. 
How many groups good and bad are engaging in so-called Millennial 
activities? Get on the Internet and search under Millennium and you'll 
find thousands of them. Gerald Barney is the president of the Millennium 
Institute in Arlington, Virginia which he says works with representatives 
of various international religious and peace organizations to promote 
as he puts it "a vision of a better more peaceful world". One, for 
example, is Peace Child International in the UK. And they're organizing 
a meeting of really thoughtful, emerging young leaders from all over 
the world, 1000 of them, in Hawaii in the late summer or early fall 
of next year for the purpose of pulling together a vision-a young's 
people vision of what they would like their century to be. Gerald 
Barney of the Millennium Institute. According to Richard Landis of 
the Center for Millennial Studies, Jerusalem will be the best place 
to be in the days before the Millennium. He'll be there next year 
and he expects to see as he puts it "a perfusion of bizarre behavior". 
Visiting a few months ago, he met a man he says was "sitting on the 
mount of olives waiting for Jesus to come back in the Year 2001". 
Mr. Landis says there'll likely be many more taking a seat beside 
him. I'm Andrew Barrack. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>