<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981022.0600.2033 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Malaysia's prime minister, Mahatir Muhammad, will present the 1999 
budget tomorrow in his capacity as the country's finance minister. 
Maggie Leev reports from Kuala Lumpur Dr. Mahatir is expected to reverse 
the austerity measures of last year's budget. Prime Minister Mahatir 
Muhammad says he will present a deficit budget designed to help the 
Malaysian economy recover from its worst recession in 13 years. Analysts 
expect deficit to be huge, and for the government to fund it through 
borrowing and an increase in taxes for luxury items and other taxation. 
Dr. Mahatir's expansionary budget will reverse last year's austerity 
measures and challenge orthodox prescription by the International 
Monetary Fund. But Dr. Mahatir is no stranger to controversy, and 
already challenged economic orthodoxy when he imposed capital controls 
in September to protect the economy from the effects of currency speculation. 
University of Malaya economist Pierre Journal says the government 
is right to try a different course of action. Given that the economy 
has gone into recession during 1998, it is important to take serious 
efforts to try to reverse this trend. Some of the measures introduced 
on the 1st of September go part of the way in this direction in terms 
of increasing the latitude for a more independent monetary policy. 
The fear, however, is that this important window of opportunity which 
has been created may be abused, particularly to give parity to efforts 
to save politically well-connected business interests. Prime Minister 
Mahatir says the budget will boost the economy, and 1999 will see 
a growth of 1 percent after contraction of 4.8 percent this year. 
But Professor Journal is skeptical about the figures. I think the 
PM's guess is only marginally better than anybody else's, although 
it may be true that he has access to a range of information which 
are relatively privileged. This whole situation is so beyond his control, 
let alone the economy's control, that it's very difficult to seriously 
predict in the near future. I think all the PM wants to do is to indicate 
that there's light at the end of the tunnel. Dr. Mahatir took over 
as finance minister after he fired his deputy, Anwar Rahib, from the 
post last month. He has blamed Mr. Anwar for implementing policies 
which brought the country into recession. Pro-Anwar supporters are 
planning a huge anti-government demonstration outside parliament Friday 
to coincide with the budget proposal. I'm Maggie Leev for VOA NEWS 
in Kuala Lumpur. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>