<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981022.0600.0548 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ugandan President Wari Museveny is in what he says will be his last 
term in office. As VOA's Scott Sterns reports, what is still to be 
decided is the future of his political movement and multipartyism 
in Uganda. President Museveny rose to power 12 years ago atop a rebellion 
that drove out military leader Tito Okelo. Having ended years of abuse 
by dictator Idi Amin and President Milton Obote, Mishu Museveny says 
he set about rebuilding democracy in Uganda. no more house running. 
Part of that house running has been a return to civilian rule through 
President Museveny's movement or no-party politics. While political 
parties are legal in Uganda, they are not allowed to raise money or 
nominate candidates for election. Without party conventions, politicians 
running for office do so as individuals, not as standard bearers for 
their organizations. President Museveny says that's because too many 
parties divide the people along ethnic lines. He says the movement 
system has helped overcome those differences, weakening the influence 
of the political establishment. The governors of the countries. President 
Museveny's critics say he's simply gotten rid of one clique and established 
another in its place. Members of his national resistance movement 
won a majority in parliament. Opposition presidential candidate Paul 
Semagurary says Mr. Museveny stalled the 1996 election. The government 
continues to face armed insurrection in the north with rebels from 
the Lourdes Resistance Army attacking civilian convoys and skirmishing 
with the army. President Museveny says that's a sign that those outside 
the political process are too weak to confront his government directly, 
either on the battlefield or at the ballot box. Once you see the people 
for violent changes. Why? Why? If you want this position, campaign 
for it. Opposition leaders are already campaigning for a referendum 
on a return to multipartyism in Uganda, planned for 2001. It's a concession 
Mr. Museveny's assembly made when it extended restrictions on political 
parties before the last election. Now there's some debate within his 
movement about how to approach the referendum. Some say the movement 
should campaign for a no vote and keep things the way they are. Others 
say the movement should itself become a party, throwing open the process 
to full-scale campaigning. President Museveny says it's up to the 
voters. If they want a movement, they vote for it. long ago. Reelected 
as head of the movement earlier this year, President Museveny's job 
is far from finished. He's promising to expand economic development 
and decentralize more power to local authorities. As for democracy, 
President Museveny says candidates who admitted defeat in recent local 
government elections took a giant step forward for Uganda, showing 
that it's possible to have free and fair elections where losers do 
not resort to violence but instead congratulate the winners. Scott 
Stern, VOA NEWS, Kampala. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>