<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981022.1700.2697 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
US ranchers struggling with chronically low prices for their beef 
cattle are turning to a legendary animal that a century ago stood 
at the brink of extinction. Large herds of American Bison nearly lost 
after two centuries of slaughter by hunters and settlers are once 
gain thundering across western US range lands. Their return is due 
in large parts to efforts by US cattle ranchers to put bison meet 
on the American dinner table. Rob Sivak explains. Government and private 
conservation efforts have brought the bison back. Today, while some 
wild herds roam in federal park lands, most of the quarter million 
bison in the United States are owned by American farmers and ranchers. 
They're working hard to make bison profitable as a low fat, low cholesterol, 
alternative to beef on the American dinner table. But, many Americans 
still think of bison as an endangered species. And ranchers say that's 
made marketing bison meat a bit of a challenge. We've had people literally 
stand and call be killer, because we are processing bison because 
they were extinct. That's Ron Kipps a Pennsylvania rancher who's one 
of about 1500 bison producers in the United States. They claim much 
of the credit for restoring the American bison herd and for increasing 
that herd at a rate now approaching 20 percent a year. Mr. Kipps ranged 
beef cattle until the industry went through a major shake out in 1990. 
He recalls that bison were not much of a business eight years ago. 
Back then, we processed 14 head for the year. Now, we're looking at 
between 150 to 200. The steady increase in demand for bison or buffalo 
meat in the United States has followed an ambitious rancher funded 
advertising campaign designed to convince consumers in the US and 
abroad that buffalo are back and that they are good to eat. It's really 
taking that meat and getting it into the mainstream as a consumable 
item. That's Colorado Rancher Will MacFarlane. He helped launch the 
Denver Buffalo Company which is helping ranchers sell their buffalo 
meat to US and global markets. Mr. MacFarlane says there are some 
key selling points. The health benefit of the meat, number one. It's 
got less cholesterol, less calories, less fat than chicken and most 
fish, chicken without the skin on it. It is a healthy, healthy meat 
to eat. Mr. MacFarlane says today buffalo is being used in an expanding 
array of so-called value added food products with which consumers 
are already familiar; such as the buffalo hot dog. Which won the world 
award last year for the best new deli product in the world voted on 
by 21 different countries. We sell our value-added products at all 
the sporting events in Colorado; at the universities, the air force 
academy, all of our professional sports. It's going into more and 
more spots venues. According to Katlin Storehag of the National Restaurant 
Association, the growing number of Americans who dine out regularly 
are actually beginning to look for buffalo items on the menu. So, 
we're seeing that there's very popular restaurant that have it on 
their menu and some very successful companies that are providing that 
to the restaurant industry. And even the US Department of Agriculture 
has climbed aboard the buffalo promotion bandwagon. The USDA recently 
added buffalo hot dogs and buffalo steak and cheese sandwiches to 
the regular fare at its headquarters cafeteria here in Washington. 
Employee reactions... Very good. It's great. And very enjoyable. Taste 
much like beef. It's just a little sweeter than beef. It taste good. 
It taste like steak and cheese. And I need less cholesterol, too. 
It's great. Comments like these have convinced many cash-strapped 
US cattle ranchers that the good times are coming back for buffalo, 
which some are calling the meat of the 21st century. In Washington, 
I'm Rob Sivak. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>