<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981022.1700.3179 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At one time, there were hundreds of hobos in America. Vagabonds, who 
hopped freight trains and lived seemingly carefree under the stars. 
Today, there are probably only about 10,000. Modern hobos ride the 
rails not out of necessity. They say they prefer the independent lifestyle. 
But, it is an increasingly dangerous lifestyle as Mike Rogers reports 
from Kansas City, the nation's second largest railroad hub. ...130 
years ago. After the Civil War, many veterans who had been left homeless 
began hopping trains to find work primarily in agriculture. They carried 
their own equipment usually a hoe propped over their shoulders with 
their belongings tied in a knapsack swinging from the end. They were 
called Hoboys which was later shorten to hobos. Although they no longer 
carry hoes or routinely look for work, hobos still hop fright trains, 
but it's not always an easy task to get aboard. Sioux City Sam, a 
hobo who has just rolled into town, says it takes a lot of practice 
to learn the skill. You've got to pick a train headed in your destination. 
You've got them on a bend is the best, get them on a curve, and you've 
got them at about 30 miles per hour no faster than that. And there 
are certain things. You've for run along sides of the trains and the 
trains usually going faster than you, you pick up speed, and you latch 
on, they have bars on the sides, you know, step rails, all right, 
you grab hold and once you grab hold, you don't let go. I don't care 
what. Your body's going to swing, but you don't let go. As trains 
continue to come and go, young and old hoboes alike hop the cars as 
the engines slow down to enter the freight yard. They gather at meeting 
places, called camps. Off the road wooden areas where makeshift tents 
made from old blankets or rags or cardboard boxes provide shelter. 
It's early morning in Kansas City, breakfast time for 57-year old 
Jim "The Rat Man", who got his name because he's an expert at finding 
food in trash-cans. I had chicken patties out of the Burger King dumpster. 
How were they? Good. Jim admits that being a hobo is a tough life. 
He says hobo stay pretty dirty, seldom have much money, and often 
drink too much. But still, there's an attraction. I've been on the 
rail for 30 years, riding trains for 30 years. The allure of it is 
just the freedom of doing what you want to do without having somebody 
else to tell you that you can't do this and you can't do that. Riding 
the rails is getting tougher because of increased security by the 
train companies. 76-year old Pappy fondly remembers the good old days 
when it was easier to hitch a ride without fear of going to jail. 
They'd slow them way down so we could get on and now they're not allowed 
to do that. And if you go down around one of the freight years now, 
trying to catch a freight out, they automatically haul you in and 
you're good for 30 days for trying to hop on. Pappy, who's lived most 
of his life on road, believes the biggest problem hoboes face is drugs 
and he's probably right. Experts say today 90 percent of hoboes are 
homeless men who have alcohol or substance abuse problems. Yes, the 
hoboes are going to dope, marijuana. All that kind of stuff and still 
on bad booze. And they don't just drink a little. Hobo will do anything 
it can to get enough to get drinking with. To make matters worse there 
are three known hobo gangs roving the country. The gang members, hobo 
themselves, have been robbing, beating, and even killing fellow travelers. 
For VOA News Now, I'm Mike Rogers in Kansas City. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>