<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981022.1700.0492 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Still with terrorism. Last November, Islamic extremist killed nearly 
60 terrorist visiting South Egypt's famous ancient temples of Luxor. 
While extremist had for years attacked police and foreigners in this 
part of Egypt as part of a campaign to overthrow the government and 
install an Islamic state, the attack last year on the temple was perhaps 
the most viscous ever. It's left both psychological scars and economic 
hardship. Our Middle East Correspondent Scott Baum recently visited 
Luxor where the scars and the memories remain. Luxor has perhaps the 
greatest history of any city in the world. Lying on the banks of the 
upper Nile River, it is home to some of the greatest monuments of 
ancient time. Some of them are 4000 years old built by the leaders 
of one of the oldest known human civilizations-- the Pharaohs. The 
temple to the Queen Pharaoh Hamshinshut, who lived 3400 years ago, 
lies at the foot of the cliff that overlooks the vast complex of tombs 
and temples on Luxor's west bank. It is a wide, horizontal edifice 
with three stories of columns and a lengthy stone ramp leading up 
to its main entrance. On November 17th of last year, six members of 
the outlawed Islamic group entered the temple, killed the guards, 
and began shooting and stabbing the visitors. Cutting open the bodies 
and placing extremist literature inside them. Today, tourist from 
many countries still take the ferry across the Nile River to the West 
Bank and hike up the hard gravel paths to the temples. But in addition 
to viewing the ancient monuments, they examine the bullet marks in 
the stone walls and listen to the guides tell of the terror that day 
last November. While the number of tourist since the attack remains 
low, many who visit say they do not feel they're in danger. Jason 
Watkins is an American traveling with a church group from the central 
State of Missouri. The killing of the tourists kind of makes you scare 
and not want to come. But, you know, you can't let something like 
that keep you from coming, because then you wouldn't go anywhere. 
Tour operators say that following the attack in Luxor, hotel occupancy 
rates dropped from more than 70 percent to 5 percent. In response, 
they have cut hotel and room rates by as much as one half. They say 
occupancy rates have begun to rise in the past few months, but they 
are still losing money. The local residents who depend on tourism; 
the taxi drivers, the guides, the sellers of soft drinks and souvenirs, 
are having and even harder time. These people are living from day 
to day and are often desperate for a customer. The mayor of Luxor 
is a retired army general, Semil Selen. He was appointed a few weeks 
after the Luxor attack. Mayor Selen acknowledges the attack hurt tourism, 
but he says it is recovering. SEMIL SELEN, MAYOR OF LUXOR Indeed, 
the incident cut the number of visitors to the city; especially in 
the first months of the year. But thank God, the number is starting 
to return to its normal level. Mayor Selen says he inherited a traumatized 
city, but that because of the attacks security forces have significantly 
changes the way they protect the city and its monuments. General Selen's..by 
a small group of individuals who use what he calls "the banner of 
religion" to try to take power. The mayor says that in 7000 years 
Luxor never saw such violence. It is his intention he concludes that 
it never see it again. Scott Baum, VOW News, Luxor, Southern Egypt. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>