<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981201.1830.0443 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Washington today, it was sex lies and fund-raising. All of it familiar. 
Most of the day, the bitterly divided house of Judiciary committee 
heard testimony on the ramifications of perjury, including lying under 
oath about sex. They also have to officially extend the impeachment 
investigation into the issue of the president's fund-raising in the 
1996 election. Here's ABC's Linda Douglass. Democrats on the Judiciary 
committee charged that the party line vote to expand the impeachment 
inquiry to include the campaign finance scandal is proof that the 
investigation is running amok. It is my worry that this is becoming 
an impeachment inquiry in search of a high crime. This is the last 
desperate grasp of a group of people who are determined to impeach 
the president, and they can't put it together. The republican chairman 
brushed off their protests. We are taking a look at this, and we are 
going to take a look, and it is justifiable that we are taking a look. 
Republicans voted to subpoena secret reports written by the FBI director 
and the prosecutor who headed the task force investigating White House 
fund-raising. Both have urged attorney general Janet Reno to seek 
an independent counsel. Sources tell ABC News the committee got a 
tip that those reports might contain evidence of presidential crimes, 
though justice department sources say there is no smoking gun. But 
in the Monica Lewinsky case, republicans charge there is evidence 
Mr. Clinton lied under oath, a crime for which ordinary citizens can 
be convicted. To make that point, they showcased two women convicted 
for lying in court about sex. Because a president is not a king, he 
or she must abide by the same laws as the rest of us. Legal experts 
debated just how serious a crime perjury is. Even if there is perjury, 
is there a basis for impeachment? We cannot excuse perjury in the 
most highly publish sized case involving the most powerful official. 
What this committee is doing is trivializing the rule of law by only 
focusing on perjury because they want to get a president of the opposite 
party. You haven't the slightest idea of the agony that many of us 
go through over this question. Today the house democratic leader called 
the process chaotic and called upon the new republican leaders to 
step in. But many of them believe the president should be impeached. 
They're telling their members to vote their conscience when impeachment 
comes to the full house as they expect it will. Peter? Thanks very 
much, Linda. Sam Donaldson is with us at the White House. Sam, impeachment 
before the full house? Well, Peter, the president aides are not at 
all certain the president can win that vote on the house floor. They 
don't know. There's no vote counsel the they can get at this point. 
They might not win. But that could be very tough to arrange. On the 
one handed you have to convince the hardliners on Capitol Hill who 
are saying impeachment or nothing to go along and you have to convince 
president and Mrs. Clinton to go along. If you know this president, 
you know he won't want to voluntarily sign on to help brand himself 
in history as a real disgrace. Thank you, Sam. Tough sledding ahead 
for all the parties. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>