<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981201.1830.1198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight we're going to revisit the continuously controversial subject 
of breast implants. Silicone breast implants. Today a panel of scientists 
appointed by a federal judge said it found no proven links between 
silicone implants and the illnesses of women who have sued the implant 
manufacturers say that they suffer from. It was on this and other 
safety issues that the FDA banned implants for most women six years 
ago. We're taking "A closer look" tonight because some manufacturers 
would obviously like to have their silicone implants on the market 
again. Some women do continue to receive them as part of an ongoing 
clinical study to determine whether they are safe enough to lift the 
embargo, which is why this report from ABC's John McKenzie is an important 
contribution to the debate. Eight years ago, before Kim Hoffman got 
married, she wanted a new look, one that included silicone breast 
implants. But after the operation, one breast hardened. Then a few 
years later, the other developed a bubble. Two plastic surgeons recommended 
I replace the implants with a new silicone product, a new silicone 
implant. By that time, in 1994, the FDA had already banned the general 
use of silicone implants for breast enlargement, but it did allow 
their continued use for special medical needs -- for women who had 
lost a breast to cancer or severely injured a breast, or those needing 
to replace failed implants. What Kim Hoffman didn't know, was that 
the FDA has had concerns about how many of those implants are made. 
The mentor corporation's plant in Irving, Texas, is a major producer 
of breast implants. Government documents obtained by ABC News show 
that over the past 12 years, since 1986, the FDA has repeatedly accused 
the company of inadequate quality controls. For example, the FDA found 
-- potential manufacturing problems with the shell that could result 
in implants more likely to rupture. Potential packaging defects that 
could lead to implants becoming contaminated and causing infection. 
Incomplete inventory records that could allow defective implants from 
the assembly line to be shipped out as implants for sale. The FDA 
said there was no proof the problems were causing harm, but it considered 
the problems serious enough to pressure the company into a legal agreement, 
to improve its procedures by the end of this month. Mentor executives 
declined to be interviewed on camera, but did say the company expects 
to meet that deadline. Making sure the implants are made properly 
has been just one of the FDA's concerns, another is complications 
that can arise. So the FDA told the company to track the health of 
any woman who received one, to design a silicone study which would 
determine whether, in fact, the implants were safe. This "study" -- 
and I have that in quotation marks -- was so loosely constructed that 
it was doubtful it could gather any meaningful data. At St. John's 
hospital in Springfield, Missouri, members of its institutional review 
board objected to the study on two grounds -- that women were not 
adequately warned about the risks of silicone implants and that admission 
requirements were so broad that almost any woman could get one, just 
by joining the study. The only thing we could think of was that this 
was some sort of political device to keep these implants on the market. 
The company says it was following guidelines approved by the FDA, 
and that its implants are safe. Just months after receiving her replacement 
implants, Kim Hoffman required more than a dozen medications. I had 
tremors. Sores broke out all over my head. I had a rash on my chest 
that left scars. I was so fatigued I had to rest before being able 
toalk down a flight of stairs. Hoffman's health deteriorated so rapidly 
that within eight months, she had to have her second pair of implants 
removed. While it wasn't proven the implants were to blame, her doctor 
never reported her problems to the company, so none of it was recorded 
in the study. When Hoffman later obtained a copy of her file, it was 
marked "no complaint." If the very complications that the study is 
monitoring are not being recorded, then the data is flawed. The silicone 
safety study is still going, and mentor is still making its silicone 
implants. John McKenzie, ABC News, Springfield, Missouri. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>