<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981201.1830.0117 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The global economy is about risk as well as opportunity. It has everything 
to do with the creation today of the largest company in the United 
States. It will be called Exxon-mobil. As of today, a combined value 
of $250 billion. Together, they control 20% of the gasoline market 
in the U.S. here's ABC's Betsy Stark. The nation's number one and 
number two oil companies were driven to the Altar by a slump in oil 
prices expected to last for years. The oil companies, as well as the 
oil countries, have lost all control over prices. So in a climate 
of falling prices, the only way they can maintain profitability is 
to consolidate and ruthlessly cut costs. The merger is also expected 
to provide a big competitive advantage in what has become a very expensive 
search for new oil. Now that we're finding oil in places like west 
Africa, Russia and east Asia, it needs much more money. And there 
should be plenty of it. The new Exxon-mobil will be the largest oil 
company in the world, producing more than many oil-producing countries. 
Only Saudi Arabia and Iran will produce more barrels of crude per 
day. If size and scale are the greatest benefits, they are also the 
greatest obstacle. Regulators concerned about the concentration of 
gas stations and refineries in one company's control will be reviewing 
the deal closely. The two companies may be required to sell or close 
some of their gas stations, but most analysts expect the merger will 
be approved. Betsy Stark, ABC News, New York. The new company will 
have a combined work force of 123,000 employees. 20,000 of them may 
lose their jobs. Here's ABC's Bob Jamieson. At mobil's huge refinery 
in Beaumont, Texas, today, workers who survived several waves of layoffs 
in recent years had a new worry. If they want to cut here some more, 
there's going to be trouble. We're already cut way past where we should 
be. Well, they're gonna say that being competitive causes it. But 
I think it's corporate greed. Industry analysts predict at least 10,000 
jobs will be cut quickly, beginning with overlapping positions at 
the merged company. For example, Exxon's headquarters in Irving, Texas, 
will be the merged company's head office. That means much of mobil's 
headquarters staff in Fairfax, Virginia, will be dispensable. Exxon's 
tech center is in florham park, New Jersey.Q mobil's is 150 miles 
away in pauboro, New Jersey. The new company won't need both. Actants, 
researchers and engineers are all expected to lose jobs. For consumers, 
however, the merger will mean no dramatic change. Even here in New 
Jersey, where the two companies account for about 40% of retail gasoline 
sales, the price at the pump won't change. That's because the merger 
won't affect the price of crude oil, the main reason the price of 
gasoline is the lowest it's been in years. Bob Jamieson, ABC News, 
east Rutherford, New Jersey. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>