<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981201.0292 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Emile Lahoud began a fresh round of consultations with Parliament 
on Tuesday in search of a new premier after incumbent Prime Minister 
Rafik Hariri bowed out. Lahoud first met for about 15 minutes with 
former Prime Minister Salim Hoss, a member of the parliament who is 
widely expected to be asked by the president to form a new government. 
Lahoud then began consulting members of the 128-seat Parliament, who 
under Lebanon's constitution make recommendations on the premier to 
the president. Hariri's Cabinet has been serving in a caretaker capacity 
since Lahoud was inaugurated as Lebanon's new president last week. 
Lahoud began the latest round of consultations, which are expected 
to last two days, after Hariri declined to name a new Cabinet following 
an earlier round of consultations with Parliament. Hariri's move could 
be a ploy to gain more power as a new government is formed, but the 
crisis atmosphere generated by his possible departure could affect 
Lebanon's economic recovery. Central bank officials on Monday tried 
to calm fears about a run on the Lebanese pound by announcing that 
the bank was ready to intervene with its foreign currency reserves, 
the state-run National News Agency reported. It added that the money 
markets remained stable. In the initial round, Parliament members 
gave Hariri a majority. But that was far short of the near-unanimous 
backing he received in three previous mandates since 1992. Hariri, 
53, a business tycoon who launched Lebanon's multi-billion dollar 
reconstruction from the devastation of the 1975-90 civil war, said 
Monday in an interview with CNN that he was no longer a candidate. 
He demanded that Lahoud admit that he acted unconstitutionally by 
allowing 31 Parliament deputies to authorize him to name a prime minister 
instead of naming one themselves. Lahoud, 62, is an army commander 
who wants to assert his authority at the start of his six-year presidential 
term. Hariri virtually has had a free hand in running the country 
since he became premier six years ago under former President Elias 
Hrawi. Several Parliament members who had named Hariri as their choice 
for prime minister were expected to name Hoss in the new round of 
consultations. Salim Hoss, 69, a U.S.-educated economist, served four 
times as prime minister since 1976, including a term in 1988 during 
the darkest days of Lebanon's civil war. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>