<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981201.1600.0045 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Democrats are calling it a fishing expedition. Republicans say they 
are duty bound to investigate any possible wrongdoing by the president. 
Today, the house Judiciary committee voted to expand its impeachment 
inquiry of President Clinton to include fund-raising for his 1996 
re-election campaign. The vote was 20 to 15, along party lines. The 
committee will subpoena justice department documents concerning its 
investigation of the campaign finance issue. The memos, from FBI director 
Louis freeh and a federal prosecutor, urge attorney general Janet 
Reno to seek an independent counsel to look into whether the president 
and his aides illegally funded campaign issue advertisements in 1996. 
Reno has until Monday to decide whether to seek an independent counsel, 
and she has previously refused to turn the memos over to Congress. 
Committee democrats are questioning the timing of the panel's decision. 
The republicans have been delaying this and delaying this. They originally 
thought they'd be able to impeach the president over the monica Lewinsky 
thing. As that has now become less and less likely, they're in this 
desperate search to find something, anything to bring in to here. 
Last week it cast cath -- Kathleen Willey. Fred tomp soned and Dan 
Burton looked into it as seriously as Dan Burton is capable of looking. 
He is kind of the inspector clue Zoe of congressional investigations. 
Two investigations have already been through this and they simply 
haven't come up with anything yet. The likelihood that now we're going 
to come up with something is very slender. If they did, does this 
mean they're going over to January, February, March. No one would 
seriously think you'd begin a brand new area of inquiry on december 
1st, start looking at this thing with Christmas coming up and still 
get this over with by the end of the year. The LaBella memorandum 
has been around a lot. We've never been able to see what's in there. 
We've been told what's been redacted shows the president unequivocally 
committed criminal acts. I don't know if that's true. You can't sit 
on that while you're conducting impeachment hearings if you've heard 
that. We're asking for that to be brought forward. That's why LaBella's 
being subpoenaed, that's why the attorney general's being subpoenaed. 
That's why all these subpoenas today. The White House says the committee's 
decision is evidence that the republicans have, so far, found nothing 
to warrant impeachment. More from John king. The White House line 
today is that this shows the republicans, A, don't have enough evidence 
from the Ken Starr investigation to seriously push to impeach the 
president, and B, the White House making the case that the republicans 
are in chaos, going off on a lake fishing expedition. White House 
says it's also forcefully complaining about comments like we've just 
heard from the republican congressman from Florida, Bill McCollom, 
saying that, the republicans were saying that this memo contains allegations 
of criminal activity by the president. The White House is saying this 
memo of course has been in the hands of the attorney general for some 
time. She has in the past declined to name an independent counsel, 
is currently reviewing that decision, and that the justice department 
also has an ongoing federal grand jury investigation into other campaign 
finance abuses -- That if there was some evidence, some hard evidence 
of misconduct by the president, that it would come to light right 
now. The big line out of the White House today is that this shows 
this process is getting out of control. The president hasn't said 
anything, but his spokesman is accusing the republicans of going out 
on a fishing expedition, designed to embarrass the president. That 
was John king reporting from the White House. Earlier this morning, 
the committee addressed the issue of perjury. They heard from two 
women who pleaded guilty to lying about sex in civil trials. House 
minority leader Richard Gephardt is urging republican leaders to rein 
in the expanding inquiry. Chairman Henry Hyde says he feels "duty 
bound" to investigate anything else that comes to his committee's 
attention. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>