<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981201.2100.3007 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As we reported last night at this time on this broadcast yesterday 
new federal regulations went into effect that require F.B.I. back 
ground checks on all potential gun buyers in this country. Well, today 
as anticipated the national rifle association filed suit claiming 
the new version of the Brady law is an unreasonable invasion of privacy 
for law abiding gun owners. As is often the case in the emotional 
debate over gun laws, the new rules don't quite satisfy anybody. With 
us tonight from Washington, Steve Holmes of the "times" whose story 
appears in tomorrow's "New York Times." If I went to purchase a gun 
tomorrow, how would my experience differ from a week ago? Well if 
we're talking about a handgun, what would be different is a week ago 
you would be required to wait five days while your local law enforcement 
agency conducted a background check. Checking to see whether or not 
there are outstanding warrants, whether I've been convicted for a 
felony. Now when you go to purchase a happened gun or shotgun or rifle, 
that sort of background check will be done by the F.B.I. and it will 
be instantaneous. The F.B.I. says it will only take anywhere from 
30 seconds to two minutes to conduct that check. Now, the reason police 
are able to stop Americans at checkpoints on the road looking for 
drunk drivers is the courts ruled that's because driving is a privilege 
and not a right. But the N.R.A. is saying read your constitution. 
Owning a gun is a right and not just a privilege. That's true. That's 
why the N.R.A. is not necessarily joined in the lawsuit. But it's 
supported by some privacy groups who aren't necessarily gun owners 
or gun advocates. And they say that what we're talking about here 
is a right that's enshrined in the constitution in the second amendment 
to keep and bear arms. Therefore what the F.B.I. is doing, not in 
conducting the background checks but in maintaining a data base of 
the purchase of those firearms. And that is legally suspect. Of course, 
this could be called the cost of good intentions, because the government 
wants everybody to know, look, this is serious business. It's not 
like buying a new pair of mittens here. We have to know more about 
who's making the purchase. Certainlyly. They also say they want to 
maintain this data base. We're talking about a data base -- actually 
two. There's a data base of criminal history which they will use to 
possibly deny the purchase. There's also a data base that the F.B.I. 
wants to maintain for six months after the purchase is made of those 
sales. And they want to do this to make sure there's no fraud in the 
system, that the gun dealers are doing what they're supposed to. That's 
what causing the N.R.A. problems here. And, yes, it's true. The government 
does want to make sure that this is a serious purchase. Steven Holmes, 
buy line tomorrow morning in the "New York Times." Thank you for coming 
on the air tonight. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>