<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981201.2100.2436 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From "dateline NBC" tonight we have another look at Viagra. It's been 
on the market less than a year, remember. Everybody knows its name. 
At one point 20,000 prescription as a week were being written nationwide 
for it. All prescriptions for male patients officially. Tonight we 
have a look at the use of Viagra for women. And the possible risks 
that might exist. Here is NBC news chief medical correspondent Dr. 
Bob arnot. Lies obsession. Where a nation inundated with sex. sex 
on tv. Sex on the Internet. Even stories of sex in the oval office. 
So maybe it's not surprising that this is the most successful new 
drug to ever hit your local pharmacy. You already heard a lot about 
Viagra and men. Tonight you'll hear from one of the first doctors 
in the country who's prescribing the drug for women. And from one 
of the first woman who's taken it. Is there any reason to believe 
Viagra could be as good in women as in men? I would expect it to be. 
Although accurate numbers are hard to come by it's estimated as much 
as 30% of American women suffer from some form of sexual disfunction. 
Dr. Goldstein of Boston University school of medicine says that Viagra 
may be able to help them. Why are you prescribing this for women? 
Why am I not prescribing it for him I think may be a different question. 
Women age. Women get blockage in arteries just like men do. Laurie 
Kline, a married, 39-year-old beauty salon own certify one of the 
first women in the United States to take Viagra. After a partial hysterectomy, 
Laurie's sex life took a dramatic turn for the worse. My sex life 
was different, my bodyoy was different. It was not fumplingsing the 
same. Dr. Berman is studying Viagra in women and prescribed the drug 
to Laurie. She says the results were astonishing. I couldn't believe 
the difference that I felt. I was very surprised that it affected 
me that way. It was real remarkable. Dr. Goldstein isn't surprised 
that Viagra had an effect on Laurie. Viagra works in men by affecting 
an enzyme that increases blood flow to the general tells. Goldstein 
says the same enzyme is in women. We do know that female sexual response 
starts by increasing blood flow to the female genital. Aren't the 
sexual problems different in women than in men? If the woman has as 
her primary sexual problem diminished vaginal lubrication, pain and 
discomfort because of the poor lubrication, an increased time to arouse, 
it seems logical to be able to try this in women. Goldstein says women 
who aren't good candidates for other therapies like hormones with 
those with possible circulatory problems like Laurie, might be able 
to find relief with Viagra. Post-menopausal woman who is aging, hypertension 
diabetes, cigarette smoke, high cholesterol, perfect candidate in 
my own view for this therapy. Vie rag I can'T's manufacturer conducted 
six years of study on the drug for men. It is not recommended until 
more studies are completed. Skeptics wonder whether this is a little 
too much, too fast. This is a drug that one should not play with clearly 
it should not be used until there's good scientific evidence that 
it's both necessary and that it works. Dr. Arnold melman says that 
just because there's a demand for drugs that treat sexual problems, 
that's no reason to give up on good, sound science. Would you not 
prescribe heart medicine for women when it's only been tested in men. 
It should not be done. The F.D.A. says nearly 130 men using Viagra 
have died since the drug was introduced in March. Last week Pfizer 
changed the label to warn about the serious risks it poses to men 
with a history of cardiac disease, hypertension, stroke, or certain 
eye conditions. Although the F.D.A. says it continues to believe Viagra 
is safe and effective when used correctly, no one really knows how 
the drug might effect women. Could the argument be made that women 
are being used as Guinea pigs now in a vast uncontrolled experiment 
to see whether or not it works? Yes, there may be complication that's 
arise from the use of Viagra. On the other side of the fence, there 
are a lot of women who could be helped by this. So will millions of 
women who decide the risks are worth it be stampeding to you'reologists 
or stealing their husband's Viagra in search of that extra sexual 
edge? Not so fast. About 30% of women complain of difficulty having 
sexual desire. That is not something that is necessarily going to 
be effected by a Viagra. Dr. salt is a Sigh cry trust in New York 
City. She's also worried about women jumping on the Viagra band wagon. 
But for different reasons. I think more often in women than in men 
the psychology of how they're feeling about themselves as a sexual 
being overall is crucial to their being able to perform and how they 
feel in their sexual relationships. It is not an aphrodisiac. And 
says salt we may be look at science to take the place of romance. 
Has Viagra placed too much emphasis on the mechanics of sex and have 
we lost sight of the bigger picture, romance, intimacy? It's something 
that greatly concerns me about Viagra. Because, of course, there is 
so much about relationships between men and women. It's so important 
to be able to feel I'm with my partner, we're doing something together. 
So I would be concerned about what this pill is actually saying to 
couples. But for Laurie, Viagra is saying all the right things. I 
see it as women pulling together to help get some results and get 
some answers and help for us. That was a "dateline NBC" health line 
report from NBC news chief medical correspondent Dr. Bob arnot. We 
should tell that you the drug company is now testing Viagra on about 
500 women in the defendant group in England. There are some clinical 
trials under way in the U.S. no results yet, of course. It could be 
two years away from official F.D.A. approval for women. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>