<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981201.2100.1753 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As we mentioned, earlier in the hour, it was a long day of hearings 
in the Judiciary committee hearing room today going back over some 
covered ground. Also opening up the door to new allegations, at least 
new to the Judiciary committee. House republicans voted to subpoena 
internal documents on the subject of campaign finance to sort out 
this mess, NBC news correspondent chip Reid was in the hearing room 
today. He's with us tonight from the Washington bureau to look back 
at what went on throughout the day today. It was another wild and 
wildy entertaining day on Capitol Hill with the house Judiciary committee. 
The republicans called this hearing to demonstrate how deadly serious 
the crime of perjury is. And to do so they invited two women, one 
of whom you're about to hear spent time in jail. The second told us 
she was wearing an electronic bracelet around her ankle to monitor 
her movements during home detention. Both serving those punishments 
because they lied under oath about sex. When you're in a leadership 
position no matter what it is, you must tell the truth about, you've 
got to search your soul. And recognize what it means if you don't, 
no matter what the price. The legal system was very kind to me. The 
judge didn't want to send me to jail. The reduction to four months 
was a blessing. I was a good, loyal, upstanding United States citizen. 
I worked, voted, paid my taxes with honesty, and was respected by 
my profession, church and family. What changed that? One simple lie, 
misstatement of fact, one falsehood before a federal magistrate. That's 
what. Brian, after the perjurers, it was time for the perjury experts. 
Fact is we had heard much of it before with the republicans arguing 
that perjury is impeachable, democrats arguing that it's not necessarily 
impeachable. Eyes were starting to close. I saw some yawns in the 
audience. Then Alan dershowitz ripped into Henry hiveed and the other 
republicans for zeroing in on the president's alleged perjury while 
allegeding ignoring so much perjury by many others. In the beginning 
when you said that this was going to be a broad hearing about the 
per vasive influence of perjury on the American system, that is hamlet 
without the prince. To talk about the per vasive influence of perjury 
on the American legal system and ignore 100 years of police perjury 
and documented reports about police perjury and pretend and close 
your eyes and make believe that the only perjury worth considering 
is perjury about a sex lie committed by a president to the opposite 
party trivializes the rule of law and trivializes the oath of office. 
I thank you, professor dershowitz. I don't thank you for criticizing 
the motives, saying we're out to get the president. You haven't the 
slightest idea of the agony that many of us go through over this question. 
Many of us are sensitive to those concerns. All of us, I dare say 
I think you have disparaged us by leaping to conclusions without any 
basis. And Hyde went on to say that they are pursuing a principle 
Pam. That is the rule of law. Alan not used to that much public criticism. 
Wonder how he's taking it tonight in Washington. Chip, the real news 
of this day, if you want to call it that, subjective, is that they 
expanded the scope of this thing. There was a vote to bring not only 
more people before this complt, but more paper before this committee. 
That's right. I think that is the big news today, subpoenaing these 
documents to try to open up campaign finance as a new area of inquiry 
here. I can tell you that the democrats and the republicans could 
not possibly be farther apart here. The republicans believe it is 
their solemn duty to vect this. The democrats believe the committee 
is totally out of control. I think it is entirely relevant that we 
subpoena these particular documents. They could not be morrell vanity 
to issues involving violations of federal law by the president and 
vice president. And I would, therefore, urge our colleagues if they 
are, indeed, interested in a search for the truth to support these 
motions. If they are, indeed, not interested in a search for the truth, 
then they may wish to either abstain or vote no. In my judgment there 
is one small segment on the far right who have lost all objectist 
and are determined to impeach the president at all costs. Their hatred 
of the president exceeds their caring about this country and its people. 
That small segment which would represent a minority view anywhere 
else in America dominates this committee. That is why we need help. 
We have a new speaker of the house. This is his first crucial test. 
I guess I'm making a plea here. That is to Mr. Livingston to step 
in and take control of this run away train before we go over a cliff. 
And, Brian, democrats are hoping they can convince the American public 
that this committee is a run away train so that the American public 
will rise up, tell the committee to flip the switch, and bring that 
train to a stop. And Schumer may get to vote twice on this. Chip Reid, 
thank you very much. You bet. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>