<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981201.2100.0932 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're joined by two members of the house Judiciary committee, republican 
congressman Chris Cannon from Utah, democratic congressman Sheila 
Jackson-Lee from Texas. They are both with us from Washington tonight. 
Congressman Cannon, why can't thes question fairly be asked now, how 
much longer is this going to go? And what direction is this going 
to be taken in next? I think that what we're going to see is a relatively 
quick resolution. I hope we can get it done by the end of the year. 
I know chairman Hyde is committed to that. The only thing is distracted 
from that is the standards we need to pursue. We're in a short time 
frame. The White House stonewalled for a long time. We want more information 
before we close the door on this. If we get the information and it 
doesn't lead us anywhere, we're through. If it does, conceivably it 
could go on. I would hope we have a vote before the end of the year. 
Congressman, Devil's advocate what have you learned to advance the 
ball since the gavel fell on the first day of these hearings? What 
has come out of them? Personally I think the hearings have been incredibly 
productive. What's an impeachable offense? Secondly, today we had 
just great testimony from two women who have served jail time for 
lying about sexual relationships. We now see that the issue here is 
not sex. The issue here is perjury. The issue is not Monica Lewinsky. 
The issue is not Ken Starr. The issue is perjury, obstruction of justice. 
We're going to pursue that obstruction of justice segment for a short 
period of time to see what's happened in a couple of other areas. 
But the case that has been made now, after all of the hearings that 
we've had is very clear. There has been, what appears -- at least 
Chuck Schumer and other democrats are saying, perjury. That is wrong. 
I think it's an impeachable offense. I think that's what the hearings 
have shown us so far. Now to the congresswoman from Houston. I'm guessing 
you're going to agree the hearings have been productive so far. We 
have accomplished very little from September 11, the time of the referral 
from Ken Starr, I beg to differ with my colleague who has suggested 
that we've learned a lot. We have learned nothing. Frankly, I think 
what we all have come to this meeting and the hearings with is we 
realize that the president's behavior was reprehensible. But what 
have we accomplished? First of all, since September 11, we've had 
little more than five hearings if at all. We don't know the direction 
of this particular proceeding. Today we voted to expand the investigation 
into campaign finance reform questions, which, in actuality, should 
have been handled by campaign finance reform legislation. Today with 
respect to perjury we actually learned today, if I might finish, that 
perjury is not, per say, an impeachable offense. We respected those 
two witnesses who came before us, women. It was interesting they used 
women, that they used sex. We've already acknowledged it's not about 
sex. But it is about understanding the constitutional standards of 
what is impeachable. I will say the witness who's presented their 
cases, the three professors, the judge made it clear that perjury 
must be material, it must be intentional, and we came away with the 
understanding that it is not, per say, an impeachable offense. In 
fact, judge Wiggins, formally a member of the committee, even said 
to the republicans, I don't know about the vague allegations you're 
making about obstruction of justice and perjury as to whether or not 
they'll meet the constitutional standards of impeachment. That was 
their witness. Brian, we have to move on. I have a resolution for 
censure. We need to reprimand the president. We need to get on with 
the people's business of saving social security, fighting for education. 
We've learned nothing. There's nowhere to go with these impeachment 
hearings. Congresswoman you quote judge higinbottom. Devil's advocate 
again. It was intentional in this case, the president made a decision 
to lie. Number two, everything he does by example is material in that 
job because every American has to hold them up to their children. 
You raise a very, very valid point in my resolution I particularly 
point to the lacking of the president's upholding, morale values and 
morale standing. I say it very pronounced, if you will. But the question 
becomes if you talk about whether he intentionally perjured himself. 
Brian, you have to look -- That's clear. Brian, you have to look at 
the grgs testimony and prosecutors will tell you that it would be 
very, very difficult to prosecutor the president on the vagueness 
of his testimony. He was evasive. And he may not have told the fullness 
of the truth. But perjury is not that. That is your interpretation 
that he lied. He lied many many times. He has led the American people. 
We can handle that with censure, rebuking and reprimanding the president 
of the United States. Censure is not appropriate. Congressman, why 
can't you? I want a strong president. I think all of America wants 
a strong president. Censure does nothing unless it weakens the presidenty. 
Why do we want to weaken the presidenty where you can either impeach 
him -- this is not about retribution. This is not about inflicting 
pain. This is about political hygiene. It's about having a presidency 
which works, a presidency effective, a presidency wherin the president 
is a morale example. If we decide as a Congress that this doesn't 
rise to the level of impeachment, then we ought to get beyond it, 
quickly. But the American people have said they do not agree and they 
are appalled of the president's behavior. But they have not said that 
they want -- the presidenty toppled because of an impeachment process. 
That's what the republicans don't -- I guess that's simply why we 
cannot agree. With that, congressman and congresswoman, thank you 
both for coming out here. I'll be look for reasonable people to agree 
with me. Thank you, both. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>