<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981201.1830.0952 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" -- tonight, is it time to put the brakes on car 
pool lanes? You might know them as high occupancy vehicle lanes, HOVs 
or diamond lanes -- Parts of the highway set aside for any vehicle 
carrying more than one person. This country is crisscrossed by more 
than 46,000 miles of highway. And those in 19 states have hov lanes. 
But just yesterday, New Jersey became the first state to take down 
some of those hov signs and open up highways to all drivers. Is this 
the start of a national trend? NBC's George Lewis has some answers 
tonight, "in depth." Stuck in traffic. The commuter spends 46 hours 
behind the wheel every day. And this was supposed to be the solution, 
the hov Lane, reserved for buses for car pools. But in New Jersey, 
what could be a sign of the times, officials E Lame nating hov lanes 
on two highways, why? Heavy public pressure to get rid of them. Where 
ever I have traveled in New Jersey, it doesn't seem necessary. I don't 
think it's right. I think everybody should use those lanes. We gave 
them a fair shot. We did everything we could do to encourage people 
to car pool and to Van pool, and it simply wasn't working. Unlike 
New Jersey, California has ambitious plans to expand the use of car 
pool lanes. But now, opponents of those plans are hoping that what 
happened in New Jersey will strengthen their arguments. One California 
state legislator plans to reintroduce a Bill that died earlier this 
year, a measure that would open up California's 890 miles of hov lanes 
to all traffic, while engineers study the effects on congestion and 
air pollution. Well, I think once motorists see what's going on in 
New Jersey and see the instant relief that's created when these diamond 
lanes are open to all traffic, we're going to be in an entirely new 
world. But the California department of transportation, which closely 
monitors traffic flows using state of the art equipment, claims the 
car pool lanes are working just fine here. The bottom line is that 
car pool lanes do work. For example, during the peak rush hour, a 
person in the car pool Lane will save more than one minute per mile 
for every mile that they travel. Now the state is expermitting of 
using new ways to use the lanes. In San Diego, motorists can choose 
either to car pool or pay to use the express lanes. Chandra shakleford 
says her tolls run up to $80 a month. As far as the price goes, it's 
worth every penny to me. Shakleford has an electronic device mounted 
in her car that identifies her as an authorized user. The tolls are 
automatically deducted from her prepaid account. I save a total of 
probably about an hour a day, which gives me an hour more time with 
my family. Do car pool lanes help or hurt most commuters. As the debate 
rages, it is certain that traffic is going to get worse. George Lewis, 
NBC news, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>