<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0481 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Exxon, the United States' largest oil company, formally agreed on 
Tuesday to buy Mobil, the next-largest, for $80 billion in stock, 
to form the world's biggest corporation. While the merger is not likely 
to have any immediate effect on prices at the pump, antitrust regulators 
will certainly scrutinize it and probably force the sale of some gas 
stations and refineries. So great are the doubts that the companies 
will win approval or accept the required divestitures that investors 
sent the stock prices of both companies down on Tuesday. Shares of 
Exxon dropped $3.375, to $71.625, and Mobil fell $2.25, to $83.75, 
well below Exxon's offer price of $99.01 a share, based on Monday's 
closing Exxon stock price. The agreement would reunite the two largest 
pieces of John D. Rockefeller's Standard Oil Trust, which was broken 
up in 1911 in the nation's most celebrated antitrust case. The companies 
contended Tuesday that they now confront global competitors and plunging 
energy prices, making their recombination and the resulting savings 
a necessity. But while the companies said they could save $2.8 billion 
annually, the greatest costs would be paid by employees. The companies 
said 9,000 workers out of 123,000 worldwide were likely to find themselves 
without jobs. Lee Raymond, the chairman and chief executive of Exxon, 
who would add the title of president in the combined company, said 
repeatedly that further efficiency, not brute size, was his goal. 
``This is the case of the whole being greater than the sum of the 
parts,'' he said at a news conference, later adding: ``I have always 
had the view that the objective is to be best. If in being best you 
also have to be biggest, that's fine.'' Exxon Mobil, as the company 
would be called, would have sales of $204 billion, surpassing General 
Motors as the world's largest company and Royal Dutch/Shell Group 
as the largest oil company. It would still appear to motorists as 
the familiar separate operations, with gas stations and oil cans bearing 
the distinct brand names. Officials of the Federal Trade Commission, 
saying they were first told of the agreement Tuesday, had no comment. 
Antitrust experts said the regulators were likely to review the effects 
city by city and region by region, probably requiring the sale of 
at least some gas stations and refineries. ``If large divestitures 
are required, it could be that the deal doesn't make sense,'' said 
Eleanor Fox, who teaches antitrust law at New York University. But 
many industry analysts agreed with Raymond and Lucio Noto, Mobil's 
chief executive, who would be the combined company's vice chairman, 
that the corporations and their shareholders would do better united. 
The proposed deal comes as mergers are also welding together many 
of the world's largest banks, automakers and telephone companies. 
The companies said that they would have about a 13 percent share of 
the gasoline market in the United States, compared with about 14 percent 
for the partnership between Shell and Texaco and 10.5 percent for 
British Petroleum should it complete its planned $48.2 billion purchase 
of Amoco Corp. Analysts praised the latest combination, saying that 
other industry mergers would follow. ``To create lower costs and greater 
efficiencies, they had to go outside their own organizations,'' said 
Frederick Leuffer of Bear, Stearns. ``That same question is now before 
the other major oil companies.'' He and other analysts said they considered 
Mobil's $80 billion price tag to be fairly high, but reasonable considering 
the benefits. Raymond said the purchase would have no effect on his 
company's profitability in the first year and would begin adding to 
earnings per share after that. Exxon would trade 1.32 shares for each 
Mobil share, leaving Exxon shareholders owning 70 percent of the resulting 
company. The company would be based at Exxon's current headquarters 
in Irving, Texas, a suburb of Dallas. Mobil's headquarters in Fairfax, 
Va., would become the center for refining and sales, while Houston 
would be home to exploration, production and chemicals. The contrasting 
strengths and styles of the companies and their chief executives were 
on display Tuesday at their meetings on Wall Street with analysts 
and reporters. Raymond, who has a doctorate in chemical engineering 
from South Dakota, brought a reputation as a blunt cost-cutter and 
technician. Pruning his work force year by year, he has already made 
his company a model of efficiency. His shareholder returns at Exxon 
usually match the broad market indexes whose advances have been paced 
by companies making computer software or chips. Noto, whose company 
has slimmed down, too, is better known as a salesman and international 
diplomat. While Exxon is cautious about developing new oil and natural-gas 
sources abroad, Mobil has operations ranging from Indonesia to the 
Persian Gulf and the Caspian Sea. In an age when chief executives 
carefully tend their images, Raymond remains unfriendly to the media, 
refusing to become a celebrity and deflecting questions he deems redundant 
or dumb. ``I'm not interested in your views of how we ought to deal 
with the FTC,'' he told a reporter on Tuesday who asked why his company 
had not begun by telling the agency what operations it would sell. 
So if Raymond took the lead in reciting the merger's particulars, 
it fell to Noto to set forth the imperatives in more human terms. 
``This is not a combination based on desperation,'' he said. ``It 
is one based on opportunity. But we need to face some facts. The world 
has changed. The easy things are behind us. The easy oil, the easy 
cost savings, they're done. So all of us are now looking for some 
way to make a jump, to make a quantum leap, to be able to deliver 
more value to our shareholders, and our employees and customers.'' 
Noto was likewise the one who explained that while managers couldn't 
offer more details of the likely job cuts, ``They are not cold and 
indifferent. They understand that jobs are important and they understand 
the impact on communities.'' About 40 percent, or 50,000, of the companies' 
employees are in the United States. The executives bemoaned oil prices 
that are low and getting lower, since the Oil and Petroleum Exporting 
Countries finished their recent meeting without doing much more than 
agreeing to meet again. But they said their agreement was based far 
more on their views of where their competitors and their industry 
were going over the longer term. In a consolidating industry, they 
said, they see powerful national oil companies expanding to other 
countries. They spoke of the need for huge amounts of capital and 
deep technological expertise to produce oil and natural gas from beneath 
arctic ice and unexplored seas. Raymond's restiveness in public and 
Exxon's history of dealing with the media may hamper efforts to sell 
the agreement to the public. Exxon's handling of the 1989 grounding 
of its Exxon Valdez tanker off Alaska has come to be known as one 
of the industry's worst environmental and public relations disasters. 
Parting company with European competitors like British Petroleum and 
Royal Dutch/Shell, Exxon and Mobil are opposing a treaty meant to 
slow global warming. Since news of the talks broke last Wednesday, 
antitrust experts and consumer advocates have been picking it apart. 
``Rockefeller's revenge'' is how the merger was described by Andrew 
Heaney, president of Heat USA, a fuel-oil buying cooperative in Long 
Island, N.Y. He added, ``There's little question in my mind that if 
you have industry consolidation on this magnitude, you're going to 
see energy prices controlled by fewer people.'' At gasoline stations, 
consumers had mixed views. Some, like Juanita Purner of Santa Monica, 
Calif., suspect that the deal will raise prices. ``To me, that says 
monopoly, big business, more control, she said at a Mobil station 
in Los Angeles. ``I may have to take the bus.'' But others, like Wayne 
Daniels of Farmingville, N.Y., seemed more concerned about the workers. 
``I've heard that thousands of jobs will be lost in the merger,'' 
he said at a Mobil station in Riverhead, N.Y. Mobil has been far more 
ardent in seeking partners, allies and acquisitions, combining its 
European refineries and gas stations with British Petroleum's. Exxon 
has stood aloof, assuming it was large enough to fend for itself. 
But Raymond said in a brief interview Tuesday that he had been pondering 
how much more profitable his company could become in league with Mobil. 
The flirtation began after an American Petroleum Institute Committee 
meeting last June, when their ostensible subject was a possible alliance 
in Japan. ``Maybe we should talk about that,'' Raymond said. ``That 
and other things,'' Noto responded. About three weeks later, they 
began merger talks in earnest. Those who have been briefed on their 
discussions said that agreements on price came easily and early. Sorting 
through the potential antitrust obstacles and deciding who should 
get what job took longer. The boards held their own separate discussions 
as well, especially on the antitrust questions. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>