<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0206 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Several hundred people gathered recently on the south side of the 
Thames River in London, around the hulking facade of a former power 
station where Andy Warhol's 1964 film ``Empire'' was being projected 
larger than life. Joggers stopped to watch. So did neighbors on their 
way home from work, cyclists, film buffs and hordes of contemporary-art 
mavens who had read about the free screening. Call it curiosity or 
a cult happening or simply going to the party 18 months early, but 
the site of the new Tate Gallery of Modern Art, which is scheduled 
to open in 2000, is already becoming part of the fabric of London's 
cultural life. Before the museum opens, there will be a program of 
site-specific art installations around the power station and a series 
of screenings of other films by popular contemporary artists like 
Chris Burden, Gordon Matta-Clark, Julian Opie and Richard Serra. ``We're 
getting the public used to going here and making people aware of our 
existence,'' said Nicholas Serota, director of the Tate Gallery and 
all its branches, of which the new museum is one. ``It's also about 
beginning to build links with the community.'' Situated at Bankside 
just opposite St. Paul's Cathedral, the new $208 million Tate _ the 
first new national museum to be built in Britain in 100 years and 
the first national museum in London devoted solely to modern art _ 
is the biggest news in the London art world for some time. The excitement 
is also being felt in the United States, where collectors _ like John 
and Frances Bowes of San Francisco, Donald Bryant of St. Louis and 
Douglas Cramer of New York _ have already agreed to give their support 
to the new Tate. So has the Annenberg Foundation. These supporters 
``tend to be people or institutions whose principal commitment is 
to their local museums but who want to be a part of this project,'' 
Serota said. Bankside, which has been one of London's most neglected 
areas, not only is about to get a face lift but also is poised to 
become a major cultural center. In addition to the Tate, the Globe 
Theater, a $48 million re-creation of the original Shakespeare theater, 
opened in the neighborhood last year and has received wide acclaim. 
The Globe and the new Tate have prompted a host of other projects. 
A new $27 million pedestrian bridge _ designed by Sir Norman Foster, 
the London architect; Sir Anthony Caro, the sculptor, and Ove Arup 
and Partners, an engineering firm _ will link Bankside to St. Paul's. 
There will also be a new subway station, designed by Richard McCormick, 
a leading British architect, and a new apartment development called 
Manhattan Lofts, as well as scores of new shops and restaurants. An 
economic-development study prepared for the Tate estimates that the 
new museum will attract about 2 million visitors a year, create 2,400 
jobs and provide direct economic benefits to London of $48 million 
to $144 million a year. A modern-art museum in London will add strength 
to an already vibrant contemporary-art scene, where young British 
artists like Damien Hirst, Rachel Whiteread, Gillian Waring and Douglas 
Gordon are becoming internationally known. ``We have been experiencing 
huge audiences when we show contemporary art,'' Serota said. ``There 
is certainly no shortage of interest.'' Lars Nittve, who was appointed 
director of the new museum last spring after having been director 
of the Louisiana Museum of Modern Art near Copenhagen, Denmark, for 
three years, said it was not by chance that the new Tate was being 
built now. ``There's a greater self-confidence and international recognition 
among contemporary British artists,'' he said. ``And this museum will 
surely trigger more changes.'' Nittve and Serota envision the new 
museum as a serious rival to both the Museum of Modern Art in New 
York and the Pompidou Center in Paris. In fact, the Museum of Modern 
Art and the Tate are already joining forces to share shows even before 
the Tate opens. The Jackson Pollock exhibition that opened last month 
at the Modern is traveling to the Tate after it leaves New York on 
Feb. 2. ``We have a lot in common,'' said Glenn Lowry, director of 
the Modern. ``It makes sense to collaborate.'' London's art dealers 
and auction houses hope the new Tate will attract more art buyers 
to London. London has been steadily losing business to New York for 
the last two years because of rising European Union import taxes and 
is in danger of losing even more when the Paris auction market opens 
up to non-French auctioneers in the future. Finding Success in Raising 
Funds A museum devoted to modern and contemporary art was the brainchild 
of Serota, who oversees all the Tate museums: the original in the 
Millbank section of London, the new museum and two satellite institutions, 
the Tate St. Ives and the Tate Liverpool. An adept fund-raiser, he 
has been able to attract more than $160 million for the new museum, 
including an award of $80 million from the government's Millennium 
Commission, along with $19.2 million from English Partnerships, a 
redevelopment agency. Serota convincingly makes the argument that 
London needs a modern-art museum. Right now the Tate is able to show 
less than 15 percent of its permanent collection, because of lack 
of space. About 60 percent of its holdings will be on display once 
the Tate Gallery of Modern Art opens. A museum for modern art also 
gives Serota the chance to refocus the original site at Millbank, 
which will become the Tate Gallery of British Art, offering works 
from 1500 to the present. The Tate Gallery of Modern Art will concentrate 
on British and international art since 1900. But with an eye toward 
keeping its Millbank site an attraction for the young museum goer 
as well as the old, Serota has decided to keep the annual Turner Prize 
exhibition _ a much-talked-about show of the work of the finalists 
chosen for the coveted $32,000 prize awarded annually to a contemporary 
British artist _ at Millbank even after the opening of the Tate Gallery 
of Modern Art. ``It's a way of keeping the place contemporary as well 
as historic,'' Serota said. ``And that's something we very much want 
to maintain.'' (This year's winner, Chris Ofili, 30, a painter whose 
work centers on issues of black culture and sexual stereotyping, was 
announced at a dinner at the Tate on Tuesday night.) Strong Points 
of the Collection Besides the Turner Prize show, which has lured audiences 
to the Tate, it has an outstanding permanent collection of British 
art by masters like Turner, Constable and Bacon, in addition to its 
well-produced special exhibition schedule. While its holdings of modern 
and contemporary art are a far cry from those of an institution like 
the Modern in New York, which has a classic collection of art starting 
in 1880, the Tate does have a strong collection of modern and contemporary 
art with pockets of strength in the work of, say, the surrealists 
and figures like Bonnard, Rothko and Giacometti. It also has some 
outstanding individual pieces by Picasso and Matisse. So Serota knows 
that his main tasks are to court collectors in the hope of getting 
their art for the Tate, as well as to raise money for acquisitions. 
He has already succeeded in snagging some important collections. Janet 
de Botton, a London-based collector and Tate trustee, gave the museum 
her collection of contemporary art last year. Cramer, a trustee of 
the Modern who is head of its painting and sculpture committee, also 
gave the Tate several works of contemporary art. Artists' Opinions 
on a New Site Right from the start, Tate officials looked to contemporary 
artists for guidance in choosing a site for the new museum. The officials 
learned that converted industrial buildings or galleries in the beaux-arts 
style were preferred by artists over new buildings because they felt 
their work looked best in them. Serota had thought of building an 
extension to the Tate at Millbank, but space was limited and the planning 
problems became too great. After considering various locations including 
sites near the Kings Cross railway station in the South Bank section 
of London and Vauxhall, just opposite Millbank, he deemed the power 
station ideal, and the local council happily provided $1.6 million 
toward feasibility studies. ``The challenge was to turn a very closed 
building into an urban landscape,'' said Jacques Herzog, whose Swiss 
architectural firm, Herzog &AMP; de Meuron, was awarded the power-station 
project after an international competition. The original Bankside 
power station, built after World War II, was an imposing five-story 
building designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott, the architect of the 
Liverpool Anglican Cathedral and the designer of London's red telephone 
booths. The renovated power station will be transformed into a 360-square-foot 
museum (a bit larger than the Modern in New York) with a two-story 
glass structure running the length of the roof, providing natural 
light for the upper galleries as well as breathtaking views of London. 
The museum will be entered via a ramp at the building's west end leading 
down to a covered plaza. Three Main Elements in the Design The building 
has been designed in three distinct elements. Turbine Hall, a space 
500 feet long, 75 feet wide and 100 feet high, which once housed the 
power-station turbines, is a long covered street intended to be the 
heart of the building. The old boiler house on the river side of the 
building will be turned into three floors of galleries. The old switch 
station at the rear of the building, which now houses an electricity 
substation, will be transformed in the last phase of the building's 
development into spaces for performance art. There will also be space 
for a cafe, an auditorium and rooms for films, seminars and lectures. 
The museum's permanent collection will be housed in three large suites 
of galleries broadly arranged in chronological order. There will also 
be gallery space for special exhibitions and loans. ``I believe that 
galleries that are plain are the most powerful,'' Herzog said. ``But 
they will also be flexible to change as shows do.'' The museum is 
also about architecture that lures people inside. ``This building 
will be like a filter which people can walk through in all directions,'' 
Herzog added. ``We want to attract people who aren't necessarily going 
to the museum, to turn this once hermetically sealed power station 
into an urban, totally contemporary landscape where both art and people 
are embodied within the architecture.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>