<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0431 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
New federal regulations requiring buyers of virtually all types of 
firearms to undergo instant background checks went into effect this 
week, and gun control groups, privacy advocates and the National Rifle 
Association found themselves complaining about the rules. ``We now 
have a hybrid system which doesn't entirely satisfy the NRA's concerns,'' 
said Robert Walker, president of the gun control organization, Handgun 
Control Inc., ``nor does it satisfy ours.'' While each side also finds 
much to like in the new rules, the NRA has gone to court to block 
a new federal database of gun purchases, and gun control groups are 
lamenting the end of waiting periods. They each plan to lobby the 
new Congress for changes when it convenes in January. The rules were 
mandated by the Brady Law, federal legislation named after James Brady, 
former President Reagan's press secretary who was critically injured 
in a 1981 assassination attempt on Reagan. President Clinton has often 
called the measure one of his major crime-fighting achievements, boasting 
that it has prevented more than 250,000 handguns from being purchased 
by felons. Enacted in 1993, the law required handgun buyers to undergo 
a check of their backgrounds and wait five days before taking possession 
of their guns. But starting on Nov. 30, the waiting period was dropped, 
and the FBI was required to set up a national computerized system 
that would allow for instant checks into the background of potential 
buyers. In addition, the law automatically expanded to cover purchases 
of rifles and shotguns. ``This system is set up to prevent guns from 
going to people you and I don't want to have them _ convicted felons, 
drug dealers, illegal aliens and people who are adjudicated mentally 
deficient,'' said Jeff Roehm, chief of public affairs for the Bureau 
of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. At the time of a purchase, gun dealers 
must now call an 800 telephone number that hooks into two calling 
centers _ one in Moundsville, W.Va., another in Uniontown, Pa. _ run 
by private companies under FBI contracts totaling $42 million. Workers 
at the centers will check a national FBI database to determine if 
the customer should be disqualified. A person can be disqualified 
if he or she has been arrested for a felony, or for a misdemeanor 
involving domestic violence, has been committed by a court to a mental 
institution, has been dishonorably discharged from the military, is 
an illegal alien or has renounced U.S. citizenship. If a potential 
buyer is disqualified on the first check, the FBI has three business 
days to conduct a more thorough search to determine the details of 
the reasons, checking, for example, to see if the felony arrest actually 
resulted in a conviction. If the bureau turns up nothing untoward, 
the purchase is allowed. But as the new system was placed on line 
and weathered the technical glitches of a start-up, both pro- and 
anti-gun people found fault. Walker said the five-day waiting period 
had prevented some crimes of passion. He added that the waiting period 
allowed local police agencies to search records that might not be 
in the FBI's national database. ``We've always felt that as far we 
can see into the future there are certain pieces of information that 
are unlikely to be included in any kind of national background check,'' 
Walker said. ``So the waiting period would serve as both a cooling 
off period and a time when other people can have input.'' Walker said 
his organization would lobby the next Congress to have the waiting 
period reinstated. NRA leaders say they also intend to lobby Congress 
to revise the bill, only this time the aim would be to remove rifles 
and shotguns from the list of weapons that trigger a background check. 
``I think, for a number of reasons, starting with the work load, the 
monetary savings and the fact that they have not been proved to be 
a problem, we ought to look at scaling the law down and knocking out 
rifles and shotguns,'' said Wayne LaPierre, NRA executive vice president. 
The group filed suit Tuesday in federal court seeking to stop the 
FBI from keeping a database of the firearm purchases for which it 
provides background checks. The bureau had sought to keep a record 
of the transactions for six months in order to conduct audits to determine 
if gun dealers were following the law and to check for fraud and abuse 
of the system. But the NRA contends the Brady Law specifically bans 
the federal government from retaining records and keeping what the 
group contends is a central registry of gun purchases. The NRA is 
joined in this assertion by some privacy groups. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>