<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0237 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some 2,500 years ago, on a spring day under a full moon, Siddhartha 
Gautama was born in Lumbini. His mother had gone into labor while 
on a stroll in a verdant grove, smelling the flowers and listening 
to the songbirds. The baby would grow up to be the Enlightened One 
_ the Buddha _ and this village would become holy soil to millions 
of Buddhists who, for the most part, would these days never think 
of coming here. Situated in the flat, steamy lowlands of southwestern 
Nepal, Lumbini is not only off the beaten track, it is away from an 
adequate supply of sewer pipes, telephone lines, electric lights, 
clean sheets and mosquito control. Thirty years of planning to develop 
the site have thus far failed to make it the Buddhist counterpart 
of a Mecca or Jerusalem. The royal government of Nepal would like 
to change that. On Tuesday, it convened a two-day conference of religious 
leaders and political officials from 19 nations, trying to promote 
Lumbini as ``the fountain of world peace'' and open the way for a 
torrent of pilgrims and tourists to this impoverished country of 21 
million. The conference began with prayerful chanting, a peace march 
and a plea for help. ``His Majesty's government will leave no stone 
unturned to cooperate with individuals, organizations and friendly 
nations to develop Lumbini into an international complex for all the 
world human community,'' Prime Minister Girija Prasad Koirala promised. 
At best, such cooperation has been inconsistent in the past, a sad 
matter for many of the devoted. As if working through some inescapable 
karmic process, the development of Lumbini seems required to overcome 
sorrow, greed, egotism, despair and countless other human frailties 
before it can attain its realization. ``Five and a half years ago 
I found so much jungle that it made me weep,'' said Thay Huyen Dieu, 
a Vietnamese scholar who is building a monastery here. ``This was 
not the beautiful garden of scripture. We Buddhist people sometimes 
talk too much and do very little. This is what Lumbini needs. People 
doing, people believing.'' But while the area may lack well-sculpted 
gardens, it does not want for tranquillity. Dawn's first brush strokes 
come in brilliant greens and golds. A few bicycle rickshaws plow through 
powdery roads. An occasional pair of cranes gracefully swoop across 
the sky. The spot believed to be Buddha's birthplace is now a modest 
excavation site. There are piles of red-brown brick once used in ancient 
temples. For Tuesday's occasion, red bunting was hung across the area. 
Multicolored streamers swayed with the breeze. Priestly delegates 
wore robes of brown, maroon or yellow, depending on their sect. Many 
also carried small black briefcases, gifts of the Nepalese government. 
``What Lumbini needs is the right concept,'' said Noritada Morita, 
a retired economist with the Asian Development Bank. ``This is Buddha's 
birthplace. It has to be a peace-oriented, high-quality meditation 
place, not just for Buddhists but for everybody. The problem with 
the Nepalese is that they are so nice, they don't how to market.'' 
Not everyone was being so charitable to the Nepalese. This is a declared 
Hindu kingdom; upward of 80 percent of the population is Hindu. And 
many Buddhists feel that the government's Lumbini efforts have been 
half-hearted _ and sometimes even corrupt. ``The word pocket is supposed 
to be a noun, but here it is also very often a verb,'' the Rev. Hiroyuki 
Kawashima of the powerful Japan Buddhist Federation remarked wryly. 
The Tokyo-based federation has helped finance the archeological exploration 
of the site. For centuries after Buddha's death, Lumbini was a place 
of pilgrimage. It is described in writings left by seventh-century 
travelers. But with the Muslim invasions of the subcontinent, Lumbini 
was abandoned as a religious shrine, its location ceded to uncertainty. 
The village was rediscovered only in 1896, when excavators unearthed 
a half-buried pillar in the Nepalese countryside. It had been left 
in the third century B.C. by Maurya emperor Ashoka, a once-fierce 
warrior tamed by Buddhist compassion. An inscription claimed the spot 
to be Buddha's birthplace. The pillar stood near a destroyed temple 
that contained a relief sculpture of Maya, Buddha's mother, giving 
birth. Little was done to reclaim the site and its relics until 1967 
when U Thant of Burma, the secretary-general of the United Nations 
and a Buddhist, visited Lumbini. Its neglect distressed him, and, 
with his prodding and U.N. funds, an ambitious master plan for developing 
the site was created by the Japanese architect Kenzo Tange. Tange's 
plans call for three zones, each a mile square in area: a lavish garden 
surrounding the pillar and temple; a place for monasteries with a 
canal dividing Buddhism's two main traditions, the Mahayana and Theravada; 
a space for tourist accommodations. To get moving, the project needed 
infrastructure, something hard to come by in a nation where most people 
still earn less than $1 a day. It also required political leadership, 
which many would say has also been in short supply. Before democratic 
reforms, Nepal was ruled by its royal family from 1960 to 1990. Since 
then, there have been a succession of failed coalition governments 
_each one making its own political appointments to a succession of 
failed Lumbini development committees. ``There is no way to make plans 
when people know you won't be around for long and they cannot believe 
what you say,'' said Ram Lal Shrestha, a recently departed head of 
the Lumbini staff. ``Then there is the problem of the master plan. 
It is too ambitious for us. So we build a library, for instance _ 
who is going to pay to operate the air-conditioning?'' At present, 
perhaps only 20 percent of the original master plan has made it off 
the drawing board. A handful of monasteries are complete, deep set 
into the emptiness. Archeological work goes on. Three years ago, in 
the temple ruins near the pillar, a reddish-brown slab was found in 
a position that indicated it had been left as a marker. The stone 
was alien to the area, and Nepalese scholars have concluded that it 
denotes the precise location _ down to the inch _ of Buddha's birth. 
Other scholars are not so sure. ``Academically, it cannot be determined 
_ and I don't think there is any way to ever know for sure,'' said 
Hiroyuki Kawashima of the Japan Buddhist Federation. All in all, the 
present sluggishness made this a wise time for the Nepalese government 
to solicit help. The U.N. Development Program has agreed to review 
the master plan and consult on future management of the project. Donors 
have said they would be more inclined to contribute to Lumbini if 
ledger books are kept open and politics kept out. In the few Lumbini 
monasteries, among some of the monks drinking tea, there is impatience: 
Why has it taken so long to pay the proper respect to Lord Buddha? 
When will millions come to this place and learn of its peace? But 
other monks are undisturbed by such things. ``Why would anyone hurry 
to create gardens and buildings and monuments?'' they ask, echoing 
the Buddha in reply: Everything is transient and nothing endures. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>