<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0495 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One team of Huskies, in the midst of a multiple-time-zone road trip, 
played tired. The other Huskies, the nation's newly anointed No. 1 
team, was just awful. In the end, poor-playing Connecticut defeated 
sleepwalking Washington, 69-48, Tuesday night in the Great Eight tournament 
at the United Center. Until the final 16 minutes of the game, Connecticut 
(5-0) looked as if it wanted to abdicate the No. 1 ranking before 
it ever got warm in the throne. But after Washington pulled within 
a point, the East Coast Huskies suddenly came to life and went on 
a 20-2 tear over the next seven and a half minutes. It was Connecticut's 
player of the year candidate, Richard Hamilton, who sounded the alarm, 
scoring 11 of his game-high 17 points in the second half. But the 
star point guard Khalid El-Amin was relegated to the bench with his 
fourth foul for much of the second half. He was also feeling the heat 
from coach Jim Calhoun, who was miffed by El-Amin's evening of sloppy 
play. Instead, Hamilton took the help where he could find it: from 
the junior forward Kevin Freeman, who added 12 points, six rebounds 
and a harassing defensive presence that resulted in a steal and a 
blocked shot, and from Albert Mouring, who scored 13 points _ 11 of 
them in the first half _ and had five rebounds off the bench. But 
Connecticut's uneven effort _ 28-of-60 shooting and 22 turnovers _ 
was enough to bury No. 15 Washington (4-1), which came here from Hawaii 
after winning the Big Island Tournament and is in the midst of a two-week, 
7,000-mile road swing. The West Coast Huskies shot a dismal 19 of 
55 from the field and never got their 7-foot Canadian, Todd MacCulloch, 
untracked. He led Washington with 13 points and nine rebounds. El-Amin 
finished with 10 points and five turnovers. In Tuesday night's second 
game of the Great Eight _ a two-night event that features five of 
the nation's top 10 teams _ No. 7 Kansas (4-0) played No. 8 Kentucky 
(5-1). In Wednesday's games, No. 21 Utah (3-2) will meet Rhode Island 
(3-3), and No. 4 Duke (4-1) will play No. 9 Michigan State (4-1). 
In Tuesday night's battle of the Huskies, it was the team from the 
West Coast that had more to think about than taking on the top-ranked 
team. In one of the most thrilling games of the 1998 NCAA tournament, 
Connecticut deprived Washington of a berth in the Round of 8 when 
a loose ball found its way to Hamilton, who uncorked a fallaway jumper 
at the buzzer for a 75-74 victory in an East Regional semifinal. But 
neither vengeance nor an upset appeared to be within the grasp of 
Washington in the first half Tuesday night. Washington turned the 
ball over eight times in the first half and shot just 34.5 percent 
_ in ugly fashion, too. The junior guard Deon Luton, who had shot 
55 percent in Hawaii, rimmed a wide-open dunk, and the sophomore Chris 
Walcott muffed a wide-open alley-oop during a calamitous four-minute 
stretch in which Washington failed to score. Calhoun's bunch did not 
look much better even while running off a 13-point lead. El-Amin telegraphed 
one breakaway pass and threw away another, and Hamilton was called 
for walking under the basket. In total, Connecticut gave the ball 
up 15 times in the first half, but shot 46.8 percent despite Hamilton's 
2-of-8 shooting. Mouring, however, came off the bench for 11 points 
in 11 minutes. Those minutes came at the expense of El-Amin, who, 
after his fourth first-half turnover, was yanked off the court with 
48.6 seconds left. Washington had drawn within seven points, and Calhoun 
was not happy with his floor leader's effort. El-Amin dug a deeper 
hole with his coach when he was put back in the game with 4.4 seconds 
left, presumably to run a final play. The chunky point guard raced 
the length of the court on the dribble. The drive managed only to 
get him his third foul, for charging. In the tunnel on the way to 
the locker room at halftime, his team up by 35-27, Calhoun stayed 
on El-Amin. ``You still got all the answers?'' he barked at the guard. 
Against the Huskies, he really didn't. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>