<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0505 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial Wednesday, Dec. 2: The federal 
government has warned that New York City could lose federal aid if 
it continues to shunt disproportionate numbers of black and Latino 
children into special education. The city is a legitimate target. 
But the segregation that has raised red flags in Washington, D.C., 
is common throughout the state _ and is due in part to a funding formula 
that penalizes districts that reduce special-education enrollment 
while rewarding those who keep enrollment as high as possible and 
have the highest per-pupil special-ed expenditures. Unless New York 
state junks this formula, it could find itself stripped of special-education 
aid and in violation of federal civil rights laws. This is the second 
time in two years that the federal Education Department's civil rights 
division has questioned why New York City funnels disproportionate 
numbers of black and Latino students into special-education classes, 
which often become holding pens for children who learn nothing and 
rarely graduate. The Board of Education agreed last year to take specific 
steps to alleviate the problem. But in last month's follow-up, federal 
officials noted that many schools were still warehousing blacks and 
Latinos as well as children whose first language is not English. A 
two-year investigation by the U.S. Department of Education's Office 
of Civil Rights found that African-American children in schools where 
the principals, faculty and student body are mainly white are most 
likely to end up in special-education classes. The highest incidence 
of referrals is found in schools with low poverty rates, high reading 
and math scores and large numbers of experienced, permanently certified 
teachers. Theoretically, these schools would be best equipped to deal 
with students who might need extra help. But these children are often 
dumped into special ed even when diagnostic tests reveal no need for 
it. Ethnic stereotypes play a role in disproportionate referrals. 
But so does the desire to get under-prepared children out of mainstream 
classes so they will not be tested, bringing down schoolwide scores. 
In addition, children are sometimes sent to special ed because mainstream 
teachers lack the time or skill to help them with basic reading problems, 
the prime cause of special-education referrals. This process is driven 
by a ``spend-to-get'' state funding formula that awards special-education 
aid based on how much schools spend for this purpose _ and makes it 
fiscal suicide for them to shrink their programs. State Education 
Commissioner Richard Mills addressed the funding question two years 
ago when he proposed increasing support for mainstream classrooms 
while doing away with the incentives that lead schools to isolate 
students in special-education classes. But Gov. George Pataki failed 
to back this proposal, as did legislators from suburban Long Island, 
who use special-education aid as a way to subsidize public education 
without resorting to higher taxes. The best response is to enact Mills' 
proposal, bolstering mainstream education and removing the financial 
incentives for special ed. School districts can do it now while there 
is time to think it through, or rush later when the federal government 
presses their backs to the wall. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>