<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0409 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite forensic evidence, the modern-dance pioneer Martha Graham 
did not die in 1991. She can be found performing, name dropping and 
introducing guest choreographers the first Wednesday and Thursday 
of most months at a club in Manhattan's meatpacking district. Oh, 
she also grew 16 inches and is often mistaken for a soft-spoken, witty 
man named Richard Move. Martha(AT)Mother is the event, a satiric character 
study of Graham as artist, diva and publicity hound _ all portrayed 
by the 6-foot-4-inch Move in Graham drag _ as well as a loving tribute 
to modern dance and its practitioners. The combination of serious 
dance and high camp was devised by Move, 30, in collaboration with 
Janet Stapleton, 38, the co-managing director at Dance Theater Workshop, 
New York's premier showcase for young choreographers. Move and Ms. 
Stapleton wanted to create an event that fused their shared love for 
both contemporary choreography and the sweaty energy of the club scene. 
``I have lived in both the dance world and the late-night experimental 
cabaret world,'' says Move, who came to New York in 1989 after graduating 
from Virginia Commonwealth University with a degree in dance. (Back 
then, his last name was Winberg.) He has danced with Karole Armitage, 
Mark Dendy and Pooh Kaye, among others, and created ``Jackie 60,'' 
a drag revue also presented at the club Mother. ``I have an equal 
respect for the work that can be done at 1 a.m. in a nightclub and 
something performed at the Joyce Theater, and I don't see one as superior 
esthetically or more important than the other.'' With no advertising 
but lots of word of mouth, and very limited seating, Martha(AT)Mother, 
now in its third season, has become a hot ticket downtown. The club, 
at 875 Washington Street at West 14th Street, seats only 60, with 
room for 25 standees. A second show has been added on Wednesdays in 
response to ticket demand. Mikhail Baryshnikov has attended, and so 
have the painters Brice Marden and Francesco Clemente and legendary 
members of the Graham troupe from the halcyon 1950s _ Yuriko, Bertram 
Ross, Matt Turney, Mary Hinkson and Linda Hodes. Two other Graham 
company alumni, Stuart Hodes and Gus Solomons Jr., have performed 
on the 8-by-14-foot stage. ``One thing everyone learns once they've 
performed at Martha,'' says Move, ``is how much space they've wasted 
their whole careers.'' The format is that of a variety show, with 
Move serving as MC for works by contemporary choreographers. The evening 
opens with Move and his troupe of three women and one man _ Reid Hutchins, 
a friend since college and Playgirl magazine's 25th-anniversary centerfold 
_ doing a takeoff of a Graham dance, often to the music from the film 
``Psycho.'' The movement is based on Graham technique and is performed 
with deadpan seriousness, which, along with some lip quivering and 
glaring by Move, gives the parody bite. ``I use Reid to exemplify 
and personify the Graham hunk,'' Move explains. ``The men in the troupe 
were painfully gorgeous and for the most part did very little onstage 
and had no clothes on. They became props for these fierce women who 
were doing this incredible movement and were the stars of the show.'' 
What follows is a cornucopia of Martha Graham anecdotes and pontifications, 
delivered by Move with deliciously exaggerated diction, that introduce 
and link the subsequent dance performances. Move has culled his material 
from Graham's autobiography as well as the biographies written by 
Agnes DeMille and Robert Tracy. ``I think people are very moved by 
Martha's words, because it's very unfashionable to be so sentimental 
about your art,'' Move says. ``She equated art with religion. For 
a lot of dance people who come to the shows, hearing Graham's words 
rekindles their early years and memories of why they started dancing.'' 
Tracy actually appeared at the November edition of Martha(AT)Mother, 
giving a slide lecture about Graham's collaborations with the sculptor 
Isamu Noguchi. The hipster audience was rapt. Later the same evening, 
it howled at the performance artist John Kelly's sly impersonation 
of Pina Bausch, the moody German choreographer. By the evening's finale, 
it was gasping audibly at the delicate beauty of a stick figure manipulated 
by the puppeteer Basil Twist. ``I love Richard's integrity,'' says 
Kelly, who was also featured on the very first Martha(AT)Mother program. 
``I'm really able to appreciate the Graham choreography by seeing 
it through this lens of pathos and irony, which is what travestie 
does. The energy of the choreography on that tiny stage adds to the 
pleasure. It's time for us to look at Graham anew, both the beauty 
and the tackiness.'' Move and Ms. Stapleton initially asked their 
friends in the dance world to participate. Now, choreographers are 
calling them for a slot. Ultimately, they invite artists whose work 
they admire. The only restriction they have imposed is that no dance 
can be longer than 10 minutes. (The rule applies to Move's group as 
well.) Choreographers are free to do as they please _ show old work 
or devise something new. Tere O'Connor packed 16 of his dance students 
from New York University onto the stage. John Jasperse showed a duet 
from a dance that will have its premiere in the spring. Every artist 
is paid a modest fee. Actually, the show starts at the door. The ticket 
taker is a drag king named Willy Ryder, slender and handsome with 
a tough-guy stance. Once inside, there is a bar and a preshow video 
collage, compiled by Charles Atlas, featuring historical dance footage, 
numbers from movie musicals and any film clips in which the name Martha 
is mentioned, or screamed, as it is in ``Who's Afraid of Virginia 
Woolf.'' ``We wanted to bring a whole environment to the event and 
not just create a dance showcase,'' Ms. Stapleton says. There was 
one rocky moment. Back in November 1996, five days before the first 
Martha(AT)Mother, Ms. Stapleton and Move received hand-delivered letters 
from lawyers representing the Graham estate, basically asking them 
to cease and desist. The two had used a photograph of Graham on their 
flyer, an image given to them by the photographer. Now Move and his 
dancers appear on the flyers. ``We took the letter very seriously,'' 
Ms. Stapleton says, ``and also answered it immediately, assuring them 
that nobody was performing copyrighted works of Martha Graham. They 
asked for a few other things, which we were willing to do, including 
a disclaimer.'' The disclaimer, visible on the program and flyer, 
reads: ``This event is in no way connected to or sponsored by `The 
Martha Graham Entities.' '' There has been no correspondence from 
the estate since. The next Martha(AT)Mother is Jan. 6 and 7. Appearing 
on the program will be the mid-career choreographers Molissa Fenley 
and Lance Gries, as well as Jose Navas (who is flying in from Montreal), 
Hope Clark (best known as a dancer in Elizabeth Strebs's company), 
Sandra Kaufman (a newcomer) and Murray Louis, now 72 and the artistic 
director of the Murray Louis and Nikolais Dance Company. ``Martha 
and Murray will sit on the stage and reminisce,'' Move says, smiling. 
He pauses, then adds, ``I love dance, but I'm also happy to trash 
it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>