<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0442 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After months of negotiating, Rhone-Poulenc SA of France and Hoechst 
AG of Germany said Tuesday that they will take the first step toward 
a merger by combining their pharmaceutical and agricultural units 
into a new company. With the agreement, Rhone-Poulenc and Hoechst 
propel themselves to the top of two industries. Their new company, 
Aventis, which will be equally owned by Hoechst and Rhone-Poulenc, 
will be the world's second leading pharmaceutical maker behind Merck 
&AMP; Co. and the globe's top seller of agricultural products. Few 
drug companies can match Aventis in size. The company, which will 
be based in Strasbourg, France, should have annual sales of $20 billion 
_ well ahead of Bristol-Myers Squibb and Johnson &AMP; Johnson _ employ 
95,000 people and boast an annual operating profit of $3.8 billion. 
``This deal is all about accelerating the top line,'' said Peter McDougall, 
a pharmaceutical analyst with Dresdner Kleinwort Benson in London. 
``Everyone has pointed out that Hoechst and Rhone-Poulenc were never 
very successful in the past. Well, they didn't have critical mass 
to compete. They do now.'' Hoechst's shares closed Tuesday in Frankfurt 
at 68.1 marks, down 5.5 percent. Rhone-Poulenc's stock closed in Paris 
at 263.4 francs, off 7 percent. In U.S. trading, Hoechst's American 
depositary receipts closed Tuesday at $41, off 2.4 percent, while 
Rhone-Poulenc's ADRs drooped 5.1 percent to $47.4375. The Hoechst-Rhone-Poulenc 
courtship, one of the longest in recent memory, has yet to be completed. 
The companies said they will merge the remainder of their operations 
within the next two to three years, after each company has had time 
to divest chemical and other side businesses. The Aventis transaction 
is expected to close by the middle of next year. The companies had 
wrestled for weeks on how to construct a merger of equals that would 
appease shareholders and pass the scrutiny of European regulators. 
The French government had frowned heavily on Rhone-Poulenc's assets 
falling under German control, while Hoechst executives feared their 
shareholders would balk at any deal that didn't give them a controlling 
interest. Analysts said Tuesday that executives from both companies 
believe they have struck a working middle ground. Hoechst now has 
three years to sell off its assets, bringing it closer to Rhone-Poulenc's 
size. By basing the company in France, executives hope to appease 
any concerns the French government could raise. France also offered 
a better tax structure. In fact, Aventis appears to be a boon for 
the French. Analysts pointed out that while Rhone-Poulenc should contribute 
only 45 percent of Aventis' total sales, it has a 50 percent stake 
in the company's profits. ``Maybe Rhone-Poulenc's assets have not 
been valued properly,'' said Viren Mehta, a partner with Mehta Partners, 
a biopharmaceutical investment research firm in New York. ``But regardless 
for Rhone-Poulenc, it is a much better deal.'' Management responsibilities 
appear to be divied equally. Jurgen Dormann, Hoechst's chief executive, 
will serve as the chairman of Aventis, while Jean-Rene Fourtou, Rhone-Poulenc's 
CEO, will be vice chairman. Richard Markham, Hoechst's top pharmaceutical 
executive, will head the drug business. Alain Godard, the head of 
Rhone-Poulenc's crop-protection operation, will steer the agrochemicals 
division. Hoechst and Rhone-Poulenc executives boasted that Aventis 
could create $1.2 billion in savings during the next three years, 
with 60 percent of the total coming from the company's pharmaceutical 
operations. Analysts said some of the savings could come from laying 
off 10 percent of the company's 95,000 employees, but that would be 
difficult. Rhone-Poulenc and Hoechst are already divesting several 
businesses, and any further job reductions could anger the French 
and German governments. Of particular concern among analysts is Aventis' 
weak presence in the United States. Even though the company will be 
the world's second largest drug seller, it will rank 12th in the United 
States, far below companies with half its sales. As if expecting this 
criticism, Hoechst and Rhone-Poulenc executives noted that Aventis 
would employ 3,400 sales representatives in the United States with 
more soon to be hired. But that hardly appeased the company's critics. 
``Pfizer has 5,500 salespeople in the United States,'' said Mehta. 
``That's a lot more than Aventis. But even if Aventis had 5,500 salespeople 
they would still have a tough time. They would still be selling old 
products. This is about quality, not quanity.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>