<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0192 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many soups have extraordinarily simple origins, none more so than 
the ancient peasant dish of southern France called, in dialect, l'aigo 
boulido _ ``boiled water.'' At its most impoverished, this is no more 
than garlic simmered in water to give it flavor, with a few crusts 
of bread added for bulk. But ``boiled water'' is the perfect example 
of how an almost absurdly simple preparation can be quickly and easily 
converted into one that is nearly grand; all it takes is the addition 
of a few common ingredients, and a quick technique or two. By gently 
cooking the garlic in olive oil, you add the complexity and color 
of the browning process and turn the soup into a flavorful, dark broth; 
by crisping the bread in the same oil, you immeasurably increase its 
appeal. Using stock in place of water is a no-brainer; this is a great 
place for canned stock, as the garlic-scented oil will raise it to 
a higher level. In truth, after all of this tinkering the resulting 
soup remains on the meager side, but it requires only one more ingredient 
to turn it into a meal. That ingredient, which will dominate the soup, 
can be almost anything you can cut into bite-size chunks, from carrots 
to boneless pork. My choice is almost always shrimp, for two reasons: 
it adds great flavor of its own, and the shells can be used to make 
shrimp-shell stock. Making this stock is the work of a moment: put 
shrimp shells in a pot, cover with water, bring to a boil and simmer 
about five minutes; then strain. The liquid can be used in many shrimp 
dishes, or in place of fish stock in most recipes. You can accumulate 
shells and freeze them over a period of months if you like, and there's 
no need to defrost them before making the stock. The amount of stock 
made by the pound or so of shrimp I use in this recipe isn't enough 
to complete the soup, but its volume can be increased with water or 
chicken stock. If you have some of the latter, it's worth using, as 
the combined flavor of the shrimp and chicken stocks is really quite 
magnificent. To make the soup even more flavorful, brown a little 
spice in the oil after removing the bread and before adding the stock. 
I especially like a combination of cumin and paprika (about a teaspoon 
of each), which gives the soup a decidedly Spanish feeling. But curry 
powder, mild chili powder, a pinch of cayenne or a few rosemary leaves 
are all possibilities; this is a good place to experiment. I must 
confess that I almost always double the amount of bread given in the 
recipe here, or at least make an extra slice or two for myself; I 
find the allure of bread crisped in garlic-scented oil irresistible. 
GARLIC SOUP WITH SHRIMP Time: 45 minutes \ cup extra-virgin olive 
oil 8 to 16 medium to large cloves garlic, peeled Salt and freshly 
ground black pepper to taste 4 thick slices French or Italian bread 
6 cups shrimp stock, chicken stock, water or a combination 1 to 1{ 
pounds shrimp, peeled (deveining is optional) Minced fresh parsley 
leaves for garnish (optional). 1. Combine olive oil and garlic in 
a deep skillet or broad saucepan and turn heat to medium. Sprinkle 
cloves lightly with salt and pepper, and cook, turning occasionally, 
until they are tender and lightly browned all over, about 10 minutes; 
lower heat if they seem to be browning too quickly. Remove garlic 
with a slotted spoon. 2. Turn heat to low and add bread (in batches, 
if necessary); cook on each side until nicely browned, about 4 minutes 
total. Remove bread, add stock and raise heat to medium high. 3. When 
stock is nearly boiling, add shrimp and salt and pepper to taste. 
Cook until shrimp are pink, about 4 minutes. Place a piece of bread 
and some garlic cloves in each of 4 bowls; then ladle in a portion 
of soup and shrimp. Sprinkle with parsley and serve. Yield: 4 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>