<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The first thing you will notice about ``Tibet: Through the Red Box,'' 
by the Czech-born artist Peter Sis, is the haunting beauty of Sis' 
illustrations. We see labyrinths and landscapes of sere beauty and 
mystery, the fabulous Potala Palace in Prague, Buddhist mandalas and 
several views of a quiet study in Prague saturated in night shade. 
These arresting and luscious drawings so dominate the book that you 
almost fail to notice the text that they accompany, but there is a 
text, almost an incantation, whose motif is a child's wide-eyed rumination 
on the magical and strange stories of his father. Here, from what 
one gathers from the text, is the story: In 1954, when Peter Sis was 
a small boy growing up in Soviet-dominated Prague, his father, Vladimir, 
a filmmaker, left for Beijing to teach filmmaking to Chinese students. 
From Beijing, Vladimir went to Tibet with his students to make a documentary 
of a road-building project through the mountains. Somehow, however, 
a landslide separated him from his Chinese hosts, and he became lost 
in Tibet. After some wandering, he found his way to Lhasa, the Tibetan 
capital, where he met with the Dalai Lama, then 19, and warned him 
of the invasion of his country being engineered by Maoist China. Then 
a year late Vladimir returned to Prague and to Peter and his family 
with a small red box in which he kept a diary of his sojourn in Tibet. 
Many years later, Peter, a successful writer and illustrator of children's 
books living in New York, is summoned back to Prague by his father. 
There Peter opens the red box, kept closed for all of those years, 
and reads his father's diary. ``It's like an ancient anthill or a 
grave of memories buried in the sweet smell of honey, rosin and sandalwood,'' 
he writes, and then embarks on the slender and mystical volume he 
has put before us. The story of a man stranded for a year in Tibet 
in 1954 and of a faraway son who wonders about his fate is, quite 
simply, fabulously rich in possibilities. ``Tibet: Through the Red 
Box'' is in this sense a charming book and a visually beautiful one, 
but it is also precious and unsatisfyingly cryptic. In appearance 
and textual style it is a children's book, but it requires a good 
deal more knowledge of political matters _ the Communist takeover 
of Czechoslovakia, for example, and the Chinese invasion of Tibet 
_ for it to be fully grasped by children. The book is partly Sis' 
memoir of his father and partly an imaginative (rather than historically 
real) evocation of a Tibet that despite his father's warnings was 
invaded and transformed by China. It is also a somber recollection 
and transformation into images and words a childhood made sad by a 
father's unexplained disappearance. At the same time, it is too childlike 
in tone and structure to engage the adult mind even while its adult 
themes are not for children. Sis' voice is intentionally naive and 
his story an enchanted-forest tale, but it is one thing to be poetic 
and philosophically suggestive and another to develop themes and characters 
about which and whom we would like to know more. Indeed, Sis' story 
is so promising that one wishes he had told it more fully, even straightforwardly, 
rather than engage in all that artifice, enticing us with fragments, 
lavishly decorated hints. ``After all these years, my father is calling 
me home,'' is the way Sis begins his tale. These opening lines are 
placed between two marvelous drawings of a boy holding a satchel and 
returning down an ancient cobblestone path to home, where the red 
box glows on a desk in an upstairs room. What we do not know from 
the book, but learn from interviews that Sis has given, is that his 
summons to Prague came when his father fell ill with prostate cancer. 
The box itself was kept closed all these years because his father, 
who is still alive, was concerned that it could get him into trouble 
with Czechoslovakia's Communist authorities, which is another detail 
we know from interviews, not the book itself. ``I unlock the box with 
a rusty little key,'' Sis continues, and then unfolds the enigmatic 
fable of his father. The story includes his becoming separated from 
the road-building team and some hints of severe hardship, like getting 
lost in a snowstorm. It also includes more fabulist matters: a boy 
dressed in red and wearing bells who suddenly appears in a giant rhododendron 
forest and inexplicably delivers a letter to the elder Sis from Prague; 
an eight-foot-tall giant who takes him food in a cave; fish that have 
human faces swimming in a turquoise lake. The fabulist elements seem 
symbolic of a Tibet that is about to be altered forever by entirely 
nonfabulist Communist Chinese. But Sis' more intense concern is the 
role that the red box always played for him: a source of wonderment 
and puzzlement of a lifelong curiosity about Tibet and the father 
who got lost there and, perhaps, out of fear and hardship, allowed 
his imagination free rein. So did Sis the younger, and we are beneficiaries 
of that, even as he whets but does not satisfy our curiosity. PUBLICATION 
NOTES: `TIBET Through the Red Box' By Peter Sis Illustrated. 55 pages. 
Farrar, Straus &AMP; Giroux. $25. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>