<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0342 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For all the wealth of Exxon and Mobil _ and all the market power inherent 
in their announced merger _ these two oil giants are essentially purveyors 
of an ordinary commodity, and commodities are a drug on the market 
today, cutting into profits everywhere and hurting national economies. 
The move is essentially an attempt by Exxon and Mobil, particularly 
Mobil, to sustain profits. That helps to explain why investors, rather 
than celebrate the deal, drove down the stock prices of both companies 
on the New York Stock Exchange on Tuesday. The two companies are among 
the nation's most profitable, but the current price of crude oil, 
$11.13 a barrel, is barely enough to cover Exxon's exploration and 
production costs, and less than what Mobil spends to find and retrieve 
oil and natural gas. ``The cost reductions from this huge merger will 
come in many different areas,'' said Victor Burk, chief of Arthur 
Andersen's Energy Services Group. ``Exxon and Mobil will combine their 
headquarters and back office operations, and their purchases of supplies 
and services. As the world's biggest company, their negotiating power 
will be greatly enhanced. And they will try to reduce Mobil's costs 
for finding and developing oil reserves, bringing them more in line 
with Exxon's.'' All that cost cutting cuts two ways for ordinary Americans. 
Lower costs mean lower prices for gasoline, plastics and other petroleum-based 
products. But this merger, and others in the oil industry, represents 
a significant departure from more traditional mergers, and that works 
against ordinary Americans, says Peter Bernstein, an economist and 
consultant. ``It used to be that mergers were to gain market share,'' 
he said. ``This one is to cut costs, and that involves losses to society. 
Cost-cutting means people lose their jobs, and the impact on society 
of downsizing is probably on balance negative.'' Cost cutting through 
mergers is hardly a new tactic. In the oil industry, BP Petroleum 
and Amoco have already taken this step, and so have Texaco and Shell. 
With oil prices unlikely to rise until Asian demand revives _ probably 
many months in the future _ other oil companies appear to be moving 
in the same direction. France's Total SA announced Tuesday that it 
had acquired a 41 percent stake in Belgium's Petrofina SA. The plunge 
in commodity prices goes beyond oil, and also beyond steel or textiles 
or livestock or grain or all the other basic materials that the word 
``commodity'' brings to mind. Because of the collapse in Asian demand, 
an index of 28 of these commodities has fallen by 25 percent since 
last spring, a record drop. But in today's modern global economy, 
``commodity'' also takes in numerous manufactured goods that are easily 
produced anywhere. Commercial airliners are not commodities. Two companies, 
Boeing and Airbus, control the key technologies and production skills. 
Highly technical medical devices are also exempt, their production 
limited to those companies and workers with the necessary know-how. 
But razors are a commodity, the very best easily copied and manufactured. 
Cars are another example, and so are apparel, lathes, computer chips, 
small appliances, toys, kitchenware, television sets, watches and 
many other electronic devices. Commodities in this broader sense are 
in over-supply mainly because so many companies stepped up production 
in recent years, in the expectation that as supply rose, so would 
demand, absorbing the new supply. The Asian crisis destroyed that 
strategy, and now manufacturers find themselves unable to sell all 
that they can produce, and often forced to cut prices, hurting profits 
and forcing layoffs in the United States and abroad as production 
has been cut back. ``The basic phenomenon, however you to define the 
word commodities, is that there is a huge amount of slack capacity 
in most industries,'' said Alan Blinder, a Princeton University economist. 
Exxon and Mobil are caught in this squeeze. No U.S. corporation was 
more profitable than Exxon last year, and Mobil was also among the 
top performers. The two giants are still reporting healthy profits. 
Their refining operations and gasoline marketing, for example, continue 
to prosper. What's more, says Burk, an Exxon-Mobil merger will give 
the new company much more clout in dealings with OPEC. ``In terms 
of production,'' he said, ``it will be near in size to several of 
the big state-owned oil companies in the Middle East. It will have 
the means to finance very large exploration and development projects. 
And we may see Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, for example, opening their 
countries to foreign oil investment.'' But right now, in the basic 
business of exploring for oil, drilling the wells and recovering crude 
oil and natural gas, Exxon's and Mobil's costs are beginning to reach 
or surpass the basic price they get for even the best quality crude, 
known as West Texas Intermediate Crude. Its price of $11.13 Tuesday 
is down 41 percent from $18.83 last summer. Exxon, the stronger of 
the two companies, pumped from its U.S. fields 204 barrels out of 
a total worldwide production of 584 barrels last year. The exploration 
and production cost averaged $7.11 a barrel, according to Arthur Andersen's 
Energy Services Group, which surveys oil industry costs, based on 
public disclosures. Outside the United States, the Exxon exploration 
and recovery cost was $10.39 a barrel _ a healthy margin last year, 
when crude oil rose above $20 a barrel for a while, but uncomfortably 
close to today's much lower price. Of the 250 million barrels of crude 
oil that Mobil pumped everywhere in the world last year, 89 million 
came from U.S. fields, at a cost of $14.85 a barrel in the United 
States for exploration and recovery, and $11.52 abroad. ``Mobil is 
not in good shape today in this category,'' Burk said, `` and when 
you consider all the other costs involved in recovering crude oil, 
the cost for both companies is probably more than the current world 
oil price.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>