<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0296 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States has finally found a customer for fighter planes 
that it sold to Pakistan but never delivered. The incident created 
a longstanding irritation between the two countries, senior American 
officials said Tuesday. With Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif arriving 
to meet President Clinton at the White House on Wednesday, New Zealand 
agreed Tuesday to acquire the 28 F-16 fighters on a 10-year lease-buy 
arrangement for about $105 million. American officials confirmed the 
arrangement but not the price and said many details remain to be worked 
out, including how much money will go directly to reimburse Pakistan 
and whether New Zealand can later upgrade to a newer model. Pakistan 
had paid some $650 million for 28 of 60 F-16 fighters it had ordered 
when a congressional amendment was triggered in 1990 that cut off 
all direct economic aid and military sales to Pakistan. It was cut 
off when President George Bush said he could no longer certify that 
Pakistan was not developing nuclear weapons. But Washington refused 
to reimburse Pakistan, since the money was already spent to build 
the planes, and it has been searching intermittently for nearly a 
decade to find another customer, while the planes remain in storage 
in the Arizona desert. In 1995, Clinton said that the situation was 
unfair and that he would try to rectify it. But an effort in 1996 
to sell nine of the planes to Indonesia for $200 million was abandoned 
because of congressional objections to Indonesia's human rights record. 
While President Suharto has since resigned, Indonesia's economic collapse 
made it an unlikely purchaser. Pakistan's nuclear program, which was 
almost entirely dependent on Chinese expertise and aid, was undertaken 
in response to India's nuclear program. In May, after India conducted 
nuclear tests, Pakistan did as well, bringing down further economic 
sanctions against both countries, which Pakistan could ill afford. 
Tuesday, Clinton formally waived some of those sanctions imposed on 
India and Pakistan, allowing lending to resume by the U.S. Export-Import 
Bank, the Overseas Private Investment Corp. and the Trade and Development 
Agency. American officials had said last month that the sanctions 
would be waived as a reward to both countries for agreeing to stop 
testing and as an incentive for further steps to control proliferation. 
The American and allied effort to defuse a nuclear arms race in South 
Asia continues, and it will be a prime topic between Clinton and Sharif, 
officials said. They will also discuss other concerns, like drug trafficking 
and the situation in Afghanistan, where Pakistan has been largely 
supportive of the Taliban movement that has sheltered Saudi terrorist 
Osama bin Laden. But progress on the F-16 issue will help ease the 
atmosphere. New Zealand's conservative government, led by Prime Minister 
Jenny Shipley, considers the F-16s ``a windfall opportunity,'' she 
said Tuesday in Wellington, the capital. ``The prices will not be 
replicated in the future,'' she said. New Zealand's allies, including 
Washington, have been pressing the country to modernize its military. 
But the prime minister's minority government immediately lost the 
support of an independent member of Parliament, reducing her majority 
to a single vote. The New Zealand deal, with payments spread out over 
10 years, will give the Pakistanis something back, but nothing like 
their original outlay. The United States has hundreds of F-16s in 
Arizona for which Washington is also seeking buyers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>