<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0200 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If you feel you have become a slave to Julia or Jacques, don't abandon 
your recipes all at once. And remember: the road to freedom begins 
with a familiar dish. Choose a favorite recipe, one you have enjoyed 
preparing, and think about how you might vary it by substituting ingredients 
or changing the proportions. (Do not try this, however, with cake 
or pastry; baking without following a formula is only for experts.) 
To start a stew or casserole, for example, fresh fennel could replace 
celery. If you like the direction the flavor has taken, you could 
intensify it by adding a few fennel seeds or a splash of Pernod, or 
even some fresh tarragon, which also imparts a subtle note of licorice. 
Some tomato puree can enrich a sauce that previously called for just 
chicken stock. Does the market have beautiful bunches of Swiss chard? 
They might be used in a dish designed for spinach. Another way to 
liberate yourself is to improvise with leftovers. Turn a stew into 
a soup by cutting the meat into smaller pieces and adding more broth 
and perhaps a starch, like cooked rice or noodles. Consider turning 
a vegetable dish, like sauteed mushrooms, into a pasta sauce. Use 
leftovers in a salad, topping greens with cold pieces of grilled meat 
or fish. Or dress yesterday's starch, like rice or pasta, with a sauce, 
which can then be baked to make a casserole. Top it with bread crumbs. 
Here are some other pointers to help you wing it: Always keep texture 
in mind when varying recipes or improvising. The texture of the ingredients, 
not the taste, is what affects how they cook. For example, to replace 
meaty fresh tuna, best served rare, you need a fish with similar density, 
like swordfish, rather than a more delicate flaky sea bass, which 
should be cooked more thoroughly. Taste and check seasonings as you 
go, but allow food that has been simmering to cool down for a minute 
before doing so. Do not hesitate to add a little salt _ sea salt is 
best _ to bring out flavor. More salt is first aid for many recipes. 
If you detect bitterness in a dish from an ingredient like mushrooms 
or radicchio, salting tends to cancel it out. (About the only way 
to modify heavy oversalting is to add starch, like potatoes.) A few 
drops of lemon juice can also work wonders to correct a sauce, even 
one that may be slightly oversalted. Similarly, a bit of butter or 
oil swirled into a sauce just before serving will add a gloss and 
richness far beyond its measure. If a sauce is too thin, cooking it 
longer, uncovered, will concentrate it. And if you are afraid of overcooking 
the main ingredient, drain off the sauce, cook it down separately, 
then recombine the dish. Introduce new seasonings one at a time, in 
small increments, until you like the flavor. And when dining out, 
think about how you might reseason or otherwise improve a dish you 
ordered. The internal temperature for rare, medium and well-done is 
the same for all meats, game and poultry. Keep an instant-read thermometer 
on hand for testing. But beware the guidelines that say 140 degrees 
is rare. It is not. Meat is rare at 120 degrees but it is still risky 
at that temperature because all possible pathogens are not destroyed. 
To reduce liquid, sear meats or brown a casserole, do not be afraid 
of high heat on top of the stove or in the oven. A few minutes on 
a hot grill or broiler flame is the only way to burnish fish fillets 
without overcooking them. But keep watch carefully. Conversely, if 
you want melting tenderness, a slow simmer is best. As for quantity, 
measure. If you are not sure you have made enough soup for six, spoon 
some from the pot into a bowl, calculate how much you need, and add 
more ingredients if necessary. Do not rush things. When you are cooking 
on your own, you will need the time to experiment or repair a flat 
taste. Indeed, soups and stews are usually better when prepared a 
day in advance and reheated. And then, if all else fails, there is 
always another basic rule to remember: adding bacon or chocolate will 
improve any dish. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>