<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0503 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial Wednesday, Dec. 2: To everyone 
except the partisans, it has always been obvious that President Clinton 
and Bob Dole violated campaign spending laws in the 1996 election. 
Now the Federal Election Commission staff has advanced the cause of 
honest politics by studying both campaigns and formally concluding 
that the candidates broke the law and should pay millions of dollars 
to the federal government as punishment. The conclusion by commission 
auditors and counsel, made public yesterday, should help close the 
soft-money loophole that has destroyed the campaign finance laws. 
It should also finally prod Attorney General Janet Reno to get an 
independent counsel to investigate. Though widely expected, the auditors' 
conclusion laid out in unmistakable detail what this page has argued 
since the 1996 campaign: that the Clinton team eviscerated the letter 
and spirit of the election laws by pledging to limit spending in return 
for federal subsidies, and then using the party apparatus to raise 
and spend money for ad campaigns. The Dole campaign, no less clearly, 
did the same thing, except that Dole was probably not as directly 
involved in the fund-raising and advertising strategy as the president 
was. It was Clinton, after all, who turned the White House into a 
coffee and sleepover bazaar for donors. The three Republican and three 
Democratic members of the Federal Election Commission must do their 
duty and adopt the findings of the auditors and the legal counsel. 
The commission has been notoriously partisan and weak-kneed in the 
last few years, but it can now take the opportunity to do the right 
thing, knowing that both parties were equally guilty. Politicians 
in Washington are already saying that the commissioners should at 
least waive the repayments on the ground that the parties thought 
they were behaving legally. That would be a travesty. The commission 
should insist on the repayments and then go on to close the so-called 
soft-money loophole for presidential and congressional campaigns, 
for now and forever. In the past, the commission has ruled against 
presidential candidates who tried to raise and spend money for their 
campaigns outside the regular limits by setting up separate committees. 
Some of the presidential candidates are already starting to adopt 
that practice again, knowing that the commission has been lax. The 
commission can now make this principle clear: Any money spent for 
a presidential or congressional candidate must adhere to longstanding 
federal laws, whether it is raised or spent by a so-called independent 
committee or by a political party. The attorney general, with her 
eye more on protecting the president than enforcing the law, has looked 
for ways around her obligation to seek an independent counsel to investigate 
Clinton. Whatever excuse she had is now gone. Even if the commissioners 
do not accept the commission's staff recommendation, it is obvious 
that someone not beholden to the president needs to look into the 
1996 fund-raising fiasco. If Ms. Reno calls for someone to look at 
both Democratic and Republican use of soft money, so much the better. 
The Federal Election Commission's finding comes as the House Judiciary 
Committee has decided to add campaign finance violations to its impeachment 
inquiry. This page supports aggressive congressional investigations 
into such matters, conducted in a bipartisan spirit. Now that the 
staff of the commission has found that Dole and Clinton violated the 
law, it should be obvious that such an investigation not be tied to 
the impeachment proceedings. Let the commission and Ms. Reno do their 
duty first. Congress can then pass campaign finance reform and extend 
the soft-money ban to ads sponsored by independent groups. That step 
would complete the process of cleaning up the laws that turned the 
1996 campaign into one of the most corrupt in modern history. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>