<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0384 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The twain met here last month, when the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra, 
the conductorless ensemble from New York, performed at the Hanoi Opera 
House. Orpheus, which plays on Monday evening at Carnegie Hall, was 
the first professional American orchestra to appear in this country 
since the Vietnam War ended in 1975. The two sold-out concerts were 
glittering affairs, attended by culture-starved expatriates and curious 
Vietnamese, turned out in their dressiest Western-style clothes. Even 
Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, the revered former commander of the Vietnamese 
army, who led his forces to victory over both France and the United 
States-backed regime in Saigon, was in the first audience. The visit 
was an emotional experience for the orchestra, several of whose male 
members still remember the numbers they drew in the draft lottery. 
The orchestra's founder and president, Julian Fifer, was a prominent 
member of the student protest movement in the early 1970s, as an undergraduate 
at Columbia University. The morning after the orchestra arrived, Fifer 
and I had breakfast, before doing some sightseeing and visiting the 
national conservatory of music. I tried to explain to him the remarkable 
transformation that had taken place here since my first visit, 10 
years ago. Rip Van Winkle was more on top of things than I was. When 
I first visited Vietnam, in 1988, Hanoi was one of the most isolated 
capitals in the world, quiet except for the whir of bicycles and only 
intermittently electrified. I was tagging along on a joint American 
and Vietnamese archeological expedition in a remote western province. 
I had brought along some music cassettes to beguile the evening hours, 
running the gamut from Renaissance choral music to rock. When I played 
some of them for my Vietnamese friends, their befuddled reactions 
suggested that musically, at least, East was East, and West was definitely 
West. Vietnam at that time adhered to a strict Socialist ideology 
and was anything but welcoming to visitors from non-Communist countries. 
The government has since initiated a policy called ``doi moi,'' or 
``open door,'' and Western influences are now apparent everywhere. 
The streets are clogged with cars and noisy motorcycles, and the neon 
signs of nightclubs and even massage parlors light up the night. As 
a symbol of its new cosmopolitan outlook, the Vietnamese government 
last year splendidly refurbished the Hanoi Opera House, a scaled-down 
version of the Palais Garnier in Paris, built by the French during 
colonial times. On my first visit, it was a moldering ruin, home to 
a flea market sheltered under tents, to keep out the falling plaster. 
The posh hotel in which we were now having breakfast, I told Fifer, 
had been known as the Kingdom of the Rats. My archeologist buddies 
and I used to sit in the bar, drinking lemonade and Russian vodka 
with East German electricians and a shady Iraqi ``diplomat'' and watch 
the rodents cavort. Today, the hotel is run by a French firm, which 
has restored its chic colonial-era name, the Metropole; it serves 
a perfect croissant and cafe au lait. Performing in Vietnam, Fifer 
said, was ``the realization of a lifelong dream.'' Before organizing 
Orpheus in 1972, he had formed a group called Music for Peace, to 
raise money for antiwar activities. He was also involved with the 
Movement for a New Congress, which worked on behalf of congressional 
candidates opposed to the Vietnam War. He showed me a story about 
that group in a 1970 issue of Time magazine, which described him as 
``a gentle, soft-spoken 19-year-old cellist.'' A photograph showed 
him grinning, with a bushy head of hair and a cello case leaning against 
an American flag with the peace symbol instead of stars. Fifer's youthful 
idealism helped shape Orpheus. The traditional symphony orchestra, 
presided over by an autocratic conductor, seemed to him the musical 
equivalent of the military-industrial complex, and he was determined 
to create an ensemble in which the members had the equality and freedom 
of expression enjoyed by the players in a chamber group. What resulted 
was the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra, an experimental musical collective 
in which all the players were equal, at least in theory. The ensemble 
has never even had a permanent concertmaster, yet it has evolved into 
one of the most successful chamber orchestras in the world. After 
breakfast, Fifer and I toured the city by cyclo, the pedal-powered 
rickshaw that used to be the only way of getting around. Then we picked 
up the Orpheus timpanist, Jonathan Haas, and went to the Hanoi National 
Conservatory of Music. The school occupies three boxy concrete buildings, 
more cheerful than most state architecture in Hanoi. They are ranged 
around a paved courtyard. The students politely tried not to stare 
as we made our way to the reception hall. There we were hospitably 
received by the rector, Tran Thu Ha, a woman of middle age who began 
every sentence with a giggle, and the vice rector, a violinist named 
Ngo Van Thanh. Another man gave us his card, which identified him 
as ``Excellent Artist, Luu Quang Minh,'' the dean of accordion, guitar 
and jazz. ``You knew he had to be the jazz guy,'' Haas whispered as 
we sat down to tea and oranges. ``He's the one wearing cool-looking 
clothes.'' Through an interpreter, Ms. Ha explained the functioning 
of the conservatory, which was founded in 1956. Its purposes include 
scientific research and preservation of the traditional music of Vietnam. 
The school's 1,000 students, ranging from primary-school children 
to professionals in their mid-20s, come from every province in the 
country and live in dormitories on campus. There are two professional 
orchestras in Vietnam, that of the conservatory and the Vietnamese 
National Symphony Orchestra, though they share many of the same players. 
Last April, Thanh said, the conservatory orchestra toured the country, 
playing works by Brahms, Tchaikovsky, Mendelssohn and two contemporary 
Vietnamese composers. ``There are three different kinds of works by 
Vietnamese composers,'' he explained, ``symphonic works in the Western 
style, pieces written for traditional instruments, and a new, experimental 
style, very popular now, which uses some Western and some Vietnamese 
instruments.'' The principal living composers, he said, were Dam Linh, 
Nguyen Van Nam and Da Hong Quan. Haas asked whether we could see some 
of their scores. As so often happens in Asia, our hosts said, ``Yes, 
of course,'' but never actually produced them. Minh briefly described 
the conservatory's jazz program, which was established seven years 
ago. ``We're basing it on the German conservatory system,'' he said. 
``All the students have to learn classical music first, then they 
can go into jazz or traditional Vietnamese folk music.'' His own interest 
he said, was in developing a jazz-folk fusion using his instrument, 
the accordion. We dropped in on a rehearsal of a traditional orchestra. 
A teacher sternly beat time with a pencil on her wooden desk. The 
ensemble comprised bowed, plucked and struck string instruments and 
an assortment of tuned bamboo percussion. The melody was carried by 
the tieng dan bau, a small monochord that produces a haunting sound 
with harmonic overtones, subtly modulated by a vibrato bar. The boy 
playing it was a beginner; two women hovered over him, softly singing 
the words of the melody as they corrected his technique. Down the 
hall, a wind quintet was waiting for us. They had prepared Ibert's 
``Trois Pieces Breves,'' which they played with impressive polish 
and insouciant, idiomatic style. We applauded at the end of the performance, 
and the indefatigable Haas asked whether they knew any chamber works 
by Vietnamese composers. Yes, they said, a bassoon instructor at the 
conservatory had composed a piece for the same instruments. But a 
desultory search failed to turn up the sheet music. They played a 
piece by Hindemith instead. Throughout the Orpheus visit, the Vietnamese 
proved more interested in demonstrating their proficiency in Western 
music than in responding to requests for Vietnamese music. On his 
last day in Hanoi, Haas returned to the conservatory to see its collection 
of traditional percussion instruments, but _ surprise! _ the key to 
the room couldn't be found. Undeterred, he found his way to a drum 
factory on the outskirts of the city, where he bought a complete set, 
made with water-buffalo skins. Altogether, Haas collected 60 instruments, 
weighing more than 600 pounds, in Vietnam. ``I think I should be in 
some sort of 12-step program,'' he said. Since most of the musicians 
at the conservatory could not afford tickets for the concerts, which 
cost up to $30 apiece, Orpheus invited them to an open rehearsal. 
The concerts themselves were a great success, but for the Orpheus 
players, the most moving aspect of their visit to Hanoi seemed to 
be the connections they made with Vietnamese musicians. Many members 
of the orchestra expressed surprise at the cordial warmth with which 
they were received, given the horrors in which their countrymen had 
played a part during the war. On an unusually cool, crisp afternoon, 
I sat with David Singer, an Orpheus clarinetist, at an outdoor cafe 
beside Hoan Kiem Lake, in the heart of the city. He surveyed the scene 
with satisfaction, gazing at a pagoda in the middle of the lake, and 
pronounced Hanoi ``the most beautiful city in Southeast Asia.'' Like 
all the members of the orchestra with whom I spoke, Singer said that 
the visit to Vietnam was the high point of the ensemble's eight-country 
tour of the region. We briefly exchanged memories of the Vietnam War 
era (he had a low lottery number, mine was high), and a wistful look 
crossed his face. ``I had a friend in the band in high school,'' he 
said. ``His name was Bruce Teague. In 1968, he came over here to fight 
and never came back. Now I get to come here and play.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>