<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0298 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nowhere would the new Exxon Mobil have a vaster reach than in Asia, 
where the two companies own and operate oilfields, refineries, pipelines 
and gas stations from the Arctic chill of Sakhalin, off Siberia, to 
the tropical swelter of the Natuna Islands of Indonesia. The announcement 
Tuesday of Exxon Corp.'s $80 billion acquisition of Mobil Corp. may 
have profound implications for the Asian oil industry, which has been 
dominated by Royal Dutch/Shell and Caltex Petroleum, a joint venture 
of Chevron and Texaco. A combined Exxon Mobil would leapfrog Shell 
and equal Caltex as the largest oil company in Asia, with roughly 
8 percent of the 18.9 million barrels of oil products sold in the 
region in 1997. The new company would dominate the refining capacity 
of Singapore, and be a leading producer of natural gas and a pioneer 
in the emerging market of China. `Caltex and Shell have pretty much 
been the one-two punch in Asia over the past decade,'' said Al Troner, 
managing director of Asia Pacific Energy Consulting in Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia. ``This would create a very powerful new competitor.'' Perhaps 
the deal's greatest impact would be felt in the Japanese oil industry, 
which has suffered badly from overcapacity and swooning prices. Although 
Exxon Mobil would be only the second-largest oil company in Japan, 
after Nisseki Mitsubishi, analysts said it would have enough marketing 
power to force Japan's gasoline prices further down. That could mean 
disaster for smaller Japanese oil companies, which cannot afford a 
price war at the pumps and have been left out of the wave of consolidation 
in the oil industry. Nisseki Mitsubishi itself is the result of a 
recent merger of two of Japan's largest companies, Nippon Oil and 
Mitsubishi Oil. ``Pump prices will go down, and weaker oil companies 
will be driven off the edge,'' said Lalita Gupta, an industry analyst 
with Deutsche Securities in Tokyo. ``The big question is when is the 
shake-out going to take place?'' Exxon and Mobil already operate a 
joint-venture company that owns refineries and service stations in 
Japan. Ms. Gupta said the venture had nearly twice the average monthly 
sales volume at its service stations as Nisseki Mitsubishi. By merging 
outright, she said, Exxon and Mobil could cut their overhead costs 
in Japan and further reduce retail prices. ``Nisseki Mitsubishi wants 
to stabilize prices,'' she said. ``But Exxon and Mobil have a strategy 
of driving out competition by reducing prices.'' Elsewhere in Asia, 
analysts said, Exxon and Mobil would complement each other well, with 
few overlapping assets. Exxon is the leading oil producer in Malaysia, 
while Mobil operates a huge natural gas plant in the Indonesian province 
of Aceh. Mobil owns a stake in a refinery in New Zealand, while Exxon 
is the largest shareholder in a vast offshore gas field north of Indonesia. 
The only duplication of assets is in Japan and Singapore, where both 
companies have big refineries. Exxon and Mobil also each have plans 
to build petrochemical plants in Singapore, which are expected to 
be combined in a merger. And with their common roots in John D. Rockefeller's 
Standard Oil Co., Exxon and Mobil have been active in Asia for more 
than a century. Standard Oil used Singapore as a depot for kerosene 
in the 1890s _ carrying on a fierce competition with Shell to sell 
its bright blue tins. Some experts said the neat fit between the assets 
of the companies did not extend to strategy. Mobil, they said, had 
aggressively built its holdings in natural gas and pipelines in Asia, 
while Exxon was content to stick with basic oil production and distribution. 
Mobil has also built a thriving business in the trading of oil _ a 
business Exxon has eschewed. Oil trading has enabled British Petroleum 
and Total of France, which have few plants in Asia, to generate hefty 
revenue there. This summer, British Petroleum announced that it would 
buy Amoco for $48.2 billion. On Tuesday, Total said it would acquire 
Petrofina of Belgium in an all-stock deal valued at $13 billion. ``Mobil 
has made a lot of strides in this region while Exxon has been static,'' 
Troner, the industry consultant, said. ``Whether we call it Mobex 
or Exbil, you can see how the thinking of the two companies is different.'' 
Troner said he worried that Mobil's entrepreneurial style in this 
region could be tempered by the more cautious and centralized Exxon. 
He noted that Mobil's Asian operations _ which range from natural 
gas refineries to marketing companies _ all report to the company's 
Asian chief in Singapore. Exxon's regional outposts tend to report 
individually to its corporate headquarters in Irving, Texas. While 
the deal may provide lower prices for consumers, it is grim news for 
Asian oil companies and oil-producing countries. Analysts said a number 
of companies in Thailand and Indonesia were hoping to extract themselves 
from financial trouble by selling out to a foreign company. ``This 
merger is going to take attention away from Asian assets, at least 
temporarily'' said Janet Yang, an energy and chemicals analyst with 
Salomon Smith Barney in Hong Kong. ``And now, these companies will 
not only have to compete with Exxon and Mobil, but a new, leaner company.'' 
Driven as it is by a plunge in oil prices, the Exxon-Mobil deal underscores 
that the Asian oil industry is in dire straits. Analysts here predicted 
that oil prices would not recover until at least the end of next year. 
That is just one more bit of bad news for major producing nations 
like Indonesia, Malaysia and Brunei, which have already been ravaged 
by financial crisis. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>