<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0284 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States has begun talks with several countries to find new 
bases of operation in Central and South America for the American military 
forces that must soon leave Panama, American officials said Tuesday. 
The discussions, while preliminary, have taken on new urgency because 
the United States has to close its principal airfield in Panama by 
May 1 as part of its agreement to relinquish control of the Panama 
Canal entirely by the end of 1999. The airfield, Howard Air Force 
Base, a few miles west of Panama City, supports the bulk of the aircraft 
and other forces involved in American-led efforts to stop the flow 
of cocaine and other drugs flowing from South America to the United 
States. Without new bases by that deadline, American commanders fear 
there could be an interruption in the interdiction flights. The Pentagon 
has held talks with Honduras, Peru and Ecuador about the possibility 
of allowing small numbers of surveillance aircraft, like AWAC's, to 
use existing airfields in those countries, senior defense officials 
said, speaking on condition of anonymity because of diplomatic sensitivities 
inherent in America's military presence in the region. Defense Secretary 
William Cohen said he had discussed the issue with a number of countries 
gathered here for a three-day conference of defense ministers from 
the Americas, but had not made a decision or reached an agreement 
on the bases. ``What we are looking for are forward operating locations 
that could be of assistance in surveying the territory to prevent 
the transfer of narcotics,'' Cohen said at a news conference Tuesday. 
Gen. Charles E. Wilhelm, commander of all American forces in Central 
and South America, declined Tuesday to identify prospective sites, 
but said in an interview, ``We need to be close to the regions where 
we need to operate.'' Ever since the Panama Canal opened in 1917, 
the United States has kept a military presence in Panama, but that 
force has gradually dwindled in accordance with the treaties President 
Carter negotiated in 1977 to return control of the canal to the Panamanians. 
The Pentagon had hoped to reach agreement with Panama to maintain 
a presence and, for a time, considered a proposal by the Panamanians 
to create a multinational counter-drug center at Howard. But those 
negotiations faltered in September over the Americans' insistence 
that the United States still be able mount other military operations 
from the base, not just those involving drugs. The United States now 
has about 4,000 troops in Panama, nearly half of them at Howard Air 
Force Base, which has been the primary center for the anti-drug operations 
since 1990. Although Howard has only a dozen aircraft permanently 
based there, scores of fighters, tankers and surveillance jets pass 
through, flying some 15,000 missions a year. Wilhelm said the United 
States was likely to need two or three forward bases in the immediate 
future to even come close to replicating the range of flights now 
launched from Panama. The officials said the United States did not 
need large airfields, but rather support bases, with few troops, that 
would allow aircraft from the United States to operate during short 
missions to the region. ``We're not interested in building air bases,'' 
Wilhelm said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>