<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0193 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The memoirist approach to cookbook writing is winning out. Increasingly, 
cookbooks are autobiographies instead of mere collections of recipes. 
There are two recent books of this kind, both about Mexican cooking 
by women who were not born in Mexico. ``Rosa Mexicano'' by Josefina 
Howard (Viking, $29.95), is the first book by Ms. Howard, the owner 
of the Upper East Side restaurant Rosa Mexicano in New York City. 
Punctuated with recipes, it sketches the details of her life. ``My 
Mexico'' by Diana Kennedy (Clarkson N. Potter, $32.50), the sixth 
book about Mexican cookery by Ms. Kennedy, one of the world's foremost 
experts on the subject, is her most autobiographical work. Of the 
two, ``Rosa Mexicano'' offers a more compelling personal story. But 
its recipes are no match for Ms. Kennedy's. Ms. Howard was born in 
Cuba of Spanish parents who were involved in the arts. She lived in 
Spain, and fled the country with her mother during the Spanish Civil 
War after her father, who opposed Franco, was killed. They eventually 
made their way to New York, where Ms. Howard finished school, studied 
interior design, then married an American, Charles Howard. The cookbook-as-autobiography 
can be vague about certain details, one of which here is Howard's 
profession. Nonetheless, the couple and their infant son moved first 
to Cuba, then to Mexico City, where Ms. Howard started an interior 
decorating business and gradually became interested in, then fascinated 
by the food of Mexico. Then the story _ which is interspersed with 
a collection of fairly basic recipes _ shifts constantly from autobiographical 
details, including the breakup of her marriage, her eventual return 
to New York and her start in the restaurant business, to historic 
explanations of essential foods, to how these foods eventually became 
part of the menu at Rosa Mexicano. Ms. Howard begins with tortillas, 
the very basis of Mexican cookery, and quickly moves on to cuitlacoche, 
the delicious but fairly esoteric corn fungus, accompanied by a truly 
revolting photograph of bloated, blackened ears of corn. Next on the 
menu is the maguey worm, another delicacy. There are sections covering 
beans, mushrooms, moles, sweets and, finally, chilies, which are described 
in excellent detail. She offers lively glimpses of life in Mexico 
and especially in Mexico City in the 1960s and 70s. The recipes worked 
reasonably well, but the dishes hardly break new ground. Ms. Kennedy, 
who was born in England, moved to Mexico in 1957, after marrying Paul 
Kennedy, who was a correspondent for The New York Times. She has lived 
in Mexico ever since, and now makes her home in Zitacuaro, west of 
Mexico City. ``My Mexico'' gives an account of travels that take her 
all over Mexico, mainly to ferret out cooks and their regional specialties. 
She does not mince words, whether describing the ``grossly overcooked'' 
fish at restaurants in Campeche or calling for ecological respect 
for the land. Anchoring the reminiscences are the recipes, many of 
them unusual, rustic and delectable, like a type of pozole, or hominy 
stew, made with fresh corn; skillet-roasted potatoes with chili; zucchini 
with sausage; shrimp in green sauce, and steamed tacos filled with 
shredded skirt steak. She describes some things, however, that you 
might not be in a rush to make. Flying ants (the mere mention of which 
makes her mouth water), for example, or the first ant eggs of the 
season fried with chilies. Black wasps make their way into her accounts 
of gastronomic adventure. Who can top a recipe for mole of black iguana 
(``But take heart, you can also use pork'')? She is (and always has 
been) uncompromising. The first recipe in the book, for tamales with 
corn tassels that also requires the fermented drink pulque (use light 
beer instead), gives you some idea. In another, she says, ``Open the 
steamer and bless it with a double sign of the cross.'' Substitute 
one chili for another at your peril. (There is a useful chart on chilies 
in the back of the book.) And do not (italics)ever(end italics) use 
canned hominy in your pozole (something that does not appear to trouble 
Ms. Howard). But it is difficult to understand how either of these 
books, and especially ``My Mexico,'' could have been published without 
a map. Keep an atlas at your side as you read them. GUACAMOLE EN MOCAJETE 
Adapted from ``Rosa Mexicano,'' by Josefina Howard Time: 15 minutes 
3 tablespoons chopped onion { teaspoon minced Serrano chili, or more, 
to taste 1{ teaspoons finely chopped cilantro leaves { teaspoon salt, 
or more, to taste 1 small vine-ripened tomato 1 ripe Hass avocado 
Tortilla chips for serving. 1. In a medium-size bowl, mortar or a 
Mexican mocajete (lava stone mortar), thoroughly mash 1 tablespoon 
of the onion with the chili, { teaspoon cilantro and the salt to make 
a paste. 2. Cut the tomato in half horizontally, squeeze out the juice 
and seeds and discard. Chop pulp and add it to the bowl. 3. Cut the 
avocado in half lengthwise, cutting around the pit. Gently twist the 
top half of the avocado off to separate the halves. Carefully rap 
the pit with the edge of a sharp knife and twist it out. Using a paring 
knife slice the avocado flesh of both halves lengthwise, then crosswise, 
cutting down to the skin, to form a grid. Scoop the avocado into the 
bowl with a spoon. 4. Add the remaining onion and cilantro, and gently 
fold all the ingredients together. Season with more chili and salt 
if desired. Serve at once with tortilla chips. Yield: 2 servings. 
PAPAS PASTORES (SHEPHERD POTATOES) Adapted from ``My Mexico,'' by 
Diana Kennedy Time: 40 minutes 2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil 
1 pound very small new potatoes, rinsed and dried Salt to taste One-third 
cup finely chopped onion 1 garlic clove, finely chopped 3 Serrano 
chilies, finely chopped, or more, to taste { cup loosely packed, roughly 
chopped cilantro 3 tablespoons fresh lime juice. 1. Heat oil in a 
heavy skillet with a cover. Add potatoes, sprinkle with salt and fry 
over medium-high heat, stirring from time to time, 6 to 8 minutes, 
until skins begin to wrinkle and brown. Add onion, garlic and chilies, 
reduce heat to medium-low and fry for 3 minutes longer. Add cilantro 
and lime juice, and fry for another minute. 2. Add 1 cup of water, 
cover pan and cook over very low heat until almost all the liquid 
has been absorbed and the potatoes are tender, another 20 minutes 
or so. Add additional water during cooking if it evaporates too quickly. 
The potatoes should be moist but not soupy. Season to taste with additional 
chilies and salt, if desired. Yield: 4 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>