<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I can't remember just when I decided to pump up the muscadine into 
a full-size cake, but I do remember the reaction of my French colleagues: 
surprise. In France, the muscadine is a candy, always chocolate and 
orange, always about the size of a Tootsie Roll _ and always as popular 
as a truffle. This confection is meltingly smooth on the inside and 
ever-so-slightly crackly on the outside, the result of its being brushed 
with chocolate, which hardens into a shell. The outer chocolate is 
kept rough and craggy so that when it is rolled in powdered sugar, 
it looks like the bark of a snow-dusted tree. Enlarged from candy 
to cake, it makes an untraditional but ideal buche de Noel. In my 
rendition, I play with the chocolate and orange base in several ways. 
The heart of my muscadine, which is essentially a jellyroll, is a 
feather-light rectangle of ladyfinger cake, whose crumb is designed 
to sop up liquids and creams. Here, it soaks up a Grand Marnier sugar 
syrup and is rolled up with a bitter-chocolate ganache studded with 
store-bought candied orange zest. Then it is finished in the same 
way the candy is _ with chocolate and sugar. If you want to give it 
a straight-from-the-patisserie look, decorate it with caramel spikes 
or buy (or make) a few meringue mushrooms. This cake is great whether 
you make it the day you serve it or whether you prepare it _ up to 
the chocolate coating _ a month in advance and keep it stowed in the 
freezer. MUSCADINE YULE LOG Time: 1 hour, plus 1 hour 40 minutes' 
refrigeration 10 ounces bittersweet chocolate 1 cup heavy cream 2 
tablespoons finely chopped candied orange zest (at specialty food 
stores) 5 tablespoons sugar 3 tablespoons Grand Marnier 4 large eggs, 
separated } cup confectioners' sugar, plus extra for sprinkling and 
dredging 1 teaspoon vanilla extract \ cup plus 3 tablespoons cake 
flour Caramel spikes, optional (see recipe). 1. Prepare chocolate 
ganache: Finely chop 6 ounces of the chocolate, and place in a mixing 
bowl. In a small saucepan, bring cream to a boil. Whisk hot cream 
into chocolate until smooth, then add orange zest and stir to mix 
well. Set aside to cool and thicken, or chill 40 minutes, stirring 
occasionally. 2. Prepare Grand Marnier syrup: In a small saucepan, 
combine sugar with \ cup water. Bring to a boil, then remove from 
heat. Stir in the Grand Marnier, then set aside to cool to room temperature. 
3. Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Line a 15-by-10-inch jellyroll pan 
with parchment paper, allowing paper to overlap slightly at ends. 
4. Using a mixer, whisk egg whites until foamy. Gradually add { cup 
of the confectioners' sugar, and beat until whites form firm, glossy 
peaks. In a large bowl, whisk egg yolks by hand with \ cup confectioners' 
sugar. Add vanilla, and whisk to blend. Turn mixer to lowest speed, 
and add yolk mixture to whites, mixing only to combine; do not overmix. 
Place flour in a sifter, and sift over mixture. Using a rubber spatula, 
gently fold in the flour. Scrape mixture into jellyroll pan, and smooth 
the top. Sprinkle cake lightly with 2 tablespoons of confectioners' 
sugar. Let it sit 5 minutes; sprinkle with 2 more tablespoons confectioners' 
sugar. 5. Bake cake until lightly golden and springy to the touch, 
about 10 minutes. Slide it on the parchment paper onto a rack, and 
cool to room temperature. Place a piece of parchment paper on the 
counter, and invert the cake on the paper. Peel away the baking paper. 
Brush Grand Marnier syrup over the surface of the cake. Using an offset 
spatula, spread the chocolate ganache evenly over the syrup. Starting 
from one of the shorter ends of the cake, using the paper for assistance, 
roll up the cake. Cover with plastic wrap, and refrigerate for 1 hour. 
(The cake can be chilled, and when set, wrapped airtight and frozen 
for 1 month.) 6. Just before serving, spread a generous amount of 
confectioners' sugar on a baking sheet. Chop and melt the remaining 
4 ounces of chocolate. Unwrap the cold cake, and brush it with a coating 
of melted chocolate, then roll it in confectioners' sugar. Return 
cake to refrigerator for 5 minutes to set the chocolate, then transfer 
to a serving platter. If desired, decorate with Caramel Spikes. Yield: 
8 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>