<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0300 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
William F. Baxter, who as head of the antitrust division of the Justice 
Department under President Ronald Reagan brought the sharp edge of 
economic analysis to bear on enforcement decisions, died Nov. 27 at 
his home in Los Altos, Calif. He was 69. The cause was complications 
from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and Parkinson's disease, 
said his wife, Carol Cairns Baxter. Baxter was the head of the antitrust 
division from 1981 through 1983. Despite intense objections of lawyers 
at the Justice Department, he dismissed the 13-year-old suit against 
IBM, concluding that the government's case made no sense long after 
IBM had lost dominance in the computer industry. Baxter also aggressively 
pressed AT&AMP;T to settle its antitrust battle by splitting off the 
parent company that operated in the long-distance market from the 
regional companies that monopolized local phone service. That decision 
was vigorously opposed by powerful members of Reagan's Cabinet. Paul 
Joskow, a professor of economics at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, credited the break up of AT&AMP;T with not only transforming 
the telecommunications industry but also creating the ``intellectual 
template against which other sectors _ like electric power and natural 
gas _ would later be reformed.'' Lawrence White, a professor of economics 
at the Stern School of Business at New York University and chief economist 
at the antitrust division under Baxter, also credits Baxter with vigorous 
prosecution of price-fixing, including prosecuting American Airlines 
president Robert Crandall for inviting the chairman of Braniff Airways 
to join forces to raise air fares. The suit was novel because Braniff 
had rejected Crandall's invitation, leaving no price fixing for Baxter 
to prosecute. But Baxter convinced an appeals court that even an offer 
to fix prices represented an illegal attempt to monopolize. Baxter's 
colleagues said that merger guidelines issued by his division in 1982 
were his most enduring achievement. Joskow said that they set a foundation 
for analyzing mergers both in the United States and other industrialized 
countries. The guidelines provided a clear blueprint for antitrust 
action. No longer would the government oppose a merger out of a vague 
sense that a combined company lacked competitors or was too large 
and would squash smaller concerns. The guidelines established clear 
questions, focusing on the effect of the merger on consumer prices, 
that the antitrust authorities would need to answer with state-of-the-art 
economic analysis. Baxter's decisions on IBM and AT&AMP;T were widely 
applauded within the economics profession. But some experts criticized 
Baxter for refusing to challenge vertical mergers _ mergers between 
companies and their suppliers or distributors _ and so-called vertical 
restraints like resale price maintenance _ the practice of dictating 
a price below which manufacturers would not allow wholesalers or retailers 
to charge. Baxter thought that such practices rarely harmed consumers 
because they could turn to products of other manufacturers. Yet, he 
said, resale price maintenance could benefit consumers. For example, 
it could prevent discounters from driving out of the market those 
retailers that provided extra service, the cost of which could be 
passed into their prices. But even F. Michael Scherer of Harvard University, 
a critic of Baxter's attitude toward vertical restraints, said that 
they were rarely a significant threat to consumers. Scherer applauded 
Baxter's tenure at the Justice Department and said that his merger 
guidelines ``put analytic sense into what had been a capricious decision-making 
process.'' Baxter was born in New York City and spent most of his 
academic career at Stanford, where he received a bachelor's degree 
in 1951, a law degree in 1956 and joined the faculty of the law school 
in 1960. He served in the Navy between 1951 and 1954. He served as 
a consultant to Citibank and helped write an acclaimed 1977 book on 
the economic and regulatory issues emerging from the growth of credit 
cards. Baxter did not back away from controversy. He filed a brief 
before the U.S. Supreme Court calling on it to give more leeway to 
manufacturers to engage in practices like resale price maintenance 
despite the fact that at least one prominent member of Congress was 
calling for his resignation over the issue. He declared that the Supreme 
Court had based opinions on ``wacko economic propositions'' and that 
there was ``no respectable academic support for the outmoded, jerry-built, 
amateur, pseudo-economic propositions that underlies some antitrust 
options.'' Peter Temin, an economic historian at MIT who interviewed 
Baxter extensively for a 1987 book about AT&AMP;T, said that Baxter 
was ``very convinced of his point of view _ not someone troubled by 
doubts or introspection.'' ``He was ideological in his approach to 
antitrust enforcement, but on balance he exercised very good taste,'' 
he added. ``He went for simple, perhaps even Draconian, responses 
because he recognized that simplicity was of itself a virtue in the 
administration of complex policy.'' In addition to his wife, Baxter 
is survived by a stepson, Bernard Treanor; four children by a previous 
marriage to Barbara Metzger Baxter, William F. Baxter III, Marcia 
Baxter Bearman and Stuart C. Baxter; three grandchildren; a brother, 
Donald J. Baxter, and a sister, Janice Adams. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>