<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0293 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Few nations, if any, have had a more turbulent relationship with the 
United States in this century than China. After the Boxer Rebellion 
in 1900 when roving bands of Chinese slaughtered hundreds of American 
missionaries, the two nations gradually pulled together and became 
allies in World War II. But soon after, American and Chinese troops 
were shooting at each other in Korea, which led to some of the most 
intense days of the Cold War. The two nations resumed diplomatic relations 
in 1979, and American educators returned to China, only to pack their 
bags and depart a decade later, after the Tiananmen Square massacre. 
Today, despite tensions recently provoked by the Chinese government's 
continuing crackdown on democracy advocates, the relationship between 
venturesome American colleges and universities and China is warming 
up _ some say sizzling. The University of Buffalo's MBA program based 
in Beijing that was terminated after Tiananmen Square will be restarted 
in January. Next spring, Temple University will inaugurate a two-year 
Master's of Law for some 50 Chinese law graduates and judges in Beijing. 
The Yale China Association, originally a missionary organization founded 
in 1901, which now supports teachers and medical personnel in China, 
is being deluged with requests from Chinese institutions seeking partnerships 
with American schools. Nancy Chapman, executive director of the Yale 
China Association, which is an independent affiliate of Yale University, 
said many of the requests she receives come about because her organization 
is ``a known quantity in China.'' ``The growing interest is mutual,'' 
she said. ``The deans of most of the professional schools at Yale 
_ from the Music School to the School of Public Health _ have visited 
China recently with the aim of establishing academic ties. That's 
new.'' All told, there are hundreds (not even the Chinese know exactly 
how many) of academic programs in China resulting from collaborations 
between Chinese and American colleges and universities, and more are 
on the way. Marjorie Peace Lenn, executive director of the Global 
Alliance for Transnational Education, a nonprofit accrediting agency, 
said, ``It's a growth industry with dramatic numbers even taking into 
consideration the recent economic downturn in Asia.'' Ezra Vogel, 
director of Harvard University's Asia Center, an academic research 
institution focused on China, confirmed this view. ``There's great 
intellectual ferment and excitement in China about opening what was 
for so long a closed society,'' he said. Last spring, Vogel accompanied 
Neil Rudenstine, president of Harvard, on two visits to China _ preliminaries 
for closer ties in the future. ``China did more than $260 billion 
in foreign trade in each of the last two years, and with that kind 
of contact the Chinese need to train a whole generation that's been 
closed off from affairs outside their country,'' Vogel said. ``China 
has made more than 100 contacts just with Harvard. They need everything 
_ information about pollution control, health and medicine, an insurance 
system, finance, how to get alumni to support a university. There's 
no end to it.'' Wary of overdependence on the West, Chinese officials 
in the United States speak guardedly about the joint ventures. Dunhuang 
Xu, chief of the education section of the Chinese Consulate in New 
York, who spoke through an interpreter, insisted that China had its 
own highly developed educational system and that all contacts with 
American colleges and universities must be made in partnership with 
Chinese schools. Nevertheless, Xu acknowledged: ``We need to train 
specialists. Our graduates in these fields must know what to do both 
inside of China and outside of China.'' Despite all of this activity, 
the internationalization of China is not without difficulties. ``When 
you first offer your faculty a chance to teach in China, they jump,'' 
said Lewis Mandell, dean of the University of Buffalo's School of 
Management. ``But after they've been there once, and discovered that 
the air in Beijing is pretty dirty and that January in Beijing is 
not like April in Paris, they aren't so eager to go back.'' Given 
the obstacles, why the rush? The foremost reason for American interest 
in teaching in China goes by the name of globalism. In a world that 
appears to be shrinking with rapidity, almost no one in American higher 
education wants to be thought of as provincial. Stephen Trachtenberg, 
president of George Washington University, sounded the trend in a 
speech last month: ``Internationalism has moved from being an academic 
ideal to becoming, increasingly, an academic reality.'' The world, 
he concluded, is in the process of developing ``a planetary education 
system.'' William Kirby, chairman of the department of history at 
Harvard University and a specialist in modern Chinese history, said 
that today American colleges and universities ``are under great pressure 
from an increasingly diverse student body to broaden the curriculum.'' 
The University of Buffalo has other motives for setting up a joint 
venture in Beijing, according to Mandell. ``We're only 30 percent 
supported by tax revenues today, and in five years we project that 
will be down to 15 or 20 percent,'' he said. ``So we have to run ourselves 
like a for-profit business. Our China program can bring in a couple 
of hundred thousand a year.'' In addition, there is the hope that 
the program will add panache to an institution's profile. After the 
University of Buffalo set up its China program in the 1980s, Business 
Week ranked the school among the top 40 business schools in the nation, 
but after the U.S. State Department cut off funding following the 
Tiananmen Square massacre and the program was terminated, the School 
of Management declined in the rankings. ``We aspire to be among the 
top 40 once again,'' Mandell said. Sometimes even the most high-minded 
pursuits in China pay off with hard cash. Last year, Oberlin College 
received an anonymous gift of $6 million in memory of the late H.H. 
Kung who had been educated at the Oberlin branch in Shanxi province 
and gone on to serve as Chiang Kai-shek's chief financier and premier 
of Nationalist China. A similar gift was received by Yale University 
where Kung had earned an M.A. in economics. Finally, most experts 
agree, the old missionary zeal is still alive in the United States, 
even if disguised in secular dress. Among the best known of the college-affiliated 
survivors from the China-missionary era are Princeton-in-Asia, the 
Yale China Association and the Oberlin Shanxi Memorial Association. 
``Although we send teachers rather than missionaries to China today, 
our mission statement written in 1911 hasn't changed,'' said Carrie 
Gordon, executive director of Princeton-in-Asia, which is an independent 
affiliate of Princeton University. ``We seek to promote goodwill and 
understanding and to facilitate in every way the free exchange of 
the best ideals in the civilizations of both the East and the West.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>