<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0408 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a flurry of letters released Tuesday, Iraq began answering in considerable 
detail some of the questions posed by arms inspectors over the last 
year. But officials of the U.N. Special Commission, which is in charge 
of disarming Iraq, said they had found little new in the responses. 
The letters were apparently part of an effort to demonstrate cooperation 
as chief inspector Richard Butler was leaving for talks with the French 
and Russian governments, which are Iraq's strongest supporters in 
the Security Council. The one positive note, officials said, was an 
Iraqi request for technical teams to help examine sites where a variety 
of weapons had been reported destroyed or jettisoned by the Iraqis. 
Those problems include shells of mustard gas and missile warheads. 
Butler said he had reacted with satisfaction to the requests but recalled 
in a letter to Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz that he proposed 
the work in June and was prepared to begin in August, when Iraq stopped 
inspections of new sites. Officials of the commission, known as Unscom, 
say Aziz has stopped replying directly to Butler since Iraq stepped 
up its campaign to have him removed and replaced by a U.N. official. 
Butler is an independent expert on arms control who was the Australian 
representative at the United Nations before becoming executive chairman 
of the inspection agency, which reports directly to the Security Council, 
not to the U.N. bureaucracy. Iraqi officials are hoping to demonstrate 
adequate cooperation in the coming weeks to lead to a comprehensive 
review of relations with the United Nations. But they missed a deadline 
Monday to turn over a crucial document on chemical munitions that 
were used in the war with Iraq from 1980 to 1988. The commission says 
it needs the document to determine how much of which chemical agents 
remain to be accounted for. Despite repeated U.S. statements to the 
contrary, Iraqi President Saddam Hussein expects that review to lead 
to a lifting of an oil embargo imposed in 1990. Butler would have 
to find that enough progress had been achieved to recommend starting 
a review. Russia said recently that not everything could be known 
about the remnants of the Iraqi weapons programs and that it was time 
to close the books on what is known and move on. Iraq is still under 
the threat of U.S. and British attack if it refuses to cooperate with 
the inspectors, a threat that Secretary-General Kofi Annan underlined 
this week when he said in response to questions on a trip to North 
Africa that the Americans did not need to return to the Security Council 
for authority to take military action against Iraq. The United States 
and Britain are also actively courting a wide range of Iraqi opposition 
groups and individuals with promises of assistance if they are willing 
to work together in trying to topple Saddam, Iraqi exiles said this 
week. The exile groups have been told that there could be a change 
in Iraq in a month or two, an exile leader said. The government-controlled 
Iraqi newspapers Tuesday published a letter from Foreign Minister 
Mohammed Saeed al-Sahhaf to the Security Council that asked for a 
meeting on ``acts of aggression against Iraq and its sovereignty and 
territorial integrity.'' An Arab diplomat, Jassim Mohammed Buallay, 
the representative of Bahrain on the Security Council, takes over 
the rotating presidency of the council from the United States on Tuesday. 
Other diplomats are watching to see whether Iraq will be able to muster 
additional support, or more of a hearing, with someone from the Persian 
Gulf at the helm. Although Bahrain, where the special commission maintains 
its regional base, has supported the United States on Iraq, it is 
the only Arab country on the Security Council, and it will be expected 
to reflect the views of other Arab nations, as well as its own. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>