<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0217 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many people go through life with a single, vivid taste image of a 
lemon _ one of something acidic, clean tasting and unforgivingly sharp. 
Unlike an orange, which can have dozens of flavors, depending on the 
variety, the lemon has just one reliable note that sticks firmly in 
their minds. That is, until they taste a Meyer lemon. This fruit, 
thought to be a cross between either a lemon and an orange or a lemon 
and a mandarin, looks like a lemon, but with tight orange-yellow skin 
when it's ripe. And it tastes more like a lemon with a gentle streak. 
Its sharpness is softened with a beguiling sweetness and an intoxicating 
perfume that's both floral and herbaceous, a little like rosemary. 
The Meyer lemon has always been something of a California secret, 
and every year when its brief growing season begins there, as it has 
just now, eager cooks sigh with relief. The Meyer is not as assertive 
as a Lisbon or a Eureka, the common supermarket varieties, but it 
offers so much more in nuanced flavor that it is unforgettable. And 
these days, the Meyer's secret is finally out. Chefs on the East Coast 
and elsewhere are reaching for it as hungrily as those in California. 
After tasting one, you get the sense that this is what a lemon is 
supposed to be, and returning to one of those others after a Meyer 
is like being dragged back to jug wine after learning about Petrus. 
``I love them so much,'' said Seen Lippert, the executive chef at 
Metrazur, opening in Grand Central Terminal in New York City this 
February. ``I use them for everything. I love to use them raw in salads; 
I shave the skin into it.'' A Meyer lemon contains about four times 
the sugar of a regular lemon, but it can be used almost interchangeably 
with the Eureka and Lisbon varieties, adding a smoother, rounder edge 
to both sweet and savory dishes. The greatest difference, Ms. Lippert 
said, is that with Meyer lemons you can use the whole thing _ from 
pulp to peel. She marinates whole pieces with sardines, and ``ever 
so slightly candies'' thin slices, she said, and adds them whole to 
tarts. Sometimes, she said, her rhapsody gaining force, she will use 
them with regular lemons in desserts, making ice cream from Eurekas 
and serving it beside sorbet from Meyers. ``They're so fabulous,'' 
she said. The Meyer lemon has left many chefs smitten. But perhaps 
none more so than Lindsey Shere, the former pastry chef at Chez Panisse 
in Berkeley, Calif. She is largely responsible for introducing the 
fruit to American diners. Around 1980, the Meyer lemon came to Chez 
Panisse the way many products did. Someone Ms. Shere or Alice Waters 
knew (they don't remember who) had a tree in the yard. They were sold 
on their taste, said Ms. Shere. It also helped that, coming from backyards, 
they were organic. And organic supermarket lemons were difficult to 
find then. ``It wasn't ever thought about as a way of introducing 
them particularly,'' Ms. Shere said. ``It was more a statement of 
our own philosophy.'' Just like organic chickens and mesclun greens. 
Ms. Shere began using the Meyer lemons in tarts and souffles, and 
folding its wildly fragrant zest into batters and sauces. When she 
wrote ``Chez Panisse Desserts'' (Random House, 1985), seven recipes 
called for them. ``It's particularly appropriate for dessert,'' she 
said, ``because it does have those sweet overtones and that mellowness.'' 
Many of her Meyer lemon recipes, like a souffle, ice cream and cream 
pie, are fairly simple, allowing you to appreciate the nuances of 
its scent. It's much as you would treat a great tomato: you wouldn't 
want to smother its goodness with other flavors. Back then, unless 
you lived in California and had a Meyer lemon tree in your yard, you 
almost certainly couldn't get them. But she was a convert. And before 
long, so were many other California chefs. They got them the same 
way, from neighbors and friends. It is an exchange that still exists. 
Chez Panisse, in fact, still trades Meyer lemons for dinners. Friends 
of the restaurant earn a free dinner for about every 100 pounds of 
lemons they deliver. During the season _ which stretches from November 
to March _ chefs who know the fruit use it incessantly. Alan Tangren, 
now the pastry chef at Chez Panisse, said the only time the Meyer 
lemon failed him was when he made a lemon sauce. ``It was just boring,'' 
he said. ``For that kind of thing, you really need the acidity.'' 
And when used as the acid in something like a vinaigrette, he said, 
it is best to combine it with a mild vinegar like champagne or rice 
wine. ``It has a fuller, more heavily perfumed flavor in the mouth,'' 
said Ms. Lippert, who, by the way, is another alumnus of Chez Panisse's 
kitchen. So, minor adjustments, like adding a little vinegar or regular 
lemon juice to boost the acidity, simply require tasting and making 
mental notes as you cook. Today, the lemon has a dedicated following. 
Before Ms. Shere and others became devotees, though, the Meyer lemon 
had been primarily an ornamental tree. The tree was brought to the 
United States from China in 1908 by Frank N. Meyer, an influential 
plant explorer for the Agriculture Department. Meyer had discovered 
it as a potted plant in Bejing and introduced it here as an ornamental. 
``It's as productive as the devil, so it really caught on in backyards,'' 
said Lance Walheim, an owner of California Citrus Specialties, a grower 
of Meyer lemons. It might have caught on in kitchens earlier, too, 
had it not been for a virus called tristeza (Portuguese for ``sadness'') 
that was discovered in the plant in the 1940s. California agriculture 
officials, concerned that the virus would be transmitted to larger 
citrus groves, banned the Meyer in many of the citrus growing areas 
of the state. ``Commercial growers didn't want anything to do with 
them,'' Walheim said. Then, the University of California at Riverside 
interceded. By 1970, it had developed a tree without the disease, 
which it called the Improved Meyer Lemon. There are still fewer than 
a dozen commercial growers of Meyer lemons in California. And for 
many of them, ``commercial'' is hardly the word that comes to mind 
when you see their groves and packing houses. They are small and personal, 
more like boutiques than malls. And they do not operate like the large 
citrus producers, for which productive trees and profit margins are 
the major priorities. Napa Valley Meyer Lemons, owned by Charles and 
Marge Foskett, is one of these small growers. In October in the Fosketts' 
backyard grove in Napa, Calif., the Meyer lemons were at least a month 
behind schedule. Chefs were beginning to fidget, but the Fosketts 
were unfazed. ``You can take them in and gas them to ripen them,'' 
Foskett said, sitting in an easy chair next to a wood stove in his 
living room. ``But we don't do that. We're just a mom-and-pop operation 
here.'' The lemons will ripen when they ripen. And the chefs will 
have to wait until they do. The Fosketts run their flourishing business 
entirely on their own. Now that Foskett is retired from the Navy, 
they do it to keep themselves busy, he said, and to pay a few bills. 
``Marge does most of the picking,'' Foskett said. ``I do the polishing 
and grading. Then we give out the best ones.'' They have 250 trees, 
all in a shallow basin behind their ranch house. Their packing house 
is a small room about the size of a walk-in closet; its walls are 
lined with old fruit-box labels and posters of submarines. There are 
no machines. After harvesting, the Fosketts pour the buckets of lemons 
out onto a carpet-covered table so they don't get bruised and, wearing 
cotton gloves, they polish the fruits one by one. Mrs. Foskett keeps 
meticulous records, too. During the 1996-97 season, she said proudly, 
reading her handwritten notes, they sold precisely 32,483 Meyer lemons. 
That is an awful lot of polishing. Each Monday, Foskett calls up local 
restaurants, like the French Laundry and Tra Vigne, for their orders. 
Then, they pick the lemons, polish them and deliver them on Friday. 
The lemons may cost a little more, but you can bet the Eureka lemons 
at the supermarket aren't handled this way. A few hundred miles south 
and seemingly a world away from the Fosketts and their small grove 
is the Central Valley, California's largest citrus growing area. From 
Stockton south to Bakersfield stretches what looks like a plush green 
carpet of orange, lemon, avocado and persimmon trees. The only thing 
that breaks up the fabric is a grid of arrow-straight country roads. 
Here, the Fosketts' son Mike owns California Citrus Specialties, with 
Walheim. With about 1,200 trees, it is one of the largest growers 
of Meyer lemons, and it ships around the country. It may not polish 
its lemons one by one, but it has a single family harvest the lemons, 
and it takes them to a small organic-packing house, where the fruit 
is treated more delicately. Its harvest last year of 65,000 pounds 
of Meyer lemons, though huge compared with the Fosketts' in the Napa 
Valley, is still peanuts next to the citrus growers surrounding them, 
with their powerful machinery and factory-like packing houses. California 
Citrus Specialties grows varieties that the large growers won't risk, 
so their groves feel as much like laboratories as they do a working 
farm. On Walheim's property, for instance, blood orange trees alternate 
with oroblancos (a cross between a grapefruit and a pummelo), kumquats 
and Meyer lemons. He and Foskett were two of the first California 
growers to plant blood oranges commercially. ``It's a crap shoot with 
the specialty stuff,'' Walheim said. ``You never know what's going 
to happen.'' Lately, their bets have been paying off. Their Meyer 
lemon crops have responded prodigiously to the Central Valley's warm 
climate. And specialty stores around the country are becoming more 
aware of these gems, increasing their Meyer lemon sales by almost 
20 percent every year over the last five years. Still, the Meyer lemon 
is far from becoming mainstream. It is still largely a California 
product. ``If the acreage increased 10 more acres, it would flood 
the market with fruit,'' said Ben Faber, a farm adviser for the University 
of California Cooperative Extension in Ventura. But the market for 
the fruit simply may never grow all that big, and the network of small 
growers will likely remain. Several times, Walheim said, the big citrus 
growers have made large plantings of Meyer lemons, then failed to 
sell them. It is a fussy fruit. Its season is short. It must be clipped 
from the tree, not pulled, and because it has a lot of juice and a 
thin skin, it doesn't ship very well. To make matters worse, as the 
season wears on and the fruit continues to ripen on the trees, the 
Meyer lemons soften, making them as delicate to transport as eggs. 
Few supermarkets are prepared to handle it in this ultra-ripe state. 
That, of course, is the tradeoff for something with such a seductive 
fragrance and flavor. It must be hunted down at specialty stores and 
it can be expensive _ between $1.99 and $2.99 a pound in New York 
City stores, more than twice the price of a regular lemon. But think 
for a moment; you can taste the alternative in your mind. MEYER LEMON 
TART Adapted from Alan Tangren, Chez Panisse Time: 1 hour, plus 1 
hour for chilling the dough 13{ ounces (3 sticks plus 3 tablespoons) 
unsalted butter, softened, plus extra for greasing pan 1{ cups sugar 
8 large egg yolks { tablespoon milk 12 ounces (about 2 and one-third 
cups) all-purpose flour \ teaspoon plus [ teaspoon salt 1\ pound (5 
or 6) Meyer lemons 5 large eggs. 1. In the bowl of a mixer, cream 
together 8 ounces softened butter (2 sticks) and { cup sugar. Add 
1 egg yolk and the milk, and beat to combine. In a medium bowl, combine 
the flour with \ teaspoon salt. Slowly add the flour to the butter 
mixture, stirring until completely blended. Gather dough into two 
balls. Freeze one for future use, chill the other for at least 1 hour. 
2. Heavily butter a 10-inch tart pan with a removable bottom. On a 
lightly floured surface, roll out the dough to a circle [-inch thick. 
Transfer to the tart pan, press into the pan and trim the edges. Prick 
the bottom with a fork, and place the shell in the freezer for 30 
minutes. 3. While shell is in freezer, prepare lemon curd: grate zest 
of lemons. Squeeze lemons to extract 1 cup of juice. In a medium nonreactive 
saucepan, combine juice and zest. Add remaining 1 cup sugar, remaining 
5{ ounces butter and [ teaspoon salt. Place over medium heat, stirring 
once or twice, until sugar is dissolved and the butter is melted. 
4. In bowl of a mixer, combine eggs and remaining 7 egg yolks until 
blended. Slowly add hot lemon mixture to eggs until blended. Return 
mixture to saucepan, and place over low heat. Whisk constantly until 
mixture thickens to a puddinglike consistency; do not allow it to 
boil. Remove from heat, and continue to stir to stop the cooking. 
Strain lemon curd into a bowl. Adjust sugar to taste; the curd should 
be tart, but may need additional sugar if the lemons were unripe. 
Cover with plastic wrap, pressing it right against the surface of 
the curd. Allow to cool. 5. Preheat oven to 375 degrees. Remove tart 
shell from freezer, and bake until lightly golden, 20 to 25 minutes. 
Remove from heat and allow to cool slightly. Spoon lemon curd into 
tart shell, and smooth the top. Bake until filling has puffed around 
the edges, about 30 minutes. Cover edges with foil, if necessary, 
to prevent over-browning. Cool to room temperature before serving. 
Yield: One 10-inch tart; 8 servings. FREEZER PRESERVED LEMONS Adapted 
from Thomas Keller, French Laundry Time: 25 minutes, plus 1 month 
freezing time 9 Meyer lemons 9 tablespoons kosher salt 9 teaspoons 
sugar. 1. Fill a sink or large bowl with a mixture of cold water and 
ice. Fill an 8-quart pot two-thirds full of water. Place pot over 
high heat, and bring to a boil. Remove from heat, and add lemons. 
Allow lemons to sit for 1 minute, then immediately remove them and 
place in the ice water bath. This will remove any wax or pesticides. 
2. In a medium bowl, combine salt and sugar. Cut lemons in quarters 
from the end down to about } inch from the other end; leave quarters 
attached at one end. Divide salt and sugar mixture evenly among lemons, 
heaping it in the spaces between the quarters of each lemon. Place 
lemons in freezer bags, and freeze for one month. 3. To use, remove 
from freezer and cut into quarters. Separate pulp from skin, and discard 
pulp. With the point of a small knife, remove and discard any pith. 
Cut skin into julienne or dice. Yield: about 1\ cups preserved peel. 
CELERY ROOT, ENDIVE, AVOCADO AND BLUE CRAB SALAD WITH MEYER LEMON 
DRESSING Adapted from Suzanne Goin, chef at Lucques in Los Angeles 
Time: 30 minutes 3 tablespoons minced shallots Juice of 2 Meyer lemons, 
plus extra if desired \ teaspoon kosher salt \ teaspoon freshly ground 
black pepper } cup vegetable oil 2 tablespoons extra virgin olive 
oil, plus more for sprinkling { cup heavy cream Pinch of cayenne pepper 
1 large Granny Smith apple 1 large celery root, peeled and sliced 
into [-inch matchsticks 1 large Belgian endive, cut in half lengthwise, 
then sliced thinly diagonally 12 ounces blue crab meat 2 tablespoons 
chives, in 1-inch lengths 2 tablespoons roughly chopped celery leaves 
\ cup roughly chopped parsley 1 large ripe avocado. 1. Prepare dressing: 
In a medium bowl, combine shallots, lemon juice, salt and black pepper. 
Allow to sit for 5 minutes, then gradually whisk in the vegetable 
oil and olive oil. Add the heavy cream and cayenne pepper, stirring 
to blend. Adjust seasonings to taste. 2. Peel and core the apple, 
and cut into [-inch matchsticks. Place in a large mixing bowl with 
the celery root, endive and 10 ounces of the crab. Add about half 
of the dressing, and toss to coat; add more dressing, if desired. 
Add the chives, 1 tablespoon of the celery leaves and all but 1 tablespoon 
of the parsley. Add additional lemon juice and salt and pepper as 
desired, to taste. 3. To serve, peel avocado and slice into thin wedges. 
Place in a medium bowl, and toss with just enough olive oil to coat 
the wedges. Season with salt and pepper to taste. Divide the avocado 
among six plates. Divide the celery root mixture among plates, placing 
it on top of the avocado but allowing some of the avocado to show 
at one side. In a small bowl, combine the remaining crab meat, parsley 
and celery leaves. Add { tablespoon of the dressing, and toss to combine; 
reserve the remaining dressing for another use. Place a spoonful of 
crab mixture on top of each salad as garnish. Serve immediately. Yield: 
6 servings. MEYER LEMON SOUFFLE Adapted from ``Chez Panisse Desserts'' 
by Lindsey Shere (Random House, 1985) Time: 1 hour 15 minutes 5 large 
eggs 3 Meyer lemons 5{ tablespoons sugar, plus extra for coating the 
dish and sprinkling 1 tablespoon plus 2 teaspoons flour { cup milk 
1 tablespoon unsalted butter, plus extra for coating the dish \ teaspoon 
cream of tartar. 1. Separate eggs, placing 5 yolks in a small bowl, 
and 4 whites in the bowl of an electric mixer; discard the fifth white, 
or reserve for another purpose. Whisk yolks just until blended, then 
set aside. Set whites aside at room temperature, or refrigerate if 
the souffle is to be served later in the day. Rinse lemons with warm 
water, and grate and reserve the zest. 2. In a small, heavy saucepan, 
combine 1{ tablespoons of the sugar and the flour. Gradually stir 
in the milk, mixing until smooth. Place pan over medium heat, and 
stir constantly until mixture has boiled for 1 minute. Remove pan 
from heat. While whisking vigorously, slowly add several tablespoons 
of the hot milk mixture to the egg yolks. Add yolk mixture to saucepan 
over medium heat, and whisk just until the mixture is smooth and thick, 
and light yellow in color, 1 to 2 minutes. 3. Remove saucepan from 
heat. Add butter, and stir until it has melted. Stir in the reserved 
lemon zest, and set aside to cool. The mixture may be refrigerated 
at this point for up to 4 hours; bring to room temperature before 
baking. 4. Half an hour before serving, preheat oven to 400 degrees. 
Butter a 1{-quart souffle dish and coat it with sugar. Place the bowl 
of egg whites over a bowl of hot water, and stir gently until they 
are barely warmed. Using an electric mixer at medium speed, whisk 
egg whites until foamy. Add the cream of tartar, and increase speed 
to medium-high. Gradually add remaining 4 tablespoons of sugar, whisking 
until whites are moderately stiff but not dry; they should have smooth 
soft peaks with very fine bubbles. 5. Add about \ cup of the beaten 
egg whites to the yolk mixture, to loosen and smooth the yolks. Gently 
fold the yolk mixture into the remaining egg whites, until barely 
mixed. Pour into the souffle dish, and smooth the top. With the tip 
of a table knife, draw a circle about an inch in from the side of 
the dish, and an inch deep into the souffle mixture. Squeeze 1 to 
2 teaspoons of lemon juice from one lemon. Trail juice over top of 
souffle, and sprinkle juice lightly with sugar. 6. Bake souffle until 
it has puffed and is golden brown on top, about 20 minutes. If souffle 
is browning too quickly, reduce heat to 375 degrees. Serve immediately. 
Yield: 4 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>