<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0195 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nearly a decade ago, we were staying with two other couples in a rented 
beach house, and the agreement was that each of us would cook one 
meal. For mine, I was carrying a photocopy of a time-tested recipe. 
I spent a sunny, breezy day racing down supermarket aisles collecting 
ingredients. But the basil and saffron the recipe called for? None 
available. In the kitchen I played fast and loose with garlic and 
pepper, but nothing could raise my shrimp-with-rice dish above the 
bland. Everyone murmured thanks. After all the work I had done, however, 
nothing less than a standing ovation could satisfy. The next day's 
lunch was another couple's turn. After a lazy morning, the wife sauntered 
into the kitchen saying she would make use of leftovers. I followed 
her into the kitchen to see if we should telephone for restaurant 
reservations, just in case. But she swiftly transformed the remains 
from my meal, flavoring the rice and shrimp with a little cumin from 
an ancient bottle on the shelf. She chopped up scallions, julienned 
some red peppers, stuffed it all into a couple of avocados, and topped 
it with a vinaigrette enlivened with the pulp of a tomato that had 
been hiding in the back of the refrigerator. A few chopped cocktail 
peanuts finished off the dish. She, of course, got the applause that 
I had suffered for. How did she do it, we asked. ``I just listen to 
what the food tells me to do,'' she said. That was when I decided 
that I, too, would learn to cook without recipes. But where to begin? 
The French are apparently born with knowledge of the proper ratio 
of vinegar to wine that is needed for a beurre blanc. It is not unusual 
for an Italian family to have its own long-cherished way of making 
Bolognese sauce. But we don't have a central cuisine in the United 
States, or a code of cooking passed from one generation to the next. 
Perhaps that explains why we have such an extraordinary culture of 
cookbooks. We really need them. They beckon us to try the newest fads, 
telling us that we, too, can be wonderful cooks. And sometimes they 
are right. But as a consequence, we have become recipe-bound. And 
cookbook dependence leads only to neurotic need, fear of recipe abandonment, 
and worse _ the compulsion to prepare the same foods over and over 
again. So when I decided to throw away my recipes, I had no idea of 
what to put in their place. My first experiment took place when my 
husband and I returned home from the movies starving, and he suggested 
a fast call for a pizza delivery. Like that woman at the beach, I 
told him that the leftovers would tell me what I should do. I rustled 
up a pasta sauce from some zucchini and spinach, and set out two bowls. 
One bite convinced us that this was why takeout was invented. Clearly 
I needed help. But where would I get it? I began by hanging out with 
my more food-savvy friends, shopping with them and spending time in 
their kitchens. When it came to classes, I found a particularly helpful 
one that emphasized French techniques. The teacher, unlike many of 
the others with whom I had studied, refused to give us recipes. Instead, 
he demonstrated dishes, seldom using measuring utensils, and insisted 
that we write down our impressions and recreate his dishes at home. 
At first, this was infuriating. But I was learning basic principles. 
Just like a good college student, I kept a notebook of my discoveries. 
At first they were quite simple. For a flavorful stock, for example, 
use twice as many onions as carrots, and twice as many carrots as 
celery. And I made note of those flavor combinations that were apparently 
made in heaven and will never let you down: roasted red peppers and 
goat cheese; chilies and cilantro; mushrooms and potatoes. Eventually 
I began to make lists of flavors that I loved and longed to find uses 
for: cardamom, star anise, pumpkin seeds. At that point I returned 
to my cookbooks, now using them in a different way. I began setting 
them out side by side, comparing recipes for similar dishes and taking 
note of common elements and proportions. I would look at an Italian 
risotto dish next to an Indian biryani, and then use some of one to 
make the other. I would see if coconut could be substituted in a cream 
sauce. I would try out standard crepe fillings in tamales. Last year 
I once again found myself sharing a vacation rental house. Once again 
it was time to put together a meal. But there was a difference. I 
would do it without spending a sunny day under the fluorescent lights 
of the local superstore. I took stock of what was already in the larder. 
There was an abundance of crisp apples and some pecans. A previous 
visitor had left behind a bottle of balsamic vinegar. Lots of broccoli 
was hanging about, as well as a few greens, potatoes and onions. There 
was no Cuisinart, and no decent knives. Yet I had changed. I now found 
these limitations exhilarating. The salad became one of toasted nuts 
atop apples and endive with a honey mustard vinaigrette. For the soup 
base? Onions and garlic sauteed in a little olive oil and flavored 
with dried thyme and cayenne. I chopped up the broccoli and potatoes, 
and simmered them with onions and garlic in water and wine. Margarine 
and a little skim milk, plus a fistful of Parmesan, became a soup-thickening 
bechamel, made tasty with a few shakes from an old jar of nutmeg. 
The meal was gobbled up. And this time I got my vacation day at the 
beach house and an ovation. It was a great moment, but one that took 
a while to arrive at. If you are new to cooking, it is important not 
to be too ambitious. Start with one useful and adaptable dish, and 
explore it thoroughly. Limit yourself to cookbooks by masters of particular 
cuisines. Some of my favorites are ``The Fine Art of Italian Cooking'' 
by Giuliano Bugialli, ``Classic Indian Cooking'' by Julie Sahni, and 
anything by Julia Child. The cuisines are vastly different, but these 
books emphasize basic techniques and master recipes _ which allowed 
me to cut loose while remaining grounded.) Tomato sauce is a wonderful 
dish to begin with because it is so tasty yet is such a utility player, 
able to go from a soup to a pasta topping. Compare different recipes, 
and cook them all. Don't be afraid of boring anyone. The people you 
are feeding will likely enjoy the chance to explore along with you. 
Write down what you thought of the amount of onion in one dish, the 
hint of basil in another, the thickness of a third. Then, using what 
you have learned, play with small, safe variations. How would it be 
with rosemary? What would happen if you threw in some chopped olives? 
Or mushrooms? Move on to another solid master recipe, such as vichyssoise 
soup, and proceed the same way. As you work your way through your 
experiments, you will not only be eating some decent meals and getting 
used to the kitchen but you will also be developing your senses _ 
just as musicians get to know chord progressions and key changes. 
Cooks who are more experienced might want to try bolder variations 
of the dishes with which they are most comfortable. Instead of mashed 
potatoes, try a chestnut puree with a dash of Calvados, or sweet potatoes 
with ginger. On a wintry day, leave that ham bone and butter out of 
your split pea soup, and make a health-conscious meatless potage seasoned 
with cumin and curry. Yes, you will have flops if you cook without 
recipes. My biggest fiasco was a bit of pesto derangement. I ground 
peanuts and macadamia nuts with cilantro, lemongrass and jalapenos, 
and placed my creation on top of linguine. Hello, fusion food from 
purgatory. But these days I have fewer disasters than I did when I 
was recipe-dependent. When you learn to cook without recipes, you 
develop not just your skills but also your common sense and your ability 
to capitalize on what you would have previously considered to be mistakes 
(although my peanut pesto refused to be rehabilitated). Freeing yourself 
from recipes is likely to open up your relationship to food. You will 
be able to express the bounty of the season and the region. Last summer 
an impossibly sultry day inspired a mango gazpacho. A recent trip 
to the Union Square Greenmarket in New York on the first autumnal 
morning resulted in a gratin of portobello mushrooms and potatoes. 
At a restaurant you will find yourself figuring out how to recreate 
at home that halibut with the trendy beet sauce for a fraction of 
the expense. Creating meals this way has opened up a sensual world 
of memories and associations for me. Sometimes I will cook out of 
homesickness for the Mexican and Asian influences of my native town 
of Santa Barbara, Calif. I will put together tuna burgers with wasabi, 
or an Alfredo sauce with chipotles, and the flavors will carry me 
home for a few minutes. Lately I have even started dreaming about 
dishes I want to create. One was an apple and beet soup laced with 
orange peel and fresh mint. It turned out to taste as good in reality 
as it did in sleepyland. Have I truly thrown away my cookbooks? Absolutely 
not. I collect them now more avidly than ever and use them for suggestions 
and ideas. These days my cookbooks talk to me. They don't order me 
around. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>