<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0491 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Armando Benitez gained notoriety in New York last summer by instigating 
a major brawl with the Yankees. But the hard-throwing reliever will 
have a chance to change his image with the Mets, who acquired Benitez 
Tuesday in a three-team swap that sent catcher Todd Hundley to Los 
Angeles. The Mets traded Hundley and a minor league pitcher to the 
Dodgers for catcher Charles Johnson and outfielder Roger Cedeno. The 
Mets, who had no spot for Hundley after signing Mike Piazza to a huge, 
long-term deal in October, then dealt Johnson to the Orioles for Benitez. 
The Mets and the Orioles, who seem to be engaged in a parallel existence 
these days, are also going head to head in the bidding for free agents 
Robin Ventura and B.J. Surhoff. The Mets had the larger offer for 
Ventura as of late Tuesday afternoon, a four-year, $32 million deal 
_ exactly what the third baseman had asked for at the outset of negotiations, 
and $2 million more than the $30 million deal dangled by the Orioles. 
However, Baltimore may redouble its efforts to sign Ventura now that 
first baseman Rafael Palmeiro has left the Orioles to sign a five-year, 
$45 million contract with the Texas Rangers. Surhoff, an outfielder, 
met Tuesday with Mets general manager Steve Phillips; Phillips said 
afterward that the Mets must determine whether they should increase 
their three-year, $13.5 million offer to Surhoff, who has a three-year, 
$14.5 million offer in hand from the Orioles, as well as a four-year, 
$17 million deal forwarded by the Pittsburgh Pirates. The unusual 
three-team deal Tuesday was a natural because of the needs of the 
respective teams. The Mets, needing bullpen help, have tried prying 
Benitez from the Orioles for the last two months. Baltimore has sought 
a front-line catcher, but shied away from Hundley because of concern 
about his surgically-repaired right elbow, a worry that only grew 
more acute after the Mets refused the Orioles' request to examine 
Hundley. The Dodgers made no secret of their distaste for Johnson, 
who struggled in his four-month trial with Los Angeles last summer, 
and their desire to acquire Hundley, who hit 71 homers combined during 
the 1996 and 1997 seasons before his operation. Benitez, 26, one of 
the game's hardest throwers, started a May 19 fight with the Yankees 
by hitting Tino Martinez in the back with a 98-mph fastball, earning 
a thuggish reputation in New York. But Benitez can also dominate a 
game. He has 283 strikeouts in 2132/3 innings over five seasons in 
the majors; opponents batted just .199 against him last season. With 
Benitez, the Mets' bullpen could be among the strongest in the majors, 
including current closer John Franco, left-hander Dennis Cook, and 
Turk Wendell, a right-hander who compiled a 2.06 ERA after the All-Star 
Game break. Benitez tore an elbow ligament in 1996 after toying with 
a split-finger fastball, and there was fear that he would need reconstructive 
elbow surgery that summer. But Benitez bounced back and, according 
to Baltimore officials, he has not had any subsequent problems. Hundley 
played the last nine seasons with the Mets, and had been considered 
a team leader in the team's recent bleak years. He evolved into big-time 
slugger in 1996, hitting 41 home runs and driving in 112 runs, and 
the Mets rewarded him with a four-year, $20 million contract. But 
injuries chipped away at Hundley in 1997. He hit 30 home runs, but 
pain in his elbow forced him to the bench before the All-Star break, 
and subsequent examination revealed that he would ultimately need 
reconstructive surgery. Hundley played on, as the Mets pushed for 
a playoff berth, until finally breaking down in September and undergoing 
surgery. Hundley's relationship with the team had deteriorated during 
the past two seasons, in spite of his popularity with his teammates. 
In August 1997, Mets Manager Bobby Valentine suggested to reporters 
that Hundley did not sleep enough. And when asked if he had spoken 
to Hundley about his drinking or smoking, Valentine said that he might 
have; Hundley responded angrily for several days, before going to 
Valentine and smoothing their differences. As Hundley recovered from 
his surgery _ and the Mets fretted about whether he would be able 
to come back _ Phillips told Hundley that he would not acquire Mike 
Piazza. The Mets then traded for Piazza within the week. Hundley reacted 
with disgust, and in the days that followed word leaked from within 
the Mets' organization that team officials were concerned that Hundley 
was drinking too much. Hundley was furious about what he considered 
to be a smear campaign. But he agreed to try the outfield, an experiment 
that failed miserably. Hundley batted .161 with 3 home runs in 53 
games for the Mets, his defense was horrible, and he went to Valentine 
to remove himself from the lineup. After the Mets signed Piazza to 
a seven-year, $91 million contract on Oct. 26, Phillips promised to 
trade Hundley. Cedeno, 24, is a center fielder who has not blossomed 
the way the Dodgers had expected. He batted .242 in 105 games for 
the Dodgers last season, but it is unlikely the Mets will view him 
as answer to their need for a leadoff hitter _ Cedeno had a .317 on-base 
percentage last season. The Mets also included Arnold Gooch in the 
trade with the Dodgers. Gooch has been among the Mets' better prospects. 
At age 22, he already has two years of experience in Class AA, compiling 
21 victories over the last two seasons. However, Gooch's stuff is 
not regarded as overpowering; rather, he relies on his control. Johnson, 
27, batted .218 for the Florida Marlins and the Los Angeles Dodgers 
last season. He gives the Orioles the strong defensive catcher they 
have not had for years, but many baseball executives believe his offensive 
skills have regressed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>