<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Boeing Co. said Tuesday that the economic downturn in Asia was forcing 
it to scale back production of many passenger jets beginning next 
year and to cut more jobs over the next two years _ perhaps as many 
as 20,000 _ than it had indicated in June. As a result, Boeing, the 
world's largest aerospace company and the nation's largest exporter, 
also said that its 1999 earnings would be between $1.5 billion and 
$1.8 billion, lower than the already greatly reduced estimate of $2 
billion it gave investors last summer. Operating margins in 2000 would 
be even lower than 1999, the company predicted. The announcement came 
as Boeing is still struggling to recover from a disastrous decision 
in 1996 to raise airplane production to record levels in order to 
meet booming demand from the world's airlines. The company ended up 
taking $4 billion in accounting charges and posting its first annual 
loss in 50 years in 1997 after its factories buckled under the strain. 
Boeing is still committed to delivering 550 planes this year and a 
record 620 in 1999. Workers toiled through the Thanksgiving holiday 
to finish jets before the end of the year even as the company has 
been desperately trying to reduce its staffing from a June high of 
238,000 in order to bolster profits. Boeing had previously estimated 
that it would eliminate as many as 28,000 jobs by the end of next 
year. Tuesday it said it would increase that estimate to as high as 
38,000 and for the first time added that it expected to cut as many 
as 10,000 additional positions by the end of 2000. Boeing spokesman 
Lawrence McCracken said the company had not yet worked out the specific 
details of which jobs will be eliminated. But he said that the reductions 
would come from all over the Seattle-based company, from the factory 
floor to the headquarters suites. ``Some of the cuts will be handled 
through attrition,'' he said, ``but at those levels not all of them.'' 
Boeing currently loses about 5 percent of its employees each year 
due to attrition, he added. The International Association of Machinists, 
which represents 40,000 Boeing workers and will begin contract negotiations 
next summer, lashed out at the company Tuesday. ``If this is what 
we have going into negotiations, then we're in for some trouble,'' 
said Bill Johnson, president of the Boeing local. Some analysts said 
the job cuts were overdue and should go deeper because Boeing, which 
has been slow to modernize its production methods, produces less revenue 
per employee than its main competitor, the European consortium Airbus 
Industrie. But others were disappointed that Boeing was trimming its 
profit forecasts for 1999 and 2000 after shocking investors in July, 
when it announced estimates that were one-third lower than the forecasts 
of most analysts at that time. ``I thought the basic goal was to move 
the numbers down last summer so you could give people a positive surprise,'' 
said Nicholas Heymann, an analyst with Prudential Securities in New 
York. Heymann had been a leading bear on Boeing stock until the last 
few months, when he began recommending it in the belief that the company 
was turning itself around. ``It sounded like they were slowly getting 
it wired back together,'' he said. ``It ain't quite working the way 
we thought it was.'' Peter Jacobs, an aerospace analyst with Ragen 
MacKenzie, Inc., an investment banking and brokerage firm in Seattle, 
said he was heartened that Boeing had confirmed its delivery targets 
for this year and next and that the company finally seemed to be making 
a realistic assessment of the damage caused by the recession in Asia. 
Boeing said it would cut production of its 747 jumbo jet to two a 
month from 3.5 a month in late 1999 and might even cut production 
to one a month in early 2000 if demand does not pick up. The 747, 
the largest commercial airplane on the market, is most popular on 
Asian routes and is also Boeing's most profitable model because, after 
30 years in production, its development costs have long since been 
written off. Boeing also said that in early 2000 it will cut production 
of the single-aisle 757 to four airplanes a month from five a month 
and production of the wide-body 767 to 3.5 a month from four a month. 
Production of the wide-body 777, which had been scheduled to be reduced 
to five a month from seven a month late next year and then return 
to seven a month in 2,000, will stay at five a month, the company 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>