<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0326 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now comes the hard part for Exxon and Mobil. The two companies, involved 
in two of the largest antitrust challenges in American history _ first 
at the beginning of the century with the breakup of the empire of 
John D. Rockefeller and then 50 years later in the notorious Oil Cartel 
cases _ will once again have to confront antitrust regulators. While 
the history of American antitrust law is largely the history of the 
oil industry, this time the legal examination promises to be particularly 
thorough as authorities from a host of states will join officials 
in Europe, Japan and Washington to scrutinize every aspect of the 
proposed new leviathan company, from neighborhood gas stations and 
regional refineries to pipelines, trans-oceanic tankers and natural 
gas and oilfields. ``It will undoubtedly be a large, broad and extensive 
investigation,'' said Donald Kaplan, a Washington lawyer who led the 
Justice Department's global antitrust examination of the oil industry 
in the 1970s and 80s. ``There will literally be hundreds of different 
antitrust markets they will have to look at. There are not only many 
products but also a broad geography to cover. This will be difficult 
and expensive, and it will produce a lot of paper.'' Moreover, with 
a wave of large and small mergers both pending and completed in recent 
months, the regulators will be under political pressure to make sure 
that the marketplace does not begin to lose its competitive edge. 
Already, the Federal Trade Commission and European Union are studying 
the proposed $48.2 billion merger between British Petroleum and Amoco 
Corp. and Tuesday another big deal was announced when Total said it 
would buy Petrofina in a stock deal valued at $13 billion. Still, 
experts predicted that the issues were not insurmountable, that the 
industry had changed in countless ways since it was controlled by 
Rockefeller's Standard Oil and that Exxon and Mobil could complete 
the deal if they were willing to shed some important assets. At a 
news conference detailing the merger Tuesday, Lee Raymond, the chairman 
of Exxon who will lead the combined companies, said he ``would be 
absolutely amazed although pleasantly surprised'' if the FTC did not 
order the sale of some assets. Soon afterward, lawyers for the companies 
met with FTC lawyers to begin the inquiry. The companies have retained 
two of Washington's largest law firms to handle antitrust issues before 
the FTC. Exxon has hired Covington &AMP; Burling, and the team will 
be led by Charles Rule, a former head of the Justice Department's 
antitrust division. Mobil has retained Hogan &AMP; Hartson, where 
it will be headed by Janet McDavid, incoming chairman of the American 
Bar Association's section on antitrust law. At Georgetown University, 
Ms. McDavid was a law student of Robert Pitofsky, who is now the chairman 
of the FTC, and she was a member of a Pentagon task force on antitrust 
issues, which he headed. Both Ms. McDavid and Pitofsky served on President 
Clinton's transition team in 1992. Not surprisingly, Exxon and Mobil 
have been big players on the Washington political scene, although 
antitrust lawyers said Tuesday that the staff members of the FTC who 
review mergers strived to be insulated from political pressure. The 
most recent statistics, for the year 1997, show that Mobil spent $5.3 
million on lobbying and Exxon spent $5.2 million. Even before Tuesday's 
announcement, some consumer and industry groups announced their intention 
to challenge the merger on antitrust grounds, and state officials 
announced their intention to begin a broad inquiry. ``We're beginning 
an investigation in coordination with other states,'' said Connecticut 
Attorney General Richard Blumenthal, who is head of the antitrust 
section of the National Association of Attorneys General. ``Our concern 
is this combination of two giants, even if it is designed to increase 
their strength globally, could have an immense impact on consumers 
on Main Street. Exxon and Mobil were created as part of the breakup 
of the Standard Oil monopoly, the very reason we have today's antitrust 
laws,'' Blumenthal said. Still, Kaplan and other antitrust experts 
predicted that the antitrust issues would not block a merger, a sign 
of the transformation of the oil industry from the time it was controlled 
by the innovative trusts devised by Rockefeller at the end of the 
last century. Lawyers and analysts said that significant divestitures 
might be required in the retailing and marketing end of the business 
and in the production of petrochemicals and lubricants but that the 
deal could ultimately be approved by regulators. The area of the business 
least vulnerable to antitrust action is in oil exploration, where 
competition is robust, foreign governments play a large role in setting 
prices and significant technological innovations in drilling have 
sharply lowered the capital costs that had once posed a formidable 
barrier to newcomers. Antitrust law has been shaped by trends in the 
oil industry. The Supreme Court's most notable ruling in the field 
came in 1911, when the court divided Rockefeller's Standard Oil into 
34 separate companies by interpreting the Sherman Antitrust Act as 
prohibiting any business combination that unreasonably restrained 
trade and was not in the public interest. The decision prompted the 
court's sole dissenter, Justice John Harlan, to complain bitterly 
that the court had put ``words into the antitrust act which Congress 
did not put there.'' Two of the biggest surviving pieces were Standard 
Oil of New Jersey _ later renamed Exxon _ and Standard Oil of New 
York _ later Mobil _ which came under government scrutiny again after 
World War II after the completion of a detailed analysis by the FTC 
titled ``The International Petroleum Cartel.'' In 1953, the Eisenhower 
Administration filed the Oil Cartel case, contending the two Standard 
Oils and three other companies were participating ``in an unlawful 
combination and conspiracy to restrain interstate and foreign commerce 
of the United States in petroleum and products.'' Seven years later, 
Standard Oil of New Jersey signed a consent decree as part of the 
oil cartel cases in which it agreed to not join forces with the leading 
competitors in the world oil market, including Standard Oil of New 
York. That agreement also broke up the two companies' joint ownership 
of the Standard Vacuum Oil Company, a leading producer and refinery 
of oil in the Far East. The consent decree lasted 25 years, expiring 
in 1985. ``It was one of the largest divestures of that time,'' recalled 
Robert Bicks, a lawyer in Manhattan who was an assistant attorney 
general in charge of the Justice Department's antitrust division during 
the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations. ``It was the first of 
the foreign commerce cases that recognized the connection between 
what happens abroad in the oil business and prosperity and competition 
here.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>