<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0289 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the heads of most of the world's biggest oil companies were invited 
recently to the home of the Saudi ambassador to the United States, 
each of the seven tried valiantly to put his best foot forward. They 
had come here, after all, to discuss a tantalizing opportunity _ helping 
Saudi Arabia develop its vast energy reserves. Up first was Exxon 
chairman Lee Raymond, who delivered a trim, concise speech. He recited, 
from memory, statistics on Saudi natural gas reserves and suggested 
some specific ways Exxon might be able to help. Five other executives 
followed him, each making low-key, carefully worded pitches. Finally 
it was the turn of Mobil chairman Lucio Noto, who, characteristically, 
started off with a joke. Little had changed, he said, since Mobil 
had been the smallest partner in Aramco, the four-company partnership 
the Saudis nationalized in the 1970s. Now, once again, he was the 
last in line. That shattered the meeting's icy atmosphere, allowing 
Noto to go into a lengthy discourse on the Saudi political landscape, 
ground that he was familiar with because he had known some Saudi princes 
when he had lived in the country as a young Mobil executive two decades 
before. The bosses at Exxon and Mobil, in short, have markedly different 
styles, making their proposed alliance seem an odd match indeed. Not 
that it would be a marriage of equals, though. It is Raymond who would 
put a far bigger stamp on the combined company. Raymond, 60, has always 
been clear and focused. He grew up in tiny Watertown, S.D., and, in 
1963, armed with a doctorate in chemical engineering from the University 
of Minnesota, he joined Exxon as a production research engineer. In 
his methodical rise at Exxon, he never flinching from tough assignments, 
including overseeing the cleanup of the Exxon Valdez oil spill and 
the legal settlements that followed. He gained a reputation of being 
reserved and analytical, of investing Exxon's huge cash flow with 
great care. So it surprised no one when he was named chairman and 
chief executive in 1993. Noto is also 60 but has a far quirkier resume. 
The son of Italian immigrants, he once pushed clothing-filled handcarts 
in New York in the summer. Persistent and gregarious, he was able, 
soon after he getting his M.B.A. at Cornell and starting his climb 
at Mobil, to impress the powerful with a savvy sense of political 
and economic trends. He was a dark horse when the top spot opened 
up in 1994, and even he was surprised when he was named chairman, 
president and chief executive. And in many ways, each man does reflect 
the company he leads. Mobil, which spends millions to run opinion-laden 
advertisements and sponsor ``Masterpiece Theater,'' has long been 
aggressive in courting public opinion. Run by strong executives who 
are given a lot of leeway to take risks, the company found ways to 
make deals to get into Russia and Kazakhstan. And it is quick to apply 
new technology, leading the way, for instance, in credit card systems 
that allow pay-at-the-pump gasoline sales. Before Noto got on the 
scene, though, Mobil's return on equity was far from stellar. Exxon, 
by contrast, run under the tight grip of Raymond and a small group 
of top executives, tries to avoid the limelight even when the news 
is good. It excels at squeezing the most return from the resources 
it has, but balks at taking political risks. And while its exploration 
skills are first-rate and its refineries and network of service stations 
are run with clockwork efficiency, it likes to limit its risk. For 
example, it preferred to let Royal Dutch/Shell show that oil and natural 
gas could be profitably recovered from fields lying thousands of feet 
under the ocean floor before it took the big plunge itself. And the 
merged company, with Raymond in charge, would be likely to mirror 
the Exxon model, with the devotion to cost-cutting and engineering 
prowess that has made Exxon by far the most profitable of the oil 
majors. In an era of $11-a-barrel oil, energy diplomacy and power 
politics _ Mobil's specialties _ may have to take a back seat for 
now. Not that Mobil, and its distinctive style, would be entirely 
swallowed up. As in any marriage of opposites, analysts say, the beginning 
may be rocky, but later each may find that its partner has strengths 
that will shore up its own weaknesses. But there could still be problems. 
``They are both so independent that they like to do things their way,'' 
said Fred Leuffer, an oil analyst at Bear, Stearns, said of Raymond 
and Noto. ``That makes it almost impossible to get together in any 
amicable way.'' Mathieu Zajdela, a managing director of Petroleum 
Finance Co., a consulting group based in Washington, who has worked 
with Mobil in Europe over the years, foresees difficulties because 
Exxon is so much bigger. The danger, analysts say, is that Raymond, 
so used to thinking of Exxon as a paragon of efficiency and profitability, 
would ride roughshod over Mobil. And the merger would, in fact, leave 
Noto playing a very limited role, as vice chairman of a 19-member 
board that included just 6 directors from Mobil. Raymond would take 
all the top positions _ chairman, chief executive and president. And 
the headquarters of the new Exxon-Mobil would be in Irving, Texas, 
the Dallas suburb that is Exxon's home now, far from Mobil's home 
base in Fairfax, Va., which will house the company's management for 
refining and marketing. Not that Noto would be surprised at his secondary 
role. The plunging crude oil prices that have put pressure on the 
whole industry have hit Mobil especially hard because it is smaller. 
Earlier this year Noto began looking for a merger partner, approaching 
British Petroleum, Amoco and Conoco. In August, though, when British 
Petroleum announced its $48 billion takeover of Amoco, his options 
narrowed considerably. And talks with Conoco were called off when 
it became clear that it would not be a good fit. And Exxon was surely 
even tougher for Noto to crack because of its size and because Raymond 
had always been wary of the uncertainties of a merger. Noto, however, 
is known for his persuasive powers. Two years ago he put together 
a joint marketing and refining venture with British Petroleum that 
has led to the shedding of thousands of jobs and the saving of about 
$500 million a year in costs, a move that prompted other oil majors 
to form similar ventures. The idea of a merger was born, Raymond said 
in an interview yesterday afternoon, in lower-level talks earlier 
this year about combining refining operations in Japan. When he and 
Noto attended a meeting together in June, Raymond brought up those 
talks and said, ``Maybe we should talk about that.'' To which Noto 
responded, ``That and other things.'' Within three weeks, the two 
were talking about far closer ties. Noto, sitting next to Raymond, 
acknowledged that the two had different styles, but said, ``You don't 
run a company based on style.'' He added that he was ``quite comfortable'' 
working for Raymond, a rival he has butted heads with many a time. 
``I can adapt myself to this.'' The two companies, Noto stressed, 
have many things in common, like not basing ``our strategy on what 
is popular today.'' The idea of a merger was born, Raymond said in 
an interview Tuesday, in lower-level talks earlier this year about 
combining refining operations in Japan. When he and Noto attended 
a meeting together in June, Raymond brought up those talks and said, 
``Maybe we should talk about that.'' To which Noto responded, ``That 
and other things.'' Within three weeks, the two were talking about 
far closer ties. Noto, sitting next to Raymond, acknowledged that 
the two had different styles, but said, ``You don't run a company 
based on style.'' He added that he was ``quite comfortable'' working 
for Raymond, a rival with whom he has clashed many times. ``I can 
adapt myself to this.'' The two companies, Noto stressed, have many 
things in common, like not basing ``our strategy on what is popular 
today.'' As soon as he took charge at Mobil, Noto made it clear that 
even though Mobil had already gone through the wringer, shedding 15,000 
workers over the previous five years, it was just the beginning. ``The 
challenge is how do you run the company the way you think it should 
be run and still have enough of an eye on the short-term considerations, 
like the shareholders?'' he said in an interview shortly before he 
took over. He was determined to make Mobil more profitable and make 
shareholders happy, a goal analysts say he has achieved. He set out 
to cut another 15,000 jobs and to pass down more power to middle management 
to shake Mobil out of its doldrums. But cutting jobs would not be 
enough for either company. Both Noto and Raymond faced the daunting 
task of finding huge new fields of oil and natural gas to replace 
dwindling reserves. Both pinned high hopes on the opening of Russia 
and other former Soviet bloc countries, with their vast reserves, 
but economic and political realities soon derailed those dreams. That 
left even a strong company like Exxon, which has been slow to replace 
reserves, wondering where it would strike oil next. Raymond may well 
fall behind Noto on diplomatic skills. He has been in the forefront, 
for instance, in speaking out on global warming, insisting that it 
has not been proved scientifically. As chairman of the American Petroleum 
Institute, the industry trade group, he has been the point man in 
trying to head off attempts to limit emissions of carbon dioxide, 
which would almost surely force industries to cut down on oil consumption. 
And he has not been afraid to be blunt about it, causing an uproar 
at a meeting of the World Petroleum Congress last year for his views. 
``Some people seemed astonished that someone would actually stand 
up in public and point out some of the scientific uncertainties and 
damaging economic consequences of the proposals under discussion,'' 
he said at the gathering. In dealing with the varied groups claiming 
damages from the Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska in 1989, he has often 
taken a tough line to keep claims down. He was also willing to take 
the heat for having Exxon go through a continuing long and costly 
appeal of a $5 billion jury award in the case, even though many people 
said Exxon should have simply paid it. As for today's challenges, 
Noto and Raymond might be the ideal team. Noto was in Saudi Arabia 
from 1977 to 1985, making friends with some current Saudi leaders. 
And Raymond has the resources and skills to put projects together. 
Between them they may find a way back into the country with by far 
the largest oil reserves in the world. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>