<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0500 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The State Assembly passed a 38 percent salary increase Tuesday for 
New York's elected officials, and the leader of the Senate said his 
house would pass it on Wednesday, leaving it up to Gov. George Pataki 
to decide what he will demand from the legislature in return for allowing 
the raise to become law. Sen. Joseph Bruno, the Republican majority 
leader, said the Senate would also pass a bill mandating that if the 
legislature fails to pass a state budget on time, its members will 
lose the pay increase for the remainder of the year. That provision 
was one of several that he said the Senate would approve Wednesday 
to appease the governor. Others include a bill permitting charter 
schools and one abolishing tenure for school principals. The Senate 
Republicans' gambit is this: to lay before Pataki, a fellow Republican 
who opposes the salary increase, a number of attractive options, leaving 
it up to him to decide which of them he will demand that the Democratic-controlled 
Assembly pass in return for a raise. It is also a politically shrewd 
move by Bruno to address the failing by the legislature that has attracted 
the greatest derision: 14 consecutive years of late budgets. Pataki's 
office declined to comment on the legislature's maneuvering. His communications 
director, Zenia Mucha, referred reporters to the governor's remarks 
Monday, when he said, ``I don't think a pay raise for legislators, 
standing alone, is justified,'' but would not say that he intended 
to veto it. Until last week, leaders of both houses said that, unwilling 
to take the risk of public ire without a guaranteed reward, they would 
not pass a bill unless they had a firm agreement with the governor 
that he would allow it to become law. But legislators have been emboldened 
by Pataki's statements that while he opposes a raise, he would accept 
it in return for other legislation he values. Assembly Speaker Sheldon 
Silver told reporters Tuesday that he was putting the bill to a vote 
without a deal because, ``I think it's important to make a statement.'' 
Few subjects make legislators more skittish. They overwhelmingly want 
a raise, which would be their first in 10 years, but they do not want 
to be seen by the public as clamoring for it, and they did not openly 
raise the prospect until after they were safely re-elected. The Assembly 
voted 86-55 to approve the pay raise bill Tuesday, without a single 
lawmaker rising to debate it. The vote fell largely along party lines, 
with Democrats 78-14 in favor and Republicans 41-8 against. But the 
real division was geographical, with the great majority of upstate 
legislators voting against giving themselves a raise. Lawmakers from 
upstate regions, where their salaries go farther and many of their 
constituents are poor, have found it harder to speak out in favor 
of increasing their own pay. The bill would increase the salaries 
of legislators and statewide elected officials 38 percent, which legislators 
have described as merely keeping up with the cost of living since 
their last raise. Legislators' base salaries would rise to $79,500 
from $57,500 a year. With stipends that most of them receive for leadership 
and committee posts, the average total salary would rise from more 
than $66,000 to more than $91,000, second in the country only to California's 
legislative pay. The pay of the lieutenant governor, attorney general 
and comptroller would go to $151,500 from $110,000. Under a separate 
resolution _ needed because the governor cannot sign a bill dealing 
with his own salary _ Pataki's salary would rise to $179,000 from 
$130,000. The Assembly passed that resolution 106-36. Judges, whose 
pay has been frozen since 1993, would see a 21 percent increase under 
the bill. Aides to Pataki, Bruno and Silver have been negotiating 
since Monday on a bill to allow charter schools, which are specialized 
public schools, sometimes privately run, sometimes with heavy input 
from parents, that operate largely outside the educational bureaucracy. 
There has been little progress in those talks. Pataki has ardently 
sought charter schools, but his version is opposed by both houses 
and the teachers' unions. The governor's proposal would free the schools 
from some of the restrictions of the unions' contracts, and allow 
schools to be created without the oversight of the state Board of 
Regents. Under Bruno's proposal, if the legislature goes even a minute 
past the start of the fiscal year, it would forfeit the pay raise 
for the rest of that calendar year. He also said the Senate might 
vote to make the state's fiscal year, which now begins April 1, start 
later. Many Assembly Democrats objected to the senator's proposal, 
but would not say whether they might swallow it to gain the raise. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>