<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0414 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the House Judiciary Committee voted along party lines to issue 
new subpoenas related to President Clinton's campaign finances, the 
top House Democrat called on Republican leaders Tuesday to rein in 
the impeachment proceedings and ``bring us out of the chaos.'' Stating 
a view held even by some Republicans, Minority Leader Dick Gephardt 
charged that a leadership vacuum had developed at the critical final 
stage in the House impeachment inquiry because of the transition of 
power from Speaker Newt Gingrich to Rep. Bob Livingston. ``You cannot 
deal with something as grave and important as impeachment without 
some common-sense process that everyone understands,'' Gephardt said 
in a news conference, where he announced he was sending a letter to 
Livingston. ``No one seems to be in charge. No one seems to be grabbing 
the reins.'' He called for some Republican leader to ``drive this 
train to a certain outcome that everybody in the country understands 
and believes is a fair process.'' Mark Corallo, Livingston's spokesman, 
said, ``We haven't seen the letter yet. They are entitled to their 
opinion.'' Christina Martin, Gingrich's spokeswoman, said ``there 
is a legislative procedure already under way'' in the Judiciary Committee.'' 
Several Republicans close to different factions in the House leadership 
described a situation in which neither Gingrich nor Livingston necessarily 
wanted to preside over the impeachment vote. A Republican congressman 
close to Livingston said the Louisiana Republican viewed his leadership 
as beginning in January and ``he's really staying studiously out of 
this.'' The Republican, who spoke on the condition that he not be 
identified, said, ``Frankly, there's no upside for the new speaker. 
This is on Newt Gingrich's watch.'' But a Republican close to the 
departing Gingrich camp said, ``There is a school of thought that 
perhaps the first great act Bob Livingston does as speaker is end 
the process.'' Gephardt's appeals were echoed by Democrats in the 
House Judiciary Committee, who called throughout a daylong hearing 
into the consequences of perjury for a bipartisan move to censure 
Clinton instead of impeaching him. The Democrats sharply protested 
the committee's 20-15 vote along party lines to issue four subpoenas 
that moved the committee beyond the president's relationship with 
Monica Lewinsky and into his campaign fund-raising. The committee 
called for FBI Director Louis Freeh and Charles La Bella, a former 
Justice Department prosecutor, to be deposed about their recommendations 
that Attorney General Janet Reno name an independent counsel to look 
into the president's 1996 campaign finances. It also subpoenaed the 
two men's memorandums to Ms. Reno making their case and several Justice 
Department analyses of their reports. And it subpoenaed Independent 
Counsel Kenneth Starr for any documents related to John Huang, the 
Democratic fund-raiser who had raised most of the questionable donations 
that the Democratic Party later returned. But overnight the committee's 
Republicans dropped plans to seek documents about several other Democratic 
fund-raising figures and to subpoena the president, too, in a demand 
that he direct Reno to produce the memos. Rep. Henry Hyde, the committee 
chairman, said that despite the new tack he still hoped his committee 
could complete its inquiry this month. But he said the memos the committee 
sought had been ``kept in a deep freeze'' and that ``we're going to 
take a look.'' He said, ``We are not participating in a wild goose 
chase.'' But the Republicans also acknowledged that if they found 
new evidence they wanted to pursue that their timetable could slip, 
and for the first time there was rumbling among senior House Republican 
aides that the House could put off a vote on any proposed articles 
of impeachment until January _ and possibly hand it to the new 106th 
Congress. Republicans have long been intrigued by the memos submitted 
by La Bella and Freeh, and have been critical of Reno's failure to 
name an independent counsel to look into the 1996 fund raising. Just 
this week she declined to name such a counsel to investigate Vice 
President Al Gore and she faces a deadline of next week on whether 
to appoint one to look into allegations that Clinton violated the 
campaign finance laws. Two other congressional committee chairmen, 
Sen. Orrin Hatch of the Senate Judiciary Committee and Rep. Dan Burton 
of the House Government Reform and Oversight Committee, have sought 
in vain to obtain the unedited copies of the documents. Hyde also 
tried to get access to the unedited memos earlier in his inquiry. 
Last Friday, in response to a request from the Justice Department, 
U.S. District Judge Norma Holloway Johnson issued a sealed ruling 
holding that there was not sufficient need for the House Judiciary 
Committee to have access to the unedited memos, which contain secret 
grand jury information. But having now issued a subpoena, committee 
Republicans plan to make their own case before the judge. Paul McNulty, 
a spokesman for the committee Republicans, said they were interested 
in the memos because they ''may contain allegations of criminal wrongdoing 
by the President.'' He did not specify further. But several Republicans 
said that with the committee set to begin drafting articles of impeachment 
against the president next week, they doubted they would find anything 
substantial in the memos to pursue. ``My expectation level is low 
about what we're going to find,'' said Rep. W. Asa Hutchinson, R-Ark., 
``but it's important to take a look.'' Rep. Bob Inglis, R-S.C., said 
the committee was simply curious because Congress had never seen the 
full memos. ``The mystery begs for a solution,'' he said, ``and begs 
for a look see.'' Democrats today questioned the committee's new course. 
``This is the last desperate gasp of a group of people who were determined 
to impeach the president and haven't yet gotten their way,'' said 
Rep. Barney Frank, D-Mass. And White House press secretary Joe Lockhart 
noted that investigations of the 1996 campaign had been going on in 
Congress for two years. ``This is like a bad rerun of a show that 
nobody wanted to watch the first time,'' he said. He said the day's 
developments had confirmed the president's decision not to appear 
before the committee in person. ``You know I think anyone who watched 
the proceeding over the last few hours would understand why the president 
of the United States has no business in that room,'' he said. Unless 
it takes another new tack, the committee is expected to vote toward 
the end of next week on as many as three articles of impeachment against 
the president. At least one article, on perjury, is considered certain 
to win committee approval on a strict party line vote. It remains 
far from clear whether there is support in the full House to impeach 
the president, with a wavering group of moderate Republicans likely 
to decide Clinton's fate. No party leaders are methodically counting 
votes, making it harder than usual to determine the mood of the House, 
but the vote on an article of impeachment on perjury is generally 
considered too close to call. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>