<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0343 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This being Las Vegas, the art gallery at Steve Wynn's new Bellagio 
Hotel was still open the other night at 11 o'clock, so I wandered 
in. Every day, I'm told, 1,800 people, which is the maximum number 
allowed, pay $10 to see what's in the gallery's two small rooms (dark 
walls, spotlights on the pictures). Half of the visitors buy the $4 
audio guides narrated by Wynn. The crowds had thinned at night, which 
made it easier to see the Brancusi and Giacometti sculptures and a 
big Franz Kline painting called ``August Day.'' I mention those three 
works, among the couple of dozen things on view, because the next 
morning, when I returned to take another look, poof! They were gone. 
They'd been sold and shipped out in the middle of the night. Hey, 
this is Vegas. What do you expect? Novelty rules. You may recall the 
Bellagio's advertising blitz, with its pictures of lovers on balconies 
and spurting fountains. Of course, much of the hoopla about the hotel 
was generated not by advertisers but by art writers who, in praising 
the art that Wynn had bought, helped to sell the idea of the place 
as a quasi-museum. Las Vegas, we were led to understand, was no longer 
a city of simulated histories, stuck forever in the ephemeral present. 
Now it had real paintings and sculptures, which linked it to cultures 
older and bigger than itself. Except, as it has turned out, it didn't 
necessarily have these particular paintings and sculptures, because 
like everything else in gambling's unofficial capital, the art was 
for sale: Wynn legally became an art dealer to get a tax break on 
the collection, a situation that requires him to keep the art in the 
gallery on the market. I thumbed through the collection catalogue, 
a remarkably good document put together by his curator, Libby Lumpkin, 
with essays by writers like Dave Hickey and Peter Schjeldahl and Richard 
Schiff. I calculated that half a dozen of the works in the catalogue 
had already been sold: besides the works by Brancusi, Giacometti and 
Kline, a Johns, an Oldenburg and a Lichtenstein are gone. A couple 
of Warhols are poised to go; they've been removed from the gallery. 
If I sound critical, I am not. What Wynn is doing doesn't bother me. 
There's something refreshing about the fact that his money is, so 
to speak, on the table. If Wynn treats great works of art a little 
like poker chips, if what he enjoys is the art of the deal, he's no 
different from many other collectors, just more public about his activities. 
Give him credit. He has found a way to sell his hotel by promoting 
his art and to sell his art by promoting his hotel, the buzz about 
one helping to stimulate the buzz about the other. Even the money 
the gallery rakes in from tickets and audio guides (around $25,000 
a day) seems to me proof of Wynn's marketing savvy, not because the 
money helps the hotel's bottom line (it goes to charity, Wynn says) 
but because in Las Vegas charging admission makes more people want 
to look at the art. Where everything is measured in money, nothing 
worthwhile is free. Hence, the gallery's appeal is paradoxically enhanced 
by its fee. (Note to Manhattan dealers: don't try this at home.) I 
mention all this because I had the sense, in looking at Wynn's collection 
and in watching other people look at it, that something rather curious 
was taking place. It has to do with wonderment. The art here has acquired 
a life that seems to match its new, unorthodox environment. Las Vegas 
exists for the pursuit of pleasure. People who've never looked at 
art before (one woman in the gallery asked me who Renoir was) are 
discovering a new pleasure in Cezanne, which can't be a bad thing. 
After I stopped into the gallery at night, I went to see the hotel's 
other big attraction, the Cirque du Soleil's ``O,'' as in ``eau.'' 
It's like most Cirque du Soleil shows _ the same acrobatics, basically 
_ except that much of it takes place in a vast pool of water, which 
miraculously comes and goes onstage. I mention it because ``O'' is 
not unlike the hotel's art gallery in that its gimmick involves something 
foreign to Las Vegas. Las Vegas is a desert, and just as you don't 
expect to find great art here, you don't imagine that a lake can be 
conjured up, then suddenly made to disappear. A funny thing happens 
as a result of this cognitive dissonance: neither the art nor the 
water seems altogether real at first. They are initially absorbed 
into the simulationist culture of Las Vegas _ they seem unbelievable. 
Hickey, the art critic, who lives here, jokingly describes the situation 
as ``post-hyper-real real.'' Spectacle being the ultimate form of 
reality here, real art becomes a kind of phenomenon akin, say, to 
the world's biggest gold nugget at Wynn's Gold Nugget casino. Authenticity 
as a thing in itself becomes an attraction. Visitors to the Bellagio 
are enticed by the idea of their proximity to a genuine Monet. I heard 
a man in the gallery ask whether the art was real. In one of the hotel's 
restaurants, which has a number of Picassos on its walls, diners ask 
the staff the same question. Hence, the aura of the true object is 
enhanced by contrast with its opposite. This is one of the odd lessons 
here. Another lesson: good art is astonishingly elastic. It survives 
almost anything and adapts to whatever circumstances you put it in, 
opening itself up to new meanings and allegories. Hickey mentioned 
to me the way a Modigliani portrait in the collection looked when, 
at one point, it was hung over a baccarat table in the hotel's casino. 
The picture's suave, Mediterranean sensibility suddenly became apparent 
in a way that would not necessarily occur in a museum. Not all paintings 
are at home in museums, after all. Most of them weren't painted with 
museums in mind. Museums are neutral and neutralizing spaces, which 
is why it's a lot more memorable to come upon a good 1970s de Kooning 
behind the registration desk of a Las Vegas hotel than in the Museum 
of Modern Art. Lately the Pop pictures sold by Wynn (who is himself 
a kind of pop figure and therefore perhaps too close to pop to see 
fully its merits) have been replaced by a Rembrandt and an excellent 
Rubens, both on approval, meaning he is thinking about buying them. 
Having taken the measure of his audience and the art market, he's 
clearly reconsidering the slant of the collection, selling off post-1950s 
art to orient what's on view more to the tastes of the novice public 
that the hotel attracts. To Wynn's credit, he doesn't seem to want 
to compromise the quality of what's on view in the process. At least 
not so far. It has been said that Las Vegas is the most democratic 
of cities because slot machines don't care what race you are or where 
you went to school: everyone faces the same odds. In a way, Wynn seems 
to regard his gallery of multimillion-dollar paintings as a populist 
enterprise. I'd add that it's also a symbol not of a new, culturally 
mature Las Vegas but of the old, wild, unpretentious Las Vegas, where 
everything is fantastical and nothing stays the same. Wynn says that 
only a great deal of money would cause him to part with his favorite 
works in the collection (a Van Gogh, a Cezanne, a few Picassos), a 
statement meant to signal that his art is not entirely up for grabs. 
We'll see. I suppose this is about as much of a guarantee of stability 
as you can expect around here. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>