<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sales of mutual funds through banks got off to what may prove to be 
a deceptively quiet start in Japan on Tuesday. As part of the nation's 
closely watched effort to deregulate its financial markets starting 
April 1, banks and insurance companies were allowed to begin selling 
mutual funds Tuesday, joining brokerage firms in a push to draw more 
of Japan's $10 trillion in personal savings out of bank deposits and 
into riskier investments. Fund managers have been able since earlier 
this year to rent space in banks and set up booths to sell their products 
using their own salespeople, although few did so, and many foreign 
firms have been selling their funds using telephones and securities 
firm offices. But the banks, which have vast branch networks throughout 
Japan, represent a huge opportunity to reach groups of customers so 
far untapped. Overnight, funds managed by Fidelity Investments, the 
largest mutual fund company in the world, became available in almost 
2,000 new outlets in the branches of 23 leading banks here. Previously, 
the company sold funds through four brokerage firms _ Nomura Securities, 
Nikko Securities, Daiwa Securities and Merrill Lynch _ and from booths 
set up in seven bank branches around Tokyo. Fund management companies 
have been allowed to rent space in banks. Goldman, Sachs, the foreign 
financial institution that has attracted the most Japanese investment 
so far, with 1.6 trillion yen ($13.2 billion) under management, gained 
roughly 500 new outlets. Before, it had sold its funds through 18 
brokerage firms. Precise data on Tuesday's sales of mutual funds through 
banks were not available. Fund managers and bank officials said there 
were lines of customers in some branches but mostly they asked questions 
and took pamphlets. ``It's difficult to foresee what the business 
will be like from today,'' said Yasuyo Yamazaki, president of Goldman 
Sachs Investment Trust Management Co., a unit of Goldman, Sachs (Japan), 
who spent Tuesday shuttling around bank branches and brokerage offices 
to see the event from ground zero. ``My expectation is that it's going 
to be a gradual process, but I was quite impressed by what I saw. 
The banks are quite serious about this business.'' Yamazaki and others 
expect banks in particular to become important sales outlets because 
of the relationships the banks have cultivated with their customers. 
Japanese bankers often make it a point to greet customers by name 
and even send them small gifts from time to time. Such attention may 
be an advantage in a country where the postal savings system is considered 
the safest haven and mutual funds represent a potential lucrative 
new business for banks. ``Banks are much more highly regarded in Japan 
than brokers,'' said Bill Wilder, president of Fidelity Investments 
Japan. ``They're offering customers a choice, not selling them one. 
It's a different approach.'' The anecdotal evidence of Tuesday's tepid 
sales came as no surprise to the foreign fund managers who have poured 
money into the business here in hopes of capitalizing on deregulation. 
No one yet knows whether the ultra-cautious Japanese investor _ whose 
tolerance for earning a scant half-percent in interest continues to 
amaze Western analysts _ will ever sink a significant portion of savings 
into investment vehicles that offer a higher return but only in exchange 
for higher risk. Plus, the Japanese appetite for mutual funds, never 
greatly in demand here, has waned markedly, with accounts dropping 
to a record low of 300,000 at the end of last year from 2.5 million 
in 1990. Equity funds in particular, the funds that form the bread-and-butter 
business of most foreign management companies, have a spotty track 
record here. ``Sales will start fairly slowly and steadily and hopefully 
build up to something meaningful for all of us,'' said Clifford Shaw, 
head of Mercury Asset Management, a unit of Merrill Lynch &AMP; Co. 
``I think that's what you'd expect. They'll come in, ask for information, 
take it away and then come back with more questions.'' In the last 
eight years, Japanese investors have watched stock prices get cut 
in half, have seen interest rates drop to historic lows and have seen 
the value of the yen swing widely against the dollar _ not to mention 
their having noticed that in a deflationary environment like Japan, 
investors can effectively make money by keeping it at home. The average 
Japanese investor regards his or her odds in the stock market as little 
better than a crap-shoot, and thus far, the mutual funds that have 
sold best here have been fixed-income funds and balanced funds, which 
invest in a mix of bonds and stocks. Partly as a nod to that preference, 
Fidelity Investments Japan started two fixed-income funds Tuesday. 
And Yamazaki acknowledged that investors thus far have preferred Goldman's 
fixed-income and balanced funds to equity funds. Nonetheless, American 
and European fund managers continue to forge ahead _ and reap an ever-increasing 
share of the market. Of the 44.2 trillion yen in net assets under 
management by investment trust companies at the end of October, 9.3 
percent, or 4.1 trillion yen, was held by foreign managers, according 
to the Investment Trust Association. At the end of March, foreign 
firms controlled almost 7 percent of the market, with 2.7 trillion 
yen of the 38.5 trillion yen in net assets then under management. 
``You've got a huge economy, you've got all these assets, historically 
low interest rates, a rapidly aging population and weak pension system, 
and yet the mutual fund industry is half the size of Fidelity itself,'' 
Wilder said. ``Something is broken here, but it won't get fixed until 
there is greater diversity in our distribution, more widely available 
information and people like ourselves and our competitors who are 
willing to educate and be patient.'' Yamazaki of Goldman pointed to 
Citibank's success in selling foreign currency deposits, which carry 
the risk of fluctuations in currency rates, a risk Japanese investors 
have historically been unwilling to tolerate. When restrictions on 
holding foreign currency were abolished on April 1, lines of customers 
spilled out of Citibank branches and into the streets. ``The people 
visiting bank branches today and asking for information, that's a 
typical and rational response to something new,'' he said. ``This 
is not like buying Coke or gum. On average, they're going to be investing 
$20,000 to $30,000, so they're thinking about it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>