<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0220 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nearly three out of four uninsured children in New York City are eligible 
for public health coverage, but barriers built into the Medicaid application 
process and widespread ignorance about another insurance program for 
low-income children keep them unenrolled, according to a report issued 
Tuesday by the Commonwealth Fund. The report, based on a series of 
focus groups conducted with low-income families and Medicaid workers 
who screen families for eligibility, found that parents were eager 
to get health insurance for their children but were deterred by an 
enrollment process they perceived as burdensome, confusing and even 
hostile. In contrast, parents familiar with Child Health Plus, the 
other program for low-income children, praised its ease of application, 
but few families with eligible children had ever heard of it, the 
report said. Even Medicaid eligibility workers were unaware that it 
covered poor children ineligible for Medicaid, the report found. The 
focus groups were structured to reflect New York City's population 
and conducted in August and September by the Global Strategy Group 
Inc. with the support of the fund, a large, private philanthropic 
organization in New York. There are 370,000 uninsured children in 
New York City. David Sandman, program officer at the fund, said the 
report showed that the problem of uninsured children would not be 
solved simply through the expansion of eligibility for Medicaid and 
Child Health Plus, scheduled to take effect in stages between Jan. 
1, 1999, and July 1, 2000. The statewide expansions, financed with 
$256 million a year in federal money, will ultimately cover children 
in families with incomes of up to 250 percent of the poverty line, 
or $41,059 for a family of four, potentially reaching 9 out of 10 
children under 18 who now lack insurance. ``New York has decided that 
it makes sense, in both economic and human terms, to provide health 
care coverage to low-income children,'' Sandman said. ``But passing 
new legislation is only a partial solution. The problem of hundreds 
of thousands of uninsured children without health care in New York 
City will only be solved by developing new outreach strategies and 
revamping the enrollment processes for the programs we already have.'' 
Nearly 20 percent of all children in New York City are now uninsured, 
according to Department of Health figures. An earlier study by the 
fund found that such children are far more likely than their insured 
counterparts to go without preventive care, immunizations and even 
acute medical care. The new report quoted parents who said they had 
lost family insurance coverage when they went from full-time work 
to part-time jobs, or from city employment to private industry, where 
they found insurance premiums unaffordable and were unaware that their 
children qualified for subsidized insurance. Others, who had left 
public assistance, said they were not told that their children still 
qualified for Medicaid, or said they had given up after calling an 
automated Medicaid telephone line that provided conflicting information 
about eligibility rules. The sharpest complaints were about the Medicaid 
application process. Parents said they must often miss several days 
of work to gather and submit documents to Medicaid eligibility workers, 
whose decisions strike many parents as arbitrary. ``Parents view workers 
as uninformed, unconcerned and rude and believe they actively discourage 
enrollment,'' the report said. Medicaid eligibility workers from the 
city's Human Resources Administration also expressed frustration with 
the enrollment process, the report said, quoting workers who complained 
that they were overwhelmed by paperwork and confusing rules. HRA spokesman 
James Whelan said, ``We have not seen the report yet and therefore 
we cannot comment.'' The report recommended retraining eligibility 
workers, streamlining the Medicaid application process and reaching 
out to low-income working families at schools, workplaces, day care 
centers and coin laundries. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>