<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0353 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Link Exchange, a two-year-old Internet company that built a large 
membership by luring Web sites with the offer of free advertising, 
and then sold advertising to outside companies and products to its 
members, has clearly reaped its reward. In early November, Microsoft 
Corp. bought the company with plans to fold it into the Microsoft 
Network, the software giant's portal, or gateway page, on the World 
Wide Web. The terms of the deal were not disclosed, but news reports 
put the value at $250 million in stock. Link Exchange, which is based 
in San Francisco, was started in March 1996. Its advertising network 
membership consists of people with home pages and small businesses 
with Web sites, all drawn by a barter system for advertising on the 
Web sites of other members. Link Exchange also offers free help with 
starting a Web site and designing a banner ad, a free mailing list 
program for direct-marketing campaigns and regular reports on when 
and how often users visit the members' sites. For every two banner 
ads a member places on its site, one of its ads appears elsewhere 
on the network. Advertising brings Link Exchange Web sites what all 
sites want: more traffic. For businesses, traffic can mean customers. 
The network's growth has been impressive: at the end of 1997, there 
were 200,000 members, compared with 75,000 at the end of 1996. Today, 
Link Exchange's advertising network has more than 400,000 members. 
Greg Koslowski, who owns an employment agency in Coconut Creek, Fla., 
that specializes in the computer and technical fields, has been a 
member of Link Exchange since it began. ``I filtered out the ads of 
other employment agencies when I set up my banner exchanges,'' he 
said, and used the traffic reports as a monitor of visits to his pages. 
``The information allowed me to modify my site to direct people to 
my job-posting page,'' he added. The banners traded among members 
do not generate revenue for Link Exchange. But in the company's two-for-one 
exchange policy, there is a leftover banner, and Link Exchange sells 
those to outside companies, including American Express and Amazon.com. 
Link Exchange's large membership has given it a ready pool of customers 
for the other half of its revenue-generating business: offering Internet 
products to members. These include a service that submits a company's 
Internet address to search engines, an affiliate program in which 
members can earn a commission based on the sales of retailers linked 
to their site and the opportunity to join other Link Exchange members 
in buying adspace at bulk rates on large Internet networks such as 
Gamespot, Theglobe.com and Babycenter.com. Yahoo has also been part 
of this advertising package, but that will probably change, because 
it competes with the Microsoft Network as a portal. Link Exchange, 
which was privately held, did not release revenue or sales figures. 
Chief executive Mark Bozzini said half of the company's revenue came 
from advertising and the other half from sales of Internet products. 
Some of these products duplicate similar Microsoft offerings and may 
go the way of the Yahoo advertising deal. Jim Nail, a senior analyst 
at Forrester Research, which sells reports on Internet marketing trends 
and technology, said Link Exchange had been successful in selling 
advertising to outside companies. ``With the Microsoft Network, there 
will be added credibility,'' he said. But Microsoft did not buy the 
company primarily for its advertising network, Nail added. The Link 
Exchange acquisition gave Microsoft a channel for selling its software 
and products to the company's hundreds of thousands of members, he 
said, adding that Microsoft sites like Travelocity and Sidewalk offer 
Link Exchange members a ready-made model for small businesses that 
are trying to reach a local audience on the Web. How much of Link 
Exchange's income will continue to come from outside advertising is 
unclear, though the network offers advertisers an impressive reach 
and the ability to place banners among similar sites. According to 
Doug McFarland, the general manager of Media Metrix, an Internet statistics 
tracking company, Link Exchange reaches about ``a third of all Internet 
users in a typical month.'' But, he added, so do other networks like 
Doubleclick and 24/7 Media. Some larger advertisers, like Procter 
&AMP; Gamble and American Airlines, tried Link Exchange but have discontinued 
buying banners. Animalhouse.com, a site for college students, also 
bought advertising on the network. ``Link Exchange had a wide reach 
for a reasonable price,'' said Jay Samit, the president of Animalhouse, 
which is controlled by the Universal Studios unit of Seagram Co. and 
Hyundai Group. However, his company, which started on the Internet 
on Sept. 15, will probably not stay with Link Exchange in the long 
run. ``For our launch, it was a way to get to the word out about our 
site,'' Samit said. ``But as we emerge as a stronger brand, we'll 
be trying to pull people onto the Web through our site, as opposed 
to hijacking traffic through other sites.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>