<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981201.0303 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Auditors for the Federal Election Commission have found that the 1996 
campaigns of President Clinton and Republican Robert Dole illegally 
benefited from so-called issue advertising paid for by their political 
parties. The auditors recommended that the Dole campaign repay more 
than $17.7 million, and the campaign of Clinton and Vice President 
Al Gore repay $7 million. The release of the auditors' findings coincided 
with a move by Republicans on the House Judiciary Committee to expand 
their impeachment inquiry into allegations of campaign finance violations 
by President Clinton. The auditors' nearly 500 pages of findings are 
to come before the agency's six commissioners for action on Thursday. 
They also could be influential as Attorney General Janet Reno nears 
a Monday deadline on whether to ask for an independent counsel to 
investigate allegations of unlawful spending by Clinton and the Democratic 
Party in the 1996 election campaign. At issue in her decision is the 
legality of $46.6 million spent by the Democratic National Committee 
on issue ads that Clinton and his campaign consultants helped design. 
The FEC auditors, backed by the agency's legal counsel, found that 
the party issue ads violated the spending limits of the federal election 
laws and should have counted as contributions to the presidential 
campaigns. The auditors also said there was unlawful coordination 
between the two presidential candidates and their parties in designing 
the issue ads. The Republican ad campaign is not part of the attorney 
general's review because Dole is not a ``covered individual'' under 
the independent counsel statute. Reno's looming decision on whether 
to seek an independent counsel to investigate the Democratic issue 
ads is viewed as pivotal because it touches directly on potential 
legal wrongdoing by Clinton, who helped write some of the scripts 
for the Democratic ads and raised money to broadcast them. The FEC 
auditors reviewed dozens of Democratic ads and found that three advertisements 
paid for by the Democratic Party were the same as ads broadcast by 
the Clinton campaign. The auditors also concluded that 37 Democratic 
issue ads that prominently featured Clinton ``appeared to convey electioneering 
messages.'' The auditors recommended that the $46.6 million spent 
on the ads by the Democratic Party should have counted as in-kind 
contributions to the Clinton-Gore primary campaign. The repayment 
formula for Clinton is based on the percentage of taxpayer funds his 
primary campaign received. In return for limiting their spending, 
the presidential candidates each received $13 million in federal matching 
funds during the primary season and more than $60 million for the 
general election. The Democratic issue ads began in 1995 and were 
broadcast during the primary campaign, while the less costly Republican 
issue ad campaign began later and continued after the primaries. The 
auditors found that the Dole campaign exceeded its primary spending 
limit by $2.9 million and found an additional $14.8 million in issue 
advertising and other over-spending in the general election. Although 
the FEC audits the presidential campaigns every four years and has 
frequently required repayments to the Treasury, the amounts recommended 
by the auditors for 1996, if approved by the full Commission, would 
be the largest ever sought from the presidential campaigns. It is 
far from certain that the FEC will approve the auditors' findings. 
The six commissioners, who are evenly divided along partisan lines, 
have wide latitude to make revisions or even to reject the auditors' 
recommendations. It would take a majority of four commissioners to 
adopt the report. In the past, the FEC has modified the findings of 
its auditors. After the 1992 presidential campaign, for example, the 
auditors recommended that Clinton repay $4.4 million, but the FEC 
approved a repayment of only $1.4 million. ``It would not be at all 
uncommon for the commission to revise the findings,'' said Trevor 
Potter, a former FEC chairman. Fred Wertheimer, an advocate of campaign 
finance overhaul, was one of the first lawyers to question the legality 
of the 1996 Democratic and Republican issue ad campaigns. ``The big 
question now is whether the fix is in and whether the FEC commissioners 
will pull the rug out from under its very own auditors and override 
their findings,'' he said in an interview Tuesday. Working with Common 
Cause, the government reform group, Wertheimer protested the ad campaigns 
before the 1996 election and unsuccessfully pressed Reno to appoint 
an independent counsel at that time. Lawyers for the Clinton and Dole 
campaigns have repeatedly defended the legality of the issue ads and 
they vigorously contested the auditors' conclusions Tuesday. Dole 
campaign lawyers stressed that the Republican National Committee ``independently 
designed, produced, and aired the issue advertisement campaign'' and 
that the Dole campaign ``did not direct or control those ads.'' Lyn 
Utrecht, the Clinton campaign's counsel, and Joseph Sandler, counsel 
for the DNC, issued a joint statement. ``Rulings of both the FEC and 
the courts make it clear that issue ads _ as run by the DNC _ are 
legal,'' they said. ``If the commission wants to change its approach, 
it must do so through changes to its regulations, not through a faulty 
and incorrect legal analysis.'' Clinton has said he relied on the 
legal advice of his campaign's lawyers and Democratic Party lawyers 
in approving the issue ads. Reno is likely to weigh this in her decision 
on whether to ask for an independent counsel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>