<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981201.2000.2025 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I'm Lisa Mullins. On World AIDS Day today, South Africa's President 
Nelson Mandela spoke at a rally in the province of Kwazulu Natal where 
the disease is decimating the population. We want our community to 
be able to say to our country, "Come and witness the reality of AIDS. 
See the devastation in our community. See the. See the courage of 
those who live with the infection and of the children who have lost 
their parents. Mandela intended that his speech help break the silence 
surrounding AIDS in South Africa. One reason for the country's growth 
rate of HIV infections, the highest in the world, is that taboo surrounding 
AIDS and its victims. That's why one of the most effective tools in 
the fight against the disease is a soap opera on radio and TV and 
in the newspapers. THE WORLD's Carolyn Dempster turns on "Soul City." 
"Soul City" is not your typical soap opera. Set in the heart of a 
South African township, its principle characters are the men and women 
who work in the local health clinic and live in the neighboring city 
and its sprawling squatter settlements. In this excerpt from the series, 
a highjack victim is rushed to the clinic with gunshot wounds. I think 
it's much more difficult than conventional drama. Harry Dudmore leads 
the team of script writers on the "Soul City" project. We have to 
work under the constraints of the message, but at the same time, we've 
developed all sorts of little techniques and tricks which allow us 
to remain as we believe we are, rivetedly entertaining, the really 
entertaining, really get people glued to the screen, sitting on the 
edge of their seats, et cetera. But at the same time, giving empowering 
messages. You know, it's not a big stretch to move across from the 
kind of dissing power in dramas that we are surrounded with to dramas 
where people actually take control of their own lives. Since "Soul 
City" started in 1994, it has communicated those messages to expanding 
numbers of followers, according to the program's research and development 
manager, Sue Goldstein. Our audience ratings showed that for television, 
we had an average audience of 2-1/2 million per episode. And for radio, 
the reach is even bigger. So we believe we've reached 12 million people 
at least, which is close to half the population. The ultimate aim 
of the "Soul City" project, Goldstein says, is not just to educate 
viewers but to influence their behavior. Our second series evaluation 
showed very clearly that people who work "Soul City" were almost twice 
as likely to always use condoms as people who didn't. And this was 
particularly evident in the younger age group. I think that we've 
got a lot of qualitative material which said people specifically link 
their changing behavior to "Soul City." Some do say, "I too never 
believed the reality of AIDS." I took it as a joke. I thought it was 
a way of parents to try and keep their children from sexual activities. 
Through "Soul City, I now carry condoms with me all the time. Getting 
the message across about AIDS prevention is particularly crucial in 
South Africa says "Soul City" consultant Clive Evian. The years of 
apartheid in a sense protected South Africa from HIV because it closed 
a lot of the doors to the rest of Africa where the epidemic was spreading 
so much. And also, apartheid created the environment for HIV to spread 
so rapidly. So when the virus did eventually come here, it spread 
really rapidly. I've heard what people say. They say if you're HIV 
positive, you are dirty. They say you're bad luck, and they don't 
want to be near you. "Soul City" researcher Sue Goldstein says episodes 
like this one combat the culture of silence that has allowed the AIDS 
epidemic to hit South Africa so hard. Parents use "Soul City" to help 
them talk to their children about sex and important issues around 
contraception and condoms. And I think that was really exciting for 
us because South African parents have real difficulty, perhaps more 
than other parents in other countries in talking to their children. 
They're very traditionalists, and they used to be mechanisms in through 
which parents could discuss sex with their children, which have now 
fallen away. And nobody discusses it. Not only Vera's but even some 
of the actors have undergone a change in attitude. Billy Ann Dubay 
is one of the most popular actresses in the series. When I talk to 
a youngster about using condoms, I mean, they laughed at me. They 
said wearing a condom was like smelling a rose with a blocked nose. 
It's not funny when you think of the dangers. One out of four South 
Africans is expected to contract AIDS by the year 2010, reducing life 
expectancy by 20 years. "Soul City's" Sue Goldstein says she and her 
colleagues are keeping those figures in mind as they plan their next 
season. Because the perspective and our belief is that when people 
start recognizing and acknowledging people are sick and start identifying 
with them, they're much more likely to take care of themselves and 
to use prevention, and to have safe sex. South Africa's government 
cannot afford to treat the disease, so prevention is still the most 
cost effective method to combat AIDS. And if the government does not 
succeed in halting or even slowing the spread of HIV among young people, 
the impact could be worse than the damage done by decades of apartheid. 
"Soul City" can't by itself halt the spread of AIDS, but as it has 
already proved, it can make a difference. For THE WORLD, I'm Carolyn 
Dempster in Johannesburg, South Africa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>