<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981201.2000.2432 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There have been signs in China this year that the Communist Party 
might permit more free speech. In June, a tiny band of pro-democracy 
campaigners set up the country's first opposition party, and two months 
ago, Beijing signed the U.N. International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights which guarantees freedom of assembly and speech. But this week, 
China has made it clear that there are limits to democracy, severe 
limits. Chinese police have detained several key members of the fledgling 
opposition party including prominent dissident Chiu Wen Lee. The BBC's 
Duncan Hewitt is in Beijing. Duncan, tell us what the difference is 
this time surrounding the government's clamp down on this China democracy 
party and in its activists. Well, that does remain to be seen in the 
sense that many of these people detained have been detained and questioned 
on a number of occasions over recent months, and then ultimately, 
later released. But there does seem to be a sense of greater concern 
amongst activist groups. In the case of Chin Yu Min, his family say 
that the warrant from the police said he was being accused of attempting 
to subvert the government overthrow the state. So this is a prett 
serious charge. So that again is a sign perhaps that there's a concerted 
effort to stop this opposition group getting out of hand. Is it surprising 
at all that in this one-party state, there are groups that are at 
least even attempting to try and register it as an official opposition 
party? Well, I mean, this was a new challenge to the Chinese government. 
These people were very explicitly saying that they wanted to follow 
the law of China. They were pointing to the fact that China's constitution 
guarantees freedom of association, and they were saying that they 
wanted to go through official channels. So in July, when Bill Clinton 
was in China, we had people in Hung Jo, in the east of China near 
Shanghai going to the local government and saying, "We want to register 
a political party." They didn't call it an opposition party as such, 
but they made it clear that what they were looking for was the transition 
to democracy. And this was something that had never been done before 
in the history of the People's Republic. The Chinese government, I 
think, has been slightly taken aback by this which may explain why 
there's been perhaps a rather incoherent reaction around the country 
from local authorities. In some cases, we've heard of people being 
told to put out more information and then come back and, you know, 
in theory, given some hope of actually having their application approved. 
Overall though, I think the government has now made it clear it does 
not tolerate this. The Constitution ultimately puts the rule of the 
communist party in the most important place and that it will not allow 
anything it sees as a challenge to bat. And out of curiosity, I'm 
wondering about in terms of what happens on the street there and not 
kind of coalescence of opposition. Do people feel freer to speak out 
on the streets in terms of criticizing the government? Are people 
always watching over their shoulder as they have in the past? What 
is it like there now? Well, I think it's quite interesting actually 
now. If you go out into the street as I, you know, obviously have 
to do quite often and ask people for their opinions, then in Beijing 
certainly, a lot of people will very, very freely tell you what they 
think about a whole number of things and often about political things 
which might surprise you. There are times when I thought that people 
wouldn't want to talk about issues but actually they've had plenty 
to say. And perhaps the problem for a lot of people who have strong 
views on things is the lines are now more blurred than they used to 
be. In the past, it was pretty clear what was acceptable and what 
wasn't. Now things which sometimes might seem to be too politically 
sensitive are tolerated, but if people then perhaps happen to go a 
little bit further, they'll find that the authorities still come down 
on them rather hard. The BBC's Duncan Hewitt speaking to us from Beijing, 
China. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>