<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981201.2000.2999 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From Anri, Toulouse Latrec, to Pablo Picasso, to Oscar Wilde, some 
of the greatest artists in the past 150 years have shared one thing 
besides their talent: their taste for drink. In fact, one drink in 
particular. But ask for Absant or Absynt at your local bar or drop 
by for a bottle at the liquor store and you're likely to come away 
with nothing more than a blank stare. The licorice flavored drink 
has been banned here and across most of Europe for 80 years. It is 
a whopping 160 proof and they say it can drive you stark raving made. 
Vincent Van Gogh was allegedly drinking the stuff when he cut off 
his ear. Even so, Absant is about to go on sale again in Britain. 
David Howes works for a major British liquor retailer. David, tell 
us exactly what Absant or Absynt is. What is it made of? Well, essentially, 
it's made of pure alcohol. I mean, this is one of the reasons it's 
so extremely dangerous. I mean, you heard the proof. And in sheer 
alcohol by volume, in fact, 70 percent of what's in the glass is pure 
alcohol, which makes it pretty evil. The other ingredient that it's 
got in this is the lease of the wormwood plant, which is essentially 
hallucinogenic. I mean, this is a drug. So the combination of hugely 
high amounts of alcohol and this drug, well, it made it extremely 
fashionable in France especially at the turn of the century. And it 
sounds extremely dangerous. Well, yes, I mean, the combination of 
the two meant that it was in about 1910, I think, that a Swiss farmer, 
that was where the whole drink was invented, a Swiss farmer committed 
murder three times and they put it down to Absant and banned it. By 
1915, they realized in France that they had to ban it because medically, 
it was extremely dangerous. And they'd actually got specialist Absant 
clinics where people went to dry out or die. I mean, it was that bad. 
So then I guess the obvious question is why would one want to bring 
it back? Well, that was something I was asking. I actually found it 
in Prague last year in the Czech Republic, and where they have been 
making it ever since. It was certain European countries banned it 
from certain didn't. I went to her majesty's customs and excise to 
find out whether it's been banned in the U.K., but it was never hugely 
popular in the U.K., although it's still just as unsafe. They forgot 
to ban it eight years ago, so this company has come out this week 
and said this is going to be the drink for the millennium. But frankly, 
I mean, if you did drink this for the millennium, I mean, it's going 
to be kinder to your body to have a nice glass of champagne instead 
and then ask a friend to hit you hard over the back of the head with 
a baseball bat, 'cause the feeling is going to be about the same the 
next morning. When I was tasting it in this bar, if the bar maid hadn't 
been ridiculously pretty, I really wouldn't have had any. I wonder 
when one serves this Absant or Absynt, what do you serve it in? What 
do you serve it with, or is it irrelevant to ask that question? Well, 
I think after you've had some I think most things become irrelevant. 
That's rather the point of it. And at the turn of the century, part 
of this great culture, the Bohemian culture, I mean, it's coming from 
the capital of old Bohemia nowadays, that's what Prague is, but the 
Bohemian culture, they had thought was always this sort of drug culture 
way of serving it. You used to tip some into a spoon and then put 
sugar in the spoon and then tip that in the glass and stir it up, 
and then set light to it. Not a hard thing to do. So there was a whole 
sort of subculture of how you serve it and things like that. I wonder 
if you think this would create much of a market in the United States. 
Well, it is illegal and has been since 1921 in the United States. 
It was one of the countries that did actually remember to make it 
illegal after it had wiped out quite a lot of the, well, the artists 
in Europe. I mean, people like Toulouse Latrec, you see, where probably 
we wouldn't have such great impressionist art, quite literally if 
it wasn't for Absant, because it was the equivalent of a drug to them, 
and they were painting to be able to buy more Absant. Well, David 
Howes, speaking to us from Britain, we appreciate it. Thank you very 
much. Cheers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>