<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981201.2000.1257 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullins. In Mexico, the Zapatista rebels 
say they are considering a series of meetings with the government 
in the coming months, but another rebel movement is showing no sign 
of reconciliation. The popular Revolutionary Army or the EPR, first 
surfaced in 1996 when it launched violent attacks against government 
troops. The EPR has since waged its battle for socialism by using 
propaganda as its primary weapon. The Mexican Army has fought back 
with mass arrests and some charge human rights violations. THE WORLD's 
Frank Contrares traveled to a village in the mountains of Southern 
Oaxaca state where the government has been rounding up suspected EPR 
guerrillas. The village of Sanagustingo Cesha sits on the side of 
a mountain two hours from the nearest paved road. There's only one 
way to enter the village of 2,000 people, and it's guarded by heavily 
armed Mexican soldiers. Once you get here, hardly anybody wants to 
talk. Walking around the market, you can almost feel the tension. 
The Army considers this to be a hot bed of EPR rebel activity. They 
have been rounding up suspects from here for the past two years, and 
so far, more than 100 people from Sanagustingo Cesha had been arrested. 
About two dozen men from the village share a cell inside the Santa 
Maria East Cotel prison in the city of Oaxaca. They spend most of 
their time stitching together soccer balls as part of a prison work 
program. All are accused of participating directly or indirectly in 
an EPR attack that killed 13 Army soldiers two years ago. Like all 
the men locked up here, Erani Ortega says he has an alibi. He says 
dozens of people saw him conducting a music group during a major village 
fiesta. It was the feast of our patron saint that lasted two nights 
from p.m. to 4:00 a.m. That's our tradition here with fireworks and 
everything. I was busy that night conducting music at the church, 
and then the soldiers came and arrested me saying I participated in 
the attack. I know absolutely nothing about that. I didn't do it. 
Ortega says that in the two years since he has been arrested, he has 
yet to see a judge. According to the Mexican Constitution, that would 
be a violation of Ortega's human rights. Galdencio Martinez was the 
mayor of Sanagustin before he, too, was arrested. He says he and the 
other prisoners were subjected to various torture devices the night 
they were picked up. They put electric shocks on the most sensitive 
parts of our bodies, even on our testicles. And they poured mineral 
water down our noses. The torture lasted for three hours. The Army 
zeroed in on these men because many belong to a radical teachers union 
called Section 22. The union has a long history of social organizing 
sometimes taking strong anti-government positions. It's even said 
that Section 22 has connections not just with the EPR but with other 
rebel movements going back to the 1970s. During a recent news conference 
in Mexico City, Interior Minister Francisco Lavasida said 70 percent 
of the EPR rebels in Oaxaca had been captured and are now in jail. 
He says the government's crackdown is preceding in strict observation 
of the law. Still, the government has acknowledged that some people 
have been tortured, and the Army says it is investigating the incidents. 
The human rights group, Amnesty International, says the Mexican Army 
practices torture and abduction with impunity, and the government 
is not doing enough to prevent it. Amnesty's Morris Tidball says he 
has documented hundreds of cases of arbitrary detention like those 
involving the men from Sanagustingo Cesha. Well, the human rights 
situation in Sanagustingo Cesha and other similar areas of the country, 
we're talking about mostly rural indigenous areas where there is Army 
presence, equates to the most grave situations which Amnesty International 
has documented in Latin America during decades. This week, the people 
of Sanagustingo Cesha were shocked to hear that their mayor-elect 
was attacked by a group of suspected EPR guerrillas. He's now fighting 
for his life in the intensive care unit at a nearby hospital. Many 
village residents are tired of being caught between the Army and the 
rebels, but few risk talking about it in public. On a narrow cobblestone 
street near the market, one man ducks into a dark corner before agreeing 
to speak. He nervously whispers his belief that the church music director, 
the former mayor, and the other men who were arrested are all guerrillas. 
And he says he hopes the Army drives the EPR completely out of the 
region. The rebels say they want to do away with the bad government 
and the rich, but in reality, it's the other way around. They threaten 
the poor people like us. They say we have to support them and give 
them food, and if we don't, they kill us. Other villagers speaking 
on condition their voices not be recorded, criticize the Army for 
its willingness to violate human rights in its fight against the EPR. 
They question whether it's a price worth paying, especially at a time 
when Mexico is struggling to become a more democratic society. Still, 
the government has vowed to continue its counter insurgency campaign 
for as long as it takes to rid the country of the popular revolutionary 
Army. For THE WORLD, this is Frank Contrares in Sanagustingo Cesha, 
Mexico. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>