<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981201.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Most patients can't wait to get out of the hospital, but when Augusto 
Pinochet left a London clinic today, it was great with reluctance. 
The former dictator's departure provided evidence that he is not too 
sick to be extradited to Spain. A judge in Madrid wants to try Pinochet 
on charges of genocide and torture. Pinochet rose to power in 1973, 
when he overthrew President Salvador Allende. It was a turning point 
in Chilean history, yet Chileans remember it in wildly different ways. 
From Santiago, THE WORLD's Alejandro Martins reports. Nothing divides 
Chileans more than the events of September 11th, 1973, the day President 
Salvadaor Allende addressed the nation for the last time. He was in 
the presidential palace as it was being bombarded by the armed forces. 
"These are my last words," said President Allende, "And my sacrifice 
will be a moral lesson against cowardice and betrayal. Moments later, 
President Allende committed suicide, bringing to a dramatic end his 
controversial three years in government. Adlan Briones is a well-known 
businessman Chile and the president of the Pinochet Foundation. He 
says the military took power because President Allende had brought 
the country to state of chaos. She was a medical doctor with no economical 
experience, and she really did a mess of the law. We handed the bill, 
with an inflation of 600 percent. You couldn't find the most simple 
things like bread. So the whole country became disgusted, and this 
was really the reason the military has to take over. That's not exactly 
how Allende supporters remember 1973. Congresswoman Isabel Allende, 
the late president's daughter, heads the foundation that bears his 
name. My father, he wanted, he dreamed with. But whether Allende's 
government was chaotic for military intervention was necessary is 
not the key issue for Chile today. According to leading human rights 
lawyer Abnon Ondalele, this is the crucial question is whether the 
military committed violations of human rights. Even if we accept that 
there was an economic, of course, that could justify a coup d'etat 
by the military, but you cannot after coup d'etat go to kill and torture 
and exile and then disappear all those people that committed mistakes 
in the economic policy or that were in favor of a leftist government. 
Those are crimes. Those who died or were disappeared are not victims 
of human rights violations. According to the president of the Pinochet 
Foundation, Adlan Briones, calls them casualties of war. President 
Allende brought into Chile a great number, around 4,000 people trained 
as. And they were employed by the Chilean government much earlier. 
At the moment of the military - when the military took over, this 
people persisted, you know and some other Chileans but very few. Most 
of them were they. And there casualties on both sides. Naturally, 
the sides of the guerrilla was much higher because the Army was better 
prepared. General Pinochet's arrest in October divisions that many 
thought Chile had left behind. Professor Ricardo Israel, director 
of the School of Political Science at the University of Chile says 
this radical a different abuse of the past are shaping the country's 
political future. This is why it's so much of a lie and disgusting. 
1973 you are discussing your political of today. What I insist this 
is unfair for young people who did not live 1973 for our sons because 
we're just meting our hate, our divisions to them. Most of the demonstrators 
for and against General Pinochet on the streets of Santiago these 
days were not even born at the time of coup. 1973 is not taught in 
history lessons at school, but young Chileans are as polarized as 
their parents. And many say only an open debate about the past could 
help Chile step away from the shadow of 1973. For THE WORLD, this 
is Alejandro Martins in Santiago, Chile. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>