<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981201.2000.0964 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the past 30 years, the island nation of Cuba has gone without 
Christmas. Castro's government officially outlawed the holiday in 
1969 as a way to keep workers in the sugar cane fields to meet production 
goals. But then last year in honor of the Pope's visit, the government 
provisionally declared the day a holiday. Today, Cuba's ruling Communist 
Party is calling for a permanent reinstatement of Christmas. In the 
capital, Havana, THE WORLD's Mariusa Reyes says that Cuba's avowedly 
secular regime is getting into the holiday spirit. Even the government 
is calling it Christmas, and everyone else is referring it to it as 
a Christmas celebration. In a lengthy document published by the "Grandman" 
newspaper, which is the official newspaper of the Communist Party, 
the government gave a long, long explanation, very detailed explanation 
as to why they decided to reinstate Christmas. And one of the things 
that comes straight to everyone who reads the document is that the 
reference to the Pope's visit and the and the result that they call 
are positive of that visit in terms of the relationship between the 
church and the state in this country. But it's interesting, Mariusa, 
because the other side of that is that the declaration from the Communist 
Party insisted that the abolition of the holiday back in 1969 was 
not inspired by any kind of anti-religious sentiment even though the 
government was avowedly atheistic at the time and Christmas trees 
were "strongly discouraged." Are they saying at this point they've 
had a change of heart? Yeah. There seems to be a contradiction here, 
I mean, in historic terms, I will say. The government gave, as I say 
before, this very long explanation, and insisting that it wasn't because 
the revolution had any anti-religious sentiments just as you said. 
But because in the first year of the revolution and thereafter, people 
had to go out to the sugar cane fields to help with the harvest. The 
country, the government says, couldn't afford to have people in their 
homes celebrating anything. Obviously, this is a version of history 
that the church might not agree with, but in any case, they don't 
seem prepared to challenge that now at the moment. Now last year, 
Mariusa, when people were allowed to take the holiday off or to take 
the day off before it was officially a holiday, it seems like a lot 
of people didn't quite know what to do because they haven't been able 
to celebrate Christmas for the past 30 years. Do you think they'll 
have a better idea this year? Well, some people have been able to 
do it. I mean, in a very low profile, they have been having their 
small, familiar gatherings at home, you know, sitting around the table, 
eating what they can afford, and perhaps not buying Christmas trees 
or anything like that but some people have done that. And obviously, 
people with religious sentiment with religious faith have kept going 
to church on that day. Well, a sure sign that Christmas is there. 
I guess you can now buy plastic Christmas trees. Any other sorts of 
decorations on sale around town? Well, actually, yeah, you can see 
a few Christmas trees, and they're plastic, and they're very expensive. 
I saw the other day, for example, a Christmas tree for $60, and that's 
without ornaments. And I'm afraid not many people will be able to 
afford that if you consider that the average salary of a professional 
here, a monthly salary is between $10 to $15. THE WORLD's Mariusa 
Reyes speaking to us from Havana, Cuba, Mariusa, thank you. Thank 
you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>