<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981201.2000.2679 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Something is moving in the movable feast that is Paris. Under a government 
order effective today, the outdoor pet stalls on the Keyes by the 
River Seine are moving indoors. We unleash THE WORLD's Hugh Schofield 
to sniff out the story. The Keyes of old Paris, one of the sites to 
remember. The bookstores, the painters, the fishermen, and the animals. 
The pet shops have been on the K'dela Majaseree for a hundred years. 
The tradition of sending animals here goes back much, much longer, 
but that was then and this is now. Today, the Keyes is a noisy metropolitan 
thoroughfare. Lories roar a few yards from the piled up cages. Animal 
rights activists say the market is outdated and cruel. Sevan Coshay 
speaks for the National Society in Defense of Animals. It is a part 
of Paris where there's a lot of gas pollution. Many cars as passing 
by. And for us, it's not fresh air, and they enclosed, you know, in 
small cages. There's a lot overpopulation, and we do not agree with 
that kind of - It's a shame. It's really shameful. It is actually 
a bizarre place right in the center of the city stalls not selling 
not just domestic pets but geese, ducks, exotic breeds of hen, even 
sheep and goats. The owners of the shop say they have no choice but 
to comply with the order to bring the stalls back indoors off the 
streets, but they don't like doing it. The stalls were an attraction. 
People came to see the animals. But in the end, it was the tourist 
themselves who were the problem; many of them were complaining. Stall 
owners like Jean Azaleno are not impressed. The people who complain 
are the Germans, the Americans, and the English; in other words, people 
who don't actually live in Paris. They say it's nice for the animals, 
there's too much pollution. I say, look, the animals are there for 
one day, two days, ten days max. And look at the misery, the famine 
there is in the world. Last week in France, ten homeless people died 
of cold. Isn't that more important than some animals in a cage? So 
is this just a case of the city authorities running scared because 
the tourists are complaining, or maybe the French themselves are beginning 
to import British or American notions of animal rights, not something 
they've particularly espoused in the past? Jean Jama is director of 
veterinary services at the Paris City Hall. I think people's attitudes 
to animals are changing here. They're more aware of the idea of animal 
suffering. For example, the whole problem of dangerous dogs, pit bulls, 
and so on, and the way they're treated has become a big issue here 
like in England. Twenty years ago, there wasn't anything like as much 
care or understanding. So now, the hens and the ducks and the game 
fowl will have to come inside. Next, the budgerigars and the puppies 
in a somewhat fitted and equally cramped interior of the pet shops. 
There's no saying whether they'll be especially happier but it is 
being seen as a minor victory for the activists. For THE WORLD, I'm 
Hugh Schofield in Paris. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>