<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981201.2000.0690 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Edward Corey was the U.S. ambassador to Chile between 1967 and 1971. 
In 1970, he opposed plans by the CIA to undermine President Salvador 
Allende. His opposition led to a meeting in Washington with Secretary 
of State Henry Kissinger and with President Richard Nixon. He sat 
down and I sat to his left and Kissinger to his right in the Oval 
Office, and he began with the disposition on Allende and how he was 
going to "smash" or "crush" that SOB, that bastard by economic means. 
When he finished this, he looked at me for the approval he expected 
since no American ambassador was in favor a Marxist-Lenin, this regime 
anyplace in the world, and my response stunned him and Kissinger even 
worse. I said, "You are dead wrong, Mr. President," and went on to 
explain that Allende was bad news for the United States, but you had 
to keep open the possibilities. I wonder, Ambassador, then with the 
benefit of hindsight if you now feel vindicated in your conviction 
that the U.S. should not have aligned itself with right-wing generals, 
including Pinochet. First of all, Chileans and only Chileans are responsible 
for the overthrow of Allende. If the CIA would live up to the reputation 
that international conspiracy theorists have doped up for it, I would 
venture to guess that every U.S. politician would hire ex-CIA agents 
to manage their campaigns in the United States to get elected. The 
fact is that the CIA at best was marginal. Chileans elected Allende 
and Chileans overwhelmingly invited the military to remove him. Well, 
then explain. If you're saying that Chileans were responsible for 
the overthrow of Salvador Allende and putting Pinochet in office, 
then what was the United States' role? Well, if you look it up, you 
will see that the United States starting with President Carter took 
extremely strong action to seal off Pinochet from the United States. 
Therefore, to suggest that the United States somehow aligned itself 
with the Pinochet regime is totally wrong. I think the United States 
was outraged by what accompanied the military takeover. So, Ambassador, 
then take us to the present at this point, the Clinton administration, 
as you know, has been very quiet on the case of General Pinochet since 
his arrest in Britain until yesterday, and that's when the secretary 
of state made a careful statement saying that the wishes of Chilean 
people in the case should be respected. What do you think should happen 
at this point? Should the United Kingdom released Pinochet and should 
Spain drop its case? Well, I think it's a very complicated problem, 
and firstly, it's a human rights problem, and there's no question 
that all of this is a major step towards establishing a clear body 
of international law that might deter despots of the future and punish 
those currently at risk. But no such legal framework yet exists except 
that affecting genocide. And I don't believe that is really involved 
in the Chilean case. Therefore, I don't believe this is a legal case. 
I think it's a political case, and it's one for politicians to decide. 
But all of this just smacks of white man's burden. The question... 
democracy. Let it decide. There's also a fear certainly that Pinochet 
will not be brought to justice if he's brought back to Chile. That's 
an unfortunate fact in an imperfect world. In a perfect world, in 
a world that is Utopian, everybody would have perfect justice and 
equal rights. But we do not live in that kind of a world, and you 
can dredge up the past for whatever purpose you wish. You cannot make 
laws retroactively. Former U.S. ambassador to Chile, Edward Corey, 
speaking with us from his home in Charlotte, North Carolina. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>