<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981201.1600.2690 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is VOA News Now. It's 21 hours 45 universal time. Both young 
and old are embracing the Internet. Since 1997, there's been a Web 
site specifically designed for older users. Dan Noble has details. 
According to demographers, every 7.7 seconds, someone in the world 
turns 50 years of age. This is the audience that Third Age.com, a 
San Francisco, California based site, hopes to reach. Third Age is 
a term we borrowed from France. This is Mary Furlong, an expert in 
the field of technology and aging and the creator of Third Age.com. 
It's a time of life where, you know, you've raised your children, 
you've been a child yourself, and you're now ready for what's next 
in your world. And it's that time for 45 to 70 to even older where 
you redefine who you are with your interests, your hobbies. You often 
change your work environment. Many people move during this life stage. 
So it's all about the transitions that happen to you at mid-life and 
beyond. Third Age.com with advertising support from a number of companies 
including IBM and Proctor & Gamble has several different areas for 
online users to explore. Again, Mary Furlong. The five topic areas, 
the five channels we have are romance, where you can meet someone. 
We've actually had several marriages since we started. We have a technology 
section that's probably the easiest technology section on the Web. 
So it's a glossary about learning that new technologies. It's a Net 
etiquette guide. You can get advice from experts. So it's sort of 
the Web made easy. We have a house and beauty area where you can learn 
tips about fitness and health and have a guide to other researchers 
on the Web. We have a money area which allows you to negotiate life's 
transitions on your terms: How do you learn about investing. We have 
an invest center that lets you become a savvy online investor. And 
we have a work area that talks about issues that happen after life 
changes and work. We have about a half million people that come to 
Third Age every day, and maybe about 20 percent come from around the 
world. There are people that get involved not only with posting messages 
and what we refer to as forums, but also who get involved in live 
chat. Lola Grippo is a Third Age.com user and the Web site's community 
organizer. We have a unique community in that our members enjoy not 
only interacting with each other online, but also getting together 
off-line. So we've had many different events where they get to meet 
face to face. And I'm there representing the company. And also as 
community coordinator, I help to find hosts for our different forum 
discussions of which we have currently over 500 on a wide range of 
topic matters. According to Lola Grippo, one of the more attractive 
aspects of older computer users is that they're anxious to help each 
other. The more I meet them online and off line, the more impressed 
I am with them, the kind of people that they are, the heart spring 
that they really come from. You know, these are people that are just 
very genuine and very gracious and really want to be able to help 
each other. There's very much of a helping hand spirit here, and they 
have helped each other in numerous ways in disaster situations, but 
also in helping each other to overcome any fears they might have whether 
it be about reluctance to embrace the computer, which they be unfamiliar 
with, or other things in their lives that may be perhaps loss or loneliness. 
As the world's population ages, Third Age.com hopes to insure that 
there will always be a place for older people to meet along the information 
super highway. I'm Dan Noble. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>