<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981201.1600.3190 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For centuries, flute music was an integral part of the culture of 
various Native American tribes. Today, it is enjoying a wide audience 
with recordings by both native and non native musicians. Kevin Locke, 
a Lakota Indian from the Standing Rock Reservation in South Dakota, 
is one of those musicians. This music is from his album, "Green Catcher," 
one of several he has recorded. Mr. Locke has traveled the world performing 
for audiences in more than 70 countries. VOA's Susan Logue spoke with 
him here in Washington where he gave a series of performances at the 
Kennedy Center. One of the best sources of inspiration for music I 
think is the - listening to the birds sing, beautiful birds sing. 
And so here's an example of the song inspired by a meadowlark. During 
his performances, Kevin Locke plays a lot of different kinds of music, 
but he's best known for playing traditional Lakota and Dakota courting 
music or love songs. And most of those love songs I think historically 
you can trace them, you know, their date of composition either just 
pre-reservation or early reservation going up until probably about 
the 1940s, I think. That genre of music kind of began to fade in terms 
of its popularity as a genre of composition back in the '40s. So they 
haven't really been hardly - fewer of any compositions since that 
time. The courting music of the Lakota and Dakota tribes is all based 
on vocal compositions that were adapted to flute. Mr. Locke says the 
love songs were written by young men who were inspired by the first 
words their loved one addressed to them. At that time, I think there 
was quite different rules that were in operation. You know, it was 
a lot more restricted in terms of their intercommunications so that 
these young ladies would often not say anything for a long period 
of time, and then finally, after he sees her for quite some time, 
she might say something to him. And whatever spoken word she might 
say, this would form the text for the composition. So he'd take those 
few words and then he'd create a song around those words. Like here's 
a little song it says,. She says, "Whenever you come, people are always 
talking. It's causing a lot of talk." So there's that short little 
phrase and he'll just take it and says,. Lakota love songs were in 
danger of disappearing until Kevin Locke took an interest in the music 
and went to tribal elders asking them to teach him the songs so he 
could record and preserve them. Just as his ancestors did in the past, 
Mr. Locke first learns the song then he transcribes it to the flute. 
This version of the "Gossip Song" is from his album, "Dream Catcher." 
Unlike western flutes which are based on the symphonic scale of eight 
notes, the flute Kevin Locke plays voices only seven notes. Four represent 
the directions, one represents, the heavens, another represents Earth, 
and the seventh presents the player's heart. Traditional flutes are 
basically arbitrary intervals, and they're just made by people who 
don't know anything about western music, but yet the intervals are 
such that they can replicate a human voice with the flute. Kevin Locke 
has been playing flute for more than 20 years and was awarded a National 
Heritage fellowship by the National Endowment for the Arts in 1990 
for his role in preserving the courting music of the Lakota people. 
I'm Susan Logue. Very beautiful music, isn't it? Haunting, kind of 
evokes the wide open spaces that we can envision out there on the 
great prairies. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>