<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981201.0500.1341 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
America's divorce rate: about one divorce for every two marriages 
is the highest in the world. Now there's a growing movement in the 
United States to prepare young people for marriage by having them 
take courses on it in high school: communication skills, preparing 
a budget, things like that. VOA's Andrew Barrett reports on how these 
courses are gradually being introduced into the nation's high schools. 
In most U.S. high schools, classroom discussion about marriage and 
relationships comes up in the context of a health or life skills course 
usually based on lessons from a textbook on health, according to Paul 
Vince, professor of psychology at New York University. The one thing 
that everybody agrees about in the United States today is that health 
is a good thing, and health is important. And so the courses on marriage 
have been put in to textbooks on health, which is really rather odd. 
So somewhere between learning how to brush your teeth and, you know, 
how your stomach gastric juices work, you'll find a section on marriage. 
Mr. Vince studied six such books used by high schools in 20 states. 
He says the text avoid important topics like love, commitment, and 
the virtue of self-sacrifice which he believes is really the glue 
that keeps couples together. There's something called self-sacrifice. 
And this is actually not only necessary for the benefit of your partner 
and of your children, it actually ends up benefiting the individual, 
himself or herself. And this understanding of the need for relationships 
and the need for committed concern for others, which will involve 
sacrifice, that psychology is totally absent, and they need to bring 
that back in to move us away from this very narcissistic emphasis 
on the isolated individual. Mr. Vince is not alone in his belief that 
American teenagers aren't learning enough about marriage issues. A 
loosely organized national movement of educators, therapists, and 
lawyers wants high schools to stay away from a moralistic approach, 
however, and instead, teach practical marriage skills. For example, 
state legislators in Florida recently approved a bill that starting 
in January will require high schools to teach the relationship skills 
like compromise and communication. Florida is the only state to have 
that, but hundreds of high schools around the country have already 
adopted some form of that curriculum. Four hundred schools in 32 states 
use a program called partners, which was developed in 1994 by the 
Family Law Section of the American Bar Association or ABA. Lynn Gold 
Bicken who is with the ABA teaches the course in Philadelphia and 
has students read the classic O'Henry short story, "The Gift of the 
Magi." It's about a man who loves his wife so much, he pawns his cherished 
gold watch to buy her a beautiful comb, while she cuts and sells much 
of her hair to buy him a watch chain. I say to the kids if they read 
that story, I bet you think that's true love, don't you? And they 
say yes. And I say, "Well, I tell you, it's bad communications, 'cause 
if they had talked to each other, they probably could have had both." 
The fact is marriage is not perfect. The story doesn't end and they 
live happily ever after. We've now brought into our course a piece 
of literature that they probably wouldn't have read otherwise, but 
now we show them how communication skills would have made that story 
come out differently, and they still would have been living happily 
ever after. Every part of our course fits to something else: the budget, 
the reading, everything. These are the kinds of things that make kids 
interested in school. Lynn Gold Bicken also teaches young people communication 
techniques to help settle real-life issues that might lead to bickering 
and arguments. She uses the scenario of a woman angry at her husband 
because he throws his dirty socks on the floor. You could say it really 
angrily that you throw your socks on the floor. "What you expect that 
I'm supposed to pick them up?" as opposed to, "You know, I notice 
that whenever you take your socks off, they land on the floor. I assume 
that means you think I'm supposed to pick them up. You know, I wonder 
if you know how I feel when I see those socks there," you know. And 
then you get into this, "This is the behavior I notice. This is how 
I feel about it. And, you know, I really hope that in the future, 
you could throw them in the hamper." My husband and I learned to use 
these skills, and when one of us gets angry, and believe me, anger 
is not something that you can do away with in any relationship, you 
know, he will say, "What happened to that skill that we learned?," 
and we'll fall back on it, and it makes a difference. But will these 
courses make a difference in the lives of America's young people? 
Howard Markman, a marriage expert at the University of Denver, Center 
for Marital and Family Studies has his doubts. Relationship skills, 
he says, need to be developed in the context of a relationship. Trying, 
he says, to reach kids in school may be too early. But Lynn Gold Bicken 
says we'll find out. The ABA plans a long-term study to see whether 
students who take the courses get married and stay married. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>