<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981201.1600.1341 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
American artists Leo and Diane Dylan celebrated their 40th wedding 
anniversary last year and also illustrated their 40th book together. 
It's called "To Everything, There is a Season," and it was just published 
by Blue Sky Press. The book is based on the third chapter of the biblical 
book of Ecclesiastes, verses one through eight, which suggests there 
is a proper time for every human activity: from birth, laughter, and 
love to war, weeping, and death. The breadth of the message is dramatized 
by the sweep of the book's art, which draws on different traditions 
from around the world. VOA's Nancy Beardsley reports. That's Judy 
Collins performing one of her most popular folk songs inspired by 
words written more than 2,000 years ago. The same words have been 
quoted in theatrical productions, at weddings, funerals, and graduations, 
and now in a new book aimed at children but meant for readers of all 
ages. Leo Dylan is African-American, while is wife, Diane, is Caucasian. 
They've attempted to fuse their own and other cultural traditions 
in the art they create together, and the wisdom of Ecclesiastes offered 
a new way to achieve that goal. These were words that apply to all 
humanity anywhere on the Earth, and in order to show that graphically, 
we decided to use a different ethnic group on each page and a style 
of art to show the expression of peoples around the world. Some people 
have asked us how long it's taken to do this book, and usually, you 
know, if we want to be facetious, we would say it took us 40 years, 
because when this book came along, it was the perfect vehicle for 
the thing that we've been interested all of our career. "To Everything, 
There is a Season" begins by noting that there's a time to be born 
and a time to die. The Dylans illustrated those words with a procession 
of figures and flat profile, resembling those on the murals of Egyptian 
tombs. L. DYLAN: The Egyptian is the oldest culture, at least in recorded 
history, and it had about it a number of symbols which the Egyptians 
used to portray death. The figure with the jackal head is usually 
the figure that carries people to the netherworld, so it seemed really 
appropriate to use the Egyptian as a particular starting point for 
the book. The idea that there is a time to kill and a time to heal 
takes readers to another time and place with art work patterned after 
the screen fold picture books of ancient Mexico. D. DYLAN: That seemed 
like a natural because the culture did sacrifice people for their 
spiritual beliefs. The interesting thing about it is there are instances 
where we kill now for a belief, and so in a sense, we're still doing 
it today. Other pages are illustrated with Russian icons, Thai shadow 
puppets, and aboriginal bark paintings from Australia. Diane Dylan 
hopes the results will encourage more interest in the world's artistic 
heritage. D. DYLAN: We feel that art today is not revered the way 
it has been in the past in our culture. And I think a lot of times, 
the attitude is that art is just decoration. But I think it's very 
important to our lives and our spirits to have art, music, sculpture, 
graphic arts, but it's all part of our development. Leo Dylan says 
he and his wife also wanted to emphasize the timeliness of the book's 
message. L. DYLAN: Most of our time is spent trying to control to 
get the things to work the way we would like them. After illustrating 
this book, you come to realize that there is a very simple, pure way 
of living, one which we would like to be able to have. The Dylans 
end with another verse from earlier in Ecclesiastes: "One generation 
passes away, and another generation comes, but the earth abides forever." 
The illustrate those words with a picture of planet Earth as seen 
from outer space. I'm Nancy Beardsley. Judy Collins, very nice. And 
that concludes this hour of VOA News Now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>