<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981201.0500.1828 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Delegates to a one-day conference in Washington of international donors 
have pledged more than $3 billion in aid to the Palestinians over 
the next five years. U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright with 
Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat standing right by her said the international 
community was sending a message of hope and support for the Palestinian 
people. Mr. Arafat expressed satisfaction with the results of the 
conference and said he was confident the pledges would be fulfilled. 
President Clinton launched the meeting of more than 45 countries and 
international organizations calling for a clear signal that the Wye 
River peace accord will change the lives of ordinary people indeed. 
Today, our purpose is to send a clear signal that this peace is more 
than a piece of paper, that the promise imagined at Oslo can become 
a concrete reality, a true peace, a growing peace, good for Palestinians, 
good for Israelis, good for the region and the world. There are roughly 
50 international states and organizations represented here this morning. 
Most of you have traveled a great distance. I thank you for your persistence 
and for your generosity. We must convince those who have invested 
so much in this process that it was a sound investment. We must look 
at Gaza and the West Bank in a new light, not as battlegrounds but 
as energetic places at the crossroads in the Middle East endowed with 
well-educated populations, strongly supported by the Palestinian community 
around the world, ripe for further development once investors see 
that the peace agreement truly is taking hold. For too long, too many 
young people have turned to terrorism and old hatreds partly because 
they had nothing better to do. We must give them a different future 
to believe in. Every step toward opportunity is a step away from violence. 
Palestinians have a right to the same things all people aspire to: 
to be part of a normal, even happy society where children receive 
a decent education, where there are jobs to go around, and decent 
health care, where people's memories are reconciled with their hopes 
for the future, and there is no fear. Mr. Clinton says the real challenge 
is to deliver the economic benefits of peace to all peoples involved 
sooner rather than later. He also indicated that he hopes his upcoming 
trip to the region will lend support to the peace process. U.S. officials 
say the promise the aid will help create jobs, provide education, 
and strengthen Palestinian infrastructure. Mr. Clinton said he would 
ask Congress to contribute more than $400 million in addition to the 
$100 million a year it plans to donate over the next five years. Other 
major donors include the European Union, Japan, Norway, and Saudi 
Arabia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>