<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981201.0500.3168 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Singer and guitarist David Crosby spent three decades with the group, 
Crosby, Stills & Nash. During that time, he had his share of troubles, 
including drug and alcohol addiction, a prison term due to drug charges, 
and he nearly died while awaiting a liver transplant. Crosby is now 
recovered, and he feels he's been granted a second chance in life. 
As VOA's Bernie Bernard reports, David Crosby was also reunited with 
his son, who also happens to be a musician. Three years ago, David 
Crosby was not sure if he was going to be alive. The years of drug 
and alcohol abuse had taken a toll on his body, and he was desperately 
in need of a liver transplant. As he lay in his hospital bed, Crosby 
says he was reminded of a secret that none of his fans and very few 
friends new about. Thirty years earlier, he fathered a child that 
was given up for adoption. As death loomed closer to David Crosby, 
he received a surprising piece of correspondent about his son. His 
parents sent me a letter saying, "Hi, we are John and Madeline Raymond, 
and we're the people who raised your son, James." And my heart's going, 
bapong, bapong. They said that, "We know that you might not survive 
this, and we think it would be a terrible shame if James didn't get 
a chance to meet you, his real father." During their three-hour meeting, 
James Raymond revealed to his father, David Crosby, that he was also 
a musician and songwriter. After a successful liver transplant and 
recovery, Crosby jumped at the chance to make a recording with his 
son. The result is the self-titled album by the trio, CPR: Crosby, 
guitarist Jeff Peabar, and James Raymond on keyboards. The father 
and son team wrote most of the tunes on the album. He gave me a set 
of lyrics that he'd written and said, you know, "See what you can 
do with these. So I wrote a song very quickly and played it back for 
him and he liked it. That's kind of understating the case. He came 
back with this thing sounded like a Steely Dan demo, blew my mind 
out my ear, and I was stunned, you know, at the level that he was 
able to play. At age 56, David Crosby has been reunited with his first 
son, has a three-year-old child with his wife, Jan, and was pleased 
to discover that he was also a grandfather. He's currently working 
on the second part of his autobiography and is supervising the production 
of a documentary about his life. Suddenly I'm the luckiest guy in 
the world. I'm not dead, and I got to play music again, and I get 
to play the best music I can possibly make. And I get to do it with 
my son. While he still plays and records as a member of Crosby, Stills 
& Nash, David Crosby takes occasional breaks to tour and devote his 
time to CPR. I'm Bernie Bernard. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>