<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981201.1600.2149 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And I'm Tony Riggs. This is VOA News Now. At the end of the 20th century, 
it is still possible for heads of state to elude prosecution for crimes 
against humanity, but the climate of tolerance is changing. More governments 
are acknowledging that if cycles of war and vengeance are to be stopped, 
atrocities cannot go unpunished. Prosecuting war criminals is the 
subject of today's Dateline. Here's Pamela Taylor. Last Wednesday, 
Britain's highest court ruled that former Chilean dictator, Augusto 
Pinochet, is not protected by diplomatic immunity. He now faces possible 
extradition to Spain to stand trial for crimes allegedly committed 
against Spanish citizens. Britain's panel of judges ruled by a vote 
of three to two against granting immunity on the grounds that torture 
and hostage taking are not acceptable conduct for heads of state. 
VOA correspondent Laurie Kassman has more from London. One by one, 
the judges announced their decision. It was not until the last of 
the five pronounced his own ruling that former General Augusto Pinochet's 
fate was sealed. I agree with them that General Augusto Pinochet does 
not have immunity from prosecution, and I, too, would therefore allow 
the appeal. The House of Lords' action reverses a lower court ruling 
that said Mr. Pinochet enjoys diplomatic immunity as a former head 
of state, and therefore could not be extradited. A Spanish judge has 
charged with human rights abuses against thousands of Chileans and 
other nationals after her seized power in a bloody 1973 coup. Ann 
Klewitt of the House of Commons Human Rights Committee says it is 
right that British law now coordinates with international human rights 
conventions. I think it's a great day for British justice that we 
actually show that we do have respect for international law. And now 
it will be up to Britain's home secretary, the country's justice minister, 
to decide whether to take action on Spain's extradition request. VOA 
correspondent, Laurie Kassman in London. A leading expert on war crimes 
is Aria Neyer, the founder of the New York-based Human Rights Watch 
Organization. Mr. Neyer, himself a survivor of the Holocaust in Nazi 
Germany has conducted human rights investigations in more than 40 
countries. He says the understanding of what constitutes a war crime 
has expanded and today applies to civil wars and internal armed conflicts 
as well as to international conflicts. When the Geneva Conventions 
were adopted or the current version of the Geneva Conventions were 
adopted in 1949, one of their provisions was a list of offenses that 
could take place in internal armed conflicts. And then in 1977, a 
protocol was added to the Geneva Conventions which expanded that list 
of offenses. And when the U.N. Security Council created the tribunal 
for Rwanda, which was only an internal conflict, the U.N. Security 
Council provided that the crimes that had been committed in Rwanda 
could be prosecuted as war crimes. Mr. Neyer, who is now president 
of Institute says there are many examples of war crimes being committed 
every day in the modern world. He cites the examples of Burma, Liberia, 
Sierra Leone, and Sudan, and particularly Rwanda. In 1994, about one 
million ethnic Rwandan Tutsis were slaughtered by ethnic Rwandan Hutus 
partly in reprisal for atrocities they said the Tutsis had committed 
against them earlier. Mr. Neyer says despite the frustration of trying 
to deal with the many abuses being committed around the world, he 
believes human rights efforts have brought significant change. He 
says South Africa's transformation following the end of apartheid 
is only one of many examples. You wonder if you are making a difference, 
but as one looks back over the years, there have been some positive 
changes. I do believe that the human rights movement contributed to 
the fall of Communism in the former Soviet empire, and while not all 
of the countries in that region are great places for human rights 
today, in general, the human rights situation has improved greatly 
in that region. And I think human rights efforts contributed significantly 
to the transformation that has taken place in most of Latin America. 
Mr. Neyer points out that international tribunals were established 
to deal with war crimes committed in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. 
But he says something more permanent is needed to deal with situations 
such as the recent murder of civilians in the Congo in order to prosecute 
those responsible while they're still in power. Unfortunately, we 
don't have an international criminal court which would have jurisdiction 
over Congo. To be able to reach the Congo, we would have to have a 
permanent international criminal court, no geographical boundaries, 
no national boundaries. It would be able to operate worldwide and 
exercise jurisdiction at the point that crimes are actually being 
committed the way domestic courts have jurisdiction over crimes committed 
in their own countries as they are being committed. Aria Neyer says 
apart from the war crimes committed in Central Africa, this decade's 
most infamous crimes took place in Europe during the disintegration 
of the former Yugoslavia. I would say that the detention camps that 
the Bosnian Serbs established in Bosnia such as Omasca and Caratairm 
and Turnipoli and Susicha, those were places where thousands of people 
were tortured and many people were raped. So I would say that those 
detention camps were among the most notorious crimes. Also, of course, 
the massacre of some 8,000 Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica. That 
was the largest scale killing during the war and perhaps the murders 
at Srebrenica one of the most grotesque of all the war crimes committed 
in Bosnia. Aria Neyer is the author of a book called "War Crimes," 
which chronicles human rights abuses throughout the 20th century and 
the efforts of the international community to respond to them. In 
early November, prosecutors from the Yugoslav War Crimes Tribunal 
were forced to call off a planned trip to the Serbian province of 
Kosovo. Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic said they would not 
be allowed to conduct investigations into reports of atrocities against 
ethnic Albanians on Yugoslav territory. However, the prosecutors continue 
to insist they have the jurisdiction to investigate as we hear in 
this report from Lauren Comito in the Hague. This battle has been 
building ever since key prosecutor, Louise Arbore, requested visas 
from Yugoslav authorities for herself and ten investigators. The Yugoslav 
government has consistently denied the Tribunal's authority to investigate, 
and Ms. Arbore has just as consistently asserted her right to unrestricted 
access in Kosovo. She cites several Security Council resolutions to 
back up her claim. Ms. Arbore told reporters she was still optimistic 
about getting her delayed visas, but that hope was dashed after she 
received a letter from Yugoslav officials granting her only a visa 
to attend a law conference in Belgrade. Ms. Arbore said she decided 
to decline what she calls an unacceptably limited visa. I intend to 
continue pursuing all legalese available to me until I am granted 
access to the relevant site, and to the witnesses that I may choose 
to contact in Kosovo. Tribunal president, Gabriel Kirk McDonald, backed 
her up, calling Yugoslav officials' actions totally unacceptable and 
illegal. This conduct is a further example of the FRY's utter disregard 
for the norms of the international community. Essentially, it has 
become a rogue state, one that holds the international rule of law 
in contempt. Judge McDonald called off her own trip to Belgrade saying 
it was inappropriate for her to travel to a state that is blatantly 
challenging the Tribunal's authority. She also pointed out that the 
Yugoslav government is challenging the authority of the Security Council 
and said she will urge the council to respond forcefully. For the 
moment, though, there are no on site investigations in Kosovo despite 
what prosecutors Arbore has called credible reports of atrocities, 
including summary executions, destruction, and attacks against civilians. 
Lauren Comito reporting from the Hague. Prosecuting war criminals 
was written and researched by VOA's Judith Latham. For Dateline, I'm 
Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>