<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981201.1600.0784 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pakistan's opposition leader Benazir Bhutto is appealing to the international 
community to stop Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif from introducing a system 
of Islamic justice in Pakistan similar to what the Taliban has installed 
in Afghanistan. Sarah Porter has details from Islamabad. Benazir Bhutto 
says he has written to human rights groups and to leaders of various 
countries including British Prime Minister Tony Blair. In letter, 
the former prime minister urges those she has contacted to send a 
strong message to Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. Ms. Bhutto says Mr. 
Sharif should be told that the Taliban-like system of justice is as 
unacceptable to the international community and Pakistan as it is 
in Afghanistan. The Taliban's strict interpretation of Islamic law 
has brought public executions for alleged murderers and hand and foot 
amputations for alleged thieves. Taliban religious police regularly 
patrol the Afghan capital, Kabul, beating women who violate the strict 
dress code and men who do not grow long beards. Ms. Bhutto says the 
proposal for a Taliban system of justice if implemented will be included 
in the 15th amendment bill recently proposed by Prime Minister Sharif. 
The bill has already been passed by Pakistan's lower parliamentary 
house but has yet to go through the upper house. The 15th amendment, 
if approved by the upper house, would alter Pakistan's constitution 
to make Islamic Sharian law the supreme law. The move has been opposed 
by Pakistani human rights groups, ethnic and religious minorities, 
and opposition political parties. They say the amendment is aimed 
at giving dictatorial powers to the prime minister. Ms. Bhutto says 
that the 15th amendment is a dangerous exploitation of Islam. In an 
open letter to the secretary general of Amnesty International, the 
opposition leader has drawn attention to what she says is a deteriorating 
human rights situation in Pakistan. In the letter, Ms. Bhutto appeals 
to the London-based human rights organization to urgently confront 
Mr. Sharif's plans. Amnesty has often criticized the Taliban which 
controls 90 percent of Pakistan's neighbor, Afghanistan. Prime Minister 
Sharif, who is currently in the United States, reportedly announced 
his intention to introduce a Taliban system of justice during a public 
speech last month to tribal leaders in Pakistan's frontier areas. 
Sarah Porter for VOA News, Islamabad. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>