<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981201.0500.0794 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The hurricane season has officially ended, although one storm is still 
pushing its way through the Atlantic Ocean. Hurricane Nicole is no 
threat to anyone right now, but she is probably the last of what weather 
forecasters are calling the deadliest Atlantic hurricane season in 
more than 200 years. As VOA's Challus McDonough reports, the forecasters 
are analyzing the data from this year's storm to help them prepare 
for the future. U.S. hurricane researchers say they collected huge 
amounts of data about the 1998 storms. That is partly because of the 
higher than average number of storms that sprung up in the Atlantic 
Ocean this year. But it is also because the Federal Hurricane Research 
Agencies had better equipment including more so-called hurricane hunter 
airplanes to monitor the storms. But the storm watchers say they need 
to rethink the way they measure storms. Hurricanes are ranked by wind 
speed from small category one storms to dangerous category fives like 
this year's deadliest storm, Hurricane Mitch. But National Hurricane 
Center director Jerry Gerald says Mitch killed about 11,000 people 
not with its high winds but with torrential rains. We had the media 
very much interested in this category five hurricane out there, and 
then the winds started going down, and so - And a lot of people is 
thinking the threat was going down, or in reality because it was moving 
slow and moving closer to the coast, the threat was really going up. 
Now hurricane researchers say the strongest 20 percent of storms do 
about 80 percent of all hurricane-related damage, so the goal is to 
identify those big storms and get people out of their way. But they 
say they have learned they need to better measure and predict other 
things in addition to wind speed, like rainfall and storm structure. 
Hurricane Research Division Chief Hugh Willoughby says the agencies 
are still predicting rainfall the way they did in the 1950s. This 
season was kind of a wake up call for us, and I'm planning on changing 
some of the direction in my organization to look at statistical characterization 
of rainfall, and just generally to improve the forecast tools. It's 
clearly a major problem, and we can do a lot better with it. It's 
- We like the news media focused on wind speed, and now it's time 
to change direction. The researchers say they are not going to get 
rid of their measurement tools, just work on adding to their prediction 
arsenal. But they say accurate forecasts are useless if communities 
do not prepare themselves for the inevitable storms. Sometimes the 
problem is complacency; people simply do not believe the storm will 
hit them or they think it will not be too bad. For example, when Hurricane 
Georges was headed toward Key West Florida, only about 40 percent 
of the people there evacuated. But the National Hurricane Center's 
Jerry Gerald says that was not the problem when Hurricane Mitch hit 
Central America. He says the center warned Honduras 36 hours before 
the storm made landfall, but the government there just could not get 
people out of the way. Even if they had a perfect forecast, you wonder 
if the systems were in place to allow them to escape to safety. So 
I suspect that, you know, I'm not convinced that the biggest weakness 
there was the forecast. Even so, the storm researchers say earlier, 
more accurate warnings will save lives. Challis McDonough, VOA News, 
Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>