<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981201.1600.0477 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Russia is likely to cancel its moratorium on capital punishment. VOA's 
Peter Heinline in Moscow reports Russia's top human rights official 
admits the pressure is on to bring back the death penalty. Human Rights 
Commission chairman Vladimir Katashkan warned Tuesday Russia's top 
law enforcement officials are pushing for an end to the ban on capital 
punishment. He told the Istar-Tar News Agency the death penalty moratorium 
in effect since 1996 is likely to be canceled and punishments made 
more severe. President Boris Yeltsin ordered the moratorium when Russia 
joined the Council of Europe, a 40-nation human rights body. But efforts 
to turn the moratorium into law have been rejected in parliament because 
of concerns about rising crime rates. Moreover, the moratorium has 
not stopped courts from handing down death sentences. Human rights 
groups estimate there are about 1,000 people on Russia's death rows. 
Polls show a majority of Russians favor the death penalty. Following 
the murder last month of lawmaker and democracy activist Galena Staravoitova, 
Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov said violent criminals must be physically 
eliminated. But human rights activists say the move to reinstate the 
death penalty is part of a worrisome trend in Russia. Diedrich Loman 
of the Moscow office of Human Rights Watch calls it a step backward. 
Unfortunately, there's a lot of back sliding going on in this country, 
and this canceling the moratorium would not be the first effect of 
back sliding at all. This is a process that is being going on for 
quite a while for a few years now. Mr. Loman says in Russia's poorly 
functioning criminal justice system, suspects are presumed guilty 
until proven innocent. He says once forced to confess a crime, a suspect 
is almost certain to be convicted. We oppose the death penalty in 
all cases, but especially also because in Russia, the number of people 
who are tortured, who are forced to confess to crimes that they, in 
a lot of cases, have not committed is phenomenal. And that means that 
there's a very great risk of people being executed who in fact are 
not guilty. Human Rights Commission chief Vladimir Katashkan says 
a move to reinstate the death penalty would undermine Russia's prestige 
abroad. Other rights activists say in such a case, they would push 
the Council of Europe to drop Russia as a member. But Mr. Katashkan 
also says the pressure is mounting for tough measures to combat the 
wave of crime sweeping the country. Peter Heinline, VOA News, Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>