<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981201.0500.2669 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The floods that inundated parts of the southeastern United States 
state of Texas back in mid October took a heavy toll on the region's 
farming and ranching industry. Cattle ranchers and hardest hit Gonzales 
County say thousands of animals, mostly calves, were drowned or lost 
in the raging river waters. As we hear in this report from Janet Heinlick, 
the ranchers are still sizing up the flood's financial as well as 
emotional impact. Ranchers in Gonzales County say it's the worst livestock 
disaster they've ever heard of. In this county alone, officials estimate 
10- to 15,000 cattle are lost or dead. Ronnie and Florence Baker own 
a ranch in the town of Gonzales. While they're used to floods, this 
one caught the Bakers by surprise. Ronnie Baker says the water rose 
quickly at the end of the day. Once it got dark, you couldn't do anything 
with the cattle anyway. And then that was like Saturday night, and 
then Sunday morning, it was too late. You couldn't do anything. In 
fact, if we tried to move, we would have probably lost them all. Trying 
to get them across the water that was already up. The Bakers waited 
anxiously through the night, then the next morning, they could see 
all of their 65 cows and calves huddled on a tiny patch of exposed 
land. The Bakers says that didn't last long. As the water started 
coming up, they kept backing up to higher ground, to higher ground, 
to higher ground, and as the water kept coming, the ones on the outer 
edge, the water just picked them up and just floated them off. After 
a few days, the Bakers recovered all of their cows but lost 12 of 
their 14 calves. As the flood water rushed through the valley, many 
livestock were swept up by the current and drifted for days. One rancher 
likened the situation to a bucket of water being poured on an ant 
hill. Many bulls, horses, and calves didn't survive the wild ride. 
Fortunately, though, not all the animals were done for. A cow can 
float for 25, 30 miles. Dr. Bruce McGee is a veterinarian in Gonzales 
County. He says cows do better in floods than other livestock. A cow, 
they will float because she's got room and she's got four stomachs, 
and she can swell up, and she floats of kind of on her side with her 
head turned back over her back. And she can go for miles and miles 
if she doesn't get hung up in a fence or some brush or a thicket or 
she doesn't get into some bad turbulence somewhere. County officials 
have been trying to get livestock back to their owners. The Texas 
A&M extension offices help to serve as a sort of livestock clearinghouse 
for ranchers. There's not much they can do about the hundreds of carcasses 
that are washing up on people's property. Some carcasses have traveled 
much further downstream. Recently, shrimp boats in the Gulf of Mexico 
reported finding cow corpses in their nets. But even for ranchers 
who get cows back live, things aren't quite the same as before. Physically, 
the cows are hurt and exhausted, and mentally, they're dazed, bewildered, 
easily provoked, even dangerous. You got her? no. Up the road from 
McGee's clinic, McGee's helping the Bakers bring a cow in from the 
fields. She was injured in the flood and McGee wants to get her on 
his trailer so he can take a closer look. It's a tough battle. The 
cow snorts and kicks acting more like a bull in a rodeo. Finally, 
the handlers get the cow into the trailer. The flood comes at a particularly 
bad time for Texas ranchers. Many are still trying to recover losses 
from the summer's drought. County officials hope to persuade Congress 
to appropriate some grants. But even with the hardship, many ranchers 
remain stoic. The Bakers say they don't want a handout. If they can't 
make it on their own, they say, they just as soon get out of the business. 
This is Janet Heinlick in Gonzales County, Texas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>