<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981210.1830.0064 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. The impeachment battle in the house Judiciary committee 
is virtually over. Today it has been a last-ditch battle between two 
very accomplishedded lawyers. One for the president and one against. 
There was also another videotape not seen by the public before. The 
Judiciary committee is now on the eve of making a political decision, 
the likes of which has only been made twice before. Our first report 
is from ABC's Linda Douglass on the case against impeachment. Laid 
out by the committee's democratic counsel abbe Lowell. The democrats' 
lawyer repeatedly issued a warning to the republicans -- Let's make 
sure that the committee, house members who will be voting on the floor 
and the country understand what will be the subject of a Senate trial. 
The subject will be sex, he said, and he used the videotape of the 
president's deposition in the Paula Jones case to argue that it will 
be hard to determine whether the president lied. The tape showed how 
the lawyers argued for 15 minutes about the definition of sexual relations. 
For example, it says, the last line, contact means intentional touching 
directly or through probing. Even the judge thought the president 
might be confused. It is just going to make it very difficult for 
me to rule, if you want to know the truth, and I would like to know 
if Mr. Clinton knows all of these definitions anyway. Lowell said, 
in a trial, witnesses would be called to corroborate mr. Clinton's 
claim that he believed sex only meant sexual intercourse. Listen to 
the witnesses, Monica Lewinsky and Linda Tripp. If you get to orgasm, 
that is having sex. No, it's not. yes, it is. No, it's not. Sex is 
having intercourse. One article of impeachment charges Mr. Clinton 
lied about the "Nature and details" of his relationship with Lewinsky. 
Lowell again -- "should that be played out in a Senate trial?" The 
perjury that some in the majority have said tears at the fabric of 
our judicial system comes down to whether the president lied about 
whether he touched Ms. Lewinsky. And what about the president's memory 
lapses which republicans charge are lies. I'm amazed there are lots 
of times when I literally can't remember last week. Is that lying 
asked Lowell? What about this? I have no recollection of it, but I 
am happy to searchmy recollection. I do not have a recollection of 
that, but I am happy to now search my recollection. As for the charge 
that Mr. Clinton abused his office by lying to aides, Lowell scoffed 
at the idea that his motives were na sinister. The president wanted 
to conceal his private, sexual relationship from everyone and anyone 
he could. As my daughter would say, duh. Lowell appealed to the undecided 
republicans who will have to vote on all of this on the floor of the 
house next week. He said the public has been telling us that they 
do not want to see a trial in the Senate where the issue is sex. Peter? 
Thank you. The democratic counsel had the morning, the afternoon belonged 
to the lawyer for the republicans. His case against the president 
was unsparing. Here's ABC's Jackie Judd. Somber, but also caustic 
and cutting, the republicans' lawyer david schippers said, "no single 
piece of evidence could be viewed in a Vacuum, that the evidence as 
a whole reveals the sinister nature of events." Example -- schippers 
told the committee no one should be surprised that lewinsky was never 
told specifically to lie. Of course, no one said, "now, Monica, go 
in there and lie." They didn't have to. She knew what was expected 
of her. Similarly, nobody "promised" her a job, but once she signed 
the false affidavit, she got one, didn't she? Schippers used Mr. Clinton's 
sworn testimony in the Jones case to argue that the president lied 
under oath. Example -- President Clinton's lawyer asks him whether 
Lewinsky was telling the truth when she denied having sexual relations 
with him. Is that a true and accurate statement as far as you know 
it? That is absolutely true. That is absolutely true. And at the time 
the president knew it was absolutely false. Another example of what 
schippers called "Mr. Clinton's complete disregard for the concept 
of truth," when the president was asked repeatedly whether he had 
been alone with Lewinsky. At any time have you and Monica Lewinsky 
ever been alone together in any room in the White House? I think I 
testified to that earlier. I think that there is -- I have no specific 
recollection. Time and again, schippers asked the committee to use 
common sense in rejecting Mr. Clinton's explanations. Example -- the 
president claimed he was only trying to refresh his memory after the 
deposition by asking Betty Currie about Lewinsky. How could she know 
if they were ever alone? If they were, Ms. Currie wasn't there. Right? 
This wasn't any attempt by the president to refresh anybody's recollection. 
It was witness tampering, pure and simple. Schippers seemed barely 
to contain his disdain for Mr. Clinton. Life was so much simpler before 
they found that dress, wasn't it? Meaning, schippers said, that if 
the president's DNA had not been found on Lewinsky's dress, he would 
still be lying about the relationship and all that followed. And as 
for democrats who claim the republican-led committee has created a 
Scandal where none existed -- By the way, who's putting the country 
through this? The president, by his actions. Jackie Judd, ABC News, 
Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>