<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981210.0613 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From sixth to first in four days. Gianluca Vialli's Chelsea could 
jump to the top of the English soccer league for the first time since 
1989 by winning at Derby on Saturday. Unbeaten in the Premier League 
since the opening day of the season, Vialli's team beat leader Aston 
Villa 2-1 on Wednesday to move up three places to third. And with 
Villa not in action until Sunday and second place Manchester United 
facing a tough game at Tottenham, Vialli's team can make it to the 
top. He doesn't want to talk about it. ``Despite us having a great 
run and everybody still being tuned in, we know there is a long way 
to go,'' the former Sampdoria and Juventus striker said. ``The players 
are meeting everybody's expectations. We know we've got a big chance 
to be successful. I'm not saying we're going to win the league or 
the cups but we want to do our best and the players are very responsible 
and professional. ``It's up to us to go on like that and to keep our 
feet on the floor.'' After beating Villa for the second time this 
season _ knocking John Gregory's team out of the League Cup 4-1 _ 
Vialli has to get his players focused on a more mundane visit to mid-standings 
Derby. With Gianfranco Zola returning to form and Norwegian striker 
proving his value as substitute with a last-minute winner, Chelsea 
looked impressive against Villa and had the league leader under pressure 
for almost the entire second half at Stamford Bridge. But Derby's 
wily manager, Jim Smith, no doubt will have some tricks up his sleeve 
when Chelsea's talented team of mainly overseas stars arrive at Pride 
Park. Powered by the goals and mercurial skills of Costa Rican forward 
Paolo Wanchope, Smith's team lies 10th in the table and is capable 
of beating the best or losing to the worst. With Chelsea enjoying 
the eurphoria of beating the league leader, Manchester United is basking 
in the glory of reaching the last eight of the European Champions 
Cup. Alex Ferguson's team achieved that with a 1-1 tie with Bayern 
Munich on Wednesday and, after the excitement of qualifying for the 
quarterfinal of Europe's premier club soccer tournament, Ferguson 
has to get his players focused on a trip to White Hart Lane to meet 
in-form Spurs. Since George Graham took over, Tottenham has developed 
a steely look to the team and now looks tough to beat. French star 
David Ginola, urged by Graham to work a little harder and put his 
undoubted talent to better use, is in standout form and the goals 
have started to flow from Chris Armstrong. By the time Villa gets 
to host defending titlist and fifth-place Arsenal on Sunday, Gregory's 
team could be down in third, having led the standings for two months. 
The Gunners likely will have eight of their top players out through 
injury, including Dennis Bergkamp, Patrick Vieira, Emmanuel Petit 
and Tony Adams, yet their replacements performed superbly in their 
final Champions Cup game on Wednesday, winning 3-1 in Athens against 
Panathinaikos. Fourth place Leeds is not in action until Monday, when 
David O'Leary's team hosts struggling Coventry. Although his team 
has climbed since he took over from Graham at Elland Road, O'Leary 
is playing down his own team's chances of taking the title. ``We're 
fourth in the league at the moment but in all honesty we're only a 
top eight team,'' said the former Arsenal and Ireland international 
center-back. ``When the going really gets tough later on this season 
the young kids, and there's six of them in the team, will get tired. 
That's a fact.'' Seventh place Middlesbrough hosts West Ham, which 
slipped to sixth after last week's 4-0 loss at Leeds, while Liverpool 
had the tough task of reversing its slide to ninth when it visits 
eight-place Wimbledon on Sunday. Gerard Houllier's under fire Liverpool 
won't be helped by the fact that it was outplayed for the second time 
by Spanish club Celta Vigo on Tuesday, losing 1-0 at Anfield and tumbling 
tamely out of the UEFA Cup. A the other end of the standings, Blackburn 
manager Brian Kidd, whose team climbed away from last in his first 
game in charge, hopes for another good performance at home to Newcastle. 
Rovers' victory over Charlton lifted the team two places and dropped 
Southampton back to last. The Saints go to 15th place Everton while 
next-to-last Nottingham Forest visits Leicester. Sheffield Wednesday, 
14th after edging Nottingham Forest, hopes to gain three more points 
by beating 16th place Charlton at home. Four points clear in division 
one, Sunderland should profit from a home game against second from 
last Port Vale while second place Ipswich hosts mid-standings Barnsley. 
Rangers and Kilmarnock, first and second in the Scottish Premier League 
and level on points, meet at Ibrox Saturday. Third place and defending 
titlist Celtic, which has five points to make up, visits Dundee United. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>