<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981210.1251 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
VIENNA, Austria (AP) - European Union leaders open a two-day summit 
Friday at which they will recommit to letting a dozen countries into 
the EU. But on the summit's eve, it was unlikely they'll agree on 
how to fund their biggest expansion ever. Ahead of the summit, German 
Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder and Spanish Prime Minister Jose-Maria 
Aznar were at odds over the EU's future financing. Schroeder said 
Germans were tiring of being the EU paymaster and Aznar, seeing EU 
aid for poorer EU members going eastward, insisted on raising EU membership 
fees. Austrian Chancellor Viktor Klima said he will ask the leaders 
to inject urgency into the finance debate so a budget deal can be 
agreed in March. ``I hope we can come to an agreement'' Aznar told 
reporters. ``But I don't agree with (keeping national contributions) 
at 1.27 percent of GNP or freezing spending.'' The EU opened membership 
negotiations with Cyprus, Hungary, Poland, the Czech Republic, Estonia 
and Slovenia and preliminary talks with nations judged less-ready: 
Lithuania, Latvia, Slovakia, Romania and Bulgaria. Malta is expected 
to join them. Britain, Denmark, Sweden and Austria, among others, 
want to bring Lithuania, Latvia and Slovakia into the first group. 
Germany and France oppose that. The leaders will meet in a historic 
setting: the cavernous Redoutensaal of the Hofburg Palace where Europe's 
aristocratic leaders of 1815 redrew their continent's map and danced 
away the memories of Napoleon's wars. In its 20th century version 
of building a better Europe, the EU refuses to set entry dates in 
order to keep candidates working apace on their economic and political 
reforms to meet EU membership requirements. Turkey, too, continues 
to trouble the West Europeans. They have ruled it out as an immediate 
candidate. Ankara has declined an invitation to come here Saturday 
to meet with leaders of the EU, Cyprus and the East European candidates. 
Germany, the Netherlands, Austria, Sweden and France insist the EU's 
annual budget _ 86 billion European currency units (dlrs 100 billion) 
this year _ must not rise beyond inflation in 2000-2006 when the first 
newcomers would join. They also reject letting spending rise in line 
with economic growth which would add some 20 billion ecu (dlrs 23.6 
billion) by 2006. Spain, Greece, Ireland and Portugal _ which get 
special EU aid _ want that so they don't lose out when even poorer 
east European nations join. Germany and other northerners say they 
already pay far more into the EU than they get back. Germany's net 
payment is 22 billion marks (dlrs 13 billion) a year. ``We cannot 
and we do not want to continue a policy that seeks to buy our neighbors' 
good will with net payments that become an unbearable budget burden 
in our own country,'' Schroeder said in Bonn. ``We cannot and we do 
not want to solve Europe's problems with a German checkbook.'' Separately, 
Britain's refuses to give up a refund it has been getting since 1984 
to compensate for its net payments, even though it is better off today 
than when the payments started. The EU budget is funded by sales taxes 
and membership dues from 15 member nations. They can be asked to pay 
up to 1.27 percent of their annual gross national product. Key to 
its reform is an agreement to make deep cuts in farm spending. Subsidies 
for EU farmers still eat up half of the budget. The EU leaders will 
also discuss plans to cut Europe's stubbornly high unemployment, the 
launch of a single currency in January and plans to ensure the 11 
nations adopting the euro will speak with a one voice in international 
finance meetings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>