<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981210.0956 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States plans to boost aid to areas of Central America hit 
by Hurricane Mitch to dlrs 370 million while asking Congress to forgive 
most of the debt owed by Honduras and Nicaragua, White House officials 
said Thursday. President Bill Clinton meets with leaders of five Central 
American countries on Friday following a conference on post-hurricane 
reconstruction they were attending Thursday at the Inter-American 
Development Bank. The United States already has given dlrs 250 million 
in emergency aid to the region, which officials said amounts to about 
65 percent of total relief so far. The hurricane, which struck in 
late October, killed more than 9,000 people in Central America. In 
Bonn, Germany, the Paris Club of creditor nations agreed earlier Thursday 
to grant Nicaragua and Honduras a moratorium on repayment of government-to-government 
debt until 2001 because of devastation caused by the hurricane. White 
House officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said total debt 
relief to the two countries could exceed dlrs 1 billion. The Paris 
Club, which includes the United States and 17 other rich countries 
as well as Russia, called on the International Monetary Fund to work 
out programs for increased debt relief for both countries. The U.S. 
debt relief package, if approved by Congress, would write off up to 
90 percent of Nicaragua's dlrs 94 million debt to the U.S. government 
and 67 percent of the Honduras dlrs 144 million debt, the officials 
said. The debt includes mostly agriculture, military and trade loans. 
El Salvador, Guatemala and Costa Rica, whose leaders also were in 
Washington seeking assistance, have not asked for debt relief. Cllinton 
also will propose to Congress an additional U.S. contribution to the 
Central American Emergency Trust Fund or a similar fund to help countries 
meet their obligations to multilateral banks, one official said. Officials 
say U.S. and other assistance has gone to reopen roads, support disease 
prevention, restore drinking water and replant crops. Overall, the 
plan is to ``cover the estimated shortfall in financing during reconstruction 
period, provide assistance for the reconstruction effort and to reduce 
the outstanding stock of debt to help Nicaragua and Honduras achieve 
sustained growth over the longer term,'' the official said. Attending 
the meeting at the Inter-American Bank were Honduran President Carlos 
Flores, Nicaraguan President Arnoldo Aleman, El Salvadoran President 
Armando Calderon Sol, Costa Rican President Miguel Angel Rodriguez 
and Guatemalan Vice President Luis Alberto Flores. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>