<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981210.0294 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Serb police blocked a Finnish forensics team Thursday from carrying 
out the first exhumations of Kosovo massacre victims in a dispute 
over Serb access to rebel-controlled territory. The Finnish team leader 
accused the Serb side of obstruction. The scheduled start of digging 
on the makeshift graves of as many as 22 slaughtered ethnic Albanians 
was to have marked a breakthrough in investigative work into atrocities 
in the war-torn Serbian province. But a Serb police contingent consisting 
of an armored personnel carrier and about two dozen policemen wearing 
flak jackets and carrying automatic rifles stopped the Finnish convoy 
on the road in Trstenik, well short of the grave site in the central 
Drenica region. The convoy carrying 19 forensics experts turned back 
toward the capital Pristina after more than two hours at the roadside. 
Serb police, who did not comment, reportedly insisted on accompanying 
the team. But the Kosovo Liberation Army, which controls the area 
virtually unchallenged during the current truce, said the police were 
unwelcome. ``The Finnish team is free to come on their own but they 
cannot come with the police,'' said KLA local commander Gani Koci. 
``We see this as clear obstruction,'' said Finnish team leader Helena 
Ranta. She said the Serb action also violated the diplomatic immunity 
of the Finnish ambassador for human rights, who accompanied them. 
A Serbian investigative judge from Pristina, Danica Marinkovic, said 
her team's safety also was reportedly at issue. ``According to our 
laws, the exhumations can't take place without us,'' she said. The 
Finns had received permission from government authorities to carry 
out the exhumations on six sites, including a frozen hillside in Gornje 
Obrinje which is believed to contain the mutilated bodies of men, 
women and children from a single family clan. The September killings 
in a nearby forest 40 kilometers (25 miles) west of Pristina were 
among the most savage during Serbian forces' seven-month offensive 
against separatists in Kosovo. The slaughtered bodies were witnessed 
before burial by diplomats, journalists and human rights workers, 
some with limbs hacked off and all shot in the back of the head. The 
massacre prompted shock and outrage worldwide and stepped up international 
pressure on Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic, who agreed Oct. 
12 to withdraw forces and end the crackdown. The 19-member Finnish 
team expects to spend up to a week at the site in Gornje Obrinje, 
which the Albanians know as Obrija, before moving on to the other 
sites, some containing Serb bodies: Glodjane, Golubovac, Klecka, Orohovac 
and Volujak. ``We're not here to say who's guilty and who's the perpetrators,'' 
Ranta said before Thursday's dispute. ``We're here to shed some light 
on the sequence of events and how these people died.'' The results 
of exhumations and autopsies by the team, sponsored by the European 
Union, will be given to local courts and also could further war crimes 
investigations in Kosovo. Hundreds of people in the majority ethnic 
Albanian province have been killed in this year's offensive as well 
as subsequent periodic violence since the October truce. While most 
of the victims were ethnic Albanians, the Serb military also has alleged 
massacres by the KLA, and both sides have been condemned for committing 
human rights abuses. Weeks of shuttle diplomacy have failed to produce 
a settlement that would settle the dispute over the future political 
status of Kosovo, which had autonomy until 1989. U.S. envoy Christopher 
Hill planned talks in Belgrade on Thursday with government authorities, 
who are determined to keep Kosovo within Serbia, the dominant republic 
left in Yugoslavia. Hill insisted after meeting with ethnic Albanian 
negotiators Wednesday in Pristina that efforts to resolve the conflict 
are ``still on track'' _ even though all sides in the dispute had 
rejected his latest peace proposal. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>