<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981210.0597 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Northern Ireland's David Trimble and John Hume said Thursday that 
accepting the Nobel Peace Prize doesn't mean their efforts to end 
30 years of violence in the British province have ended. In their 
acceptance speeches, both said the prize was for an incomplete peace. 
The peace accord reached in April has yet to be implemented, with 
Trimble insisting he won't let Irish Republican Army supporters into 
a new government for Northern Ireland unless the IRA starts to disarm. 
``We do have a peace today in Ireland. But it is still something of 
an armed peace,'' said Trimble, the leader of Northern Ireland's largest 
Protestant party, the Ulster Unionist Party. ``It may seem strange 
that we receive the reward of a race run while the race is still not 
quite finished,'' Trimble said. ''The paramilitaries are finished. 
But the politics are not finished,'' he said, vowing to see the accord 
implemented. In his own speech, Hume, leader of the Social Democratic 
and Labor Party, Northern Ireland's largest Roman Catholic party, 
also said there would be difficulties ahead. But quoting another Nobel 
peace laureate, American civil rights activist Martin Luther King 
Jr., Hume vowed that ``we shall overcome.'' The politicians were picked 
for the peace prize, which includes a 7.6 million Swedish kronor (dlrs 
943,000) cash award, because the Norwegian awards committee saw them 
as the two key figures in talks that led to what is now called the 
Good Friday Agreement. The five-member committee has often used the 
prize to nurture difficult, ongoing peace processes. This is the second 
time it has tried in Northern Ireland. The 1976 prize went to Betty 
Williams and Mairead Corrigan for founding a peace movement that later 
fizzled. ``We all know that there are still major problems to be faced,'' 
said awards committee chairman Francis Sejersted. But, he said, there 
could be no turning back, even if there are setbacks. Hume, 61, and 
Trimble, 54, accepted their awards, which include a gold medal, before 
about 1,000 people, including Norway's King Harald V and Queen Sonja, 
at the Oslo City Hall. About 4,000 Norwegian school children, signing 
songs and carrying the flags of many nations, gathered outside of 
the city hall in a peace parade, with Hume and Trimble stopping to 
light their peace torch before the ceremony. Inside, Trimble and Hume 
stood together, appearing solemn, as they displayed the prizes to 
the applauding audience. The ceremony was being held against a backdrop 
of rising crisis in Northern Ireland. The outlawed IRA, nearly 17 
months into a truce, is insisting that it won't destroy any of its 
secret stockpiles of weaponry, a goal contained in the accord. In 
his speech Trimble emphasized why a symbolic start to disarmament 
was so important now to Protestants. Trimble's long-postponed demand 
has often been criticized by Hume's SDLP as pointless, since the IRA 
could always smuggle in new weaponry, and counterproductive since 
it put the IRA truce under unnecessary pressure. Noting he had never 
asked for specific amounts of weaponry on specific dates, Trimble 
said: ``All I have asked for is a credible beginning. All I have asked 
for is that they say the so-called war is over. And that is proved 
by such a beginning. ``That is not too much to ask for,'' Trimble 
said, taking aim at Hume's position. ``Nor is it too much to ask that 
the reformist party of Irish nationalism, the SDLP, support me in 
this.'' Turning to the IRA's allied political party, he said: ``Any 
further delay will reinforce dark doubts about whether Sinn Fein are 
drinking from the clear stream of democracy, or still drinking from 
the dark stream of fascism.'' The April peace agreement called for 
Protestant and Catholic politicians forming a multiparty administration 
for Northern Ireland and joint policy-making bodies with the Irish 
Republic by October. Neither of those steps have been taken, even 
though Irish voters endorsed the accord in May referendums. ``We owe 
this peace to the ordinary people of Ireland,,'' said Hume. He also 
credited the peace's backers, including U.S. President Bill Clinton, 
British Prime Minister Tony Blair and his Irish counterpart Bertie 
Ahern. ``Too many lives have already been lost in the pursuit of political 
goals,'' Hume said. ``The challenge now, is to grasp and shape history.'' 
The Nobel prizes were endowed by Swedish industrialist Alfred Nobel, 
the inventor of dynamite. The prizes, first awarded in 1901, are always 
presented on the Dec. 10 anniversary of Nobel's death. The peace prize 
is awarded in Oslo, and the others in Stockholm, Sweden. Last year's 
peace prize went to the International Campaign to Ban Landmines and 
its American coordinator Jody Williams. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>