<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981210.1230 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A group of senior Palestinians led by Yasser Arafat voted overwhelmingly 
Thursday to declare clauses of the PLO charter calling for Israel's 
destruction null and void _ but continued to reject Israel's demand 
to bring the matter to a vote before a larger body. The vote was an 
interim step ahead of Monday's session of the Palestine National Council 
which is to reaffirm the move in the presence of U.S. President Bill 
Clinton. In announcing Thursday's decision by the Palestine Central 
Council, a 124-member leadership body, Selim Zanoun said the matter 
would not come to a vote before the PNC. Instead, the PNC session 
would convene only to affirm the speeches by Clinton and Arafat. The 
meeting ``will be only to listen to President Clinton's speech and 
President Arafat ... there will be no vote,'' Zanoun said. It was 
not clear how the affirmation would manifest itself. In Thursday's 
vote, the 105 members present were asked whether they approved an 
Arafat letter to Clinton in which the offending PLO charter clauses 
are declared revoked. Of those present, 81 voted for, seven voted 
against and seven abstained, according to Salim Zanoun, the chairman 
of the Palestine National Council. Under the Wye accord, the PNC and 
delegates of other Palestinian groups were to reaffirm the Arafat 
letter on Monday, thus completing the process of revoking the charter. 
Israel continued to insist on a vote. ``We expect that they will continue 
to do so on Monday and vote in an unequivocal matter... if there is 
to be further implementation,'' said David Bar-Illan, a top aide to 
prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. In April 1996, the PNC held a vote 
on revoking the charter clauses. Israel's dovish government at the 
time accepted the outcome as satisfactory. However, when Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu came to power a month later, he said the Palestinians 
had not completed their task and demanded that the PNC be called together 
again. Even though the Palestinians have agreed to the demand, the 
two sides disagree over procedure for Monday's session. The Israeli 
leader said Thursday that he would stick to his position even if Clinton 
declares the PNC session a success without a vote. ``It is Israel 
which determines issues connected with its future,'' Netanyahu told 
Israel radio. Arafat said the procedure was an internal Palestinian 
matter. ``It's not their (the Israelis') business,'' he said. It is 
unlikely the U.S. president would side with Israel in such a dispute 
because it would mean that the main purpose of his visit, to usher 
in the next stage of the Wye agreement, has failed. Deputy State Department 
spokesman James Foley was avasive on whether the Clinton administration 
wanted a vote. ``The procedures need to be ckear enough that nullification 
has taken place,'' he said in Washington. Immediately after the PNC 
session, five percent of the West Bank is to be transferred from Israeli 
control to joint jurisdiction. Netanyahu said last week he was freezing 
the pullback over what he claimed were systematic Palestinian violations 
of the peace accord. He said Thursday that he would not change his 
decision unless the PNC took a vote and Arafat publicly dropped plans 
to unilaterally declare a state in May. Netanyahu also said he has 
ordered the Israeli army to deal with Palestinian riots with a ``firm 
hand.'' The West Bank has been swept by stone-throwing protests in 
recent days, and thousands of Palestinians marched Thursday in the 
funeral procession of a 17-year-old stone mason, Jihad Iyad, who was 
killed by Israeli army gunfire a day earlier. Israeli hard-liners, 
including Cabinet ministers, have said Clinton's visit is conferring 
statehood status on the Palestinian areas. On Thursday, signs reading 
``Clinton go home'' were strung along the Tel Aviv-Jerusalem highway 
and on walls in Jerusalem. Posters showing a photo montage of Clinton 
wearing a checkered headdress, a symbol of Palestinian nationalism, 
were plastered on some walls. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>