<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981210.0931 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
People around the world marked the 50th anniversary of the United 
Nations' human rights charter Thursday by protesting continued abuses, 
while some governments announced new initiatives aimed at better rights 
protection. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is the most 
comprehensive and widely recognized international standard for the 
protection of human rights. The U.N. General Assembly scheduled a 
special session to mark the anniversary. But throughout the world, 
there were reminders of the many still denied basic rights. Thousands 
of student protesters marched to the U.N. building in Indonesia's 
capital, demanding greater democracy and the prosecution of former 
President Suharto on corruption charges. And even as Chinese President 
Jiang Zemin promised to protect human rights in a letter marking the 
anniversary, police ransacked the homes of several dissidents in a 
widening crackdown. Gays and lesbians picketed the Zimbabwean consulate 
in Cape Town, while in the Zimbabwean capital of Harare, a police 
band withdrew from celebrations and officers refused to escort a march 
by 400 human rights activists that included homosexuals, organizers 
said. Homosexual acts are illegal in Zimbabwe and carry a penalty 
of a fine or imprisonment. The Dalai Lama said in Paris that conditions 
for his fellow Tibetans were worsening under Chinese rule, while scores 
of Tibetan exiles in India burned the Chinese flag in protest of Beijing's 
rule. Black-clad demonstrators outside the U.S. embassy in Athens 
hung an effigy of the Statue of Liberty to protest America's continued 
use of capital punishment. ``Today should be a day of shame for many 
governments,'' said Pierre Sane, Secretary General of Amnesty International, 
at the first world summit of human rights defenders in Paris. ``Poverty 
affects hundreds of millions, while the torture, disappearances, unfair 
trials and unlawful killings continue.'' He said 117 governments torture 
their citizens, at least 55 unlawfully kill them, at least 87 jail 
political and religious opponents, 31 nations make their people ``disappear'' 
and at least 40 execute their citizens. Pope John Paul II urged nations 
to persevere in securing basic freedoms for all. ``Let's make sure 
that the Declaration of Human Rights does not become just a monument 
to admire, or worse, a document for the archives,'' the pontiff said 
in a message to the U.N. General Assembly. In London, Amnesty International 
laid 3,197 white flowers _ one for each of the people officially recognized 
as either murdered or abducted under former Chilean President Gen. 
Augusto Pinochet's regime. Pinochet is being held in London pending 
extradition to Spain on charges of torture and conspiracy to murder. 
In Myanmar, Nobel Peace laureate Aung San Suu Kyi attended a U.N.-sponsored 
ceremony with other officials of her opposition National League for 
Democracy. No government officials took part. The junta has never 
honored the 1990 election in which her party won 392 of the legislature's 
485 seats, and has never allowed the freely elected Parliament to 
meet. In the past several months, the military rulers have arrested 
nearly a thousand of her party members. South Africa, which staged 
several events, announced that it would ratify several U.N. human 
rights conventions concerning civil and political rights to mark the 
anniversary. Philippine President Joseph Estrada ordered a review 
of all people jailed for politically related crimes, and the Mozambique 
government announced it plans to introduce human rights as part of 
the school curriculum in 2000. The 40-member Council of Europe committee 
of ministers called on states to abolish the death penalty and establish 
independent national institutions for the protection of human rights. 
``Three themes are of particular concern to us today: to secure the 
abolition of capital punishment, to guarantee media freedom, and the 
effective enjoyment of women's human rights,'' said Daniel Tarschys, 
secretary-General of the council's human rights assembly. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>