<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981210.0303 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
OVER MISCHIEF REEF, South China Sea (AP) _ U.S. Congressman Dana Rohrabacher 
flew Thursday on a Philippine air force plane over a disputed South 
China Sea reef to observe structures being built by China and said 
the United States should help stop Chinese expansion in the area. 
``We can't ignore this bullying by the Communist Chinese in the Spratlys. 
This is intolerable,'' Rohrabacher said while viewing clusters of 
structures jutting out from Mischief Reef. Three Chinese warships 
were on guard nearby. Rohrabacher was accompanied on the C-130 cargo 
plane by Philippine military officials and Roilo Golez, chairman of 
the Philippine House defense committee. His trip to the Spratlys, 
which China had opposed, was the first in recent years by a lawmaker 
from a country not part of the conflicting claims to the territory. 
It reflects Philippine attempts to seek international support to halt 
Chinese expansion in the contested area. ``The main objective of this 
trip is to seek an international forum. We want the world to know 
what is happening,'' Golez said. The Spratlys, which straddle vital 
sea lanes in the South China Sea, are claimed in whole by China, Vietnam 
and Taiwan, and in part by Malaysia and the Philippines. Brunei claims 
one reef. Last month, Manila lodged a protest with Beijing after Chinese 
workers began enlarging buildings erected at Mischief Reef. Both countries 
claim the reef. China says the concrete structures are shelters for 
fishermen, but the Philippines says they could have military uses. 
The plane carrying Rohrabacher flew for about 20 minutes over the 
reef, making six passes and flying as low as 100 meters (300 feet) 
at one point over the structures to steer clear of clouds. The California 
Republican used binoculars and took pictures while kneeling in front 
of a small round window. Below, four large clusters of structures 
on stilts stood near the fringes of the reef, surrounded by warships 
and several other Chinese boats. Army Maj. John Bonafos, a Philippine 
military expert on the Spratlys who joined the trip, said satellite 
dishes have been installed on all of the structures, which can serve 
as docks for large ships. Rohrabacher, who as a member of the U.S. 
House International Relations Committee led efforts to block most-favored 
nation trade status for China, said he was aghast at the presence 
of the Chinese warships. He said China was bullying its way into the 
Spratlys knowing that other claimants like the Philippines have weaker 
militaries. He said the Philippines should assert its claim because 
if China is allowed to fortify its presence near the Philippine coastline, 
it would endanger sea lanes near the contested areas as well as nearby 
Philippine oil and natural gas exploration sites. ``When you're dealing 
with gangsters and dictatorships like Communist China, they only understand 
it when you're strong and courageous and standing up for your rights,'' 
the California Republican said. Rohrabacher said he would submit a 
report about the trip to the House committee and would urge the U.S. 
government to exert political and economic pressure on China to dismantle 
its structures on Mischief Reef and send its warships home. Mischief 
Reef, called Panganiban by the Philippines, is about 150 miles (240 
kilometers) west of the western Philippine island of Palawan. Aside 
from their strategic location, the Spratlys also are believed to be 
sitting atop large deposits of oil and natural gas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>