<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981210.2130.0056 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The issue of whether President Clinton should be impeached had a thorough 
airing today before the house Judiciary committee. Members heard summations 
from republican and democratic counsel. Then, for most of the evening, 
members turned to one another as each had ten minutes to state their 
views. Earlier today, the president's videotaped deposition from the 
Paula Jones lawsuit held the stage. Both the republican and democratic 
counsel used snippets to make their case for and against impeachment. 
Speaking for the republicans, David schippers laid out a case which 
asserts that President Clinton lied repeatedly to avoid the consequences 
of his relationship with Monica Lewinsky. The whole plan was to delay, 
obstruct and detour the investigations, not to protect the presidency, 
but to protect the president personally. It's bad enough the office 
was abused for that purpose, but infinite harm done to the presidency 
by those frivolous and Del he tory tacts is irreparable. Future presidents 
will be forced to operate within those strictures because one person 
assumed the office put him above the law. Furthermore, the power and 
prestige of the office of president was marshaled to destroy the character 
and reputation of Monica Lewinsky, a Young woman that had been ill-used 
by the president. Abbe Lowell summarized the case from the democratic 
perspective. He insisted there is not enough evidence to warrant a 
vote for impeachment. Independent counsel Starr's referral goes out 
of its way not to make a Perjury charge, because that offense, as 
many of you on the committee who have been lawyers in the courtroom 
know, is one of the hardest to prove. On October 15th, majority counsel 
chopped and diced Mr. Starr's grounds into four others, but he, too, 
did not include one calling perjury. While the majority convened a 
perjury hearing a few weeks ago, many of the witnesses were, in fact, 
talking about other crimes, and as all of the federal prosecutors 
who testify here said, this would never be a real case in a real court. 
So if lawyers can conclude that this would not be charged as a crime, 
how do you as lawmakers allow it to be charged as a high crime? Committee 
members are expected to begin casting votes tomorrow on the four proposed 
articles of impeachment. Members of the house have been notified by 
speaker Newt Gingrich that if articles are approved, the full house 
will begin its floor debate next thursday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>