<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981210.1600.0047 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Punctuated with videotape of President Clinton's original testimony 
about monica Lewinsky, two very different stories are being told before 
the house judiciary committee today. Majority counsel David schippers 
is giving his summation at this hour, saying it is the "sorrowful 
duty" of lawmakers to remove Mr. Clinton from office. Schippers told 
the committee President Clinton has repeatedly lied and says the tape 
of the president's testimony speaks for itself. For example, we uncovered 
more incidents involving probably direct -- he knew that he could 
only avoid an admission that he allow the false affidavit to be filed 
by convincing the grand jury that he hadn't been paying attention. 
Take a look at this tape that's coming up, and you will see what the 
president of the United States doesn't want the people of the United 
States ever to see. Watch. I need some guidance from the court at 
this point. I'm going to object to the inknew wen do. I'm afraid, 
as I say that this will leak. I don't question the predicates here, 
I question the good faith of counsel. Counsel is fully aware that 
miss Lewinsky has filed -- has an affidavit which they are in possession 
of, saying that there is absolutely no sex of any kind in any manner, 
shape or form with President Clinton. And yet listening to the innuendo 
and the question -- Well, your honor, with all due respect, I would 
like to know -- I am not coaching the witness in preparation of the 
witness for this deposition, the witness is fully aware of miss Lewinsky's 
affidavit, so I have not told him a single thing he doesn't know. 
But I think when he asks questions like this, where he's sitting on 
an affidavit from the witness, he should at least have a good faith 
proper. Do you think for one moment after watching that tape that 
the president wasn't paying attention? They were talking about Monica 
Lewinsky. At the time, the most dangerous person in the president's 
life. If the false affidavit worked, he was home free. Shipper's democratic 
counselpart also used excerpts from the tape and they confused him 
with their definition of sex. Abbe Lowell played excerpts from Linda 
Tripp's tape recordings in which monica Lewinsky said she had been 
raised to lie. Lowell said impeachment should be a last resort and 
attacked independent counsel Ken Starr's motives. Independent counsel 
Starr's referral goes out of its way not to make a Perjury charge, 
because that offense, as many of you on the committee who have been 
lawyers in the courtroom know, is one of the hardest to prove. On 
October 15th, majority counsel chopped and diced Mr. Starr's grounds 
into four others, but he, too, did not include one calling perjury. 
While the majority convened a perjury hearing a few weeks ago, many 
of the witnesses were, in fact, talking about other crimes, and as 
all of the federal prosecutors who testify here said, this would never 
be a real case in a real court. So if lawyers can conclude that this 
would not be charged as a crime, how do you as lawmakers allow it 
to be charged as a high crime? After schippers is finished with his 
summation, each member of the committee will get ten minutes. If statements 
from the members can not be finished tonight, they will continue tomorrow 
morning. A vote on the articles of impeachment could come this weekend. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>