<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981210.2130.1493 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Many actors from popular TV shows of yesteryear have come back as 
stars of new shows. Mark Scheerer examines some old faces in new places. 
Pleased to meet you. Back when Rick was Ricky, his spoon was silver. 
Now his badge -- Is "NYPD blue." And when Rick Schroeder joined "NYPD 
blue" midseason, he was just the latest late-'80s TV star to show 
up on a new show this fall. Hi, we met. The new "ER" intern, Lucy, 
usually looks lost, but if she also looks familiar -- Told me to run 
away. It's Kellie Martin, who, with her character becca, spent adolescence 
on "life goes on." It was high school. Becca graduated from high school, 
but I never had a graduation ceremony because I was working, so I 
had to graduate on the set. And in the middle of studying at Yale, 
she decided she wanted to be a doctor or at least play one on TV. 
I didn't even have to think twice about giving up school for awhile. 
I mean, I'll graduate eventually. I have one year left. But I was 
so excited because it's the only show I watch. Legally, I did the 
appropriate thing. The chance to play doctor also brought "thirtysomething's" 
Ken olin back to TV in CBS' "L.A. doctors." Meanwhile, his "thirtysomething" 
co-star, Peter horton is doing the Devil's work this season on fox's 
dark drama, "brimstone." I do not have special powers. The WB's "charmed" 
zapped Shannen Doherty back into series television. "90210" may have 
made her famous, but growing up in that TV zip code is a Time she 
doesn't like to remember. It was nine years ago and it's not even 
worth, like, talking about any more as far as I'm concerned. It's 
completely over. For Christina Applegate, star of NBC's new "Jesse," 
the memories are fond. It's just her former character she'd rather 
we forget. I'm hoping -- knock on wood -- that when people see this 
-- those who have, don't even think about her. "her" name was Kelly 
bundy, the short-skirted, dim-witted daughter on fox's long-running, 
"married with children." Nobody knew you could act. And the funny 
thing was that's what I was doing for 11 years was acting. And now 
she's headlining a sitcom, just like other '80s ensemble characters. 
"Murphy brown's" faith Ford, this season, became "Maggie winters." 
And the Olsen twins, who, together, played one character on "full 
house," are a pair of teenagers in "two of a kind." "Cheers'" Ted 
danson wanted to go where everyone knew his name -- on television. 
This time, though, they call him, "Becker." Right now, we're sitting 
in the cafe, the coffee shop that Dr. John Becker comes and eats all 
his meals. Sure, it's vaguely familiar, but even a successful former 
TV bartender couldn't pass up the chance to be a doctor. Mark Scheerer, 
"CNN Entertainment News," New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>