<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981210.1830.0071 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. This day began with a spirited defense of prnz before 
the Judiciary committee. Before too long through the day and into 
the night, the republicans in the house Judiciary committee made one 
attack after another. They were backed up by the president's words 
and legal transcripts and phone logs and testimony of friends. The 
chief republican investigator said the president lied and lied until 
he ran out of people to lie to. After the congressional elections 
it seemed as if the president had dodged the impeachment arrows. Tonight, 
it is not so clear. We begin with NBC's Gwen Ifill on Capitol Hill. 
Dualing lawyers for and against impeachment. Lowell arguing that sending 
four articles of impeachment to the Senate would be a congressional 
abuse of power. Resort to the impeachment process is like resort to 
that fire extinguisher behind the glass door with a big sign that 
reads, break only in case of emergency. We are asking you not to break 
the glass. Republican investigator David schippers is telling Americans 
they should not trust the president. He lied to the people. He lied 
to his cabinet. He lied to his top aides. Now he has lied under oath 
to the Congress of the United States. Both sides used the same piece 
of evidence, a newly-releed videotape of President Clinton recorded 
in the Paula Jones sexual harassment case. I have never had sexual 
relations with Monica Lewinsky. I never had an affair with her. Democrats 
using the tape to prove he was set up, tricked by Paula jones' attorneys. 
Republicans used it to remind undecided lawmakers of the president's 
history of evasion and they argued outright lies. At any time were 
you and Monica Lewinsky alone in the hallway between the oval office 
and this kitchen area? I don't believe so unless we were walking back 
to the back dining room. The president wanted to conceal his private 
sexual relationship from anyone and everyone he could. As my daughter 
would say, dah. Shipper says the president's lies went further when 
he tried to cover up his actions. Of course no one said, "Monica, 
go in there and lie." They didn't have to. Monica knew what was expected 
of her. Newt Gingrich is notifying all 435 members of the house that 
they will be expected to vote and debate impeachment next week. The 
second time in history that has happened. No one knows what the outcome 
will be. Gwen Ifill, NBC news, the capitol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>