<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981210.1830.0935 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" -- the great carry-on debate. Airlines on overload 
and cracking down on passengers who try to cram as much as they possibly 
can into those overhead compartments. During the first ten months 
of this year, more than 419 million passengers flew on domestic flights, 
which, on average were 71% full. But all of those flights were filled 
to capacity with every size and shape of carry on luggage. But those 
days are coming to an end. NBC's Robert Hager tonight "in depth." 
Just in time for holiday travel, airlines cracking down on oversized 
carry-on bags. This time, more than an occasional flight attendant 
stopping an occasional passenger as they board. This time, serious. 
Three large airlines -- united, Delta and southwest -- are challenging 
passengers at some airports as soon as they reach a security checkpoint, 
long before they get to a departure gate. Here's how it works. The 
airlines put a barrier in front of the carry-on security screener. 
If a bag doesn't fit through, passengers must turn it over to be checked 
in the cargo hold. It takes some by surprise. A lady stopped me and 
said my bag was way too big. Sir, you're bag has to fit through there. 
I know that. The flight leaves in ten minutes. I'll check it at the 
gate. I can't stand in line, there is no time. United's using these 
devices in Chicago and Los Angeles and plans to add another 40 at 
airports soon. Delta has them in nine airports. Southwest has them 
in four. In San Diego, a fight. Continental which doesn't want to 
limit the size is suing dealt ta to get rid of the barriers at a checkpoint 
they share. And there's confusion. Different rules for different airlines. 
Northwest and midwest express limit it to only one. The hole in united's 
sizing barrier measures 14" x 9". The hole myrrh urz 14 by 9. dealt 
ta is bigger and southwest bigger still. Southwest's bigger still. 
USAir, America west, Alaska and others all count both briefcases and 
laptop computers as carry-ons. But not northwest doesn't count briefcases. 
Continental doesn't count laptops. And some passengers hope airlines 
won't count other outrageous carry-ons. Flight attendants recall -- 
They had taken the Turkey and all the trimmings to grandmothers and 
they literally had coolers that they had packed everything in. They 
took it on the airplane to grandmothers. One of our retired flight 
attendants has recently told us of people bringing on, literally, 
a kitchen sink. Next week, the flight attendants union will ask for 
one common government rule about carry-ons that all passengers and 
all airlines would have to follow. But so far, the government says 
it doesn't want to get involved. Which could mean more chaos over 
carry-ons at the most chaotic travel time of the year. Robert Hager, 
NBC news. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>