<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0537 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The White House, mobilizing a campaign to stop impeachment, has been 
bouyed by quiet discussions with some leading Republicans on Capitol 
Hill about a deal under which President Clinton would accept a punitive 
censure resolution to escape impeachment and trial, officials said. 
The contacts have not been with the main Republicans driving the impeachment 
movement, Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois and Rep. Tom Delay of Texas, 
but involve other important figures who have given the White House 
some hope but no certainty, the officials said. At the same time, 
as part of the broad effort to sway undecided Republican House moderates, 
presidential aides have contacted 45 potentially persuadable members 
of Congress in the past few days to offer further evidence or explanation 
in the president's defense and to urge them to vote against impeachment, 
according to White House officials. Clinton himself spoke to ``a handful'' 
of House members this week to try to answer their concerns, a White 
House official said Thursday night. The official would not provide 
the members' names. In addition, the White House said that two undecided 
House members, Rick Lazio and Michael Forbes, both of New York, are 
scheduled to travel with the president to the Middle East, giving 
Clinton a further opportunity to make his case. Lazio said Thursday 
that he not yet decided whether to go. Another undecided Republican, 
Jon Fox of Pennsylvania, is also scheduled to accompany the president 
to Israel, according to the White House. The shape of a compromise 
that would save Clinton from impeachment was fuzzy Thursday night. 
But advisers to the president suggested that Republican leaders might 
permit a vote on a harsh censure resolution, including a substantial 
fine to be paid by Clinton, if it appeared that the impeachment bill 
was going to fail. Republican leaders have so far been adamant that 
the full House would vote only on articles of impeachment, not on 
censure. Rep. Robert Livingston, the speaker-elect, refused to say 
Thursday whether he would allow a vote on censure. Livingston said 
Thursday that Republican leaders were not putting pressure on members 
to vote for impeachment, but that the White House is engaged in an 
aggressive anti-impeachment campaign. ``The president's administration 
and his people have not hesitated to lobby,'' Livingston said. ``We 
hear they're lobbying in all sectors.'' Despite Thursday's greater 
sense of optimism among some presidential advisers, the Clinton White 
House has frequently misread the mood of Congress. The current White 
House optimism contrasts with a feeling as recent as last weekend, 
when Clinton and his top aides were deeply pessimistic about the outcome. 
One senior administration official said privately Thursday that the 
White House was now engaged in wishful thinking and predicted that 
the House would vote to impeach Clinton next week. In another sign 
of danger for the president, a senior Republican aide in Congress 
said that four Republicans will announce Friday that they will vote 
to impeach Clinton. In response to pleas from his advisers and fence-sitting 
members of Congress, Clinton is considering a public statement on 
the impeachment matter before he leaves for Jerusalem on Saturday 
or shortly after his return on Tuesday. If the Judiciary Committee 
approves one or more articles of impeachment, as expected, the full 
House will begin debate Thursday. Clinton called Sen. Alfonse D'Amato 
on Thursday to thank him for his statement earlier this week opposing 
impeachment, according to the White House spokesman, Joe Lockhart. 
D'Amato, a bitter critic of Clinton over the past six years, said 
on Tuesday that impeaching the president would be a ``grave mistake'' 
for the nation and a disaster for the Republican Party. Preliminary 
discussions with members of Congress have cheered White House partisans, 
leading to at least momentary optimism that Clinton can avoid a Senate 
impeachment trial on any of the four impeachment articles charging 
perjury, obstruction of justice and abuse of power. ``I think we're 
fine, today,'' said one presidential adviser, speaking on condition 
of anonymity. ``Today,'' he cautioned. White House officials, using 
a variety of intermediaries in the business community and among political 
consultants who work with both parties, have also reached out to Republican 
leaders to negotiate a quick end to the impeachment drama. After two 
days of detailed legal and constitutional defense of the president 
before the House Judiciary Committee, the White House is making a 
subtle attempt to persuade Republicans that impeaching a popular president 
would seriously damage the Republican Party. White House officials 
point to D'Amato's remarks as representative of a substantial number 
of Republicans who want to punish the president but not contravene 
the will of the public, which opposes impeachment by a wide margin. 
D'Amato lost a re-election bid last month after 18 years in the Senate. 
``If we want to be a unified national party and have a country that 
is unified, we have to get this behind us,'' D'Amato said. A political 
adviser to the president who also has close ties to Republicans said 
that he believed D'Amato's comments were carefully timed and cleared 
by senior Republicans as a signal to House Republicans to stop short 
of sending articles of impeachment to the Senate for trial. Neither 
D'Amato nor his aides returned telephone calls seeking comment. John 
Czwartacki, a spokesman for Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott, said 
that Lott had not spoken to D'Amato before his remarks and that D'Amato 
spoke for himself, not for the Senate leadership. The spokesman for 
one Republican who favors censure over impeachment, Rep. Billy Tauzin 
of Louisiana, said that Clinton has not yet adequately explained or 
apologized for his relationship with Monica Lewinsky and that Tauzin's 
vote was still up for grabs. ``Short of a detailed, heartfelt apology 
from the president, I think he's sealed his fate,'' said Ken Johnson, 
Tauzin's spokesman. ``Right now, the only person who can save the 
president from the embarrassment of impeachment is the president himself.'' 
The White House was receptive Thursday to the censure resolution proposed 
by House Judiciary Committee Democrats on Wednesday. ``The president 
believes that people who in good faith come forward with a reasonable 
solution to put this matter behind us, in a prompt way, short of impeachment, 
should be considered,'' Lockhart said. ``And looking at that proposal, 
I think it meets the criteria.'' The Democratic censure resolution 
says that Clinton violated the trust of the public and dishonored 
his office, deserving the ``censure and condemnation of the American 
people and the Congress.'' The resolution leaves open the possibility 
of the indictment of Clinton after he leaves office, but it does not 
require him to pay a fine or appear personally before the House to 
answer the charges against him. Those provisions have been suggested 
by others, including William Weld, the Republican former governor 
of Massachusetts, who appeared as a witness before the Judiciary Committee 
on behalf of the White House on Wednesday. Lockhart would not definitively 
answer whether Clinton was willing to accept a fine as part of a censure 
deal, saying the question had not yet been formally raised by Congress. 
But he said the possibility of indictment after Clinton leaves office 
was an ``acknowledgment of reality'' because the Constitution does 
not grant a former president immunity from criminal prosecution for 
acts while in office. Clinton has not commented on the impeachment 
debate this week but revealed a bit of his state of mind at an observance 
marking Human Rights Day. ``I have learned in ways large and small 
in the last six years that there is within every person a scale of 
justice,'' the president said Thursday, ``and that people can too 
easily be herded into hatred and extremism often out of a belief that 
they have absolute truth and therefore are entitled to absolute power, 
that they can ignore any Constitution, any laws, override any facts.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>