<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0410 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Western diplomats and dissident Yugoslav officials say the forces 
of President Slobodan Milosevic appear to be turning to politically 
motivated arrests to counter the rapidly spreading influence of rebels 
in Kosovo province. Moreover, the assassination last week of a guerrilla 
commander, which was initially thought to be a result of a feud within 
rebel ranks, is now described by diplomats and Yugoslav officials 
as the first in what they predict will be a series of back-and-forth 
retaliatory attacks. Under threats from NATO, Yugoslavia has all but 
stopped conventional attacks on the ethnic Albanian rebels who now 
operate freely in widening areas of the Serbian province. But by resorting 
to traditional methods of repression, the government can strike at 
the rebels and avoid a NATO reaction, Yugoslav officials say. ``It 
will trigger a response,'' a Western diplomat said. ``My expectation 
is the Albanians will do something like set off a bomb in a Serb market 
or assassinate a Serb official. If that happens, then the lid is off 
the next phase of the war, and there will be no stopping it.'' A Yugoslav 
security official who spoke on the condition of anonymity added: ``The 
war will move to the cities, and it will be very bloody. This is a 
dangerous move for everyone.'' But now, the Yugoslav government has 
stepped up one of the most effective measures of a police state: mass 
arrests and trials where the absence of elementary legal protections 
nearly insures convictions. In the last few months, as many as 2,000 
ethnic Albanians have been detained or are being sought for allegedly 
helping the rebels, according to United Nations estimates. As Kosovo's 
Albanians say has often been the case since Milosevic stripped away 
their broad autonomy in 1989 and began imposing tight police control 
on the province, suspects are routinely tortured into signing confessions, 
which almost guarantee that they will be convicted, international 
human rights officials say. Human rights monitors say those detained 
are so terrified they do not reveal that they have been tortured. 
But not always. Under two bare light bulbs dangling from a stained 
ceiling, police guards brought Ismet Gashi, a 36-year-old farmer, 
to stand before a three-judge panel last Friday in the Western city 
of Pec. He stood in an attitude of submission, shoulders down, his 
eyes fixed on the dirty orange carpeting. When they removed the handcuffs, 
he kept his wrists jammed together, silently assuring his guards that 
he was still under their control. A judge read his signed confession. 
He had admitted joining the rebels and being with them in three villages. 
In essence, the confession was the same as hundreds of others in which 
defendants say they fought for the rebels or fed them or in some way 
were a party to what the government calls terrorism. But when the 
chief judge asked Gashi to affirm his confession, the defendant did 
something that made the police officers present begin to fidget. For 
one of them, his right leg began twitching. ``They beat me and made 
me sign that,'' Gashi said, mumbling at first. As he continued, his 
voice gained strength. ``They beat me so much that I could not walk 
afterward. I needed 10 minutes just to put my signature on the paper.'' 
Then he indicated why statements like his were so rare. ``Just before 
court, the police told me they would be waiting for me afterward, 
and if I did not agree with the confession, I would see what happened 
to me,'' he said. ``I've never heard anything like it before,'' said 
Ariana Zherka, a field worker for the Humanitarian Law Center, who 
attended the hearing. ``He will have big problems now.'' Ms. Zherka 
said she thought that the presence of a reporter for an American newspaper 
in the courtroom had emboldened the defendant. The authorities in 
Pristina, the capital of Kosovo, and in Belgrade had no comment on 
the accusations of torture and forced confessions. Like the looting 
and burning of ethnic Albanian villages over the summer, the arrests 
leave ethnic Albanians feeling completely vulnerable to government 
abuse. The government's actions seem to be radicalizing those here 
who had thought their differences with the government could be settled 
peacefully. After talks with U.S. diplomat Richard Holbrooke in October, 
Yugoslavia committed itself to providing amnesty to those arrested 
on terrorism charges, and to stop further arrests. The aim was to 
reduce tensions between the ethnic Albanians who dominate Kosovo and 
the Serbian leaders who govern it. But amnesty has not been granted, 
and the arrests are increasing. While most of those arrested seem 
to be ordinary people, about 10 percent are described by foreign officials 
as community leaders. They are people whose status would allow them 
to counsel restraint as ethnic Albanians try to decide whether to 
follow rebel leaders who advocate war to attain independence, or politicians 
who favor negotiations. Dr. Xhevap Avdijaj, the only ethnic Albanian 
physician in the area around the village of Sinaj, says he favors 
peace. But, he said, after 48 hours in police custody in September, 
he signed a false confession that he was setting up a medical system 
to help the rebels. ``They held me on a table and beat me with sticks. 
At first there was a regular police night stick, then one about this 
long,'' he said, holding his hands about four feet apart. ``They could 
swing that long one really well, and it hit a lot harder.'' ``I was 
completely black and blue from the back of my neck to my feet,'' he 
said. ``But it was nothing compared to others. They carried some out 
of the interrogation room on stretchers.'' Avdijaj said he suffered 
internal bleeding for several days after the beatings. For instance, 
the judge in the case of Gashi, who told the judge his confession 
was the result of torture, can decide to accept the confession anyway. 
Gashi's assertions against the police can be ignored, according to 
foreign lawyers studying the Yugoslav system. Defendants can be charged 
on the basis of statements from witness who do not appear in court, 
foreign diplomats say. They can be held incommunicado for months, 
then allowed to speak with an attorney for a few minutes. ``We can 
talk to our clients about anything, as long as it is not about the 
charges against them or conditions in prison,'' said Destan Rukiqi, 
a defense attorney. When Rukiqi asked a judge to intervene on behalf 
of a client he said was being tortured by police, Rukiqi was detained 
for several days and beaten, he said. His client is one of at least 
five who have been beaten to death in custody, according to foreign 
human rights workers. Foreign diplomats say special police teams have 
been sent to some jails to carry out torture that guards refused to 
do. The diplomats say they believe that the police are using electric 
shock devices. Occasionally lawyers file formal complaints about the 
abuses. But Barbara Davis, of the U.N. Office of the High Commissioner 
for Human Rights, said, ``We do not see those allegations treated 
seriously by judges.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>