<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0327 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Forget the Fountain of Youth. Ford Motor Co. says it has found value 
in the opposite _ a suit of clothes that makes its wearer feel old, 
with stiff joints, dim vision and weak muscles. Ford makes its young 
designers wear the old costume, on the theory that it gives them empathy 
for aging customers, and consequently will lead them to design cars 
that can be used more easily by everyone. General Motors Corp. is 
more direct: it has a focus group it calls the Paragon Team, about 
30 people with arthritis, vision problems, artificial knees or hips, 
or other infirmities. It videotapes the team members as they get in 
and out of vehicles, and as they drive. Some of the best designers 
are young; at Ford, Fred Lupton, an ergonomics engineer, describes 
them as ``new young whippersnappers, coming in fresh off the college 
circuit.'' Lupton, himself only 32, says young designers often have 
trouble with the concept of building cars that can be operated safely 
and comfortably by older drivers. So Ford has developed the ``third 
age suit'' _ ``third'' being the company's diplomatic term for the 
period after middle age. The suit has rigid parts that restrict the 
movement of the neck, torso, elbows and wrists. Designers use it to 
try, for example, to get in the car and fasten the seat belt, which 
requires them to reach across the torso to grab the belt and then 
insert the buckle near the right hip. ``You're really straining,'' 
Lupton said. ``Trying to bend over and look down to your side becomes 
more difficult. With a neck brace, you can't look down as easily.'' 
Another exercise is to try to drive in reverse while wearing the suit. 
Younger drivers generally twist their torsos and put their chins over 
their right shoulders, to look out the back window when they back 
up; wearing the suit, a driver has to do what many older drivers with 
less neck flexibility must do: use the mirrors. In addition, special 
goggles simulate the effects on vision of cataracts. ``Everyone needs 
the awareness the third-age suit can provide them,'' Lupton said. 
``Kind of getting a feel _ what it's like to be arthritic, with a 
reduced range of motion and reduced strength.'' Ford had one suit, 
which commuted between design centers in Detroit and Dunton, England; 
it is currently making a second. General Motors, in contrast, finds 
people who suffer from various afflictions of aging, and brings them 
in to try everything on a car, including inserting and turning the 
ignition key. Judy Greig, the company's engineering group manager 
for harmony and human factors, said one tester had suffered from polio 
and had little strength in his upper body. In 10 cars, she said, he 
needed a special tool to help twist the key; in the 11th, he could 
do it unaided. That car, she said, was ``a competitor's vehicle.'' 
GM studied that design, she said, improved on it, and put it in some 
Cadillacs. The company found that older drivers often caught their 
feet on the piece of plastic just inside the door sill that holds 
the carpeting in place. It was not obvious in person, but it showed 
up on videotapes, she said. So GM switched to a more rounded design, 
she said. Members of the Paragon Team are unpaid volunteers, Ms. Greig 
said; sometimes the company feeds them lunch. ``They are so excited 
someone is asking them for their input,'' she said. Both companies 
say a major safety factor is size and contrast of dashboard displays, 
and susceptibility to glare, which may be a bigger problem for older 
drivers. Another problem is designing all cars for drivers with limited 
strength or dexterity; Ford and GM, for example, say that the Crown 
Victoria and the Cadillac, respectively, are favored by older drivers, 
but some older customers on fixed incomes will buy smaller cars that 
may be designed mostly for recent high school graduates looking for 
something inexpensive to buy and run. One challenge, Ms. Greig said, 
is ``to accommodate the aging population without alienating the able-bodied 
population.'' For many reasons, including factors like the ones mimicked 
by Ford's third-age suit, older people have a high death rate in crashes, 
even though many probably travel fewer miles by car than younger people. 
According to the National Safety Council, of every 100,000 people 
aged 65 to 74, about 17 die each year in vehicle accidents, compared 
with 16 for the population as a whole. Among people 75 and older, 
the figure was nearly 33, almost twice the rate for the general population. 
With growing seat-belt use among younger people, safer cars and safer 
highways, the death rate is falling in general, but it is rising for 
those 65 and older. Some of the old people who are killed are pedestrians, 
but the old people in the cars are also at risk. One design feature 
that engineers have not adapted to older people is air bags. Nearly 
all of the adults killed by air bags in low-speed crashes were elderly. 
Doctors say the reason is probably that their bones cannot withstand 
the impact. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>