<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0549 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Abe Hirschfeld, the New York real estate magnate known for quixotic 
forays into politics and other high-profile misadventures, was charged 
Thursday with hiring a hit man to kill a longtime business partner 
with whom he had a bitter feud and survivor-takes-control agreements 
covering many of their properties. The 79-year-old businessman, who 
made headlines by offering Paula Jones $1 million this fall to settle 
her sexual harassment lawsuit against President Clinton, was accused 
of giving an intermediary $75,000 in cash to pay a hired gun to kill 
his 73-year-old associate, Stanley Stahl, in 1996, and of supplying 
photos and other information about the target in a note in his own 
handwriting. The Manhattan district attorney, Robert Morgenthau, who 
said he also had witnesses and tape recordings to prove the case, 
said Hirschfeld promised to make a second payment of more than $75,000 
after Stahl was slain. But, he said, the scheme fell apart for murky 
reasons, and Stahl got wind of it, went to the authorities and began 
riding around in a bulletproof limousine. ``I wouldn't feel too happy 
if somebody paid $150,000 to have me knocked off,'' Morgenthau said 
at a news conference when asked whether Stahl's life had ever been 
in danger. He noted, however, that Stahl, a partner of Hirschfeld's 
for decades until their relationship soured, was still alive. ``Not 
guilty _ it's all lies,'' Hirschfeld declared at a Criminal Court 
arraignment in which he was ordered released on $1 million cash bail 
_ to which he responded by pulling out his wallet and offering the 
judge the $1 million bank check that had been made out to Paula Jones 
but never accepted. The court did not accept it either, and gave Hirschfeld 
until Monday to pay the bail. Afterward, speaking to reporters and 
television cameras outside the Criminal Courts Building, Hirschfeld 
amplified on his innocence. He charged that a former secretary, Rosemary 
Singer, and a former construction supervisor of his, Joe Veltri, had 
proposed killing Stahl, and had threatened to accuse him of plotting 
a murder-for-hire if he did not pay them $500,000. He said he refused. 
``I never hired nobody to kill him,'' Hirschfeld said. ``I don't get 
one penny of benefit by killing him.'' He insisted that his partnership 
agreements with Stahl, canceled last February, provided that the heirs 
of each would be the beneficiaries in the event that either died; 
prosecutors, however, say the surviving partner would have retained 
control over most of the properties. Hirschfeld acknowledged having 
given $75,000 to Veltri in the fall of 1996, but he called it a bonus 
for 20 years of loyal work. Ms. Singer, his secretary for 32 years, 
and Veltri were subsequently dismissed for reasons that were unclear 
Thursday. Efforts to reach both Thursday night were unavailing. Thursday's 
events began with a bizarre scene shortly after midnight when Morgenthau's 
detectives went to Hirschfeld's home at 825 Fifth Ave. to arrest him. 
Morgenthau said Hirschfeld, indicted earlier this week, had been invited 
to surrender voluntarily, but had refused and had even fired his lawyer, 
Charles Haydon, for suggesting that he accept the offer. But Hirschfeld 
insisted that he had an agreement with the prosecutor to surrender 
at 7:30 a.m., and when the detectives showed up at his apartment he 
first proposed that they all stay until morning _ he in handcuffs, 
if necessary _ and get a good night's sleep. He said he offered them 
coffee and desert. When they refused, he and other witnesses said, 
he dropped his pants and suggested a lewd act, called 911 to report 
a robbery in progress and, after the police arrived and the confusion 
was cleared up, was taken away in handcuffs. ``Oh yes,'' he said, 
``I called 911 because they wanted to take me in naked.'' Held overnight 
in a detectives' squad room, Hirschfeld called various members of 
the news media to protest his innocence and to complain about his 
treatment at the hands of Morgenthau, who had obtained an indictment 
of the developer last year on state income-tax evasion charges, a 
case that is still pending. After what he called a night on the floor, 
Hirschfeld called the media again to complain that he had not been 
allowed to attend a news briefing at which Morgenthau announced his 
indictment and arrest. In the afternoon, Hirschfeld went to court 
in a crumpled blue suit and a gray shirt open at the neck. His sparse 
hair was tousled and a light stubble flecked his round face. Arraigned 
on charges of criminal solicitation in the second degree, which is 
subject to seven years in prison, Hirschfeld, still in handcuffs, 
pleaded not guilty before Acting State Supreme Court Justice Laura 
Drager. Assistant District Attorney Gilda Mariani asked for $2.5 million 
cash bail. But Hirschfeld's lawyer, Theodore Kupferman, noted that 
his client was free on a $1 million bond in the 123-count tax evasion 
case, and that a judge in that pending case allowed Hirschfeld to 
travel to Israel. ``If he wanted to flee, that was his chance,'' Kupferman 
said. Hirschfeld, who was born in Poland and emigrated from Israel 
to America in the 1950s, and Stahl, the son of a Brooklyn butcher, 
had been partners in real estate since the 1960s, and both made millions. 
Stahl, a quieter man, staked everything he had in 1962 to build a 
50-story office tower at 277 Park Ave., which became the centerpiece 
of a business that includes office and apartment buildings, some jointly 
held with Hirschfeld. Hirschfeld made a fortune in parking lots and 
other real estate, and has run largely self-financed but losing races 
for lieutenant governor of New York and for Congress and Manhattan 
borough president. He had a brief, turbulent reign as publisher of 
The New York Post in 1993. Court records show that many of their partnerships 
were ownership agreements for particular buildings, including 405 
E. 54th St., 404 E. 55th St. and 360 E. 55th St. But their relationship 
began to sour around 1991, when each became suspicious that the other 
was cheating. The suspicions led to lawsuits in which Hirschfeld demanded 
that Stahl sell out or buy out Hirschfeld's interests. Stahl refused 
and counter-sued. Hirschfeld charged that Stahl discriminated against 
blacks in renting apartments; Stahl said the charges were brought 
by ``agent provocateurs'' hired by Hirschfeld. There were disputes 
about who should have check-signing privileges, where money should 
be kept, how company books should be kept and other matters. The disputes, 
Hirschfeld contended, made it impossible for him to file his tax returns. 
The suits were full of invective. Stahl called Hirschfeld ``incredible.'' 
Hirschfeld said Stahl was ``like Alice in Wonderland,'' and charged 
``generosity has never been Stahl's strong suit.'' Neither side budged 
and the feud reached a nadir in 1996. Morgenthau charged that Hirschfeld 
then paid $75,000 as a first installment to have Stahl killed. The 
cash, he said, was given by an intermediary to ``a person in the back 
seat of a chauffeured limousine parked near Hirschfeld's office building 
at 15 Penn Plaza.'' Later, Morgenthau said, Hirschfeld's intermediary 
delivered a second envelope bearing ``photographs of Stahl taken by 
a private investigator'' and ``a note written by Hirschfeld with Stahl's 
name, address, a telephone number and his car's license plate number.'' 
Other investigators said the plot went awry, before the second installment 
was paid, when the intermediary was ``roughed up'' _ it was unclear 
by whom or why. The intermediary then disclosed the scheme to Stahl, 
who informed the authorities, and the investigation that led to Thursday's 
charges was begun. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>