<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0317 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gabriel Orozco, a clear-eyed romantic, is one of the more ingenious 
artists to come along in years, and if you doubt me I suggest you 
go to his ambitious new show at Marian Goodman and play a little Ping-Pong. 
You may recall his debut at the Goodman gallery, in 1994, when he 
stuck yogurt container lids on the walls, the ordinary clear plastic 
kind of lids with the blue rims and the expiration dates stamped on 
them. They were the only things in the room. Needless to say, it didn't 
seem like much, but the nature of good new art is that often you don't 
recognize it; then gradually, by virtue of its quality, it reorders 
your taste, which must adjust to accommodate it. We think taste is 
synonymous with refinement, which is another way of saying that we 
think taste narrows through experience. Actually the reverse should 
be true. Taste should broaden if you really make an effort to look. 
That is one lesson of Orozco's work. Since his first show, he seems 
to have been ubiquitous. Last summer some of his photographs were 
in a group exhibition. Against a Manhattan skyline he had arranged 
junk to mimic the buildings. Another photograph showed tire marks 
he had made by riding a bicycle through a puddle. The work seemed 
slight, but it was funny and also vaguely melancholy, the kind of 
modest art that waits for you to come to it. Now there's the current 
show, which dispels all lingering reservations. But of course you 
are still wondering about the Ping-Pong. A few years ago Orozco concocted 
an oval pool table with no pockets. This time he has come up with 
an X-shaped Ping-Pong table with a lily pond in the center: call it 
Giverny for the rumpus room. (He calls it ``Ping-Pond Table.'') Three 
or four people can play singles at a time, with the choice of hitting 
either across the water or sideways, although there are no rules. 
You make them up. Apart from being an amusing twist on an old Surrealist 
idea, the table is about pleasure _ simple pleasure _ which is almost 
a novel concept in the art world these days. I played with two people 
for a few minutes, had a ball and didn't worry about the meaning of 
the whole thing, which you too are blissfully free to ignore. Except 
that there is a serious sculptural element to the work involving our 
participation in it. And to recognize it is to acknowledge a certain 
ineffable sensibility in Orozco's art: One might say the Ping-Pong 
table is less about its own eccentric shape than about the space that 
we occupy with it and what we do in that space. Space, both physical 
and psychological, is the subject. I gather, along these lines, that 
as a boy in Mexico, Orozco listened to his mother play the piano, 
and for whatever reason he also fixated on the space behind the instrument. 
In the show is ``Maman,'' a compact one-room pavilion with a pitched 
slate roof, two upright pianos acting as walls. In this case, space 
is turned roughly inside-out; the inside, where you can sit, is behind 
the two pianos, which you play only when outside the pavilion. Some 
time ago Orozco also sliced a vintage Citroen DS lengthwise into three 
parts, removing the middle section and suturing the other two. Being 
in the eviscerated car was a little like sitting in the pavilion: 
snug. In France, the old Citroen recalls bygone French style and bourgeois 
comfort, and when Orozco's car was exhibited there it was inevitably 
interpreted as an allegory of straitened times. There's nothing explicit 
about its message, just as it is possible to interpret the Ping-Pong 
table as a variant on the old metaphor of sport as social model, but 
the interpretation is optional. Unlike many young artists, Orozco 
doesn't lecture. Sometimes you can detect a hint of politics in his 
art yet only peripherally, the way you may see actors moving on a 
darkened stage only by looking away from them. In any case, ``La DS'' 
derived its impact from what it lacked, meaning the missing middle 
of the automobile. Orozco made people focus on the space cut out of 
the car, on something that was not there. Thinking back to his first 
show, I'd now say that the yogurt caps were calculated to cause a 
similar effect by making people uncomfortably aware of the gallery's 
emptiness. The installation was about the psychological gap between 
what we expected or hoped to see and what we did see. Its subject 
wasn't the esthetics of yogurt packaging but our interaction with 
an empty room. If this line of argument sounds a little convoluted, 
let me also endorse Orozco more straightforwardly by saying that his 
work can be very beautiful. Proust, who understood beauty as well 
as anyone else, once went to a concert that he loved but his friends 
didn't. He decided that they didn't like it because it had been truly 
beautiful: ``For true beauty is the only thing that cannot respond 
to what a romantic imagination anticipates. Everything else lives 
up to those preconceived ideas: dexterity is amazing, vulgarity soothing, 
sensuousness thrilling, claptrap dazzling. But beauty which from the 
beginning of all things has been joined to truth in an eternal friendship 
has not got all these charms at its disposal.'' One big room in Orozco's 
present show includes materials he recently picked from Dumpsters 
in New York City. He rented a truck, which he drove around SoHo and 
the West Village, stopping at construction containers, assembling 
chunks of cement, discarded cables, furniture and soda bottles, then 
photographing what he had put together. When he was finished at one 
place he packed everything into the truck and drove on to the next 
site. It's a strategy that links him to artists from Kurt Schwitters 
through Gordon Matta-Clark to Richard Tuttle, but this is not to say 
that Orozco is simply derivative. All art comes from somewhere, otherwise 
it makes no sense, the trick for an artist being, as Delacroix once 
said, to recognize what ``is still not enough'' in the art that already 
exists. In Orozco's case what he found by rummaging through Dumpsters 
is installed in a room with wire dandelions that he had made in Paris, 
and with aluminum sculptures, enlargements of wax impressions of the 
inside of his tightened fist. The impressions look a little like human 
hearts. The whole thing sounds inchoate, which it certainly can seem, 
until you get over your initial resistance to it and begin to focus 
on the relationships among objects. Then, surprisingly, a formal logic 
emerges out of the combination of made and found, industrial and naturally 
derived materials. Art is ultimately about empathy, toward which Orozco's 
work consistently inclines us. He has made a few videos, which the 
gallery is showing, and I recommend them, especially if you still 
have doubts but also if you want to grasp his work at its core. He 
made the videos by walking for a day, with no plan, taping what caught 
his attention, arranging a few objects that he found along the way 
but mostly just keeping his eyes open. The videos are unedited. In 
one, made in Amsterdam, the camera follows a rut in the street, which 
becomes a kind of abstract, wavering line, then focuses on a spinning 
concrete mixer with a blue circle painted on it, then presents several 
portraits of passers-by, and also finds a geometry in some folded 
newspapers in a grid of mail slots. At one point the camera jerks 
and you sense Orozco looking for something to look at. You see how 
he sees, in other words, which is intensely. And you are made aware 
of the crucial question at the heart of his work: What is the point 
of looking if your mind isn't open to what you see? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>