<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0223 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
``Nobody'd ever believe that you'd be capable of doing what you've 
done,'' the once-wholesome main character in ``A Simple Plan'' is 
told by his wife, at a point when he can barely believe it himself. 
Though he begins the story innocently enough, Hank Mitchell (Bill 
Paxton) winds up digging himself ever deeper into a hole that's impossible 
to escape. However straightforwardly these events are described, they 
become ever more gripping and unsettling as the film proceeds. When 
you get the shivers watching this wintry tale unfold, it won't be 
from the cold. Exactly how and why a chance event escalates to such 
intensity is at the heart of this quietly devastating thriller directed 
by Sam Raimi, the cult horror director (``The Evil Dead'') who makes 
a flawless segue into mainstream storytelling. And in an acting collaboration 
that is as fine as their first, and could share its title (``One False 
Move''), Paxton and Billy Bob Thornton play out the consequences of 
a harmless-sounding error in judgment that winds up leveling everything 
in its path. Since this is a year in which films come in pairs (dueling 
World War II epics, etc.), ``A Simple Plan'' is one of two bleak snowbound 
dramas so well acted and sharply astute that they light up the holiday 
season. (Paul Schrader's forthcoming ``Affliction,'' shown at the 
Sundance Film Festival, is the other.) Adapted by Scott B. Smith from 
his suspenseful and highly cinematic best seller, it begins with the 
irresistible hook of a windfall that drops out of the sky. Hank and 
two other men accidentally happen onto a small airplane that has crashed 
while carrying $4.4 million in cargo. What they do about this, and 
how they do it, will shape their fates forever. The plan of the title: 
Hank decides he will take the money and hide it for a while, waiting 
to see if anyone comes to claim it. He assumes this responsibility 
because he is the only member of the trio who has a job (at a feed 
store) and shows any sign of responsibility. The other two men are 
Hank's childlike brother Jacob, who is played with both sweetness 
and an edge of danger by Thornton, and Jacob's friend Lou (Brent Briscoe), 
later described as ``a 40-year-old out-of-work high-school dropout 
who's proud when people call him the town drunk.'' So Hank, who has 
a tidy little home, a pretty wife and a baby on the way, is clearly 
the man in charge. But Hank's wife, Sarah (Bridget Fonda), turns out 
to be an unexpectedly powerful player in this drama. Right away, she 
suggests that Hank return $500,000 to the plane, to ward off suspicions 
of looting. This winds up having terrible consequences when a nosy 
farmer gets in the way, and it's only the beginning of the story's 
lethal complications. As they mount, the film becomes ever more enveloping 
as a well-honed morality tale rising to a near-biblical level of punishment 
for its characters' transgressions. By the time Sarah gets to the 
maternity ward, nursing her newborn baby as she thinks only of further 
scheming for Hank, the story has taken on an air of eerily contemporary 
tragedy. The film's simple visual scheme favors muted tones (with 
effectively plain production design by Patrizia Von Brandenstein, 
Alar Kivilo's stark, unfussy cinematography and Danny Elfman's insinuating 
score) but its moral distinctions are alarmingly gray. It is by behaving 
expediently and self-protectively that Hank begins his series of missteps 
(``I can't afford to go to prison, Jacob!'') in a downfall captured 
in all its discreet horror. Paxton's fine, sturdy performance makes 
it all the more troubling to discover what lurks behind the smooth 
facade of hard-working Hank. Smith's screenplay refines his book to 
create some especially strong, wrenching encounters between the two 
brothers, scenes that pivot on Thornton's haunting mix of menace and 
fragility in the film's showier role. Their last encounter here is 
searingly realized, powerfully backed up by all the layers of complicity 
and betrayal that have come before. By the time it occurs, the viewer 
has watched an ostensibly small film turn into something that, despite 
its title, isn't simple at all. PRODUCTION NOTES: `A SIMPLE PLAN' 
Directed by Sam Raimi; written by Scott B. Smith, based on his novel; 
director of photography, Alar Kivilo; edited by Arthur Coburn and 
Eric L. Beason; music by Danny Elfman; production designer, Patrizia 
Von Brandenstein; produced by James Jacks and Adam Schroeder; released 
by Paramount Pictures. RUNNING TIME: 120 minutes. RATING: ``A Simple 
Plan'' is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult 
guardian). It includes profanity and deadly violence. CAST: Bill Paxton 
(Hank), Billy Bob Thornton (Jacob), Bridget Fonda (Sarah), Brent Briscoe 
(Lou), Gary Cole (Baxter), Becky Ann Baker (Nancy), Chelcie Ross (Carl) 
and Jack Walsh (Tom Butler). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>