<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0307 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Citing persistent ``deterioration across the economy,'' the Bank of 
England lowered its benchmark interest rate Thursday, by half a percentage 
point, the third cut in as many months and the second consecutive 
time it did so by a half-point. The cut, to 6.25 percent, reflected 
anxiety over the slowing performance of the British economy and the 
growing threat posed to it by turmoil abroad. ``The prospects for 
global activity appear to have weakened, and commodity prices have 
fallen further'' since its last cut on Nov. 5, the central bank said 
in a statement. The move came a week after 10 of the 11 nations joining 
a single European currency, the euro, lowered their rates to 3 percent. 
The cut is intended to give some relief to manufacturers and exporters 
that have attributed a deep slump in sales to Britain's higher rates 
and the strong pound. It still left the securities repurchase rate, 
the minimum at which the central bank lends to commercial banks, more 
than double that in the rest of Europe and the highest in the Group 
of Seven industrialized nations. Financial markets had expected a 
rate cut, and stock and bond prices showed little change. The FTSE 
index fell 8.80 points, or less than 0.2 percent, to 5,660.30, and 
the yield on government 10-year bonds held near a record low of 4.49 
percent. The pound held at a one-month low of 2.76 German marks. Many 
industrial nations have reduced rates in recent months in an effort 
to head off a global recession caused by financial crises worldwide. 
The Bank of England's decision brought a swift response from lenders, 
with the principal mortgage banks all cutting their rates by the same 
half-point within minutes of the bank's announcement. Although the 
housing market has not suffered the same problems as other sectors 
of the nation's sluggish economy, there has been a marked slowdown 
in sales over the last six months. Kevin Gardiner, senior economist 
at Morgan Stanley International, said ``survey data from the manufacturing 
and service sectors have been consistently negative since last month,'' 
with a growth in inventories particularly worrisome. This indication 
of a decline in consumer confidence was cited by business leaders 
and retailers worried about poor early holiday sales. ``A cut of at 
least half a percent was essential to boost flagging consumer demand 
before the Christmas period and also to help encourage sterling on 
its downward path,'' said Dr. Ian Peters, deputy director general 
of the British Chambers of Commerce. Kate Barker, chief economic adviser 
at the Confederation of British Industry, welcomed Thursday's announcement 
as evidence that the central bank was alert to the dangers of deflation 
but warned that more cuts were needed. ``With economic weakness now 
spreading out well beyond manufacturing, this cut is unlikely to be 
the last and will not in itself ward off the impending downturn in 
growth,'' she said. Jeremy Batstone, an analyst at NatWest Stockbrokers, 
said the move was praised in the City of London financial district, 
where most traders had expected only a quarter-point drop. ``It is 
a clear sign that the authorities are becoming concerned about the 
risk of deflation in the economy rather than inflation,'' he said. 
The Bank of England was given independence last year to set interest 
rates free of government direction, but its nine-member monetary policy 
committee is still obliged to maintain them at a level that prevents 
inflation from sliding more than 1 percent above or below the current 
2.5 percent target. Despite government forecasts of continued growth, 
many economists are predicting that Britain will experience a sharp 
slowdown or a small recession in the first half of 1999. Companies 
have issued profit warnings not just in Britain's depressed manufacturing 
industry but also in the service sector, which has been held up by 
Prime Minister Tony Blair's government as the engine propelling Britain 
into its future role as a leader in the modern globalized economy. 
The annual survey by MORI, a leading polling organization, of Britain's 
senior executives showed that only 1 percent of those questioned expected 
the economy to improve in 1999, and 89 percent predicted it woulf 
worsen. In the same survey a year ago, the figures were 50 percent 
with a positive view and only 12 percent with a negative one. Union 
leaders have been concerned by falling factory orders and jobs lost 
in recent plant closings and consolidations. They said they had hoped 
for an even bigger rate cut. John Edmonds, general secretary of the 
GMB union, which has 740,000 members, said the half-point reduction 
was a ``pathetic'' response and accused the central bank of ``living 
in a parallel universe.'' ``They should come into the real world,'' 
he added. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>