<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0249 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some exhibitions have hard acts to follow. ``Cubism and Fashion,'' 
at the Metropolitan Museum of Art's Costume Institute, is saddled 
with at least two. One is last year's big winter show at the institute, 
an over-the-top survey of Gianni Versace. This exercise in elegant 
kitsch was exhilarating fun, but it had roughly the same relationship 
to serious design that the motorcycles in the Guggenheim's dazzling 
summer show had to real art. With ``Cubism and Fashion,'' Richard 
Martin, the curator of the institute, has wisely taken a different 
tack, reinstating both historical perspective and the wide-angle view. 
His new show traces the influence of modern art's most earthshaking 
movement on the work of several generations of 20th-century designers, 
rather than on a single contemporary career. It's a real palate cleanser, 
so pure and restrained as to seem almost penitential, as if to compensate 
for last year's excesses. Which brings us to the second act. This 
exhibition may also feel wan because it is based on an idea that is 
either not fully developed or not inherently rich enough to begin 
with. The two possibilities can nag at the viewer's mind. The recent 
standard for exhibitions linking fashion and 20th-century art is ``Fashion 
and Surrealism, '' which Martin organized in 1987 at the Fashion Institute 
of Technology (where he was worked as a curator from 1980 to 1993). 
Ambitious and exhaustively detailed, this show represented a near-perfect 
fit that Cubism, with its emphasis on abstract form and structure, 
might never match, even under ideal conditions. When you think about 
it, there's little about Surrealism that doesn't dovetail with fashion, 
from its focus on the female form and physical beauty to its extensive 
uses of photography and altered or displaced objects. And there are 
frequent crossovers _ Man Ray's photographs, Dali's fabric designs, 
Bellmer's dolls and Duchamp's store window, for example, all of which 
Martin included or referred to in his Surrealist show. (In the Cubism 
exhibition, he includes reproductions of famous modern paintings _ 
Picasso's ``Demoiselles d'Avignon,'' Duchamp's ``Nude Descending a 
Staircase'' _ color coordinated with the clothes.) In addition, ``Fashion 
and Surrealism'' unfolded over 8,000 square feet at the FIT, nearly 
twice the amount of gallery space at the Costume Institute. This suggests 
a third act, one that can't be followed because it isn't over. It 
centers on the question: what does the Met want from the Costume Institute? 
Its commitment doesn't seem to be as strong as it used to be, and 
this can limit curatorial creativity. After the reign of Diana Vreeland, 
whose sprawling exhibitions put the institute on the map in the 1970s 
and '80s, the museum severely reduced and relocated its galleries, 
shrinking space from 14,000 square feet to 5,000. In addition, its 
exhibitions are limited almost exclusively to items in the Met's permanent 
collection. (Everything in ``Cubism and Fashion'' is owned by the 
Met except two 1998 dresses lent by Geoffrey Beene.) While Martin 
has done some outstanding shows at the Met, few of them have matched 
the breadth or depth of his FIT efforts. Thus, the nagging thoughts. 
It is hard to know exactly what is being stretched to the limit: the 
idea or the Costume Institute's collection. Or what makes the show 
feel meager: again, the idea or the institute's galleries. But that 
shouldn't stop you from looking and learning what you can. Martin's 
thesis is that Cubism's radical reorientation of painting's pictorial 
conventions _ its flattening of space, its emphasis on structure and 
its preference for indeterminate forms, layered transparencies and 
multiple viewpoints _ played an important role in the modernization 
of dress that began around the turn of the century. His approach is 
largely formal and highly focused. He acknowledges other influences 
only occasionally: mentioned, for example, are Japanese kimonos, whose 
simplified forms were extremely influential in those years, as demonstrated 
by ``Japonism in Fashion: Japan Dresses the West,'' a related exhibition 
at the Brooklyn Museum of Art. And he doesn't touch on the increasing 
liberation of women during the same period, which surely had repercussions. 
Still, the clothes speak for themselves, at least in the first gallery. 
Here their dramatic changes in bulk and structure signal the profound 
rise in the physical and mental freedom of women that occurred between 
the late 1890s and the end of World War I. Martin makes the point 
with three opulently upholstered ball gowns from the turn of the century, 
elegant armor that camouflaged, extended and encased the wearer's 
body. He then turns to the designs of Callot Soeurs, who retained 
richly embroidered fabrics, but reduced the volume of the dress to 
a simple cylinder that mirrored the body far more accurately. Even 
more reduced is an evening dress from around 1920 by Paul Poiret. 
It forsakes even the cylinder for the flat plane of fabric, wrapping 
and draping the figure in what are essentially large squares of red 
silk deeply bordered in navy blue. Thus, in two decades, the female 
silhouette comes into view. In one of the show's best wall texts, 
Martin describes late 19th-century dresses as inherently sculptural, 
stand-alone garments that looked very much the same on the body or 
hanging in the closet. In contrast, modern clothes tended to be flat 
and limp, their structural logic incomprehensible until someone put 
them on. For the first half of the exhibition, Martin follows the 
different Cubist innovations he has defined from garment to garment, 
through examples profound and superficial. Jacques Doucet is represented 
by a day suit whose jacket is little more than an asymmetrical plane 
folded around the body. A dress-and-coat ensemble by the designer 
Nemser features a fairly silly dress printed in a routine Cubist-Art 
Deco cityscape pattern (its skirt has round-topped panels of pleats 
reminiscent of the Chrysler Building). Non-Cubist signs of modernity 
enter the discussion: the abstracted plant forms in white applique 
on a blue silk dress by Mariska Karasz is seen as reflecting the influence 
of Matisse and modern artists' attention to peasant designs. The show's 
heart is a cluster of nine dresses by Madeleine Vionnet, who is similarly 
central to Brooklyn's ``Japonism'' show. Undoubtedly the result of 
synthesized influences, Vionnet's breathtaking economies of dress 
still look like modernism incarnate. Transparent, planar, structurally 
declarative, they reduced the garment to its scaffolding and reconstituted 
it so that every seam and stitch figured in the whole, and the body's 
scaffolding was revealed as well. Fabric played a new role, as Vionnet 
was the first designer to exploit the bias cut. It enabled her to 
reorient seams in sweeping diagonal lines and fanning curves, and 
created an effortless flow and body-skimming effect. Nothing is added; 
it's all in the fabric. When Vionnet wanted to complicate things, 
she might make a strap look like a bit of scarf casually draped over 
a shoulder. Her specialties included groups of tiny pin-tucks that 
measured a skirt or dress in fine parallel lines. In a maroon silk 
chemise dress from 1926-27, ranks of pin-tucks descend diagonally 
from each shoulder to a pin-tucked skirt. Where they meet, at the 
garment's dropped waist, they create a delicate gridded square that 
magnifies the fabric's weave, and its bias tilt. After Vionnet, this 
exhibition comes to life only intermittently, usually when her inventions 
are evoked, as in the deconstructed garments of the Japanese designers 
Rei Kawakubo and Issey Miyake. Its final third, devoted to postwar 
and recent fashion, includes a startlingly plain white-and-navy evening 
gown by Jo Copeland, and a dress and a suit by Christian Francis Roth, 
whose bold geometric fabrics glibly quote earlier designers glibly 
quoting Cubism. A glittery bodysuit ensemble by Versace, luxuriously 
beaded with layered motifs, is suitably collagelike. And a suit by 
Charles James, which was once owned by the painter Lee Krasner, reiterates 
some of Vionnet's inventive use of seams, but in stiff, heavy fabric 
that takes one back to the upholstered evening gowns at the show's 
start. This section also includes ball gowns by Yves Saint Laurent, 
one with a noticeable bustle, the other with the low, square neckline, 
fitted bodice and full contrasting overskirt of an 18th-century French 
gown. And the bright geometries of a Perry Ellis sweater, said to 
be inspired by the work of Sonia Delaunay, only makes one wonder why 
Delaunay's designs are not included. The answer, one assumes, is that 
the Met doesn't own any. It would have been interesting to see what 
this show would look like with more space and greater freedom of choice. 
``Cubism and Fashion'' remains at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, 
Fifth Avenue at 82nd Street, through March 14. The exhibition is made 
possible by Prada. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>