<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0357 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An Egyptian gas pipeline is snaking its way east across the Sinai 
desert, laying the groundwork for a regional power network that could 
bind Israel closer to its Arab neighbors and radically change its 
energy and security strategy. By directly fueling electric power plants, 
as its builders intend, the Sinai pipeline would end Israel's dependence 
on sources a continent or more away for vital energy imports. Israeli 
officials agree that the Egyptian connection would be the easiest 
and cheapest way to satisfy spiraling domestic power demands. But 
before concluding a deal, the two countries must overcome intense 
mutual mistrust. Egypt has irked Israel by linking progress on gas 
sales to the Palestinian peace talks, and at the moment the pipeline 
is to stop 25 miles short of the Israeli border. ``These decisions 
should be made on purely economic grounds, and economically the Egyptian 
project is best,'' said Natan Sharansky, Israel's minister of trade 
and industry. ``But the Egyptians have wanted to make this a political 
issue, a way to apply political pressure.'' Ahmed Maher Said, Egypt's 
ambassador to the United States, said in a telephone interview that 
Egypt wants the project to succeed. ``If it is a question of a guarantee 
that the supply of gas would continue without political vetoes, this 
could be done with a statement of intent,'' he said. ``It does make 
good business sense. To me, it seems like this is a go situation.'' 
The new pipeline _ originating in Nile Delta gas fields and paralleling 
the Sinai's northern Mediterranean shore _ is now being built by a 
50-50 partnership between the state-owned Egyptian General Petroleum 
Corp. and the giant Italian conglomerate ENI, a developer of Egypt's 
40 trillion cubic feet of natural gas reserves. Within two years, 
gas is expected to begin coursing through the 36-inch-diameter, 150-mile-long 
pipeline to what is now its official destination: El Arish, an isolated 
Sinai beach town just west of Israel and the Palestinian-administered 
Gaza Strip. The Egyptian government has not yet put forward a formal 
offer for a long-term supply deal. And Israel says only that it is 
``currently considering the option'' of buying the gas from Egypt. 
But the builders are banking on a deal: The scale and trajectory of 
the project make it clear that Israel is the pipeline's viable market, 
and ENI does not disguise its expectation that the pipeline will extend 
well beyond El Arish. Already, ENI has signed an agreement in principle 
to supply gas to the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, and company plans 
show the pipeline continuing to Israel's three main coastal power 
plants. ``This is a natural start for a system that could extend throughout 
the region,'' Enzo Viscusi, an ENI spokesman in Rome, said. ``It has 
great implications.'' The northern Sinai project represents the revival 
_ but this time with contracts, cash and backhoes _ of the ``peace 
pipeline'' idea discussed by Egypt and Israel in the afterglow of 
the Oslo peace accords five years ago. The proposal foundered with 
the chilling of Israeli-Arab relations after the Likud government 
of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu came to power in 1996 
and put the old Labor government's assumptions on the peace process 
under review. Egypt was unwilling to proceed with big cross-border 
business deals unless Israel continued withdrawing from Palestinian 
territories as required by the Oslo land-for-security plan. Israel 
was infuriated, saying its negotiations with Palestinians should have 
no bearing on negotiations for gas contracts. In recent months, a 
flurry of deal-making and ditch-digging resuscitated the pipeline, 
at a cost estimated by ENI at more than $200 million, just as President 
Clinton's Wye Plantation mediation effort led to the resumption of 
Israeli pullbacks from the West Bank. Clinton is to arrive in Israel 
on Saturday night for further talks. ``The situation today is that 
the government of Israel wants to buy the gas, and we are waiting 
for a decision from Egypt to sell us the gas,'' said Yossei Maiman, 
president of the Merhav Group, an Israeli energy contractor. Six months 
ago, Egyptian Petroleum Minister Hamdi Banbi declared that Egypt's 
commercial gas producers would be permitted to export to Israel, and 
expressed hope that political obstacles could be resolved. The Israeli 
government says it wants that policy stated more formally and emphatically. 
The ``formal consent and commitment of the government of Egypt is 
a prerequisite for a natural gas supply agreement,'' Israel's Ministry 
of National Infrastructure said in a statement. ``This is required 
because of the linkage made in the past, by the government of Egypt, 
between the commercial negotiations and the political situation.'' 
Yet to Egypt, the two issues are inextricably related as ``a matter 
of the general political context in the Arab world,'' according to 
Said. ``If the implementation of the Wye agreement proceeds, the project's 
possibility of proceeding is greatly enhanced,'' he said. ``If Wye 
doesn't proceed, it will truly be difficult.'' As ENI acknowledges, 
however, a gas-supply arrangement with the Palestinian Authority cannot 
be concluded without the approval and technical cooperation of Israel, 
which controls the Egyptian-Gaza border. A power plant of the size 
ENI has discussed building for Gaza would use no more than a tenth 
of the pipeline's planned capacity of 7 billion cubic meters a year, 
according to industry estimates. But in Israel, fast-rising power 
demands combined with environmental and budgetary considerations have 
led to official forecasts of natural gas imports of 4 billion cubic 
meters a year by 2005 and 12 billion by 2015, the Infrastructure Ministry 
said. At the same time, recent gas discoveries have tripled Egypt's 
proved reserves and export potential. Sales to Israel of 4 billion 
cubic meters a year could, even at today's depressed prices, earn 
Egypt as much as $300 million annually, it is estimated, representing 
a fivefold increase in exports to Israel. ``This type of interdependence 
should be encouraged,'' said Meiman, whose company's 20 percent share 
of a $1.2 billion Alexandria oil refinery makes it the largest Israeli 
investor in Egypt. Flanked by nations that were the world's leading 
oil producers but also its declared enemies, Israel long ago forged 
alternative relationships with the biggest non-OPEC exporters, Norway 
and Mexico. It also bought crude oil through intermediaries on costly 
spot markets, and imported coal from South Africa and Colombia. After 
the Camp David accords were signed in 1979, Egypt joined the ranks 
of Israel's suppliers, and is now providing up to a fifth of Israel's 
oil imports, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration. 
But because of the refusal of most Arab countries to sell to Israel 
directly, and its own fears that overland supplies could easily be 
cut by terrorists or the producers, Israel has never had working pipeline 
connections to any of its energy-producing neighbors. Israel needs 
to make decisions soon. Electricity consumption is rising fast, and 
its coal-fired power plants are casting a pall of particulates over 
coastal towns and beaches. Natural gas is cleaner than most alternatives, 
and, here in the Middle East, marginally cheaper. With energy prices 
at a 25-year low, this is a propitious time to negotiate supply contracts. 
Late last month, the Infrastructure Ministry postponed until next 
year a self-imposed December 1998 deadline for plans on importing 
natural gas, expanding electrical generating capacity, and possibly 
converting existing plants to gas from coal. The ministry has also 
proposed huge gas-fired desalination plants to satisfy demands for 
drinkable water in the Gaza Strip. The ministry said it was having 
exploratory talks with four unnamed suppliers of liquefied gas, though 
it would be priced higher than piped Egyptian gas and requires the 
construction of a $600 million-plus marine terminal and regasification 
plant. At stake are billions of dollars in fuel and construction contracts. 
These decisions are in turn dictated by long-term strategic considerations. 
Though the Sinai pipeline alone could satisfy Israel's demand for 
gas over the next decade, Israeli officials say they favor a mix of 
sources, including liquefied gas from Turkmenistan shipped through 
Turkey, an increasingly close military ally. ``It is not good for 
us to be totally dependent on one pipeline,'' Sharansky said. Another 
Sinai gas pipeline is being planned. Amoco Corp., which is being acquired 
by British Petroleum, signed agreements in November with Egypt and 
Jordan to build a smaller-capacity pipeline across the Sinai, under 
the Gulf of Aqaba from the Egyptian port of Taba, and continuing to 
Amman and beyond. Nile Delta gas should begin flowing to Jordan in 
2001, through a $400 million Amoco joint venture there with Tractebel 
of Belgium, said Robert Clark, an Amoco spokesman in London. ``This 
is not the peace pipeline, but rather a discrete project to provide 
gas to supply Jordan's energy needs into the 21st century,'' Clark 
said. ``I don't want to preclude the possibility that this could develop 
into a wider regional distribution system, but that is a consideration 
for the future.'' Yet Jordan's energy demands could eventually include 
producing surplus electricity for Israel, under the terms of a recent 
agreement between the two countries. New transmission lines across 
the Jordan River and systems to unite the adjoining electricity grids 
are almost completed, Israel reports. Israel's electricity demands 
are about 10 times greater than Jordan's, and Jordan already has the 
advantage of connections to Saudi pipelines. Jordan and Egypt are 
also unifying their electricity grids, with a new power cable under 
the Red Sea. And both Amoco and ENI have had continuing conversations 
with Israeli energy officials about supplying gas. ``There have been 
discussions for some time about the possibility of exporting gas via 
the eastern Mediterranean coast to the Palestinian Authority and to 
Israel, and those discussions are still continuing,'' Clark said. 
Egyptian authorities and the pipeline's developers have also discussed 
building a power plant on Egyptian territory near Gaza and exporting 
electricity to both Israel and the Palestinian Authority. Israeli 
officials say they would not necessarily oppose the proposal if Egypt 
provided long-term supply guarantees, and if Palestinian power lines 
remained part of the Israeli grid _ an insurance policy against sabotage 
or diplomatic reprisals. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>