<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0508 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Aetna Inc. said Thursday that it had agreed to buy Prudential Health 
Care from Prudential Insurance Co. of America for $1 billion, creating 
the United States' biggest managed-care company with 22.4 million 
customers, including 18.4 million in health-maintenance organizations 
and other managed-health plans. Aetna U.S. Healthcare, a hard-driving 
health insurer known for tight-fisted relations with doctors, would 
swallow Prudential, a household name for generations. Prudential Health 
Care nurtured a reputation for reliability and caring but never learned 
how to make money in a tough new world of managed health care. The 
deal, which must be approved by federal and state regulators, would 
increase Aetna's ability to negotiate on fees and working rules with 
doctors and hospitals and eventually to raise premiums for customers. 
``Yesterday, there were four national health-care insurance carriers; 
now there are three,'' including Kaiser Permanente and United Healthcare, 
said John Erb, a consultant with the Arthur J. Gallagher consulting 
firm. ``I wouldn't be surprised if there are only two by this time 
next year.'' Aetna and Prudential officials said that consumers, including 
500,000 Prudential members in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and 
Connecticut, would not immediately notice any change. They said many 
doctors were already in both companies' networks and that health-plan 
rules would not change much over the next two years. But many doctors 
expressed concern on Thursday. Aetna is largely viewed as one of the 
most stringent managed-care companies, pushing hard for cost reductions, 
disputing claims and questioning out-of-network services. And some 
doctors might have to take patients in plans that reimburse treatment 
costs at lower rates than their other plans. Richard Huber, the chairman 
and chief executive of Aetna, said the company would ``absolutely'' 
continue a policy of requiring doctors to take part in all Aetna health 
plans or none. Doctors say the all-or-nothing choice sometimes forces 
them to drop all Aetna plans, disrupting care for patients. Officials 
of medical societies in a dozen states discussed the issue this week 
at a meeting of the American Medical Association in Honolulu. Louis 
Goodman, executive director of the Texas Medical Association, said 
the state groups would urge state officials to pressure Aetna to change 
the policy. Commenting on the Aetna-Prudential deal, Thomas Reardon, 
president-elect of the AMA, said that doctors were concerned about 
``the increasing consolidation and integration, which results in greater 
and greater market power for these managed-care organizations.'' The 
deal would give Aetna more negotiating weight. It would have about 
30 percent of the managed-care business in New Jersey and Texas and 
would also be one of the three largest managed-care companies in seven 
other states _ New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Florida, Georgia, 
Virginia and Ohio. It would surpass Kaiser Permanente of California, 
which has 8.5 million members, as the nation's biggest managed-care 
company. Aetna, based in Hartford, Conn., said its earnings would 
rise immediately after completion of the deal, which is half in cash 
and half in debt, in late spring or early summer next year. It said 
the merged company would save $130 million to $150 million a year, 
including savings by eliminating 1,000 to 2,000 jobs over the next 
two years. Prudential Health Care has 16,000 employees, including 
1,000 at its headquarters in Roseland, N.J. Aetna has 32,000 employees. 
It would be the second big merger this year for Aetna, which is still 
in the throes of integrating NYLCare, a health-care business it bought 
from New York Life Insurance Co. in March for $1.05 billion. With 
NYLCare, Aetna is the fourth-largest managed-care company and Prudential 
is fifth. Consultants and analysts said the deal posed serious financial 
risks for Aetna, which will face the costs and uncertainties of running 
multiple information systems, especially as companies face the worrisome 
challenge of computer changeover problems in 2000. The big danger 
for Aetna would be to misjudge its medical costs and fall behind in 
paying doctors and hospitals, a sequence that has caused deep trouble 
for Oxford Health Plans and other managed-care companies, including 
Aetna. ``There is a very strong long-term concern that there won't 
be as good operating control and financial information as if the systems 
were fully integrated,'' said Mimi Willard, a Wall Street analyst 
with Donaldson, Lufkin &AMP; Jenrette. But Huber said Prudential had 
``made an offer we can't refuse.'' The price, calculated as less than 
$200 for each managed-care member, compared with $600 a member that 
Aetna paid for NYLCare. And Prudential agreed to certain financial 
guarantees that would repay Aetna if the Prudential contracts made 
less money than projected in 1999 and 2000. Although Steven Shulman, 
president of Prudential Health Care, increased sales drastically and 
cut operating losses in half, to about $100 million this year, the 
asking price for the health-care unit dropped at least $500 million 
in the last year. Prudential Life, which plans to change to a shareholder-owned 
company from a mutual company owned by policyholders, had long been 
eager to sell the health-care unit, which has had operating losses 
for several years. Aetna had said no before, but this time, ``they 
wanted very badly to do a quick transaction,'' Huber said. The health-care 
unit was ``an albatross, and they had to rid themselves of it,'' he 
added. Arthur Ryan, chairman and chief executive of Prudential, said 
the proceeds of the sale would be channeled to insurance and financial-services 
units. Huber said that Prudential Health Care had become more attractive 
after it cut costs by folding 44 service centers across the country 
into just four. Only a few weeks ago, Huber told Wall Street analysts 
that Aetna would make no further acquisitions for at least a year. 
``People are just surprised that they stepped up to a rather large 
acquisition when they had very definitely said they would not,'' said 
Joyce Albers, a partner at Deerfield Management, a health-care investment 
management firm. The bankers advising Prudential were Merrill Lynch 
&AMP; Co. and Prudential Securities. Wasserstein Perella advised Aetna. 
Skadden Arps Slate Meagher &AMP; Flom was Prudential's law firm in 
the deal, and Davis Polk &AMP; Wardwell represented Aetna. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>