<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0300 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Color landscape photography, pressed into service to sell everything 
from calendars and cigarettes to postcards and environmental causes, 
is usually not subversive. But the work of Virginia Beahan and Laura 
McPhee is subtly, slyly that. Using an old-fashioned Deardorff view 
camera with an 8-by-10-inch format, this photographic team produces 
detailed and powerfully cinematic images that in enlargements are 
viscerally appealing. But once the photographers have your attention, 
they seem to make you look hard at the pictures because something 
is almost always off balance. A tree takes center stage against a 
white sky in a 1995 image from Carbon Canyon in the Santa Monica Mountains 
of California. Below the tree are a profusion of delicate yellow wildflowers 
and some bushes with red flowers; in the distance, misty brown and 
green mountain slopes dotted with houses. In the foreground is the 
concrete foundation of a burned house. As though bearing mute witness 
to the tragedy, the nearby tree, which looks as though it has been 
burned black, stands like a spectral sentinel, its unusually bushy 
branches a metaphoric widow's shroud. The intriguingly off-kilter 
work of Ms. Beahan and Ms. McPhee, who each won a John Simon Guggenheim 
Foundation fellowship in 1993 for their collaborative work, appears 
in ``No Ordinary Land,'' published by Aperture ($35), with an afterword 
by Ms. McPhee's father, the writer John McPhee. In conjunction with 
the book's publication, Aperture's Burden Gallery in Chelsea is exhibiting 
more than three dozen of the team's photographs, a number of which 
are also at the Laurence Miller Gallery in SoHo. With a dozen pictures, 
some different from those at Burden and much more tightly focused, 
the show at the Laurence Miller packs a wicked punch. Sometimes, Ms. 
Beahan and Ms. McPhee achieve the strikingly unorthodox by positioning 
their camera and tripod in such a way that the picture is an aggregate 
of almost impossible parts. In the strangely Hopperesque ``Kaihalulu 
Beach, Kauiki, Maui'' (1996), a shot taken from above, the focus of 
the left half is the small standing figure of a woman in a swimsuit 
who is holding a baby and not looking out to sea but sideways, at 
something out of the camera's range. Just behind her on a smooth, 
chocolate-brown beach is a rumpled beach towel. At her feet, water 
glides in and swirls dreamily around the beach. But looming in front 
of her and forming a ferocious barrier between her and the deep blue 
sea is a row of tall, jagged black rocks, against which the sea crashes, 
leaving behind white foaming pools. ``Windmills and Brush Fire, Coachella 
Valley, Calif.'' (1995) is similarly divided into wildly contrasted 
segments. In the foreground are the forever-shifting, sensuous sand 
dunes. Beyond the dunes and on flat ground is a bristling forest of 
tall windmills. And beyond them are blue hills over which hang a thick 
white haze and the leavings of a brush fire spewing black smoke into 
a blue sky. ``The Blue Lagoon'' (1988), taken at a geothermal hot-water 
pumping station in Iceland, looks like the epitome of the industrial 
degradation of the environment. In the foreground is a pleasant, almost 
postcard-pretty scene of children and adults in the pale blue water. 
Beyond the sea and the swimmers is a bank of heavy-duty machines, 
many emitting plumes of white smoke. Behind this seeming industrial 
inferno are blackish mountains, above which are heavy white clouds. 
But in an added twist on a scene that looks dreadful but is actually 
benign and beneficial, an assortment of chimneys play a kind of woodwind 
movement on the theme of smoke. Three thin chimneys attached to gleaming 
towers are like trilling piccolos. Next to them are a pair of thicker 
tall chimneys, the oboes, releasing deeper tones. To the right of 
the image are the bassoons, two boxy constructions letting off fulsome 
sounds. The Beahan-McPhee collaboration began in 1987 when the friends 
traveled to Iceland to photograph what Ms. McPhee described as an 
apocalyptic landscape. They had started with two Deardorff cameras 
and two sets of other camera equipment. But after several days of 
traveling and working together, they realized they were collaborating 
in their picture-taking. And they have been working mostly as a team 
ever since. Each also continues to work on separate projects, mainly 
in black and white, Ms. McPhee photographing her family and Ms. Beahan 
concentrating on still lifes and portraits. Occasionally, the team 
has taken some so-so pictures: of a sleeping Buddha or terraced tea 
plantations in Sri Lanka, urban graffiti in New Jersey, and the artificial 
volcano at the Mirage Hotel in Las Vegas. But most of the time they 
catch the stunningly surreal. In ``Lava Monolith With Antenna'' (1994), 
taken in Italy, a black rock rears out of the water like some fantastical 
Loch Ness monster, its foreboding presence heightened by the golden 
glow of sea and sky. ``Boiling Mud Pot With Headlights'' (1988), taken 
in Iceland and shown only at the Burden Gallery, probably offers the 
most delightful surprise. At first glance one sees a forbidding moonscape, 
a yawning hole in the foreground that seems to have mysteriously appeared 
out of blue ash. In the distance is a rock-strewn brown ridge. What 
is the off element here? Perched unobtrusively on the horizon, against 
a hazy sky, are the hazy outlines of a car, its headlights on. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>