<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0416 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The chief arms inspector for Iraq has told the Security Council in 
a letter that the Iraqis have been interfering with inspections at 
a number of sites. And Thursday, Baghdad toughened its stand against 
allowing entry to the ruling party's offices, in contravention of 
council resolutions. In his letter, the chief inspector also said 
the Iraqis had refused to explain why and where equipment and microorganisms 
thought to be associated with a biological weapons program had been 
moved during a break in inspections last month. Officials in Washington 
said the Iraqis were on their way to creating a very serious situation, 
but drew back from a direct threat of force. On Nov. 15, after Saddam 
Hussein lifted a ban on arms inspections, President Clinton said any 
new obstructions could be met with a military force. In Baghdad Thursday, 
Saddam's government declared that political sites were off-limits 
to inspectors. A senior official of Hussein's Baath Party stood on 
the steps of a building that inspectors were barred from entering 
on Wednesday and announced that they would never be permitted access. 
Iraq is required under council resolutions to allow inspectors to 
go anywhere they wish to search for weapons material or documents. 
``The answer would be the same,'' said the Baath Party official, Latif 
Nsayif Jassim, when asked what would have happened if inspectors had 
returned Thursday, which they apparently did not. ``This is a party. 
Political parties are not included.'' The Iraqis also stalled for 
45 minutes the start of an inspection at another location. In his 
letter to the council, Richard Butler, the executive chairman of the 
commission charged with disarming Iraq, detailed Iraq's recent acts 
of noncooperation, including a bar on photographing bombs last Saturday 
and an Iraqi decision the day before not to allow inspections on Fridays, 
the Muslim holy day. Butler also told the council that last Saturday, 
during an investigation concerning biological weapons, ``the Iraqi 
representatives made efforts to prevent videotaping and interrupted 
and sought to direct site personnel's responses.'' The Iraqis also 
tried, but failed, to stop inspectors from photocopying documents. 
At the same location, Butler said, the director of the Iraqi project 
under investigation said that none of his employees were allowed to 
answer the inspectors' questions. Butler has inadvertently been drawn 
into speculation again here about his relationship with Secretary-General 
Kofi Annan after Annan said in an interview with an Arab newspaper 
that he sometimes regretted undiplomatic comments made by Butler about 
Iraq. ``His diplomacy is seasonal,'' Annan was quoted as saying in 
the interview with Ashraq al-Aswat, a London-based publication. ``I 
have spoken with him on this.'' In the interview, Annan added that 
Butler's work ``is difficult and associated with high pressure'' and 
that pressure causes people to say things they would not say under 
normal circumstances. Butler, who was Australia's representative at 
the United Nations before becoming head of the disarmament commission, 
is a straight-shooting arms control expert who says he has been regularly 
lied to by the Iraqis. His frank style has upset some of Annan's aides, 
who have often been more conciliatory to Iraq. In Washington, Secretary 
of Defense William Cohen, who still has 20,000 American troops in 
the Persian Gulf area, said he agreed with Butler in calling the situation 
``very serious.'' But he said the administration wanted more time 
to study a full report on inspections expected next week. Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright, who is in Paris, had a tougher message, 
when she repeated the Clinton administration's warning to Iraq that 
``the option of using force is on the table.'' Although diplomats 
here, including those from the United States and Britain, do not expect 
military action soon, they say that the Iraqis are isolating themselves 
again from their would-be defenders on the Security council, among 
them France. Albright, who met with President Jacques Chirac for about 
an hour Thursday, said later that she and Chirac ``very much agreed'' 
that Hussein had no choice but to cooperate with the inspectors. At 
the State Department, a spokesman said that the first casualty of 
the Iraqis' defiance would be the comprehensive review of sanctions 
promised by the Security Council three weeks ago. James Foley, the 
spokesman, said the use of force was an issue that the United States 
would decide alone. ``We've never signaled the timing or even the 
decision concerning the use of force,'' he said. ``That's not something 
you want an adversary to have advance knowledge of.'' A European diplomat 
at the United Nations said the United States would be unlikely to 
return to the Security Council for support in the use of force because 
any such move would be vetoed by Russia and China. Iraq cannot hope 
to have sanctions lifted until it has satisfied the Security Council, 
through Butler's Special Commission, that all its weapons of mass 
destruction _ biological, chemical, nuclear and the missiles to deliver 
them _ have been destroyed. The Iraqis say the sanctions have caused 
intolerable hardships in Iraq. Thursday, through the United Nations 
Children's Fund, they released new statistics showing that more than 
a million children are not in school this year because of the sanctions. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>