<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0417 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a 6-0 vote, the Federal Election Commission rebuffed its own professional 
staff Thursday and refused to order multi-million-dollar repayments 
from the 1996 presidential campaigns of President Clinton and Republican 
Bob Dole. The decision nullified the recommendation of the commission's 
auditors and general counsel that the campaigns repay nearly $25 million 
for exceeding federal campaign spending limits and illegally coordinating 
their advertising with the two political parties. The commission's 
vote, which came on the heels of Attorney General Janet Reno's decision 
earlier this week not to ask for an independent counsel to investigate 
President Clinton's involvement in an advertising blitz paid for by 
the Democratic Party, all but obliterates the spending and contribution 
limits that have been a cornerstone of the post-Watergate election 
laws. It also almost surely means that the proliferation of issue 
advertising, will intensify in the 2000 presidential campaign. The 
issue ads, which benefits presidential and other federal candidates, 
are paid for by the national parties with money raised outside the 
federal election laws, which put a $1,000 limit on individual campaign 
contributions. ``The signal that inaction by the commission sends 
is that there is no limit to the type of presidential campaigning 
you can encourage others to do and avoid the limits,'' said Kent Cooper, 
a former FEC official. ``It basically removes the limits that the 
presidential public financing system had imposed.'' The vote by the 
six commissioners was not unexpected. Although the FEC itself was 
a creation of the post-Watergate election-law reforms, the agency 
has a history of timidity. Evenly divided along partisan lines, the 
six commissioners often reflect the views of their political parties 
in 3-3 ties. But the decision Thursday not to seek the multi-million-dollar 
repayments from the Clinton and Dole campaigns could reflect the parties' 
views unanimously, because Democrats and Republicans alike view unfettered 
spending as desirable. Throughout several days of public hearings 
on the 1996 audit, the commissioners expressed grave doubts about 
the auditors' conclusions. Karl Sandstrom, a recent Democratic appointee, 
was the most vocal. ``This whole process has been unfair to the responding 
committees,'' Sandstrom said. He also said, ``I don't adopt the recommendations, 
I don't adopt the findings and I don't adopt the legal analysis.'' 
Lee Ann Elliott, a Republican commissioner since 1982, said she thought 
it was legal for the parties to coordinate some activities with the 
presidential candidates. She also said that as long as party issue 
ads did not expressly contain an electioneering message for a candidate 
they were proper. ``There is an exhortation to vote for a specific 
candidate in an election _ that should be our standard,'' she said. 
The FEC did not decide one important issue related to the audit: whether 
the party ads should be considered as in-kind contributions to the 
Clinton and Dole campaigns. It is likely they will refer this issue 
for further investigation by the Commission's enforcement division, 
but it is unlikely the FEC would approve further action on issue advertising 
after rejecting the repayments, several agency officials said. In 
recommending repayments of $7 million from the Clinton campaign and 
$17.7 million from the Dole campaign, the auditors and the agency's 
chief counsel had agreed that the money paid for party ads represented 
an illegal end-run around the spending limits for presidential candidates 
who receive federal matching funds. But on Wednesday, the commissioners 
agreed to dramatically reduce the repayment for the Dole campaign, 
presaging the Thursday decision to require no repayments for the issue 
advertising. The agency's decision was hailed by lawyers for both 
campaigns. ``I'm pleased with the commission's decision on the issue 
ads,'' said Kenneth Gross, counsel to the Dole campaign. ``It's the 
correct position in our view.'' Lyn Utrecht, a lawyer for the Clinton-Gore 
campaign, said, ``As we've said on numerous occasions, we feel it's 
clear the issue advertising run by the Democratic National Committee 
was fully in compliance with the law.'' In deciding not to seek an 
independent counsel, Reno emphasized the fact that President Clinton 
had relied on the advice of campaign and party lawyers that the issue 
ads were legal. The rise of issue advertising is a byproduct of the 
growth of soft money, the controversial large donations from wealthy 
individuals, corporations and labor unions that are raised by the 
political parties in unlimited amounts. Soft money has played an increasingly 
important role in presidential elections since 1988. In 1996, President 
Clinton's re-election campaign came up with an innovative plan to 
finance early advertising with Democratic party soft money. The ads 
were created by the president's campaign consultants and featured 
Clinton prominently. As long as the ads did not contain an express 
exhortation to vote for a candidate, Democratic lawyers said, they 
could be paid for by the committee, in large part with soft money. 
The Clinton-Gore campaign and the Dole campaign were limited to spending 
about $30 million each in the primaries. The DNC, with no spending 
ceiling, paid for $46 million in issue ads. The Republican party bought 
similar ads, but began them later in the election cycle. In refusing 
to order the repayments from the Clinton and Dole campaigns, the FEC 
effectively blessed the legality of this arrangement. Because the 
party ads were in some instances identical to ads run by the Clinton 
and Dole campaigns, the FEC auditors and general counsel viewed the 
issue ads as crossing the line into impermissible electioneering. 
The commissioners disagreed. ``This will send a message for 2000,'' 
said former FEC Chairman Trevor Potter. ``It validates the Clinton 
tactic.'' Already, some potential presidential candidates for 2000 
are raising soft money through political action committees established 
at the state level and through non-profit organizations. Some contenders, 
including billionaire Steve Forbes, a Republican, have broadcast issue 
ads in early primary states like New Hampshire. Some campaign finance 
watchdog groups fear that in 2000 it will be the candidates, as well 
as the two political parties, who creatively circumvent the federal 
campaign spending and contribution limits with issue advertising. 
Issue ads are not confined to presidential elections. In the 1998 
congressional elections, the National Republican Congressional Committee 
financed $30 million is such ads, some of which raised the Monica 
Lewinsky scandal. More of these ads are likely in congressional races 
in 2000. ``The FEC's decision means we've returned to the law of the 
jungle when it comes to campaign spending,'' said Fred Wertheimer, 
an advocate of overhauling campaign finance practices who has unsuccessfully 
urged the FEC and the Justice Department to limit party issue advertising. 
``There are really no limits left.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>