<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0548 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Toronto Blue Jays' efforts to trade Roger Clemens will be the 
headline event at the baseball winter meetings, which begin Thursday 
in Nashville. The New York Yankees, unwilling to meet the Blue Jays' 
demand of four players, do not appear to be a major factor in the 
bidding for Clemens. In fact, Brian Cashman, the Yankees' general 
manager, currently has no plans to attend the meetings. The Cleveland 
Indians, baseball officials said, have forwarded a significant offer 
for Clemens that involves at least one marquee player _ perhaps outfielder 
David Justice. But Gord Ash, the Toronto general manager, indicated 
Thursday that a second team has made an aggressive push for Clemens. 
The market for the five-time Cy Young Award winner has probably not 
been as vigorous as the Blue Jays expected. Many teams are unwilling 
to trade three or four high-quality players for Clemens, and then 
renegotiate his contract and pay the 36-year-old right-hander like 
a free agent. Executives have called it a double whammy. Some speculated 
that the Houston Astros would offer the pitchers Shane Reynolds, Scott 
Elarton and the outfielders Derek Bell and Richard Hidalgo. Instead, 
they offered a much more modest package: Bell, reliever Jay Powell 
and a young pitcher. And Thursday, the Astros signed Shane Reynolds 
to a three-year, $21.5 million deal that an includes an option for 
the 2003 season. Toronto wants Ramiro Mendoza, Orlando Hernandez and 
the minor leaguers Alfonso Soriano and Homer Bush from the Yankees. 
The Yankees, conversely, might be willing to surrender Andy Pettitte, 
Bush and Mike Lowell, a young third baseman. An executive with the 
Texas Rangers indicated Thursday that his team's interest in a Clemens 
deal has waned, after the Rangers and the Blue Jays could not settle 
on a package that might have included the outfielders Tom Goodwin 
and Rusty Greer. The Colorado Rockies and the Atlanta Braves are also 
believed to be involved, while the Mets and the San Diego Padres are 
regarded as long shots. Gord Ash, Toronto's general manager, said 
Thursday that he has never spoken with anyone from the Baltimore Orioles, 
and a highly ranked Orioles official confirmed this. The high volume 
of free-agent signings in November will naturally curtail the trade 
discussions at the winter meetings. But some big names are being talked 
about: Atlanta has had offers for the slugger Ryan Klesko from the 
Tampa Bay Devil Rays; the San Diego Padres seem willing to trade Greg 
Vaughn, who hit 50 home runs last year, as well as the reliever Randy 
Myers, and the Padres are also talking trade with the Yankees about 
Mike Lowell; Arizona seems intent on trading the left-hander Brian 
Anderson. The Dodgers are close to dealing shortstop Jose Vizcaino 
to St. Louis. There will likely be free-agent signings at the winter 
meetings, as well. Kevin Brown, perhaps the last marquee player available, 
is being wooed by the Los Angeles Dodgers, the St. Louis Cardinals, 
the Rockies and the Orioles, his salary could approach $14 million 
to $15 million a year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>