<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0483 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.S. Supreme Court delayed the execution Thursday night of a Canadian 
whose government had appealed for his life, saying he had been denied 
the right to speak with consular officials as guaranteed by international 
treaty. The stay, one of several over the last decade for the inmate, 
Joseph Stanley Faulder, came 30 minutes before he was to receive a 
lethal injection in the Texas death chamber. A spokesman for the Supreme 
Court said the justices needed more time to consider Faulder's case. 
While Faulder has another appeal before the Supreme Court, Texas prison 
officials said the stay was granted to consider the consular issue. 
The court set no date for hearing the appeal, but Texas officials 
said no execution date could be scheduled for another 30 days. While 
last-minute appeals in death penalty cases are common, it was Faulder's 
standing as a Canadian citizen that brought international attention 
to the case. The Vienna Convention on Consular Relations requires 
that people arrested in a foreign country be allowed to seek assistance 
from their country's consul. That courtesy was not extended to Faulder 
when he was arrested in 1977 and charged with fatally beating and 
stabbing a wealthy 75-year-old woman in a July 1975 robbery. Texas 
officials said they did not realize that Faulder, who had a Texas 
driver's license, was from Canada. It was not until 15 years after 
his arrest that his family, who believed him to be dead, found out 
that he was alive on death row in Texas. As his execution date neared, 
the Canadian government, which outlawed the death penalty in 1976, 
asked that the sentence be commuted. Secretary of State Madeleine 
Albright asked the state to delay the execution until issues regarding 
Faulder's rights under the treaty could be examined. U.S. officials 
and human rights groups are concerned that failure to give adequate 
consideration to the treaty would lead to abuse against Americans 
arrested in other countries. Faulder, 61, spent much of the afternoon 
Thursday in a holding area next to the room where he was to die after 
a federal appeals panel in New Orleans struck down a stay issued on 
Wednesday by a U.S. District Court judge in Austin. That judge, Sam 
Sparks, had ordered state officials to postpone Faulder's death until 
a Dec. 21 hearing could be conducted to determine whether there had 
been a fair clemency process. That issue grew from an appeal raised 
on behalf of all death row inmates in which lawyers argued that the 
18-member Texas Board of Pardons and Parole had failed to conduct 
its work in public, to provide reasons for its decisions or to record 
its votes. A prison spokesman, Larry Fitzgerald, who told Faulder 
of the stay, said the inmate was surprised but viewed the move as 
a temporary reprieve. ``He was a very happy man,'' said Fitzgerald. 
Throughout the appeals, Faulder has not disputed the charges against 
him. In fact, in an interview with the CBC last month, he was quoted 
as saying: ``I don't say that I shouldn't be here. I say that death 
row should not exist.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>