<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0420 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After three months of vacillation, the government on Thursday finally 
unveiled its 1999 spending plan to halt Russia's economic tumble. 
Yevgeny Primakov called the economic blueprint, his first as prime 
minister, a bold effort to boost Russia's hard-pressed factories and 
farms while clamping down on wasteful spending. ``It is honest,'' 
Primakov said Thursday. ``We have not included what we cannot pay 
for.'' But the 1999 budget was roundly criticized as a political exercise 
to attract Western financial aid while placating powerful constituencies 
at home. From tax revenues to inflation, the budget is based on highly 
optimistic assumptions, which are unlikely to survive their bruising 
contact with Russia's dour economic realities. ``The budget is based 
on a best-case scenario,'' said Peter Westin, an economist with the 
Russian-European Center for Economic Policy. ``It all looks very unrealistic.'' 
Since he took office three months ago, Primakov has talked of the 
need for state intervention in the economy to prop up faltering enterprises. 
Thursday's budget includes billions of rubles of new subsidies for 
the coal industry and for agriculture. In a bow to Communist sentiment 
and to buy peace in the ranks of the military, enlisted soldiers will 
have their pay increased by 62 percent, and officers by 102 percent. 
With the government all but broke, the new budget was the subject 
of considerable infighting between Yuri Maslyukov, the Communist member 
of the Primakov team who oversees economic policy, and Mikhail Zadornov, 
the reform-minded finance minister. At the insistence of Zadornov, 
spending plans were trimmed back and revenue projections decreased. 
But the budget still reflects the premium Primakov has placed on achieving 
political consensus by distributing credits, writing off debts and 
avoiding unpopular reforms. With politicians increasingly consumed 
with the struggle to succeed the ailing president, Boris Yeltsin, 
it is unclear whether any of Russia's leaders have the will to put 
the nation's financial house in order. The fear is that by the time 
the Communist-dominated Parliament approves the Primakov budget plan, 
the government will be left with a sizable deficit. That will force 
it to print even more rubles and heighten the already considerable 
inflation. The shaky state of market reform in Russia is a big concern 
for Strobe Talbott, the U.S. deputy secretary of state, and Lawrence 
Summers, the deputy treasury secretary, who have come to Moscow for 
high-level talks on economic and security issues. The 1999 budget 
calls for spending of 573 billion rubles ($29 billion). The U.S. 1999 
federal budget, in contrast, is $1.7 trillion. Russian revenue is 
projected at 474 billion rubles ($24 billion). That leaves a budget 
deficit of 101.5 billion rubles ($5.1 billion). The projected budget 
deficit is equivalent to 2.5 percent of Russia's gross domestic product. 
When Russia's large debt servicing costs are excluded, government 
revenue will actually exceed spending by 1.7 percent of GDP, Zadornov 
boasted Thursday. Western economists have long been urging Russia 
to slash its enormous deficit, which was one of the main causes of 
its current economic crisis. But the fine print of the budget is less 
than persuasive, economists said. The Primakov government is forecasting 
tax receipts that far exceed Russia's current level of tax collection. 
Indeed, in recent weeks the government appears to have dealt a blow 
to revenue-raising efforts by deciding to cut the nation's value added 
tax from 20 percent to 15 percent. The action was taken at the urging 
of Georgi Boos, the new head of the State Tax Service. Invoking Russia's 
version of ``supply side'' economics, Boos has argued that the cut 
in the VAT will encourage economic growth and increase tax receipts. 
But few economists agree. They say Boos has simply handed out a costly 
favor to his business friends and deprived the nation of an important 
source of income. In a country where cheating on taxes is a national 
pastime, the VAT, a type of sales tax that is applied at each stage 
of production and distribution, is one of the few levies that the 
government is able to collect on a regular basis. Critics also say 
the budget's inflation estimate (30 percent) is also based on wishful 
thinking. Sergei Kiriyenko, who was dismissed as prime minister in 
August, said the best the country could hope for was an inflation 
rate of 60 percent or 70 percent. Significantly, the budget also assumes 
optimistically that Russia will attract billions in foreign credits 
from the International Monetary Fund and other sources. Russia also 
put the West on notice that it is counting on its cooperation to renegotiate 
its debt. The budget calls for paying only $9.5 billion in foreign 
debt and interest payments next year, of the $17.5 billion due. ``Without 
an easing of the debt burden in 1999 and 2000 and the following years, 
it is simply not possible for Russia to exist,'' Zadornov said. ``It 
is simply like that.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>