<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0212 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some good things really do last, if not forever, then for longer than 
anyone might reasonably have expected. Take ``Star Trek.'' The 1960s 
science-fiction series has successfully survived a generational turnover 
and made a relatively smooth transition from video into films. If 
``Star Trek: Insurrection,'' the latest installment, is little more 
than a glorified television episode, it still has all the ingredients 
that have made it a perennial, with a few extras, including improved 
special effects. Those staples include a starship captain who is a 
strong, wise, imperturbably serene daddy figure, a soldier with a 
heart of gold, piloting his harmonious multicultural extended family 
into the great unknown. Strip away the gadgetry and elaborate technobabble, 
and the problems that Capt. Jean-Luc Picard (Patrick Stewart) and 
his loyal crew encounter out there on the intergalactic frontier are 
precisely the same ones we struggle with here on Earth. Almost every 
major villain in ``Star Trek'' is a variation on the same vengeful, 
power-mad tyrant. Often, as in the case of ``Insurrection,'' that 
bad behavior can be traced to some psychological wound. When the full 
story of the bad guys, a tribe called the Son'a, is revealed in the 
latest episode, the trouble can be traced to an ancient generational 
conflict. In the world of ``Star Trek,'' it seems, the late-'60s generation 
gap is still grist for the narrative mill. And a little ``Father Knows 
Best''-style psychological strategy, applied gently and at the perfect 
moment, is all it takes to prevent catastrophe. What makes this hokum 
work as entertainment is the series' unquestioned belief in basic 
human benignity. It is a conviction that can't be faked, and when 
expressed with a light touch, as it is here, it can be seductively 
appealing. The new episode begins in the next best place to paradise, 
a pristine planet that is the habitat of the Ba'ku, a tribe of only 
600 who live an idyllic agrarian existence. The Ba'ku enjoy eternal 
life and youth on their planet through an atmosphere whose chemical 
components regenerate human cells once the people have reached maturity. 
While exploring the planet, the crew of the Enterprise senses itself 
becoming rejuvenated. Even the nearly bald captain feels a tingling 
in his scalp. What might heaven in outer space look like? Why, of 
course, like northern California. The Ba'ku suggest tranquilized residents 
of such affluent Marin County towns as Mill Valley, dreamily discharging 
their daily tasks in a world that has completely forsworn modern technology. 
Picard becomes deeply taken with Anij (Donna Murphy), a 309-year-old 
beauty who wears low-cut gowns and speaks in a voice that throbs with 
the calm wisdom of centuries. Anij discourses knowingly about the 
eternity of the moment. But paradise is about to be despoiled. The 
Ba'ku's neighbors, the evil Son'a, have made a secret deal with the 
Federation to allow them to relocate the Ba'ku to another planet and 
harvest the regenerative properties of their atmosphere for the universal 
good. They plan to trick them into entering a spaceship that is a 
holographic replica of their planet, then spirit them to a place where 
they will age like ordinary mortals. Picard's discovery of the plot 
occasions the movie's most impassioned speech, delivered to the starfleet 
admiral, Dougherty (Anthony Zerbe), who is cooperating with the Son'a, 
about the ugly history of forcible relocation. Picard, threatened 
with possible court-martial for disobeying a superior, refuses to 
go along with the plan and armed conflict erupts. The battle scenes 
in which Picard and his crew fend off the swooping enemy aircraft 
armed with transporters that kidnap the Ba'ku one by one, have snap. 
The Son'a are typical ``Star Trek'' villains. They're humans with 
fright masks. When he's not plotting mayhem, the Son'a's evil leader 
Ru'afo (F. Murray Abraham) has facials in which his hideously crinkled 
gray skin is stretched and realigned over his features. Directed by 
Jonathan Frakes, who appears only briefly as Riker, the Enterprise's 
second in command, ``Insurrection'' is breezily paced, and Michael 
Piller's screenplay has enough good-natured humor to keep things from 
bogging down into sentimental pompous. The lighter moments include 
some innocuously clever man-vs.-machine banter between the Enterprise's 
resident android, Data (Brent Spiner), and an angelic little Ba'ku 
boy, and a witty scene in which Picard and Data sing a duet from Gilbert 
and Sullivan. With its vision of a peaceable kingdom of eternal youth 
in an agrarian arts-and-crafts paradise in a California environment, 
``Insurrection'' is an appealing millennial throwback to the hippie 
dream that is part and parcel of ``Star Trek's'' utopian ethos. PRODUCTION 
NOTES: `STAR TREK: INSURRECTION' Directed by Jonathan Frakes; written 
by Michael Piller, based on a story by Rick Berman and Piller and 
on ``Star Trek'' created by Gene Roddenberry; director of photography, 
Matthew F. Leonetti; edited by Peter E. Berger; music by Jerry Goldsmith; 
production designer, Herman Zimmerman; produced by Berman; released 
by Paramount Pictures. RUNNING TIME: 105 minutes. RATING: ``Insurrection'' 
is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). There is some violence, 
but it is not gory, and some very mild sexual innuendo. CAST: Patrick 
Stewart (Picard), Jonathan Frakes (Riker), Brent Spiner (Data), LeVar 
Burton (Geordi), Michael Dorn (Worf), Gates McFadden (Beverly), Marina 
Sirtis (Troi), F. Murray Abraham (Ru'afo), Donna Murphy (Anij) and 
Anthony Zerbe (Dougherty). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>