<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0565 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
WASHINGTON _ U.S. and Canadian authorities announced Thursday that 
they had broken up a sophisticated ring that smuggled Chinese immigrants 
into the United States, and ultimately to New York City, through a 
Mohawk Indian reservation along the border. Authorities said the ring, 
made up primarily of Chinese nationals and members of the Mohawk tribe, 
transported more than 3,600 Chinese immigrants across the lightly 
patrolled border along the St. Lawrence River and into upstate New 
York during the last two years. Officials said that 47 people had 
been indicted for conspiracy to smuggle aliens into the United States. 
Of those, 35 have been arrested. ``This is the first large-scale alien 
smuggling operation we have encountered on the northern border,'' 
Doris Meissner, commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service, said in announcing the indictments. Only about a dozen of 
the immigrants who were smuggled in have been taken into custody. 
Officials said the immigrants, primarily young men from Fujian Province, 
paid as much as $47,000 for the journey from China. Ms. Meissner said 
she had no information on what types of companies or businesses the 
aliens worked in once they arrived in New York City. The break-up 
of the ring comes three weeks after Attorney General Janet Reno announced 
cracking the largest immigrant smuggling ring to be dismantled in 
the nation _ an operation that brought in more than 12,000 people, 
mainly Indians, Pakistanis, Syrians and Afghans during the last three 
years. Thursday's announcement highlighted the extent to which the 
28-square mile Indian reservation, which straddles two Canadian provinces 
and one U.S. state, has become a haven for smugglers. The foggy creeks 
and wooded islands featured on the Indian territory, which is known 
as the St. Regis Mohawk Reservation on the U.S. side and the Akwesasne 
Indian Territory in Canada, have long been used to spirit gasoline, 
cigarettes, tobacco and drugs between the two countries. In recent 
years, more and more of the contraband has been human. ``The geography 
of the Akwesasne is perfect for smuggling,'' said Thomas Maroney, 
the U.S. attorney for the northern district of New York. ``It's in 
Canada. It's in the United States. It's in Ontario. It's in Quebec. 
A look at a map shows you how easy it is to use the place as a vehicle 
for smuggling. It isn't just aliens, though that's what we're involved 
with here. There have been cases of alcohol and tobacco going north 
and drugs going both ways.'' Officials with the Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police said the investigation into the smuggling ring began with a 
tip they received 18 months ago. But the transport of illegal immigrants 
across the Mohawk territory was widely known in the reservation and 
surrounding territories. Last year, a Pakistani woman drowned when 
a smuggler's rickety boat capsized in rough waters between Corwall 
Island, part of the Indian territory in Canada, and the U.S. mainland. 
And residents of the reservation say they are used to seeing Asian 
people traveling across their land at all hours of the day or night, 
easily evading the 40-officer tribal police force. ``You go outside 
and it's not uncommon to see people of a different color going through,'' 
said Joyce Mitchell, a spokeswoman for the Mohawk National Council 
of Chiefs. Last year Canadian police broke a smaller immigrant smuggling 
ring that was importing Chinese nationals, sending some into the U.S. 
through the Mohawk reservation but keeping most of the aliens in Canada. 
The tip Canadian authorities received involved information that not 
all the top people in that ring had been captured and that a similar 
and larger operation was still functioning. Thursday's announcement 
concerned that second syndicate. Authorities said that the ring transported 
immigrants through Hong Kong and Taipei and a number of intermediate 
countries, including Germany, Brazil, Morocco, France, Greenland and 
Cuba. Once in Toronto or Vancouver, the aliens took advantage of Canada's 
relatively liberal refugee laws and gained entry by claiming to be 
fleeing persecution in China. Last year, 24,852 individuals applied 
to Canada's Immigration and Refugee Board for asylum. The board, a 
quasi-governmental body, approved 10,042. But, officials say, it can 
take up to 12 months to get a hearing on a refugee claim. In the interim 
there are no restrictions on the applicant's freedom. Officials could 
not say how many of those whose claims were rejected had been removed 
from Canada. In contrast, individuals who seek asylum in the United 
States are incarcerated while awaiting a hearing on their claim. Canadian 
police officials said that while waiting for their hearings the aliens 
who had been brought to Toronto and Vancouver by the smuggling ring 
melted into the large Asian populations in those cities. Eventually 
they were driven to Corwall Island, Ontario, in the St. Lawrence River 
about 50 miles southwest of Montreal. Smugglers then moved the immigrants 
by boat to the Mohawk reservation in upstate New York or to a swatch 
of Indian territory in Quebec on the south bank of the St. Lawrence, 
where they can easily cross into the United States. Under an agreement 
the tribe has with the U.S. and Canadian governments, there are no 
border controls between the Quebec and New York sections of the reservation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>