<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0333 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We know three things for certain, and standing in the muck of Bill 
Clinton's character amidst the remains of his presidency, it helps 
cleanse us to think about them. We know that undertaking the impeachment 
process, wherever it leads, was what the Constitution provided for 
a president who had so betrayed the people as to lie to their faces 
and lie under oath, and even as he cringes and whines, so fears the 
consequence of his behavior that he despoils the meaning of contrition 
by refusing to admit what he did. And we know that the Clinton story 
is not the essence of America, nor close to it. It is one nasty episode 
in U.S. history, which at least we confronted not sometime in the 
future when it was too late, but while he and we could confront each 
other. And we know, with gratitude to those who created America's 
particular system of government, that every national Election Day 
we will get a chance to select a leader. On such a day, perhaps the 
next, we will again choose a person whom voters can regard with respect 
while he serves and history will remember with approval afterward. 
Those are kernel American truths, whether Bill Clinton is allowed 
to serve out his second term or not. But there is no constitutional 
reason for Americans to carry for two more years this man who made 
himself the great American moral albatross. ``I am not a crook,'' 
cried Richard Nixon. ``I am not Richard Nixon,'' cries Clinton through 
his lawyers. ``We are not fools,'' is what Americans should reply 
through Congress. Throughout the impeachment hearings, the Clinton 
defense army kept informing us that presidential lying under oath 
was not as bad as Watergate. That line of non-reasoning cements Nixon's 
achievements in presidential depravity as the minimum standard for 
impeachment _ which would have been a big surprise to him and his 
fellow conspirators. Clinton did not lie simply to cover up his affair 
with Monica Lewinsky. He lied and lied, under oath and directly to 
the people, and lied to aides who became a chain letter of lies, to 
build a wall of lies around the White House. The wall was built purposely 
to save his job if Congress decided to travel the impeachment road. 
For a president, there are phrases for that, which follow Nixon beyond 
the grave. They are called obstruction of justice and abuse of power. 
In the Clinton case the White House line that he should not be impeached 
because most people lie to cover up sexual infidelity is sour comedy. 
How many people swear they cannot remember if they were ever alone 
with their lover? Could the president please provide a list of people 
he thinks might have been in the room with him and Ms. Lewinsky while 
they were making love? Anyway, he is not most people, but legally 
a person unique in the land, in privileges and power. Weaving a skein 
of lies to cover up his conduct while president is not one of these 
privileges. Surely, surely, it was not the intent of the writers of 
the Constitution or of the former colonies that adopted it that the 
president should go unpunished for acts that would land any officer 
under him in jail _ like adultery with a subordinate. Clinton has 
large adulterous company in America, but he is the only one in the 
country for whom ``Hail to the Cheat'' is played. We are ankle-deep 
in Clinton's own character-gook. We are trapped in his own sick decision 
to risk the presidency for back-office sex with a subordinate. Even 
people on his payroll say what he did was reprehensible, and defiling 
to the presidency. But now these folk say the House of Representatives 
should not impeach him and send him to the Senate for trial. Clinton 
made his choice. The obligation of the House is to make its choice 
_impeach. The Senate would then make its own choice _ convict or not. 
The other option _ House censure without impeachment _ is evasive, 
and possibly illegal. It can be wiped from the records by any Democratic 
Congress, as the censure of Andrew Jackson was torn from the books 
by his party. Someday, because America gives us blessed chances to 
scrub ourselves, the country will feel clean again. Following the 
constitutional process laid down to deal with the Bill Clintons will 
make us fresher faster. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>