<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0086 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For more than 250 years, until the carnage of our own century, the 
Thirty Years War of 1618-1648 set the standard in Europe for bloodshed, 
fanaticism and brutality. Confusing in its chronology and appalling 
in its deliberate assaults on civilian life, the war fully deserved 
its reputation as one of the darkest episodes in Western history. 
Starting primarily as a bitter religious struggle, it gradually became 
a naked clash for power among increasingly aggressive states of Europe 
and ravaged much of modern-day Germany. For one distinguished historian, 
Veronica Wedgwood, writing in the appeasement-stricken England of 
the 1930s, this ``futile'' struggle was ``the outstanding example 
in European history of meaningless conflict.'' If that bleak conclusion 
no longer holds, it is because we have come to recognize in recent 
years that the reaction by contemporaries to the horrors of the war 
changed assumptions and attitudes beyond recall, and that this reorientation 
was to propel Europe toward the modern age. Even if we view the year 
merely as a marker of political change, 1648 belongs in the same league 
as other milestone dates, like 1066 and 1789, because the peace treaties 
hammered out that year not only proved to be entirely new kinds of 
diplomatic agreements but also created a system of international relations 
that survived until World War II. To celebrate these treaties on their 
350th anniversary, a vast exhibition has been mounted in three sites 
in Munster and Osnabruck, the Westphalian cities where the negotiators 
spent much of the 1640s and where they finally signed their accords. 
The exhibition, sponsored by the Council of Europe and made up of 
some 1,500 items, opened on Oct. 24 with ceremonies that featured 
the combatants' descendants in the persons of 10 kings and queens 
and 11 other heads of state, including Vaclav Havel as well as a prince 
and a grand duke. Far more than a recollection of the events of 1648, 
it reaches back into the 16th-century origins of the fighting; it 
concludes with a chilling display of Nazi interpretations of the peace; 
and in between it suggests how Europe's political, military and artistic 
cultures were transformed by the ravages of a seemingly endless war. 
The beautiful Dominican church in Osnabruck, now converted into an 
art museum, establishes the historical background with a display of 
paintings, printed broadsides and sculpture that evoke the bitter 
confessional conflict among Roman Catholics, Lutherans and Calvinists. 
Virulent propaganda rarely inspires great art, and this was no exception. 
A Catholic ``Ship of the Church,'' attributed to Jacob Loef, carries 
revered biblical figures, including Jesus crucified on a mast, and 
is followed by a dozen or so little men identified as Luther, Hus 
and other heretics. Fully clothed, waist deep in the water and vainly 
brandishing weapons, they seem more absurd than serious in their threat 
to the Church. On the Protestant side is a crude anonymous painting 
of a monk making love to a nun, their union blessed with tiny monster 
progeny and various symbols of lust, all presided over by a benign, 
red-nosed pope. Liturgical artifacts and church scenes expand on the 
differences among the faiths, but one is caught short by the sudden 
sight of an authentic masterpiece, Bernini's bust of Pope Urban VIII 
from the Louvre. Deep in contemplation, the shrewd and cultured pontiff, 
dressed in an exquisitely detailed cape and hat, seems almost out 
of place surrounded by the products of fierce confessional strife, 
especially as he became an advocate of peace and compromise in the 
1630s. Yet it is salutary to be reminded of the dignity of the faiths 
_ here and in the depictions of church buildings _ amid the hatreds 
that their bitter rivalries aroused. A few hundred yards away, Osnabruck's 
main museum houses a record of the chief personalities and events 
of the war. The most dazzling portrait (even in the company of Velazquez 
and Rubens) is a gleaming Van Dyck of the Spanish general Ambrogio 
Spinola, whose intelligence shines through an awkward pose in full 
armor and ruff. But the most vivid personality is the Swedish King, 
Gustavus Adolphus, the Lion of the North, who saved the Protestant 
cause as he swept through Germany until felled in battle. Gustavus 
never did well in his painted portraits, but there is a monumental 
bronze bust by Hans von der Putt that suggests his charismatic power; 
a vicious sword that one suspects he wielded with murderous accuracy, 
and a battle plan he drew that reflects his mastery of the art of 
war. Yet the overall effect of the scenes of fighting and the townscapes, 
the portraits and the broadsides is to demonstrate the steady decline 
of the religious passions that had prompted the war. Here was one 
of the major shifts of the age, as politics and territorial ambition 
(not to mention loot) became driving forces for the combatants. Velazquez's 
``Surrender of Breda,'' perhaps the greatest work the conflict inspired, 
could not be lent by the Prado, but it adorns the catalog, and its 
portrayal of the Catholic Spinola gently comforting the Calvinist 
Dutch commander emphasizes the dwindling pleasure of victory, even 
over religious antagonists. And the Dutch response after they recaptured 
Breda, Hendrick de Meyer's ``Withdrawal of the Spanish Garrison,'' 
is a calm country scene, surveyed by a peasant and his dog, with covered 
wagons quietly passing by on a fine autumn day. It is true that the 
peace conference had to be split between Protestant Osnabruck and 
Catholic Munster, and that Pope Innocent X (also present in a Bernini 
bust) was to denounce the treaties as ``invalid, iniquitous, damnable, 
inane'' for their concessions to the Protestants; but it is more significant 
that the pope's fulminations were ignored. The last room in Osnabruck, 
in the harsh new wing of the museum normally devoted to the art of 
the Holocaust victim Friedrich Nussbaum, surveys later reactions to 
the war and draws particular attention to the Nazi response. In the 
1930s and early 40s, Westphalia was compared to Versailles _ the treaties 
by which France had crushed German hopes, but which now were to be 
overturned. The xenophobia and arrogance remind one of the new fanaticisms 
and hatreds that replaced religious passions in national affairs. 
A half-hour train ride to the south (messages took a day to cover 
the same distance in the 1640s), in Munster's Landesmuseum, the larger 
implications of the conflict occupy 35 rooms, each devoted to a different 
theme. In one breathtaking display of Baroque exuberance, all the 
major protagonists are assembled: two popes in busts by Bernini, the 
leaders of Spain in austere full-length portraits by Velazquez, the 
Dutch leader in a robust Van Dyck, a charming Christina of Sweden 
by Bourdon, a corpulent and disheveled Christian of Denmark by Karel 
van Mander and half a dozen stiff princely figures. The one blaze 
of color in this self-consciously stoic gathering is Cardinal Richelieu, 
resplendent in his robes in a full-length painting by Philippe de 
Champagne from the University of Paris. This was the public face of 
the war. More revealing of its reality are the rooms devoted to its 
social consequences. A harrowing display of the omnipresence of atrocity, 
plague and hunger includes a cart and coffin for a plague victim that 
has survived from the 1620s. The gruesome images include a finely 
polished ivory by Leonard Kern of a man eating a human leg and vicious 
scenes of civilians tortured by soldiers. It is here that one sees 
the roots of those other fundamental changes brought about by the 
war. For it was the revulsion at the bloodshed and depravity that 
prompted the determination, finally, to establish tighter military 
discipline. Thanks to stricter organization, more formal training 
and the isolation of troops into barracks, all of which accelerated 
after the war, civilian and battle casualties fell dramatically during 
the century that followed. The creation of a more comprehensive, formal 
international system was also a means of restraining the horrors. 
The aristocratic faces of the dozens of peace negotiators are on view, 
as are the elegantly sealed documents they signed. Looking at them, 
one realizes that only their persistence _ remaining in this corner 
of Europe for seven years to resolve all the issues _ enabled the 
peace congresses to put back in the bottle the genie of unrestrained 
aggression that had been spawned by the new capabilities of gunpowder 
warfare and the new ambitions of the territorial state. These statesmen 
redrew the map of Europe, and in the process they revolutionized diplomacy. 
Gerard ter Borch's famous painting of the decisive moment, the signing 
ceremony in Munster, comes to life when one crosses the Cathedral 
square to the city hall where it took place, in a room that still 
looks as it did in 1648. It is a numinous reminder of the transformation 
of politics and warfare. No less compelling is the evidence of the 
war's impact on the artistic sensibilities of the age. This was one 
of the great periods of European art, and its most sensitive practitioners 
recoiled from the slaughter and desolation they saw. Jacques Callot's 
grim series on the ``Miseries of War'' sets the tone; less obviously, 
Mathieu Le Nain's haunting version of a genre scene, ``Argument Over 
a Card Game,'' takes on layers of meaning as we notice the competing 
symbols of military and civilian life, the readiness to spill blood 
and the somber, exhausted faces of the soldiers. Even more resonant 
are a pair of desolate paintings by George de La Tour: ``John the 
Baptist in the Desert'' and ``Job and His Wife.'' Driven from his 
native Lorraine by the conflict, La Tour shows John in depressed solitude, 
and his gaunt figure of Job stares blankly as his wife tells him, 
``Curse God and die.'' We see these paintings differently in the context 
of an agonizing, consuming war. Predictably, the artists also embodied 
their generation's most urgent pleas for peace. Velazquez's ``Breda'' 
had an antiwar message; so did Rubens's design for the entry of the 
Cardinal-Infante Ferdinand, the new ruler of the southern Netherlands, 
into Antwerp. And the final room in Munster, centered on Rubens's 
lush ``Peace and War,'' makes the case unmistakably. The sunny, fruitful 
world of Peace dominates the painting, while in the background Minerva 
pushes Mars away into the dark world of furies and war. Mars looks 
over his shoulder in amazement at the pleasures of Peace, which seem 
to be organized for the benefit of two young girls (as it happens, 
portraits of the children of one of Rubens's friends, a personal touch 
that indicates the strength of the artist's feelings). But it was 
not enough merely to hope for the future. The very agenda of art, 
which hitherto had so often celebrated the glory of war and its heroes, 
subtly changed as well. A quiet landscape by Claude Lorrain that hangs 
amid cavalry engagements and sorties gives one a foretaste of the 
future. The emotion and drama of the Baroque were about to give way 
to the more formal and restrained esthetic of Classicism and Rococo, 
and it may not be too much to suggest that the experience of 30 years 
of brutality helped encourage that shift in sensibilities. The catalog 
for this rich and multifaceted exhibition is a huge and handsome hardback, 
modestly priced, beautifully illustrated and flawed only in its skimpy 
index. For those who cannot get to Westphalia by Jan. 17, it offers 
a glimpse of what is on offer: a stirring encounter with one of the 
most creative as well as violent ages in European history, illuminated 
by art both great and ordinary, and by a swirl of people and events 
that echo long after they are seen no more. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>