<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0295 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
GAME OF THE WEEK (Monday Night) Jets (9-4) at Dolphins (9-4) Miami 
has been impressive at home, especially on defense, allowing 6.7 points 
a game. Overall, Miami has allowed a league-low 14.2 points a game. 
Another good omen for the Dolphins: Quarterback Dan Marino has thrown 
for more yards (7,820) and touchdowns (68) against the Jets than any 
other team. But New York has the second-best offense in the American 
Football Conference and Miami's offense is average. The Jets can easily 
score 25 points against any defense, because quarterback Vinny Testaverde 
is hot. He is 9-1 as a Jets starter and has a conference-high 22 touchdown 
passes. Look for Testaverde to pass for more than 300 yards. The only 
catch for the Jets: The key players Keith Byars (arm) and Aaron Glenn 
(ankle) are doubtful and questionable, respectfully. Jets, 31-17 SUNDAY 
1 P.M. GAMES Cardinals (6-7) at Eagles (3-10) Arizona's playoff hopes 
may have been destroyed in a crushing loss to the Giants last week; 
no one is sure how Arizona will react against Philadelphia. Will the 
Cardinals be able to erase the loss, or will it plague them? Making 
Arizona's job easier is the fact that Philadelphia is struggling. 
It may have the worst offense in the league, and although the Eagles 
held Arizona to 129 yards passing in Week 3, quarterback Jake Plummer 
has improved. Look for him to throw for 250 yards and running back 
Adrian Murrell to rush for 100. Cardinals, 30-14 Falcons (11-2) at 
Saints (6-7) Atlanta can match its club record for victories, set 
in 1980. The Falcons have scored 353 points, and are on pace for a 
club-record 434. In 10 of its games, Atlanta has 300 or more yards 
of offense. When quarterback Chris Chandler is healthy, the Falcons 
may have the third-best offense in the league behind Minnesota and 
Denver. But they will face a very confident Saints defense this week. 
New Orleans held Dallas to 8 yards rushing last week, a shocking number 
for a great offensive line and top back like Emmitt Smith. New Orleans 
will keep the Falcons from scoring 30 points, but Atlanta is too good, 
and the Falcons honestly believe they have a shot at home-field advantage 
throughout the playoffs. Atlanta, 21-19 Bears (3-10) at Packers (8-5) 
The refrain coming from the Packers these days is, ``Go ahead, doubt 
us, but we're still dangerous.'' Yet losing to a struggling Tampa 
Bay team on Monday night was one of the low points for Green Bay this 
season. They have a lot of issues to resolve for the playoffs, like 
finding a consistent running game. The problem with the Bears is that 
they don't present a legitimate threat to the Packers in any form 
_ on paper. The Bears are confident against Green Bay and even they 
don't know exactly why. This game is a repeat of their most recent 
meeting, last season, in which Green Bay won by just 1 point after 
Chicago failed to convert on a game-winning 2-point conversion. Packers, 
17-14 Bengals (2-11) at Colts (2-11) Cincinnati has been one of the 
most disappointing teams in football, and Coach Bruce Coslet will 
probably be fired at season's end. On his way out the door, he will 
get his first loss as the Bengals' coach in four games at the RCA 
Dome. Peyton Manning is hot right now, and the Falcons barely beat 
him last week, while Cincinnati did not put up much of a fight against 
Buffalo. Manning has taken every snap this year (808 plays), has 21 
touchdown passes and needs just two more to break the rookie record 
of the former Giants quarterback Charlie Conerly. Colts, 28-21 Broncos 
(13-0) at Giants (5-8) The Broncos feel almost invincible. By beating 
the Giants, they can both match the 1972 Miami Dolphins, who finished 
the regular season 14-0, and win a league-record 19th straight game. 
In their last two games the Broncos have not looked pretty, and expect 
this game to be more of the same. Look for the Giants to double-team 
tight end Shannon Sharpe, and for defensive end Michael Strahan to 
have three sacks. That will keep the game close, but these Broncos 
win because this is a special season for them and when they want to 
be, they are unbeatable. Broncos, 31-21 Patriots (8-5) at Rams (3-10) 
New England has jumped right back into the playoff race because quarterback 
Drew Bledsoe has taken the team on his back. The Patriots may be the 
most dangerous team in the AFC East right now, especially because 
they are starting to get back their injured offensive players. There 
is little chance that they lose to the Rams. Patriots, 31-10 Raiders 
(7-6) at Bills (8-5) It's not often that a game features four Heisman 
Trophy winners: Tim Brown, Desmond Howard, Charles Woodson and Doug 
Flutie. OK, Howard isn't in the same stratosphere as the rest of his 
Heisman buddies, but Brown, Woodson and Flutie are all critical players 
for their teams. One might think the key to this game is Flutie against 
a very good Raiders defense, but really it is the Oakland offense 
against the Buffalo defense. There have been remarks by opposing teams 
that the Raiders' offense has become predictable. The Bills get the 
victory because they are predictably tough at home. Bills, 20-14 Steelers 
(7-6) at Buccaneers (6-7) The team that loses this game is basically 
out of the playoff picture. The Steelers are coming off a bad loss 
to New England, while the Buccaneers beat Green Bay last Monday night. 
That victory reenergized the Buccaneers' season. Take Tampa Bay in 
this one, because the Buccaneers are playing at home (Tampa Bay is 
5-2 at Raymond James Stadium) and because the Steelers still have 
not found a way to cure their offensive ills. Tampa Bay, 26-14 Oilers 
(7-6) at Jaguars (10-3) It looks like Jaguars quarterback Mark Brunell 
will miss the remainder of the regular season _ at least _ with a 
severe ankle sprain. This totally changes the complexion of the Jaguars, 
because Brunell is so critical to their offense. Jacksonville's 37-22 
victory over Detroit was actually closer than it seems; it took 10 
fourth-quarter points to put some room between Jacksonville and the 
Lions. Will it be enough for the Jaguars to simply hand off the ball 
to running back Fred Taylor 25 times? Nope. Oilers, 28-27 Redskins 
(4-9) at Panthers (2-11) Redskins quarterback Trent Green is suddenly 
hot, though it's about, oh, six weeks too late. Green has 12 touchdowns 
and only 2 interceptions in his last six games. He is the reason the 
Redskins are in a mini-winning streak, last week beating the hapless 
San Diego Chargers for their second victory in a row. Carolina plans 
on blitzing Green crazy with a Greene of its own, linebacker Kevin 
Greene, tied for second in the NFL with 14 sacks. Not enough for the 
Panthers, who need to add more offensive weapons in the off season. 
Redskins, 13-7 SUNDAY 4 P.M. GAMES Chargers (5-8) at Seahawks (6-7) 
If the league decided to hold a vote on instant replay tomorrow, Seattle 
Coach Dennis Erickson would be first in line, holding up a card with 
``Yes'' on it. Because of the terrible call on Vinny Testaverde's 
quarterback sneak last week, the Seahawks are in a tremendous hole 
in terms of getting to the playoffs. They could have defeated the 
Jets, improved to 7-6 and, since they will beat the Chargers, been 
8-6 after this weekend. Erickson might have won the last two and saved 
his job. Now he's in trouble, but this week, he gets a respite because 
San Diego, while allowing the fewest yards in the NFL, offers little 
challenge offensively. Seahawks, 27-16 Cowboys (8-5) at Chiefs (5-8) 
Dallas can clinch its sixth division title in the 1990's with a victory 
over the Chiefs and an Arizona loss. The Cowboys were the toast of 
the division until that bizarre 22-3 loss to New Orleans last week. 
Look for the Chiefs to try to duplicate, at least in some form, the 
defense the Saints used, which featured lots of stunts on the line 
and run blitzing to shut down the running game. The problem is, Dallas' 
Chan Gailey is a smart offensive coach and won't be fooled twice. 
He will make some adjustments and get Dallas back on track. How much 
the Cowboys win by depends on whether Deion Sanders, nursing a toe 
injury, plays. He is listed as questionable. Cowboys, 30-22 Vikings 
(12-1) at Ravens (5-8) Minnesota can clinch home-field advantage throughout 
the playoffs with a victory and an Atlanta loss. This could be a dangerous 
game for the Vikings. In addition to Baltimore being able to score 
some points, the Vikings are beat up. Wide receiver Jake Reed (back) 
and running back Robert Smith (knee) will not play. Wide receiver 
Cris Carter is questionable with a pulled calf, but will most likely 
play. Still, with all the danger for Minnesota, they still have quarterback 
Randall Cunningham and wide receiver Randy Moss. Cunningham has passed 
for 708 yards and 8 touchdowns the last two games and Moss has 14 
touchdowns this season. They are proving too much for any team. Vikings, 
38-20 SUNDAY NIGHT Lions (5-8) at 49ers (10-3) League scouts say that 
one of the better performances put on by a quarterback in the second 
half of the season has been by Batch. In a downtrodden year for the 
Lions, Batch is a bright spot for the future. But right now, Detroit 
is staring at a loss. San Francisco, a playoff berth already in its 
pocket, believes it can still catch the Falcons for the division title, 
as remote as that seems. That belief keeps the 49ers hungry, and the 
Lions are the next meal. 49ers, 30-14 
</TEXT>
</DOC>