<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0235 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An honest mistake is what you could call ``Lettres d'Amour,'' a new 
work for the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater. A grim, amorphous 
piece about couples and outsiders seeking love in a loveless climate, 
the work is stronger on atmosphere than dance values. Its French-born 
choreographer, who uses one name, Redha, is not a novice. He founded 
his company in France in 1983, has worked in films and created a piece 
for the San Francisco Ballet a few years ago. Yet ``Lettres d'Amour,'' 
which received its New York premiere on Wednesday night as part of 
the Ailey troupe's season at City Center, is dismally short on identifiable 
choreographic style. There is something wrong when the most interesting 
movement on stage shows a woman running up a kneeling man's chest. 
For all his ballet training (Rosella Hightower in France, Stanley 
Holden in California), Redha strives for an eclectic contemporary 
vocabulary. ``Lettres,'' which was created for the Ailey company and 
first performed in September during a South African tour, has some 
theatrical impact, but its idiom is strangely inorganic, not expressive 
or meaningful on its own terms. Rarely has a dance work at the Ailey 
seemed so unsuited to its members or its audience. Not every work 
has to be uplifting in this company; this is not the only twist on 
the battle-of-the-sexes theme. Donald Byrd and Ulysses Dove have not 
been slouches at choreographing aggressive pieces in this vein for 
the company. But Redha does not give the dancers a focal point. They 
go from gymnastic partnering to awkward floor work to exits and entrances 
that are more disconnected than nonlinear. The oppressive atmosphere 
is deliberate, but what should be a work about unpleasantness becomes 
unpleasant itself. A science-fiction landscape is evoked in the initial 
monochromatic ice-cold lighting design by Redha and Brenda Dolan. 
Redha's costumes are black and gray. The men wear sleeveless cassocks 
and strip to shorts and one kneepad. The women, in short camisoles, 
don black velvet gowns. Presumably the people onstage are hemmed in 
by ritualistic rules of behavior. After a prologue in which two priestlike 
men strike fists to their chests, the stage fills with six men and 
six women, assorted couples or trios. The women are yanked and pulled. 
Some are repeatedly held upside down in splits or they stand on men's 
shoulders. The odd-man-out role goes to Richard Witter, given a solo 
in which he repeatedly collapses and then rolls on his shoulder. At 
the end, Renee Robinson looks in danger of being squeezed by light 
projectors and electric fans that are moved toward her from four corners. 
If all this were not enough (it isn't), the nine musical recordings, 
ranging from Arvo Part to Gavin Bryars, threaten to drown the action 
in an acoustical fog. By contrast, the revival of the 1970 ``Streams,'' 
one of Ailey's less-than-successful plotless pieces, looked positively 
merry in its clarity of form and structure. Martha Graham's pelvic 
contractions, inserted into a balletic style, were superbly executed. 
The droplet sound of Miloslav Kabelac's light percussion score gave 
the piece its watery title, metaphorically rendered by the flowing 
processions onstage. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>