<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0343 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ericsson AB, the Swedish company that has been aggressively reorganizing 
its business to resist growing competition in its key cellular-phone 
business, said Thursday that its fourth-quarter profit would be 15 
percent to 20 percent lower than expected and that it would cut 10,000 
more jobs because of flagging demand for its phones and public switching 
systems. The company, which warned investors in October to expect 
slower sales because of economic turmoil in Asia and Latin America, 
said it would announce a 10 percent cut in its work force, or 10,000 
jobs, in January. That would be in addition to 10,000 jobs that the 
company is eliminating as part of a cost-cutting effort begun a year 
ago. Ericsson reported that revenue from cellular phones in the third 
quarter fell by 1.6 percent, to 10.82 billion Swedish kronor, or $1.35 
billion, from 11 billion kronor in the period a year earlier. But 
the company said it had maintained its global market share, which 
is 16 percent, according to Dataquest, the market research consultant. 
Analysts surveyed by First Call, which tracks company earnings, said 
they expected Ericsson to earn 87 cents a share in 1998 and $1.05 
a share in 1999, up from 81 cents a share in 1997. But the announcement 
of the new job cuts reflects serious worries that, despite undiminished 
confidence in its long-term prospects, slower growth in many of its 
key global markets in 1999 will dampen sales of cellular phones and 
phone systems. After the earnings warning Thursday, shares of Ericsson 
fell more than 22 percent, to 183 kronor. Its American depository 
receipts fell $4.75, to $24.125. In its wake, shares of other telephone 
suppliers, including Alcatel of France and Royal Philips Electronics, 
turned lower. Shares of other telephone-equipment makers also fell. 
Motorola declined $2.50, to $57.5625, ADRs of Finland's Nokia lost 
$2.3125, to $106, and Lucent Technologies dropped $2.1875, to $97.1875. 
Analysts who follow Ericsson, the world's third-largest wireless phone 
company after Nokia and Motorola, interpreted the announcement as 
an effort by Ericsson to manage market expectations and said it reflected 
disappointingly low growth in public contracts from Asia and Latin 
America, where a recovery is taking longer than expected. Laurent 
Douillet, who follows Ericsson at Lehman Brothers Securities in London, 
said he had downgraded his earnings estimates. ``But it is not a major 
downgrading,'' he added. Ericsson's cellular-phone sales have been 
hurt by slower economic growth in emerging markets, and while signs 
are emerging of gradual recovery in some Asian countries, Sven-Christer 
Nilsson, Ericsson's chief executive, said that ``wider repercussions 
on global demand'' were depressing sales and income. Last year, Ericsson 
began moving swiftly to increase productivity and improve earnings, 
including cutting 10,000 jobs worldwide. The company now employs about 
100,000 people, including about 9,000 in the United States. The company's 
U.S. operations are based in Richardson, Texas, and it has major operations 
in North Carolina, Virginia, California and New York. Lars Stolberg, 
Ericsson's spokesman, said the additional job cuts would most likely 
total 10,000 workers. He said Ericsson was more than halfway through 
the last round of layoffs and had not yet decided where the additional 
job cuts would come. Nilsson said in a statement that Ericsson's nine-month 
results were also depressed by a shift in demand to lower-priced cellular 
phones, notably those linked to prepaid phone services, which now 
account for about a third of the large European market. Analysts said 
the shift was particularly strong in key European markets like Britain 
and France. Such prepaid cards generally enable customers to own wireless 
phones and receive unlimited calls while allowing them to make a limited 
number of outgoing calls at a fixed rate. These phones are usually 
low-priced and have correspondingly low margins for manufacturers. 
Nilsson said that accounted for a lower operating profit despite increased 
sales. Ericsson has had to act decisively to resist the growing competition 
from global competitors, including Nokia, which this year overtook 
Ericsson as the largest supplier of digital cellular phones to the 
United States, the world's largest market, doubling its market share 
to 40.3 percent, from 19.8 percent in 1997, according to Dataquest. 
At the same time, Ericsson's share plummeted to 20.6 percent, from 
41.3 percent. Analysts have praised Ericsson's efforts to revamp its 
operations, and they say fresh technology in the cellular-phone business 
should enable Ericsson to regain its past momentum. Phillip Redman, 
who follows the cellular-phone market for Yankee Group, a consulting 
concern in Boston, said much of Nokia's gains in the United States 
could be attributed to its success in landing lucrative contracts 
to supply digital cellular phones with advanced technology to AT&AMP;T, 
the largest U.S. cellular-phone operator, which introduced the system 
with considerable fanfare earlier this year. ``So 1998 for Ericsson 
was not a great year,'' he said. Ericsson is well placed, however, 
to compete with a new generation of digital cellular-phone technology 
that is expected to be introduced in markets in Asia and elsewhere, 
with broader capabilities than current models, he said. ``That will 
be a much larger market, and also a global market,'' he said. ``So 
on the long-term growth cycle Ericsson is well prepared.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>