<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0328 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If you were packing your bags for a trip to the afterlife, expecting 
to settle in for a spell, what would you take? Something pretty? Something 
protective? Something sentimental: a souvenir, maybe, of where you'd 
been? The ruling elite of ancient Egypt, who envisioned the hereafter 
as a high-polish version of the here and now _ part work, part play, 
part dress-for-dinner pomp _ kept all of these requirements in mind 
when they chose their traveling gear. And some sense of their taste 
in such matters can be gleaned from a gem of a show, ``Gifts of the 
Nile: Ancient Egyptian Faience,'' at the Rhode Island School of Design 
Museum here. Don't be put off by the craft-specific title. Faience 
was a medium with a particular allure for the Egyptians, and they 
used it to create some of their most memorable art. The 200 or so 
objects here _ sculptures, amulets, jewelry and dishes borrowed from 
museum collections in the United States and Europe _ are small enough 
to be carry-on luggage, but they are gorgeous and weighty with information. 
Faience, a type of nonclay ceramic, began as a paste made from two 
materials emblematic of Egyptian life: sand from the parched, devouring 
desert, and water, associated with the nurturing Nile. A coloring 
agent was added, usually powdered copper. Objects were shaped by hand 
or in molds; kilns were heated, and the stage was set for a magic 
act. Going into the kiln, faience was doughy and dull gray, but it 
emerged transformed: rock-hard and coated with a succulent glaze, 
often aquamarine, though the chromatic possibilities were wide. The 
Egyptians called the results ``tjehnet,'' which, the show's catalog 
explains, means luminescent, like the sun and stars. This seemingly 
self-generated brilliance became emblematic of rebirth, which may 
explain why the Egyptians valued faience as highly as they did and 
why many spectacular examples are found in their tombs. Spectacular 
is not too strong a word for much of the work in the exhibition, organized 
by Florence Dunn Friedman, curator of ancient art at the Rhode Island 
School of Design. True, the very earliest sculptures of animals and 
insects, despite their naturalistic verve, are a bit rough, as if 
their makers hadn't yet brought an intractable medium fully under 
control. But a cluster of small rectangular faience tiles on view 
gives a hint of a memorable, vanished sight. About the size of belt 
buckles and glazed a soft turquoise, they were among the 36,000 such 
tiles that once covered a room in the Old Kingdom pyramid tomb of 
King Djoser. Individually, they are nothing much; but when installed 
as part of a wrap-around sheet of glowing color, they must have made 
a striking impact, as if the viewer were floating on air or swimming 
under water. Faience was often used for royal portraits, and one of 
the show's highlights, on loan from the Metropolitan Museum of Art, 
is the likeness of King Amenhotep III in the form of a sphinx. The 
sculpture is no larger than a doorstop or a bookend, but the leonine 
body and youthful, smiling head feel gently monumental, and the periwinkle-blue 
color has a visionary audacity. Other objects linked to royalty abound, 
including doll-size faience wigs made for statues of kings or queens. 
And because of its vivifying reputation, faience was closely identified 
with women and fertility. The show includes several cult statues of 
the grotesque god Bes, protector of infants and new mothers, as well 
as images, possibly talismanic, of women as passive erotic subjects, 
their limbs atrophied, their bodies marked with tattoos. The female 
realm also extended to the Good Housekeeping aspects of domestic life, 
represented here by an array of cups and bowls and a complete low-calorie 
brunch of faience fruits and veggies (peas and cucumbers for starters; 
figs and nuts for dessert). For the boudoir there are perfume flasks 
and cosmetic pots, compartmentalized what's-it boxes with twistable 
lids, and a bedside goblet shaped like a lotus, every leaf and petal 
meticulously incised. To the Egyptian nobility, the lotus, like faience 
itself, signified new life, the exalted state for which earthly existence 
is a kind of dress rehearsal. In that world, one has the impression, 
just about anything goes. It is life-plus, raised to the nth degree, 
with all its oddities and wonders magnified, exalted, turned urbanely 
surreal. Among objects created specifically for funerary use one finds, 
for example, a pectoral on which the goddess Isis leans back against 
her outstretched wings like Jean Harlow on a Deco sofa, ready for 
her close-up. In one cult image, the god Thoth (patron of writers, 
a thankless job) has a male model's build but a bird's head; in another, 
he is a plump hermaphrodite wearing jackel-headed carpet slippers. 
No wonder the face on a Middle Kingdom mummy's mask, with its big 
eyes and raised brows, conveys a worried, ``what next?'' look. Ultimately, 
of course, ``what next?'' was the one important question, and the 
privileged classes of ancient Egyptians found their answer. They may 
have had no more hard proof than anyone else, but they were geniuses 
at inventing an afterlife, and ``Gifts of the Nile'' captures its 
essence with a wish list cargo of treasures suitable for sailing off 
into a faience-blue beyond. ``Gifts of the Nile: Ancient Egyptian 
Faience'' remains at the Rhode Island School of Design Museum, 224 
Benefit St., Providence, R.I., through Jan. 3. The show travels to 
the Kimbell Art Museum, Fort Worth, Jan. 24 through April 25. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>