<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0368 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Biologists have for the first time deciphered the full genetic programming 
of an animal, a landmark achievement both in its own right and as 
a milestone toward understanding the human genome. The animal is a 
microscopic roundworm known as Caenorhabditis elegans and used in 
laboratories throughout the world as a means to explore biology at 
the genetic level. Researchers report that its genome, or full DNA, 
consists of 97 million chemical units and is predicted to contain 
19,099 genes. If printed in ordinary type, the DNA sequence would 
take up 2,748 pages of a New York Times newspaper. The genome, deciphered 
by two teams of biologists headed by John E. Sulston of the Sanger 
Center near Cambridge, England, and Robert H. Waterston of Washington 
University in St. Louis, has given biologists their first sight of 
the information needed to develop, operate and maintain a multi-cellular 
animal. The only genomes sequenced up until now have belonged to single-celled 
organisms like bacteria and yeast. Because worms and humans have turned 
out to share many genes in common, the worm genome is regarded by 
biologists as an essential basis for understanding how the human genome 
works. ``In the last 10 years we have come to realize humans are more 
like worms than we ever imagined,'' said Dr. Bruce Alberts, president 
of the National Academy of Sciences and editor of a leading textbook 
on molecular biology. Seeing the worm's complete genome is humbling, 
Alberts said, because it makes biologists realize how much there is 
yet to understand. ``We always underestimate the complexity of life, 
even of the simplest processes,'' he said. ``So this is really only 
the beginning of unraveling the mystery of life.'' Dr. Eric Lander, 
director of a human genome sequencing center at the Whitehead Institute, 
said of the findings: ``This is really a landmark achievement. It 
is the first time we've had a picture of the gene set needed to run 
a multi-cellular organism.'' ``This is a brilliant innovation of half 
a billion years ago that we are getting a look at for the first time,'' 
he said, referring to the evolution of animals from their single-celled 
precursors. Completion of the worm's genome, a 10-year project that 
was finished on schedule, also reinforces the credibility of the federal 
human genome project, which is locked in an undeclared race with a 
formidable new rival, a private enterprise named Celera. Celera is 
owned by Perkin-Elmer, the company that makes the leading brand of 
DNA sequencing machines. Sulston's work was financed by Britain's 
Medical Research Council and the Wellcome Trust of London, Waterston's 
by the National Institutes of Health. The two teams worked in close 
cooperation although they were an ocean apart. They announced their 
effective completion of the genome in the Friday issue of Science. 
The two laboratories are also the leading production centers of the 
human genome project. When the two researchers first decided to sequence 
the worm's genome in 1988 each was advised by colleagues that the 
task was a lunatic venture. The longest stretches of DNA that had 
been sequenced at the time were just a few thousand units in length. 
``Several people told me I was nuts and was throwing away my career,'' 
Waterston said. ``But I have a lot of faith in John,'' he said, referring 
to his colleague's ability to solve hard problems. When James Watson, 
then director of the human genome project, first told the two researchers 
he would advance money for a pilot project, they realized a long commitment 
lay ahead of them. Sulston recalled that on the Syosset platform, 
the Long Island train station near Watson's Cold Spring Harbor laboratory, 
``I said to Bob `The prison door has just closed behind us _ I heard 
it clang.' '' The two researchers first met in Cambridge in the laboratory 
of Sydney Brenner, the biologist who selected the C. elegans worm 
as a model animal for scientific study. Sulston was completing a study 
of how the worm grows from a single egg to the 959 cells of the adult 
animal, and then moved on to mapping the worm's chromosomes, the packages 
in which the DNA is stored. Waterston, a physician interested in muscle 
disease, had been persuaded by Brenner to study muscle disorders first 
in the worm. The task of sequencing the worm's genome was not the 
usual kind of academic research project. Both Waterston at the Washington 
University School of Medicine and Sulston in Cambridge had to transform 
their laboratories into semi-industrial plants employing more than 
200 people each in almost round-the-clock operations. One major problem 
in sequencing a genome is that the machines that analyze DNA can read 
segments of only 500 units or so in length. The full genome must be 
reconstituted from an inordinate number of small overlapping pieces. 
Another complexity is that the DNA must be amplified, or copied many 
times, to furnish the machines with a sufficient amount to analyze. 
Many regions of the worm genome, however, resist the usual amplification 
processes. Even now the genome, though effectively complete, has a 
few small gaps that remain to be filled in. From early on in the project, 
Sulston and Waterston posted on the Internet the DNA sequences they 
obtained, for other scientists to analyze. ``As the Internet evolved, 
a mechanism developed for us to provide data to people in a practical 
way,'' Waterston said. Biologists throughout the world soon learned 
that at the touch of a button they could compare any gene they were 
working on with the growing set of genes available from the worm project. 
The worm genome proved to be of broad interest because of the unexpected 
degree of overlap between worm and human genes. A researcher who finds 
that a particular gene is involved in human disease can compare its 
DNA sequence with those in the worm genome data base. A match with 
a worm gene of known function will often reveal the role of the human 
gene. The worm genome is thus providing an essential platform from 
which to understand how the human genome is put together. Yet it will 
take years of work to understand even the worm genome. Unlike computer 
programming, in which programmers usually insert explanatory remarks 
to describe what function each segment of code performs, biological 
programming comes unannotated, with no explicit hint of evolution's 
intentions. Biologists know or can guess the role of about half of 
the worm's genes; they have no idea what the rest may do. At first 
glance the worm genome seems just a thicket of puzzles. Dr. Francis 
Collins, director of the human genome project at the National Institutes 
of Health, said geneticists had believed humans have about 10 different 
genes for making varieties of collagen, the main structural protein 
of skin. Yet the worm turns out to have 170 collagen genes. Biologists 
have no idea why it would need so many but say they trust in evolution's 
wisdom that it does. Genes that contribute nothing to an organism's 
survival tend to be shed quickly. For many genes that exist in one 
copy in the worm, humans have four versions, confirming the long-held 
suspicion that the animal genome has twice undergone a full-scale 
duplication in the course of evolution. The spare copies were presumably 
free to evolve new and useful functions. The C.elegans worm would 
have split off on a separate evolutionary path before the first of 
the two duplications occurred. An intriguing pattern already discernible 
in the general organization of the worm's genome is that its genes 
fall into two broad classes that are arranged differently on the chromosomes. 
One set of genes performs basic housekeeping functions for the cell. 
These genes have many counterparts in yeast and must have been highly 
conserved through evolution for two such different organisms to carry 
matching sets. The other set of genes is special to the worm and seems 
to be evolving at a much brisker pace. Sulston and Waterston report 
that the two sets of genes have different locations on the worm's 
chromosomes, with the older, conserved genes lying in the central 
region of chromosomes and the more variable genes being positioned 
toward the two ends. ``It really does look as if the genome has found 
a way to hide its more important genes from the vicissitudes of the 
evolution that is going on more rapidly in the arms,'' Waterston said. 
Many of the worm's genes occur in clusters, as if one important gene 
had been duplicated many times to perform variations of the original 
function. But for all the presumed importance of the clusters' tasks, 
many are unknown. ``One of the things I found surprising was that 
there are so many gene clusters _ 402 _ yet many are of genes about 
whose function we know nothing,'' said Dr. Robert Horvitz, a worm 
biologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Sulston believes 
that only a small fraction of the worm genome's value is yet apparent. 
``The genome is not an open sesame in itself,'' he said. ``It just 
provides this marvelous toolkit with all the basic information for 
making an animal, if biologists can just figure it out. The value 
it will deliver over time is much greater than the value you get on 
first analysis.'' Biologists have already found the worm genome to 
be of great value. ``I can't tell you how indebted those of us who 
do molecular genetics are to the people who did the genome sequence,'' 
said Dr. Gary Ruvkun of the Massachusetts General Hospital. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>