<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981210.0305 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The recent drop in the price of oil and natural gas and the continuing 
decline of other commodity prices at year's end is putting renewed 
pressure on many of the emerging-market countries at the center of 
this year's global financial crisis. Many of the world's most troubled 
nations _ economically, politically or both _ depend on the sale of 
commodities for a major part of their economic growth and government 
revenue. Just look at a list of oil exporters: Russia, Venezuela, 
Mexico, Ecuador, Algeria, Nigeria and Indonesia. All these countries, 
and others, are getting less from commodities, whether it is oil, 
copper, platinum or zinc. ``My view is that the markets haven't sensed 
how seriously this can be for the global economy,'' said Lawrence 
Brainard, head of emerging-market research at Chase Securities. ``I 
think it is a sleeper.'' The intensifying commodity problem is expected 
to lead to bigger bond defaults in Russia and _ at a minimum _ sharp 
budget-cutting in many Latin American and other nations, which could 
aggravate political uncertainty. In addition, growth will slow in 
a world that, outside the United States and Europe, is already in 
a recession or on the edge. Commodity prices have been one of the 
two key conduits for transmitting the Asian financial crisis around 
the world. The other has been stock markets, which have gotten more 
attention from investors. Lower commodity prices are mostly seen as 
a boon for investors, reducing costs on gasoline, heating oil, natural 
gas, food and many manufactured products. The stock markets in many 
of the troubled countries are rebounding now, after central bank interest-rate 
cuts in the United States and Europe and an International Monetary 
Fund rescue package for Brazil helped calm investor fears of a global 
recession. But the worldwide demand that is needed to turn commodity 
prices around is not showing up. Two closely followed commodity indexes 
_ the Goldman Sachs Commodity Index and the Commodity Research Bureau/Bridge 
index _ are at their lowest levels in more than two decades. Commodities 
are so weak that Citigroup may sell its commodity business, Phibro 
Inc. Actually, the 10-month slide in commodity prices that began in 
the fall of 1997 _ when the effects of the Asian crisis first hit 
the United States _ was steeper and more damaging than the second 
wave of declines that began in mid-November. From October 1997 until 
the end of August this year, the Commodity Research index plunged 
21 percent, then leveled off. But since Nov. 12 it has dropped almost 
8 percent. What worries analysts now is that the recent decline is 
a signal that prices will not turn around soon. Matthew Sagers, director 
of the energy service of Planecon, a consulting group specializing 
in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, said the consensus 
on oil prices ``is that we are going to be here for several years.'' 
Brainard and other analysts argue that an extended period of lost 
economic growth and lower governmental revenues that stem from the 
drop in commodity prices will raise the pressure on many already troubled 
governments and economies. That could intensify investor concern and 
weaken currencies. To defend those currencies, central banks would 
have to raise their interest rates _ which would mean even slower 
growth. The impact on Russia, for example, has been stark. The country's 
$87 billion in 1997 exports included $21.9 billion in oil, $16.4 billion 
in gas and $14 billion in metals _ about 60 percent of the total. 
But the prices of every one of these commodities have fallen sharply 
and are still declining. The price of platinum, for which Russia is 
the second major supplier, has dropped almost 12 percent just since 
July. The price of oil plunged 36 percent _ from around $22 a barrel 
in October 1997 to around $14 in August _ and has fallen another 23 
percent, to $10.72, since November. These sectors, especially energy, 
are a critical source of tax revenue for the Russian government. About 
a third of government budget revenues come from energy taxes, according 
to Marcel Cassard, chief economist for emerging Europe at Deutsche 
Bank in London. The exact impact the recent commodity price decline 
will have on the Russian budget and spending is hard to tell; the 
draft 1999 budget is already hard to interpret because of its inclusion 
of tax cuts. The draft budget, which the government adopted Thursday, 
reduces both the value-added tax and the corporate tax and does not 
impose, as some analysts had hoped, new export taxes on energy. Even 
so, Cassard said, ``you would have to assume lower revenues.'' The 
most immediate fallout from this commodities pricing squeeze, several 
analysts said, will be even more Russian defaults on foreign loans, 
as the government diverts those interest and principal payments to 
cover the cost of domestic programs. Russia owes about $17 billion 
of interest and principal payments this year, including $5 billion 
to the IMF. The government included debt payments of just $9.5 billion 
in its draft budget. In fact, the government has already asked the 
foreign government leaders in the so-called Paris Club and the foreign 
bank lenders in the London Club to restructure and stretch out their 
debt payments. But now analysts say that even the goal of $9.5 billion 
will not be met. ``Looking at the budget assumptions and the exchange 
rate, they will have serious problems servicing even $5 billion of 
debt,'' said Gretchen Rodkey, the Russian and East European bond analyst 
at Bear Stearns &AMP; Co. Analysts say the only bonds they are sure 
will be serviced are the Russian eurobonds that had been issued by 
the present government after the fall of the old Soviet Union. The 
commodity price decline is also hurting countries with more economic 
importance to the United States and the world. The Mexican government 
said last week that the drop in oil prices would cut its budget revenue 
by as much as $1.5 billion next year, forcing it into a tough debate 
on how to close the gap. The oil price decline could also slow economic 
growth. In Venezuela, where Hugo Chavez, a former coup leader and 
political outsider, was elected president on Sunday, oil is 70 percent 
of the country's exports and accounts for 50 percent of its budget 
revenue. And as Chavez determines the new path in which he will take 
Venezuela _ and the spending needed to do it _ investors will remember 
that Venezuela's revenues will suffer more than any other Latin American 
nation for every decline in the price of oil. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>