<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981210.2000.1206 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now most Americans oppose impeaching the president, and most Americans 
do not approve of the way Congress is handling its job, but for all 
its faults, the House of Representatives appears to be a paragon of 
responsibility compared to its Russian counterpart, the state Duma. 
As THE WORLD's Alistair Wanklin reports from Moscow, the Duma has 
been acting rather strangely of late. Hundreds of demonstrators gather 
on the street outside secret police headquarters in Moscow. They're 
here to mourn the millions who perished in the Soviet Goulag labor 
camps and to protest a vote by the Russian parliament to put back 
a statue of Felix Drajinsky, who founded the KGB. Deputies in the 
state Duma say the statue would symbolize the fight against crime. 
Influential Duma speaker, Genardi Selasnork, has even called for reintroducing 
the labor camps. : When in hard labor, men plead with God daily to 
allow them to die to save them from the work in the stone-breaking 
plant and in the forest. So I would vote with both hands to bring 
the labor camps back. Other Duma deputies have suggested targets for 
blame. This valiantly anti-Semitic speech at the provincial rally 
earned Duma deputy, Albert Makashov, a Nazi epithet in the Russian 
media. Yet, the Duma deputies voted not to criticize Makashov for 
his remarks. The Communist Party's silence may be based less on sympathy 
with Makashov's views than on a lack of political courage, according 
to Andre Riyabov of Moscow's Carnegie Center. They are very afraid 
to lose their old political initiative. And in this situation, as 
they drive some decision like about Drajinsky, about the president 
to show their electorate that they are ready, ready for struggle, 
for struggle for their influence, for their president and parliament 
election. Some Russians warn that the Communists are playing with 
fire with these extremist symbols, especially during a time of hardship. 
In the street outside the secret police headquarters in Moscow, pensioner 
Helen Sachs was one of the Russians protesting plans to reinstall 
the Drajinsky statute. She was upset to see that mere fascists had 
turned to counter the protest. You go there, you'll see a man with 
a Swastika on his chest. You can see a lot of young people, so-called 
skin beating Negroes and people from the caucases repeat step by step 
everything what happened in Germany when fascists came to power. Russia's 
Communists are using some powerful images in their campaign for popular 
support. Anti-Semitism might win them more enemies than votes, but 
the poll shows one in two Russians supports the return of the statue 
of Drajinsky. For THE WORLD, I'm Alistair Wanklin in Moscow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>