<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981210.2000.2886 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Tony Kahn with the answer to today's Geography 
Quiz. We were looking for the second largest of the United Arab Emirates, 
and the answer is Dubai, where one of THE WORLD's toughest horse races 
is now underway, a hundred-mile run through the desert. We reached 
the race's chief veterinary officer on a mobile phone at a makeshift 
field hospital along the course. Martha Maschef says this race is 
not the usual dash to the finish line. It's not a race in the sense 
that they're, you know, galloping flat out over the desert sands like 
you would in a horse race to be. It's more of a strategy race... Ah-hah. 
... where people have to figure out how they can best get through 
these five bet gates that the horses must pass through in order to 
continue. So at each point, they must pass a veterinary commission, 
that is they have to make sure their heart rate is OK and that their 
gait is normal, and that they look good. Right. Now you have a very 
practiced eye, and obviously a very skilled hand because you've got 
to keep these horses healthy. Are these animals that sort of know 
they're in a race and want to win? Do they have like a winning attitude 
or am I barking up the wrong quality here? No, I think that the betters 
one definitely do. And at the start of the race, certainly, you know, 
it's a remarkable sight to see I believe we had 163 starters going 
off through the desert sort of all at once. So, yeah, they definitely 
know they're in a race. It's not the same type of race where they're 
all galloping along head and head and neck to neck. I mean, they're 
excited, they know they're in a race. They're keen to continue, but 
they've done this enough and they're smart enough to pace themselves. 
Right. So a lot of that is rider strategy, too. Some riders are smarter 
than others, and the ones that are able to finish in such conditions 
that they can pass all of that checks are the smarter ones. I'll tell 
you, it sounds an awful lot like real life. That's what I like about 
this race. It's not over until three minutes. Yeah, I think that's 
what everybody that participates in it likes about it. I know that 
the crown prince of Dubai has a 12-horse team. Does he have, as it 
were, the inside track knowing the terrain and being the host country? 
Yeah, the Dubai horses have been running really well, but actually, 
the winner has already come in. Oh, really? And it was an American 
horse. Oh, it's over? Yes, well... We have a winner? It's not over, 
because there's still 57 horses out on the court. There's a great 
honor in simply completing this race. You know, we're happy to see 
them come in in good shape, and it does sound funny, but we really 
don't care who wins. We like to just see everybody complete the course 
and be in good shape. I love this race. So the winner, by several 
hundred lengths? July. I'm sorry? Jedi. Jedi? Jedi, as in "Return 
of the Jedi." Right. And I assume... And he came in and was drinking 
water and eating hay and looked pretty good. Chief veterinary officer 
of the Dubai race of races, Dr. Martin Maschef. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>