<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981210.2000.0378 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A senior official from Iraqs ruling Baath Party stood firm today He 
said if UN weapons monitors try again to inspect the party site in 
Baghdad a new government in Iraq. Until them though, P.J. Crowley, 
spokesman for the National Security Council, says Iraq must comply 
with the U.N. inspection regime. UNSCOM inspectors must be able to 
do their work. Chairman Butler has announced that UNSCOM is in the 
midst of a series of inspections to test Iraqi cooperation. The president 
has clearly laid out specific benchmarks that we will use to evaluate 
exactly what Iraq is required to do. So we will uh - we'll make a 
judgment once uh we hear from chairman Butler and his assessment with 
Iraqi cooperation, and I would expect that to be a number of days 
away. All right, basically then, what the U.S. is saying is we do 
support UNSCOM in this. If UNSCOM should decide for what reasons it 
thinks are necessary to knock on the door of any Iraqi because they 
think weapons might be hidden there, it is incumbent upon Iraq to 
open that door, make sure it's opened or else. It is incumbent upon 
Iraq to provide the information, the access, the people, whatever 
is required to allow UNSCOM to answer those remaining questions so 
that it can certify to the Security Council that - that Iraqi no longer 
possesses weapons of mass destruction or the means of delivering them. 
One of the things that we been hearing, Mr. Crowley, from Sandy Berger 
and others is something that I think you could fairly interpret as 
saying, what we really would like to see happen in Iraq is the end 
of the Saddam Hussein regime. There is no question that we have reached 
a judgment that - that Iraqi will clearly - the Iraqi people will 
clearly be better off with a regime that is more interested in feeding 
its people than building weapons of mass construction. There's no 
doubt that we look forward to the day when there is new leadership 
or positive leadership in Iraq. Is the United States government doing 
more than just looking forward to that? Are there any operations going 
on that are directed specifically at trying to see the change in that 
government? We - We earnestly believe that if the Iraqi people had 
the free choice, you know, this being Human Rights Day, if the Iraqi 
people had the free choice to choose a government, they would choose 
a government other than the one currently led by Saddam Hussein. So 
we are operating activities like Radio Free Iraq to try to provide 
objective information to the people of Iraq. You know, we are making 
clear to Iraqi opposition that we support their efforts to present 
to the Iraqi people and to other countries in the region that there 
is an alternative to the regime of Saddam Hussein. We are going to 
help build political support over the long-term for these opposition 
figures, and so that they would be in a position to replace the existing 
regime sometime down the road. That being the precedent, would then 
it be OK to do the same in other countries besides Iraq where we also 
felt we had a significant concern and national interest at stake? 
If the day should come, should - could we do it in Latin America or 
China? We support efforts to bring greater democracy and opportunity 
to a wide range of countries around the world. A perfect example, 
and a great example on a day like today, being the positive aspects 
that are going on in the country like Nigeria, where in the aftermath 
of the death of a - of a leader in Nigeria through a heart attack, 
natural causes, we have a general who has temporarily taken over in 
Nigeria but is now moving the country dramatically towards greater 
democracy. These are the kinds of things that we are supporting all 
over the world. This is something we want desperately to provide to 
the people of Iraq - free choice, greater opportunity - and we are 
trying to create a climate where that can happen some time down the 
road. Thank you very much for speaking with us. OK, very good. P. 
J. Crowley is the spokesman for the National Security Council. He 
joined us from his office in Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>