<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981210.2000.3076 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, we don't know who he is, but we do know what he paid today for 
a 35-year-old tape of the Beatles' earliest known concert recording: 
$25,300. A lot of money, to be sure, even for what amounts to a bootleg 
of the top rock group of them all. THE WORLD's Marco Worman tells 
us about bootlegs, the fans who collect them, and the record companies 
who are trying to get in on the action. Bootleg recordings are the 
wild mushrooms of the musical kitchen, where most music lovers are 
happy to own a greatest hits package that say the Beatles, certified 
Beatlemaniacs must hunt down every last note the band ever recorded 
and even some they didn't intend to record, like this ragged outtake 
from the "Let it Be" sessions, which wound up on a bootleg CD. Bootlegging 
is illegal. In the United States, if you are found gathering sound 
from a concert without permission and the artist chooses to press 
charges, you could be punished with up to five years in jail or fined 
a quarter of a million dollars. The argument is straightforward: bootlegging 
deprives the artist of royalties, especially if the illegal recording 
is produced and sold widely. I mean, Paul McCartney one time in an 
interview said, "I don't mine bootlegs." And then he said, "But you 
know every time I say that, my lawyer says, "Yes, you do." That's 
Jim O'Donnell, rock historian and the author of "The Day John Met 
Paul." Bootlegging goes very far back. I know it goes at least back 
to the turn of the century. The great Italian tenor, Caruso, for crying 
out loud, was bootlegged. The recordings that we have of many top 
artists come off of so-called bootlegging. In many cases, the appeal 
for rare recordings has forced the hand of record companies to release 
outtakes that would otherwise be the soul purview of bootleggers. 
Take, for example, this curious edition to the otherwise pristine 
CD collection Billie Holiday's "Lady Sings the Blues," a painful, 
15-minute track of Lady Day rehearsing "God Bless the Child." Unlike 
this unfortunate recording of Billie Holiday taken from the recording 
company vaults, most bootlegs are recorded at concerts, says rock 
historian Jim O'Donnell. Somebody goes to a show, and they know they 
will like - They like the performance, so they show up with a tape 
recorder, and then they record it, and sometimes they get the quality, 
sometimes they don't. Sometimes they're quite, quite good. When the 
Grateful Dead was touring, the band roped off special sections at 
its venues for so-called tapers, many of whom came up with pretty 
decent recordings. Yet from an artistic standpoint, there's a philosophical 
question at the heart of the bootleg issue. Is it really right that 
the half-baked piece be heard? Writer, Jim O'Donnell. From the point 
of view of the artist, I don't see it. I don't think that's fair. 
Yet, I have to admit from the point of view from someone who loves 
the music, that is interesting, and I don't think it's hurting the 
artist. You know, Brahms, the composer Brahms right before he died 
in 1893, he burned all his unfinished manuscripts. Now he had every 
right to do that, but I have to admit, to me, that's almost the kind 
of artistic manslaughter. I mean, I can't imagine if we could have 
seen those manuscripts what they would have done for classical music. 
Now there's a gap there. As record companies try to feed public demand 
for the musical sketchbooks of recording artists, technology is allowing 
home grown bootlegs to be more easily traded and sold. It used to 
be to get music to people, you'd have to go to some trouble to find 
them and hand it to them. Well, now, you can get on the Internet and 
someone can slip stuff onto the Internet, and then, pop, there it 
is. And it continues to expand so quickly. Bootlegging continues to 
be a uniquely western phenomenon. In other parts of the world, music 
remains a performance art, and if you've got enough disposable income, 
you might buy some CDs and cassettes. In America and parts of Europe, 
a lot of fans have the money to get every legal recording by an artist 
and they still want more. Rocker Marshall Crenshaw recently released 
a collection of bootleg style recordings he made of himself at home. 
Ironically, one of them, complete with buzzing amplifier, is called, 
"You're my Favorite Waste of Time" and would make an appropriate anthem 
for obsessive bootleg seekers. For THE WORLD, this is Marco Worman. 
Well, that's it for today. In Boston, I'm Tony Kahn. See you tomorrow 
for another spin of THE WORLD. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>