<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981210.2000.0643 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and right. They 
are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one 
another in the spirit of brotherhood. Fifty years ago today, Eleanor 
Roosevelt stood before the U.N. General Assembly and read the newly 
signed Universal Declaration of Human Rights. World War II's horrid 
memories were still fresh in her audience's mind. Just three years 
earlier, Allied troops had liberated German concentration camps, exposing 
Adolf Hitler's attempt to exterminate Europe's Jews. BBC war correspondent 
Richard Dimbleby was among the first to report on the barbarity of 
the camps. I have just returned from the Belzum concentration camp. 
I find it hard to describe adequately the horrible things that I've 
seen and heard. Dead bodies, some of them in decay, lay strewn about 
the road and along the rutted tracks. On each side of the road were 
brown, wooden huts. There were faces at the windows: the bony, emaciated 
faces of starving women too weak to come outside, propping themselves 
against the glass to see the daylight before they died. The Declaration 
of Human Rights was an attempt to create rights for everyone on Earth. 
We emphasize the word "attempt" for abuses have continued from the 
Soviet Union's Joseph Stalin to Cambodia's Pol Pot, and from Chilean 
to Uganda, from Burma to Iraq. Some of the worst atrocities since 
the second World War were committed in the past decade. The first 
time the human rights declaration has been enforced on an international 
level came only within the past five years. The U.N. Security Council 
set up courts to prosecute war crimes in Bosnia, where the phrase 
"ethnic cleansing" came into being, and Rwanda, where an assumed half 
a million people at least were killed in just 100 days. Thomas Bergentall 
is an Auschwitz survivor who became a U.N. commissioner for human 
rights. He says that without international courts, the declaration 
signed a half century ago today is just empty words. To my mind, Rwanda 
is the clearest example of genocide that we have since the second 
World War. We will never end genocide in this world unless we have 
a situation where statesmen, seeing what is happening, will know that 
unless they act to stop it, that they will be held responsible. The 
never-again call is really very hollow, because the apology just isn't 
enough. An apology could never be enough for victims of one of the 
most fundamental abuses of human rights: torture. Systematic, government-sponsored 
torture is practiced in dozens of countries. An estimated 400,000 
torture victims are trying to rebuild their lives right here in the 
United States. To do so, many need psychological as well as physical 
rehabilitation. Some victims of torture around the world will find 
professional help, but many more will not. THE WORLD's Margaret Evans 
introduces us to one torture survivor who is getting better. In the 
pre-dawn hours of a cold winter morning in Copenhagen, Denmark, Hussein 
Daigu and his partner, Metta, prepare breakfast for their two children. 
They're making porridge. And as the snow falls gently outside, it 
looks like a typical Danish family scene. But Daigu is not typical. 
He's torture survivor. Sixteen years ago, he was being held as a political 
prisoner in Turkey, where he was systematically tortured for three 
to four hours a day every day for a month. A lot of beating, my hands, 
my feet, everywhere on my body. Then there was the psychological torture. 
They threatened to rape my mother and my sister. They fed me salty 
food and didn't allow me to drink. I didn't know where I was or what 
would happen, absolute uncertainty. Daigu believed captors used a 
well-known form of torture called salanga, beating his feet with lead 
pipes for hours, displacing his foot pads, and destroying the nerve 
endings. Daigu will never walk without pain again, but he says it's 
harder to cope with torture's psychological legacy -- nightmares, 
anxiety, headaches, fear of strangers, an inability to concentrate 
- all common after effects of torture. It wasn't until 1985 when Daigu 
was granted political asylum in Denmark that he received the help 
he needed. Here in the center of Copenhagen, the townhall clock chimes 
every day at noon. It was in this perhaps unlikely city, home of "The 
Little Mermaid," that the first medical rehabilitation center for 
torture victims was founded in 1982. While torture has been practiced 
for centuries, research into the after effects on individuals is relatively 
new, starting when a group of Amnesty International doctors studied 
Chilean and Greek victims. Inga Genefka was one of the doctors. We 
were all horrified when we had the first meeting back in '75 and '74, 
and we were seeing how bad the situation were, not only physical - 
that was expected - but psychologically with the patient anxiety and 
bad memory and concentration. And they were feeling shameful and all 
the things they couldn't function really. At the Copenhagen center 
a physiologist works with three torture survivors from Iraq, communicating 
through an interpreter. The doctors here try to treat people who have 
suffered the most appalling abuses of the human body imaginable: mutilation, 
electric torture, rape, suffocation, dental extraction without anesthetic. 
Chief psychologist, Edith Montgomery, describes torture as an expertly 
planned attack on a person's sense of self. It might, for instance, 
be that you are aiming a person's sexuality, for instance. When people 
are forced to do things that are against the way they perceive themselves 
and go against socially accepted norms for behavior, then that affects 
their identity and their sense of self. Montgomery says torture methods 
are remarkably similar around the world, and that victims are typically 
strong personalities: teachers, union leaders, journalists. Often, 
the torturers don't want to kill them, they want to destroy their 
will to oppose, to render them useless, and then send them back into 
society as examples. What we have heard is that there are actually 
schools for torturers where they are taught to break down people. 
They use tricks that will remind the victims of their torture all 
their lives, like planning torture sessions after every meal so victims 
won't be able to eat without remembering the torture chamber. But 
Montgomery says the biggest challenge is helping victims overcome 
their sense of guilt. Many feel ashamed of what's happened to them 
and guilty for having lived while others didn't, or for having given 
up the names of friends or family under duress. For many, it takes 
years therapy to place the blame where it belongs: on the torturers. 
Back at his breakfast table, Hussein Daigu is an example of someone 
who's been helped by the treatment. He spent a year in the therapy 
program, and today, his anxiety attacks and nightmares are less frequent, 
and Daigu has created a new life for himself, learning Danish, raising 
a family. But Daigu is one of the lucky ones. Systematic torture exists 
in a third of the world, and 20 to 30 percent of the global refugee 
population, up to five million people, are believed to have been tortured 
at one time or another. Yet there are just 200 torture rehabilitation 
centers in the world, and almost all suffer from funding shortages. 
Inga Genefka, who today heads the International Council for Torture 
Rehabilitation, says the international community has not put the issue 
high enough on the global agenda. I think it is a shameful example 
of how little the rich governments in the world are considering torture. 
I think it is shameful. But in the same time, I'm seeing that, for 
instance, U.S. has voted for a new Torture Victims Relief Act so that 
at least next year, they can give up to certain and still peanuts 
for this work. Genefka says it's the duty of the West to help torture 
victims reclaim their voices, and until they do, to speak on their 
behalf, to denounce torturers and the regimes that support them. For 
THE WORLD, this is Margaret Evans in Copenhagen. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>