<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981210.2000.2016 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Puerto Rico's identity crisis began about the time the Caribbean island 
was ceded to the United States a hundred years ago. Soon after the 
Americans expelled the Spanish, many Puerto Ricans asked to join the 
union. In 1952, Puerto Rico came as close as its ever been to statehood 
by becoming a commonwealth, sort of like a U.S. state but not, sort 
of like a sovereign nation but not. This Sunday, Puerto Ricans will 
vote in a non-binding referendum on the status issue. In the second 
of our three-part series, THE WORLD's Jeb Sharpe visits New York, 
home to almost half of all Puerto Ricans living in the United States, 
to find out how the issue looks from the mainland. Our guide to Puerto 
Rican New York is a colleague, THE WORLD's assistant director, Anne 
Lopez. She grew up here in East Harlem, also known as El Barrio, and 
takes us on a whirlwind tour of her old haunts. This is the playground 
where I used to play. My school's actually a couple of - a block over 
that way. We used to walk over here, and there's this other street 
here. And what do you remember of the neighborhood being like then? 
A lot like it is now. There were always people out on the street, 
always a lot of music, a lot of noise, you know. Everybody spoke Spanish. 
You could buy a lot of the Caribbean foods in the stores. You were 
either black, Puerto Rican, or Chinese. Those were the only groups 
that were really living here at the time. But all the priests and 
nuns were Irish or Italian, you know. And so that was the other culture. 
They always came from the outside in. So it was pretty much a very 
strong Puerto Rican neighborhood. At the AAA Restaurant, the woman 
behind the counter, an old neighbor of Anne's, smiles and waves. It's 
no wonder Anne ended up with a strong Puerto Rican identity, growing 
up in this close-knit environment, surrounded by Spanish speakers 
and Latino culture, and steeped in her father's wistful stories of 
the island home he left as a child, never mind Anne's U.S. citizenship 
and New York birthplace. For a very long time, I never really thought 
of myself as American at all, because I assumed that this country 
didn't perceive me as American. And then I realized that you have 
to seize your own citizenship. You got to make them see you as American. 
So I'm coming to the point where I think I see myself more as an American 
than I used to, but I wouldn't say I'm a full-pledged American, 'cause 
I realize that the experience of the average American in this country 
is very different from my own. I am American, but I'm not. The Puerto 
Rican identity is fraught with contradictions, and it's colored by 
a history of colonialism and an ambiguous relationship with United 
States. For instance, Puerto Ricans are U.S. citizens but can't vote 
in federal elections unless they move to the mainland. They have a 
representative in Congress, but that representative can't vote. There 
are almost as many Puerto Ricans on the mainland as on the island, 
and even those born here tend to feel intensely connected to their 
island roots. And, make no mistake about it, says Juan Figueroa, head 
of the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Funds in New York, 
Puerto Ricans, no matter where they are, care deeply about the status 
issue. The status question for us is like religion. It's our opium, 
so to speak. And, you know, as a family, you know no matter where 
you are, you know, if you want to become, if you want to be still 
part of that family, you better not dare cross that line if you're 
statehooder and go out and, you know, do something else or vice versa, 
because you're going to get, you know, you're going to be the "black 
sheep," quote, unquote, of the family. Anne Lopez found that out back 
when she was in college. I remember once I went to a rally down at 
- by the U.N., and I heard this band singing this song called, "Hay 
viva Un Puerto Rico Libres," which means, "May Puerto Rico Live Free." 
And I remember I went home and I was singing that song, at my mother 
said, "What? What are you saying?" She said, "Be careful with that." 
I went, "OK." And so I realized that, you know, it hit me then - then 
that people have very staunch views on how things should go there. 
Hi, hi, come in to my nest. Anne takes me home to meet her mother, 
Julia Lopez, who feeds us big bowls of Anne's favorites Puerto Rican 
stew, sancocho. Mrs. Lopez seems more interested in talking about 
cooking then politics, but in the end, she can't contain her exasperation 
with yet another non-binding referendum on Puerto Rico's future status. 
I feel that it's almost a joke because it never comes through. And 
Puerto Rico will be making a big mistake if they vote for statehood 
or independence. But they like the idea of having the United States 
protect them, and to say nothing of all the culture that has been 
shared both ways. Having made her pitch for continuing commonwealth 
status, Julia Lopez sends us on our way. OK. And get home safe. All 
day, Anne and I ask people about the status question. We talk with 
retired garment workers, cab drivers, musicians. We talk with statehooders, 
Independistas, and people who want to leave well enough alone. Perar 
Santiago is admiring a vendor's toy songbirds on 3rd Avenue, but her 
mind is on Puerto Rico. Santiago fears a change in status could cost 
Puerto Ricans their freedom to travel back and forth, so she'd rather 
stick with what she knows. In contrast, statehooders argue joining 
the union is an issue of fairness and economic opportunity. Henry 
Coldrone of the East Harlem Chamber of Commerce points out that Puerto 
Ricans have served in America's Armed Forces during every war since 
World War I. The point is that you live and you die, and you bleed 
for a flag, but you can't vote for the person who sent you there, 
which is the president, who's commander-in-chief. So we have things 
that we've put together like a patchwork. You can do this, but you 
can't do that, you can do this, but you can't do that. And it's just 
- It's not reasonable, it's not logical. Down the street in a store 
that sells only Puerto Rican products, Angel Santos, born and bred 
in New York, favors independence. We were forced out of the island 
practically, especially the hillbillies, and the sold our lands to 
American, uh, rich men and, uh, government, and uh, we were - We've 
been pretty abused for 400 years from this time, and a hundred years 
from the Americans. So it's about time that we - it stops. Only a 
small minority of Puerto Ricans both here and on the island are for 
independence, but you wouldn't know it here in East Harlem. We're 
looking at a mural. And, um, it's an open lot, and somebody painted 
on this wall the - the Puerto Rican flag and then the flag of -- the 
fly of... Again, our guide, Anne Lopez. And over here, it says in 
Spanish,, "If you want to be free, you just have to begin to do it." 
The crowd here at the annual gala of the Puerto Rican Legal Defense 
and Education Fund is highly educated, left leaning, and mostly distrustful 
of U.S. policy and attitudes toward Puerto Rico and Latin America 
in general. Ruth Pagani, a housing advocate from Washington, says 
Puerto Ricans on the mainland and Puerto Ricans on the island are 
one and the same. But she argues that when you live and work here, 
it becomes a lot harder to consider statehood as a viable option. 
The one thing the Puerto Ricans here have experienced that Puerto 
Ricans on the island have not have been the systemic discrimination, 
and, um, and bigotry. And Puerto Ricans in Puerto Rico have just never 
really been exposed to that. So they don't understand the ramifications 
of becoming full-fledged citizens and have an island become a state 
in a country that has pervasively viewed its Latino citizens as second 
class. The overriding feeling among these activists and civil rights 
lawyers is that until Congress authorizes a binding referendum on 
the future of Puerto Rico, all the huffing and puffing is for naught. 
When and if that time comes, they stand ready to fight for a fair 
process. For many of them, that means letting Puerto Ricans here on 
the mainland have as much say as those back on the island. For THE 
WORLD, I'm Jeb Sharpe. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>