<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981210.2000.2627 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nicaragua today became the second Latin American nation to sue U.S. 
and British tobacco companies for the cost of treating sick smokers. 
The lawsuit was filed in a U.S. court in Puerto Rico. Guatemala filed 
a similar lawsuit in May, while Brazil confirmed today that it plans 
to do the same. These legal maneuvers follow last month's $206 billion 
settlement between the tobacco industry and 46 U.S. states. DeLisa 
Simmons is with the Houston law firm of Fleming, Hovencampf, and Grayson, 
which filed the lawsuits on behalf of both Guatemala and Nicaragua. 
Ms. Simmons, let me ask you first about the legal precedent. I guess 
you often do in the court. What is the precedent for a lawsuit like 
this, a foreign government suing an American company in a U.S. court? 
Well, there is a long history of foreign governments suing in the 
United States jurisdictions, and the first reported case that we can 
find is dated 1870, when the French government filed the lawsuit here 
in the United States. And that was upheld by the United States Supreme 
Court. Now are you filing in the United States because it's manufactured 
here, although the damage is being done in the countries that you're 
representing? Yes. And also, the activities that the tobacco companies 
worldwide were orchestrated and manipulated and dictated through the 
companies here in the United States. To what extent did you get either 
your example or your inspiration from the lawsuits that have led to 
the settlement between the industry and the states in the United States? 
Well, obviously, the filings and the settlements here in the United 
States had sparked the interest worldwide for other countries and 
other attorney generals looking at this matter and looking at their 
health care costs which are rising. Right. But in order for them to 
get the money that they were after, they had to prove an awful lot 
before they were able to say, "Listen, you guys should have been responsible." 
In other words, are you going to have to reprove that case, do you 
think, when you start again in the venue in another country? We still 
have a similar burden of proof to the suits filed here in the United 
States by the U.S. attorneys general. Fortunately, a lot of the groundwork 
has already been put down for us, and we have available in the public 
domain a lot of information that attorneys have spent years fighting 
for and fighting in the courts for. It's now available. Give me a 
picture for what kinds of warnings do exist for cigarette smokers 
in Latin America. Here in the U.S., we have the warnings on the packages, 
and of course, we have the whole climate of opinion that's built around 
it. In Latin America, do they have warnings on the cigarette packages? 
Some countries do have warnings, some countries do not. The warnings 
generally are not as strong as the recent warnings that you're seeing 
issued here in the United States. I do not have cigarette packages 
in front of me, so I can't read them to you, but they're generally 
not as strong. Well, presumably they're in Spanish, right? Right. 
What's the nature of those warnings, even if you don't have the exact 
wording? Do you know? That they may be dangerous to one's health, 
that, uh - They're very benign, not nearly as strong as the ones here 
telling people that they are addictive, they do cause cancer. DeLisa 
Simmons is with the Houston law firm of Fleming, Hovenkampf, and Grayson, 
which filed lawsuits against tobacco companies on behalf of both Guatemala 
and Nicaragua. We also contacted Michael York, a lawyer in Washington, 
representing Philip Morris in court. He says the lawsuits by Nicaragua 
and Guatemala are not a threat to his client. These are really copycat 
lawsuits filed by plaintiffs' lawyers in the United States seeking 
to generate legal fees. There's a basic legal premise in the United 
States that you cannot bring a lawsuit for indirect kind of damages. 
These lawsuits are flawed because they're being brought on behalf 
of federal governments in the United States against United States 
companies that allegedly did or did something that might have influenced 
someone in the foreign country to decide whether to smoke or not. 
And that's a preposterous proposition. I think the courts will see 
right through it. That was Michael York, a lawyer representing Philip 
Morris. He was in court. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>