<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981210.1600.0663 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The world is marking the 50th anniversary of the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights. It sets forth guarantees to individuals for civil, 
political, and economic rights. Observance range from a film festival 
in Moscow. To a soccer tournament, football tournament, in Yemen. 
To a day-long session at the U.N. General Assembly in New York. President 
Clinton has marked the day by announcing a series of modest steps 
to further the cause of human rights in the United States and around 
the world. Deborah Tate has that story from the White House. Mr. Clinton 
welcomed the progress made in human rights around the world. Since 
the signing of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights a half-century 
ago. But speaking to a gathering of human rights advocates at the 
old executive office building Thursday. The President said much more 
work needs to be done. In totalitarian states like North Korea. In 
military dictatorships like Burma. In countries where leaders practice 
the politics of ethnic hatred, like Serbia. And Iraq. In African nations 
where tribal differences have led to unimaginable slaughter. In nations 
where tolerance and faith must struggle against intolerant fundamentalism, 
like Afghanistan. And Sudan. In Cuba, where persons who strive for 
peaceful democratic change. Still are repressed and imprisoned. In 
China, where change has come to people's daily lives. But where basic 
political rights are still denied to too many. While vowing to work 
to further human rights in other countries. Mr. Clinton said the United 
States must also improve its own record. But he took issue with critics 
from other nations. Who say it is sheer arrogance for the United States 
to discuss human rights in their countries. Because they embrace different 
cultural values. This is a phony attack on those of you who fight 
every day. For human rights. None of us want everyone to be the same. 
None of us want to have all the same religious practices. None of 
us want to have all the same social and political structures. None 
of us say we know exactly how lives should be organized everywhere. 
Under all circumstances. And how every problem should be solved. We 
say we have a common humanity. And whatever you think should be done 
differently, must be done with the limits. That respects our common 
humanity. In an effort to further the cause of human rights around 
the world. Mr. Clinton announced a number of initiatives. Including 
a ten-fold increase to $30 million in funding for the International 
Labor Organization's program to fight child labor. He also announced 
increased U.S. funding from nearly two to three million dollars to 
the U.N. Fund for Torture victims. And he signed an executive order 
that aims to strengthen U.S. implementation of human rights treaties. 
In addition, the President announced a new annual human rights award. 
This year's recipients include U.S. civil rights leader and Democratic 
congressman from Georgia, John Louis. Robert Bernstein, the founder 
of Human Rights Watch. Betty Bow Lord, a noted human rights activist 
and China scholar. And Dorothy Thomas, who has worked to fight human 
rights violations against women around the world. Deborah Tate, VOA 
News, at the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>