<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981210.1600.3012 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The concept of franchising originated in the United States in the 
1940's. Franchising is where companies sell individuals the right 
to operate stores bearing the firm's name. In recent years, franchising 
has become an international phenomenon. As U.S. firms franchise their 
operations overseas. And franchisers in other countries set up shop 
in the United States. Linda Kashton reports. Improvements in technology 
are facilitating the trend. Marcel Portman, international director 
of the U.S. Franchise Association, says the increased availability 
of communications devices like faxes, wireless telephones, and electronic 
mail has made it easier for businesses to expand to other countries. 
And franchising is a highly effective expansion tool. Mr. Portman 
says because when you sell your idea to someone in another country, 
you're getting a business partner who understands the foreign market 
and its customs. The new partner, Mr. Portman says, is getting the 
chance to market an idea that has already been proven a success. Basically, 
the possesors has given you a puzzle where they have all the pieces 
and you have to put it together with them. If you want to go into 
the pizza business. You -- and you've never even done a pizza at home. 
With a franchise, it's an achievable goal. Because they will train 
you from what -- how a pizza's made. To how to sell it and how to 
market it. And how to distribute it. How to package it, even. Franchises 
not only spread business, Mr. Portman says, they spread ideas. He 
says an Australian franchise called Cash Converters has introduced 
U.S. shoppers to a novel way to save antique valuables. He says the 
U.S. packaging franchise, Mailboxes, Etc. has facilitated postal service 
in many parts of the world. It's a way of improving standards of living 
in many countries. Because a lot of countries can use a good concept 
like Mailboxes, Etc. Personally, when I was in Chile. I was raised 
in Chile. And the hamburger business was terrible until McDonald's 
came in. They came to Chile and they showed people how a burger can 
be nicely wrapped. In a nice restaurant. Clean floors. Clean bathrooms. 
Nice big sign. Everybody with uniforms. And everybody started catching 
up to it. And those that didn't catch up to them are no longer there. 
In Chile, Mr. Portman says, McDonald's hamburgers are served with 
avocado. Franchisers may spread new ideas, he says. But if they want 
to be successful, they will adapt to old customs as well. Linda Kashton, 
VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>