<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981210.1600.2695 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The health of the world's oceans could get a boost from a newly developed 
tool. It's from a report released by the Harvard Medical School Center 
for Health and the Global Environment. The report documents the health 
of oceans. Particularly the region extending from the Northwest Atlantic 
to the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean. As Roseanne Skirble tells 
us, the study has produced an Internet-based mapping and monitoring 
system. That can analyze the decline of the world's ocean waters. 
And possibly help to reverse it. Sylvia Earl is explorer in residence 
at the National Geographic Society. And world-renowned ocean expert. 
Responding to the report, she paints a bleak picture of ocean life 
today. Starfish dying. Dolphins dying. Turtles dying. Fish dying. 
Sea grasses dying. Corals dying. Sea urchins dying. But it's true 
that each of those things, like a red light here, a red light there. 
Flashing, flashing, your life support system is in trouble. Sylvia 
Earl says the ocean is at the heart of what makes this planet hospitable 
for life as we know it. If the oceans are in trouble. So are we. If 
we mess up our life support system in any way. If we perturb it. If 
we tinker with it. We do it at our peril. That's also the conclusion 
of the Harvard Center for Health and the Global Environment Report: 
Marine Ecosystems Emerging Diseases as Indicators of Change. The report 
suggests that with the rise in frequency in severity of marine-related 
disease, humans too are at greater risk. Not only from sickness and 
health care costs from contamination. But also from job loss in the 
seafood industry, recreation, and tourism resulting from a depleted 
ocean. The report makes use of a new technological tool. The Internet-based 
Geographic Information System integrates databases across various 
scientific disciplines and environmental hot spots. Lead author, Paul 
Epstein, explains. MARINE ECOSYSTEMS EMERGING DISEASES AS INDICATORS 
OF CHANGE: What we're doing is mapping epidemics. But then, with the 
Geographic Information System, able to layer on that a sea-surface 
temperature. Another layer of nutrients that are coming in. The sewage, 
the fertilizers, and even from aerosolized fossil fuel use. A lot 
of the nitrogens coming in by air. The advantage really of trying 
to bring together all of this information is to try to look at trends 
in these diseases and mortality events. And ascertain whether they 
are linked. Jan Landsberg is a research scientist with the Florida 
Department of Environmental Protection. And an advisor to the report. 
She says the overlapping databases begin to tell a story of marine 
life never before known or reported. Really means that we can look 
at the big picture. And very often that big picture is not seen at 
all. And by doing that, we can begin now to really look at the impacts 
that we as humans are having in many of our coastal environments. 
And ultimately, how this links together with climate. And how the 
climate is influencing the health of many of our aquatic animals. 
But really it's very important to realize that every single piece 
of that puzzle is part of a much bigger puzzle. It tells us there 
are things happening in the environment. That are not really very 
good. Paul Epstein, with the Harvard Center for Health and the Global 
Environment, hopes the new technology will lead to solutions to the 
plight of the world's oceans. This has been built from laboratories 
in Venezuela. But it is clearly a prototype of a kind of monitoring 
mapping system that could be used globally. Access to the Geographic 
Information System and the Report: Marine Ecosystems Emerging Diseases 
as Indicators of Change is available at the Harvard Center for Health 
and the Global Environment Internet website at http:\\heed.harvard.edu. 
I'm Roseanne Skirble. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>