<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981210.1600.1356 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yesterday we introduced you to John Beltzer, creator of the non-profit 
Songs of Love Foundation. In today's report, Shep O'Neil continues 
the story of John's efforts. Eight year old Precious Feliciano has 
muscular dystrophy. A long term, or chronic, illness. This song was 
created for Precious a year ago. By a group of talented musicians 
from the Songs of Love Foundation. The song describes how Precious 
likes to draw. And talk on the telephone. And how she likes to play 
with her friends Willy and Barbara, with her sister Destin, and with 
her dolls. The song tells how Precious dreams of becoming a singer. 
And it tells of her favorite food, broccoli and cheese. The song is 
performed by the New York City Police Department Choir. With soloist 
Ruby Collins. A few years ago, Ruby sang the American National Anthem 
at a White House ceremony for police officers killed in the line of 
duty. John Beltzer, founder of the Songs of Love Organization proposed 
that the New York Police Department take part in creating the song 
for Precious. The Department accepted with great enthusiasm. We've 
had 10 Songs of Love writers write the song. It was this huge, massive 
collaboration. We actually recorded the song in this really big studio. 
We had the studio donated for the entire day. We had a lot of media 
there. And two days later, about seven of the police officers and 
myself. And some of the other Songs of Love people presented the song 
to Precious Feliciano at the hospital. Many New York newspapers and 
television stations told of the emotional encounter between Precious 
and her benefactors. Popular talk show host, Rosie O'Donnell devoted 
a whole broadcast to the Songs of Love Foundation. And its volunteers. 
John Beltzer says building the Foundation was a gradual process. Well, 
when I first started this organization, I called a couple of friends. 
And they were singer-songwriters. And then they started calling other 
friends. And then eventually, I placed ads in local newspapers. In 
a New York newspaper. In a national newspaper. And a Los Angeles newspaper. 
And little by little, musicians started calling us. Wanting to participate 
in the project. Because they realized that it was a great way for 
them to give back with their talents that they have been given. Parents 
who commission a song for their child pay nothing. Friends and relatives 
can sponsor a song for $250. Every song gets special attention. Like 
the songs for Precious Feliciano and Crystal Lee. Or this song created 
in Spanish. For four year old Eduardo Vera. Eduardo is from a family 
of Mexican immigrants. The Spanish lyrics for Eduardo's song were 
written by Tony Carillon. Director of the Latin American Arts Council, 
and member of the Songs of Love Foundation. John Beltzer wrote the 
music. He had to learn Spanish to record the song. I was born in Brazil. 
In fact, we've written almost 20 songs for Brazilian patients. So 
those songs are done in Portuguese. We've also done a song in Hebrew. 
We've done songs in Spanish. Eventually we want to set up Songs of 
Love Foundation in a lot of countries. We ask singers and songwriters 
who happen to have their own home recording studios. Or studios that 
they may have access to. To give us a call. John and his foundation 
have given much happiness to the chronically and terminally ill children 
for whom the songs are created. John Beltzer too, has found satisfaction 
in his quest. To fulfill a dream that began in sadness. John feels 
that there is one more thing to do in memory of his late brother, 
Julio. John's inspiration for the foundation. My dream is to get Stevie 
Wonder to sing that song. Because Stevie was Julio's hero. His idol. 
And so we're really going to be trying to get Stevie to sing that. 
And perhaps other artists to sing Songs of Love. Because, really that 
was the beginning of everything. John Beltzer, singer, songwriter, 
creator of the Songs of Love Foundation. And torchbearer of a special 
kind of human love. This is Shep O'Neil. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>