<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981210.1600.3179 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Autry Museum of Western Heritage in Los Angeles celebrated its 
tenth anniversary last month. The museum is the legacy of Gene Autry. 
He was one of Hollywood's singing cowboys. Who died in October, at 
the age of 91. As Mike O'Sullivan reports, the museum takes a panoramic 
view of western U.S. history. And looks at the far-reaching impact 
of western images. Beginning in the last century, the American frontier 
captured the imagination of many people around the world. Through 
Buffalo Bill Cody's traveling wild west show. Through art, novels, 
and later, film and television. The real-life history of the region 
is just as interesting. Chief curator James Noughton says the Autry 
Museum is devoted to both the fact and fiction of the American West. 
Our full name is Autry Museum of Western Heritage. And that last part 
of that name, western heritage, really says it all. Because we're 
about the West. In this broadest sense. From prehistoric cultures 
to the present. We're interested in preserving and interpreting materials 
that tell about the lives of everyday people. And their experiences 
in this region. We think of as the West. And then, we of course take 
a look at how different media, including literature, film, art, advertising, 
television, radio, whatever. How those different media affect what 
we think about the West. So it's a tall order. We're a big museum 
and can handle it, I think. The museum has nearly five thousand square 
meters of permanent exhibits. And two galleries for temporary shows. 
One running through next January looks at the California gold rush 
of 1848. An upcoming exhibition will look at American Indians. Both 
the reality and their portrayal in popular culture. Yet another will 
examine the life-long legacy of the folk singer Woody Guthrie. Mr. 
Noughton says these shows point out the diversity of Western American 
Culture. Over the years, we've done nearly 75 exhibits of all sizes. 
But about 50 in the big gallery. Which have covered topics as diverse 
as the history of women artists of the West. We've looked at the contributions 
of Japanese women to settlement of the West. We've looked at topics 
quite diverse. Currently developing exhibits on Chinese settlements 
in the West. A major show in 2001 coming up on the Jewish West. Our 
changing exhibits are ways for us to look in greater depth at topics 
that we can't really deal with effectively in our permanent galleries. 
And these are shows that we can of course, then travel elsewhere. 
The museum curator says another future exhibit will look at the impact 
of Hollywood images in a part of Eastern Europe. Through movie posters 
from Poland. We're currently working on a show entitled: Western Americansky. 
Which is a view of Polish Western film posters. An intriguing look 
at how Eastern Europe depicted America's West. Through the creation 
of extraordinary art. That tells us not only about how they viewed 
America and it's West. But a little bit of how they viewed themselves. 
And how that art is a medium for looking at issues important to Poles. 
In the 40's, 50's, 60's, up to the present. Mr. Noughton notes that 
the Solidarity Movement in Poland used a poster from the western film, 
High Noon. In it's crucial election campaign in 1989. The film portrays 
a man who has the courage to stand and fight for his principles. But 
in the revised election poster, the film star Gary Cooper, carried 
a ballot and not a gun. Mr. Noughton notes that since the time of 
Buffalo Bill, a former western scout turned showman. Images of cowboys 
have become part of the global culture. We see manifestations of it 
everywhere. Tremendous popularity in dressing Western. And acting 
Western in Japan. There have been a number of Eastern European countries. 
Certainly throughout Great Britain and Germany. There is a great popularity. 
And reflected as well by people from those regions visiting the United 
States. And our Western historical science in the Autry Museum. In 
the ten years since it opened, the Autry Museum has expanded its outreach. 
Through educational programs for students. Scholarly seminars, and 
now the Internet. Although the man who inspired the museum is no longer 
with us. The heritage he promoted through film and television. And 
through the Autry Museum of Western Heritage. Is still alive in popular 
culture. Mike O'Sullivan, VOA News, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>