<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981210.1600.2396 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
U.S. Institute of Peace Senior Fellow, Andrew Natsayuse served as 
director of the Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance during the Bush 
Administration. He told VOA's Judith Leython that North Korea's food 
problems really began when subsidies from the former Soviet Union 
began to dry up after the fall of communism. In 1992, there was a 
complete collapse of the Soviet economic system as the Soviet Union 
just ceased to exist. And the subsidies the Soviet Union ended. Those 
subsidies were a million tons of food a year. And a half a million 
barrels of oil. And the precipitous ending of those subsidies led 
to a collapse of the North Korean economy. Since then, they have been 
unable to recover from it. And what's happened, basically, is that 
much of the industrial infrastructure of the country is being bartered 
for corn in China. And there is a point at which the trouble sustaining 
that barter system over a longer term. The amount food aid they've 
been getting from international committees is nowhere near enough 
to make up for the food deficit. Which is why there's been such high 
mortality rates. In a typical year, what percentage of food is North 
Korea able to produce for its own people? Well, that's a subject of 
great dispute. One of the mistakes most of the analysts have made 
in looking at their cultural system is they're looking at how much 
food is produced in the harvest. Instead of how much is in the distribution 
system. Because what has happened, is people fail to realize that 
the Stalinist economic system. The farmers don't own their land. They 
don't own the food they produce. It's taken by the state. The second 
thing is happening is one of the things that takes place in a famine. 
Is hoarding. People panic, and so they steal food and they hide it 
to keep their families alive. Reports say that North Korea's building 
new facilities to launch medium-range missiles. What effect has this 
concentration on military expenditures had on the well-being of the 
North Korean people? Insofar as their ability to buy food is concerned? 
Well, the North Korean currency is not usable in international markets. 
In other words, a no-grain company from the United States or China 
would accept North Korean cash. To buy anything. Because it's useless 
in the international market. And so how much they spend of that money 
internally for military purposes is really not going to change the 
balance sheet. In terms of what they purchase abroad. They don't have 
too many things that people want. Other than weapons they produce. 
That they're selling abroad for food. Is there any sense in which 
the North Korean government is choosing guns over butter, as it were? 
Oh, yes. I think internally, they are. If they invested more of their 
internal money in their own agricultural system. And less in military. 
They probably would be able to at least, to produce internally more 
tractors, for example. And maybe some more fertilizer. But because 
the military is the dominant force in the economy. They have not been 
doing that. They need to privatize like the Chinese. And they absolutely 
refuse to do that. Because the Head of State, Kim John Yung said in 
a speech that he delivered in December '96, if they do that they will 
go the way of the Eastern European communist regimes. Which of course, 
all fell. And they're afraid of that happening in North Korea. I know 
it's hard to get reliable information out of North Korea. But a recent 
UNICEF study showed that about 60 percent of the children surveyed 
were suffering from malnutrition. What does your own research show? 
Sixty percent of the kids are suffering from stunting. Which means 
they haven't had enough food over a period of years. Not just a couple 
of years. And then 16 percent of those kids are acutely malnourished. 
Which means they're actually losing weight and wasting. Which means 
they're at risk of dying. One suspects the North Korean government 
has made a conscious choice to sacrifice the health of its people 
and its children. To military goals. What should the U.S. response 
be? Well, the North Korean government is not trying to kill off their 
people. But what is also true, is their first priority is not the 
survival of individuals. But the survival of the state. And they will 
tell you that. They want to make sure the state, as it exists, continues. 
And if they have to sacrifice of millions of their people to do that. 
They're prepared to accomplish that. They're trying to get food aid. 
But they want it on their terms. Which is don't ask any questions. 
Just give it to us. And we'll decide how to distribute it. Andrew 
Natsayuse of the U.S. Institute of Peace is writing a book on the 
North Korean famine. And its political security and humanitarian implications. 
North Korea, Guns, or Butter? Was written and researched by VOA's 
Judith Leython. For Dateline, I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>