<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981210.1600.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Congressional panel investigating President Clinton is in the 
middle of another long day of testimony and debate. But today, the 
lawmakers are focusing on an actual draft of four articles of impeachment. 
Prepared by the Republican majority against the President. Democrats 
on the panel have offered an alternative proposal that censures Mr. 
Clinton. But does not threaten his removal from office. The panel 
is expected to approve at least one article of impeachment tomorrow 
or Saturday. Yesterday, White House lawyers finished two days of defense 
of President Clinton against impeachment. Today, Republicans on the 
committee seem to be introducing new evidence. National correspondent 
Jim Malone, speaking with us earlier. Tells us what this new development 
means. Well, what they're trying to do is: the Republicans have decided 
to introduce the videotape testimony of President Clinton. From the 
Paula Jones case, way back in January. Where a lot of this started. 
Where he was asked about his relationship with Monica Lewinsky. And 
denied in fact that it had been sexual. So the Republicans will try 
to use parts of that videotape to buttress their argument. That the 
President did in fact commit perjury, legally lying under oath. That 
he took efforts to obstruct justice. And abused his power by trying 
to conceal his relationship with Monica Lewinsky. The Democrats have 
already started to use a little bit of that videotape testimony. To 
support their arguments that really the case is all about sex. They 
showed a long segment where the lawyers in the Paula Jones case were 
arguing over what was the definition of sexual relations. And the 
President was sitting there somewhat befuddled. Listening to all this. 
So, I'm not sure how much impact this videotape testimony is going 
to have. In the past, every time the Republicans have tried to present 
some sort of a silver bullet in terms of evidence. It seems to have 
backfired. Well, you wonder about this videotape. It reminds me of 
last August, I think it was? When the videotape deposition of President 
Clinton during the Monica Lewinsky matter. Was shown on television. 
And that sort of backfired. At least in terms of the public. You know, 
and Barbara, at this point I'm not sure how many minds are going to 
be changed. The American people seemed largely through the polls, 
to have tuned out on this. I think a vote to impeach the President, 
at least out of the committee. Might make some people wake up. And 
to reflect on the gravity and the seriousness of the situation. And 
get the public more engaged. But I think for the moment, what the 
White House is trying to do. Is just secure enough of those Republican 
moderates. And we're talking about a relatively small group here. 
Twenty or so people. And maybe a few conservative Democrats who are 
wavering. To secure their votes against impeachment. If the President 
can do that, he will avoid this terrible historical stain of impeachment. 
Which has only been done once before to a U.S. President. Andrew Johnson 
in 1868. How much of a stain, really is it? Well, I don't think people 
would know who Andrew Johnson was. Other than: A: He succeeded Abraham 
Lincoln. And B: He was the only president impeached. I think the historians 
would say it's a terrible stain. Even though it's generally agreed 
upon that that impeachment was politically driven. And that Johnson 
was somewhat of a victim. But it's still a terrible legacy to have. 
And I think it's something President Clinton would desperately want 
to avoid if he could. President Clinton has admitted essentially that 
he did try to mislead the Special Prosecutor's office several times. 
In answers to his specific questions about sex. About gifts. About 
his behavior. Many of the Republicans are trying to get the President 
to admit that he actually legally lied. Committed perjury. They're 
even offering the suggestion that if he does that, he might be able 
to avoid impeachment. But won't that lay him open for a more serious 
problem later on? Well, it would. Potentially. Because that's in some 
ways the crux of this. You wonder, if he could get a few more votes. 
By acknowledging that he lied. Something he so far has refused to 
do. Because A: He doesn't want to be legally copable when he leaves 
office. And B. Probably because of his pride. He doesn't want to admit 
this. He might be able to sway enough Republican moderates to ensure 
he's not impeached. On the other hand, he might leave himself open 
to prosecution. After he leaves office on perjury charges. He may 
have a very difficult decision to make in the days ahead. On how to 
go on this one. And it could have a very lasting impact on how history 
judges his presidency. National Correspondent Jim Malone. Speaking 
with Barbara Kline and Russ Woodgates. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>