<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981210.1600.0885 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Three international human rights groups: Human Rights Watch, Amnesty 
International, and Article 19. Sent a joint team to Kenya last April. 
To investigate the causes and repercussions of ethnic violence in 
the Rift Valley. Article 19 has issued its report. Blaming the violence 
in part on misinformation and inflammatory political speeches. In 
London, correspondent Laurie Cassman talked with one of the report's 
authors. Article 19 says rumor and misinformation played a large role 
in fanning fear and aggression. During the ethnic clashes earlier 
this year in Kenya's Rift Valley. John Lun is Article 19's Africa 
program researcher. And a co-author of the report on Kenya's post-election 
political violence. He said the lack of access to independent information 
played a role in fueling the violence. JOHN LUN, AFRICA PROGRAM RESEARCHER, 
ARTICLE 19: One dimension of it, speaking for Article 19 now. Was 
one of our central concerns. Which is lack of access to independent 
and impartial information. Through the media and through any other 
sources. Which comes to be a rumor mill. And a climate of misinformation 
and mistrust. And that in turn, is rooted in legal and institutional 
obstacles to the full exercise of freedom of expression in Kenya. 
The ethnic clashes claimed scores of victims in the Ekulyu and Klanjin 
communities. Mr. Lun says the team found that Kenyan politicians, 
members in particular of Kamyu and the Democratic party. Also contributed 
to the climate of fear and anger. Inflammatory speeches, remarks which 
seemed designed to rouse one ethnic group against another. Speaking 
in terms of the Rift Valley Province as sort of a carnu home. Central 
Province as a Democratic party home. We do feel that those kinds of 
interventions were a contributory factor. To the violence that's laid 
out. The report says the pattern of violence was similar to the outbreaks 
in Kenya between 1991 and 1994. Mr. Lun notes some positive developments 
though. Including Kenya's own inquiry into the root causes of the 
violence. And its constitutional reform process. The way in which 
it's being organized has been changed. Following dialogues between 
governments and civil society organizations. And the reform process 
is due to go underway in earnest next year. The track record of initiatives 
of this sort is not particularly good in Kenya. But perhaps this time 
round, we'll see something more genuinely incredible. On the positive 
side, Mr. Lun also cites Kenya's media task force. Which is due to 
propose some media law reforms. But Article 19, which campaigns against 
censorship. Says more needs to be done by Kenyan officials to end 
the harassment of human rights organizations and of the media. And 
to guarantee access to accurate and impartial information. Laurie 
Cassman, VOA News, London. This is the Voice of America. Coming to 
you from Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>