<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981103.1830.1303 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to take "A closer look" at what else is on the ballot 
tonight besides candidates, propositions, measures, voter initiatives. 
In 44 states there are 235 different issues being decided directly 
by the voters. In some cases, it's an issue which politicians have 
found too hot to handle. In some cases, it's an attempt to get around 
existing legislation. It may be a bond issue, even an attempt to amend 
a state constitution. There's a big debate now about whether letting 
the voters legislate is such a good thing. ABC's Brian Rooney explains 
why. From a new 50 cent tax on cigarettes, to lowering electric rates 
and allowing expansion of Indian casino,S Californians alone face 
12 staid wit ballot questions. Vote yes. Vote no. Vote yes. Vote no. 
In the bewildering array of messages, the common themes are money 
and the power of special interests. Designed 100 years ago to be the 
grassroots voice of the people, initiatives have become so big and 
expensive, some people now refer to it as "the initiative industry." 
It costs about $1 million to qualify for the California ballot. That 
includes in some cases, paying professional signature collectors. 
It costs millions more to win, but the really big money goes into 
defeating an initiative, especially when corporations are affected. 
Harvey rosenfield leads a ballot initiative to undo the California 
legislature's De-regulation of the power industry, which he says actually 
costs ratepayers more money. He's up against a $39 million campaign 
to vote "no." We pay the utility companies to give us power and they're 
taking some of our money and putting it back in the form of commercials 
on television to defeat an initiative that would actually help us. 
Proposition nine will destroy our new competitive electric system. 
Often it's not clear who is behind the campaigns. Money itself is 
not the problem. The problem is money not reflecting the popular will 
or being used in ways that does not allow the public to understand 
where the money comes from. Movie producer Rob reiner has spent $2 
million of his own money and been the front man for a campaign to 
tax cigarettes for early childhood development programs. But you wouldn't 
necessarily know the tobacco companies were behind the television 
campaign to defeat him. None of the money goes to our schools. They're 
spending upwards of $40 million on this campaign to defeat proposition 
10 because all they care about is their profits. Money also buys awareness 
of issues most people never thought about. Suddenly, after seeing 
hundreds of TV commercials, you're starting to go, "oh, my god. What 
are we going to do about Indian gaming?" The rich can push their own 
agenda. Millionaire George soros has put his money in favor of medical 
marijuana in half a dozen states. In Missouri, casinos are for pushing 
more riverboat gambling. And in Nebraska, phone giant AT&T has launched 
its own initiative to try to lower long-distance access fees set by 
other phone companies. Some people, including Ralph nader, suggests 
throwing corporations and their money out of the process. And in four 
states there's a movement to limit initiatives themselves. Of course, 
the voters have to approve an initiative to do it. Brian Rooney, ABC 
News, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>