<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981103.1830.0051 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening, everyone. Whether you have voted today or haven't yet, 
it looks at this hour as if we are in for a very interesting night 
of election returns. Some very close races being fought out there 
in the country. We won't know how heavy the vote is until it's all 
over, but as our political unit picks over the returns and as we look 
at the exit polls, early we think it may turn out to be an unusual 
night. There are some very, very hard fought issues being resolved. 
In nearly two-thirds of the states, there are all sorts of ballot 
measures to be decide ID directly by the voter. We'll get to all of 
that as the evening unfolds. The polls have already closed in a couple 
of states. In Indiana wherein the Senate race we project Evan bayh, 
popular two-term governor there has been elected to an open seat for 
the Senate. Dan coats retiring. Evan bayh has defeated the may fort 
Wayne. He was ahead for all of the race. The republicans tonight would 
like to win enough seats in the Senate, that one notwithstanding to 
override any presidential veto. They need a gain of five to make it 
a veto proof 60. They're all trying to build on their majority in 
the House of Representatives, the republicans are, and in state houses 
around the country as well. There are a handful of races that can 
give us an early indication of how the night is going to go. First 
here's ABC's John Cochran. Keep an eye on those early returns from 
the east, especially New York, where republican senator Al D'Amato 
is in a bitter contest with democrat Chuck Schumer. If Schumer can 
win here, it will be hard for republicans to gain a Veto-proof majority 
in the Senate. Check in early down south, too, in North Carolina, 
where republican senator lauch Faircloth is in trouble. His younger 
opponent, John Edwards, has done what southern democrats have to do 
to win, emphasize that they have little in common with liberal democrats 
up north. In South Carolina, it's the democrat, Fritz Hollings, who 
faces a stiff challenge. At 76, he is old enough to remember when 
democrats owned the south. Now, can he Hang on in the south's most 
republican state? Especially up against a young, energetic opponent, 
Bob Inglis? Anyone interested in campaign finance reform will be looking 
at the midwest and Wisconsin, where democratic senator Russ Feingold 
may find that while virtue is its own reward, it may be the only reward. 
Feingold limited how much he would take in campaign contributions. 
His republican opponent, Mark Neumann, was not so squeamish and erased 
fegold's early lead. The issue of gambling and the strength of the 
Christian coalition will also be tested in early races. Religious 
conservatives may be the only hope for Alabama's republican governor, 
fob James, who is trying to spring an upset. His democratic opponent, 
Don siegelman, advocates a state lottery to pay for education, a plan 
staunchly opposed by religious activists. Gambling is also the big 
issue in South Carolina where Christian conservatives have backed 
republican governor David beasley. But he faces a stiff challenge 
from democrat Jim hodges, who argued that the state needs gambling 
income that is going to other states. Who said this was not an exciting 
election? Tonight there are plenty of close, important races. John 
Cochran, ABC News, Washington. We both said veto proof of the Senate. 
We mean filibuster proof. If you have 60 votes you can break a filibuster 
by the other side. Filibuster is the key word, not veto in the Senate. 
So, based on what we've seen so far and John's reporting there, what 
are the voters actually thinking? We're joined tonight as we are in 
every election by Lynn sherr who has her eye on the exit polls. Peter, 
our exit pollsters are talking to some 10,000 voters today. While 
the results are still preliminary, they are very clear. The Lewinsky 
matter was not the primary reason they say they voted for members 
of the house. Let's take a look at the numbers. In fact, the incident 
ranked dead last, cited by only 5% when we asked voters which issue 
mattered most in their vote. 19% said moral and ethical standards 
were the most important issue affecting their vote. Most of them voted 
republican. Still another 20% said education was the most important 
issue. Most of them voted democratic. Those were the two top issues. 
In other words, democrats are managing to blun the the fallout from 
the White House affair by emphasizing one of their traditional issues, 
education. And they can do that because of the general satisfaction 
let's look at the numbers. Personal behavior gets only a 37% approval 
rating, his job performance is applauded. 40% of the voters told us 
that their family finances are better off than they were two years 
ago. And that is the best they have felt in the last five elections. 
Peter. Thanks very much. She'll be here with us throughout the evening 
to tell us what people are thinking. Cokie Roberts and Sam Donaldson 
are here with us as they are on every political occasion. We were 
just talking that on normal occasions we might have been able to call 
a race in Kentucky by this time of the day. Their polls close early 
too. They have an open Senate seat, two members of the House of Representatives 
running for the Senate, and it is much too close to call. That's true 
all over the country tonight. This will be a long night. But at the 
moment, it's looking like a better night for democrats than they had 
any reason to expect. That was what you predicted last night. I'm 
happy to stick with my prediction. And the the early sign as you pick 
over the end trail, democrats doing well because? Apparently as Lynn 
just told us, a lot of people are saying they're better off than they 
have been before. They're acrediting the democrats with their financial 
well being. We're always looking for a national trend. In the Senate 
race there's probably not, Peter. In Al D'Amato loses in New York, 
in Carole Mosely Braun loses into incumbents -- incumbents are up 
in their records and peculiar issues have to do with them. But we 
may see a shift of several seat in the Senate. Because these seats 
that are tossups in the moment in our estimation are going to be so 
close, you can't say it will be a blowout. Thank you you both. Stay 
with us for the evening. We'll have fairly long evening. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>