<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981103.0559 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Indicating that members of the military contributed to the downfall 
of former President Suharto, a government fact-finding team said Tuesday 
that some security officials incited deadly riots just before his 
ouster. A report by the panel also disputes military claims that no 
mass rapes were committed during the riots on May 13-15. It concluded 
instead that 66 women, many of them ethnic Chinese, were raped. The 
release of the harshly critical report is a further blow to the credibility 
of the tarnished Indonesian military, which is caught between widespread 
allegations of human rights abuses under Suharto and a new role as 
a promoter of democratic reform. It comes as the military is preparing 
a huge security operation to protect a government assembly that will 
cast guidelines next week for general elections in 1999. Student activists 
plan to protest, saying the government is not moving fast enough on 
political reform. After three months of investigation, a team set 
up by Suharto's successor, President B.J. Habibie, said that some 
military officials urged crowds in parts of Jakarta, the capital, 
to loot and burn in a wave of unrest that left 1,200 people dead. 
``The riots in Jakarta can be described as an effort to topple the 
power unconstitutionally,'' said Marzuki Darusman, chairman of the 
panel that includes human rights activists, senior police officers, 
lawyers, bureaucrats and community leaders. At a news conference, 
Darusman acknowledged that much of the unrest was sparked by anger 
over price increases amid Indonesia's worst economic crisis in decades. 
He did not speculate on who was trying to topple the government or 
whether military involvement in the riots was approved by the institution, 
or was an act of individual officers. Without elaborating, he said 
infighting between political elites also helped provoke the riots. 
He urged the military to court-martial former Lt. Gen. Prabowo Subianto, 
a son-in-law of Suharto who was fired from his post as commander of 
Indonesia's special forces after admitting to involvement in the kidnapping 
of nine political activists. Darusman also said the government should 
investigate Maj. Gen. Syafrie Sjamsuddin, an ally of Prabowo who was 
head of the Jakarta military at the time of the riots. Sjamsuddin 
was later handed a less prominent post. Some government opponents 
have alleged military hard-liners provoked the riots because they 
wanted an excuse to crack down on dissidents, a charge that the military 
has vehemently denied. The government-backed investigators said the 
military bungled efforts to restore order in Jakarta, in many cases 
ignoring looters or taking payoffs to guard terrified ethnic Chinese. 
``We found the involvement of security officials who also benefited 
or commercialized their security service for protection in several 
places,'' Darusman said. ``The security officers in several places 
let the riots happen,'' he said. The Chinese minority, which dominates 
the economy, has been a frequent target of attacks as Indonesia endures 
a period of prolonged economic hardship. Many Chinese-owned shops 
and homes were attacked and burned. The riots in Jakarta erupted after 
police fired on a crowd of student demonstrators on May 12, killing 
four. Suharto quit on May 21, bowing to overwhelming opposition to 
his 32-year authoritarian rule. The conclusions of the investigators 
were based on extensive interviews with witnesses, said Bambang Widjojanto, 
a human rights lawyer who is on the government panel. Some witnesses 
have said they saw men with short, military-style haircuts roaming 
Jakarta and other cities in trucks and urging crowds to riot. Some 
of the men were armed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>