<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981103.0204 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The first witness in the corruption and sexual misconduct trial of 
Anwar Ibrahim said Tuesday the ousted deputy prime minister asked 
police to tamper with evidence showing he had committed adultery and 
sodomy. Mohamed Said Awang, former chief of the country's top police 
unit, the Special Branch, was the first of 52 prosecution witnesses 
expected to take the stand in the government case against the jailed 
dissident. Anwar faces five counts of corruption and five counts of 
illegal sex acts. He denies the charges and says they were cooked 
up to undermine his growing challenge to the 17-year leadership of 
Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad. Mohamed testified that the Special 
Branch had launched operation Solid Grip, an investigation into sexual 
misconduct by Anwar, back in 1992. That was before he was named deputy 
prime minister and finance minister in 1993. It wasn't until August 
1997, however, that the investigation turned serious with a letter 
and a sworn statement that accused Anwar of adultery and sodomy. Anwar 
got police officers to force retractions by the writers of the two 
statements, the prosecution said. The statement by Anwar's personal 
driver, Azizan Abu Bakar, said Anwar sodomized him 15 times. The other, 
by Ummi Hasilda Ali, the sister of the wife of Anwar's private secretary, 
said her sister had sex with Anwar. Both statements were also sent 
to Mahathir, who said he fired Anwar after he himself talked to people 
who said they had sex with his handpicked successor. Mahathir said 
Anwar was morally unfit to run the Southeast Asian nation and dumped 
him on Sept. 2. ``Whatever witnesses and documents the prosecution 
will bring to the court will prove beyond doubt that the accused abused 
the position as deputy prime minister and finance minister for his 
own personal gain,'' Abdul Gani Patail, the chief prosecutor, said 
in his opening statement. It was unclear whether the police who are 
alleged to have forced the retractions would be charged with any crime. 
``A poison-pen letter has become evidence,'' snapped Anwar, just after 
the trial adjourned and he was whisked off to the lock-up in the court 
basement. Earlier, Anwar's mother could be seen hunched over during 
the humiliating testimony. At one point, Anwar mouthed to her, ``Have 
you eaten?'' Defense lawyers on Monday opened their case by asking 
the judge to hold Mahathir in contempt of court for saying publicly 
that Anwar should be convicted. Mahathir was also on the witness list, 
but it was doubtful he would actually be called. After his sacking, 
Anwar led an unprecedented anti-government movement in which tens 
of thousands of supporters gathered at his rallies. Even after his 
arrest on Sept. 20, the demonstrations continued. A full-scale riot 
broke out on Oct. 24 when police launched tear gas into a mosque and 
protesters retaliated by throwing rocks and bricks at police. On Tuesday, 
riot police with shields and tear-gas launchers stood guard across 
the street from the red-brick High Court at Independence Square, where 
Anwar led a huge anti-government protest just hours before his arrest. 
His supporters said they wanted to maintain calm during the trial 
to ensure Anwar gets a fair hearing. ``It's unlikely that people will 
do anything while the trial is on,'' said Syed Husin Ali, the leader 
of the opposition group, People's Party of Malaysia. During the opening 
day Monday, Anwar's attorneys argued the first four graft charges 
were invalid because the lower house of Parliament had repealed the 
special anti-corruption law under which he was charged. High Court 
Judge Augustine Paul dismissed the request. The defense said it would 
take the motion to an appeals court. The first four corruption charges 
will be heard before the trial adjourns Nov. 14, as Malaysia plays 
host to 20 world leaders in the capital for the Asia-Pacific Economic 
Cooperation forum. When the trial resumes, the fifth graft charge 
and the five sex charges will be heard. Meanwhile, dozens of observers 
clamored for a second day to get into the courtroom. ``By not allowing 
the international community to come in and observe the trial, the 
prime minister is undermining the name of the country,'' U.N. Rapporteur 
Param Cumaraswamy told The Associated Press outside the court. U.N. 
Secretary-General Kofi Annan has been among international leaders 
who have expressed concern over Anwar's plight after he appeared at 
his arraignment with bruises and a black eye, alleging police brutality. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>