<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981103.1079 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A sordid tale of greed, jealousy and hate came to a close Tuesday 
when a Milan court convicted the ex-wife of fashion heir Maurizio 
Gucci of his contract murder and sentenced her to 29 years in prison. 
All five defendants in the trial were convicted of premeditated murder, 
with the accused hitman getting the stiffest sentence, life imprisonment. 
Italy does not have the death penalty. Onetime-socialite Patrizia 
Reggiani Martinelli, dubbed the ``black widow'' by Italy's press, 
blinked a few times when the judge read out her sentence for the murder 
of her ex-husband and then, her eyes red-rimmed, lowered her head. 
Gucci, the last of his family to hold a stake in the maker of luxury 
loafers, handbags and other accessories with the famed double-G logo, 
was shot four times as he walked into his office building on March 
27, 1995. Prosecutors alleged that Reggiani Martinelli, 49, paid the 
four co-defendants to eliminate Gucci, whom she had publicly made 
clear she despised. They painted her as a greedy woman who wasn't 
content with her dlrs 860,000 a year alimony and feared that Gucci's 
new companion would devour his wealth. Earlier in the day, when Judge 
Renato Semek Ludovico allowed the defendants one last plea to the 
jury, Reggiani Martinelli declared: ``I was naive to the point of 
stupidity,'' renewing her denial that she had ordered the slaying. 
After the verdict, she told her lawyer, ``Truth is the child of time,'' 
recounted the attorney, Giovanni Maria Dedola. Reggiani and the triggerman, 
former auto mechanic Benedetto Ceraulo, maintained their innocence; 
the other three defendants confessed. The three included Reggiani 
Martinelli's former best friend, Giuseppina Auriemma, who played psychic 
to Milan society, and whom, prosecutors contended, Gucci's ex-wife 
asked to organize the killing. Auriemma was sentenced to 25 years. 
Also convicted were Ivano Savioni, a doorman in a rundown hotel in 
Milan's prostitution district who allegedly acted as the go-between, 
and the alleged driver of the getaway car, Orazio Cicala, whose failed 
pizzeria and gambling habits left him in debt. Savioni was sentenced 
to 26 years and Cicala got 29. Throughout the trial, Reggiani Martinelli 
showed no remorse for Gucci's end. Once glamorous, with coiffed hair 
and heavy jewelry and makeup, she grew wan and often had a vacant 
look since the trial began in May. Most of her emotion came out in 
the form of bitterness for what she saw as Auriemma's betrayal. Reggiani 
Martinelli admitted freely that she wanted Gucci dead but argued that 
Auriemma coldly converted her well-known hatred toward him into an 
excuse to blackmail her after the slaying. ``Never let the friendly 
fox into your chicken coop. Sooner or later, it could get hungry,'' 
Gucci's ex-wife said as she began her final plea to the court. Payments 
totaling dlrs 375,000 made to co-defendants, she argued, were really 
blackmail money for a murder that she desired but didn't order. With 
its courtroom revelations about greed, betrayal and shameless social 
climbing, the trial exposed a seamy side of the chic capital of Italy's 
fashion industry. The Guccis had long left the fashion business, however. 
Gucci sold the last family stake in the company in 1993 for dlrs 120 
million after a long history of family infighting and went on to live 
the good life, including a villa in St. Moritz and a 70-meter (215-foot) 
yacht. Defense lawyers promised an appeal. ``The fact that she was 
sentenced to less than life imprisonment means there was some doubt,'' 
Reggiani Martinelli's lawyer said. Convicts in Italy often are released 
after serving two-thirds of their sentence, meaning, along with time 
in custody since her January 1997 arrest, Gucci's ex-wife might end 
up doing less than 18 years. ``It confused suspicion with proof,'' 
Raffaele Della Valle said. Reggiani Martinelli's mother and one of 
her two daughters, Allegra, 17, were in court before the jury recessed 
for its seven-hour deliberations. No family members were present for 
the verdict. Allegra broke into tears at the news, her mother's lawyer 
said. The jury also awarded dlrs 125,000 in damages to the Gucci office 
doorman, Giuseppe Onorato, who was shot in the arm while sweeping 
leaves near the entrance when his boss was killed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>