<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981103.0570 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar said Tuesday he had authorized talks 
with organizations linked to the armed Basque separatist group ETA, 
marking the first time the government has taken steps to negotiate 
an end to the 30-year conflict. ``There are news reports that I have 
authorized contacts. It's true,'' Aznar said upon his return from 
a trip to London. The contacts would be through the Basque National 
Liberation Movement, a loose grouping of ETA and other militant separatist 
organizations, a spokesman for Aznar's office said on the condition 
of anonymity. ``The contacts, that have not happened up until now, 
will take place with the go-betweens of ETA's world,'' the spokesman 
said. ``We cannot say anything yet about the how, who and when.'' 
The official government spokesman, Josep Pique, told reporters that 
the contacts were aimed at exploring possibilities opened up by the 
cease-fire, ``to find out whether (ETA) is really willing to give 
up violence for good.'' The Basque peace process was ushered in nearly 
two months ago when ETA initiated an indefinite cease-fire in its 
campaign for a Basque homeland straddling northern Spain and southern 
France. Groups close to ETA said the truce was modeled on the Northern 
Irish process that led to last April's peace accord and called on 
the government to promote a negotiated settlement as British Prime 
Minister Tony Blair had done in Northern Ireland. Irish republican 
leader Gerry Adams visited the Basque region last month and urged 
Aznar's government to respond positively to the cease-fire by opening 
negotiations for peace. A group of Basque political parties and organizations 
known as the Irish Forum secured Adams' backing for its proposal, 
known as the Lizarra Declaration, for all-party peace talks, including 
the government and ETA. The government rejected the proposal at the 
time. The government's tough stand against ETA, resulting in many 
arrests and earlier this year the dismantling of a major ETA financial 
network and the closing of an allied daily newspaper, is believed 
to have been a factor in bringing about the cease-fire. The Irish 
Forum includes Herri Batasuna, the radical political coalition linked 
to ETA, as well as moderate Basque nationalist parties, labor unions 
and civic groups. The government's hard-line position of rejecting 
peace negotiations with ETA or legal organizations linked to it has 
softened gradually since the cease-fire and since regional elections 
on Oct. 25. Recently, the government let it be known ETA would not 
be required to hand over its weapons before peace talks could be held 
covering such issues as the future of 535 ETA prisoners being held 
in Spanish jails. Aznar's Popular Party and Euskal Herritarrok, a 
political coalition linked to ETA, came in second and third respectively 
in last month's Basque regional elections. The moderate Basque Nationalist 
Party that supports ETA aims but opposes its violence placed first. 
Euskal Herritarrok said the elections showed that Basques wanted to 
see political negotiations to resolve the dispute over Basque independence 
_ one of the last armed conflicts in Western Europe. The government 
said it interpreted the election results to mean that many Basques 
do not want independence. ETA, which stands in the Basque language 
for Basque Homeland and Liberty, has killed nearly 800 people since 
1968. Before the truce, the group had been targeting town councilors 
from Aznar's Popular Party in retaliation for the government's hard-line 
policies, killing six since July last year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>