<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981103.0269 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A week after NATO's decision not to strike against Yugoslavia, the 
U.N. refugee organization said Tuesday thousands of displaced people 
in Kosovo province had found shelter, as shuttle diplomacy talks moved 
into a second round. U.S. envoy Christopher Hill met with ethnic Albanian 
leader Ibrahim Rugova in the provincial capital Pristina Tuesday for 
discussions on a draft agreement. On Monday, Hill held separate talks 
with Serbian President Milan Milutinovic and European Union envoy 
Wolfgang Petritsch after arriving from the Macedonian capital, Skopje. 
Hill, the U.S. ambassador to Macedonia, has led international efforts 
to bring the two sides closer to a political solution for the secessionist 
Serbian province, where hundreds of people have been killed and an 
estimated 300,000 others have been forced from their homes since Serb 
authorities launched a crackdown on Albanian militants in February. 
The number of people camped out in the open, however, has dropped 
considerably, since Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic pulled his 
troops out of the province last week, said Jacques Franquin, a spokesman 
for the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees in Geneva. Franquin said 
the number of people living in the open is now put at ``a few hundred,'' 
but cautioned the numbers are ``very approximate,'' as many of the 
displaced have not returned to their own homes, but are staying in 
villages with neighbors and relatives. As part of an Oct. 12 agreement, 
Milosevic pledged to order troops back to their barracks and dismantle 
police barricades, allowing for people to return safely. On Tuesday, 
however, a regional command of the rebel Kosovo Liberation Army claimed 
that Serb forces have not been withdrawing as planned from their checkpoints 
in the west of the province. In a statement faxed to the ethnic Albanian 
media Tuesday, a KLA regional command, claimed Serb forces have re-grouped 
and re-located to positions further off the main roads. It also said 
the Serbs were harassing and shooting at Albanians trying to return 
to their villages. ``If provocations, attacks and murder of civilians 
continue, the (KLA) will be forced to take defensive measures,'' said 
the statement. The KLA statement also claimed Serb police buried nine 
ethnic Albanians in the border town of Junik Monday. The Albanians 
were reportedly killed recently in clashes at the border. None of 
the reports could be independently confirmed and there was no immediate 
response from the Serb side. Serbian sources in the province reported 
Tuesday that the KLA attacked overnight an ethnic Albanian family 
for ``its known loyalty to Serbia.'' According to testimonies from 
the Sopa family members, four uniformed KLA members riddled their 
home in the village Malo Gracko, 20 kilometers (13 miles) south of 
Pristina with bullets. The head of the family, Fehmi Sopa was seriously 
wounded and was in a coma in a Pristina hospital, said the Serbian 
Media Center. In Belgrade Tuesday, U.S. Assistant Secretary of State 
Julia Taft was meeting with Yugoslav government officials and representatives 
of media organizations that have been banned under a new, harsh media 
law. Last week, Taft visited refugees in Kosovo to assess the humanitarian 
situation there. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>