<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981103.1097 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
About 5,500 Russian officials are under investigation for taking bribes 
this year, and Russia's economic troubles are creating a breeding 
ground for corruption, the interior minister said Tuesday. ``A poverty-stricken 
official is always prone to crime,'' Sergei Stepashin told a news 
conference. He called for increasing salaries of police and other 
officials, sharply devalued by a steep dive of the Russian currency 
since the government stopped propping up the ruble in August. Russian 
police have undertaken a massive effort to combat graft, including 
corruption in its own ranks, but the problem has continued to plague 
the government, Stepashin said. ``We are especially concerned about 
corruption on the grassroots level, such as bribe-taking among traffic 
police and various small offices,'' he said. Stepashin urged the government 
to radically streamline the bureaucracy to reduce the opportunities 
for bribery. Stepashin mentioned several high-profile corruption cases, 
including the arrest last summer of top officials with the government's 
statistics service, accused of falsifying data to help big companies 
dodge taxes. Police found more than dlrs 1 million in cash at suspects' 
homes. Meanwhile, a lawmaker in the southern republic of Dagestan 
was arrested Tuesday and charged with embezzling 800 million rubles 
(dlrs 50 million) in government funds intended for fish conservation 
efforts in the Caspian Sea. The arrest, cited by the ITAR-Tass news 
agency, came the day after Dagestan's Justice Minister was charged 
with embezzling other funds. Also Tuesday, the head of the Russian 
parliament's security committee, Viktor Ilyukhin, urged the Prosecutor 
General's office to investigate 15 top officials in the State Customs 
Committee on possible corruption charges, ITAR-Tass reported. Last 
week, Grigory Yavlinsky, a prominent liberal lawmaker and a presidential 
hopeful, caused an uproar when he said Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov's 
new government is as prone to corruption as its predecessors. On Monday, 
Yavlinsky specified his accusations in a letter sent to Primakov, 
urging him to investigate past business connections of several high-ranking 
Cabinet members and their lobbying efforts for business interests. 
Primakov criticized Yavlinsky for failing to provide evidence, but 
instructed his aides to investigate into the accusations and prepare 
a detailed response. The Prosecutor General's office, meanwhile, has 
ordered a preliminary investigation on possible libel charges against 
Yavlinsky over the allegations. Stepashin on Tuesday described Yavlinsky's 
accusations as a publicity effort and called on him to provide hard 
facts. Yavlinsky, in his turn, has said that he simply wanted to draw 
public attention to the problem and it remained up to police and prosecutors 
to collect specific evidence. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>