<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981103.0556 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the latest disruption of the new Mideast peace agreement, Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu postponed a Tuesday Cabinet meeting during 
which the accord was to have been ratified. Netanyahu said he ordered 
the delay because the Palestinians have not submitted a complete blueprint 
for fighting terrorism, but would not say what was missing from the 
security plan. Defense Minister Yitzhak Mordechai said Israel is holding 
out for a list of 30 wanted Palestinians the Palestinian Authority 
has promised to arrest as part of the peace agreement. Israel is also 
seeking a timetable for the arrests, Mordechai said. Implementation 
of the 12-week land-for-security agreement cannot begin until it has 
been approved by Israel's Cabinet and the parliament. The original 
startup date for the agreement was Monday. The Palestinians reacted 
angrily to Netanyahu's decision to postpone the Cabinet meeting, which 
had been scheduled for Tuesday afternoon. ``Instead of playing these 
sorry political games, he (Netanyahu) should just stand up and say 
... I won't implement what I have signed,'' said Palestinian negotiator 
Hassan Asfour. The Palestinians have said they have handed a security 
plan to the United States, as required. The United States has promised 
to brief Israel on the plan, but not present it as a document. Mohammed 
Dahlan, the Palestinian security chief in the Gaza Strip, said the 
security plan was presented to the United States, to the satisfaction 
of U.S. officials. Dahlan, who played a key role in putting together 
the anti-terror plan, said he also discussed the plan with Israeli 
security officials. The Israeli officers deemed the Palestinian plan 
sufficient, he said. Israel radio said Netanyahu would try to work 
out the problem in a telephone call to Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. 
However, Arafat left for Spain, as scheduled, in mid-afternoon, and 
there were no signs that the dispute had been resolved. Netanyahu 
appeared to be contradicting the Clinton administration when he said 
Tuesday that the Palestinians had not delivered everything they promised. 
James Rubin, the U.S. State Department spokesman, said Monday that 
``the necessary plans were provided on time, prior to entry into force 
(of the agreement).'' The approval of the peace agreement in Israel's 
Cabinet does not appear to be a certainty, with at least six of the 
18 Cabinet ministers reportedly undecided and three opposed. In hopes 
of broadening support, Netanyahu on Monday released four U.S. letters 
of guarantees to Israel. In one letter, the United States addresses 
a key Israeli concern, Arafat's plan to unilaterally declare a Palestinian 
state in May, the end of the five-year period of Palestinian autonomy. 
In the letter, U.S. Ambassador Edward Walker says the United States 
opposes such a move. However, the Palestinians were assured that in 
disputes with Israel over implementation, U.S. officials would ``vouch 
for'' the Palestinians publicly whenever appropriate, said Palestinian 
negotiator Saeb Erekat. The latest setback came a day after Netanyahu 
and Arafat overcame another hurdle in a rare show of good will. On 
Monday, the day the peace accord was to have taken effect, Arafat 
agreed to a request by Netanyahu to a delay so the agreement could 
be approved by Israel's Cabinet and the Knesset. The Knesset vote 
is set for Nov. 12. Netanyahu told Arafat that despite the delay he 
would do his best to carry out the initial Israeli troop withdrawal 
in the West Bank on or around Nov. 16, the original date stipulated 
in the agreement. Also Tuesday, a leader of the Islamic militant group 
Hamas said more than 300 activists have been rounded up by Palestinian 
security forces since last week's suicide attack on an Israeli convoy 
in the Gaza Strip. Palestinian security official said earlier this 
week that they had arrested more than 100 suspected Islamic militants. 
They have refused to update the figure. A senior Arafat aide, meanwhile, 
said Palestinian security agents foiled Iranian-backed attempts by 
Hamas to assassinate Arafat and senior Palestinian Authority officials. 
Iran is training and funding a secret Hamas group to carry out the 
assassinations as well as suicide bombings in Israel, said Tayyeb 
Abdel Rahim, the secretary general of the Palestinian Authority. Last 
week, Iran's spiritual leader, Ali Khamenei, sharply criticized Arafat, 
calling him a traitor for signing the latest peace agreement with 
Israel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>