<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981103.1130.1518 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ted danson is trying to stage a comeback on the small screen. Dennis 
Michael reports, the actor may have found the right prescription this 
time. I want to take a whack at this again. Ted danson is taking another 
whack at prime-time situation comedy. Last year's "ink" fell to the 
network axe, but things are looking up for "Becker" on CBS. John Becker 
is a Bronx doctor with opinions, strong ones. You know what's killing 
this country? Those idiotic TV talk shows. You know, I watched one 
last night, I should have just stuck a fork in my eye. He was a research 
doctor at Harvard. And for some reason -- we haven't found out yet 
-- he decides to bury himself in amongst people. And so he starts 
a practice in this lower-income neighborhood in the Bronx. And he's 
a really good doctor. And he's really, really bad as a human being, 
just cannot shut up, cannot stop talking about what he thinks is stupid 
in society. Let me have a cigarette and a cup of coffee, will ya? 
Hey, it's your lucky day. Here's a cigarette in a cup of coffee. Hey, 
caffeinated nicotine, am I crazy or is that a good idea? John, those 
are two separate questions. The great thing is he's the type of character 
that says everything you've ever thought. All the evil things that 
you've -- that have crept into your brain, he's the one that will 
actually voice it for you, which is great. I think he's more brutally 
honest than politically incorrect, but that's just my opinion. Terry 
Farrell, just off six years in orbit around bajor in "deep space nine," 
plays John Becker's main foil, the owner of a coffee shop that has 
the dubious privilege of being Becker's podium. It's completely new 
for me. So I don't feel like an expert yet, but I'm having a good 
time. And I feel really lucky that they're giving me the chance to 
learn how to do this. "Becker" was set as a midseason replacement, 
intended to join the schedule in January. But the network was so excited 
about the show's growth, they've chosen to start the midseason in 
November. Danson says it's the writing. Day one, the writing has been 
superb. And every day, you can't wait to come see what little goodies 
they've come up with overnight. So the writing is impeccable. Danson's 
been in long-running sitcoms before, of course, and another long run 
in prime time doesn't worry him. I am sadly not as adventuresome a 
fellow as I thought I was. I would love it, absolutely love it. And 
as you've already learned, "Becker" is not afraid of calling it as 
he sees it. Dennis Michael, "CNN Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>