<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981103.0130.0052 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Those stories in a moment, but first -- politicians finally will find 
out tuesday if all those ads, speeches and handshakes paid off. The 
polling booths open in the morning for midterm elections. In New York, 
republican Alfonse D'Amato and democrat Charles Schumer did some last-minute 
campaigning Monday. They're in one of the most closely watched Senate 
races. Other nail-biters include California's contest between democratic 
incumbent barbara boxer and republican challenger Matt fong and North 
Carolina's race between republican incumbent Lauch Faircloth and democratic 
opponent John edwards. California, Minnesota and Maryland have some 
of the most-watched governors' races. Wolf Blitzer looks at President 
Clinton's attempt to rally the party faithful. The president was at 
the White House campaigning from a Politically safe distance -- this 
time using the voter-tested issue of a Patient's Bill of rights to 
hammer republicans. I hope the American people will go to the polls 
tomorrow in large numbers. And I hope they will vote in a way that 
sends a signal loud and clear that america needs a real patient's 
Bill of rights. His aides say they're now feeling a lot better about 
the elections than only a few weeks ago when they feared his confessed 
relationship with Monica Lewinsky would translate into huge republican 
gains. In these final hours before the elections, Mr. Clinton was 
busy granting more interviews to African-American and Hispanic news 
organizations -- part of his campaign to energize the democratic party's 
most loyal voters. There is a huge, huge difference in the positions 
of the democratic and republican parties in the Congress on issues 
that are vital to Hispanics in america. The democratic party, meanwhile, 
was accusing republicans of sponsoring efforts to intimidate those 
minority voters from even showing up at the polls. We have come this 
afternoon to alert voters and those who would intimidate them, and 
we've come on the basis of hard evidence that the annual ballot security 
vigilante watchers are at it again. Not so, say the republicans. It 
is one of a series of lies and hate-filled attacks that have come 
from the democrats this year. What's worse -- these lies are clearly 
aimed at dividing Americans and manipulating black voters. Attorney 
general Janet Reno released a statement saying -- "we will not tolerate 
harassment of minority voters." And her justice department has sent 
out letters reminding political watchers that videotaping minority 
voters at or near the polls could constitute a violation of the voting 
rights act. In addition, the justice department is sending out 141 
observers to monitor the elections in five states. Wolf Blitzer, CNN, 
the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>