<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981103.2100.1809 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Numbers into us. This one bears repeating as east coast races go, 
as Senate races go, where either party is concerned. This was a big 
one. Charles Schumer will be going to the U.S. Senate. More importantly 
he'll be replacing a man who was called candidly and affectionately, 
senator pothole, he was called the fonz for his very New York manner, 
a guy whose mom was by his side as late as his campaigning yesterday 
afternoon, Alfonse D'Amato. North Carolina Senate, another big one 
A. nother big pickup for the democrats, Lauch Faircloth who served 
only one term in the U.S. Senate will be leaving at the age of 70. 
Faircloth was an average north carolinian, or so he campaigned. One 
of U.S. senators without a college degree. The new man is a wealthy 
attorney, John Edwards. Meet the new senator-elect from North Carolina 
at the age of 45. South Carolina, one of the Pillars of the Senate 
will go back, Ernest Fritz hollings will go back. That was a tough 
contested seat. Hollings very good to the home state. Called in a 
lot of chips for this one. First race we called all night, Evan bayh, 
son of Birch bayh, the very successful democratic senator. Evan bayh, 
the son, was in his own right a successful and popular governor. Just 
42 years old. Family man. Good image there in the home vate. George 
voinovich will be the projected winner. That's the Glenn seat. While 
Glenn is in space, they decided who to replace him in that seat. Alabama 
governor, big one, siegelman will replace James, James was seen by 
a lot of political insiders in south as part of the old south. A democrat 
who did not bring them the kind of good publicity the new south thought 
it deserved. James is out. Alabama has a new governor. This gentleman 
by the way just received a phone call from Bill Clinton from the White 
House tonight. Not this gentleman who may very well be up against 
the democrats in the year 2000. This is George W. bush, one of two 
bush sons elected to state houses tonight. Texas made history tonight. 
They've never sent a governor to the state house for two terms. Well, 
they just have in Texas. An extraordinarily popular republican. There 
is his brother, governor-elect of the state of Florida, Jeb bush, 
tried last time, was defeated. Second time was the charm. One looks 
like Barbara, the other one looks like George. But both bush sons 
are now in big political offices in states with growing populations. 
Paris glendenning, from the grounds up, grassroots politician, former 
prince George's or as it's called locally P.G. county executive from 
the state of Maryland, against sauerbrey, didn't give him much of 
a race last time around. He will be the governor of Maryland. Our 
projected winner tonight. And in the state of South Carolina, hodges 
over the incumbent beasley, Mr. hodges at age 41, former state lawmaker. 
He'll be going to Washington. Married, two children, by the way. Rhode 
Island governor, Lincoln Almond, returning. The republican incumbent. 
Merth York the democrat was in a tough race, gave him a good run. 
But 62-year-old Lincoln Almond will continue to guide the tiny east 
coast state of Rhode Island. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>