<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981103.2100.3082 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We'll kick off a little discussion here with our analysts. Take a 
look at Newt Gingrich. This will be the first time in 70 years that 
republicans kept control of the house for a third term. ok. I'm with 
E.J. dionne, Jim waen of "the Chicago tribune" and Susan molinari, 
former congresswoman herself, a republican of New York, joins us from 
boston. E.J., is thathe sound of a man who says don't turn on me? 
Don't you guys -- I'm hearing discussion already that people are going 
to turn on the republican leadership. Don't turn on me. We're still 
controlling this house for the first time since right before the great 
depression? I was going to ask Susan molinari if things went better 
when her husband ran the show in these elections. I think he was reacting 
to things he said, he's raising the specter of herbert hoofer. He 
makes a fair point. It should be said that the democrats could end 
up losing two seats in the senate, depending on how Nevada, Illinois, 
Kentucky and Wisconsin turn out. The other side of it is, that his 
own spin and the republican spin a couple weeks ago was they were 
going to gain six to 30 seats in the house. Before that, 10 to 40 
seats in the house. If they're suffering, they're suffering in part 
because of expectations they laid out. Susan molinari, we went into 
this thing about Bill Clinton being the issue, do we emerge with Newt 
Gingrich the issue? Is he the one whose head is on the block? Certainly, 
E.J. makes the point that right now we're all going to wake up tomorrow 
again and the house of reprentatives is going to controlled by the 
republicans. But at the same time it was the speaker who went out 
there and said we are going to gain amazing amounts of numbers and 
built up expectations and a Lot of us really wondered why the republican 
leadership was proceeding in that direction because clearly what tonight 
is coming out to from a Circumstantial standpoint does not look good 
for the republican party. People are going to question -- did we have 
the right message? Did we set forth the right agenda? Did we try to 
nationalize the campaign with regard to Bill Clinton? Did we not nationalize 
it enough with regard to rallying around a Republican agenda? There 
are a lot of questions asked. At the end of the day we do have to 
fall back on the fact that republicans will control the house and 
the Senate. Jim Warren of "the Chicago tribune," did you detect defiance 
in the voice of Newt Gingrich? Did you detect somebody who had all 
of a sudden gone from making someone else embattled to being embattled 
himself? What's interesting, we saw the Reverend Jackson before, I 
thought for the first time in history we found a force more potent 
of any TV anchor, in trying to curtail him, impending laryngitis, 
I was wrong. Let's also remember though the results may be muddled 
there are some things that will be clear. The G.O.P. is in control 
of the Congress. They don't have the votes to do big things they have 
that majority and the impeachment hearings pending of President Clinton. 
Also, let's remember all along, Susan knows and knows it because the 
man she married was an attempted coup D'etat against Gingrich. There 
has never been much loyalty. Most of the people don't particularly 
like him. There is still a great deal of respect for him as a spokesman 
idealogically and from where he took them. Susan, Hang on, E.J., look 
at this result. Coverdell in Georgia, the Senate race is popping up 
on the screen. Are you going to put it up there for me. That isn't 
it. Which one is it? Where is it? Where is that result? I'm not calling 
it until I see it othe screen. Also, we're talking about Gingrich 
coming out of this. There it is, projected winner, Paul Coverdell 
in Georgia. E.J., means what? He was supposed to win big. What happened 
tonight, early on he was running behind. He looked like he was in 
some trouble. It turns out he holds the seat that the republicans 
absolutely had to hold tonight and he did it. Susan, before I run 
out of time -- last thing. We, once again, we have an impeachment 
of Bill Clinton on the books. Is it just on the books or has it got 
any momentum to go forward? Clearly tonight's elections, while republicans 
are going to do well in the remaining house and Senate seats that 
have yet to be called there is not an overwhelming mandate that anybody 
can interpret to say let's be more aggressive, let's be more decisive. 
Got to go to a break, decision 1998. Stay with us. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>