<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981103.2100.2022 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We are joined in our studio tonight by a woman constantly mentioned 
vis-A-vis some sort of national office or the republican party, we'll 
probably dispense with that right away. The governor from the state 
of New Jersey, Christine Todd Whitman, who wasn't running for a thing 
tonight and could sit back and watch. And governor, what you have 
been watching is not all that great news for your party? Well, what 
it is is great news for governors. I think that's the agenda that 
republicans need to look at very closely because for the most part 
you have seen republican gubernatorial candidates particularly incumbents 
with just a few exceptions win and win very handedly, that's because 
they have been talking and running on accomplishments of lowering 
taxes, more jobs for people, better education for children in their 
states. The issues that people really care about in their daily lives. 
That's something that I believe should be a strong message to the 
republican party around this country. Now, governor, no gentle way 
to ask this. As you know, your view on certain issues hasn't been 
in vogue in your own party, you are slightly to the left of a lot 
of the more nationally prominent republicans, however, tonight what 
we're seeing in at least some of the east coast numbers coming in 
is a lot of those conservatives, a lot of those to the right of you, 
are being turned away. Long wape of asking, do you thk the views of 
the governor of New Jersey suddenly will come around and be viewed 
more as the central theme of the party? Well, I think that's where 
the party has been all along. Our party is not a party of litmus tests. 
It never has been historically. You put it correctly when you said 
my position may be different than some of the spokespeople from Washington. 
You know, there are a lot of governors who hold different position 
thans I do on social issues, but we don't get into those. That's not 
what our job is about. Our job is about making life better for the 
citizens of our state and we have to deliver on that every day. We 
don't have time for ideological battles. We want to make changes. 
You're right, you're seeing where there are some close races where 
you have seen a turnaround in races where republicans were leading 
up until about a Week or so ago. What changed -- seems to have changed 
those things around is the democrats came after them hard on some 
of the social issues. Thpublic said we just don't want litmus tests. 
We want people who are going to focus on the issues that will affect 
us every day in our daily lives. Republicans have been giving them 
that. It's unfortunate, certainly in the Congress in the house and 
the Senate where republicans have been winning since 1994, the agenda 
they that they have been pushing is one of lowered taxes, balanced 
budgets and more power to the states which has enabled governors to 
deliver the way we've been able to deliver over the last four, six 
years. Candidly, governor, didn't you expect this president who has 
been in so much trouble to have been handed more of a wake-up call 
than he has been handed tonight? I really didn't. I have been in 18 
states campaigning for people. And I will tell you that, as is often 
the case in these midterm elections the pundits in Washington want 
to make it a national referendum on an individual issue and these 
elections are decided by what's important to the voters in those districts. 
We don't have a parliamentary system, this isn't about the president, 
this was not a wake-up call for the president, this is about what 
republicans and democrats were talking about in their elections. Another 
final question. There is no easy one to ask this one either, I'll 
take a whack at it. A close associate of George W. bush in Texas, 
a lot of talk you know, about governor bush heading the G.O.P. ticket 
next time around. The talk as well in conversation formally or informally 
has gone to you, perhaps number two spot on the ticket. The associate 
said in response, you know what, they don't like each other, the ticket 
wouldn't work. Your response? I can't speak for George W. bush. I 
like George fine. I don't have any problem with him. We worked very 
well together at the convention. I think he is certainly a contender. 
There is no question he will go to the forefront of this race for 
the presidency. But it's also a long way off. So he's got to be very 
careful. He has done a wonderful job in Texas. Broken all the rules 
by getting re-elected there and getting re-elected pretty handedly. 
He is someone the democrats will have to contend with. The governor 
of the most densely populated state in the union, a woman roundly 
described as one of the most popular in the G.O.P. happy to be joined 
tonight by Christine Todd Whitman, governor of New Jersey. Ank you 
very much. It was a pleasure. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>