<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981103.2100.2641 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
to the real Pot boiler now in the midwest. In Illinois, incumbent 
democratic senator Carol Moseley-Braun. The important number here 
is not the percentages between candidates, it's that number on the 
top right hand of your screen. Only 15% of the presinths reporting 
so far. So we can say if this trend continues, bad news for a democratic 
incumbent. She was swept in 1992, the "year of the woman." She had 
problems freelancing a bit in foreign affairs and some ethics problems 
as well. It forced her to going on television, cut a campaign commercial 
that said she'd made mistakes, and in effect apologized to the voters. 
It might have been too little, too late. It is a big race getting 
a lot of national attention. Democratic party nationwide as well at 
the republican party watching this one very closely. We are joined 
live this evening by the Reverend Jesse Jackson. Welcome. You're smiling. 
Are you optimistic for your friend the senator from Illinois? Well, 
I really am, as well as the victories today in New York, in california, 
in North Carolina. It may be too early to define what happened, democrats' 
inclusion, republicans' intolerance, this idea the big tent where 
there's inclusion, there's room for women in their quest to determination, 
room for blacks and hispanics, for labor. The big tent of inclusion 
versus growing intolerance. Republicans against the right of a woman's 
determination, against raising minimum wage for people, against the 
hate crime built to include women, the disabled, and gays. One sees 
in Clinton administration, inclusion, hope and growth. One senses 
the growth from South Carolina across to California. Someone actually 
said on the air here tonight that they were proud of the american 
people because of their mass compartmentalization, meaning the president 
is still, let's remind everybody mired in scandal. He faces formal 
impeachment proceedings in the house whener they're back at the 106th 
Congress. And yet the American public did not cast votes as a referendum 
tonight. Only 23% said they had this scandal on their minds when they 
entered the voting booth. To what do you attribute that? Because most 
people figure that the Lewinsky ads directed by Mr. Gingrich took 
away any sense of impartiality. The 26 counts on Starr for leaking 
information to the grand jury. People see that as ugly and messy. 
There are no winners. In the real world, 1500 people a day are dying 
from cancer, half a million people a year. And yet while Mr. Clinton 
and democrats fight for more research for cancer, they want to embrace 
the American lobby. In the real world democrats fought for 100,000 
new teachers to expand the educational options. The republicans turned 
their back on fed's Creek and thought there would be a victory to 
not refurbish urban schools. So you talk about low income and schools 
and teachers and health care and liberal wages, there's something 
about that that is hopeful. In our broadcast a few months ago, Reverend 
Jackson, you said you would explore the possibility of running again 
for a national office this time around. Are you still in the mood 
to explore? Well, I am. I'm excited about the prospect. I've not yet 
made the decision. Each time I have run, we've increased the base 
of democratic voters and young voters. As a matter of fact, the voters 
we put on in 1984 came from democrats and senate in 1986. Those same 
votes today gave democrats the margin they had for a Ving tore. Even 
the critical issues we raised about less talk about P.L.O. as opposed 
to no talk has set the stage, a less free Mandela. That's now U.S. 
policy. The policies we espoused have been good for America. Now I'm 
convinced three critical issues happen to be affordable health care 
for all the American people, a vehicle to transport capital to areas 
like iowa and urban Chicago, and the commitment to educate all our 
children and leave none behind. On that, thank you very much Jesse 
Jackson where he's cheering on a Democratic incumbent senator. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>