<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981103.2100.0941 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With that as the backdrop, we are joined tonight from Newport beach, 
california, by the former vice president of the United States, Dan 
Quayle. Mr. vice president, good evening to you. Good evening. Your 
reaction so far, and should this -- can this fairly be called a trend? 
Well, let's hope we'll do better as we come west. I think we will. 
Sorry about losing North Carolina and New York. But we've got some 
real good opportunities in testify Nevada, Colorado, wisconsin, Kentucky. 
I don't think there's going to be big changes. We'll lose a few and 
democrats will lose a few. When you look at this thing tomorrow morning, 
you'll see it was a very good night for incumbents. 5% are going to 
get re-elected. Let's be candid. We have a president of the United 
States who has gone on television and admitted to an illicit affair 
with a woman half his age. A lot of republicans around this country 
and many democrats thought that that would spell near certain disaster 
as we sit here at 6:17 your time on a Tuesday night, election night 
1998. And apparently from what we've seen so far tonight, it hasn't. 
How do you explain that? We had hoped to have a very good night. We'll 
have to wait and see. We're going to do better as you come west. But, 
clearly, the republicans win when they stick to the issues. One of 
the things that republicans have got to realize that we have got to 
get our agenda before the American people and not let the democrats 
get their agenda. And the democrats, they demagogue the issues as 
usual got their agenda out there and we failed to get our agenda out 
there. Our agenda is cutting taxes, missile defense, banning partial 
birth abortion. These are our gut issues we should be talking about, 
taking the case to the american people. And when we have an issue-oriented 
campaign, we do very well. It could be a missed opportunity for us. 
Mr. vice president, let me ask you, when a big company screws up, 
all eyes turn to management normally. In of this case, the talk tonight 
has been, well, let's take a look at Mr. gingrich's management of 
the 105th, Trent Lott, the majority leader of the senate, arguably 
tonight was theirs to lose in many cases. Can you make a case there 
tonight that perhaps a review of current management of the Washington 
wing of your party is in order? Well, unfortunately, politics is not 
run like a business. Sometimes I wish it was more like a business. 
The speaker is not really the C.E.O. nor is the majority leader of 
the senate. Both of them did the best they could under some tough 
circumstances. There may be some review that would be in order. Off 
to leave that to the senators and Congress, men and women of the republican 
party, to make that determination. But what we need to focus on is 
what's best for the country. We're going to be moving forward with 
about the same number in the house and Senate and the same republican 
governors, which I might point out we have a snort in the Senate and 
House of Representatives and we have anywhere from 32 to 35 republican 
governors. That's pretty good. If you look when Bill Clinton took 
over as being president after 1992, republicans have done very well. 
Former vice President Dan Quayle, you're kind to make time for us 
tonight. Thank you very much for coming on the air. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>