<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981103.2100.0421 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We want to go to the west coast tonight. A lot of big races. People 
still going to the polls. Polls open late. NBC news correspondent 
Maria shriver has been tracking a lot of the big races out there. 
There are big races and big issues both. Maria in our Los Angeles 
bureau. Go ahead, Maria. Thanks a lot, Brian. We should note the polls 
are still open out here in the west. There are three Senate races 
we'll be watching. The race between Barbara boxer and the California 
state treasurer Matt fong, this race has been tight all along. Fong 
was ahead by a few points a few weeks ago. By last week the polls 
had boxer inching ahead. A lot of this will depend on voter turnout. 
We should mention that the polls are still open here. Boxer was muzzled 
early on in this campaign. She could not get out there and campaign 
the way she wanted to. Everywhere she went people asked her about 
the president and his troubles in Washington. That's a sticky situation 
for her, a personal situation since her daughter is married to Hillary 
Rodham Clinton's brother. But after the house impeachment vote she 
was freed up and she quickly took advantage of that, went out and 
defined fong before the voters before he had a chance to define himself, 
as anti-abortion, anti-gun control and very much to the right of most 
of the moderate republicans in this state. He was depicted far more 
conservative than conservatives define themselves out here. Two interesting 
note, fong was a relative political unknown. He had a name which helped 
him a lot, helping him, his mother has been elected five times to 
statewide office here in California. She's a democrat. Fong himself 
was once a democrat. His mom campaigned for the democratic ticket 
here, except of course for the senate race, she did campaign for her 
son. Weep should note the Asian vote is somewhere between 5% and 6%. 
In a close race it could make a big difference. Boxer took note of 
that and spent quite a bit of time campaigning hard in chinatown. 
Let's take a look at Nevada, shaning up as the tightest Senate race 
in the country. The incumbent, senator Harry Reid is running against 
congressman John ensign. What complicates this race for makes it interesting 
is the fact that Nevada is one of the fastest growing states in the 
country. It's estimated 40% of the voters there are new. Unfortunately 
for Reid they've never voteed for him in either of his two senate 
bids before, so that makes it a little bit tougher for him. If Reid 
is re-elected he's in line to become the number two in the Senate, 
the democratic whip. Ensign's people tell him if he's elected it will 
give him the prominence they had in previous years. The Senate race 
pits two women against each other, only the third time in history 
that this has happened. You see it on your screen, the democratic 
incumbent, Patty Murray was elected in the year of the woman in 1992, 
remember she was the mom who ran in tennis shoes. Early on she was 
thought to be in trouble in this race against Linda Smith, but recent 
polls show that Murray should win this one. But we want to emphasize 
once again that the polls are still open, people leaving work and 
getting out there to vote. Those are the Senate races. Brian? Maria 
shriver on duty in the Los Angeles bureau. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>