<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981103.1830.0285 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One republican strategist said this election is much more about the 
quality of everyday life than it is about ideology or Washington scandals. 
We've asked our correspondents Kelly O'Donnell in the west, Roger 
O'Neil in the rocky mountains and Jim Avila in the midwest and east 
to see what issues voters faced today. Kelly, let's start with you. 
Tom, even more than candidates' races, for many voters, local issues 
drive them to the polls. Here in the west, what voters decide can 
set political and social trends that influence the rest of the country. 
Voters in Oregon have the most to Wade through -- 14 issues. More 
than any other state. Across the west, from Arizona to Alaska, some 
six dozen ballot issues. In California, what's described as the world's 
most expensive voter initiative. Vote yes on prop 5. Indian gaming 
-- a measure to expand gambling on tribal lands. Opposed by competitors, 
the Las Vegas casinos, the warring sides combined spent up to a staggering 
$115 million. Also here, fronted by actor/director Rob reiner, a 50-cent-A-pack 
cigarette tax to fund children's health care and smoking prevention. 
Moving to Washington, voters could end affirmative action in government 
hiring and skood admissions. Washington, Arizona, Nevada, Oregon and 
Alaska could all legalize marijuana for medical use in terminally 
ill patients. Tonight, Alaska and Hawaii must decide on constitutional 
amendments that would make gay marriage illegal -- a first anywhere. 
The youngest states could shape debate for the rest of the nation 
on that divisive social issue. tom? Thanks, Kelly. NBC's Roger O'Neil 
joins us now from Denver. Roger? What do you have for us? Tom, one 
of the best-known politicians in the west, certainly in Colorado, 
governor Roy Romer is being replaced today after 12 years in office. 
He couldn't run again. Double that to 24, and that's how long it's 
been since a republican has been in the governor's mansion. But it 
could change tonight. The republican favored by the squeakiest of 
margins. In Colorado, Utah, and Montana, three issues have galvanized 
voters, which should produce big turnouts. In Montana, politicians 
may find themselves asking for permission before raising any taxes. 
A constitutional amendment there, no more tax hikes unless voters 
say "Okay" first. In Utah, hunters are aiming their sights on outsiders 
who want to make it harder to Hunt and fish there. Proposition 5 would 
require a two-thirds, rather than simple majority vote before any 
hunting or fishing regulation is changed. And there's a new twist 
in Colorado to the old argument of funding private schools with public 
money. Amendment 17 would give an income tax credit to parents who 
pull children out of so-called "failing public school" and enroll 
them in private classrooms. But the most talked about issue is a new 
football stadium for the Denver broncos here in Denver. Quarterback 
John Elway can fill the old mile-high stadium with 70,000 fans on 
any Sunday, but will voters be willing to pay for it? Thanks, Roger. 
Jim Avila is with us in Chicago. jim? Integrity is on the ballot in 
several states east of the Rockies, but it's not the president's ethics 
in question. In Illinois, exit polls say the deciding factor in the 
race for U.S. Senate is Carol Moseley-Braun's personal campaign finance 
ethics. Michigan -- not only is Jack Kevorkian's personal attorney, 
Geoffrey fieger, running for governor, assisted suicide is on the 
ballot as a Referendum. Wisconsin -- a major vote on the future of 
campaign spending. The incumbent senator, Russ Feingold, co-sponsor 
of spending limit legislation, is running his own campaign with a 
self-imposed limit. A loss could scare away support for election reform 
in the next Congress. Indiana -- the red meat issue is HMO reform. 
A statewide poll says 70% believe more regulation of health care is 
needed. In Ohio the Senate and the governor's race is all object local 
issues. And in New York, above the roar of the D'Amato/Schumer Senate 
race is the down-home issue of whether the Yankees should be given 
a taxpayer-supported stadium. Clearly, there's plenty on the ballot 
that has little to do with Washington hijinks. tom? Kelly O'Donnell 
in San Francisco, Roger O'Neil in Denver, and Jim Avila in chicago, 
thank you. We'll be seeing more of you in the days to come on what's 
going on in our particular regions. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>