<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981103.1830.0980 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth." On election day, 1998, what's on the minds of 
the American voters? In Chicago this morning, we talked to six voters 
-- three democrats, two republicans and one independent. They ranged 
in age from 29 to 73, and included professionals, retirees, parents. 
And, even though one single issue did not determine any of their votes, 
they had some strong opinions. Over breakfast, they talked with NBC's 
Lisa meyers "in depth." The middle of middle America. Here, jobs are 
plentiful. Voters seem mostly content. In an election short on passion, 
one topic provoked spirited conversation -- Washington, D.C. John, 
a republican, sells real estate. The best thing that could happen 
would be having an earthquake, and seeing washington or the capitol 
Beltway fall into the atlantic ocean. They say they're disgusted with 
the president and with republicans in Congress. But like so many in 
America today, they say it did not affect their vote. Heather, a democrat 
and a waitress, won't vote. You believe both sides are lying? I believe 
both sides are lying. Who is the better liar? I mean, really. Ron, 
who's retired, hasn't voted in six years. All of this going on about 
his, his sex life to be Frank about it. So he lied about it. What 
on earth does that have to do with government? June, a republican, 
runs her own business. Bill Clinton has done much more of a detriment 
to this country than any other individual, except maybe perhaps the 
unabomber. All of you seem to believe that the president did commit 
perjury, that he lied under oath. yes. Uh-huh. Yeah. Yet only one 
of you favors impeachment, removing him from office. why? They are 
making it such a political issue, and I do find some discomfort and 
fault with the republicans for bashing on the issue. The economy is 
good, jobs are up. Everything, so I think if things were opposite, 
we would just be all on fire to impeach him. Jay, who's retired, and 
Gary, a minister with three children, say the scandal has deepened 
distrust and widened the gap between them and their leaders. The people 
in Washington in general are so wrapped up with the scandal that they 
can't see anything else. There is a disconnect primarily because the 
issues that are affecting me are the issues of the safety of our neighborhood, 
my children being able to go to school. And get home from school. 
Their message to the new Congress -- focus on education, taxes, social 
security, not more scandal. Can we get it over with tomorrow and move 
on with our lives? We're going to sit here and talk about it and talk 
about it and nothing gets done. However, they have little faith their 
message will be heard. Lisa Myers, NBC news, Chicago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>