<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0438 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Evaluating hockey standings a month into the season is like surveying 
indicator precincts on election morning. The early numbers might accurately 
predict the final results; or they might seriously mislead. An example 
might be the pecking order of the Eastern Conference and the Atlantic 
Division Tuesday night as the New York Rangers and the New Jersey 
Devils met in the Meadowlands. Both Hudson River rivals looked north 
in the standings to the first-place New York Islanders, who have won 
little since the first Reagan administration. Despite the lease-busting 
shenanigans of their owners, their poor attendance, their embarrassment 
over their dwindling television visibility and the absence of their 
best player, the Islanders were one game over .500 and tied with Philadelphia 
and Ottawa at 12 points. Adding intrigue for pundits is their interest 
in Pavel Bure, the flashy right wing who refuses to return to Vancouver. 
The Islanders have talked with the Canucks about a trade involving 
Zigmund Palffy, their flashy right wing who has not signed a contract. 
Such a deal would seem logical and doable for the Islanders and would 
strike a blow against the Rangers, who also have expressed interest 
in the Russian Rocket, who scored 51 goals last season. Despite a 
six-game undefeated streak coming into Tuesday night's game, the Rangers 
had only 16 goals in 10 games. They need Bure as much as the Islanders 
do, but they have less to offer in trade. While it is a credit to 
Coach John Muckler that his Rangers have evolved from a country-club 
team into a scrappy bunch of competitors, it is also a reality that 
teams with such limited talent and such little depth don't always 
sustain this approach successfully for 82 games. A serious injury 
here, a major slump there or an attitude problem anywhere could chill 
them before winter. The Devils, who featured the recently signed Scott 
Niedermayer back in the lineup, had only 17 goals in their first nine 
games. Leading the league in goals with nine was Edmonton's Bill Guerin, 
who was traded by New Jersey last season after a contract dispute 
like Niedermayer's. Certainly the Devils could use a player with the 
skill and charisma of Bure. Clearly, they have more depth than most 
teams and could offer more in a trade. But the business history of 
general manager Lou Lamoriello suggests that $7.2 million a year in 
contract money will be spent on two or more players, not on just one, 
even a great one like Bure. The big spenders locally in recent seasons 
have been the Rangers, and even they seem to be counting beans more 
closely under their Cablevision ownership. Over the past several years, 
the suits at Madison Square Garden have scoffed over rumors that the 
Islanders would try to acquire a star through free agency or trade. 
They have accurately pointed out that their Long Island rivals chronically 
suffer from financially questionable ownership and rumors that turn 
out to be fantasy. Could this change in the matter of Palffy and Bure? 
Paul Kraus, the agent for Palffy, said Tuesday that ``it makes sense 
to me on a couple levels,'' and he added: ``Zigmund wants to play. 
He's not anxious to get out of the Island. But, if he gets traded, 
I don't think he would object to Vancouver.'' Kraus said he discussed 
the matter on Monday with David Seldin, the president of the Islanders. 
``No insults were traded,'' Kraus said. Asked whether the subject 
of Vancouver had come up in the conversation, Kraus said, ``Yes, it 
did.'' However, Kraus added that he had not yet spoken to Brian Burke, 
the Vancouver general manager, who would have to negotiate a contract 
with Palffy, who scored 45 goals last season. Trying for Bure makes 
sense for the Islanders in many ways. With Trevor Linden and Gino 
Odjick emerging as team leaders, it would reunite Bure with two former 
Canuck teammates who admire him. Bure's presence might help sell tickets 
in a building that is often less than half full. A successful Islanders 
season might repair some of the new ownership's self-inflicted public 
relations wounds. It could stoke interest in the new arena they say 
they need, if not in Nassau County then perhaps elsewhere on the land 
mass. (And wouldn't Brighton Beach in Brooklyn, with its Russian community, 
be an ideal place for Bure to live and work?) Best for local fans, 
it might help get the Islanders back on television on a regular basis. 
So far, they have been treated like shirt-tail relatives by Cablevision, 
which owns the Rangers, owns the Garden and controls the television 
rights of all three local hockey teams. Cablevision has capriciously 
bumped the Islanders off some telecasts, and its cryptic economic 
explanations have been specious at best. (Friday night's Rangers-Devils 
game appeared locally on not one but two cable outlets: Fox Sports 
New York and ESPN). Should the Islanders put together a competitive 
team featuring a star like Bure, it would be hard for Cablevision 
to keep them off the air while favoring the Rangers first and the 
Devils second. What a strange alliance. Monopoly control makes for 
strange bedfellows. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>