<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0407 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
George W. Bush set down his peanut butter and raspberry jelly sandwich 
and wrinkled his nose, as though the aide on the other side of the 
tiny campaign plane had tossed him liverwurst by mistake. But it wasn't 
the sandwich. It was that word someone just said. ``Dynasty,'' he 
repeated with a sour edge. ``In a dynasty, you don't have to earn 
anything. In a democracy, you've got to earn it.'' Bush, 52, was bouncing 
around the state on one of the final swings of a steamroller of a 
campaign that, Tuesday, saw him become the first person in Texas history 
to win consecutive four-year terms as governor of the nation's second 
largest state. (Until 1974, Texas governors served two-year terms.) 
On the same day, his brother, Jeb, 45, won the governorship of Florida, 
the nation's fourth largest state, rebounding from a narrow loss in 
the race for the job four years ago. Their grandfather had been a 
U.S. senator from Connecticut. Their father had been president of 
the United States. Maybe it's not a dynasty. But it's not liverwurst, 
either. This was supposed to happen four years ago, when Jeb Bush 
made his first run for governor in Florida. Many close to the family 
had considered the younger brother the more astute politician, and 
it surprised some that it was the older brother alone who won in 1994. 
George W. Bush said that he has a photograph from his inauguration 
that he finds himself looking at every now and then. In it, he is 
taking the oath of office while, in the background, his father can 
be seen wiping away a tear. ``And there, on the other side, is Jeb,'' 
he said. ``He's looking happy and proud, but also something else, 
maybe a little sad, too. It's a tough moment, tough for me to look 
at. I love my brother, you see.'' Something else has happened in those 
intervening years. George W. Bush had emerged as the early frontrunner 
in virtually every poll for the Republican nomination for president 
in 2000, a goal that he has not yet said he desires but which Tuesday's 
Bush victories will go a significant way toward making more possible. 
``There is no doubt that having two brothers and two sons of a former 
president as governors of two of the largest and most politically 
pivotal states in the country, and one of them as a potential presidential 
candidate, makes the Bushes one of the most remarkable political families 
of the 20th century,'' said Ralph Reed, a Republican strategist in 
Atlanta. ``It's the legitimate manifestation of a Republican dynasty,'' 
said Rich Bonds, a former Republican national chairman who has known 
the Bush family for many years. Less clear is what it means to the 
two states. What's a dynasty to do in the 1990s? Most government officials 
and political observers in Austin and Tallahassee believe that it 
will do neither brother much good at home to have a sibling running 
another state, no matter how sizable. They will have to make their 
own way with their own legislatures. But there is no doubt that if 
George W. Bush does decide to run for president, having a brother 
in the governor's mansion in Tallahassee will be very, very helpful. 
It is rare for American political families to produce two governors 
at the same time, said Stephen Hess, a senior fellow at the Brookings 
Institution in Washington who wrote the book, ``America's Political 
Dynasties,'' in 1966. Usually, he said, such dynasties are centered 
in a single state _ the Tafts of Ohio, the Adamses of Massachusetts, 
the Frelinghuysens of New Jersey, the Longs of Louisiana _ though 
there are exceptions, which Hess calls ``free-floating dynasties.'' 
The Kennedys began in Massachusetts, but later made their mark in 
New York and Maryland. The family that most recently held two governorships 
at once was the Rockefellers, in New York and Arkansas. One has to 
go back to the Washburns of the years during and just after the Civil 
War to find a family with so many political stars of such national 
reach, Hess said. During that period, four Washburn brothers were 
congressmen from Maine, Illinois, Wisconsin and Minnesota, two later 
became governor, one became a senator and one was secretary of state 
under Ulysses S. Grant. But the Washburn dynasty burned out in one 
generation. ``And when you talk about the Bushes, you are not talking 
about a family of ward bosses in Chicago,'' Hess said. ``These folks 
are U.S. senators, vice president, president, governors of two of 
the largest states in the country. We're talking about quite a powerhouse. 
It is sure going to be an advantage if George W. Bush decides he wants 
to run for president.'' Bush crumpled up the paper that held his sandwich 
and glanced out the plane's window toward the flat, green fields of 
north central Texas, striated with wiggling creeks and their bright 
yellow flood plains. ``We inherited a great name,'' he said. ``It's 
a great political legacy. It's obviously a political advantage. But 
to me, the election of two sons as governors is a tribute to George 
H.W. Bush and Barbara Bush. It's a great tribute to my mom and dad.'' 
The former president and first lady showed up Monday at a raucous 
rally in downtown Houston while their eldest son was making his final 
campaign swing, but neither spoke or took part in the news conference 
that followed. ``We never sat around our house discussing issues,'' 
George W. Bush said. ``We talked about what the Astros did that day 
or whether Marvin had finished his peas yet. My father never tried 
to put his stamp on my life.'' In a letter to The New York Times in 
August, responding to written questions for a profile of the Texas 
governor, former President Bush said that ``both George and Jeb are 
strong enough to take it,'' referring to the stresses of public life. 
``They are men of conviction and integrity,'' he wrote. ``Both Jeb 
and George were at my side in some pretty tough times.'' The two oldest 
Bush brothers are seven years apart in age, and it was a significant 
difference when they were younger. But now, as middle-aged men with 
their own families, the difference seems almost trivial. Geography 
and the demands of their campaigns have kept them apart, but they 
have tried to keep in touch and, through their parents, their three 
siblings and the friends of the family keep tabs on the other's advancing 
prospects. ``The truth is, we're very close,'' George W. Bush said. 
They are products of a intensely driven and tightly knit family. ``It's 
a competitive family,'' said Chase Untermeyer, who was George Bush's 
appointments secretary and has known the family for many years. ``I 
don't think it's competitive with a hard edge to it, but if you ever 
see the Bushes playing tennis or even backgammon, it can be pretty 
frightening.'' When asked to describe the relationship between the 
two brothers, Bonds answered instantly. ``Spirited,'' he said. George 
Strake, a former Texas secretary of state and Republican chairman 
who also knows the family well, said, ``They may be competitive on 
one level. But when it comes to politics, they go back to being bloodbrothers 
and allies.'' Jeb Bush was the first son to take an interest in a 
political life, and it came as a surprise to many when it was not 
him, but his older brother, who was successful in 1994 when the brothers 
first ran for governor. The younger Bush alienated many black Florida 
voters in 1994 and stridently pushed a conservative message that scared 
off some moderates. His older brother, although just as conservative 
as Jeb on many issues, ran a more upbeat, unconfrontational campaign 
and has governed in such close partnership with Democratic leaders 
that Texas' retiring Democratic lieutenant governor backed Bush for 
re-election. This time around, Jeb Bush seemed to have learned a lesson 
from his brother's success. He aggressively courted liberal Democrats 
and voter groups usually ignored by Republican candidates in Florida, 
stressing compassion and inclusiveness as campaign themes. He also 
reached out to blacks and stressed his own family's diversity. ``My 
children are Hispanic,'' he said of his two sons and daughter during 
campaign stops in South Florida in fluent, slightly accented Spanish 
while his Mexican-American wife of 24 years, Columba, appeared on 
Spanish-language television ads on his behalf. Susan A. MacManus, 
a political scientist at the University of South Florida in Tampa, 
said that she believes Jeb Bush has ``seen that a middle-of-the-road 
strategy has been extremely effective in Texas.'' Those who know Jeb 
Bush say that the 1998 campaigner _ the one who adopted a style more 
like his brother's _ was the result of soul-searching and personal 
growth over the last four years, and they expect it to continue throughout 
his administration. ``There was no epiphany,'' said Jeb Bush. ``Life 
is a journey. I hope I never stop learning.'' Both brothers said they 
look forward not only to leading their respective states but to working 
together on issues of common interest. ``It's a great moment for me,'' 
George W. Bush said. ``It's going to be great to see him at that first 
Republican governor's conference.'' The brothers intend to be at each 
other's inaugurations. Then they will face fresh legislative sessions. 
And then, George W. Bush will face a decision. Despite his standing 
in the polls and a network of political supporters who once supported 
his father, Bush has consistently tried to deflect presidential speculation 
by saying that his focus was on winning re-election in Texas (``I 
hardly ever think about it,'' he said, ``Except every day when people 
ask me about it.''). He has also said that he had some reluctance 
about putting his family into a national political spotlight. Jeb 
Bush said that he has not encouraged his brother to run for president 
because ``that decision has to be personal'' but that he hopes he 
will. This week, as the campaign wound down, George W. Bush still 
insisted that he had not made up his mind, but said he knew that he 
could not wait much longer. First, he said, he needs to work on his 
inauguration address. Then, he needs to make sure that the legislative 
session that opens in January is off to a solid start. Sometime, probably 
around April, he said, he will take some uninterrupted time and think 
through the whole notion of a presidential bid. An answer will most 
likely come soon afterward, he said, later in the spring. The campaign 
plane began to dip down along the edge of East Texas, the thick, dark 
Sabine River twisting languidly along the Louisiana line. The governor 
didn't want to talk about delegate counts or presidential strategies. 
That's for later. But surely he had to acknowledge that having a brother 
running the fourth largest state in the union wouldn't be a bad thing 
for a presidential candidate? He cocked his head and a smile crept 
up one side of his face. ``That would be helpful, wouldn't it?'' he 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>