<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0391 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Who is the greatest living British actress? Maybe the question is 
silly, since it makes an infinitely demanding art sound like a steeplechase 
for mature fillies, and maybe it is meaningless. After all, it is 
not exactly easy to measure Maggie Smith, with her droll wit and sly 
timing, against Diana Rigg, who is currently giving a fierce, febrile 
performance as Racine's Phedre in the West End. Or Dame Maggie against 
Vanessa Redgrave, who, sadly, seldom brings that wonderful emotional 
clarity of hers to the stage these days, or Dame Diana against Helen 
Mirren, of whom more in a moment. But if I were to nominate a woman 
for top spot at the theater's top table today, it would be Judi Dench. 
Those Americans who have yet to discover Dame Judi, or know her primarily 
for her Oscar-nominated Queen Victoria in the movie ``Mrs. Brown,'' 
will get the chance to fill the gap when she comes to Broadway next 
spring as the prickly, warm, gullible, shrewd protagonist of David 
Hare's ``Amy's View.'' Meanwhile, she is giving a performance in London 
that makes still greater demands on her multiple skills. She plays 
the title role in Peter Hall's revival of Eduardo de Filippo's ``Filumena'' 
at the Piccadilly: Filumena is an illiterate Neapolitan ex-prostitute 
with a steel-plated hide, a canny brain and a maternal heart doughtily 
thumping away inside. Since ``Filumena'' is a somber comedy, and its 
author shuns opportunities for hilarity that lesser dramatists would 
eagerly embrace, we don't observe the trick that gets the action moving. 
On storms Michael Pennington as the wealthy merchant, Domenico, expostulating 
so unstoppably that one fears he will send his dapper little mustache 
spinning into the stalls; he is followed by an eerily unimpressed 
figure with strings of black hair straggling down a white nightgown. 
This is Dame Judi's Filumena, quietly celebrating an improbable triumph 
over her aging lover. She has decided that 25 years is long enough 
to wait for a marriage proposal, especially as Domenico is now displaying 
a taste for younger flesh, so she has staged a deathbed scene and 
conned him into making a respectable wife of her. Nor is this the 
last of Filumena's surprises. It emerges that long ago she bore three 
sons and had them secretly adopted. How can Domenico try to annul 
their marriage when, as she proceeds to reveal, one of the boys is 
his own? There is some gorgeous comedy as Pennington quizzes the three 
young men about their mating and musical habits, and can't decide 
if his son is the cheery plumber, the supercilious shirt maker or 
the poetically inclined clerk. De Filippo, who died in 1984, set the 
play in his native Naples in 1946, so the situation is also deeply 
serious and the stakes high. Wedlock, blood and paternity all matter 
far more than in the London or New York of 1998. For de Filippo this 
is a dramatic advantage, but for actors in Europe's chilly northwest 
it's a challenge. I've seen British productions of the great Neapolitan's 
work that have left me feeling I was watching parody, Italian waiters 
flinging about feelings like overcooked lasagna. Can Peter Hall's 
cast resist spaghetti-house accents and rococo gestures and still 
create the intensity and tension that all this Mediterranean bonding 
requires? The answer is yes it can, thanks largely to Pennington, 
who successfully engineers Domenico's transition from arrogance through 
unease to a touching humility, and overwhelmingly to Judi Dench. Hers 
is a squat, rough-voiced Filumena who has been toughened by life and 
who still has a sort of slum truculence about her. A rasping cackle 
of glee gives way to a big triumphant smile as she reveals to the 
outraged Domenico that she has been robbing him blind to finance her 
sons' upbringing; and when she announces in a blunt, matter-of-fact 
way that she will kill him if he ever tells the boys that one of them 
is his son, one feels he would be most unwise to disbelieve her. But 
if the character demanded nothing but aggressive unsentimentality 
from an actress, the play would be less interesting and the role less 
tricky to perform. There comes a point when Filumena must admit to 
Domenico that, despite his neglect and his womanizing, she loves him, 
maybe more than ever. Eventually, there comes another when a woman 
who claims never to have wept finds that (to quote Timberlake Wertenbaker's 
full-blooded translation of one of de Filippo's stage directions) 
``tears are running down her face like pure water from a polished 
rock.'' By some marvel of human geology, Dame Judi gives us the granite, 
gives us the purity of emotion trapped inside, and makes the mixture 
more than merely plausible. In its unpretentious way it is a heart-splintering 
performance, one that could only have been created by a major actress 
in total command of her protean strength. Still, Dame Judi has formidable 
rivals. Given the voltage that Helen Mirren generated when she last 
appeared on the London stage, in 1994, one had expected her to fizz 
and dazzle in ``Antony and Cleopatra'' now at the National Theater. 
But, no, her Egyptian queen isn't as excitingly unpredictable as her 
lovelorn Natalya Petrovna in Turgenev's ``Month in the Country,'' 
though this is largely for reasons beyond her control. Sean Mathias' 
production lacks energy and depth, and Alan Rickman inexplicably chooses 
to see Shakespeare's grizzled hedonist as a sullen melancholic who 
cares little more for Cleopatra than for his own clarity of diction. 
It would be easier to strike sparks from a wet blanket, or throw a 
successful party for the ghost of Hamlet's father, than form an electric 
bond with this glumly inarticulate Antony. Even so, Ms. Mirren has 
her moments, starting with her very first words, ``If it be love indeed, 
tell me how much,'' which come across as a particularly challenging 
question in some ontological quiz game. As one might expect of so 
incisively intelligent an actress, hers is a smart, ironic, mocking 
Cleopatra, but, despite the odd burst of rage or wail of regret, not 
a particularly passionate one. Only toward the end, when death has 
provided Rickman's Antony with a definitive exit, does Ms. Mirren 
rise fully to the emotional occasion, bringing us the grief and gravity 
that Shakespeare demands. Meanwhile, one of the National's former 
artistic directors _ that's right, Peter Hall again _ is giving a 
first major London revival to one of the greatest box-office successes 
in that theater's 35-year history. Not content with bringing ``Filumena'' 
to the West End, the workaholic veteran is at the Old Vic with ``Amadeus,'' 
whose premiere he himself staged back in 1979. At this point, I had 
better anticlimactically confess that I have never been a huge fan 
of Peter Shaffer's death-of-Mozart play. When the court composer Salieri 
is destroying Mozart while seeming to befriend him, the piece admittedly 
has the awful fascination of a well-plotted revenge drama; but when 
this Iago turns out also to be an 18th-century Faust, and starts orating 
about his war with the God who has showered his rival with the musical 
gifts he himself has been denied, the effect is of a melodrama living 
way above its intellectual means. Still, David Suchet's Salieri, while 
lacking the darkness of soul that Paul Scofield originally brought 
to the role, is suave and menacing and notably nimble when it comes 
to shifting his eyes and lips from smile to sneer. The acting around 
him is strong, too, and that of his victim superb. Americans are unlikely 
to have heard of Michael Sheen. Despite a high-powered Peer Gynt for 
the Japanese director Yukio Ninagawa, we British have barely registered 
him ourselves. But his Mozart is not only the scampering, snickering 
egomaniac, the ``obscene child'' that Shaffer's thematic pretensions 
require him to be: as the eyes weirdly glinting above pasty, sweaty 
cheeks emphasize, he is vulnerable, baffled and helplessly in pain. 
It is a moving portrait of an unacknowledged genius on the brink of 
his unmarked grave, one that only a most talented young actor could 
create. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>