<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0284 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Members of the Indonesian military helped to instigate the violence 
and looting in the Indonesian capital in May that killed nearly 1,200 
people and led to the resignation of President Suharto, a fact-finding 
team has concluded. The 18-member investigating team, including representatives 
of the government, private groups, the armed forces and the Commission 
on Human Rights, also concluded that the military had been ineffective 
in controlling the chaos that engulfed the capital and four other 
cities from May 13-15. Flanked by members of the clergy, the military 
and the Rights Commission, Marzuki Darusman, the head of the team, 
announced the results on Tuesday after a three-month investigation. 
Government officials failed to show up for a meeting to receive the 
report. ``There was the involvement of many sides from local thugs 
and political and mass organizations to the involvement of certain 
members and elements within'' the military, Darusman said. The report 
concluded that much of the violence had been organized and provoked. 
Suharto's role in the rioting was not addressed, with the report attributing 
the chaos to ``a conflict between the political elite, related to 
the continuity of national leadership, and a deterioration of the 
monetary situation.'' The report confirmed that 66 women, most of 
Chinese descent, had been raped during the three days of rioting and 
that 10 others had been victims of sexual assault and harassment. 
Ethnic Chinese residents, who are predominant in the country's mechant 
class, were a target of many of the rioters. The number of rape cases 
verified in the report is far lower than earlier reports by rights 
groups that 168 women had been raped, but higher than estimates by 
the military, which said it had investigated and found no evidence 
that any rapes had occurred. One member of the investigating team, 
Asmara Nababan, attributed the discrepancy to difficulties in verifying 
the rapes in the climate of fear that followed the riots. Although 
there were fears that the team's findings would be watered down to 
protect the interests of the military and government officials, the 
report turned out to be frank. Two military officers were singled 
out as bearing the most responsibility for the unrest. The team called 
on the government to investigate the role of former Lt. Gen. Prabowo 
Subianto, a son-in-law of Suharto who was the commander of an elite 
army unit. The officer who was in charge of security in the capital 
during the riots, Maj. Gen. Syafrie Samsuddin, was found not to have 
carried out his duties properly, and the report said he ``should be 
held accountable.'' Samsuddin remains an active officer in the Indonesian 
military, while Subianto was ousted from the military in August on 
charges that he was involved in the abduction and torture of political 
activists earlier in the year. Nababan said that the report could 
not be used as a legal document for prosecution purposes but that 
he hoped that its eight recommendations, including a court-martial 
for Subianto, would be taken seriously. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>