<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0261 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Currency traders attacked the lira in August, and were repelled when 
the central bank intervened to make it clear that it would maintain 
Italy's link to the euro, the single continental currency that comes 
into official use on Jan. 1. Antonio Fazio, the Italian central bank 
president, disclosed details of this summer's unheralded currency 
battle in testimony before a Parliament committee last Thursday. With 
the Russian financial system in meltdown and global investors shunning 
risk, he said, traders had bet heavily that the lira would sink in 
value, buying futures contracts that would insure big gains if it 
did. They backed off when the central bank signaled through its own 
purchases of the lira on the open market that come what may, Italy 
would support its own currency in preparation for the introduction 
of the euro, the currency that will replace it. For Italians, the 
strength afforded by the lira's lock to the euro was reassuring. Indeed, 
while the advent of the new currency is still weeks away, the euro 
is already a financial force, both in currency trading and in European 
capital markets, where it has begun to alter the ways in which governments 
do business. As the euro approaches, European capital markets are 
melding together. After Jan. 1, all securities will be denominated 
in euros, and the currency will be used for electronic commerce. Not 
until January 2002 will euro notes and coins enter circulation. But 
a vigorous market for euro-style bonds _ so-called euro-fungibles, 
government or corporate securities issued with the pledge of payment 
in euros _ already exists. After a fitful start in 1997, fresh issues 
of these securities averaged $16.6 billion a month in the first half 
of 1998. Paola Lamedica, a bond strategist with Paribas in London, 
called the volume ``above any realistic expectation,'' despite a slump 
since August, when global markets plunged. Now, with new bonds denominated 
in euros, and thus no currency-exchange risk, investors in Milan, 
like those in Paris, can shop Europe for the lowest prices and highest 
yields, and they are doing so, she said. As a result, countries that 
are comparative spendthrifts, such as Belgium or Italy, are likely 
to find it harder to finance their operations if they continue paying 
their way by accumulating debt. So high was the level of public debt 
in the two countries _ more than 120 percent of their gross domestic 
products, double that of Germany and France _ that European officials 
bent the rules to admit Italy and Belgium to the euro club, in which 
total debt was not supposed to exceed 60 percent of national output. 
Both countries have pledged to bring the level down. So is the party 
over? Not necessarily, experts say, though the price of an entry ticket 
may have gone up dramatically. In the past, accumulating debt had 
been relatively easy, given the captive audience European nations 
enjoyed for their government securities. With high savings rates and 
a lackluster stock market, for example, Italians scooped up their 
government's notes as the investment of choice. Now, however, there 
will be a wide range of options. Indeed, Vincent Truglia, managing 
director for sovereign risk at Moody's Investor Service in New York, 
compares Europeans to New Yorkers in the 1970s, when the city's fiscal 
crisis left few local financial institutions feeling obliged to purchase 
municipal bonds. ``There's no large captive audience anymore,'' he 
said of Europe as the new currency approaches. Lacking a central European 
government and the equivalent of U.S. Treasury bonds, European nations, 
much like American states and Canadian provinces, he said, will be 
competing with each other, ``at lower prices and higher interest rates.'' 
In fact, some analysts use that comparison with North American markets 
for state and provincial bonds to estimate future European bond spreads. 
Stephane Vanadia, bond strategist with Lehman Brothers in London, 
believes that future spreads between, say, Italian and German bonds 
will rarely exceed 50 basis points, or one-half of a percentage point, 
except perhaps in times of severe economic stress. ``It could be raised 
in case of recession,'' he said, but in normal market conditions, 
he expects 20- to 30-basis-point spreads. This past February, Italy 
offered the largest euro-denominated bond issue thus far, bonds worth 
the equivalent of $7.2 billion. Sweden and Finland have followed suit 
with lesser amounts. The appetite for these bonds has been ferocious. 
Much of the buying, traders say, is by Japanese banks and other financial 
institutions eager to broaden their bond portfolios, which had been 
overweighted toward the dollar because of the fragmentation of European 
currencies. Indeed, some of the dollar's recent weakness is attributable, 
they say, to Japanese institutions' liquidating dollar holdings in 
exchange for the euro. So where are the limits for European governments? 
Analysts say that, in part at least, the Maastricht treaty, the 1991 
agreement establishing the single currency, which sought to give the 
euro a firm foundation by requiring low inflation and public debt 
levels, will rein in European spending. Under the treaty terms, governments 
whose deficit levels exceed 3 percent of output or debt levels surpass 
60 percent of output are threatened, theoretically, with penalties. 
While that may be fine as long as European economies grow, a severe 
test will come whenever European economies slip into the next recession, 
and governments are tempted to spend their way out of it. Still no 
one is quite sure whether the proposed penalties will stick. And with 
left-leaning governments now in power in Germany, France and Italy 
_ the major nations among the 11 first-stage euro participants _ there 
is political demand for neo-Keynesian pump priming to stimulate growth 
and reduce unemployment. Given that political pressure, and the hard 
realities of high joblessness, their interpretation of Maastricht's 
guidelines may prove to be extremely liberal. Despite Maastricht's 
strictures, said Truglia of Moody's, ``the bottom line is governments 
are free to do what they want.'' Thus, bond markets, searching for 
criteria to judge risk, are adding Europe's political risks to the 
calculation of economic fundamentals _ and notably, the risk of nations' 
backing out of the euro. ``From a theoretical point of view,'' Ms. 
Lamedica of Paribas said, ``it's definitely possible,'' given that 
neither the Maastricht treaty nor subsequent agreements forbid it. 
And indeed, among the criteria Vanadia of Lehman Brothers uses to 
judge national risk is a ``cessation risk,'' _ the chance that a country 
might reintroduce a national currency. Indeed, speculators who attacked 
the lira in August were betting on just that. On Aug. 28, Fazio said, 
as the dollar took a beating against European currencies, Italy's 
central bank noticed heavy trading in lire and German marks, as traders 
bet that the lira, with the dollar, would be pulled down. In forward 
contracts pegged to Jan. 2, 1999, one day after the euro's introduction, 
speculators bet that as many as 999 lire would be needed to purchase 
a German mark, against 988 then. In the end, the central bank _ by 
merely showing its face, and then by spending about $300 million supporting 
the lira's value _ fended off the attack. Paradoxically, many experts 
believe that of the three largest nations in the euro club _ Germany, 
France and Italy _ France runs the greatest risk of leaving, because 
of low public acceptance of the single currency. In a referendum, 
only 51 percent of the French voted in favor of adopting the euro; 
in recent public opinion surveys, support has dropped to about 45 
percent. In July, though, Paribas canvassed thousands of its clients 
and found that only 13 percent believed there was a chance of the 
euro agreement breaking down, compared with 39 percent in December 
1997. ``The main threat,'' Ms. Lamedica said, ``would be political 
disquiet over fiscal policy, if you entered a period of stress.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>