<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0317 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
City Center used to be a place where, as one critic complained, a 
cloud of dust rose when Tosca stamped her foot. The neo-Moorish fantasy 
on West 55th Street began its second life in 1943 as a ``people's 
theater,'' where the performing arts could be enjoyed for $5.95 an 
orchestra seat, a price raised only in 1968. The former Shriners' 
temple soon became known as a lovably dowdy home for the arts, where 
generations of audiences grew up watching all-American companies like 
the New York City Opera, the New York City Ballet and the Joffrey 
Ballet grow with them. Theatergoers could see the Lunts, Paul Robeson 
and Tallulah Bankhead perform, along with a raft of musical revivals. 
In the years that followed, the center had as many ups and downs as 
that opera heroine. There were lean years when it struggled to keep 
its doors open, a poor relation to the gleaming Lincoln Center a few 
blocks north and a daunting challenge to a succession of would-be 
saviors. The latest is Judith E. Daykin, a briskly pleasant 57-year-old 
former administrator with the Paul Taylor Dance Company and the Brooklyn 
Academy of Music. Seven years after she was appointed president and 
executive director by the theater's board, City Center is sporting 
a gleaming new look and personality. Much of that fresh spirit is 
attributable to the huge success of ``Encores: Great American Musicals 
in Concert,'' which opened at City Center in 1994. The series of rarely 
heard musicals performed in semi-staged concert versions with original 
orchestrations and star turns by popular performers has become the 
darling of critics and audiences alike. On Friday, another theatrical 
group, the Stratford Festival of Canada, opens for a two-and-a-half-week 
season. If successful, the troupe plans to return each year to City 
Center. Ms. Daykin has expanded many of City Center's activities, 
including fund-raising, marketing and booking. The number of weeks 
that the theater is occupied has increased from her first season: 
22 companies and events are scheduled over 33 weeks this season; while 
13 companies performed over 17 weeks in the 1991-92 season. After 
retiring the theater's accumulated debt of about $750,000 in her first 
year, she has increased the number of board members, educational programs 
and box office hours. She also created an annual gala that nets $300,000, 
representing the bulk of donations from a board that is recognized 
more for its ideas than its ability to raise money. The current annual 
operating budget is $9.5 million, about 60 percent of which is earned. 
The red-upholstered 2,300-seat theater itself _ with its wide, shallow 
mezzanine and first and second balconies _ and the backstage warren 
of small offices and studio spaces have been spruced up. A major goal 
for Ms. Daykin and her board is for City Center to be booked 11 months 
of the year. One step in that direction has been to make the theater 
almost exclusively a rental, a departure from the years when City 
Center presented, or paid, companies to perform, taking care of their 
expenses in return for box office receipts. This season, under the 
new scheme, there have been some disappointments when several well-reviewed 
troupes failed to do expected business at the box office. Still, her 
admirers believe that Ms. Daykin is on her way to making City Center 
a viable, financially healthy institution in an era of declining attendance 
at music and dance performances. ``What was a struggle to survive 
is now a struggle to grow,'' said Raymond A. Lamontagne, who has been 
on the board for four years. However, Ms. Daykin has her detractors. 
City Center's changing relationship with dance over the last decade 
has been the subject of much report-writing and pained discussion 
in dance circles both in and outside New York. Some believe that City 
Center, once a theater with seven resident dance companies, has abandoned 
the art, and there are frequent complaints that the staff can be difficult 
to deal with. In response, Ms. Daykin said, ``I think we have the 
most extraordinary arts staff in the city, and we bend over backward 
to provide services for our user companies.'' Company directors and 
others working in dance who were interviewed for this article declined 
to speak critically about City Center on the record. ``There's nowhere 
else to go,'' one administrator said. The days are gone when the center 
regularly presented companies that performed dance, though dance troupes 
account for 12 of the 22 bookings in the current season. The only 
attraction that City Center is financing on its own is the ``Encores'' 
series. It is co-presenting the Stratford engagement with the Canadian 
theater company, a $1 million project for which the two institutions 
have raised $300,000 and are projecting an $850,000 box-office return. 
The center charges a $35,000-a-week rental fee to nonprofit arts companies 
for use of the theater, some equipment and some services. That sum, 
Ms. Daykin said, is only 46 percent of the total cost of keeping the 
theater open for a week, so that City Center ultimately subsidizes 
the remaining 54 percent of the cost. (Three dance companies with 
annual seasons at City Center _ the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, 
the Paul Taylor Dance Company and American Ballet Theater _ receive 
an additional discount of $5,000.) Even so, the cost of performing 
at City Center is prohibitively high for most dance companies, in 
part because of stagehand wages, which are not included in the rental 
fee and are comparable to stagehand rates at Broadway theaters. Yet 
a New York season is still considered an important part of a dance 
company's development and companies regularly raise money to lose 
at City Center. The total cost of a week's engagement there for a 
major New York ballet or modern-dance troupe, can range from $130,000 
to $800,000, depending on the company's size, the lavishness of its 
productions and whether it uses taped music or an orchestra. (The 
top orchestra seat price for dance at City Center is $58 for American 
Ballet Theater.) Most mainstream ballet and modern-dance troupes are 
too big for the chief alternative, the 472-seat Joyce Theater on Eighth 
Avenue in Chelsea. ``We knew we could not afford to present, because 
if we presented one company we would have to present all of them,'' 
Ms. Daykin said. As a result, she has brought in more drama, including 
the National Theater of Greece, in response to what she perceives 
as a changing cultural climate. ``The dance boom is over,'' she said. 
``I couldn't keep the theater lit.'' Ross Kramberg, executive director 
of the Paul Taylor troupe, said: ``City Center is one of the larger 
prestigious venues available to us. As I understand it, other comparable 
venues are more expensive and scheduling is tighter where there are 
resident companies.'' The theater most similar to City Center is the 
New York State Theater at Lincoln Center, which has two resident companies 
and few open weeks. The State Theater charges $100,000 a week for 
the 2,792-seat house and the front-of-house staff. The fee does not 
include the salaries for stagehands, which are close to Broadway stagehand 
wages. But because of the different services and equipment provided 
by the two theaters, total production costs work out to be about the 
same. Audiences arriving this week and next to see the Stratford Festival 
productions of ``Much Ado About Nothing,'' with Brian Bedford, Martha 
Henry and William Hutt, and ``The Miser'' will find a handsome, freshly 
painted and carpeted theater. Built for the Shriners in 1923, the 
Mecca Temple had passed into the city's possession for nonpayment 
of taxes and was to be turned into a parking garage when Mayor Fiorello 
LaGuardia stepped in to save it. LaGuardia and Newbold Morris, president 
of the city council, envisioned a theater like Carnegie Hall and the 
Metropolitan Opera House in everything but ticket prices, with in-house 
rehearsal space for the artists who would perform there. The new theater 
would be nonprofit, owned by the city and leased for $1 a year to 
City Center's governing organization, today the City Center 55th Street 
Theater Foundation. LaGuardia's rescue was not to be the last time 
City Center was saved. One blow to the theater's coffers _ and pride 
_ occurred when the City Ballet and City Opera abandoned the theater 
in the mid-1960s for the State Theater at the new Lincoln Center. 
In 1975, City Center nearly folded, but was saved by a consortium 
of dance companies that took on the running of the theater. By the 
time Ms. Daykin arrived in early 1992, City Center, though now a declared 
landmark, was caught in another downward spiral. Hired to save as 
well as run it, her responsibilities include programming, booking 
attractions and dealing with the theater's staff, the labor unions 
and the companies performing there. Ms. Daykin, who grew up in Illinois, 
began her professional career as an actor, director and stage manager 
and has had long experience in theater and dance. She now commands 
a mini-empire from her ninth-floor offices above the auditorium. Theatrical 
productions have played a major role in City Center's history, starting 
from its first month as a theater, when it was called the New York 
City Center of Music and Drama. The Manhattan Theater Club is based 
at City Center, where it has rented two auditoriums since 1984. But 
it is the success of the ``Encores'' series, which Ms. Daykin began 
with Theodore S. Chapin, president of the Rodgers and Hammerstein 
Organization, that has been crucial in the current rejuvenation of 
the center. The series is now fully subscribed, although some seats 
are available, Ms. Daykin said. This season ``Encores'' is presenting 
``Babes in Arms,'' Feb. 11-14; ``The Ziegfeld Follies of 1936,'' March 
25-28, and ``Do Re Mi,'' May 6-9, for five performances each. ``That's 
probably all we'll ever do,'' Ms. Daykin said about the number of 
performances. ``Encores'' is expensive, she added, costing $1.7 million 
a year to produce; the series earns $1.35 million at the box office 
(an orchestra seat is $55), with City Center making up the difference. 
``Of course, we have funders who are very devoted to it,'' Ms. Daykin 
said. ``And it got attention from people who, if they were not interested 
in dance, had not paid attention to City Center. Returnees translate 
to givers, which translates to corporate givers.'' Not coincidentally 
perhaps, membership at City Center has increased, bringing in $200,000 
this year as compared with $8,000 in Ms. Daykin's first year. And 
the move to Broadway of the ``Encores'' production of ``Chicago,'' 
with companies performing around the nation and abroad, has meant 
small royalties for City Center. ``I've been struggling with how to 
further exploit that,'' Howard M. Squadron, the longtime chairman 
of City Center's board, said with relish. ``I'd like to find out how 
to take a show like `St. Louis Woman' and give it some summer weeks 
or get it on television.'' The 1946 Harold Arlen/Johnny Mercer musical 
starred Vanessa L. Williams and ended last season's series with ecstatic 
reviews. Ms. Daykin's enthusiasm for theater has also brought the 
Stratford company to City Center. She attended the festival in Ontario 
for 30 years, she said, and she and Richard Monette, the festival's 
artistic director, are friends. ``Negotiations would have broken down, 
except that Judith was very keen on this idea,'' Monette said. ``I 
kept giving up, but she was tenacious.'' This shift toward theater 
occurred in part because Ms. Daykin sensed that City Center lacked 
an identity. ``Lots of companies played here,'' she said. ``The audiences 
were devoted to those companies, but not to this theater. There was 
no money to be raised because there was nothing to be raised (italics)for.''(end 
itallics) The city contributes about $1 million a year to City Center. 
``It's a frail relationship,'' Ms. Daykin said about the city's role 
as a financial sponsor. ``The money is nowhere near to keeping pace 
with inflation or to the support before 1990, when the biggest cuts 
to city buildings occurred.'' That other frail relationship in the 
life of City Center, its connection to dance, may undergo some changes. 
A study is now under way, commissioned by the dance program of the 
New York State Council on the Arts, that addresses the feasibility 
of creating a 1,000-seat house in Manhattan, larger than the Joyce 
Theater but smaller and presumably more affordable than City Center. 
Robert Yesselman, who is conducting the study, said that Beverly D'Anne, 
the head of the state council's dance program, ``was reacting to what 
she'd heard at panel meetings year after year about the need for affordable 
theaters and rehearsal space.'' The study, expected to be completed 
by the end of the year, explores alternatives to City Center that 
include booking a block of time at the theater to be built at Columbus 
Circle by Jazz at Lincoln Center, building a new theater or renovating 
an existing one. Ms. Daykin said she doubted that it would be cheaper 
for dance companies to perform in such a theater. ``It will never 
be cheap to play a large dance company in New York,'' she said. Squadron 
raised another issue: ``I do think it's true that there are companies 
that are too big for the Joyce and not up to a theater like City Center. 
But I'm not at all sure that there are enough such companies that 
could fill a 1,000-seat theater. We can close off the second balcony 
and even part of the first balcony at City Center to make a 1,200- 
to 1,600-seat theater. It's very difficult, it seems to me, for someone 
to come up with a formula that is perfect. The companies are so different 
in size and resources.'' The rental fee stays the same, however. Ms. 
Daykin said that her vision for the future of City Center, which was 
at first simply to keep it open and functioning, did in fact include 
dance. ``What should City Center be doing?'' she asked rhetorically. 
``We should try to help insure the dance companies' success here. 
We can't afford to pay all their bills. We must present and produce 
other arts that do not compete with dance. The more activity, the 
better we do.'' A workable mix of bookings, she said, would be for 
City Center to finance 30 percent of its attractions; to have 30 percent 
more as rentals to nonprofit arts groups, and rent a further 30 percent 
at higher market fees to companies operating commercially. Ideally, 
she said, the new audiences brought in by ``Encores'' and the Stratford 
Festival will cross over and try the dance companies, whose brochures 
are on display in the front lobby: ``If theater people come in and 
see all the dance materials, realize they didn't pay too much and 
can see the stage, and had a nice brownie in intermission, maybe they'll 
come back to see some dance. The same is true for dance audiences. 
``Music, theater and dance all have a place at City Center, just as 
LaGuardia envisioned.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>