<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0166 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
``Chi-chi, beignets, glace et boissons fraiches,'' the French vendors 
would call out along the beach in Nice: ``Crullers, beignets, ice 
cream and cold drinks.'' The sing-song phrase is engraved in my memory 
from summer days playing along the Mediterranean. I can't recall how 
we managed to eat those beignets _ thin slices of apple dipped in 
batter and fried _ with sandy, salty fingers. But I know we did, because 
each time I make one I can see the beach. Most cultures have some 
form of beignet; I'm thinking of American fritters, Japanese tempura 
or the fried puffs of dough dipped in honey that my wife's Italian 
family serves after every holiday meal. In France, beignets are considered 
a classic dessert, but they can be savory, too _ what you dip in a 
beignet batter is up to you. This fall, I'm making beignets with quinces. 
Quinces are a lot like apples, but the texture is firmer, so I poach 
them for a few minutes in a citrus-infused sugar syrup to soften their 
bite and add some extra flavor. When quinces are no longer in the 
market, you can substitute apples or pears, or even bananas, which 
don't need to be poached. And while some beignet batters are nothing 
more than flour, water and salt, like a tempura batter, and others 
use both beer and yeast to leaven them, I make a batter with beer 
as the leavening and an egg for richness, flavor and more puff. It's 
your choice whether to serve the beignets hot enough to burn a few 
fingers, or to stack them up and enjoy them at room temperature. But 
hot or cold, they should be dusted with confectioners' sugar. You 
can stop there, or you can make a wonderful creme anglaise, a pouring 
custard, that I think is the best beignet dip. Too bad the beach vendors 
didn't have this _ it would have made a great thing even greater. 
ORANGE FLOWER CREME ANGLAISE Time:25 minutes, plus about { hour for 
cooling 6 large egg yolks 1 cup sugar 1 teaspoon flour 2 cups half-and-half 
2 broad strips orange zest 2 tablespoons orange flower water. 1. In 
a medium mixing bowl, combine egg yolks, sugar and flour. Whisk together 
until thick and pale. 2. In a small saucepan, combine the half-and-half 
and orange zest. Place over medium heat and bring to a boil. While 
whisking the egg mixture, very slowly pour about half the hot cream 
over the yolks. Pour yolk mixture back into pot. 3. Stirring constantly 
with a wooden spoon, heat until the creme anglaise is thick enough 
to coat the back of a spoon, about 5 minutes; if you run your finger 
down the back of the spoon, the mixture should not run into the track 
that is made. Remove from heat immediately, and strain the creme anglaise 
into a bowl. 4. Press a piece of plastic wrap against the surface 
of the creme anglaise. Refrigerate until cool, about half an hour, 
then stir in the orange flower water. Serve chilled with quince beignets. 
Yield: 3 cups. QUINCE BEIGNETS WITH ORANGE FLOWER CREME ANGLAISE Time: 
45 minutes 1 cup plus 3 tablespoons sugar 2 broad strips orange zest 
1 broad strip lemon zest 1 vanilla bean, split lengthwise 4 medium 
quinces, peeled 1 cup all-purpose flour Salt 1 large egg 1 cup beer 
4 cups oil for deep frying Confectioners' sugar, for dusting Orange 
flower creme anglaise (see recipe). 1. In a medium saucepan combine 
4 cups water, 1 cup of the sugar, orange zest, lemon zest and vanilla 
bean. Place over high heat to bring to a boil. In the meantime, cut 
each quince crosswise into 4 slices. Using a thin, sharp knife, cut 
the core from each slice. 2. Add quince slices to boiling syrup, and 
reduce heat to low. Poach slices until they can be pierced easily 
with a knife, about 8 to 10 minutes. Drain on a cooling rack. 3. In 
a medium mixing bowl, combine the flour, remaining 3 tablespoons sugar, 
a pinch of salt and the egg. Whisk together to blend thoroughly. Very 
gradually add the beer, whisking until the batter is smooth and the 
consistency of heavy cream. 4. In a medium saucepan over medium heat, 
heat the oil until a bit of batter tossed in sinks, then pops up quickly. 
Working with 4 at a time, dip slices into batter to coat evenly, then 
drop into the oil. Fry until golden on both sides, about 3 minutes. 
Drain on paper towels, and continue with the rest of the quince slices. 
Dust beignets with confectioners' sugar. Serve hot or at room temperature, 
accompanied by orange flower creme anglaise for dipping. Yield: 16 
beignets. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>