<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Manhattan has many libraries, big and small, young and old, and at 
least two of them are now much in the news. In the renovated Rose 
Main Reading Room at the New York Public Library on Fifth Avenue at 
42nd Street, the very act of bending over a book now has a built-in 
majesty. Even first-time users may feel that they have been co-opted 
among Shakespeare's ``potent, grave and reverend seigniors.'' But 
Manhattan also has a new and specialized library in which efficiency 
and elegance go hand in hand. It is in the French Institute/Alliance 
Francaise at 22 East 60th Street. You don't have to be bilingual to 
have a wonderful time in this library. Even with elementary French, 
you can cruise the whole range of French illustrated magazines. You 
can sing along, sotto voce, with Charles Aznavour on CDs. You can 
turn to the CD-ROM and run the gamut of France from the Champagne 
country to the high Alps. It does not come quite free, but at $65 
a year ($50 for the elderly) you can get yourself a whole new persona. 
The institute, now generally called the FIAF, was founded exactly 
100 years ago by a group of private American enthusiasts. Unlike its 
namesake in London, it has never been subject to the French government 
and is to this day a not-for-profit institution. There had always 
been a library at the institute, and its shelves harbored many a welcome 
surprise for the informed researcher. In other respects, however, 
it had fallen far behind the times by the 1990s. The spaces available 
to it rambled this way and that. Levels were uneven, equipment antiquated, 
dead ends not unknown. The new technology of information played no 
part, and the books soldiered on with zero conservation control. Radical 
action was needed. The institute's centenary in 1998 would clearly 
be the ideal time for that rescue. Coincidentally, the French Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs was reviewing the status of French libraries abroad. 
New York in that context was an important center. In June 1995, the 
ministry for the first time gave money to a private foreign institution 
when it awarded the institute a matching grant of $1 million toward 
the renovation (or, more exactly, the reinvention) of the library. 
That sum was matched within six months by the institute's American 
board members. (The entire project cost around $2.7 million.) It so 
happens that Michael Graves, one of the most gifted and versatile 
American architects of the day, has a magical touch with libraries 
both big and small. When asked to design a room for rare books in 
the American Academy in Rome in a space that was 11 feet wide, 40 
feet long and 20 feet high, he was not deterred. His feeling for materials, 
his feeling for nuance and his ability to draw upon the past all came 
into play. His chairs in Rome paid homage to an English architect, 
Sir John Soane, and in his handling of a very awkward space he tipped 
his hat to a 15th-century library in Cesena, Italy. The wood used 
throughout was pearwood, which in the words of the donor, Barbara 
Goldsmith, ``has the soft color of melted caramel.'' In details such 
as this, seduction lurks. Michael Graves had also built a library 
in Denver, that was almost literally ``as big as all outdoors.'' Completed 
in 1996, it is a 405,000-square-foot extension of an existing building. 
It gives both space and dignity to the standard disciplines that a 
library must foster. But it also includes a separate Storytelling 
Pavilion for children. There is nothing of the classroom about its 
high walls and ceiling, every inch of which is covered, pajama-style, 
with broad blue-and-white stripes. Boredom is banished thereby. Graves 
was just the man for the new French Institute library. He designed 
every single thing about it, from the copper shades over the lights 
in the magazine room to the emblem (a vine-leaf in flower) on the 
pale blue carpet that turns up everywhere. What had been a dingy, 
tumbledown interior is now rational, airy and filled with a soft clear 
light that never digresses into shadow. One room leads to another, 
gently and easily, and there are no second-rank rooms that could be 
mistaken for jumped-up closets. He designed the children's furniture, 
and he made sure that the screen on their computer was just the right 
size and height for 3- to 6-year-olds. And he used maple everywhere, 
from the long wooden poles that hold the latest French newspapers 
to the generous form-fitting armchairs that nestle up to the big circular 
tables in the reading room. It is one of the properties of maple that 
it does not trap the light but catches it and passes it on. Even in 
France, there used to be libraries that appeared to be made more for 
detention than for delight. In the new library, spirits are raised 
and standards set high from the moment that we get to the top of the 
stairs. All around us _ on open stacks, too _ is what looks like an 
almost complete set of major French writers, past and present, in 
the monumental ``Pleiades'' edition from Gallimard. Straight ahead, 
above the reception desk, is a bust of Marianne, the archetypal free-spoken 
and fine-looking young Frenchwoman. Also on hand are busts of George 
Washington and Benjamin Franklin, who figure as benevolent American 
greeters in what is almost entirely a French scene. There are no cathedral 
ceilings in this library, which straddles two buildings and has no 
natural light. But Graves has turned both these handicaps into advantages. 
Just when we might notice that the ceilings are rather low, he has 
opened up one of them with an oculus, a large circular see-through 
hole with railings at the top of it. This one gives us a glimpse of 
a world way above our heads, where rare and ancient works of reference 
live in privileged isolation. Illogical as it may be, we feel taller 
for having looked up at it. As for the difference of level between 
the two buildings, he has turned that, too, to advantage with a long, 
narrow, carpeted slope that leads down into a rather mysterious room 
in which four very large computers sit waiting. Auto-Apprentissage 
is the name for this department of the library. It may sound like 
an upmarket driving school, but in fact it is where we can improve 
our French (by appointment only) with the help of a language program 
tailor made to our specific needs. With the help of those massive 
machines, we shall soon know exactly where we go wrong and how to 
put it right. Elsewhere, we have instantaneous access to exact knowledge 
in the Reference Center. Not only can we consult every dictionary, 
encyclopedia and reference book that takes our fancy, but we can call 
up any article, any name or even any one word on the screen. This 
can be done in a matter of seconds. We can also look up anything we 
need from the several years' run of Le Monde, stored on a CD-ROM. 
Thanks to the CD-ROM, we can also tour the great museums of the world 
as ``virtual'' visitors. While in the library, we can also play videos, 
listen to CDs and look at ``bandes dessines'' (defined by the library 
as ``French comics for adults.'') A hundred current French magazines 
and newspapers are waiting. So is the online computer book catalog, 
a marvel of contrivance. This, truly, is knowledge that sets us free. 
Institute members may also borrow classic French movies, books on 
tape, audio cassettes, CD-ROMs, magazines and whatever they want from 
the thousands of books on the open stacks. While they make their choices, 
they will be in an indoor Arcadia where they will never see anything 
ugly. Better yet is that their evenings at home need never, ever, 
be dull. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>