<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0142 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
No one has been more closely associated with the California wine revolution 
than Robert Mondavi. Probably because he started it. By the wine revolution 
I mean the seemingly overnight transformation of the California wine 
industry from a stolid, unimaginative business based on a blue-collar 
immigrant clientele, into a sophisticated, often glamorous venture, 
catering to a newly affluent and increasingly worldly segment of the 
American middle class. With a tireless insistence on quality and a 
conviction that California could produce wines equal to any in the 
Old World, Mondavi inspired a generation of winemakers to reach heights 
no one had thought possible. In 1965, when President Lyndon B. Johnson 
ordered American embassies to serve only American wines, he was ridiculed 
by would-be connoisseurs here and abroad. But little more than a decade 
later, California wines vanquished France's finest at a now-famous 
tasting conducted by French experts in Paris. The two top American 
wines had been made by men trained at the Robert Mondavi Winery in 
the Napa Valley. In a new book, ``Robert Mondavi, Harvests of Joy,''(Harcourt 
Brace, $27), Mondavi, now 85, recounts the story of how, almost single-handedly, 
he changed the way Americans think about wine. Dismissed in 1965 from 
his family's business, the Charles Krug Winery, after too many arguments 
over its direction, he borrowed heavily and opened the Robert Mondavi 
Winery a year later. Today, with 900 employees, his company makes 
wine in California, France, Italy and Chile. Passion and hard work 
created a singular enterprise, but not without casualties. Success 
destroyed his first marriage and alienated his children for years. 
With admirable honesty, Mondavi paints an unvarnished picture of himself 
as a man of towering ego, relentless ambition and monumental self-absorption. 
A colleague of his once observed, ``Bob has no rearview mirror.'' 
Mondavi's opinion on that? ``He's right!'' he said. ``And I also have 
only one speed: fast-forward. Heaven help anyone who gets in my way 
or tries to slow me down; they'll probably get steamrolled.'' In a 
series of court battles that began with his dismissal from Krug and 
lasted through the mid-1970s, he fought his family, and particularly 
his brother, Peter, over his share of the family business. In 1976, 
the courts found in Robert Mondavi's favor, making him relatively 
wealthy overnight. Eventually the brothers reconciled; but just before 
the court ruling, their mother, Rosa, died of cancer. Several years 
later, Mondavi divorced Marjorie, his wife of some 42 years. In 1980 
he married Margrit Biever, a Swiss-born woman who was ``full of passion, 
creativity, business savvy and a wealth of European taste and culture,'' 
he writes. Ms. Biever, who had worked at the winery in public relations, 
became his right hand, serving as a interpreter as the winery's business 
expanded into Europe and Latin America. Mondavi continued to put the 
United States on the world's wine map. In 1979, he acquired a large 
winery in Woodbridge, in the Central Valley of California, for producing 
lower-priced wines. That year, the first vintage of Opus I appeared, 
a super-premium red wine produced in the Napa Valley by a joint venture 
between Mondavi and Chateau Mouton-Rothschild in France. In 1985, 
Vichon Winery, an Oakville neighbor, was acquired, as was the Byron 
Winery in Santa Barbara County in 1989. More recently, joint ventures 
were arranged with the Frescobaldi family in Italy and the Chadwick 
family in Chile. In 1993, Robert Mondavi stock was issued publicly; 
from $13.50 a share, it has traded at more than $50 this year. I first 
met Robert Mondavi in the early 1970s on maybe my first visit to the 
Napa Valley. A bandy-legged, rugged-looking little guy with a high-pitched 
voice, he greeted me with a warm smile. ``Had your lunch?'' he asked. 
``I have a few friends here; come on in and join us.'' Those were 
the days before phalanxes of functionaries made casual meetings with 
winemakers all but impossible. Over the years, I have interviewed 
him a dozen times and concluded that his up-front California simplicity 
masks a complex, often anguished personality. His book seems to offer 
the same view. Behind his ``and then I did'' bluster is a recurrent 
theme of lost innocence _ with Mama Rosa once again presiding over 
the kitchen at Charles Krug, surrounded by her doting husband and 
happy kids, all eager for another of her simple but superb Italian 
meals, topped off with simple but honest wine. It is a Norman Rockwell 
image of what might have been or should have been as seen by a man 
who thinks of himself as a simple winemaker but who has spent most 
of his life in airports and hotel rooms. Alas, there is a strident, 
self-congratulatory tone to the book and it wears after a while. What's 
missing is a little more about the unknown acts of generosity, the 
endless small kindnesses he has provided over the years to newcomers 
to the valley and to old-timers down on their luck. But then, at his 
age and with what he's accomplished, perhaps a little braggadocio 
is not out of order. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>