<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0328 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the United States pressed an intense diplomatic campaign to isolate 
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, administration and Pentagon officials 
said Tuesday that they had sufficient forces and firepower in the 
Persian Gulf to launch a strike on Iraq within days. Secretary of 
Defense William Cohen began a whirlwind tour of European and Persian 
Gulf allies with a stop in London. There, Britain's minister of defense, 
George Robertson, joined Cohen in raising the threat of force if Hussein 
does not reverse his decision to end all cooperation with U.N. weapons 
inspectors. Cohen later flew to Saudi Arabia and met with King Fahd 
and other senior Saudi officials, whose support _ at least tacitly 
_ is important to the administration's diplomatic efforts. In what 
amounted to a full-court press on the Saudis, Vice President Al Gore 
also spoke by telephone Tuesday with Crown Prince Abdullah, a day 
after Secretary of State Madeleine Albright made her own call. During 
a confrontation with Iraq last winter, Saudi Arabia refused to grant 
the United States permission to use Saudi air bases or air space to 
launch any attacks against Iraq. In the Saudi capital, Riyadh, a Saudi 
official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said King Fahd reiterated 
that stance to Cohen Tuesday, the Associated Press reported. The Pentagon's 
spokesman, Kenneth Bacon, who is traveling with Cohen, later released 
a statement saying the secretary was ``confident that the U.S. will 
have the support it needs to take appropriate action to support the 
U.N.'' Saudi approval may be moot. In the months since the last showdown, 
the United States has reshaped its forces in the region, making Saudi 
Arabia's approval much less important militarily. The Pentagon drastically 
reduced the number of aircraft it has based in the region, including 
those at Saudi Arabia's Prince Sultan Air Base, while it doubled the 
number of Tomahawk cruise missiles it has aboard Navy ships and submarines 
plying the Persian Gulf. Although there are fewer fighters and bombers 
in the region than there were earlier this year, the Navy now has 
250 to 300 cruise missiles, more than were used during the Persian 
Gulf war in 1991, officials said, speaking, as did others who discussed 
the subject, on the condition of anonymity. The cruise missiles _ 
and the 50 or so combat aircraft aboard the aircraft carrier Dwight 
D. Eisenhower _ could enable the United States to mount an attack 
against Iraq without having to spend days or weeks trying to secure 
permission from gulf states reluctant to support strikes against fellow 
Arabs in Iraq. ``We fully expected we would be where we are now,'' 
said an administration official. The official added that Pentagon 
commanders had drawn up new plans that rely on the smaller, reconfigured 
American force to do what a much larger force had been prepared to 
do earlier this year: strike military bases and factories all across 
Iraq that are suspected of making chemical or biological weapons. 
Iraq ignited this latest confrontation when it announced on Saturday 
it would end all cooperation with inspectors searching out Iraq's 
chemical and biological weapons programs. The move followed its decision 
in August to suspend cooperation with certain kinds of inspections. 
The Clinton administration, which faced criticism for failing to respond 
forcefully to Iraq's moves in August, has been heartened by the near-universal 
anger at Hussein's latest maneuver. Iraq's sympathizers on the U.N. 
Security Council, including Russia and France, have joined in condemnation. 
In Russia Tuesday, Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov warned the United 
States against military against Iraq, but also sharply criticized 
Hussein for provoking a new crisis. Albright, meeting at the State 
Department with Germany's new foreign minister, Joschka Fischer, said 
Hussein had ``re-invigorated the coalition'' against him. ``Saddam 
Hussein in a huge way has miscalculated,'' she said. Administration 
officials said that military action was not imminent, certainly not 
before the end of the week. In the face of international outrage, 
Iraq has already sent mixed signals about its confrontation with the 
weapons inspectors, suggesting it may yet retreat. If Iraq does not, 
however, administration officials said the United States was prepared 
to respond quickly with force. Cohen's trip has been usually secretive. 
His entourage _ including Undersecretary of State Thomas Pickering 
and the commander of American forces in the region, Gen. Anthony Zinni 
_ did not include any members of the news media. Nor has the itinerary 
been made public, although he is to travel to Kuwait and other gulf 
states on Wednesday, and Turkey announced he would be there on Friday. 
Officials said the decision to give the trip a low public profile 
was a deliberate effort to avoid putting the gulf allies in a position 
to have to declare support or not. ``It's hard to judge from day to 
day where the mood of the gulf is,'' one official said. ``He's out 
there sounding them out.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>