<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0299 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is an exaggeration to claim, as some do, that the bel canto operatic 
repertory languished completely during the post-World War I decades 
until Maria Callas and Joan Sutherland arrived on the scene in the 
1950s and 60s to revive it. Operas by Rossini, Donizetti and Bellini, 
the masters of the tradition, turned up now and then during those 
years, especially in Italian houses, and not just perennial favorites, 
like Rossini's ``Barbiere di Siviglia.'' Even Donizetti's ``Poliuto,'' 
obscure at the time, was presented at La Scala in 1940, as a vehicle 
for the tenor Beniamino Gigli. Still, in the operatic world at large 
this repertory was mostly forgotten or unthinkingly disparaged. When 
Ms. Sutherland, at 33, won international acclaim in Donizetti's ``Lucia 
di Lammermoor'' at Covent Garden in 1959, the opera had not been performed 
there in 34 years. When she sang her first Covent Garden Elvira in 
Bellini's ``Puritani,'' in 1964, the opera had not been heard in the 
house since 1887. But these great artists made the public realize 
that bel canto operas were not just dramatically preposterous showpieces 
for brainless, chirpy sopranos. When Callas sang Bellini's ``Norma,'' 
the opera emerged as a refined and emotionally shattering piece; to 
hear Ms. Sutherland and Marilyn Horne in Rossini's heroic ``Semiramide,'' 
and Callas in that composer's madcap ``Italiana in Algeri,'' was to 
marvel at the range of Rossini's compositional ingenuity. And I defy 
anyone to listen to the astonishing sextet from Donizetti's ``Lucia'' 
on the 1972 Decca/London recording, with Ms. Sutherland, Luciano Pavarotti 
and Sherrill Milnes leading the way, without succumbing to this perfect 
blend of musical and vocal ecstasy. Successors to these bel canto 
champions, like Beverly Sills, Montserrat Caballe and Shirley Verrett 
in her coloratura mezzo days, kept the revival going. Then it faltered 
again, as power for power's sake, telegenic good looks and marketable 
personality started to replace elegant _ and in Callas' case, elegantly 
powerful _ vocalism as the top priorities of young singers and audiences. 
But a new generation of bel cantists has arrived, and some notables 
among them are represented in a wave of new recordings: from RCA, 
Bellini's ``Capuleti e i Montecchi,'' featuring the exciting Bulgarian 
mezzo-soprano Vesselina Kasarova and the Italian soprano Eva Mei; 
from Decca/London, Rossini's ``Turco in Italia,'' with the acclaimed 
mezzo-soprano Cecilia Bartoli, and from Sony, ``Lucia di Lammermoor,'' 
with the Hungarian soprano Andrea Rost, and Charles Mackerras conducting 
the period-instrument Hanover Band. The overall affinity for the style 
manifested by the singers and conductors in these releases is most 
striking. What accounts for it? Perhaps the training in conservatories 
and opera companies is becoming more sophisticated, and young singers, 
tired of pushing their voices in heavier roles, are reclaiming bel 
canto values: elegant legato, lyrical continuity, evenness of production, 
agility. Even the English soprano Jane Eaglen _ vocally, the most 
highly endowed Wagnerian since Birgit Nilsson _ sings bel canto roles. 
She may not be anyone's ideal Norma, but by singing both Norma and 
Brunnhilde, as Wagner's revered Lilli Lehmann did, Ms. Eaglen reminds 
us that Wagner valued the bel canto approach to singing, even for 
(italics)his(end italics) music, which requires voices with enormous 
heft and stamina. --- ``I Capuleti e i Montecchi'' (RCA Victor 09026-68899-2; 
three CDs) is Bellini's operatic telling of the Romeo and Juliet story. 
The criticism that it defiles Shakespeare's tragedy has followed the 
work since its 1830 premiere. But as Philip Gossett, the Boswell of 
bel canto, points out in his liner notes, neither Bellini nor Felice 
Romani, his protean librettist, knew Shakespeare's plays, few of which 
had crossed the Alps at the time.'' The opera was based on an Italian 
version of this Italian story, different in significant ways. (Juliet, 
for example, is betrothed to the hotheaded Tybalt when she falls in 
love with Romeo.) The libretto was largely recycled from a libretto 
Romani had prepared for the composer Nicola Vaccai in 1825; and Bellini, 
working with untypical haste (in the 10 years of his adult career, 
he seldom produced more than one opera a year), also recycled earlier 
material. Here is fodder for another criticism: that Bellini and his 
librettist were hacks. True, cut-and-paste recycling and even farming 
out the job of writing recitatives to other composers (a sometime 
practice of the hyper-productive Rossini) were standard procedure. 
But ``I Capuleti e i Montecchi'' is a sublime work, a reflective and 
profoundly serious musical drama. As the opera reaches its denouement, 
the supporting characters drift away, leaving only the ill-fated lovers 
to sing what Gossett calls the ``most deeply moving death scene in 
all of Italian opera,'' and in the presence of this inspired music, 
when beautifully sung, one is hard put to disagree. Ms. Kasarova, 
with her earthy, poignantly colored voice, is a natural for the role 
of Romeo. She has temperament and vocal charisma, and can lovingly 
spin a high-lying pianissimo phrase. Yet RCA seems not to have captured 
her sound ideally here. Either that, or an edgy quality is starting 
to affect her middle register. Ms. Mei, the Juliet, sings with lyric 
beauty, focused sound and impressive agility. Her voice, so different 
in color from Ms. Kasarova's, blends with it intriguingly in their 
duets. The tenor Ramon Vargas, as Tebaldo, has a tendency to scoop 
up to high notes, but his voice has a nice ping, and he sings with 
vitality. Umberto Chiummo and Simone Alberghini complete the rewarding 
cast. Roberto Abbado conducts the Munich Radio Orchestra in a spaciously 
paced, sensitive performance. Evidently, Maria Malibran, Bellini's 
original Romeo, was not convinced by the final death scene, for within 
two years of the premiere, she began performing the role with a final 
scene interpolated from Vaccai's opera, which gave her and the Juliet 
more opportunity for display. That version, sung by Ms. Kasarova and 
Ms. Mei, is included in the RCA set as bonus CD of nearly 40 minutes. 
Vaccai was a composer of some skill, but this extended scene lacks 
the refinement and depth of Bellini's music. --- Rossini's ``Turco 
in Italia'' (London 289 458 924-2; two CDs) is sometimes thought of 
as a sequel in reverse to ``L'Italiana in Algeri.'' In the latter, 
a nice Italian girl deflates the puffery of an Algerian monarch: just 
what he needs. In ``Turco'' a Turkish pasha, Selim, goes to Naples 
and falls in love with the feisty Donna Fiorilla, the wife of the 
henpecked Don Geronio. But there is more here than Rossinian farce. 
Gossett, again providing liner notes, says the opera should be considered 
Rossini's ``Cosi Fan Tutte.'' This opera of spouse-swapping, duplicity 
and confusion, with a plot stirred up by a poet who speaks to the 
audience like some narrator in a Pirandello play, is eerily ambiguous 
and not entirely funny. Rossini's music, with its sudden shifts of 
key, deceptively breezy lyricism and complex ensembles, catches every 
nuance of the libretto. The role of Fiorilla has been sung mostly 
by sopranos, notably Callas, whose 1954 recording (recently reissued 
by EMI) is cherishable. Ms. Bartoli, who is now moving into the soprano 
repertory, is in her element. Her performance is musically exquisite 
and perky. As always, her delivery of Italian is incomparable. Yet 
the tessitura of the role seems high for her; this is a matter not 
of range (she nails the high notes) but of vocal color (hers is that 
of a light mezzo). Again, it may be a case of Decca/London's not having 
best captured her voice in the studio. The cast, overall, is close 
to ideal, with the stylish bass Michele Pertusi as Selim, Vargas as 
Narciso, the lyric baritone Alessandro Corbelli as Geronio, the baritone 
Roberto de Candia as the poet and the mezzo-soprano Laura Polverelli 
as Zaida, Selim's former slave and jilted fiancee. Riccardo Chailly 
elicits a supple, humorous yet dramatically resonant performance from 
the orchestra and chorus of La Scala. --- The selling point of the 
new ``Lucia di Lammermoor'' (Sony Classical S2K 63174; two CDs) is 
that it is the first recorded performance on period instruments, and 
the first using an authoritative edition of the score that restores 
Donizetti's original key scheme. Of course, the composer sanctioned 
many of the transpositions that have become common, so it's hard to 
say what an authoritative version of the score is. The Hanover Band 
plays in historically informed style for Mackerras, and certain instrumental 
features (like the warm-toned wooden flute in the mad scene) are lovely. 
But this opera is already well served on records, including two great 
performances by Ms. Sutherland (from 1961 and 1972) and two classics 
by Callas (a studio recording from 1953, conducted by Tullio Serafin, 
and a live performance in 1955 from La Scala, conducted by Herbert 
von Karajan). That is daunting competition. Ms. Rost gives an intelligent, 
often impressive performance. Her light, lyric voice is probably closer 
to the type of soprano Donizetti wrote for. Callas or Sutherland she 
is not, however, and the rest of the cast, though solid, is also not 
up to the existing competition. Still, Ms. Rost is, like Ms. Bartoli 
and Ms. Karasova, a good example of a young singer, steeped in the 
bel canto tradition, with much to offer. There are others like her 
now, including the golden-voiced Ruth Ann Swenson, who will sing Lucia 
in a new Met production in December. They are all in debt, for sure, 
to Callas, Ms. Sutherland and other bel canto pioneers, but they bring 
something of their own to this repertory. Today's audiences are the 
beneficiaries. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>