<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0421 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rep. Charles Schumer's election Tuesday to the U.S. Senate was more 
than the crowning achievement of a political career that has spanned 
nearly a quarter of a century. It was a testament to his own tenacity, 
to the high expectations he set for himself long before his election 
to the New York state Assembly when he was only 23. Democrats had 
often despaired of finding a candidate dogged enough to topple Alfonse 
D'Amato, the powerful three-term Republican incumbent. But in Schumer, 
they got everything they needed and more. They got an exuberant campaigner 
with stamina to burn. They got a brawler willing to fight fire with 
fire, and mud with mud. And they got someone whose ambition and skill 
at self-promotion easily rivaled _ and quite possibly surpassed _ 
D'Amato's. Even late Monday, after a Manhattan rally with Hillary 
Rodham Clinton provided the perfect finishing touch to weeks of intense 
stumping, Schumer insisted on going the extra mile _ actually, hundreds 
of them _ and flying to Buffalo for another event. He had already 
hit Albany and Rochester earlier in the day. ``He is unbelievably 
focused, and when he sets his sights on a goal, he cannot be deterred,'' 
said Rachel Gorlin, a Democratic political consultant in Washington 
who worked on Schumer's congressional staff in the early 1980s. ``At 
any given moment in a 24-hour day, he wants to be doing something 
to move the agenda.'' And part of that agenda, friends and colleagues 
said, has always been the ascendancy of Chuck Schumer. ``As vain as 
the rest of us are, Chuck is a step above,'' said New York state Assemblyman 
Alexander B. Grannis, who has known Schumer for nearly a quarter of 
a century. ``I've seen a lot of camera hoggers in my time, and Chuck 
was one of the better ones.'' It seems that Schumer, 47, has been 
reaching for the goal of a statewide office for decades, almost since 
his election to the Assembly in 1974. Six years later, still just 
30, he graduated to the House of Representatives, and his 18 years 
there were characterized by a steady rise in prominence and an unmistakable 
shift toward a less liberal, more moderate political persona, all 
of which set the stage for Tuesday's victory. Schumer is a career 
politician in the most literal, truest sense of the phrase. Politics 
is the only profession he has really known, and in one way or another, 
it has shaped or been entwined with every aspect of his existence 
since his graduation from Harvard Law School in 1974. After he was 
mugged in the late 1970s, he recycled the episode into political fodder, 
discussing the experience in a leaflet he passed out during his first 
campaign for Congress in 1980. He wedged his wedding that year into 
the gap of time between the Democratic primary, which he knew would 
be bitterly contested, and the general election, which he knew would 
be a cakewalk. His wife, Iris Weinshall Schumer, who now works as 
a deputy commissioner in the New York City Department for Citywide 
Administrative Services, recalled that he was so wrapped up in his 
campaign and other work that he never glanced at the wedding invitations 
long enough to know that when she told him to arrive at noon, she 
was factoring in his preoccupations and habitual tardiness. He predictably 
showed up an hour later, not realizing he was right on time. Schumer 
said in a recent interview that he has always had a way of getting 
wholly absorbed in the challenges _ big and small, meaningful and 
meaningless _ that he puts before him. ``When I was little and sick 
once I said to myself, `I'm going to turn all 2,220 pages of the dictionary,' 
and I sat there and turned them,'' Schumer said with a broad smile. 
``And I liked it.'' He paused briefly, as if trying to divine the 
moral of his own story. ``I'm not that introspective a soul,'' he 
said. Charles Ellis Schumer was born on Nov. 23, 1950, and grew up 
in a middle-class Jewish family in Flatbush. His father, Abe, owned 
a small exterminating company. His mother, Selma, stayed home to raise 
Chuck and his younger siblings, Fran and Robert. Abe Schumer hated 
his job but felt bound to it, and he and his wife instructed their 
children to achieve more. Chuck, as his parents called him, heeded 
that lesson well. He towered over many of the other kids in his Brooklyn 
neighborhood not just in terms of his uncommon height or intellect. 
He perhaps stood out most of all for his determination to excel, and 
for how much he reveled in whatever stature he attained. ``He wanted 
to be one of the smartest,'' his father said. ``No question about 
it. He was competitive. He always had a competitive nature.'' He graduated 
first in his class at James Madison High School in 1967 and went on 
to Harvard University for college and law school. In 1974, he postponed 
taking the bar exam so he could campaign for the Assembly. Schumer 
had been bitten by the political bug as an undergraduate during the 
late 1960s, a time of social unrest and activism, and understood himself 
well enough to know that he would enjoy the glow of the public spotlight. 
In the Assembly and then in Congress, he elicited both respect and 
resentment for how relentlessly he pursued his legislative and political 
intentions, how hard he charged. Perhaps the greatest testimony to 
his diligence and perseverance was the sweeping 1994 crime bill, which 
banned the sale of assault weapons, added tens of thousands of police 
officers to city streets across the country and expanded the applicability 
of the death penalty to scores of federal crimes. Schumer was a principal 
architect and proponent of the legislation, which also shored up his 
claim _ crucial to his appeal over the last few months to a statewide 
electorate more conservative than the voters in his congressional 
district of Brooklyn and Queens _ that he was a centrist, flexible 
Democrat more interested in solving people's problems than hewing 
to any ideology. Schumer both portrays himself and seems to see himself 
as a politician atypically in touch with life outside Washington. 
His wife and his two children, Jessica, 14, and Alison, 9, do not 
even accompany him there when Congress is in session. They stay in 
the family's apartment in Park Slope, and Schumer crashes on a bed 
in the living room of a town house on Capitol Hill that he shares 
with three other lawmakers. One of his roommates, Rep. Sam Gejdenson, 
D-Conn., said that during the Senate campaign, Schumer came back to 
the town house from the office later and later, because he had realized 
that there was indeed a way to expand the usable hours of the day. 
``He learned there were different time zones,'' Gejdenson said, ``and 
that he could continue making fund-raising calls into the night by 
working his way west. Chuck has new friends in Hawaii.'' And they 
now have a new friend in the U.S. Senate. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>