<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0419 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Wednesday, Nov. 4: Gov. 
Christie Whitman's plan to open the underutilized car-pool lanes on 
Interstates 80 and 287 to all vehicles may well pacify irate motorists 
in northern New Jersey. But it is a short-term response that can only 
delay the kind of creative experimentation necessary to improve traffic 
flow in the New York metropolitan area, which is notorious for dirty 
air, bottlenecks and rush-hour jams. On the face of it, opposition 
to these high-occupancy-vehicle, or HOV, lanes sounds reasonable. 
I-80's lanes have met the minimal target of carrying 700 vehicles 
an hour, but those on I-287 never did. So why not convert them to 
regular lanes, easing traffic flows for everyone? The answer lies 
in the state's own forecasts. Even if the HOV lanes are converted, 
I-287 will be congested by 2005 or 2006, while I-80 is already close 
to capacity. Not only does New Jersey want to drop these two HOV lanes, 
it intends to walk away from repaying Washington the $240 million 
in federal aid spent building them. Members of the state's congressional 
delegation inserted language in the omnibus budget bill waiving $140 
million that built the I-287 HOV lanes. They are seeking another waiver 
for the I-80 lanes. These maneuvers could encourage other states to 
seek similar relief just when officials nationwide ought to be daring 
and creative. On Long Island, for example, critics of the state-funded 
car-pool lanes on the Long Island Expressway want New York state to 
open them to all traffic on an experimental basis, an idea the state 
rejected. The fact is that HOV lanes can serve a useful purpose if 
used creatively. Houston, California's Orange County and San Diego 
have taken that path. The most innovative experiment is in the San 
Diego region. Officials there have employed electronic toll collection 
to turn underused HOV lanes into toll lanes. Solo motorists pay a 
variable toll tied to time of day and congestion to use the lanes, 
which remain free of charge for buses, vans and car pools of two or 
more. Use of the fast-moving lanes has risen, opening up space in 
other lanes and generating revenue for an express bus service. The 
New York metropolitan region cannot pave its way out of congestion. 
Expanding rapid-rail alternatives takes years. That makes congestion 
pricing an attractive strategy that the region has been reluctant 
to pursue. The New York State Thruway Authority runs a very modest 
experiment at the Tappan Zee Bridge for trucks. Drivers pay higher 
tolls during the morning rush hours and a lower toll if they cross 
before that and use the E-Z Pass electronic toll system. The authority 
is also studying congestion pricing for motorists. The Metropolitan 
Transportation Authority, which has a huge interest in speeding traffic 
flow (and reducing pollution) at bridge and tunnel crossings, is not 
even that far along. Communities have had the option to experiment 
with congestion pricing since late 1991. The only major obstacle on 
both sides of the Hudson is political inertia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>