<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0441 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From dawn to well past dusk, Andrew Parise, the mayor and Republican 
leader in this Long Island village, worked the phones ceaselessly 
Tuesday, trying to churn out the vote for Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, a 
colleague and a close personal friend. Parise's view from the white 
clapboard headquarters of the Lawrence/Cedarhurst Republican Club 
early on Election Day was that every vote mattered. Wearing his lucky 
elephant tie and holding a cup of coffee in one hand, he used a red 
telephone shaped like a race car to keep in constant touch with party 
loyalists in the field.``Every single call counts,'' he said. A quarter-mile 
away, in an empty storefront next to a bagel shop, Democratic leaders 
and their union allies organized assignments for two dozen volunteers 
to distribute leaflets at the train station and canvass door-to- door 
for D'Amato's challenger, Rep. Charles Schumer. The party faithful 
worked feverishly in this part of Long Island and across the state 
invigorated by an election that harked back to the low-tech past _ 
before exit polls and focus groups _ when campaigns actually had to 
work the streets for votes. Ultimately, Schumer prevailed. But it 
was weeks of neck-and-neck predictions that drove voter interest in 
this affluent southwest corner of Nassau County, known as the Five 
Towns, where D'Amato is a neighbor, Schumer is a frequent visitor, 
the electorate is highly educated and where, for many, voting is as 
routine as the thundering takeoffs from nearby Kennedy International 
Airport. As dawn broke Tuesday, the race appeared so tight that individual 
actions that often get lost in the sweep of a statewide campaign took 
on added significance, party leaders said. So James Piedimonte, a 
Republican committeeman, found himself trying a bit harder to arrange 
a ride for an elderly voter who told him she was feeling ill and had 
been unable to get out to the polls. The efforts turned out voters 
early in the day. They lined up in school cafeterias, gyms and one 
unlikely polling place, the Keystone Yacht Club overlooking the blue 
expanse of Woodmere Bay. Many people in this predominantly Jewish 
area said they had agonized over the Senate race because D'Amato and 
Schumer were both strong on issues important to them, they said. ``Even 
at this point, people don't know who to vote for,'' said Todd Richman, 
president of the Five Towns Democratic Club. ``People are really battling 
within themselves.'' Jane Mison said she had no idea that she would 
vote for Schumer until she entered a voting booth in the yacht club. 
``But when I saw D'Amato on the Right to Life line, that did it,'' 
said Ms. Mison, an office manager. After wrestling with her own decision, 
Ilana Lent said she was determined to vote, even after she showed 
up at the wrong polling place in Woodmere. Undeterred, Ms. Lent, 34, 
hustled the half mile to another public school in Cedarhurst, struggling 
down the stairs with her infant son, Joshua, still asleep in his stroller. 
It was well worth the effort, she said. ``I think it's an extremely 
important year to vote because it's so close,'' Ms. Lent said. ``Both 
candidates are quite good, but it's a chance to show your appreciation 
for a senator who has done a good job.'' In this area of Long Island, 
where D'Amato won in 1992, the Democrats have a slight edge in registration 
but the Republicans of Nassau County are considerably better organized. 
By midmorning, each of Parise's 28 troops had a list with the names 
of several hundred registered Republicans. The committeemen spent 
their afternoon calling people on their lists and reminding them to 
vote, and then checking the polling places to see whether they had. 
Republicans who had not shown up by 4 p.m. received a second phone 
call. When they had breaks, the committeemen filed in to headquarters 
for heaping plates of cold cuts and ziti, prepared by Thomas Cittadino, 
the village's commissioner of public works. Hours earlier, Cittadino 
had put out a breakfast spread of eggs and sausage, just as his late 
father, Vincent, had before him. A picture of the two of them _ each 
Cittadino man smoking a cigar over a pot of spaghetti with white clam 
sauce _ was pasted inside one of the club's kitchen cabinets. There 
was less tradition and no midday buffet at the Democratic headquarters 
nearby. But organizers had set up elaborate phone banks that were 
calling across Long Island to get out the Schumer vote. One sent out 
a taped message from President Clinton, urging a vote for the Democratic 
team. Another was operated by representatives of the teacher's union, 
who were only too pleased to work against D'Amato, who has blamed 
their union for some of America's educational ills. Arnold and Maxine 
Blaufarb got a phone call from the Democrats, but they said they would 
have voted anyway, as they always do, at School No. 5 in Cedarhurst. 
This year, however, they both acknowledged that they felt their votes 
were particularly important because of the closeness of the Senate 
race. That is where all political agreements ended for the Blaufarbs, 
however. Mrs. Blaufarb, 64, a veteran supporter of D'Amato, was ready 
for a change after 18 years. Mr. Blaufarb, 65, who has never been 
a D'Amato fan, decided he could not stand the negative tone of Schumer's 
campaign. Asked to reveal the secret of how the fragile institution 
of marriage can handle such direct dissent, Mr. Blaufarb gave simple 
advice: ``We never talk about politics.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>