<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0348 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
George Pataki swept to a second term as governor of New York on Tuesday, 
defeating his weak and splintered opposition by one of the largest 
margins in history, a victory so resounding that it is certain to 
raise his national profile. Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, seeking a fourth 
term, was locked in the toughest contest of his long career, against 
Rep. Charles Schumer of Brooklyn. Schumer appeared to lead the contest 
as balloting concluded on Tuesday night, according to interviews with 
voters leaving the polls. Pataki's triumph capped a remarkable transformation 
from a little-known state senator waging an uphill fight for governor 
in 1994, to a governor who has shifted the state markedly rightward 
on crime, welfare and taxes, and has made himself its most popular 
political figure. Four years ago, he narrowly defeated a liberal icon, 
Gov. Mario Cuomo, with considerable help from D'Amato. This year, 
it was the senator who turned to Pataki for help, and the governor 
spent more energy in the final weeks stumping for his one-time patron 
than for himself. Exit polls showed Pataki, a Republican who was also 
the candidate of the Conservative Party, with more than half the vote, 
and a lead of about 20 percent over his Democratic challenger, Peter 
Vallone, the New York City Council speaker, who was also nominated 
by the newly founded Working Families Party. B. Thomas Golisano, the 
Independence Party candidate making his second run for the office, 
was a distant third, and Lt. Gov. Betsy McCaughey Ross, the Liberal 
Party nominee, trailed in fourth place. Schumer, a Democrat who also 
ran on the Liberal and Independence lines, had a modest lead over 
D'Amato, a Republican who was also nominated by the Conservative and 
Right to Life Parties, according to the exit polls. Those surveys 
showed D'Amato doing much worse among New York City voters and among 
Jewish voters throughout the state than he did in 1992, when he narrowly 
won a third term. The 24-year-old split in New York's legislature 
appeared to hold fast, with Republicans easily retaining control of 
the State Senate, and Democrats keeping a strong hold on the Assembly. 
Exit polls indicated that the Liberal Party had survived the near-death 
experience of nominating Ms. McCaughey Ross, then watching her husband, 
the financier Wilbur Ross, withdraw much of her financial backing. 
She appeared to have topped the 50,000 votes a party needs in a gubernatorial 
election to maintain an automatic place on New York ballots for the 
next four years. The campaign did not present much of a test for Pataki, 
who campaigned sparingly, ignored his opponents and refused to debate 
them. But the Senate contest made up for what the race for governor 
lacked in drama and vitriol. Despite the best efforts of both sides 
to get their supporters to the polls, turnout statewide was low, with 
elections officials projecting that it would fall well below 40 percent, 
signaling that voters lacked interest in the contests and were disturbed 
by the tone of the state's most closely watched race. A loss by D'Amato 
would end one of the more remarkable political careers the state has 
seen, one that often seemed to have at least nine lives. It would 
also leave his former protege, Pataki, as the undisputed leader of 
the state Republican Party and clearly the most powerful figure in 
state politics. In the last month, in fact, as polls showed the governor 
running away with this race, Pataki and his aides grew so elated that 
they began to talk openly about that prospect. Like the last Republican 
elected New York's governor, Nelson Rockefeller, Pataki might be favored 
by moderate Republicans for the presidency, but is widely considered 
a dark horse, especially with the larger body of conservative GOP 
voters. In New York this year, as in much of the country, the election 
season lacked defining issues or ideological chasms. There was none 
of the economic unrest that animates some contests, and local fights 
were overshadowed by President Clinton's troubles, though they did 
not cut clearly one way or another with voters. In such an atmosphere, 
voters were content mostly to return incumbents to office, even if 
it meant ignoring party lines and splitting their tickets. The governor 
was headed for the third-largest winning margin in a gubernatorial 
race in state history, in both percentage terms and in raw votes, 
and the largest ever by a Republican. The biggest margins were set 
by Cuomo, a Democrat, in 1986 and 1990; he won each time by 32 percent, 
and 1.4 million and 1.3 million votes, respectively. Exit polls and 
early returns indicate that Pataki won a higher percentage of the 
vote than any Republican candidate for Governor since Thomas Dewey 
was elected to a second term with 57 percent in 1946. The governor 
did not outpoll Vallone in the city, as some of his advisers had hoped, 
but the breadth of his victory was still remarkable. Exit polls showed 
him leading Vallone two-to-one in the downstate suburbs and upstate. 
They also showed that one-fourth of the people who voted for Schumer 
also voted for Pataki. Pataki has said little about what he would 
do in a second term, beyond continuing to cut taxes and toughen criminal 
penalties, but the magnitude of his victory could allow him to claim 
a mandate for whatever his second-term agenda may hold. If the economy 
slows, however, Pataki's plans could be overtaken by budget woes, 
precisely the opposite of the circumstances that he has enjoyed for 
the last four years, as the economic expansion and Wall Street boom 
allowed the governor to do what he promised and more, simultaneously 
cutting taxes and raising spending. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>