<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0302 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In one way or another, every part of Nicaragua has been devastated 
by the relentless floods and landslides that followed Hurricane Mitch 
and killed at least 6,000 people throughout Central America. But the 
real disaster zone begins here. To the south, highways are functioning 
again, and cattle still graze in waterlogged fields. But the Izapa 
River overflowed its banks here and washed away the Pan-American Highway, 
the main land link between northwest Nicaragua and the rest of the 
country. And to travel north of here is to enter a realm dominated 
by destruction and suffering. On Tuesday, President Arnoldo Aleman 
ventured into the region for the first time since the Casita volcano 
unleashed a sea of mud over the weekend that entombed more than 1,500 
people outside Posoltega, about 25 miles north of here. Very quickly, 
he learned the importance of that severed connection and the way it 
is crippling Nicaragua's recovery and rescue effort. All along the 
road, entire families trudged in both directions throughout the day, 
balancing large packages on their shoulders or lugging sacks of rice 
and beans. With bridges and roads out, some have walked all the way 
from the capital, Managua, some 40 miles to the south, fording stream 
after stream in a desperate attempt to get food, clothing and medicine 
to family and friends in the disaster zone. Among those making the 
slow, tiring trek northward on Tuesday morning was Vicente Hernandez, 
accompanied by his wife and a younger brother. Hernandez, 29, works 
on a ranch near Posoltega, artificially inseminating cows. But he 
was away visiting relatives when the mudslide engulfed his home and 
his village, and he was now trying to return home and search for another 
group of relatives who are still missing. ``We have been left with 
nothing but this,'' he said, gesturing toward a small plastic bag 
containing a few items of donated clothing that was attached to the 
handlebars of a bicycle he was riding. ``Our family has been dispersed, 
and a great misfortune has fallen upon us.'' His wife, Maria Elena 
Caballero Gomez, began to sob. ``I don't know what has become of them,'' 
she said of the missing family members. ``And if they are alive, they 
don't know where we are.'' Jairo Javier Perez Penalver, a Red Cross 
volunteer who has been working in the Posoltega area, said that as 
late as Monday afternoon, more than 48 hours after the flank of the 
volcano collapsed, he and other rescue workers could hear the voices 
of people buried in the mud who were begging to be rescued. Most of 
them, he said sadly, are surely dead now. ``We have been asking for 
help, but it has not been arriving,'' he said. ``The only way to get 
in there and take people out safely is by helicopter, and there are 
not enough helicopters to satisfy what is needed.'' On the road, one 
traveler after another said they were responding to the pleas of relatives 
who in some cases have not eaten in three days. There are also shortages 
of gasoline, which has led to fuel rationing and made it even more 
difficult for people to move around and to incinerate the decaying 
corpses that health officials say could cause epidemics if not disposed 
of soon. Throughout the disaster zone, there are signs that hard-pressed 
and hungry inhabitants are growing increasingly impatient with their 
situation. At a brief stop along the on Tuesday and later in Leon, 
the largest city in the region, Aleman was greeted with jeers, catcalls, 
boos and shouts of ``We don't need an inspection, we need food'' and, 
``Where is the aid?'' Gilberto Wong, the president's press secretary, 
put the blame for the outbursts on the opposition Sandinista National 
Liberation Front, which he accused of trying to take partisan advantage 
of a national tragedy. The government, he said, was doing everything 
in its power to aid flood and storm victims as quickly as possible. 
``There are remote and isolated regions that it just has not been 
possible to reach because for so many days we had inclement weather 
and the helicopters could not even fly,'' he said. ``People everywhere 
are now asking us for help, but there is a lack of transport, and 
so we are asking the international community to help us.'' The Nicaraguan 
air force has only seven helicopters, he said, most of them Soviet 
models left over from the Sandinista era. The United States, Mexico 
and Panama have donated two helicopters each, he said, but tens of 
thousands of people are still stranded and in need of food, water 
and medicine. Milton Juarez, a farmer here who raises cattle and grows 
beans, corn and sorghum, would like to help out. But the floods swept 
away his cattle _ some of which reappeared later, bobbing in the swollen 
river _ destroyed his crops and leveled his home and those of his 
neighbors. Now he has to start over. ``Everything I had is gone, and 
all we have been left with is rocks and stone,'' he said as he sat 
on his bedraggled horse and surveyed the destruction here. ``I'm ready 
to plant, but somebody has to give me seeds. But so far, nobody has 
come here to help us, nobody.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>