<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0188 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Security checkpoints ward off uninvited visitors as they approach 
some of the mushroom farms that have long been part of this rolling 
Andrew Wyeth country south of Philadelphia. Corporate secrets are 
taking root in the nation's mushroom capital, and competition is accelerating 
the bucolic pace in an area where horse-drawn wagons still slow traffic 
along winding roads. The portobello did it. The stunning commercial 
success of that mushroom _ the hottest fungus to hit America in nearly 
a century _ propelled the formerly easygoing growers into a race to 
develop and market an ever-widening array of mushrooms, each more 
exotic than the last and each requiring talent and technique that 
no one here seems eager to share. Farms where only white mushrooms 
had been cultivated are now sprouting brown domestic varieties, as 
well as shiitake, enoki and oyster mushrooms. And hundreds of dark, 
cavernous mushroom houses are being converted to brightly lighted 
laboratories where formerly wild mushrooms can be grown in trim plastic 
containers under antiseptic conditions. Largely because of the intense 
competition here, in many food stores across the nation, the mushroom 
section is starting to look like a magical playground for gnomes. 
Today's cooks can choose from dozens of weird, formerly wild mushrooms. 
Just a few years ago, those portobellos dropped like fully opened 
parachutes into a national menu ravaged by dietary concerns and epicurean 
aspirations. Almost immediately, the big meaty-tasting mushrooms became 
a fetish among food lovers and, as a meat substitute, a mass-market 
sensation. By the late 1980s, only a handful of people had heard of 
portobello mushrooms. In 1997, 32.7 million pounds of the big brown 
mushrooms valued at more than $47 million were sold. (But however 
exotic portobellos may have seemed, they are actually just overgrown 
cremini mushrooms, the common brown variety that America considered 
normal until the mushrooms called whites, or buttons, began their 
reign in the mid-1920s.) In addition to generating unprecedented sales, 
portobellos, along with dietary health concerns and shifting food 
preferences, seemed to renew interest in all mushrooms. About three 
dozen varieties are being cultivated and are available year round. 
Seasons for wild mushrooms vary, but most are available for only a 
few weeks in the spring and fall. It's difficult to tell the difference 
in the market, though cultivated mushrooms tend to be cleaner and 
more uniform in size. Mushroom consumption increased by nearly 200 
percent between 1970 and 1994, according to the U.S. Agriculture Department. 
Restaurants have led the way, with mycological one-upmanship becoming 
more and more intense among chefs. Eighty percent of chefs surveyed 
by the National Restaurant Association in 1997 ranked mushrooms first 
in the top 20 chic foods. And the dishes the chefs create from ruffled 
wood ear mushrooms, pompons and cinnamon cap mushrooms are steadily 
broadening the audience for _ and the price of _ all such weird mushrooms. 
Most cultivated exotic mushrooms cost $10 to $40 a pound. ``Cost doesn't 
matter if our customers are getting something that is one of a kind,'' 
said Sottha Khunn, the executive chef of Le Cirque 2000 in Manhattan, 
who makes a lobster salad with lobster mushrooms and pot-au-feu with 
hen-of-the-woods. But to satisfy the demand, mushroom producers had 
to leave convention behind. Not so long ago, nearly all cultivated 
mushrooms grew in dark, moist sheds. They were all from the same family, 
basidiomycetes, and were the umbrella-shaped variety familiar to most 
Americans, including button, brown, shiitake, enoki and portobello 
mushrooms. All have a cap and gills. About 818 million pounds of these 
mushrooms were sold in the United States in 1997. The newly cultivated 
exotics are mostly from the ascomycetes family. They are more primitive 
_ they never developed the cap or gills that help create and protect 
spores _ and come in a mind-boggling variety of shapes, resembling 
everything from heads of coral to feathery funnels. These are trendy 
mushrooms like morels, hen-of-the-woods and wood ears. They have convoluted 
complexions and spores on their surfaces. Although only 9 million 
pounds were sold in 1997, they are the frontier of the mushroom industry 
today. Ascomycetes are much trickier to grow: the primordial-looking 
mushrooms require rooms as sterile and bright as an intensive care 
unit. The mushroom wards at Phillips and Terry Farms are a long way 
from the forest floor. Sales of cultivated exotic mushrooms have increased 
by more than 200 percent since the mid-1990s, said Jim Angelucci, 
the chief grower at Phillips Farms in Kennett Square. The trend was 
solid enough for his company to get out of the white mushroom business 
completely in 1993. Phillips Farms is now the largest producer of 
exotic mushrooms in the country. The nation's mushroom menu is changing. 
And so are things around Kennett Square. Until recently, there weren't 
many secrets among the local mushroom farmers. Some grew for the canning 
industry, others for the fresh market; there was enough demand to 
keep everybody busy. Everybody grew white mushrooms, and everybody 
grew them about the same way. Now everybody's looking for the next 
portobello. In the face of rising prices and an ever-growing appetite, 
mere mortals can find it tough not to play God. ``In nature, most 
exotic mushrooms have a short growing season, limited availability, 
and the price goes through the roof,'' said Rod Sorenson, the chief 
researcher and cultivator at Terry Farms, a three-year-old morel farm 
in Auburn, Ala. ``Growers look at that and make the assumption that 
if they could grow those mushrooms in quantity year round, they could 
make a zillion dollars.'' But there are unexpected hurdles. The cost 
of research and of reproducing the forces of nature that prompt a 
mushroom to be fruitful and multiply is steep. And if a grower is 
successful, the supply inevitably increases _ and the price plummets. 
The price of morels, for instance, has dropped steadily since morels 
from Terry Farms came on the market, said Hans Johansson, the owner 
of Mushrooms and More, a specialty produce dealer in Westchester County, 
N.Y. ``Mushrooms will only fruit if they are sure they are going to 
die,'' said Jack Reitnauer, a biologist and the director of research 
at Vlasic Farms in Blandon, Pa. To confuse a mushroom into giving 
birth, a grower has to create conditions that will scare it to death. 
Marked shifts in temperature, a sudden soaking or blaze of light will 
scare the gills off it. For basidiomycetes, both creating a luxurious 
life and insuring consistent reproduction is relatively easy: they 
rely on agricultural byproducts like straw, hulls from wheat bran 
or cottonseed meal and chicken, turkey or horse manure. Tidy mountain 
ranges of this composting mixture steam in the autumn morning as Reitnauer 
tours the 73 sheds where he grows about 16 million of the 100 million 
pounds of mushrooms Vlasco sells each year. For three weeks, a machine 
that resembles a backhoe acts as an outdoor kitchen mixer, turning 
the elements as they decompose. The heat generated makes the enterprise 
look like the Great Smoky Mountains. The compost is then transferred 
into an 8,000-square-foot room that is stacked six high with bunk 
beds that measure 6 by 64 feet; 14 inches of compost is layered on 
each bunk, and the temperature in the room is raised to 135 degrees 
Fahrenheit to pasteurize this growing medium. The beds are then cooled 
and ``seeded'' with tissue culture, which is created in Petri dishes 
in a laboratory and then used to coat sterilized seeds of grain, primarily 
rye. The grains are spread in the bed and begin to grow like a white 
veil throughout the compost, or substrate, which by this time has 
compacted to about 8 inches deep. After two weeks, the tissue culture 
colonizes the compost and an inch-and-a- half of peat moss is added. 
The mushrooms continue to grow up through the peat moss. With watering, 
they thrive, and after six days, fresh air is introduced. This shocks 
them into ``fruiting,'' or sending up the stems and caps most people 
call mushrooms. Harvesting begins 13 days later and continues for 
slightly less than three weeks. Ascomycetes are much pickier about 
their homes and their menus _ they will settle for nothing less than 
a perfect simulation of their natural habitat. In addition, different 
varieties are highly idiosyncratic in what they require to procreate. 
Reitnauer, for instance, tried to grow chanterelles when he was a 
college student. ``We noticed that they grew like crazy after an electrical 
storm, and so we tried to simulate lightning in the lab,'' he said. 
To date, no one has determined how to grow chanterelles commercially. 
But scientists have learned one thing: the lower on the evolutionary 
ladder a fungus is, the smaller the niche in which it can grow. Enoki 
mushrooms, for instance, thrive on cedar near the snow line in the 
mountains of Japan. To cultivate them requires huge stores of cedar 
and an environment that simulates the temperature, oxygen and sunlight 
levels in the Japanese highlands. In Japan, where cedar chips are 
an agricultural byproduct, cultivating enoki isn't difficult and the 
mushrooms are common and cheap. In the United States, on the other 
hand, the cost was prohibitive until a cedar substitute made of pulverized 
corncob pellets was developed. Experiments found that the forest floors 
of southern France and Spain could be simulated with uncomposted wheat 
to grow oyster mushrooms in half a dozen varieties, including vivid 
pink and blue ones, and the yellow ones that resemble tiny Cala lilies. 
Hen-of-the-woods mushrooms like oak sawdust. Wood ears like a mixture 
of semi-composted wood and straw. Shiitake like oak logs. But truffles 
seem to require a symbiotic relationship with the entire oak tree, 
the same arrangement chanterelles require with pine trees. So far, 
neither has been cultivated with much success. Morels like the forest 
floor of Minnesota, northern Ohio and Michigan, and Sorenson, the 
Terry Farms researcher, had to determine how to make the dust and 
leaves that he gets from Birmingham, Ala., seem as if they were from 
the Midwest. He said he also had to create an environment where he 
could simulate ``spring in the mountains, complete with fog, low-level 
lighting, and the ground temperature and moisture that simulates a 
good snow melt.'' SAUTEED WILD MUSHROOMS WITH HERB SALAD Time: 30 
minutes For the mushrooms: 3 tablespoons olive oil { pound hen of 
the woods mushrooms, cleaned and broken into very small strings Kosher 
salt 1 pound mixed wild mushrooms 1 tablespoon unsalted butter 2 shallots, 
minced Freshly ground black pepper to taste 1 tablespoon sherry vinegar 
For the herb salad: 10 chives, cut into 2-inch lengths \ cup parsley 
leaves \ cup small chervil sprigs { teaspoon extra-virgin olive oil 
Pinch of kosher salt. 1. Prepare the mushrooms: heat 2 tablespoons 
of oil in a large skillet set over medium-high heat. When very hot, 
add the hen of the woods, season lightly with salt, and cook, stirring 
frequently, until mushrooms are very brown and crisp, 6 to 7 minutes. 
Transfer to paper towels to drain. 2. Clean mixed wild mushrooms and 
remove stems if they are woody or fibrous. Slice any mushrooms that 
are very large, but try to maintain the variety's distinctive shape. 
3. Return skillet to medium heat and add remaining tablespoon oil 
and the butter. When butter is melted, add mushrooms and shallots, 
season with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring frequently, until 
mushrooms have released all their liquid and are lightly browned, 
8 to 10 minutes depending on varieties. Add vinegar and cook 1 more 
minute. 4. Prepare the herb salad: in a small bowl, combine chives, 
parsley and chervil. Add olive oil and salt and toss. 5. Divide hot 
mushrooms among 4 small plates. Sprinkle them with the crisp hen of 
the woods, and top each with a small mound of the herb salad. Yield: 
4 first-course servings. PAN-ROASTED HEN-OF-THE-WOOD MUSHROOMS WITH 
CABBAGE, BACON AND BLUE CHEESE Time: 50 minutes 12 ounces Savoy cabbage 
(about a half medium head), sliced 4 thick-cut slices smoked bacon 
(about \ pound), diced 1 pound hen-of-the-woods mushrooms, cleaned 
Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper 1 tablespoon balsamic 
vinegar 4 ounces crumbled blue cheese. 1. Bring a large kettle 2/3 
full of salted water to a boil and add the cabbage. Cook 3 minutes, 
drain and immediately plunge cabbage into a large bowl of cold water 
to stop the cooking. When cooled, drain cabbage well and set it aside. 
2. Place a large skillet over medium heat and add bacon. Cook, stirring 
occasionally, until bacon is cooked through and lightly browned, about 
5 minutes. Remove bacon with a slotted spoon and set aside on paper 
towels to drain. 3. Pour off and reserve all but a thin coating of 
bacon fat from the skillet; place skillet over high heat. When it 
is very hot, season mushrooms lightly with salt and pepper and place 
them feathery side down in skillet. Lower heat to medium, cover pan 
and cook until crisp and deeply browned, about 5 minutes. Turn mushrooms 
over and cook the other side. Transfer to a platter and keep warm. 
4. Wipe out the skillet and add 1{ tablespoons of the bacon drippings. 
Place skillet over medium-high heat and add the cabbage and bacon. 
Cook, stirring, until cabbage is warmed through, 2 to 3 minutes. Add 
vinegar, cook 1 more minute, and then spoon the mixture around the 
mushrooms. Sprinkle cabbage with blue cheese and serve. Yield: 4 main-course 
servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>