<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0185 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
About 50 varieties of edible mushrooms are available commercially 
in the United States, though not at all seasons. I tried eight of 
the most commonly available cultivated mushrooms alongside their wild 
cousins _ tasting them and cooking with them. Note: Health experts 
suggest cooking exotic mushrooms thoroughly to neutralize the enzymes 
that can cause stomach pains. OYSTER MUSHROOMS: These soft, white 
bland things prove that the easiest mushrooms to grow are the least 
tasty. They can add body to a roasted, braised or gently stewed dish, 
but tend to become bitter if seared or fried. The same can be said 
for the colorful oyster variations. The nearly violet-blue oyster 
is tastier than most and can have a sexy, satiny feel in the mouth. 
However beautiful the pink and yellow oysters are, they are not flavorful; 
in very small quantities, they make gorgeous raw garnishes. Cultivated 
oyster mushrooms were firmer than the wild ones. BEECH: This medium-size 
Asian capped mushroom can be tawny or white. It is fleshy and has 
a nice resistant texture. It is best roasted or sauteed and develops 
a spicy, deeply nutty flavor. Undercooked, it can be very bitter. 
The cultivated ones were far superior to the sodden little samples 
from nature. BLEWIT: Light blue to violet, dense and meaty. The wild 
ones tasted herbaceous and nutty, the cultivated ones like toasted 
grain. Both are best braised or roasted. MORELS: The domed and hollow 
black honeycombed cap tastes woodsy and sweet. The wild versions had 
a much fuller flavor, but were not as firm as the meaty, springy cultivated 
ones. POMPOMS: They look like oversize powder puffs. They feel furry 
but are extremely dense. They are bland, but absorb seasonings very 
well. They can be marinated in flavored oil and roasted in a very 
hot oven or sliced and breaded as cutlets and enlivened with herbs, 
garlic or a chili-based chutney or salsa. WOOD EAR: Also called cloud 
ears and tree ears, these whorled black and brown mushrooms are shaped 
like ... well, ears. Added at the last minute, they lend snap and 
crunch to stir-fries or soups. They do not lose their firm texture 
in long cooking and are wonderful in fish stews. Only cultivated samples 
were available. HEN-OF-THE-WOODS: This variety can range from golf-ball 
to soccer-ball size, and looks like clumps of white or tan feathers 
with a core as dense as cauliflower. The wild ones taste garlicky 
and oniony and can be quite tough but are good braised in wine or 
herbed broth, or simmered in soup. The cultivated ones are milder 
and more tender; their taste can best be described as the flavor of 
air drawn into the mouth on a walk in the fall woods. They are delicious 
sauteed. Cut into small fibers, or paddles, flash fried and drained, 
they rival potato chips. LOBSTER: It is shaped like a thick, rippled 
funnel. The name refers not to the taste but to the red-orange color. 
The mushrooms are gathered wild and in huge quantity in the Pacific 
Northwest, but have been farmed so far with minimal success. They 
have a delicate fruity flavor and are best sauteed or stir-fried. 
There was no difference in flavor or texture between the wild and 
the cultivated samples. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>