<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0173 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The annual walnut harvest, a bountiful one, is under way in California, 
the United States' walnut headquarters. Walnuts are, hands down, the 
nation's favorite nut. In France, the walnut is equally popular, particularly 
in the robust cuisine of the Perigord region, in the southwest. ``The 
Walnut Cookbook'' by Jean-Luc Toussaint (Ten Speed Press, paper, $14.95) 
is a collection of about 100 well-known and not-so-known Perigord 
recipes. Many are unusually appealing, and some (walnut-husk liqueur 
and walnut-leaf wine) are intriguing. For cooks with a walnut tree, 
there are even three recipes using green (unripe) walnuts. As translated 
by Betsy Draine and Michael Hinden, the recipes are marvels of clear 
writing. Toussaint is a chronicler of the Perigord, so there is plenty 
of walnut folklore (including, this being France, a little walnut 
flirting game). I found it difficult to stop testing recipes after 
the first dozen or so triumphs, which included a Roquefort and walnut 
omelet; a smoked trout, avocado and walnut salad; a diced cucumber 
salad with walnut and yogurt dressing; walnut tapenade; duck with 
walnut sauce; brandade with walnuts; pork chops with walnut sauce; 
walnut and grape jam; banana and walnut sherbet; honey-walnut ice 
cream, and several of the walnut cakes, the gateaux aux noix that 
seem to be in every bistro and pastry shop in southwest France. Usually 
made without much flour, these little discs are rich with butter and 
walnuts. It's a tossup for the best one in this collection of 14, 
but my favorite is a deceptively modest walnut, prune and almond cake, 
just as good for breakfast as it is for ending a dinner party. The 
book leaves out one cautionary note: Just harvested, walnuts are meaty 
and moist, but most shelled walnuts are dried slightly to facilitate 
shipping and storage. The thin membrane covering the nutmeat becomes 
more tannic when dried. It's easy to get rid of that mouth-puckering 
taste simply by blanching the shelled nuts for a minute or so in a 
pot of boiling water. Then drain them, rub off the membrane with a 
towel and let the nuts dry. For the deepest walnut taste, spread the 
nuts on a baking sheet, and put them in a 350-degree oven for eight 
to 10 minutes, until they smell toasty. If you can resist eating them 
on the spot, you can freeze them for six months or more in tightly 
sealed plastic bags. Or proceed immediately to Toussaint's recipes. 
WALNUT-PRUNE CAKE from ``The Walnut Cookbook'' Time: 65 minutes 9 
tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 1\ cups sugar 5 eggs 2/3 cup 
finely ground almonds 2/3 scant cup sifted all-purpose flour { teaspoon 
baking powder 2 tablespoons cognac or brandy 1 cup walnut pieces, 
chopped fine 1 cup pitted prunes. 1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees. 
Grease and flour the side and bottom of a 9-inch round cake pan. 2. 
Using an electric mixer, beat the softened butter at medium speed. 
Gradually add the sugar, and beat until creamy. Add the eggs one by 
one, beating continuously. Add the ground almonds. Combine the flour 
and baking powder, and sift them into the batter, beating until smooth. 
On low speed, beat in the cognac. 3. Using a food processor, chop 
the walnuts into fine pieces. Dice the pitted prunes into \-inch pieces. 
4. Add the chopped walnuts and diced prunes to the batter. Pour the 
batter into the prepared cake pan, smoothing the top. 5. Place the 
pan at the middle level of the oven, and bake for about 45 minutes, 
or until the top is rounded and golden. Remove and let cool in the 
pan for 10 minutes. Loosen the cake in the pan by running a knife 
around the side. Turn the cake onto a cooling rack; immediately reverse 
the cake, and let it cool top-side-up. 6. Serve the cake alone or 
with a scoop of ice cream, fall fruits or a snifter of brandy. Well-wrapped, 
the cake will keep at room temperature for two days and in the refrigerator 
for three days. Yield: 8 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>