<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Parsley is, without a doubt, the most underrated herb in the United 
States. We fuss over basil, fall in and out of love with cilantro, 
experiment with lavender and nearly ignore parsley. Still, the situation 
has improved somewhat over the years; when I was growing up, it wasn't 
even clear that parsley was edible _ the few sprigs on the side of 
the plate merely served notice that the dish was somehow ``fancy.'' 
Yet when you get past using parsley as a garnish, and sprinkle a handful 
on top of a dish just before serving, you begin to appreciate the 
bright, clean flavor of this common herb. And when you realize that 
it remains in season far longer than basil, rosemary or other popular 
herbs (many regional gardeners harvest parsley in the snow), you get 
a further sense of its value. My love for parsley increased even more 
when I learned how to feature it in sauces. You can, of course, make 
a parsley-based pesto simply by substituting parsley for the basil 
in any pesto recipe, and the results are quite good. But instead of 
combining parsley with olive oil, I've learned to blend it with vinegar 
to make a sharp, spiky sauce that complements simply prepared, full-flavored 
foods beautifully. I first had this sauce (or something very much 
like it) with bollito misto, the Italian dish of assorted boiled meats 
and sauces. In the last few weeks I've found it a wonderful accompaniment 
to the simplest grilled, broiled or roasted meat _ great on well-browned 
steaks, pork or chicken. There are a couple of simple technical aspects 
to this 10-minute preparation that are worth considering. First of 
all, although many sources insist that flat-leaf parsley is better 
than the curly-leaf variety, blind tastings have not borne out that 
myth; what matters more is freshness, because limp parsley has no 
flavor. Secondly, parsley is sandy, so wash it well. In the quantity 
given here, it's worth using a salad spinner afterward to make sure 
it is thoroughly dry. The vinegar you use should be mild and not too 
intensely flavored. A good rice or sherry vinegar, with an acidity 
level of about 6 percent, works best. Stronger vinegar should be diluted 
even more than indicated in the recipe. PARSLEY AND VINEGAR SAUCE 
Time: 10 minutes 1 cup packed parsley leaves (about 1 ounce), washed 
and dried 1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 1 small clove garlic, 
peeled Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste 1/3 cup sherry 
vinegar or other good, fairly mild vinegar. 1. Place the parsley in 
a food processor, along with the oil, garlic, a healthy pinch of salt 
and about \ teaspoon of pepper. With the machine on, drizzle the vinegar 
through the feed tube until the parsley is pureed. 2. Add a tablespoon 
of water and pulse the machine on and off a couple of times; taste. 
The mixture should taste sharp, but not overpoweringly so. If it seems 
too sharp, add a little more water; the texture will be quite loose, 
something like thick orange juice. Taste, and add more salt and pepper 
if necessary. Pass the sauce at the table. Spoon it over grilled, 
broiled or roasted steaks, pork or chicken. Yield: about 1 cup. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>