<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0423 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For most of his 18 years in Washington, Alfonse Marcello D'Amato has 
been the senator who never quite fit in. He was a conservative in 
a state of moderates and liberals, a machine-bred politician in an 
institution sprinkled heavily with Ivy League-trained debaters, a 
colorful showman whose predecessors and colleagues, from Herbert Lehman 
to Daniel Patrick Moynihan, were more muted and high-brow. But until 
Tuesday, D'Amato, a Republican, had confounded his enemies time and 
again with sheer wiliness, energy and gall. Once the outsider, he 
had become the consummate Senate inside player. Dogged by ethics investigations, 
he had turned inquisitor into President Clinton's Whitewater dealings. 
Dismissed by his critics as a clown, he had learned to champion the 
hopes and resentments of suburban and upstate voters who had carried 
him to victory three times. Tuesday night, those voters failed to 
answer his call for a fourth time, heeding instead the message of 
his Democratic challenger, Rep. Charles E. Schumer, that D'Amato could 
not be trusted, had been in office for too long and had embarrassed 
himself one too many times. At Republicans headquarters at the Hilton 
Hotel and Towers in Manhattan on Tuesday night, news of D'Amato's 
loss dampened the victory celebrations for Gov. George Pataki. Some 
party loyalists insisted through the night that D'Amato might still 
pull it out, as he did in 1992, while others fretted that upstate 
New York would be hurt by a Schumer victory. Exit polls show that 
D'Amato lost support almost across the board from 1992, but particularly 
among Jewish voters, despite his heavy campaigning in Jewish neighborhoods 
in the campaign's final weeks. It also appeared that Schumer did a 
better job of holding onto Democratic voters than Robert Abrams did 
in 1992, when a quarter of Democrats voted for D'Amato. D'Amato, 61, 
lost in large part, analysts said, because Schumer was the toughest 
candidate he had ever faced. The nine-term congressman was much better 
funded and far more aggressive than Abrams was in 1992. Schumer also 
had a strong 18-year record in the House, had positioned himself well 
as a moderate who could appeal to independent voters and centrists 
from both parties and was a tireless campaigner who answered each 
of D'Amato's attacks with a counter-attack. But clearly, part of D'Amato's 
problem was himself. Years of investigations into his ethics and his 
numerous high-profile gaffes _ like calling Schumer a ``putzhead'' 
during the campaign, then denying it _ had made him dangerously unpopular 
with a large segment of voters. Even his handlers were so convinced 
about the negativeness of his image that they kept him from speaking 
in his own television commercials and relied heavily on more popular 
surrogates, like Gov. George Pataki, to carry his campaign message. 
But the cartoonish image of D'Amato that voters saw this year did 
not do complete justice to his personality and style. D'Amato was 
often a man defined by paradoxes. His bitterest rivals reviled his 
hardball campaign tactics, then carefully studied and mimicked them. 
Democrats called him sleazy, yet found that he was true to his word 
when they did business with him. He could be profane and loutish in 
public, but gentle even tender in private. He was brutally vindictive 
toward his enemies, but doggedly loyal to friends. Though a fundamentally 
conservative politician who staunchly opposed abortion and gun control 
and consistently advocated tax cuts and harsh criminal penalties, 
D'Amato has always found ways to moderate his image. No ideologue, 
his guiding philosophy was a pragmatism born of the place that nurtured 
his politics, Nassau County. The grandchild of Italian immigrants, 
D'Amato was born in Brooklyn but raised in Island Park in the heart 
of middle class Long Island. After he helped put himself through Syracuse 
University and Law School by working as a janitor, no Manhattan law 
firm would hire him. He returned home, getting a job as a lawyer for 
Nassau County government. Those experiences forever shaped his political 
views. From that time on, he strove to articulate the fears of middle-class 
homeowners infuriated by property taxes and worried about losing economic 
ground, the anger of small business owners beleaguered by regulations 
and the resentments of working-class parents toward the ``liberal 
elites'' who seemed to control their schools, their newspapers, their 
banks and government offices. Perhaps better than anyone in the Senate, 
D'Amato understood that to these voters, Congress was a distant and 
abstract place. So he constantly searched for people _ breast cancer 
patients denied insurance benefits, Holocaust survivors trying to 
reclaim stolen assets _ whose gut-wrenching cases he could champion. 
Win or lose, he invoked their stories as evidence that he was a fighter 
for the little guy. A man whose first job came through the patronage 
system, he ran his Senate office like a Nassau County ward heeler, 
returning calls from almost any elected official, honoring the requests 
of big city mayors and small town supervisors alike when they asked 
for help _ and expecting their support in return. ``I hate him,'' 
said Frances Werner, former chairwoman of the Queens Republican committee 
whom D'Amato helped oust. ``But when he says he'll do something, he 
comes through.'' At times, D'Amato tried to break free from his reputation 
as Senator Pothole, embracing larger issues, such as banking law or 
Israeli policy. But history may remember him best for his mistakes, 
from croaking ``Old MacDonald had some pork'' during a 1994 Senate 
debate to using broken English to mock Lance Ito, the judge in O.J. 
Simpson's criminal trial, during a 1995 radio interview. What also 
defined D'Amato for many voters was his brass knuckles political style. 
When he ran for the Senate for the first time in 1980, he did not 
shy away from reminding voters that the four-term Republican incumbent, 
Sen. Jacob Javits, was 76 years old and not in the best health. In 
each election since, he has lambasted his opponents as liberals, as 
well as ``wimp'' in the case of Abrams in 1992 and ``putzhead'' in 
the case of Schumer this year. Democrats, and many Republicans, were 
fond of arguing that many of the people he helped over 18 years were 
campaign contributors, particularly financial services companies. 
In 1991, the Senate Ethics Committee faulted him for allowing his 
brother to use his Senate office and stationary to help a client. 
But Democrats also privately admired the ways in which he fudged or 
fine-tuned his political positions to pick off Democratic voters while 
holding down his conservative base _ though on one issue, his opposition 
to abortion, he remained firm. Fighting for breast cancer research 
money won over women angry with his opposition to abortion. Pushing 
to reduce automatic teller machine fees helped counter assertions 
that he was too friendly to big banks. Advocating civil rights for 
gays and lesbians balanced accusations that he was an extreme right-winger. 
Perhaps the oddest paradox of D'Amato's long career was that this 
year, as he sat atop one of the most potent political organizations 
in the country, he had to depend on high-profile surrogates, like 
Pataki, to woo back voters who had grown weary of him. In a testament 
to his success in delivering for New York City, D'Amato even managed 
to bring two one-time enemies, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and former Mayor 
Ed Koch, to campaign together for him. On Monday, as he stumped with 
D'Amato in Brighton Beach, Koch was asked if this year's race was 
as close as in 1992, when D'Amato won by a single percentage point. 
``Closer,'' replied Koch, a look of worry crossing his face. But D'Amato, 
recognizing the time had come to help himself, cut Koch off. ``We're 
in better shape than we were in '92,'' he said, then turned away. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>