<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0320 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Electronic cash may be joining jet packs, video phones and other world's 
fair wonders that never move from the future to the present. In the 
latest of many notable failures for what has been promoted as the 
future of money, Citibank and Chase Manhattan have decided to shut 
down their test of electronic cash, the nation's biggest trial of 
the technology to date. The banks issued the so-called smart cards 
_ cards with embedded computer chips _ to nearly 100,000 people who 
live on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. Customers could transfer 
cash from their bank accounts onto the cards at automated teller machines 
and spend the money at 600 merchants. In theory, this would make small 
purchases faster and easier than with coins and bills. But in reality, 
most people who tried the system never loaded their cards a second 
time. And with few people using the cards, two-thirds of the merchants 
dropped out. Indeed, in the program's first year, less than $2 million 
was spent using all of the cards. ``Unfortunately, we weren't able 
to make the consumers' life easier,'' said Carole Lockie, a vice president 
of Visa USA, which worked with the New York banks and Mastercard International 
on the test. Chase and Citibank customers with smart cards will be 
able to load their cards and spend money at the remaining merchants 
until the end of the year. They will then have until six months after 
the expiration date on their cards to transfer any remaining cash 
from the cards to their bank accounts. Other similar tests of electronic 
cash have produced similar disappointments. Visa introduced its Visa 
Cash smart card at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, with the hope 
of continuing to operate and expand the system there. In fact, the 
system has all but shut down and most of the banks have withdrawn. 
Last year, Mastercard closed the introductory test of its Mondex smart 
card system in Swindon, England. And it just said it would end a similar 
test in Guelf, Ontario. ``Smart cards are a technology chasing a business 
case,'' said Richard Speer, chief executive of Speer &AMP; Associates, 
a financial consulting firm. He said that the widespread acceptance 
of inexpensive terminals that merchants can use to accept credit and 
debit cards has undercut the need for electronic cash. Proponents 
of smart cards maintained that the technology will ultimately prove 
popular; in the test by Chase and Citibank, they said, consumers were 
discouraged because they could not use their cards in all parts of 
the city. ``When you localize your test on the Upper West Side, you 
realize your usage will be suppressed, because everyone leaves the 
Upper West Side,'' said Judy Darr, director of smart card programs 
at Citibank, a unit of Citigroup. Yet the banks found it too difficult 
to expand the number of places accepting the cards, because there 
was little appeal to merchants to take it. ``This is a real chicken-and-egg 
case,'' said Ronald Braco, senior vice president of Chase. ``Merchants 
don't want something where they get only a few transactions a day.'' 
While smart-card technology may eventually prove to be faster and 
easier than cash, merchants found that the versions in the tests were 
slow and cumbersome. Customers chose mainly to use the smart cards 
at grocery stores, which already take credit and debit cards. They 
were less interested in using the cards at newsstands and other stores 
that typically only accept cash. Moreover, the card couldn't be used 
in pay telephones, vending machines or other devices that require 
change. The New York banks did put smart-card readers on laundry machines 
in some apartment buildings and found that cards were used 30 percent 
of the time. The New York smart-card test was announced in April 1996, 
and introduced in October 1997. At its introduction, promoters said 
that the combination of New York's two largest banks and the world's 
two biggest credit-card companies would give the test the critical 
mass it needed to overcome the problems that earlier tests of the 
technology had faced. Beyond the difficulties the banks faced in getting 
customers and merchants to use the system, their prospects of making 
money from smart cards remained daunting. Initially, the banks hoped 
that consumers would pay $1 or $1.50 a month to use the cards and 
that merchants would pay fees to accept them, just as they do now 
to take credit cards. But during the test, the banks were forced to 
give cash rebates to customers to try the cards and to merchants to 
promote acceptance. Still, neither of the banks is giving up on smart 
cards completely. Braco said that Chase is working on a new smart-card 
product it hopes to test next year. The new version will have multiple 
features, including the ability to make purchases over the Internet 
and to keep track of bonus points at various merchants' frequent buyer 
programs. ``We've learned it takes more than just a plain vanilla 
stored-value product to be successful,'' Braco said. ``People find 
that if there is an incentive to use the card, they will use it more 
often.'' Chase and Mondex are already testing a smart card system 
at four Burger King restaurants on Long Island that reward customers 
for frequent purchases. And Citibank says there is likely to be more 
use of smart cards outside of the United States. It is going to introduce 
electronic cash products in Mexico, Hong Kong and other countries. 
The banks and credit card companies say there are also numerous applications 
for smart cards in closed environments like college campuses and military 
bases, in which the cards can be used both for payment and identification. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>