<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0344 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
What is it about music? If Milton Babbitt were a painter, and not 
a composer, his work would be a familiar part of the mental landscape. 
By now, at 82, he would have had a major retrospective at the Guggenheim 
Museum. Tableware decorated with his imagery would be available at 
the Museum of Modern Art gift shop. No museum would be able to consider 
its collection of contemporary American art adequate if it did not 
own an earlyish example of his work. He would be widely admired for 
his continuing pursuit of a high abstract style, and widely loved 
for his charm and comedy. What he drew from Mondrian and late Kandinsky 
would be generally understood: the derivation would be obvious in 
his fantastically patterned canvases, some dense and gray, others 
brilliantly colored, most small. But he would be valued above all 
for his independent qualities: the optical sleight of hand through 
which ascertainable shapes might seem to be hovering just behind the 
intricate networks of dots and lines, the exhilarating sense of an 
instability that is for one precarious moment stabilized by creative 
logic, the sheer fun of improbable ideas' being taken utterly seriously 
and played for all they are worth. The fact that his pictures did 
not look much like Rembrandt's or Picasso's would hardly be thought 
worthy of comment. The important criterion would be to have done what 
those predecessors did: fill the frame with meaning. If, as a composer, 
Babbitt has so far failed to make it with the large public, the first 
performance of his Piano Concerto No. 2, next Sunday at Carnegie Hall, 
may start a turnaround. The concerto is a big piece, running about 
25 minutes without a break, though that is just about the only quality 
it shares with similarly titled works by composers like Bartok, Beethoven 
and Rachmaninoff. Indeed, the absence of common reference marks is 
part of the point: part of Babbitt's essentially American sense of 
himself as an artist who must find a new alternative to the techniques 
of Europe. In that respect, it may helpful to compare him with Americans 
of his own generation rather than the great European composers, whose 
music his evokes only in its mastery. Like Conlon Nancarrow, who devoted 
himself to complex rhythmic-canonic studies for player piano, Babbitt 
has invented and explored a musical world that is entirely his own, 
constructed afresh. Like John Cage, he stimulated many younger composers 
by his example while remaining without peer. Like Cage's, too, his 
music poses a challenge to the cultural world it has to inhabit. It 
withholds many of the common satisfactions. It refuses all the usual 
routines of performance and presentation. As he has always done in 
the past, Babbitt creates music in his inimitable fashion and asks 
of his audience only an open mind and attentive ears. In this case, 
though, the plot is unusually clear, thanks to the tensions and harmonies 
throughout between the piano and the orchestra, and the work has an 
engaging lightness that has been intensifying in Babbitt's music during 
the last decade or so. The opening is a particularly teasing invitation. 
Here the orchestra fills in the gaps between the piano's bunches of 
notes, and does so entirely with octaves and multiple octaves: bright, 
simple sounds that fit oddly into the complexity and quickly encourage 
one to trust the composer's sense of humor and sense of purpose. Trust 
is the key issue. Few people could expect to follow a Babbitt score 
at first hearing _ or indeed, at 21st, if by ``follow'' one means 
to form in real time some coherent explanation for what is going on. 
The music does not require that. Such understanding may come. Meanwhile, 
one can enjoy the momentary pleasures and oddities. Babbitt, speaking 
recently at an event in the excellent Works and Process series at 
the Guggenheim, remarked that concertos are all either duets or duels, 
and left his audience to understand that his concerto is of the duet 
kind. The orchestra is relatively small: a Mozart orchestra but with 
trombones and tuba, a tuned percussion group consisting of vibraphone, 
marimba and harp, and no timpani. It is an orchestra made to equal 
the piano, not overwhelm it, and the soloist often plays with a modest 
ensemble, as if the score were a quick-flickering succession of chamber 
pieces. Horns, tuba and first violins might play with the soloist 
at one moment, bassoons and bass clarinets at another. Nothing happens 
in the orchestra, Babbitt said on the same occasion, that has not 
already happened in the piano, is not now happening or will not happen 
soon. Both partners are virtuosos. The pianist must be at once agile 
and strong, rhythmically alert, and able to make the instrument sound 
well at the extremes of register Babbitt likes to use. The orchestra, 
too, needs a steady, lively mind in control, and some exceptional 
players among its ranks, since the score has hair-raising passages 
for soloists and small teams. These two brilliant partners, piano 
and orchestra, move together like neighboring currents, and there 
are few places where either is silent. The piano plays for about 95 
percent of the time; the entire work is, as Babbitt put it, one long 
accompanied cadenza. Correspondingly, the piano is rarely left alone, 
and the passages where it is left alone are especially charged. One 
of them, about halfway through, propels the music toward one of its 
occasional brief slower sections. Later, there is what sounds like 
a cadenza within the cadenza, with the marking ``rubato,'' unusual 
in the work of a composer whose characteristic note repetitions depend 
on a precise pulse for their wit and bounce. Apart from the composer, 
two people were essential to the genesis of the work, and both will 
of necessity be there when it is performed. One is James Levine, who 
recorded an earlier piece by Babbitt (``Correspondences'' for strings 
and electronic sounds) and made possible the commissioning of this 
concerto for the Met Orchestra. The other is Robert Taub, who has 
played Babbitt's piano music regularly for 20 years and insisted in 
his programming, as in his performances, that this music is equal 
to that of the grander Bs of music history: Bach, Beethoven and Brahms. 
Taub will pair Babbitt with Brahms on Monday evening in a concert 
that Carnegie Hall has intelligently planned in its Making Music series 
to provide an upbeat to the premiere of the concerto. From Babbitt's 
large output for piano, Taub will play ``Reflections,'' with a tape 
part that sounds as if it were being played by a six-armed god on 
a three-dimensional keyboard. Other musicians closely associated with 
Babbitt will also perform, and the composer himself will be there, 
talking to his colleague Ellen Taaffe Zwilich. Their conversation 
alone should be worth the price of admission. Babbitt seems only to 
get faster and funnier with the years. His music likewise. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>