<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0190 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Twenty years ago, in a fascinating book called ``The Nobility of Failure,'' 
the historian Ivan I. Morris described the intense admiration felt 
by the Japanese for those who, after a monumental struggle, succumb 
to disaster. Diana Preston's absorbing and moving story of the attempt 
by the British explorer Robert Falcon Scott to be the first to reach 
the South Pole shows that that reverence for the noble failure is 
not unique to Japan. In Ms. Preston's portrayal, Scott became a British 
national hero, ``the very epitome of the English officer and gentleman 
doing his duty without fuss,'' precisely because he died valiantly 
and stoically while being beaten to the pole by the more skillful, 
less mistake-prone Norwegian explorer, Roald Amundsen. In fact, as 
Ms. Preston also demonstrates in ``A First Rate Tragedy,'' which is 
both a biography of Scott and a succinct history of South Pole exploration, 
Scott was aided in his rise to pantheonic heights by public ignorance 
of the reasons for his failure. Scott was seen at the time to have 
been a victim of plain bad luck and of a certain underhandedness by 
Amundsen, who did not signal clearly his intent to make a race to 
the pole. One of the virtues of Ms. Preston's account is her clear-sightedness 
about the fatal amateurishness of the British effort. Scott, Ms. Preston 
contends, was fatally harmed both by errors of judgment and by traits 
of character that reduced his effectiveness as an explorer. Scott, 
in other words, did have bad luck, but Ms. Preston puts that issue 
into perspective by citing Amundsen's own instructive comment on the 
role of luck in exploration: ``Victory awaits him who has everything 
in order _ luck people call it. Defeat is certain for him who has 
neglected to take the necessary precautions in time _ this is called 
bad luck.'' Scott was one of the last in the special breed of English 
adventurer-explorers, like Burton, Speke, Livingston and others, whose 
names are synonymous with arduous Victorian-era travel. A British 
naval officer from a modest background, Scott was, in Ms. Preston's 
view, an especially conflicted member of the explorer fraternity. 
He suffered from sea-sickness, fainted at the sight of blood and struggled 
to mask a congenital shyness. ``The navy was not a place which tolerated 
weakness,'' Ms. Preston writes. ``Cool assurance and decisiveness 
were the recipe for a successful career, and Scott had to conceal 
the introspective side of his character.'' He did a good job of that, 
eventually impressing Sir Clements Markham, a fellow of the Royal 
Geographic Society who pressed the British establishment to sponsor 
South Pole exploration. Scott was appointed commander of an early 
British expedition to Antarctica in 1902-3, leading a 93-day trek 
by dog sled some 250 miles farther south than humans had gone before. 
But afflicted with scurvy, snow blindness, the exhaustion and death 
of the dogs, and shortages of supplies, the three-man team (supported 
by an additional 40 team members at their base camp) stopped 150 miles 
from the South Pole. One reason for the team's failure is stated as 
a British cultural aversion by Ms. Preston: ``It never occurred to 
these sentimental Englishmen to eat the dogs, as Amundsen was to do. 
Had they done so they would have alleviated their scurvy. As it was, 
the death of the dogs affected Scott deeply in his weakened and emotional 
state.'' Scott returned to England in 1904 to find himself a hero, 
even as he returned to normal naval duties. He married Kathleen Bruce 
and then, in 1909, as the international competition with the Norwegians 
to be first to the South Pole intensified, was named head of a new 
expedition, the ``first rate failure'' of Ms. Preston's title. Scott's 
second effort to reach the pole is a gripping episode full of an almost 
inhuman pluck and endurance. One example of the remarkable spirit 
of exploratory adventure: During the six-month winter, while the team 
was holed up in specially built cabins waiting for the reappearance 
of the sun, the team's doughty naturalist Edward Adrian Wilson spent 
a hair-raising 40 days in the pitch dark at minus 50 degrees making 
a 90-mile round-trip over the ice to a place called Camp Crozier. 
The purpose: to observe the nesting habits of the emperor penguin 
and to collect a few of its eggs. Ms. Preston, an English historian 
and journalist, tells the story of Scott's final and fatal expedition 
with bracing economy. Here and there throughout this book one wishes 
that the text had been edited for American readers, who may not know 
offhand what happened to Bonnie Prince Charlie at Culloden Moor or 
what was the psammead in the sandpit in E. Nesbit's stories. Ms. Preston 
makes several references to the grisly fate of Sir John Franklin in 
an expedition in the Arctic that preceded Scott's in Antarctica, but 
she never explains what happened. Still, at the end, when Ms. Preston 
recounts the final days and hours of Scott and his rugged companions, 
her spare, unadorned account becomes deeply moving. The five men who 
went to the pole (which they reached in January 1912, one month after 
Amundsen) struggled through terrible adversity in their unsuccessful 
effort to walk back the 600 miles to base camp and their ship. It 
was at the very limit of comprehensible human endurance, when all 
five knew that they were going to die, that Scott and the others wrote 
letters to their wives and to the families of their companions, and 
it is these letters above all else that express the nobility of his 
failure. ``I wasn't a very good husband but I hope I shall be a good 
memory,'' Scott wrote to Kathleen. ``I shall simply fall and go to 
sleep in the snow,'' the naturalist Wilson wrote to his wife. ``Don't 
be unhappy _ all is for the best.'' PUBLICATION NOTES: `A FIRST RATE 
TRAGEDY' Robert Falcon Scott and the Race to the South Pole By Diana 
Preston Illustrated. 269 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $25. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>