<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0418 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Scott Niedermayer is well aware of what the New Jersey Devils expect 
of him now that he has signed a $6.5 million contract for two seasons. 
He knows that no Devils player will be saddled with higher expectations 
for the remainder of the season. Niedermayer made his season debut 
Tuesday night, and the Devils seemed more offensive minded as they 
posted their third consecutive victory, a 3-1 defeat of the New York 
Rangers at Continental Arena. It was the Rangers' first loss in their 
last seven games. Mike Richter had not allowed a goal in 140 minutes 
57 seconds after posting shutouts in two previous games. His scoreless 
streak came to an end at 14:53 into the game, when Brendan Morrison 
took a pass from Dave Andreychuk on the right, moved into the middle 
and converted his own rebound for his second of the season. Morrison's 
goal came while the Devils were on their second manpower advantage 
in the game that was created when Peter Popovic cross-checked Jason 
Arnott in front of Richter while the Devils had pinned the Rangers 
in their zone. Kevin Stevens tied the score for the Rangers with his 
second goal of the season at 9:30 of the middle period, when he jumped 
on a rebound from a shot by John MacLean, the former Devil who was 
jeered loudly every time he touched the puck. MacLean did well to 
come around from left to right and take a shot from the high slot 
before Stevens found the target. MacLean's assist must have been gratifying 
because he probably expected better treatment from Devils fans in 
his first appearance back after 15 years of service with the Devils. 
MacLean's best chance for a goal came with 6:39 left, when he found 
himself alone near Martin Brodeur, but the Devils' goaltender denied 
him from close range, holding his ground for his best save in the 
game. Scott Stevens put the Devils ahead with his first of the season 
with 1:57 left in the second period, when he took a pass from Brian 
Rolston on the left and beat Richter with a shot from a stride inside 
the blue line. Richter appeared to be handcuffed on the shot because 
he was partially screened by his defenseman Ulf Samuelsson as the 
puck sailed by his glove. Jay Pandolfo sealed the triumph with 2:27 
left and extended the Devils' undefeated streak against the Rangers 
to 11 games (7-0-4). Pandolfo beat Richter from close range after 
a pass by Rolston at a time Samuelsson and Wayne Gretzky failed to 
clear just a foot away from Richter. As a restricted free agent without 
a deal, Niedermayer had had four difficult months to think about what 
he wanted to accomplish upon his return. ``People expect a lot from 
me, and I have some expectations of myself, especially after what 
I did last year,'' he said. Niedermayer has led the Devils' defensemen 
in scoring the last three years, but last season was his best with 
14 goals and 43 assists. The 57-point total tied him for second in 
scoring among the league's defensemen. One reason people expect Niedermayer 
to be even more productive this season is that the Devils are trying 
to play a more open game under their first-year coach, Robbie Ftorek, 
than they did for five years under Jacques Lemaire. Ten games into 
this season, the Devils have failed to show any signs of breaking 
away from Lemaire's style, which emphasized defense first and foremost. 
The Devils have yet to score more than three goals in a game. Defense 
is still their priority, and it appears that it will continue to be 
for a while despite Niedermayer's return. Slava Fetisov, the top assistant 
in charge of defensemen, confirmed this after Niedermayer's first 
practice with the Devils on Sunday. ``He has all the tools of a great 
offensive defenseman,'' Fetisov said, ``but I still want him to do 
defense. With his skating ability he can play good defense and still 
jump into the attack and join the rush.'' When asked about when he 
will carry the puck into the attacking zone, Niedermayer said, ``Slava 
has a couple of ideas on the timing.'' When Niedermayer enters the 
attacking zone with the puck, multiple options and opportunities seem 
to unfold for the Devils. ``I feel real good about the possibilities 
because Robbie lets you know what he wants all the time,'' Niedermayer 
said, referring to Ftorek. ``The thing is you try to have fun when 
you play.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>