<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The votes Americans cast in Tuesday's midterm elections will inevitably 
have an impact on the impeachment proceedings against President Clinton, 
and hence on the remaining months of his presidency. But according 
to a survey of voters leaving the polls, that was not what most had 
on their minds. ``This election will have an effect on Clinton's future,'' 
said Ferrel Guillory of the University of North Carolina, one of the 
swing states in the balloting. ``But that doesn't mean that Clinton's 
past had much effect on this election. Everything I've seen and heard 
suggests quite the opposite.'' Among those elected were all 435 of 
the representatives who will be called upon next year, if the process 
unfolds as expected, to vote ``yea'' or ``nay'' on articles of impeachment. 
Also chosen, in an election in which fewer than four of ten eligible 
voters bothered to participate, were a third of those who will sit 
as jurors if the House sends the case to the Senate for trial. Early 
results suggested that Democrats had done better than they feared 
and the Republicans hoped. In the Ohio River valley, with a number 
of close House races in three states, Democrats turned in powerful 
showings that had seemed beyond their reach as recently as two or 
three weeks ago, and Sen. Ernest Hollings Jr., D-S.C., one of the 
last Democratic survivors from the days of the one-party South, made 
a strong re-election run in the face of a stiff challenge. But an 
unusual number of Senate races appeared headed for photo finishes, 
reflecting a close partisan division that also showed up in the polls. 
Across the country, nearly six voters in ten said their vote was cast 
neither in support of nor in opposition to Clinton, but for other 
reasons. About two in ten told interviewers for a consortium of five 
television networks and The Associated Press that they were expressing 
backing for the president, and about the same number said they were 
expressing disapproval of him. Clearly, neither Republican efforts 
to demonize the president for his relationship with Monica Lewinsky 
through a late flurry of television ads in pivotal districts, nor 
the Democrats' efforts to picture congressional Republicans as mindless 
partisans determined to savage the Clinton at all costs, succeeded 
in making the election a referendum on the president. It was not, 
in fact, a referendum at all. Unlike the Republican sweep of four 
years ago, this was a typical midterm election in the sense that people 
tended to respond to the candidates themselves and to issues that 
seemed important in their localities rather than to national imperatives. 
``This was a Seinfeld election,'' said Curtis Gans, who runs an organization 
that monitors voter turnout. ``He said his show wasn't about anything, 
and neither was this election.'' When people were pressed to say what 
issue mattered most to their voting decisions, almost a quarter mentioned 
either the Lewinsky affair or ``moral and ethical issues,'' which 
might be taken to mean the same thing. But more than three-quarters 
mentioned other issues like education or Social Security, jobs or 
taxes, with education at the head of the list. Schools were featured 
in television commercials, handbills and stump speeches in a number 
of the hardest-fought contests this fall. But preliminary figures 
suggested that the Democrats may have succeeded in stimulating a sizeable 
black turn-out with last-minute efforts including a visit by Clinton 
to a black church in Baltimore on Sunday and a television spot that 
concluded: ``Next Tuesday, vote Democratic. And tell Congress we're 
ready to move on.'' In a number of ways, the exit poll confirmed the 
findings of dozens of surveys taken over the past six months. Voters 
expressed approval of Clinton's performance as president, disapproval 
of his personal conduct and disappointment at Congress' performance 
under Republican leadership. They expressed confidence about the national 
economy. Most said they would just as soon see the impeachment matter 
dropped, although the electorate was divided, the exit poll found, 
on whether Congress should censure the president. ``Overall, the country 
is happy with its lot,'' a top Republican strategist said last weekend. 
``No winds of discontent, no tidal waves of change.'' There were other 
factors favoring the status quo. Only 34 members of the House of Representatives 
and only five senators, far fewer than average, are retiring this 
year, and most seats change party hands when they are open. Incumbents 
also had a strong advantage in raising money this year. No president's 
party in this century has made a net gain in House seats midway through 
a second presidential term. That, and Clinton's travails, led to widespread 
predictions a month or so ago of at least modest gains by the Republicans, 
but that view changed as Election Day approached. The improvement 
in Democratic prospects, apparently borne out in the balloting, resulted 
in part from a widespread belief that the Republicans had overplayed 
their hand in handling the report of Kenneth Starr, the independent 
counsel. Another factor may have been a string of successes for Clinton, 
who wore his governing and not his campaigning hat last month. While 
Vice President Al Gore _ increasingly introduced to audiences as ``the 
next president of the United States'' _ barnstormed through more than 
a dozen states, Clinton, by most impartial accounts, bested the Republican 
leadership in the budget deal; played midwife to a Middle East land-for-peace 
agreement, worked within the G-7 group of industrialized nations to 
stabilize the global economy, and grabbed a few rays of the limelight 
when Sen. John Glenn, D-Ohio, returned to space. One result must have 
given particular comfort to Gore, whose political style is sometimes 
so wooden that he once compared himself to an oak plank. Democratic 
Lt. Gov. Gray Davis of California, the apparent victor in the gubernatorial 
race in the nation's largest state, based on exit polls, is even less 
colorful, but that did not hurt him in a race against a strongly ideological 
rival, Dan Lundgren. Gore may face a right-wing Republican in the 
2000 race. Or he may face Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, a studiously 
non-ideological politician who was re-elected by a sizeable majority. 
Bush and his younger brother Jeb, whom exit polls projected as the 
victor in the Florida governor's race, would be strongly placed in 
the struggle for the Republican presidential nomination as governors 
of two of the nation's four biggest states. It was, in fact, a good 
election for moderates, with victories for Davis, the two Bushes, 
Gov. George Voinovich of Ohio in a Senate race and a number of other 
centrist House and Senate candidates of both parties, as compared 
to the avalanche of right-wing triumphs only four years ago. This 
was particularly noticeable in the governors' races. As more and more 
government power has moved from Washington to the statehouses, voters 
have seemed eager to keep the blatant partisanship that characterizes 
Washington these days out of governments that live closer to where 
they live. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>