<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0186 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ten years ago, Gregory Barbero's career at Polygram Classics and Jazz, 
the recording branch of the international Polygram corporation, was 
taking off as rapidly as the company's sales of classical compact 
disks. Barbero's entry into the business had been humbling: in early 
1984, fresh out of college as a philosophy major, he took a sales 
job in the record department of a Barnes &AMP; Noble bookstore in 
downtown Boston. Four months later, the compact disk was introduced 
and quickly became an obsession for classical music collectors. In 
three years as manager of the record department, Barbero saw CD sales 
increase tenfold, from $200,000 to $2 million. The classical recording 
field was expanding exponentially. In 1988, Barbero got an entry-level 
job at Polygram. By 1995, he was the vice president of London Records, 
the American branch of the London-based Decca company, one of three 
major classical labels owned by Polygram. The others were Deutsche 
Grammophon, based in Hamburg, and Philips, based in Amsterdam. Barbero 
tended to London's distinguished catalogue and its stellar roster 
of artists like Luciano Pavarotti and Sir Georg Solti. He also recruited 
artists, planned recordings and, most important, devised marketing 
campaigns for the United States. ``It was a real Wild West atmosphere,'' 
Barbero said. ``Everything you tried worked. And nothing was too crazy 
to try.'' But Barbero, who helped turn the debut disk of the Three 
Tenors into the biggest-selling classical album and used the proceeds 
to sign up fine artists like the soprano Renee Fleming, is now out 
of a job at age 36. His history with Polygram, which dominates the 
worldwide music market, tells much about the heady times and current 
confusions in the classical recording industry. The success of projects 
like the Three Tenors _ crossovers that sell beyond the usual classical 
market _ stunned recording executives more used to selling recordings 
by the thousands than the millions. Other crossover releases were 
tried, some with astonishing results, like the sensation Andrea Bocelli, 
the darkly handsome, blind Italian tenor, who sings arias, lighter 
classical works and pop songs, and has sold some 14 million records 
worldwide on the Philips label. While the good times were rolling 
for CD sales, executives like Barbero were given latitude to pursue 
serious projects. But when the windfall ended in the mid-1990s, and 
the oversaturated market lagged, panicky executives downsized classical 
departments and hooked onto crossover projects like a lifeline. Paradoxically, 
Barbero's success in demonstrating that the right classical album 
can be as marketable as a pop record may have fueled unrealistic expectations 
and contributed to his troubles. Though Polygram's classical labels 
retain their identities with consumers, they have been, in effect, 
folded into two new genre-based departments, core classical and a 
crossover division for New Age music, soundtracks and superstar artists. 
The downsizing of the core classical department raises questions about 
Polygram's commitment to important classical recordings that are not 
big sellers, like the conductor Valery Gergiev's Russian opera series 
with the Kirov Opera company on Philips, or the conductor Pierre Boulez's 
recordings of 20th-century works on Deutsche Grammophon. Complicating 
matters is the sale of Polygram Holdings to the Seagram Co., now in 
its final stages. The purchase would give Seagram, the Canadian liquor 
giant, new reach into the entertainment industry. Significantly, Polygram's 
parent company, Philips Electronics, has lowered the price of Polygram 
from $10.6 billion to $10.2 billion. Christopher Roberts, the president 
of Polygram Classics and Jazz, is sympathetic to the fears of classical 
record collectors. ``No doubt, consumers may worry that the trickle-down 
effect of these changes will be that they get less opportunity to 
follow their passion,'' Roberts said recently. ``But that is absolutely 
not the case.'' The prior structure at Polygram, where competition 
was actively encouraged among the three labels, ``made sense in the 
'80s, when so much product was coming along,'' he explained. ``But 
no longer.'' The success of the company's classical CD sales created 
new marketing problems, he added, like over-saturation, duplication 
of repertory and a crowding of release dates. He spoke of the ``naivete 
and greed'' of the 1980s. ``Everything was selling, everyone was buying,'' 
he said. ``But the real organic demand was not being addressed. The 
people who were already in the classical market were the ones converting 
to CDs. Not enough new people were coming on.'' Then, just as reality 
was settling in and the business was starting to adjust, along came 
the Three Tenors, which was good and bad for the classical recording 
field in general, and for Barbero in particular. The first Three Tenors 
concert, in September 1990, was intended as a one-time event, a joint 
celebration of Jose Carreras' recovery from leukemia and the World 
Cup soccer match in Rome. To almost everyone's surprise a recording 
of the concert sold more than 100,000 copies. ``I made a pitch to 
go to our biggest accounts, like Camelot, a chain of some 300 mall-based 
record stores mostly in the Midwest, and to put together a presentation 
to promote the Three Tenors like a pop record,'' Barbero said. Camelot 
Music signed on. Then came the tidal wave: 700,000 units sold in four 
months. Ultimately, sales topped 2 million. This proved to the corporate 
parents of Polygram, and to competing companies, that certain classical 
music, if promoted strategically, could appeal to a broad audience. 
``The Three Tenors opened up a new area: the classical superstar album,'' 
said Barbero. ``Without the Three Tenors, is Bocelli possible? I don't 
think so.'' Polygram used its big profits in important ways, including 
empowering several creative younger executives like Barbero, who was 
promoted in March 1995 to his post at London Records. Once there, 
he used the good times to support artists like the mezzo-soprano Cecilia 
Bartoli, who, it is often forgotten, was no overnight sensation. ``Cecilia 
was on her fifth record, in 1993, when things started to look up,'' 
Barbero said. With her album ``If You Love Me,'' a program of 18th-century 
Italian songs, the company realized that it ``was dealing with a once-in-a-lifetime, 
and highly marketable performer,'' he added. ``And her manager, the 
best in the business, set her up brilliantly. Suddenly, it was a juggernaut.'' 
The classical division of Polygram was reorganized to insure that 
such quality projects continued to prosper, said Roberts. The core 
classical department is now headed by Barbero's former counterpart 
at Deutsche Grammophon, Albert Imperato, a latecomer to classical 
music who heard Leonard Bernstein conduct Beethoven in Vienna during 
a his junior year abroad and had an epiphany. Now 36, he still sounds 
like an ecstatic convert. ``People are turning off their televisions 
and getting bored with the latest hype,'' he said. ``Classical music 
delivers the goods.'' In his former post at Deutsche Grammophon, Imperato 
unabashedly championed mass-market classical projects like the ``100 
Reasons to Listen to Classical Music'' series. But he points with 
pride to the German violinist Anne Sophie Mutter's recordings of contemporary 
works by Lutoslawski and Penderecki, and singles out a new two-disk 
recording of ``Undine,'' a ballet by the German composer Hans Werner 
Henze. His boss, Roberts, who doesn't expect sales for the Henze ballet 
to be noticeably good, said: ``This is a trade-off.'' Polygram can 
protect Deutsche Grammophon's status as ``the beacon of classical 
recordings'' by ``allowing the crossover department to pursue its 
special projects,'' he added. In the new arrangement, Philips, the 
label that once supported the conductor Sir Colin Davis in his project 
to record the complete works of Berlioz, is to be primarily a crossover 
label for performers like the new waltz king, Andre Rieu, the ``Lord 
of the Dance'' composer Ronan Hardiman, and, of course, Bocelli. The 
senior vice president for the crossover department, Lisa Altman, points 
to her musical pedigree (a degree in piano from the Oberlin Conservatory) 
as evidence of the judgment she will bring to emerging artists. As 
an example, she cites the California-born violin prodigy Leila Josefowicz. 
Philips released Ms. Josefowicz's first recording, the violin concertos 
of Tchaikovsky and Sibelius, when she was 16. But last year she was 
featured in an album called ``Violin for Anne Rice,'' a musical homage 
to the popular author of Gothic vampire stories, accompanied by a 
jazz combo. This is not, Ms. Altman said, some kind of crossover sellout. 
``Today's musicians don't see themselves as existing in any one world, 
any one genre,'' she explained. ``What this is about is keeping the 
artists heard and creating a healthier landscape for all music.'' 
Serious classical collectors might adopt a wait-and-see attitude about 
the changes. Are more projects like the Henze ballet coming? Can Ms. 
Bartoli continue to fulfill the expectations of Polygram's executives, 
or will she be deemed to have peaked if she branches out into more 
obscure repertory and sales drop off? Now that the elegant French 
pianist Jean-Yves Thibaudet has had a crossover success with his album 
of solos by the jazz giant Bill Evans, as transcribed by Thibaudet 
(more than 35,000 sold), will his impressive two-disk set of the complete 
piano works of Ravel from 1992 remain in the catalogue? ``I certainly 
hope so,'' Roberts replied. ``But if you never deleted anything, the 
catalogue would go crazy.'' The number of staff members in the core 
classical area has shrunk, he conceded, ``but it was a realignment, 
not a real reduction.'' The reduction was real enough to Barbero. 
But he is still working for Polygram as a freelance project consultant 
and has taken jobs for other companies also on a freelance basis. 
``On paper, the new structure at Polygram makes sense,'' he said. 
``Everyone supports it. Even I, frankly, support it. Would it be better 
if there were three healthy working classical labels? Of course. But 
for these times, given this market place, that won't work.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>