<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0191 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sorting through the political and social mess portrayed in Nettie 
Wild's clear-eyed documentary film ``A Place Called Chiapas'' is not 
easy. Nor do there seem to be any simple solutions to the simmering 
conflict examined by the film between disenfranchised Mayan Indians 
in the southern Mexican state of Chiapas and the ruling government 
against which they have been waging a fitful guerrilla rebellion. 
The movie, which opens Wednesday at Film Forum, was completed in eight 
months between June 1996 and February 1997. It takes us inside the 
Zapatista movement by indigenous Indians who are at the bottom of 
the Mexican social order. The demands of these desperately impoverished 
people include health care, education and control over their land. 
Led by a charismatic, pipe-smoking intellectual known as Subcommander 
Marcos, the movement has always had a surreal quality. Marcos, who 
appears briefly in the film, talks in poetic metaphors and issues 
cryptic statements on the Internet. A well-educated mestizo (a person 
of mixed Spanish and Indian blood) he has dedicated himself to the 
Zapatista cause for 12 years. Marcos and his freedom fighters have 
a flair for the dramatic. They take their name from Emiliano Zapata, 
the Mexican revolutionary who rode victoriously into Mexico City in 
1914 with a peasant army but was tricked and assassinated by the government 
five years later. Like their forerunners, the Zapatistas conceal their 
faces, swathing them in bandanas or black ski masks that cover everything 
but their eyes. Marcos is a shrewd manipulator of the media. When 
he calls for a convocation of journalists and observers, an international 
throng shows up for a gathering the filmmaker calls a ``post-glasnost 
revolutionary Woodstock.'' The history covered by the film begins 
on Jan. 1, 1994, the day the North American Free Trade Agreement went 
into effect. The peasant rebels, protesting an imminent influx of 
cheap corn from the United States that would undermine their meager 
livelihood as corn farmers, took over four towns and 500 ranches in 
southern Mexico. The government sent in troops, and at least 145 people 
died in the ensuing battle. Since then, an uneasy cease-fire has prevailed 
as the two sides have attempted to negotiate an elusive peace agreement. 
At the center of the negotiations is Bishop Samuel Ruiz Garcia, whom 
the Mayans call ``grandfather'' but whom the landowners who were dispossessed 
by the Zapatista rebellion view with deep suspicion. With most of 
the ranches still in the hands of the Zapatistas, the area has been 
surrounded by the Mexican army. At the same time, paramilitary troops 
who call themselves the Peace and Justice Party have aligned themselves 
with the government (which denies their existence) and terrorized 
the Indians, driving 2,000 of them from their villages. Ms. Wild and 
her film crew accompany a group of peasants back to their village, 
where they face angry troops who accuse them of violence and (off 
camera) threaten to kill the Mexican members of the crew. What is 
to be done? The filmmakers clearly sympathize with the Zapatistas, 
but they have no answers. PRODUCTION NOTES: `A PLACE CALLED CHIAPAS' 
Directed by Nettie Wild; written (in English and Spanish, with English 
subtitles) by Ms. Wild and Manfred Becker; director of photography, 
Ms. Wild and Kirk Tougas; edited by Becker; produced by Ms. Wild, 
Tougas and Betsy Carson. At Film Forum, 209 W. Houston St. Running 
time: 90 minutes. This film is not rated. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>