<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0292 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Honduran authorities struggled on Tuesday with meager resources to 
deal with catastrophic damage from torrential rains and floods spawned 
by a hurricane, as the official death toll here climbed to 362. Experts 
expect that figure to go far higher. Officials said thousands were 
still trapped by flooding in remote regions. Most major roads and 
bridges were destroyed by flood waters or blocked by mudslides after 
a week of relentless rain dumped several feet of water on this impoverished 
country in Central America. Military officials estimated that at least 
5,000 people have died and that 600,000, 10 percent of the population, 
have lost their housing. Entire neighborhoods in Tegucigalpa, the 
capital, were washed away on Friday, when the Choluteca River broke 
over its banks and inundated many parts of the city, burying houses, 
cars and people in mud. On Tuesday evening the waters had receded, 
and the sun came out. Thousands of tired and stunned people returned 
to the wreckage of their houses. Many had lost everything they owned. 
Others had lost family members. ``I lost everything,'' Ana Mercedes 
Ramirez, 38, a homemaker, said as she peered into the remains of her 
house in the La Oya neighborhood. What was once her living room was 
filled with several feet of mud. ``I've never seen anything like this, 
not even with Hurricane Fifi did anything like this happen.'' Fifi, 
in 1974, left 10,000 Hondurans dead. The latest storm, called Mitch, 
struck last week, leaving much of the downtown along the river a disaster 
scene. Factories, hospitals, prisons and bridges have been washed 
away. Some neighborhoods, where hundreds of houses stood, have become 
muddy wastelands of debris, rotting animals and human corpses, President 
Carlos Flores Facusse pleaded on Monday night for international aid. 
Top military officials conceded that they lacked equipment to rescue 
people in remote regions. Many families have been waiting for days 
without food or water on top of their houses or perching in trees, 
the officials said. ``The demand is so great and the equipment we 
have is so little that we feel impotent,'' the Army chief-of-staff, 
Gen. Mario Hung Pacheco, said. More than 5,000 people were waiting 
for rescue in southeastern Choluteca, and at least 2,000 were trapped 
by flood waters in San Pedro Sula, the authorities said. There were 
reports from the northern town of El Progreso of desperate parents' 
tying small children to the limbs of tall trees to protect them from 
drowning. The hurricane was one of the most powerful storms to hit 
the Caribbean in modern times. The tightly wound eye of the storm 
never hit the mainland. Instead, it hovered over the Caribbean and 
the Gulf of Honduras for days, dumping up to two feet of rain a day. 
Honduran officials characterized the storm as the worst natural disaster 
in recent history. Floods and landslides have destroyed more than 
two-thirds of the crops, experts said, raising a possibility of severe 
food shortages, knocking out scores of bridges and blocking nearly 
every major road. The floods have wiped out many food warehouses and 
have halted most commercial traffic, making it nearly impossible to 
transport food, and many communities have no potable water, officials 
said. Officials also said there is a great danger of cholera and other 
diseases. With limited equipment, the military and rescue workers 
are having trouble recovering corpses, and the floods have wreaked 
havoc on sewer systems and have washed out latrines. The situation 
is a recipe for disease. Many residents of the capital doubted the 
government had the resources to rebuild the destroyed areas and were 
pinning their hopes on international aid operations. ``Only with help 
from abroad can we make it out of this situation,'' said 23-ear old 
Ana Sepeda, an office worker whose house was severely damaged by the 
flood waters on Saturday. ``We are trying to continue forward, but 
it is difficult, especially for the people who lost all their things.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>