<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0398 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
How is this for a head-turning change in the cast: Patrick Byrne became 
an instant success in horse racing one year ago when he saddled Favorite 
Trick and Countess Diana and won both the Breeders' Cup Juvenile and 
the Juvenile Fillies, then won Trainer of the Year when Favorite Trick 
was voted Horse of the Year. Now, in one of those upheavals that embroil 
the racing world, the trainer and his best horses are back for this 
year's Breeders' Cup, but they are competing in different colors. 
Byrne, who surrendered his stable of champions last December to accept 
a job as the private trainer for Frank Stronach, returns with four 
different horses in three different events in this year's milestone 
day at the races. And Favorite Trick, now nobody's Horse of the Year, 
still makes the cast with a new trainer, Bill Mott, and a new race, 
the Mile, and on a new surface, grass. ``It was not easy to give up 
two champions,'' Byrne said Tuesday at Churchill Downs, where the 
next act in the drama will be played on Saturday. ``Favorite Trick 
is a great horse. But this was the chance of a lifetime for me, and 
I had to give up the horse of a lifetime to take it.'' But after a 
deliberately slow start in his new job, working with new owners and 
new horses and losing his first 11 races, Byrne began to hit home 
runs. Since then he has won with about 40 percent of his runners, 
and he has won 9 of 12 starts with the four he has brought to the 
Breeders' Cup: Wild Rush in the $1 million Sprint, Bag Lady Jane in 
the $1 million Breeders' Cup Juvenile Fillies and Awesome Again and 
Touch Gold in the $4 million Classic. Byrne watched his two Classic 
contenders working Tuesday morning, and said: ``This is going to be 
the best Classic yet. All of my horses have had their big works. We'll 
likely just gallop up to the race. I will have no excuses. ``Touch 
Gold and Awesome Again have shown me exactly what I wanted to see 
at this point. I don't imagine any scenarios for the race. It will 
be dictated by the jockeys at race time. All I know is that I have 
two horses ready to run their races.'' Byrne comes loaded with jockey 
talent to go with his horse talent: Pat Day aboard Awesome Again and 
Chris McCarron on Touch Gold. And both horses are well-bred 4-year-old 
sons of Deputy Minister. Awesome Again has won his last five starts 
and 8 of 11 overall. In the Stephen Foster Handicap at Churchill Downs 
in June, he outran Silver Charm, winner of last year's Kentucky Derby 
and this year's Dubai World Cup. Touch Gold has won 6 of 14 and has 
run in the money 10 times, and will forever be remembered as the horse 
who defeated Silver Charm in last year's Belmont Stakes and denied 
him the chance to sweep the Triple Crown. So when Pat Byrne gave up 
Favorite Trick for a new stable, he gave up the king but not the kingdom. 
And where does that leave Favorite Trick? It leaves him in the hands 
of perhaps the country's premier trainer, Bill Mott, who has made 
some hard early decisions about the Horse of the Year and his limitations. 
First, Mott decided that the Kentucky Derby at a mile and a quarter 
in May was not the race for his new star. He was right, but the horse 
ran, tired in the homestretch and finished eighth. Then Mott made 
the kind of momentous decision, in reverse, that made Cigar a superstar 
after switching from grass to dirt. He decided that Favorite Trick 
might be better suited by pedigree and style to running on grass, 
so he switched him from dirt last month. Favorite Trick promptly won 
the Keeneland Mile by three and a half lengths, and opened a new career, 
which is a pretty neat trick for a Horse of the Year. Mott sent his 
favorite runner through a half-mile workout on the Churchill grass 
Thursday morning, and Favorite Trick responded by zipping the distance 
in 48 2/5 seconds. It was nearly three seconds faster than the next 
quickest time at that distance. The colt won all eight of his races 
as a 2-year-old and 4 of 7 this year at 3, so he is 12-for-15 going 
into the Breeders' Cup Mile. Afterward, Mott reviewed his decision 
to switch Favorite Trick to the grass after 14 straight starts on 
the dirt, and said: ``It's taken us an entire year to decide what 
he wants to do best, but eventually it looked like the Mile would 
be the logical choice. We've been breezing him on the grass since 
July, and he seems to be a happier horse. I don't think he's good 
enough to handle the top 3-year-olds at the classic distances. He 
used every bit of his courage to make a mile and an eighth. Now on 
the green stuff, he moves better and is more efficient.'' FINISH LINES: 
Skip Away, the leading candidate for Horse of the Year in 1998 and 
probably the favorite in the Classic, stepped down from his van in 
midmorning after an overnight trip from New York, and was met by his 
trainer, Sonny Hine, who said: ``He's on top of his game, from what 
I can tell. He had two good works at Belmont Park, and I have no reason 
to believe he won't take these horses. I didn't come here to get beat. 
I came here to show the world how great he is.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>