<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0194 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A mountain of style buries a molehill of wishful thinking in the Hype 
Williams film ``Belly.'' On the eve of a new millennium, it ponders 
the fate of young black men drawn to drugs, violence, easy money and 
sexual license, and weakly invokes the spirits of everyone from Marcus 
Garvey to Elijah Muhammad and Malcolm X to preach the virtues of godliness, 
lawfulness, fidelity and plain old decency. And all the while its 
visual style glamorizes the fruits of casual killings and outlaw life: 
gleaming cars, complaisant women and piles of cash. ``Belly'' is a 
film that begs for a pat on the head for its virtue while catering 
to cinematic tastes more interested in crotch shots, topless dancers, 
wall-sized television screens, ganja galore and, wherever possible, 
crime without punishment, all to the accompaniment of a high-octane 
soundtrack. In ``Belly,'' Williams, a graduate of music videos making 
his feature-film debut as writer and director, uses rapid cuts, multiple 
images, superimpositions, slow motion and highly dramatic lighting 
among other devices as he assembles an assortment of rap artists in 
a tale set in 1999 among mostly undereducated urban black teen-agers. 
The focus is on the friendship of two of them, who appear older than 
their years. Pals since childhood, Tommy Brown (Earl Simmons, also 
known as DMX) and Sincere (Nasir Jones, also known as Nas) have achieved 
a measure of success in their chosen criminal life, and with a gang 
of confederates at the outset of the film pull off a murderous, bloody 
and very remunerative heist at a popular nightclub. Tommy goes home 
to his lavish modernistic mansion in Jamaica Estates, in New York 
City, and to Kisha (Taral Hicks), the girlfriend he cheats on with 
Kionna (Lavita Raynor), a girl below the age of consent. Sin, by contrast, 
returns to his more modest and more traditionally decorated house, 
where his wife, Tionne (Tionne Watkins) and their baby await him. 
While Tommy's ambition turns his thoughts to entering the drug trade 
and importing an additive that increases the potency of street drugs, 
Sin the family man is thinking of going straight. Tommy's ambition 
involves him in drug traffic, feuds and murder on the island of Jamaica 
and a venture into drug sales in Omaha, Neb., that offends a local 
gang, prompts them to tip off the police and results in a bloody shootout. 
As Sin attempts to distance himself from Tommy and his way of life, 
Tommy is on the run, never certain whom he can trust. Cornered by 
federal agents, he is given a choice: go to jail forever or infiltrate 
the organization of the well-meaning Rev. Saviour (Benjamin F. Muhammed), 
plant drugs and assassinate him at a huge gathering as midnight draws 
near on New Year's Eve 1999. Though not out of danger, Sin, meanwhile, 
is planning to begin a new life in Africa with Tionne and their baby. 
The film draws to a close with an eloquent plea for change in the 
new millennium, but fighting the emphases of Williams' style, the 
message amounts to too little, too late. ``Belly'' is rated R (under 
17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It contains considerable 
violence, simulated sex, nudity and an abundance of crude language 
built around sex and race. PRODUCTION NOTES: `BELLY' Written and directed 
by Hype Williams; director of photography, Malik Hassan Sayeed; edited 
by David Leonard; production designer, Regan Jackson; produced by 
Ronald Rotholz and Bob Salerno; released by Artisan Entertainment. 
Running time: 110 minutes. This film is rated R. With: Earl Simmons 
(Tommy), Nasir Jones (Sincere), Taral Hicks (Kisha), Tionne Watkins 
(Tionne), Lavita Raynor (Kionna), Clifford Smith (Shameek), Oli Grant 
(Knowledge), Louie Rankin (Lenox), Benjamin F. Muhammed (Rev. Saviour) 
and Hassan Iniko Johnson (Mark). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>