<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0255 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One afternoon in 1988, when David Isay was 22 years old and just stumbling 
into a passion for radio, he paid an unannounced visit to the Manhattan 
office of his father, a psychoanalyst. There he encountered a man 
who seemed to be living in an anteroom of the professional suite. 
At first, Isay's father explained away the stranger as a patient. 
Then he told the truth: he was gay and the man was his lover. Stunned 
by the disclosure, Isay (pronounced like the two words ``I say'') 
set about understanding the surreptitious life his father had led 
through years of marriage and parenting. There was nothing autobiographical, 
much less confessional, about his approach. With microphone and tape 
recorder and the license both objects conferred to ask questions, 
Isay began interviewing veterans of the Stonewall uprising, the 1969 
brawl between homosexuals and police outside a Greenwich Village bar 
that catalyzed the gay-rights movement. Six months later, the 25 minutes 
of ``Stonewall Remembered'' were broadcast on National Public Radio, 
becoming the first of say's documentaries to play on the network. 
Listeners heard from those exhilarated by the insurrection: a Vietnam 
veteran, a former convent girl, a drag queen, a lesbian now residing 
in a center for the elderly. They even heard from the public-morals 
investigator assigned to police the Stonewall Inn. Only at the very 
end, though, did they hear the producer responsible for the program 
intone simply, ``I'm David Isay.'' In the decade since that documentary, 
Isay has produced an acclaimed body of radio journalism that still 
hews to the paradoxical style of ``Stonewall Remembered.'' Whether 
assembling pieces about ghetto teen-agers or Appalachian snake handlers, 
Bowery denizens or gospel quartets, Isay has made himself both determinedly 
absent and fiercely present, imprinting his sensibility while silencing 
his voice. Isay has won or shared in numerous awards, foremost among 
them two Peabodys for broadcast journalism. Working more as an oral 
historian than a newsman, he has influenced other radio documentarians 
even as he has occasionally tangled with the editors of National Public 
Radio. In the latest nod to Isay's stature, WNYC-FM (93.9) will present 
a two-hour retrospective of his work at 7 p.m. on Nov. 27, simulcast 
on WNYC-AM (820). His success serves as proof that even a half-century 
after television should in theory have rendered radio obsolete, this 
relatively primitive medium provides certain satisfactions not even 
the highest technology can match. National Public Radio's flagship 
broadcast, ``All Things Considered,'' draws a nightly audience of 
7.7 million, not much less than the viewership for any one of the 
television network newscasts, and has created stars like Cokie Roberts, 
Susan Stamberg, John Hockenberrry and Robert Krulwich. That Isay remains 
far more obscure than they to a general audience says less about public 
radio than about his own taste for invisibility. ``I find other people's 
stories so much more interesting than my story,'' he says. ``I know 
my story. And I know I'm not much of a talker. I'm a much better listener. 
So I try to be the vehicle through which people's stories can be heard. 
What I'm looking for is poetry on the margins.'' Ken Mueller, the 
radio curator of the Museum of Television and Radio, puts it this 
way: ``Just like Frederick Wiseman is cinema verite, David Isay is 
audio verite.'' Even before entering radio, Isay had learned much 
about the meticulous editing that characterizes his work. He grew 
up, first in New Haven and then in Manhattan, with the example of 
his mother, Jane Isay, a book editor who has worked with authors like 
Harold Bloom and Melissa Fay Greene. ``She taught me the ability to 
cut down to what's most interesting,'' he says, ``to be brutal with 
yourself.'' From his father, Robert, Isay says, he took ``a real sense 
of the courage of people who are out of the mainstream and of the 
cruelty of the mainstream.'' Still, both Isay's social conscience 
and incipient technique waited in latency as he graduated from New 
York University in 1987 and headed into medical school. During a break 
from class, he wandered past an East Village store specializing in 
books and supplies for 12-step programs. When Isay chatted with the 
owners, both recovered drug addicts, he found they were planning to 
open a ``museum of addiction.'' They already had blueprints and a 
scale model made of tongue depressors. Isay raced back to his apartment, 
threw open the Yellow Pages and began calling television and radio 
stations, trying to interest anyone in the story. Finally, he reached 
Amy Goodman, the news director at WBAI-FM, the Pacifica station known 
for its iconoclasm. ``Sounds great,'' she told him. ``I don't have 
anyone to do it. Why don't you?'' With a borrowed tape recorder and 
editing help from Ms. Goodman, Isay patched together a six-minute 
piece. On the day it was broadcast in 1988, a National Public Radio 
producer named Gary Covino happened to be visiting New York and listening 
to WBAI. Covino had earned his own reputation on NPR for assembling 
audio portraits, most notably one of a street demonstration against 
the Filipino dictator Ferdinand Marcos, from vast volumes of first-person 
testimony. Now he heard a kindred spirit. ``It was rough,'' he recalls 
of the Isay piece, ``but listening through the roughness I could hear 
this sensibility that intrigued me.'' Through Ms. Goodman, he located 
Isay, a gangly, bespectacled fellow with, appropriately enough, very 
big ears. Covino re-edited the WBAI piece so it could run nationally 
on NPR's ``Weekend All Things Considered.'' Then he paid the neophyte 
$50. ``I was apologizing that it was so little,'' he says, ``and Dave 
was flipping out because he didn't think he'd be paid at all.'' So 
began the education of an acolyte. As Isay developed ``Stonewall Remembered,'' 
he spent months immersed in tapes that Covino had sent him and in 
the broadcasts of ``Weekend All Things Considered,'' which Covino 
produced. From those models, Isay learned to eschew the NPR formula 
of ``acts and trax'' _ slang for alternating sections of the ambient 
sound called actualities and vocal tracks _ in favor of using editing 
and overdubbing to create a dense aural tapestry. When Isay began 
producing more pieces, Covino took sole responsibility for editing 
them. Justifiably or not, he depicted NPR's editors as ``narrow minds 
who wouldn't hear the potential for terrific stories in his ideas.'' 
To this day, he proudly asserts, ``We violated all the rules of NPR 
editorial apparatus.'' Yet NPR broadcast virtually everything that 
Isay developed, bringing both the network and the young producer renown. 
Between 1990 and 1993, Isay traveled the country for the American 
Folklife Project, profiling characters from death row inmates to a 
Pullman porter to a minister with a 34-million-word diary. The series 
captured a Peabody honor, and the death-row segment won the Livingston 
Award for excellence by a young journalist. Subsequently, Shanachie 
Records released highlights from the series and W.W. Norton published 
a companion book. ``These were stories of sacrifice, of quiet heroism,'' 
Isay wrote in the book, ``Holding On.'' ``There seemed to be eternal 
qualities shared by all of these subjects, but we couldn't pin them 
down. Was it the sense of loneliness? The bravery? Individuality? 
Resilience? Was it that oddly wistful feeling we were left with each 
time we visited one of these people?'' The impact of Isay's next major 
documentary, ``Ghetto Life 101,'' was anything but ineffable. In 1993, 
Covino hired Isay to contribute to a yearlong series of broadcasts 
on race relations for WBEZ, the NPR affiliate in Chicago. Inspired 
by ``There Are No Children Here,'' Alex Kotlowitz's book about two 
boys in a Chicago housing project, Isay created an aural equivalent 
_ except that he actually turned over the reporting to two 13-year-olds, 
LeAlan Jones and Lloyd Newman. The pair kept taped diaries and interviewed 
friends and family members, and Isay pared down more than 100 hours 
of material to an excruciating 25 minutes. At one point, Lloyd Newman 
caught neighborhood children taunting his alcoholic father by daring 
him to spell ``fool.'' Later in the broadcast, LeAlan Jones asked 
his older sister how many of her friends had been murdered. ``Maybe 
a little less than 30,'' she replied. In still another scene, the 
two boys wandered into a downtown hotel as the lounge pianist played 
the theme song from the Peanuts cartoon series, surely not the soundtrack 
to their youth. ``Ghetto Life 101'' won a Livingston Award and a Society 
of Professional Journalists prize, among others, and was translated 
for broadcast in several foreign countries. But Isay's proteges were 
not, as it turned out, finished yet. In 1996, a 5-year-old boy from 
the same housing project as LeAlan and Lloyd was pushed out a high-rise 
window to his death by assailants ages 10 and 11. With Isay again 
editing and producing, LeAlan and Lloyd reported a 25-minute documentary 
entitled ``Remorse.'' Perhaps its most harrowing moment came in this 
exchange about the murdered boy: LeAlan: Dude, you think they got 
a playground in heaven for shorties? Lloyd: Nope. Ain't no playground 
in heaven for nobody. LeAlan: I don't know, man. How you figure there 
ain't no playground in heaven for little kids? Lloyd: God didn't make 
it special for nobody. LeAlan: But, man, what Shorty gonna do up there? 
He wasn't old enough to do nothing bad enough to go to no hell. What 
he doin, just kickin' it? Or is he reincarnated? Maybe he be a little 
bird or something. With ``Remorse,'' Isay won his second Peabody and 
the only Grand Prize ever given to a radio program in the Robert F. 
Kennedy Awards for coverage of the disadvantaged. Scribner published 
a book compiling the transcripts and many outtakes from both ``Remorse'' 
and ``Ghetto Life 101.'' Isay established his own nonprofit organization, 
Soundport, for which he currently raises $200,000 annually, enough 
to support himself and several employees and to cover production costs. 
As important, Isay had found in the use of surrogate narrators a form 
that suited his temperament, one that began to be imitated in public-radio 
circles. He employed the trope most recently in ``The Sunshine Hotel,'' 
a 25-minute portrait of a Bowery flophouse that was broadcast on ``All 
Things Considered'' in September. Isay chose Nathan Smith, the hotel 
manager, to introduce listeners to some of the 125 men who pay $4.50 
a night for a 4-by-6 cubicle topped with chicken wire: the Russian 
immigrant with a weekend heroin habit, the former band boy with Tito 
Puente, the loan shark, the drug dealer, the senile 80-year-old abandoned 
by his son and living on Oreos. Such a cast, far from disturbing Isay, 
elicited his friendship. ``He comes with a particular innocence,'' 
Smith says. ``It disarms people. You don't think he's going to cut 
your throat or rob you. It was a heartfelt, honest thing he did.'' 
Compassion and engagement, however, yielded more than 70 hours of 
raw tape. Which it fell to Isay and his digital editing machine to 
reduce in a manner that his mother might well have appreciated. ``He 
is a compulsive editor,'' says Stacy Abramson, Isay's associate producer. 
``It's enough to make you insane. He'll sit there and fine-tune and 
fine-tune and fine-tune. He'll make sure the timing of the phone call 
fits seamlessly over Nate's narration. It's so seamless you don't 
notice it. But it's been gone over and over and over. When you spent 
a year on a piece and boil it down to 25 minutes, every second has 
to be perfect.'' Despite Isay's perfection, or perhaps because of 
it, he has at times feuded with NPR. ``All Things Considered'' turned 
down his 1995 audio diary of a prostitute dying of AIDS, though the 
segment later was broadcast on ``Weekend All Things Considered'' and 
took a Kennedy Award. The network withheld broadcast of Isay's 1991 
documentary on a hospital for the criminally insane. The facility's 
director claimed, based on an advance script that Isay had provided 
her, that the report overemphasized the patients' violence. John Dinges, 
then NPR's managing editor, ordered it revised to address ``serious 
questions about both accuracy and balance.'' Isay instead withdrew 
the documentary. It later was broadcast on another NPR show, ``Soundprint,'' 
and, paradoxically enough, received an award from the American Psychological 
Association. ``There is always a prickly relationship with highly 
talented independent producers and the network,'' says Bill Buzenberg, 
who was NPR's vice president for news and information from 1990 through 
1997. ``It stems from the fact they (italics)are(end italics) independent, 
don't want to work for the network, want to do radio art to the nth 
degree. So a mutual distrust gets in there sometimes.'' Isay himself 
acknowledges the periodic tensions. ``I've been viewed with suspicion,'' 
he says. ``There's a feeling that when you do a non-narrated piece, 
when you don't write, when you do something like oral history, that 
you haven't done the research, that you don't know your facts. There's 
a feeling that you're cheating.'' Those feelings have not lasted long, 
even among Isay's few critics. Buzenberg hails him as ``one of the 
best radio artisans in the business.'' After ``Ghetto Life 101'' was 
broadcast, Dinges wrote in a memo to the NPR staff that ``pieces like 
this will revolutionize documentary radio.'' Isay, typically, lets 
his subjects speak for him. There comes a moment in the American Folklife 
Project series when a Colorado man, who has built a castle atop an 
isolated mountaintop, delivers what could be Isay's own manifesto. 
``They go on and on about Buttafuoco,'' the man says. ``Did he ever 
build anything with his hands? Conan O'Brian? Where do they come from? 
I've heard of Imelda Marcos. I've heard of Saddam Hussein. I've heard 
of all these other people. Have they heard of this?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>