<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0439 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Following are excerpts from Gov. George Pataki's victory speech on 
Tuesday night, which he delivered at the Hilton Hotel and Towers in 
New York City, as transcribed by The New York Times. Four years ago, 
the people entrusted the future of this state to my hands. We kept 
our word. We said we were going to change the state and put in place 
new policies that would free the spirit of the people of New York 
from an oppressive government. Well it's four years later, and let 
me tell you something, this is a better state than it was four years 
ago. We have kept our word in making this a safer state, making this 
a healthier state, making it a state with more environmental opportunities 
for our children and the children of the next generation. We have 
made it a state where we have freed the people from oppressive government 
and taxation and returned their spirit and their ability so that we 
can create more jobs and more opportunity and have less dependency. 
And we have a stronger New York state. But let me tell you something. 
The job isn't done. We still have to continue every day to work to 
make this a better state. And let me pledge to you today that the 
policies that have worked so well for the last four years are going 
to allow us to have even greater confidence in the future; that what 
we have done to give back the people of this state confidence in the 
future is what New Yorkers have always had. You know, there's something 
special about our great state. When I think of what that is, it's 
that New Yorkers have always believed that tomorrow would be better 
than today, that next year would be better than this year, that our 
children would have a better life than we did, that the next generation 
would have more opportunity than the generation that preceded it. 
With your help, with your confidence, we're not going to just let 
New Yorkers think that about their future. We're going to let them 
know that about their future. I'm extremely thankful tonight that 
the people have chosen to give us another term to lead this state 
into the next century. And, with your continued support, with your 
continued confidence, we're going to continue to move this state forward, 
we're going to make sure that the 21st century was better than the 
20th century. We're going to make sure that the next generation is 
proud of the fact that this is again the Empire State, again the place 
where dreams come true for people and for their families. We are going 
to guarantee you that with your continued confidence and this tremendous 
historic victory tonight, that the best New York is yet to come. Thank 
you. Thank you. Thank you. God bless you and let's make the 21st century 
again New York century. God bless you. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>