<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0281 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The fragile peace agreement between the Israelis and the Palestinians 
was severely tested Tuesday as both sides appealed to the United States 
to salvage the land-for-security accord, underscoring the central 
role of the Americans as arbiters and guarantors of the memorandum 
signed at the White House a week and a half ago. In what has become 
a pattern of postponements, Benjamin Netanyahu, the prime minister 
of Israel, again delayed presenting the agreement to his cabinet for 
ratification Tuesday. This time, under persistent pressure from the 
right, he demanded that the Americans wrest from the Palestinians 
a written timetable for the arrests of 30 fugitives suspected in terrorist 
acts. The Palestinians accused Netanyahu of political brinkmanship 
and implored the Americans to compel him to move beyond the impasse. 
The Palestinians also said the Israelis were taking advantage of the 
delay to establish footholds for new Jewish settlements in the West 
Bank, which would be illegal once the agreement takes effect. It was 
not clear whether Netanyahu was trying to shore up support on his 
right by acting tough, whether he was suffering renewed pangs of mistrust 
toward the Palestinians, or even, as some speculated here Tuesday, 
whether he was delaying the Cabinet vote until Ariel Sharon, the foreign 
minister, recovered from the flu and could help him face down the 
right-wing opposition among his ministers. James Rubin, the State 
Department spokesman, said in Washington on Tuesday that the Palestinians 
had submitted an acceptable security plan, meeting their obligations 
for the accord to take effect. He added that the Americans believed 
there was no reason to delay implementation, which was supposed to 
start Monday under a tight, 12-week schedule. ``From our standpoint 
the agreement entered into force yesterday, but we recognize there 
is a political-legal process that Israel must go through,'' Rubin 
said. ``We still believe the problems which that political/legal process 
could cause should not or need not interfere with the implementation 
of the responsibilities by both sides.'' Rubin said that Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright had spoken with Netanyahu twice Tuesday, 
and is ``working hard to resolve these problems that require clarification.'' 
Two senior Israeli ministers said the Palestinians were supposed to 
but did not include in the security blueprint a timetable for the 
fugitives' arrest. One said the omission would endanger approval of 
the agreement by the Israeli Parliament, which has been rambunctiously 
challenging Netanyahu's leadership since his return from the White 
House. Natan Sharansky, the trade minister, said the Israelis wanted 
in writing an oral commitment that the Palestinians had given at the 
Wye Plantation in Maryland: that the fugitives would be arrested 10 
at a time on the second, sixth and tenth week of the 12-week implementation. 
``It's not just a detail, it's one of the more central parts, and 
when we finally got the plan from the Americans, it was absent,'' 
Sharansky said. ``This needs to be fixed, and it can only be fixed 
through the Americans, and we expect to see very clear language from 
the United States. We need dates and figures, something that can be 
checked and controlled.'' Several senior Palestinian officials, on 
the other hand, said the Israelis were treading on dangerous ground 
in trying to force sensitive security issues out into the open. Saeb 
Erekat, who was a top negotiator for the Palestinians in Maryland, 
said the Israelis were humiliating the Palestinian officials before 
their own people. ``They are going out of their way to make it seem 
like we are agents of the Israelis, ready to do their bidding,'' Erekat 
said. ``We have prepared a security plan. The Americans have accepted 
it. The Americans should intervene immediately to make Netanyahu honor 
his commitments, or this will go on forever and he will never be satisfied.'' 
In Israel, political analysts struggled to sort out Netanyahu's motives 
for canceling his Cabinet meeting and raising anxiety about the peace 
accord. Some speculated that he was trying to stand tall and win one 
last concession from the Palestinians in order to win not just a majority, 
but a decisive majority, in the ratification vote. That would help 
him overcome threats to topple his government. ``I think he wants 
to pull out all the stops and make the vote an impressive victory 
with complete razzle dazzle,'' said David Makovsky, the diplomatic 
correspondent for Haaretz, a daily newspaper. Yasser Arafat, the Palestinian 
leader, who is in Spain, kept quiet Tuesday; he has chosen so far 
to play a patient, undemanding role. His colleagues did not restrain 
themselves. ``I cannot understand that he wants us to arrest 30 Palestinians 
when the Israelis close their eyes on settlement activities,'' Nabil 
Shaath, the Palestinian minister of transportation, said, referring 
to a crop of settlers' trailer homes that have arisen on hilltops 
in the West Bank in the last week. ``I would prefer that the prime 
minister come out and say honestly, `I can't go ahead with this memorandum 
instead of creating new political deception,''' said Hassan Asfour, 
one of the Palestinian negotiators at Wye. Under pressure from the 
far right for agreeing to turn over another 13 percent of the West 
Bank to the Palestinians, Netanyahu first delayed presenting the Wye 
memorandum to his Cabinet on Oct. 27, saying he needed to see the 
Palestinian security plan first. On Monday, he announced he was postponing 
the implementation until he received approval from his Cabinet and 
from his Parliament. He set a Cabinet meeting for Tuesday, and sought 
and received an acceptance from Arafat for a delay. Netanyahu said 
the delay would push back the first Israeli troop withdrawal from 
the West Bank by only a few days. During the peace negotiations in 
Maryland, the Israelis had dropped their demand that the fugitives 
be extradited, agreeing that the Palestinians could arrest and try 
them under the supervision of the Central Intelligence Agency. But 
it was a difficult concession. So the prime minister's representatives 
made a phone call at 3 a.m. Tuesday, Washington time, to Dennis Ross, 
the American envoy. They were seeking a written timetable for the 
fugitives' arrests from the Palestinians before the Cabinet meeting 
scheduled for this afternoon. They did not receive it, and the meeting 
was canceled. Politically, Netanyahu was still regaining his balance 
Tuesday morning from a raucous Parliament session on Monday, in which 
his gambit to attach a motion of confidence in his government to a 
budget vote almost backfired. At the last minute, his budget passed, 
and his government was endorsed, but only by a one-vote margin. He 
had been saved by the Israeli Arab members of Parliament, who abstained 
from voting so his government would not be toppled in a budget vote, 
derailing the peace effort. On Tuesday, though, Netanyahu turned on 
his saviors, saying he would not put himself in the position of relying 
on ``non-Zionist votes'' to carry a peace agreement through the Parliament. 
``I voted for him not because I love him but because I love the peace 
process,'' said Abdul Wahab Darawshe, the leader of the Arab faction 
in Parliament. ``Today he has turned and slapped us in the face. It's 
a real crime. It's a very racist declaration.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>