<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0161 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Freshness is so sacred these days that a sometimes misguided reverence 
for it leads cooks to use fresh pasta no matter what, even when dried 
is more suitable. And with all the exotic mushrooms sold fresh in 
markets, they may ignore the dried. Big mistake. Dried mushrooms are 
not like dried herbs, a pale substitute for the real thing. Think 
raisins instead of grapes, and you have a better analogy for dried 
mushrooms. They have a personality all their own, worth exploring, 
and they can add character to an everyday dish. Omitting dried mushrooms 
from the shopping list is an exercise in counterproductive food snobbery. 
Take dried shiitake mushrooms, for example. Often called Chinese black 
mushrooms when dried, they no longer require a trip to Chinatown to 
buy. Pretty they are not: they are hard, blackish brown and sometimes 
a little scaly. But watch what happens after they are reconstituted 
by soaking in water. They become supple and take on a satiny sheen. 
And once cooked, they deliver a much meatier texture and a richer 
flavor than the now-commonplace fresh shiitakes. Using them instead 
of fresh does not represent a compromise. On the contrary: they are 
an improvement, especially in Chinese dishes like stir-fried vegetables 
in oyster sauce. Their succulence and deep, earthy flavor do not limit 
their appeal to Asian dishes. I once added dried shiitakes to a coq 
au vin I was helping a friend prepare at her weekend house because 
there were no fresh mushrooms on hand. The dish was no longer coq 
au vin, which is usually made with cultivated white mushrooms, but 
it was a succulent triumph. Dried morels are almost interchangeable 
with fresh, which have become more available only in recent years. 
If you see morels on a menu in fall or winter, you know the chef is 
using the dried ones because morels are available fresh only in spring 
and early summer. If the dish is tasty, like the memorable chicken 
with morels in cream sauce that Sally Darr used to prepare years ago 
at La Tulipe, the highly regarded restaurant in Greenwich Village, 
N.Y., what difference does it make? In fact, when it comes to morels 
and certain other varieties, especially porcini, there is an advantage 
in using the dried ones because the liquid that results from soaking 
them for 30 minutes or longer can be used in the cooking to intensify 
the mushroom flavor. Reduce it, and add it to a beurre blanc, a red-wine 
sauce or a vinaigrette, for example. When soaked, dried porcini and 
other kinds of boletus mushrooms yield an essence that has a deliciously 
intense earthiness. Dried porcini and cepes lack the rich, buttery 
texture of plump, freshly gathered ones. But it's difficult to find 
them fresh, so where flavor counts, as in a risotto, dried will do 
fine. My mother often tossed some dried Polish mushrooms, which are 
a boletus variety similar to cepes and porcini, into soups, barley 
and kasha dishes and stews. The Chinese pantry, which probably contains 
more dried ingredients than that of any other cuisine, includes black 
tree ears, a kind of fungus used in some soups and dishes like moo 
shu pork. These are only available dried. Certain mushrooms, like 
oyster mushrooms and chanterelles, are definitely not as good in the 
dried form as the fresh. Dried oyster mushrooms turn leathery when 
reconstituted and have very little taste. Dried chanterelles are often 
woody no matter how long they are soaked, and lack the lovely fruitiness 
of the fresh. But black trumpets, called trompette de la mort (trumpet 
of death) in French, a more delicate (and perfectly safe) mushroom, 
are fine to use dried. It takes about 30 minutes to reconstitute dried 
mushrooms by soaking them in warm water. (For Chinese black mushrooms, 
black tea is an excellent soaking medium.) If you plan to use the 
liquid in a recipe, it may require straining through a fine sieve, 
a cloth or a paper coffee filter. After soaking, the mushrooms should 
be patted dry on paper towels. For some varieties, like shiitake, 
the woody stems must be cut off and discarded. And you can even make 
your own dried mushrooms. When you buy fresh ones, store them in an 
open box or basket in the refrigerator so that air can circulate; 
otherwise they will rot and may molder. If properly stored, they will 
dry out, darken and shrivel over a period of days or weeks. They will 
not have the eye appeal to use in a salad, but treasure them for cooking. 
And if you are an experienced forager and find you have gathered more 
wood ear, puffball or fairy ring mushrooms than you can use, drying 
is the best way to preserve them. Dried mushrooms will keep indefinitely 
in air-tight containers, and tossing in some whole black peppercorns 
may reduce the possibility of insect infestation. A few ounces of 
dried mushrooms will cost $2 to $5. And talk about versatile: I once 
added a few feather-light packages of dried morels to the backpacking 
supplies my husband and son took with them hiking in the wilds of 
Utah. Campfire risotto, not baked beans, was on their menu. ROAST 
CHICKEN WITH MORELS Adapted from Sally Darr Time: 2{ hours 2 ounces 
dried morels 3 tablespoons unsalted butter { cup heavy cream Salt 
and freshly ground black pepper to taste 1 3{-pound chicken \ cup 
dry white wine 1 cup chicken stock } cup creme fraiche 1 teaspoon 
lemon juice. 1. Place the morels in a bowl, cover with warm water, 
and soak for 1 hour. Rinse, and pat dry. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees. 
2. Melt 1 tablespoon of the butter in a medium-size skillet over medium 
heat, add the morels, and saute 5 minutes. Add the cream, and reduce 
it by half. Season with salt and pepper. 3. Rub the chicken inside 
and out with most of the remaining butter (save a teaspoon or so), 
and season with salt and pepper. Spoon the morel mixture into the 
cavity, tuck the wingtips in back, and tie the legs together. Use 
the remaining butter to grease a baking dish or roasting pan just 
large enough to hold the chicken, one that can later be used on top 
of the stove. Place the chicken in it, and roast for 45 minutes. Turn 
the chicken breast-side-down, and roast for 15 minutes more, then 
turn it breast-side-up, and roast 5 minutes longer. Transfer the chicken 
to a carving board. 4. Pour most of the fat from the baking dish, 
and place the dish over medium-high heat. Pour in the wine, and cook, 
stirring, until the wine is reduced to a glaze. Pour in the chicken 
stock, reduce the liquid by half, then strain it into a skillet. Spoon 
the morel mixture from the cavity of the chicken, and add it to the 
skillet, along with the creme fraiche and any chicken juices from 
the carving board. Simmer about 5 minutes, until the sauce is smooth 
and creamy. Season to taste with salt and pepper, and add the lemon 
juice. 5. Cut the chicken into serving pieces, boning the breast sections, 
and arrange on a warm platter. Spoon the morel sauce over it, and 
serve. Yield: 4 servings. RISOTTO WITH DRIED PORCINI Time: 1 hour 
2 ounces dried porcini mushrooms 5 cups chicken or vegetable stock 
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 3 tablespoons unsalted butter 
{ cup chopped onion 3 large cloves garlic, sliced thin 1{ cups arborio 
rice { cup dry white wine Salt and freshly ground black pepper to 
taste 1 tablespoon chopped flat-leaf parsley Freshly grated Parmesan 
cheese. 1. Place the mushrooms in a bowl, cover with lukewarm water, 
and soak for 20 minutes. Drain, and pat dry, then cut into 1-inch 
pieces. 2. In a saucepan bring the stock to a bare simmer. 3. In a 
large, heavy saucepan, heat the oil and 2 tablespoons of the butter. 
Add the onion and garlic, and cook over medium-low heat until the 
onion is translucent. Stir in the rice. Cook, stirring, about 5 minutes, 
until the rice is well-coated with the butter and begins to whiten. 
4. Add the wine to the rice mixture, stir, then add about } cup of 
the hot stock. Cook, stirring, until it has almost been absorbed. 
Stir in the mushrooms. 5. Continue adding stock, about { cup at a 
time, stirring and adding more as the rice absorbs the stock. Regulate 
the heat so that the rice and stock cook at a steady simmer. After 
about 15 minutes, the rice should have swelled and become somewhat 
tender. Continue adding stock for another few minutes, as needed, 
until the rice is plump, offers slight resistance to the bite. The 
mixture will now be thickened and creamy. 6. Stir in the remaining 
tablespoon of butter, season to taste with salt and pepper, and dust 
with parsley. Serve with Parmesan cheese on the side. Yield: 4 to 
6 servings. CHINESE BLACK MUSHROOMS AND SNOW PEAS IN OYSTER SAUCE 
Time: 45 minutes 1{ ounces dried Chinese black mushrooms (shiitakes) 
6 ounces snow peas { teaspoon cornstarch \ teaspoon sugar 2 teaspoons 
rice vinegar 2 tablespoons Chinese oyster sauce 1 teaspoon soy sauce 
1 tablespoon peanut oil { tablespoon finely minced garlic. 1. Place 
the mushrooms in a bowl, and cover with warm water. Soak for 30 minutes. 
Remove the strings from snow peas. 2. Mix the cornstarch and sugar 
together in a small bowl, add the vinegar, and stir until smooth. 
Add the oyster sauce and soy sauce, and stir. When the mushrooms are 
soft, snip off the stems. Dry the caps. Add \ cup of the soaking liquid 
to the oyster-sauce mixture. 3. Heat the oil in a wok or skillet. 
Add the garlic, and stir-fry for a minute or so, then add the mushrooms. 
Stir-fry over medium heat for about 5 minutes, add the snow peas, 
and continue to stir-fry until they are bright green and tender, about 
3 minutes. Add the oyster-sauce mixture, and continue to stir until 
the sauce is smooth and coats the vegetables. Serve at once. Yield: 
2 to 4 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>