<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0326 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Walk inside any major department store, and the troubles that have 
torn the fabric of the fashion industry are evident. In recent weeks, 
Isaac Mizrahi closed its doors, and Anne Klein has been put on the 
block after losing money for several years. A shakeout among small 
design companies has left men's, women's and children's clothing departments 
dominated by a handful of big designers such as Tommy Hilfiger, Donna 
Karan and Ralph Lauren. And as smaller designers close their doors, 
the big fashion companies command even more influence with retailers 
and gain more space for their clothing in stores. ``When you walk 
into the stores, you can walk onto a floor and you can notice immediately 
who controls that floor,'' said Mari Harkins, a senior director of 
merchandising at Donna Karan International Inc. The slump in the fashion 
industry is also evident in Bryant Park in midtown Manhattan, where 
the American fashion industry's latest showcase of women's-wear collections 
is under way. The roster for this year's shows is littered with cancellations 
from companies that have fallen as well as those that decided to forgo 
the hundreds of thousands of dollars required to put on a show. Earlier 
this year, Kenar Enterprises Ltd. filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy 
protection and Andrea Jovine shut its doors. Todd Oldham has closed 
his wholesale collection business. Adrienne Vittadini has resigned 
from her namesake company, now owned by Marisa Christina Inc. And 
Nautica Enterprises will end a licensing agreement with Bernard Chaus 
Inc. for its women's business, leaving the future of the line uncertain. 
The thinning ranks of independent designers stems to some degree from 
a gradual erosion in consumer confidence. With signs of an economic 
slowdown ahead, shoppers have been reining in their free-spending 
ways. But the industry shakeout is also a ripple effect from an earlier 
consolidation among department stores that weakened fashion's grip 
on retailing. After waves of mergers in the 1980s and '90s, there 
are now only three major department-store chains: May Co., Federated 
Department Stores and Dillard's. Department stores are putting more 
pressure on fashion companies to assume a greater share of the risk 
for selling their products, helping to guarantee profits for the store. 
Department stores keep inventories low, but they require shipments 
of new styles more often and have reduced the numbers of styles they 
carry. Fashion companies often bear the brunt of the expense for ensuring 
that their products are displayed appropriately on selling floors, 
and they may be responsible for covering a portion of salesclerks' 
salaries. ``Department stores are trying to add more value and cut 
costs substantially,'' said an investment banker at Merrill Lynch 
&AMP; Co. To increase their influence over retailers, Donna Karan, 
Tommy Hilfiger and Ralph Lauren have expanded into lower-priced lines. 
Discount chains have added to the competitive environment by introducing 
their own designer products. As a result, small designers, especially 
those that link couture to mainstream fashion in a product known as 
a bridge line, are under intense pressure to justify their existence. 
``The apparel industry is a microcosm of the big picture'' of the 
economy, said Bud Konheim, chief executive of Nicole Miller, a company 
once synonymous with a must-have, little black dress. ``It's survival 
of the fittest, and it offers tremendous opportunities for those who 
know how to survive.'' Indeed, the $85 billion women's apparel market 
has been been relatively flat, with revenue growing just 12 percent 
in the last five years, according to Tactical Retail Monitor, an industry 
newsletter. For many fashion companies, that means the only way to 
gain market share has been to grab it from other companies, and the 
stiff competition has caused designers to cut prices this year by 
about 30 percent, retail analysts and executives said. Even large, 
publicly held fashion companies have not been immune, and their share 
prices have suffered this year. While some companies have increased 
their presence in stores and have seen gains _ often, however, through 
lower prices _ investors have been resolutely downbeat about the prospects 
for consumer spending on fashion. Shares of Donna Karan, for example, 
are down more than 41 percent this year; they fell Tuesday after the 
company reported third-quarter earnings that were below Wall Street 
estimates and warned that it would only break even for the year. Other 
apparel and fashion stocks have been weak. Liz Claiborne is down almost 
25 percent for the year and Jones Apparel is off 13 percent. Faring 
slightly better is Polo Ralph Lauren, down about 9 percent, while 
Tommy Hilfiger is ahead of the pack, with its stock up about 32 percent 
this year. But there are smaller, independent design companies that 
have thrived lately, in many cases by rethinking the way they do business 
to compete in leaner times. Companies such as Nicole Miller and Tahari 
Ltd., a bridge sportswear company, are streamlining inventories and 
speeding up production to respond more quickly to changing tastes 
and to eliminate the need to cut prices to sell slow-moving products. 
Others, like the women's suit maker Kasper ASL Ltd., are scrambling 
to consolidate to gain more clout with retailers and broaden their 
product lines. More important, they and other companies such as BCBG 
Max Azria and Garfield &AMP; Marks are trying to wrest themselves 
from the control of the department-store giants by showcasing their 
fashions in small specialty shops or in their own retail stores. Selling 
in smaller shops means giving up a potentially larger sales volume, 
but it also frees them from the pressures of slashing prices to compete. 
Nicole Miller now collects 80 percent of its sales through specialty 
stores. The change has given the company more control of its supply, 
so that it can quickly curb production of unpopular items and limit 
price cuts, Konheim, Nicole Miller's chief, said. For Max Azria, the 
success of its own stores has given it increased leverage with department 
stores. With 70 retail stores in the United States and 12 overseas, 
sales at the company have jumped to a projected $280 million from 
about $1.3 million nine years ago. This week, Max Azria fashions are 
featured in several display windows at the flagship Bloomingdale's 
store in Manhattan. And the company expects to increase its selling 
space in the department store by about 50 percent next year, said 
Max Azria, the president and chief designer. ``People think this business 
is an easy business and that anybody can do it,'' he said. ``But I 
am a very creative businessman and a very creative fashion designer. 
When people think the two specialties are not possible, it's because 
they cannot do it.'' The harsh business environment means that a hot 
young designer can no longer expect to follow in the footsteps of 
Calvin Klein and start a design company that quickly becomes a licensing 
powerhouse. Instead, there has been a growing trend of designers for 
hire, which lets designers maintain their own independent business 
while offering their creative talent to other established firms. Fashion 
companies, too, have looked outside their ranks for designers to bolster 
their lines. Tse, known for its luxury line of cashmere clothing, 
chose an outside designer, Hussein Chalayan, who has his own successful 
line, to design a new sportswear line, Tse New York. ``The rules have 
to evolve,'' said Rebecca Shafer, creative director for Tse. ``When 
you're not open to new rules, you might get your company into trouble.'' 
The new rules may include expanding into new markets and distinguishing 
their products by the use of innovative fabrics and designs. The upscale 
sportswear designer Yeohlee Teng, for instance, is using new fabrics 
to create an entire line that is stain-resistant and water-repellent. 
And last year, Elie Tahari and his partner, Andrew Rosen, a former 
Anne Klein executive, started a new company and a contemporary sportswear 
line, Theory, which uses Lycra to create a line of men's and women's 
clothing. Theory's sales have tripled this year. The creation of the 
line has solidified Tahari's move into the realm of casual sportswear 
and away from his 1970s career suits for women, which earned him the 
nickname ``king of the jacket.'' Tahari has also been successful in 
using the quick manufacturing turnaround that is a hallmark of its 
contemporary sportswear in the company's broader fashion line. Recently, 
for example, the company noticed that the new deep-pocketed cargo 
pants it had been late to take to market were selling well. As a result, 
the company quickly produced 2,000 additional pairs and had them in 
stores within two months. Despite the leaner times overall, there 
has not been much consolidation in the fashion industry. But that 
may be changing, according to investment bankers at Merrill Lynch. 
Companies like Liz Claiborne, which owns the Dana Buchman bridge line, 
and Jones Apparel, which produces Ralph Lauren's moderately priced 
Lauren sportswear line, have used acquisitions to build their businesses 
and edge smaller companies out of department-store space. Now other 
companies are joining in. When news surfaced late last month about 
a potential sale of Anne Klein &AMP; Co., another well-known bridge 
sportswear line that has been struggling for years, at least three 
companies showed interest in buying it, in part because of its lucrative 
licensing potential. Bigger companies have a better chance of withstanding 
the rough road ahead that some analysts predict for the industry. 
Josie Esquivel, an analyst with Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, forecasts 
that apparel sales will grow about 1 percent to 2 percent this year, 
down from an earlier forecast of about 3 percent to 4 percent growth. 
Contributing to the slowdown is a perceived lack of freshness among 
the apparel industry's current offerings, analysts say. ``There's 
not all that much that's new,'' Ms. Esquivel said. But fashion is 
capable of surprises. There will always be independent designers who 
will catch the public's eye, and some may end up on a different path 
from that of Mizrahi, who says he plans to pursue a career in another 
fickle industry, the movie business. ``If people see something at 
the right price and it's a product that they need, they'll buy it,'' 
Ms. Esquivel said. ``Department stores, even in a slowdown, don't 
close their doors. They tend to focus on those suppliers they can 
count on.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>