<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0422 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Sarah Korein, who acquired some of the choicest real estate in Manhattan 
through bare-knuckle tactics cloaked by grandmotherly charm, died 
on Thursday at the North Division of Beth Israel Medical Center. She 
was 93 and lived in Manhattan. The cause was congestive heart failure, 
said her daughter, Elysabeth Kleinhans, a lawyer who manages the real-estate 
business with other relatives. Even in a city where real estate is 
a popular obsession on a par with sports and soap operas, Mrs. Korein 
(KO-reen) was almost unknown outside professional circles _ exactly 
as she preferred it. Her name rarely appeared in public. And the face 
that she did present was more Dresden doll than Machiavellian negotiator. 
But buyers or sellers who assumed they were sitting across the table 
from sweetness and light did so at their peril. ``She was the toughest 
deal maker imaginable,'' said Mary Ann Tighe, executive managing director 
of Insignia/ESG, a real-estate brokerage and management concern. ``She 
squeezed out every last penny.'' Mrs. Korein could even profit from 
property she never owned. In the early 1960s, for instance, she put 
a $250,000 deposit on the Osborne Apartments, 205 West 57th St. Advised 
against consummating the purchase because the building had no long-term 
investment value, she had to figure a way out of the deal. So she 
reached out to a New York Times reporter to say that she planned to 
demolish the Osborne and replace it with a new tower, her son, Dr. 
Julius Korein, recalled. When tenants besieged her office the next 
day, she comforted them. ``I don't want to take anyone's home away,'' 
she insisted, offering to sell them the contract. They paid her $500,000, 
not only taking her off the hook but also leaving her $250,000 richer. 
``She certainly was one of the best negotiators I've ever met,'' said 
the developer William Zeckendorf Jr. ``Perhaps in the beginning, people 
didn't take her seriously enough. It didn't take them long to find 
out.'' A common story in the real-estate industry was that Mrs. Korein 
would keep different buyers in separate rooms and shuttle back and 
forth among the parties until she had extracted the terms she sought. 
``Even into her old age, everyone thought she was a charming, lovely 
little woman,'' her daughter said. ``Let me tell you, that's not where 
she was.'' Mrs. Korein's trophies speak for themselves. At her death, 
her properties _ either land alone or both land and building _ included 
Lever House, the modernist landmark at 390 Park Ave.; the old Equitable 
Building, 120 Broadway, a tower so gargantuan that it inspired New 
York's first zoning law in 1916, and One Penn Plaza on Seventh Avenue, 
between 33rd and 34th streets, the fifth-largest office building in 
the city. She also owned the Delmonico Hotel, 502 Park Ave.; the Swiss 
Center, 606 Fifth Ave.; and two apartment towers on Central Park South, 
Nos. 220 and 240, overlooking Columbus Circle. Mrs. Korein bought 
and sold the Beresford Apartments, 211 Central Park West; the former 
Croyden Hotel, 12 East 86th St.; the former Fifth Avenue Hotel, 24 
Fifth Ave.; and the Schwab House apartments, a full-block complex 
between West End Avenue and Riverside Drive, 73rd and 74th streets. 
The family will not estimate the size and value of her portfolio, 
and not only because owners are customarily loath to disclose such 
things (tax assessors read the newspapers). Rather, Mrs. Korein held 
a variety of positions with any number of partners, making it difficult 
to apportion her share. Whatever the bottom line, there was no question 
that she was wealthy and tough _ a ``great Realtor,'' in the words 
of Leona Helmsley, perhaps the only figure to whom she might immediately 
be likened. Ms. Tighe said Mrs. Korein was ``always an object of fascination, 
certainly to women coming up in the business, but even to men, because 
there was no one else of her gender who accomplished what she did 
when she did.'' But while both Mrs. Korein and Mrs. Helmsley were 
known for being as aggressive as necessary to survive in the male-dominated 
industry, there was a significant difference: Mrs. Korein created 
her portfolio from scratch. Sarah Rabinowitz was born in Germany and 
reared in Palestine, where she met Isidor Korein, a Hungarian engineer 
who arrived there after World War I. They married and immigrated to 
the United States in 1923. In 1931, for $6,000, the Koreins bought 
a six-story apartment house in Brooklyn _ not as an investment but 
so that family members would have a place to live rent-free. Their 
first substantial investment, in 1941, was a large apartment building 
at 8701 Shore Rd. in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn. To make the 
units more attractive, Mrs. Korein bought dozens of refrigerators 
and stored them in the building's emptied swimming pool. With the 
advent of World War II, refrigerator production virtually ended as 
industry retooled for military needs. So Mrs. Korein was able to sell 
the refrigerators at a high profit. And because of the shortage of 
apartments, she was able to rent the Shore Road building even without 
the new refrigerators. ``One of her major secrets was somehow being 
in the right place at the right time with the right goods,'' Ms. Kleinhans 
said. After the war and against her husband's wishes, Mrs. Korein 
pursued investment in Manhattan, beginning with 715 Park Ave., an 
apartment building on the southeast corner of 70th Street. In time, 
she advised Cardinal Francis Spellman, the archbishop of New York, 
on real estate, her children said. Mrs. Korein made use of the nonamortizing 
mortgage, under which she would pay slightly higher interest rates 
but nothing toward principal, thus freeing cash for further investments. 
By the time the loan itself came due, her properties typically had 
appreciated so much in value that Mrs. Korein could easily pay off 
the amount. ``All of her properties, without exception, did nothing 
but increase in value,'' said Andrew Singer, the chairman of Singer 
&AMP; Bassuk Organization, who arranged financing for Mrs. Korein 
over many years. Isidor Korein died in 1976. But even when he was 
alive, Mrs. Korein was the ``driving force,'' said Lawrence Friedland, 
the family's lawyer. In the 1960s, he recalled, Mrs. Korein was about 
to sign a contract for the Beresford. At the last minute, her partners 
balked, fearing the risk of buying such a big building in what was 
then a rough-and-tumble neighborhood. She signed the contract anyway 
and more than doubled her money when she sold the property a few years 
later, Friedland said. Perhaps Mrs. Korein's biggest false step was 
a foray into development in 1972, when she built an apartment house, 
the Elysabeth, 35 East 38th St. It was not a success and she did not 
build again. Besides Ms. Kleinhans and Julius Korein, both of Manhattan, 
Mrs. Korein is survived by her sister, Esther Kessler of Naples, Fla.; 
four grandchildren and nine great-grandchildren. ``Into her 90s _ 
and I'm talking this year _ she would ask about cap rates and internal 
rates of return,'' Ms. Tighe said. ``She never lost her fascination 
with the business.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>