<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0385 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gov. John Rowland of Connecticut, a Republican, rode an economic recovery 
and a listless opposition to win re-election Tuesday, defeating U.S. 
Rep. Barbara Kennelly throughout the state, including her own congressional 
district. The governor, who has become more moderate with each year 
in office, wanted to use his victory speech to reach across party 
lines. ``We are fiscally conservative, but we are aggressively inclusive,'' 
he said in prepared remarks. ``There's room in our tent for anyone 
who wants to work with us to make Connecticut a better place to live.'' 
Rowland said the overwhelming result was a mandate to continue pursuing 
his agenda of lower taxes and less government. ``The outcome of this 
election has nothing to do with anything Congresswoman Kennelly did 
wrong,'' he said. ``The outcome of this election is a testament to 
what we've done right for the last four years. The best campaign ad 
is job performance.'' After less than 10 percent of the vote had been 
counted, Mrs. Kennelly conceded the race. She drew cheers speaking 
to supporters at the Arch Street Tavern in her hometown of Hartford 
when she referred to the more moderate stands that Rowland took during 
the campaign, and urged him to remain the governor he had been for 
the last year. ``Governor Rowland,'' she said, ``you promised in your 
campaign that you would put education as a priority. You promised 
that open land was important to you. You promised all the things I've 
lived for. And I say to you, governor: Keep those promises.'' Tuesday 
was the first time since 1944 that Connecticut re-elected a Republican 
governor. The breadth of Rowland's victory was especially impressive 
because Connecticut had historically voted Democratic. Now, 40 percent 
of the state's registered voters are unaffiliated, 35 percent are 
Democrats and 25 percent are Republican. With poll after poll showing 
Rowland swamping Mrs. Kennelly, the campaign had all but disappeared 
from public view in recent weeks, as Rowland tried to sit on his lead 
and Mrs. Kennelly sought to avoid questions about her lackluster campaign. 
As Rowland voted at a Hartford school on Tuesday, groups of supporters 
for the two candidates began chanting and elections officers struggled 
to separate them. ``This is the most activity we've had in a year,'' 
he quipped. Rowland, who at 41 is the nation's youngest governor, 
is a schmoozer who thrives under the television lights. Mrs. Kennelly, 
62, did not seem comfortable with the demands of a modern campaign, 
and admitted frankly that she preferred the comfort of Capitol Hill, 
where she has represented the 1st District for eight terms. Her district, 
which encompasses Greater Hartford, joined the state in voting overwhelmingly 
for Rowland. As she conceded, Mrs. Kennelly alternately smiled and 
looked grave as she thanked her family and listed the issues that 
she said caused her to embark on such an uphill journey. ``I considered 
it a privilege for being allowed to be the standard bearer of the 
Democratic party,'' she said. ``A real privilege. And I tried to do 
the best job possible, and I tried to speak for the families of Connecticut. 
``I brought the issues into the light, where they belong.'' Democrats 
once had great hope for Mrs. Kennelly, who is a daughter of John Bailey, 
a former Democratic National Committee chairman, and is the widow 
of James Kennelly, a former speaker of the state House of Representatives. 
So much suspense had built up about her potential run that in September 
1997, she made her announcement by calling a news conference at the 
Old State House and tearing aside the shroud on a royal-blue sign 
that said simply, ``Yes!'' Signs of trouble appeared quickly, though, 
as even Democratic audiences found Mrs. Kennelly to be an uninspiring 
and confusing speaker. A small but powerful group of Democratic leaders 
had convinced her to run, then did little to help her as her campaign 
faltered. Rowland, whose own polls had shown him to be vulnerable 
on education and other issues just a year ago, used this winter's 
session of the state Legislature to methodically saw planks off Mrs. 
Kennelly's platform. He began advertising on television in January, 
building a rosy reputation, while Mrs. Kennelly stayed off the campaign 
trail, saying she was raising money. The icing on Rowland's cake was 
an income-tax rebate that began arriving in mailboxes in July, helping 
to salve voter anger at his failure to win repeal of the state income 
tax, which was the signature promise of his 1994 campaign. This year's 
campaign was notable for the dearth of promises or attacks. Rowland 
talked up the recovering economy, which he called ``the Connecticut 
comeback,'' and said he would continue to push for tax cuts, but offered 
few specifics. He said his main mission in his second term would be 
to revitalize the struggling cores of the state's biggest cities, 
but even that amounts to monitoring and promoting projects that have 
already begun. At various times, Mrs. Kennelly promoted a plan to 
reign in health-maintenance organizations; a 10 percent cut in property 
taxes, and a college scholarship for youngsters who get top grades 
in high school. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>