<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981103.0335 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States is planning to provide millions of tons of food 
to help Russians stave off hunger and endure a bitter winter. American 
officials said Tuesday that at least 3.1 million metric tons of food 
would be provided under an accord being negotiated with Moscow. Much 
of the food would be provided free. The rest would be sold with generous 
long-term financing. The promise of American aid comes at a time when 
Russia is suffering from its worst harvest in 45 years. Grain production 
is down because of this summer's drought. Livestock production has 
also declined. At the same time, a plummeting ruble has led to a devastating 
cutback in imports of food. Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov has reported 
that food imports in September were at one-sixth of their normal levels. 
Western experts say Russia may have enough food to survive the winter 
but that the country's food reserves will be dangerously depleted 
by spring. There are also fears that some of Russia's remote regions 
will be cut off from needed supplies and that Russia's poor lack the 
money for an adequate diet. After initially denying that Russia was 
looking for food aid, the Kremlin has done exactly that. Primakov 
asked for assistance during a recent meeting with the head of the 
European Union. And in recent days, Russian and American officials 
have been quietly working out the terms of a food aid package in Moscow. 
Clinton Administration officials declined to publicly discuss the 
terms of the deal, saying details were being worked out. But a senior 
American official, who declined to be identified in print, said that 
Washington planned to provide at least 3.1 million metric tons of 
food. Under the American plan, 1.5 million metric tons of wheat would 
be provided free under a program in which the U.S. government purchases 
excess wheat from American farmers for distribution to needy nations. 
Another 1.5 million metric tons of wheat, soy beans and other commodities 
would be provided and financed by loans at favorable terms. And 100,000 
tons of food would be given in the form of direct aid to charitable 
organizations. The sales are expected to benefit to American farmers. 
Another American official described the 3.1 million metric ton shipment 
as a ``floor'' and not an upper limit. The White House is expected 
to issue a statement soon, making clear the American intention to 
help. Still, the negotiations have not been easy. The talks involve 
thorny questions of fairness, as well as finance. Haunted by reports 
of widespread corruption in Russia, Washington wants to insure that 
the food reaches those who need it and that Russian government officials 
and speculators do not enrich themselves at the expense of the American 
taxpayer. Washington has insisted that profits the Russian government 
receives from the sale of American food be directed to meeting the 
nation's pressing social needs. But Russian officials have resisted 
this demand, complaining that Washington is trying to control both 
the distribution of the food and the money that Russia expects to 
receive from its sale. Instead of financing social programs, Russian 
officials have said they want to use some of the profits to prop up 
its agricultural sector. Gennadi Kulik, the Russian deputy prime minister 
who is in charge of agriculture, said Tuesday that the American shipment 
of food should be used to ``help stabilize the Russian agrarian sector.'' 
Until Russia's latest financial crisis, at least 40 percent of the 
food Russians consumed was imported. In Moscow and St. Petersburg, 
the percentage was even higher. Kulik told the Russian news agency 
Interfax that the two sides were close to agreement on a scheme that 
would allow the Kremlin to use some proceeds from the sale of the 
food to support Russian farmers and the nation's agribusiness industry. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>