<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981103.2000.2904 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Lisa Mullens. In a courtroom in Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia today, the prosecution opened its case against Anwar Ebreheem. 
Until a few months ago, Anwar was assumed to be the eventual successor 
to Prime Minister Mahateer Mohammed. That was until Mahateer had him 
arrested on charges of corruption and illegal sex acts. Anwar denies 
the charges and says they were cooked up by his political opponents. 
The BBC's Simon Ingram is in Kuala Lumpur. Can you tell us first about 
the case there? Now, we know that international observers were excluded 
from the courtroom yesterday. What happened in today's proceedings? 
Well things went pretty smoothly today. A number of foreign observers 
who had been, uh, found difficulties in getting into the court were 
admitted today. When the proceedings got underway, we saw for the 
first time the former head of the Malaysian Police Special Branch. 
He, it is alleged by the prosecution, has first-hand evidence and 
proof that Anwar Ebreheem attempted to use the police in order to 
suppress evidence of illicit homosexual relationships which he was 
supposed to have had. And at this point, Anwar Ebreheem insists the 
charges are trumped up, and he has not, so far, been a shrinking violet 
in this case, anything but it seems. Uh, not at all, no. He says that 
he is the victim of a political conspiracy, um, which was trumped 
out essentially because he became too much of a threat to the prime 
minister. That's what he says. I think, though, that, uh, greater 
concern will be raised over the way in which the case is being conducted, 
the attitude of the judge which seems to be to dismiss almost out 
of hand every objection raised by the defense, and I think that it 
is, uh - it is that which has deepened the concerns of those who suspect 
that what we're really witnessing here is something of a political 
show trial intended, come what may, to doom Anwar Ebreheem's political 
ambitions. Simon Ingram, as the international community watches what 
happens in Malaysia, the stock market there is near junk status. How 
does this seem to be affecting Malaysia's standing internationally? 
Well, I think that, uh, this trial has clearly attracted a great deal 
of adverse international attention for Malaysia. We've had expressions 
of concern coming from around the region and also from the United 
States, uh, very strong views expressed in Congress and, indeed, by 
President Clinton, himself, so I think that it hasn't done any good 
at all, particularly in the sense that it's come in conjunction with 
the decision by the authorities to impose strict currency controls 
which have effectively cut off the Malaysian currency, the ringgit, 
and the stock exchange from the outside world. So all of this taken 
together, I think, has lowered perceptions of Malaysia and has meant 
that in the eyes of international markets, it is a considerably greater 
risk than it was, um, say some months ago. Meanwhile, President Clinton 
is going to be in the capital there with a large number of other world 
leaders in about two weeks for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation 
Forum. Is that, or the prospect of that, having any kind of impact 
on the situation now? Well, clearly it has. Um, the authorities, I 
think, would probably view it, um, with rather ambivalent feelings. 
On the one hand, uh, while it is an occasion for Malaysia to bask 
in world attention as the host of such an important meeting like this, 
I think also Dr. Mahathir, the prime minister, must be rather concerned 
at the sort of, uh, expressions of, uh, dismay that he will be hearing 
on a one-on-one basis over the way in which Anwar Ebreheem has been 
treated. The BBC's Simon Ingram speaking to us from Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia. Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>