<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981103.2000.3125 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The traditional throat singers of Tula are so well known around the 
world that their talent is yielding dividends for other lesser-known 
Russian musicians. It's all part of the master plan of a small artist 
management group and record label in Moscow. THE WORLD's Marco Herman 
explains. The well-run talent machine at Moscow's Green Wave Music 
Company has managed to slick up even traditionalists like Hun Hor 
Tu. Green Wave emerged from a college culture and ecology project 
started in 1986 by Alexander Cheparuken. I never imagined that it 
would turn into a world music business, let's say. Any business in 
a capitalist way was still virtually unknown and still kind of. When 
the Soviet Union collapsed, Cheparuken had to find work. A friend 
in the states asked if he could help arrange a tour of Hun Hor Tu, 
and the ensemble became a staple in world music concerts around the 
world, doing more than 150 gigs a year. This group became kind of 
locomotion for a lot of projects because this group, I mean, Throat 
Singers of Tula is the most successful, and that's why somehow their 
work and my work with them gives me some financial possibilities to 
invest throughout - to other projects. Different musicians from traditional 
Georgian, Polofoni, uh to that funk, whatever madness, you know, in 
the medieval treasures of early Orthodox music, and uh, kind of, um, 
wild Ukrainian folk funk. One of Alexander Cheparukin's more recent 
discoveries is a Moscow band called Farlanders. The five members range 
from 21 to 46 and have interests that range from traditional Russian 
woodwind music to jazz rock. What I think is quite unique in this 
band that they compose a lot of songs, uh, and you can feel in these 
compositions influences of both, like, very old Russian pre-orthodox 
paganistic kind of folklore, whatever, with the Jewish, Oriental, 
clasmire-like, um, clarinet webs and moods, you know. It's quite unusual. 
Farlanders are like kitchen chefs who've discovered a pantry full 
of different flavors and are cooking them up with pretty good results. 
That's also a metaphor for the artists and repertoire that Alexander 
Cheparukin is mixing together. I just discovered that there is kind 
of vacuum place in Russia for the person who is not trying to make 
kind of big money immediately with kind of, you know, the money manipulations 
or, let's say, promoting pop music material, but trying to find a 
real, genuine music which represents tradition of Russia and many 
other ethnic parts of Russia, I mean the other republics and, you 
know, ethnic groups in Russia. Russia's genuine music is now getting 
re-worked and reinvigorated by bands like Farlanders and the elastic 
years of manager, Alexander Cheparukin. For THE WORLD, this is Marco 
Herman. Music from Russian band, Farlander, puts the wraps on this 
edition of the program. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>