<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981103.2000.0668 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Baghdad today, Iraqis woke up to read the official line in their 
morning newspaper. A front-page editorial said, "We will not back 
down, whatever the sacrifices would be." Hundreds of people marched 
through the Iraqi capital today carrying coffins of children that 
they said died due to the trade sanctions. The BBC's Richard Downs 
is in Baghdad now. Richard, the head of UNSCOM, Richard Butler, has 
said that this is the most serious crisis since the Gulf War. Is there 
a sense of urgency there in Baghdad. To be honest, I would say no, 
there isn't that sense of urgency in Baghdad. One has got to remember 
that this is a society which is seriously deprived of any information 
about what's actually happening in the wider world, so among the general 
population, no, there isn't that sense of urgency. I think among the 
top leadership, uh, there is a sense that they've provoked a fairly 
serious confrontation with the U.N., and I suppose they prepared for 
the consequences. When I asked Tariq Aziz this - he's the deputy prime 
minister, obviously - he said yes, of course we're prepared for the 
consequences. We're a very old country; we have a very noble history, 
and, uh, we're prepared to ride out any storm that may come our way. 
Does it seem at all at this point as if Baghdad might be holding back 
on some of its tough talk, that perhaps its bark is worse than its 
bite, since it is allowing some kind of activity at this point? It's 
difficult to read. On the one hand, you have this very angry and bellicose 
rhetoric coming out of Baghdad, but on the other hand, you do have 
these feelers coming out. The top advisor to President Saddam Hussein 
published an interview in one of the most influential weekly, uh, 
magazines here basically saying that, m - try to open up a line of 
communication to the secretary general - to Kofi Annan. It's clearly 
that the Iraqi leadership believes that they have some leverage with 
the secretary general where they don't with the security council, 
and, uh, they've been trying to open this line of communication with 
Kofi Annan. I think so far unsuccessfully, I spoke just a few moments 
ago to Praka Shah, who is the U.N. Secretary-General's Representative 
here - the special representative in Iraq, and he said, you know, 
we're only here to fulfill the mandate of the U.N. Security Council. 
The secretary general is only there to fulfill that particular mandate. 
There's no question of us mediating or getting involved at this stage. 
They've got to operate on the basis of what the security council says, 
and I suppose that may be a bit of a rebuff, um, to the Iraqis at 
the moment, but at the same time, we're very early in this, uh, crisis. 
I think we're only in a few days now. Um, all the elements are in 
place for a fairly serious confrontation. As he pointed out, Richard 
Butler believes it to be the most serious confrontation between the 
two parties, but it's early days. At the same time, I wonder if that's 
the prevailing view among the people that you've spoken with there, 
or is it a more widespread view? I think the view in - in Baghdad 
is listen, we've had sanctions for eight years. We've had enough. 
We've cooperated, at least that's what they believe, with the UNSCOM 
team. We've gotten nowhere. We have the second largest proven reserves 
of oil in the world. We should be a country that's able to feed its 
children and its people. We're a country that should be able to look 
after our own interests. It's time for the sanctions to go. That is 
the predominant feeling here, and you've got to have to sympathy with 
it to a certain extent. This is a country, after all, where something 
like a million people suffer at once - have suffered over the last 
three years from malnutrition of one sort or another. It is a very 
serious situation, especially when people are very well aware that 
they sit on, you know, huge amounts of wealth in the form of oil. 
They could be pumping it. They could be a rich country. Many people 
would say well, that it's their own fault. Their leadership here has 
brought about this terrible situation, but that's called comfort for 
people who are living in terrible conditions. The BBC's Richard Downs 
speaking to us from Baghdad. Thank you for the update, Richard. Thanks 
very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>