<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981103.2000.2302 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
THE WORLD's roving reporter, Boris Maximoff, recently went on another 
of his arduous, demanding assignments to Jamaica. During his visit 
to the Caribbean island nation, Boris observed a land and a people 
of many colors. Jamaica is a seriously mixed country. People on the 
island come in every conceivable shape and skin shade, and all these 
paradations are happily discussed over dinner to the accompanying 
chorus of singing frogs. Color in Jamaica is a very complex matter. 
Willard Perkins, a very popular radio commentator in Kingston and 
a long-term observer of his country. Historically in Jamaica, the 
terminology would have been confusing to a stranger. There was no 
straight color in as in the United States, for example. In Jamaica, 
people are not divided into black and white. That seems too boring 
and somehow too final, so what do people call each other? Brown, high 
brown, mulatto which becomes malatta. Dindoos. Which is what? Dindoos. 
A dunda, strictly speaking, is, uh, an Albina, but a person who is 
not an Albina, the sort of ginger-colored hair. That would be described 
as a Dindoos, right? All that, of course, is fascinating if you are 
a compiler of dictionaries, but these words also carry meaning. You 
start to notice a vague correlation between these terms, between the 
pigmentation of the person, and social status. The present Prime Minister 
of Jamaica, P.J. Paterson, first elected in 1992, was the very first 
black leader of the country. Until now, independent Jamaica was ruled 
either by what the locals call high brown people or outright whites, 
so what's going on? Carolyn Cooper is the specialist on Jamaica music 
and literature at the University of West Indies in Kingston. The color 
is definitely more complicated than in the states. It's not a black 
or white issue. There's a sense in which, um, in Jamaica class is 
factor, you know, so that money can make black people brown, you know. 
It's also hair type. It's also, you know, the family connections and 
all of that that gives a person a sense of, you know, power or lack 
of it in this society. So, is Jamaica yet another example of the age-old 
story of color- based oppression or something else? Willard Perkins. 
There are residues of prejudice, and there's a lot of talk in Jamaica 
about - about race, but I - I don't really think that this is a country 
that is - is much threatened by color prejudice. I don't think so. 
As usual in the West Indies, things are not what they seem at first 
glance. Blacks are in positions of power in the professions and business. 
Light browns and whites can be found at the bottom of the society. 
In other words, the strength correlation between the way people look 
and what they are socially seems to have vanished or almost so, and 
yet, color-coded language is used constantly in Jamaica by everybody, 
as if it means something. How come? Carolyn Cooper. Jamaica is not 
a society in which whiteness is valorized. It's really brownness, 
and there's a sense that the brown middle ground is ideal. The ideal 
of brownness is a fine thing, but like any ideal, it makes people 
do strange things. Take a black lawyer, for example. Guess whom he 
will marry on average. That lawyer will carry with him or her the 
memory of being black in the negative sense, so even when he or she 
quote/unquote arrives, does the fact that he has arrived make him 
feel that he should only marry a light-skinned woman? So if you are 
trapped in that notion that the light-skinned woman is ideal, how 
far have you come from that sense of if there was an oppressed person 
because you can't marry somebody who looks like you because, to some 
degree, you have rejected yourself. The rejection of blackness not 
only persists in Jamaica. There seems to be certain resurgence lately. 
Carolyn Cooper mentioned to me that in the last few years, skin bleaching 
has become popular again and not only among women. So off to a beauty 
salon I went. Nobody was being bleached at that moment, but the owner, 
Carrie Spencer, assures me that tons of people are doing it now. Everybody 
is there. They're both male and female. Everybody is trying to get 
their skin. I guess the European and the American White is trying 
to get darker because they will be sitting in the sun for hours, but 
- and then the darker people are trying to get lighter, so I guess 
God must be there trying to make up his mind here. You know, who should 
I make white, and who should I make black? You know, it is quite funny. 
Well, who knows? Brown just may be ideal in the end except that ideals 
are just that, ideal. But in Jamaica, the allegedly perfect brown-skin 
color is treated as if it just may be obtained. It's become a symbol, 
a symbol of status, a symbol of normality. The chromatic scale used 
as a social marker. Why not, after all, except that most of us, and 
most Jamaicans too, cannot change the look we're born with, but the 
beauty salons are doing a brisk business anyway selling dreams. For 
THE WORLD, this is Boris Maximoff. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>