<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981103.2000.2670 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Time now for the answer to our geography quiz. Our mystery city is 
home to one of Australia's biggest horse races. The competition which 
took place today has been running for more than a century. The city 
that's been hosting the race for the past 138 years is Melbourne, 
and from Australia, THE WORLD's Margaret Sturnstein reports on the 
enduring popularity of the Melbourne Cup. They're racing the cup, 
and they've caught them in just about a perfect line. The horses are 
off and running, but Australians have come to a stop. Across the country, 
people are glued to their TV's and radios. They're camped a local 
pubs and betting agencies, in offices, schools, on the buses and trains, 
in the shopping malls. Young and old are following the Melbourne cup. 
It's like Australia is at church, is at prayer. Richard Cashman chronicles 
sports history in Australia. The race started in 1861, he says, when 
the gold rush made Melbourne a boomtown. The city seized an optimistic 
moment in Australia's history to promote the cup as more than a one-town 
horse race. We don't have a lot of pageantry in Australia, but in 
the Melbourne Cup, we indulge in pageantry. I mean indulge in symbols. 
It shows that really, in terms of our culture, sport is king. No where 
else in the world is a public holiday declared for a horse race, but 
it is today in the southern state of Victoria. Meanwhile across Australia, 
racetracks and restaurants host traditional cup luncheons. The country's 
politicians are taking a break from business, as Parliament stops 
to watch the cup. Even kids get involved, and at home, they're part 
of what's called the family sweep. That's a betting pool of sorts 
where everyone is assigned a horse. It's a long-standing tradition 
in offices and homes, including my own. All right, William gets Durimas. 
John gets Markum. My mother, Pat Evans. She takes the job and the 
cup seriously. Margaret, you get The Hind. This year, my pick is called, 
The Hind, which promises only to leave me at the rear of the pack. 
This is Australia's busiest betting day of the year. At agencies such 
as this one in suburban Sydney, many punters, as they're called here, 
are placing last- minute bets. It's estimated that Aussies are wagering 
about $130 million all on this one race that's two miles long and 
is over in about three minutes or so. I don't gamble normally, but, 
you know, the Melbourne Cup. It's the only country in the world here 
that stops for a horse race, so you've got to have a best. And it's 
an exciting day. Like 60 cups for me. The cup is the sixth most valuable 
race in the world, putting it ten places ahead of the Kentucky Derby. 
It says something about the differences between Australia and the 
U.S. that this horse race is run on a workday, while our political 
races are held on the weekend. In the U.S., of course, it's the other 
way around. At this pub in Northern Sydney, cup fans are clinging 
to their beverages and to their bets. Sand Plain and Jezebel. Jezebel 
is fighting back on the rails and won the cup. The winner is Jezebel. 
The thoroughbred earns its place in Australian history, and in case 
you're wondering, in my family sweep, my daughter, Jezza, takes home 
the big prize, while my horse, The Hind, has lived up to its name. 
For THE WORLD, this is Margaret Sturnstein in Sydney. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>