<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981103.2000.2012 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After months of testimony about money, manipulation, and murder, a 
court in Milan today convicted the ex-wife of Italian fashion heir, 
Maurizio Gucci. Patrizia Reggiani was found guilty of murder and sentenced 
to 29 years in prison. Four co-defendants were also convicted. The 
jury concluded that Gucci's ex-wife murdered him three years to get 
her hands on his fortune. Reporter Carlo Deblasio reported on the 
trial for the Italian State Broadcast Network in Rome. Carlo, according 
to the court, how did this crew, which included a psychic and a pizza-shop 
owner - how did they pull off this crime? It was a very simple murder. 
Maurizio Gucci was shot dead while he was getting out of his home. 
Uh, the intrigue and the drama is all in the things that Patrizia 
Reggiani was able to set up. She was, at the same time, cruel and 
naive. She was, at the same time, deceiving and really stupid. It's 
unbelievable how she managed to get in touch with very humble and 
unskillful people. You know, a pizza owner, a woman who is bordering 
witchcraft, and she was convincing them to commit the crime on her 
behalf. And how did this all play out in the courtroom? I mean, it 
sounds in some - some instances sort of like a drama, as if it were 
a movie. I mean, what were some of the interesting scenes? We had 
a lot of very interesting moments in the trial because at the beginning, 
it seemed so unreal that many people in Italy felt that maybe the 
prosecutors were wrong, but all of the sudden, you know, there was 
a long sequence that happened in the court when evidences and indications 
were coming out of the lips of the defendants. And it became clearer 
that it was an unbelievable plot, uh, which took place in the mind 
of a grieving woman who was not satisfied of the huge amount of money 
that she was already getting. Yeah, how much was she getting a month 
or a year? She was getting 800,000 a year which is a lot of money, 
and she had in the agreement made with Maurizio Gucci. She was having 
ships, cars, uh, shares, so she could be really satisfied with that. 
She could lead a fantastic, luxurious life, but that was not enough. 
Was there one moment in particular in the trial where sympathy had 
suddenly turned against her? You said in the beginning, people wanted 
to believe her that she was, indeed, innocent. Was there one particular 
piece of evidence or one day when things suddenly turned around and 
turned against her. Yeah, I think the mood of the country, the feeling 
against her, started to blow up when people really realized that there 
was no need even in the most perverted mind to - to murder him. For 
her, to concoct such a crime. This was disgusting. People were outraged. 
Just the idea of this rich woman mixing up, you know, in the outskirts 
of town late at night. She didn't need to do that. I mean, this is 
a world where professional models and killers are at hand for rich 
people. And so why didn't she? Why did she go elsewhere? She didn't 
do that because she didn't know what she was doing, and she's now 
going to pay the price for that. Is it likely that she will, indeed, 
spend 29 years in prison? Maybe not entirely the 29 years, but at 
least 15 or 20, which, you know, it's like a life sentence. She is 
50. Reporter Carlos Deblasio speaking to us from Rome. Thank you very 
much. Good-bye. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>