<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981103.2000.0916 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
So, have you voted? If you have, you're in the minority. Less than 
half of those eligible to vote are expected to cast their ballots 
today. Although 36 governorships, 34 Senate seats, and all 435 House 
seats are at stake. THE WORLD's Jeb Sharp tells us about a nation 
whose citizens are not standing up and being counted. Non-voters here 
in Massachusetts offered a variety of excuses today. Eric, who holds 
down two jobs offered several himself. Hey, I really don't know the 
issues on the thing very well, let alone who's doing it. I don't see 
their names. We never see what they're saying. I don't see why not 
vote for the other guy. Never actually - I worked a 12-hour day today, 
and I don't have time to get down there, and I don't have time generally 
to research all this stuff, so I guess that's about it. Eric symbolizes 
a national trend, according to Curtis Gants of The Committee for the 
Study of the American Electorate. We have had a decline in voter turnout 
of 25% nationally, 30% outside the south. Now, that stretches over 
the last 36 years. Uh, our voter turnout is lower than any advanced 
democracy in the world and most fledgling democracies. In fact, when 
the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance 
in Stockholm, Sweden did a global survey of average voter turnout 
since World War II, the United States ranked 138th out of 171 countries. 
Now that - that sounds pretty bad, right? The Institute's Ben Riley. 
But if you look at the top ten countries: Italy, Iceland, Cambodia, 
Angola, Indonesia, Somalia,, New Zealand, Uzbekistan, and South Africa. 
Now, there's only about three real democracies amongst that lot. You 
would certainly not want to start comparing democracy in Angola or 
Indonesia to the U.S. It just doesn't make sense. Even so, the United 
States does have a poor record, even when you compare it to other 
industrialized democracies. Voter turnout in the United States has 
averaged 45% in the 1990's, yet Italy, Greece, Belgium, Sweden, and 
Australia all have average turnouts higher than 80%. Curtis Gants 
of the Committee for the Study of the American Electorate blames a 
widespread distrust of politicians, a decline in community life, a 
lack of time, and the numbing effect of television. One proposed solution 
to low voter turnout is compulsory voting, but many Americans oppose 
the idea, arguing that the right to vote should also mean the right 
not to vote. Andrew Kohut of the Pew Research Center for the People 
and the Press goes a step further. He doesn't think low voter turnout 
is a forerunner of a collapse in democracy. Now, it's certainly not 
a good thing that we only get 40 percent of age-eligible people voting 
off your elections and half of the population voting in the presidential 
elections, but there are other indications of civic connectedness. 
The amount of volunteering that Americans do to help one another, 
the extent to which Americans are willing, uh, to take steps to solve 
problems in their local communities, uh, they're pretty positive signs 
of, uh, other kinds of civic engagement. Worldwide, voter turnout 
increased steadily between the Second World War and the early 1990's, 
peaking at a time of high profile elections in Eastern Europe, South 
Africa, and Cambodia, but analysts believe that numbers have dropped 
off a little, as the excitement of new democracy has waned. But here, 
in a democracy that has lasted 222 years, the decline has been steady 
and significant. For THE WORLD, I'm Jeb Sharp. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>