<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981103.1600.2421 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When South Africa's Nelson Mandela was released from 20 years in jail 
and took over as the nation's president in 1994, his government took 
another approach to try and heal the wounds of apartheid. Rather than 
calling for a war crimes tribunal, it set up a truth and reconciliation 
commission to consider granting amnesty to those who confessed publicly 
to their crimes. The theory was that getting at the truth of what 
happened under apartheid was more important than punishing perpetrators 
of crimes. Late last week, the commission's final report was handed 
over to President Nelson Mandela at a formal ceremony in Pretoria 
by panel chairman Archbishop Desmond Tutu. We will have looked the 
beast in the eye. We will have come to terms with our horrendous past. 
It will no longer keep us hostage. We will cast off its sickles and 
holdings hands together black and white. We will strive together into 
the future, the glorious future God holds out before us, we who are 
the rainbow people of God. And looking to our past, we will commit 
ourselves never again. South African Archbishop Desmond Tutu speaking 
in Pretoria. But reaction to the report has not been entirely positive. 
Former apartheid leader, F.W. de Klerk convinced the courts to order 
the commission to delete the section in the report which says he was 
involved in a cover up of state sponsored violence. And the ruling 
African National Congress, the ANC, has also objected to charges implicating 
it in criminal offenses. We have more from VOA correspondent Alex 
Belida in Johannesburg. The main finding of the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission final report was no surprise. South Africa's former white 
leaders to blame for most of the gross human rights violations committed 
during the apartheid era. But many people, both in and outside of 
South Africa, might be forgiven for thinking a five-volume study focused 
almost exclusively on human rights abuses committed by the African 
National Congress in its struggle against white minority rule. That 
is because the angry reaction of some ANC leaders to such charges, 
as well well as the party's unsuccessful last-minute legal challenge 
to block the report's release has largely overshadowed news coverage 
about the rest of the current panel's exhaustive study. And that attention 
is not diminishing. News reports are emerging of differences of opinion 
within the ANC over the report and the party's reaction to it, including 
differences between President Nelson Mandela and the man expected 
to succeed him next year, Deputy President Tabo Embecke, who now leads 
the ANC. Mr. Mandela acknowledged the ANC committed human rights violations 
during the anti-apartheid struggle and was quoted as saying no one 
can deny that. He also backhandedly acknowledged being at odds with 
Mr. Embecke over the ANC's legal challenge to the Truth report saying 
there's nothing wrong with having a different opinion. Archbishop 
Tutu says he was devastated by the ANC's effort to block release of 
the final report, and in recent days, he has repeatedly warned South 
Africans not to allow the ANC to abuse its present grip on power saying 
yesterday's oppressed can easily become tomorrow's oppressors. VOA 
correspondent Alex Belida in Johannesburg. Justice and reconciliation 
was the subject of today's Dateline. I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>