<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981103.1600.2104 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And I'm Tony Riggs along with Victor Morales. This is VOA News Now. 
The arrest of Chile's former dictator, Augusto Pinochet, and South 
Africa's report on the abuses of apartheid highlight two very different 
approaches to justice and reconciliation. The first focuses on punishing 
the perpetrators of human rights crimes. The second, on getting at 
the truth of events by waiving punishment. The question not yet answered 
for future generations: Which method is best for ultimate reconciliation? 
Justice and reconciliation is the subject of today's Dateline. VOA's 
Pamela Taylor. The October 16th arrest of Augusto Pinochet by authorities 
in London has set an international precedent for other former officials 
accused of human rights abuses. Even though British authorities first 
denied a request from Spain to extradite him, the question is by no 
means settled. The 82-year-old former dictator remains under guard 
in a London hospital while British authorities debate what they will 
do. Spanish authorities contend that General Pinochet committed crimes 
against Spanish citizens in Chile during his 17-year reign. Former 
VOA Latin America correspondent Bill Rodgers has more on the legal 
implications of the arrest. In recent years, it has become more common 
for nations or international tribunals to reach across national borders 
to apprehend those suspected of genocide, torture, and other crimes 
against humanity. According to many human rights monitors and legal 
scholars, the detention of General Pinochet further strengthens this 
trend in international human rights law. General Pinochet, who relinquished 
power traveled to Britain with a diplomatic passport. His lawyers 
are claiming diplomatic immunity to contest his arrest and possible 
extradition to Spain. But the 1961 Vienna convention on diplomatic 
relations would seem to exclude the former dictator. The convention 
says diplomatic immunity is not designed to protect an individual 
but to insure the functioning of diplomatic missions. Legal experts 
note General Pinochet was not on diplomatic business when he traveled 
to London. But even if he is successful in fighting extradition, Joel 
Solomon of Human Rights Watch believes an important precedent has 
been set. The message will remain that dictators cannot expect safe 
haven abroad just because they've been able to carve out some safe 
haven at home. And that will be positive no matter what happens with 
General Pinochet. General Pinochet, who led a military coup that overthrew 
an elected Marxist government in 1973 is accused of presiding over 
a bloody dictatorship. Some 3,000 people were killed in Chile and 
hundreds of others disappeared during his rule. However, General Pinochet 
was granted immunity from prosecution under Chile's constitution which 
was drafted and adopted while he was in power. Former VOA Latin America 
correspondent Bill Rodgers. A professor of law at American University, 
Emilio Viano, told VOA's Yaheus Wahib that Spain's claim of extradition 
was based on a European convention on terrorism. Basically, Spain 
is using the argument of universal jurisdiction. In other words, there 
are crimes that are universally condemned that say genocide, some 
force of terrorists, no matter where the conduct has occurred so that 
Spain could say, "We have jurisdiction in this case because any country 
can have jurisdiction, any government that obtains the custody of 
the accused can prosecute him." I think that it is part of this sense 
of establishing and expanding what's called universal jurisdiction. 
Now let's be very clear that even if there is persuasive reasons to 
believe that Pinochet committed crimes against humanity when he was 
head of state Chile, it is not yet certain that international law 
would authorize a domestic tribunal in Spain as distinguished from 
an international tribunal to proceed against him for those crimes. 
But legal opinion today increasingly accepts the expansion of universal 
jurisdiction for what we might, I want to call, indiscriminate, violent 
attacks on people at large. So the way I hear you, professor, is this 
could be implied for maybe future arrests of people accused of all 
crimes in places like one the former Yugoslavia. Or Argentina. So 
for example, all the former generals in Argentina that were implicated 
in the dirty war there may have to be very careful and probably not 
be able in the future to ever leave the country. And so it may be 
true also of other people some day strong man in Burma. American University 
law professor Emilio Viano speaking with VOA's Yaheus Wahib. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>