<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981103.1600.2954 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thanks, Breck. In other business news, there are more female truck 
drivers in the United States today than ever before. Economics correspondent 
Linda Cashden reports that a driver shortage has caused more firms 
to actively recruit women and technological changes have made trucks 
easier to drive. The traditional image of an American truck driver 
is of a big, burly man with enough muscle power to manipulate those 
heavy gears and get his 30 meter long tractor-trailer rig rolling 
down the highway. U.S. country music is filled with songs that attests 
to his strength, his stamina, his bravery. Norma Vogel drives a truck 
on three week hauls back and forth across the United States. Her driving 
partner is her husband, Harry Vogel. Each of the Vogels drives a ten-hour 
shift every 24 hours. Norma Vogel does not fit the truck driver stereotype 
because she's petite and because she's a woman. But then Norma says 
the truck driver stereotype is outdated. The trucks themselves are 
more friendly towards a small stature person. When I first started 
driving 14 years ago, I couldn't reach right switches on the truck 
we had at the time. I had a hard time reaching the pedals, couldn't 
get the seat position right. And all that has changed now 'cause with 
the new trucks, they have what's called kind of a wraparound dash 
where it makes everything really handy. Norma Vogel's truck also has 
an automatic transmission so she does not have to shift those heavy 
gears, and a satellite system that permits her employer, U.S. Express 
Enterprises, to track the specific location of each truck in its cross-country 
fleet at any time. Truck sleeping compartments these days come complete 
with beds, a television set, a refrigerator, and a computer with electronic 
mail capability. Sensors built into most trucks enable highway tolls 
to be collected electronically while the vehicle is in motion. Safety 
systems designed for rain and heavy fog give drivers advance warnings 
about an object they might not see. While such devices make the job 
safer and easier, Norma Vogel says she decided to switch from secretarial 
work to truck driving for other reasons. It's one of the few jobs 
in America that the woman gets paid equal pay to what a man makes. 
For instance, if Jerry makes $50,000, I make $50,000. So it's really 
equal, where a lot of times in sales and different other kinds of 
jobs, you don't get equal pay for what you do. That might explain 
why 20 percent of the truck drivers working for Norma Vogel's employer, 
U.S. Express Enterprises, are women. She says the proportion is growing. 
Linda Cashden, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>