<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981103.0500.0886 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The United States Congress recently passed and President Clinton signed 
into law legislation affecting the Internet. The measure requires 
commercial sites on the World Wide Web to restrict access by children 
to materials such a pornography that is deemed harmful to minors. 
A number of civil liberties groups are challenging this law claiming 
it is an improper restriction of free speech. To find out more about 
the challenge, Dan Noble went to the headquarters of the Electronic 
Privacy Information Center in Washington D.C. to speak with the center's 
counsel, David Sobel. Mr. Sobel, what is the Child Online Protection 
Act? This bill is the most recent congressional attempt to, as Congress 
puts it, protect children from inappropriate material on the Internet. 
This is the second such bill that Congress has enacted. The first 
one, the Communications Decency Act, was struck down by the Supreme 
Court as violating the First Amendment rights of people using the 
Internet. So this is basically Congress' second attempt to address 
this issue. Well, why are they trying to address it? There has been 
a lot of concern expressed over the last few years about the nature 
of material that is available on the Internet and necessarily because 
it is available on the Internet, also it's available to children. 
So there are people in Congress who feel that the only effective way 
to deal with that issue is through legislation. Many of us disagree 
with that and feel that the only really effective approach to this 
issue is to spend more time supervising children in the way that they 
use the Internet, and in developing educational programs. Do you see 
the law as a potential privacy issue? Well, it is because this particular 
law in effect requires that when there is sexually explicit material 
available on a Web site, that the operator of that Web site will be 
required to basically check the age of whoever is coming to the site 
and accessing the material. So that necessarily means that the anonymity 
that characterizes the Internet as we know it now will largely be 
lost and that people will in effect be required to identify themselves. 
So in that way, it does raise a real privacy issue. And as I say, 
it is an assault on the anonymity that has been a very important characteristic 
of the Internet. What impact does the Internet have on freedom of 
expression as guaranteed to Americans in the Constitution? Well, I 
think as the Supreme Court recognized last year when it struck down 
the first piece of legislation of this kind that Congress has enacted, 
the court recognized that the Internet in many ways really is the 
first true embodiment of a lot of the principles that were first recognized 
in the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, and that 
the theoretical idea of a marketplace of ideas where everybody could 
equally participate really only came into being with the creation 
of the Internet. Obviously, if you owned a newspaper or you owned 
a television or radio station, you had the ability to speak to a large 
audience. But it really wasn't until the Internet became widely available 
to people that every individual, at least theoretically, has the ability 
to reach, in effect, the entire world. Thank you very much, Mr. Sobel. 
We've been speaking with David Sobel. He's the counsel for the Electronic 
Privacy Information Center. From Washington D.C., I'm Dan Noble. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>