<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981103.0500.1403 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The British band, Massive Attack, came out in the late 1980s. It's 
one of those influential groups you've probably never heard of, which 
puts me in the majority. Their musical style called trip-hop has affected 
the sounds of Madonna, Peter Gabriel, and the band U2, all of whom 
have worked with Massive Attack at points over the years. The band's 
three albums have drawn critical praise and gained some new fans in 
America. VOA's Carolyn Weaver got tickers to hear Massive Attack during 
their recent tour of the United States and survived to give us this 
report. The group from Bristol, England formed 15 years ago as the 
Wild Bunch. They were a multi-racial artist collective of rappers, 
break dancers, and club deejays, who created new music in the way 
that they spun records, mixing punk rock, reggae, new wave, rap, and 
hip-hop music into what's called trip-hop or electronica. It's an 
eerie, futuristic sounding music that can be ominous and tender at 
the same time. On "Protection," the group's 1994 album, Tracy Thorn 
of the group Everything but the Girl contributed vocals. Bristol, 
England is a working class city with a large West Indian community. 
When Massive Attack began to come together, it was because the white 
English youth and the black teenagers from immigrant families liked 
each other's music. They also united against the fascist and racist 
overtones that were influencing some punk music. I think before Massive 
Attack came along, or should I say Wild Bunch came along years ago, 
I think you'll find that Bristol was kind of a lot more segregated, 
you know, and the fact that, you know, as the Wild Bunch, you know, 
if you looked to us, we looked like the United Nations of deejays. 
Grant Marshall, known as Daddy G, is the group's main singer and songwriter. 
He says England is too small for the cultures of different racial 
groups not to fuse. I think that, you know, kind of typifies what 
Bristol is about really in the fact that it's quite small and quite 
intimate. And you know, through the scenes and all that, runs, you 
know, a western community that's quite solid in Bristol, you know, 
and we grew up with a lot of English kids and stuff like that. And 
you know, we're all into the same sort of things we're in. And when 
we got together as Massive Attack, it was kind of, you know, a diversity 
of people from all different cultural backgrounds, you know, with 
a certain common interest in, you know, trying to get their music 
across. The other two leaders of the group are Robert Delmaja, known 
as Three D, and Andrew Vowals, who goes by Mushroom. Otherwise, the 
band's personnel is fluid. "Mezzanine," their latest album, features 
Jamaican reggae star Horace Andy and Liz Frazier, formerly of the 
Cocktow Twins, who both sang and contributed lyrics. Daddy G says 
that while the roots of Massive Attack, punk, and reggae music may 
sound very different, they share an anarchistic rebellious spirit. 
Massive Attacks three albums, "Blue Lines," "Protection," and "Mezzanine," 
are released by Virgin Records. I'm Carolyn Weaver. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>