<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981103.0500.3146 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution guarantees Americans 
some of their most cherished rights, including the freedoms of speech, 
religion, press, and assembly. The First Amendment is part of every 
American students civics curriculum but recently, as we hear from 
VOA's Martin Bush, the document moved out of the classroom and onto 
the stage, as the focus of a musical in New York. The First Amendment 
of the U.S. Constitution contains some of the basic rights guarantees. 
To celebrate this law of the land, several singers got together in 
a program they called "The High Road to Freedom." The master of ceremonies 
was the well-known actor and singer, Theodore Bickell. He noted that 
the Bill of Rights, the first ten amendments to the Constitution, 
was an addition to the nation's fundamental law. The Constitution 
would provide the government firm. The Bill of Rights would insure 
our citizens' freedom. Let's take a look at the First Amendment. This 
one amendment lists five rights. The first of the five reads, "Congress 
shall make no law respecting the establishment of religion or prohibiting 
the free exercise thereof." Now in those days, everybody knew what 
that meant. The terrible religious wars and inquisitions of the old 
world are recent history. Puritan bigotry of the new world was still 
fresh in memory. The second freedom promises free speech, a concept 
the first American president, George Washington, strongly supported, 
warning if freedom of speech can be taken dumb and silent, we can 
be led like sheep to slaughter. The Alien and Sedition Act of 1798, 
however, impinged on freedom of speech. It allowed the government 
of this nation's second president, John Adams, to imprison or impose 
heavy fines on anyone criticizing the administration. Following Thomas 
Jefferson's defeat of Adam's for the presidency, the act was repealed. 
Rejoice Columbia sons, rejoice, the time has never been, the need 
to join with heart and soul and voice to Jefferson and liberty. Freedom 
of the press was the third freedom guaranteed by the First Amendment. 
It's most telling precedent was probably the 1757 trial here in New 
York of newspaper publisher John Peter Zenger. Zenger was tried for 
printing stories and song lyrics accusing the British royal governor, 
William Cosby, of dishonesty and venality. Zenger was accused of libel 
but acquitted by the jury. This song hailed the legal victory. Then 
down with William Cosby, his justices and friends. And down with all 
the crooked crew on whom his wealth depends. That brings us to the 
fourth freedom cited in the First Amendment. Congress shall make no 
law abridging the right of the people peaceably to assemble. Now that 
was a very sensitive subject, especially after the Boston massacre. 
It was reported that a Captain Preston ordered his red coats to fire 
upon a small assemblage of protesters. The date was March 5th, 1770. 
Unhappy Boston see thy sons. The fifth freedom of the Bill of Rights 
guarantees that Congress shall make no law abridging the right of 
the people to petition the government for a redress of grievances. 
A song inspired by that right, "The High Road to Freedom," was performed 
by the young people's chorus of New York. In conclusion, Theodore 
Bickell reminded the audience at New York's 92nd Street Young Men's 
and Young Women's Hebrew Association that the price of liberty is 
eternal vigilance. The program entitled "The High Road to Freedom," 
will be telecast nationally on the Public Broadcasting Service. This 
is Martin Bush, VOA News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>