<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981103.0500.2615 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The search for survivors and the recovery of the bodies of victims 
from devastating floods continues in Nicaragua and Honduras. Thousands 
of people are dead there as well as scores of others in El Salvador 
and Guatemala. News Now's Frank Wydis talked earlier to correspondent 
Bill Rodgers in Northern Nicaragua. I'm on the banks of the Yucapa 
River near a bridge that was washed out by the torrential rains caused 
by Hurricane Mitch. I'm on my way north to see the remains of a number 
of communities washed away that were located on the flanks of the 
Casitas volcano. They were washed away over the weekend. Many communities 
were buried there but that area is still fairly inaccessible, but 
we're making our way towards that. And we're seeing already scenes 
of devastation here on the banks of the Yucapa River where a major 
bridge was washed out. There are tree trunks scattered about, rocks, 
all kinds of debris, dead cattle, people walking, making their way 
from Managua to the city of Leone walking along the road here carrying 
belongings. Some people are coming from Managua to see their relatives 
in this devastated area to see what happened to them. They're bringing 
supplies. Others are traveling from some of these devastated areas 
toward the capital. All are walking on foot. It's a grim scene of 
utter devastation. What's the transportation network there? Like, 
Bill, how are you going to get around? Well, we're on four-wheel drives. 
We're with a convoy of reporters. We're awaiting the president of 
the country who is coming to this area to visit the scenes of the 
devastation. Has there been any aid, international aid effort coming 
into the country yet? There are promises of international aid. Some 
is arriving. The United States apparently has promised some $3.5 million 
to help the people not only in Nicaragua and the rest of Central America 
that have been affected by Hurricane Mitch. There are promises also 
from Mexico, Spain, and Cuba. Have you heard I suppose there's going 
to be a big problem from the threat of disease from all this. That's 
right. Authorities here fear an outbreak of cholera and other diseases 
caused primarily by the rotting corpses that are scattered about in 
areas where many people were killed and also hundreds and thousands, 
I should say, of livestock, cattle, and other livestock that were 
lost in the flooding and mudslides. VOA's Bill Rodgers talking with 
News Now's Frank Wydis from Nicaragua. At the White House, President 
Clinton said the affected nations are in his words, "close to our 
shores and close to our hearts." He said the United States will do 
everything it can to help. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>