<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981103.1600.3134 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Crime fighting success stories always make headlines, and we've got 
one today from Ciudad Juarez, Mexico across the Rio Grande River from 
El Paso, Texas. The border town has long had a wild and lawless reputation 
boosted recently by the arrival of drug traffickers who have contributed 
to the city's escalating violence. On this, we hear from VOA's Greg 
Flakus. The city's new mayor is leading a direct and effective attack 
against corruption and crime. The new mayor of Juarez, Ustabo Alisando 
Aguilar, had some surprises for his police force last week. Without 
previous notification, he ordered drug tests for more than 300 officers 
and their chiefs. To his satisfaction, all results were negative. 
But Mayor Alisando says the testing would continue on a periodic basis. 
Mayor Alisando also had some pleasant news for the municipal police: 
a 20 percent pay raise and a special effort to provide discounts in 
local stores for police families and scholarships for the children 
of police officers. The mayor called on local universities and businesses 
to cooperate in this endeavor in which he said would help create a 
more professional police force that is more responsive to public needs. 
The mayor's program also targets police corruption, which many experts 
say is partly a consequence of the low pay and low esteem accorded 
by Mexican society to those who are supposed to uphold the law. The 
new mayor's efforts to improve the police and fight crime comes at 
a time when many people here live in constant fear. In recent years, 
violent crime has become a common feature of life in Juarez. Drug 
traffickers have carried out a war on city streets, sometimes killing 
innocent bystanders. At least 124 young women have been killed in 
a series of brutal murders that have yet to be solved. And violent 
drug-dealing youth gangs have cropped up in local schools. Just hours 
after Mayor Alisando took office, he sent police in a sweep of areas 
where drug dealers and criminals were known to operate. Habier Dehanda 
Martinez, director of Social Communications for Mayor Alisando, says 
the raids were a dramatic announcement that crime would no longer 
be tolerated in Ciudad Juarez. We need to do something. We needed 
to send a message. So by acting quickly, in coordination with the 
other levels of government, in this case, the state and federal police, 
they were able to raid a number of areas and send a message, a clear 
message to those who are into this business that there will be no 
tolerance. Mr. Dehanda says the new war on crime has counted on support 
from all sectors of society. So far, the response has been tremendous, 
not just from the members of the police force but from all groups 
in society. And so far, I know that it's still very, very little time, 
but the crime rates have diminished not by ten or 12 or but by 80 
or more percent just by showing the determination, and we hope it 
remains that way. Mr. Dehanda acknowledges there are many challenges 
facing the city, including financial restraints and the proximity 
of the world's biggest drug market, the United States just across 
the river. But he says he and other members of the new city administration 
feel that they can succeed with public support. The fight against 
crime takes participation from each and every member of the community. 
Those programs that have been successful worldwide have one element 
in common, and that's involvement of the community, and that's what 
we're trying to do here. Mr. Dehanda says Juarez has been greatly 
aided in its anti-crime effort by Mexican federal officials who coordinate 
and cooperate with local officials. He says he hopes the city can 
count on even more resources from Mexico City under President Ernesto 
Zedilla's recently announced national crusade against crime. Greg 
Flakus, VOA News, Ciudad Juarez, Mexico. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>