<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981103.0500.0611 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Political candidates around the United States held last-minute rallies 
late Monday, just hours ahead of the start of the balloting in the 
U.S. midterm elections. They generally had a common theme, an appeal 
to would-be voters to actually cast their ballots. Midterm elections, 
that is elections held in the middle of a presidential term, historically 
do not draw a great deal of voter interest. VOA's Michael O'Sullivan 
attended one rally in Los Angeles, California. On the campus of UCLA, 
the University of California, Los Angeles, students are, for the most 
part, more concerned with grades and future careers than politics. 
In California, no more than 45 percent of eligible voters are expected 
to vote this year, and among young people, turnout is generally lower. 
So when the state Democratic Party held a get out the vote rally Monday, 
attendance on campus was boosted with the promise of appearances by 
television stars, a rock group, and pop entertainer. You say I only 
hear what I want to, I don't listen hard, don't pay attention to the 
distance that you're running, to anyone, anywhere. More than 1,000 
people did pay attention, as a parade of Democratic Party candidates 
for office worked to generate enthusiasm. One of the speakers was 
Senator Barbara Boxer, a one-term incumbent who is involved in a tight 
reelection race against her Republican challenger, Matt Fong. Democrats 
outnumber Republicans in California, but Republicans are more likely 
to vote. So for Senator Boxer, good turnout is essential. And in her 
view, it is likely. I am telling you I feel something inside me that 
says that 1998 will be the year that we finally respected our democracy. 
I think it will be the year of the huge voter turnout. Do you agree? 
I feel it in my heart. Another Democratic Party official, Kruse Bustamonte, 
holds the highest elected office of any Hispanic in California. He 
is now the speaker of the State Assembly and is running for lieutenant 
governor. Hispanics make up nearly 20 percent of all registered voters 
in California and most are Democrats. Mr. Bustamonte was leading by 
nine points in a recent preelection poll so his chances of winning 
are good, again if supporters turn out to vote. He led the UCLA students 
in a chant to help insure that they do. We're here today to work the 
phones and hit the street. We're getting out the voters. We won't 
get beat. We got the message people want to hear. Democrats the ones 
going to lead this year. Another Democrat with a solid lead in the 
polls is the party's candidate for governor, Gray Davis. Preelection 
surveys show him ahead in the race against Republican Dan Lundgren 
by ten percent or more. But again, voter turnout will be a factor. 
And he notes that Democrats are making an all-out effort to get their 
supporters to the polls. We have two million phone calls going out 
the last three days, literally tens and tens of thousands of people 
walking precincts. And I'll tell you this, my friends, we have one 
more day to victory, one more day. In the flurry of activity leading 
up to Tuesday's election, Democrats and Republicans are voicing the 
same message. Elections are often won or lost by small margins and 
the party that wins is often the one that most effectively mobilizes 
its supporters. Mike O'Sullivan, VOA News, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>