<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981103.0500.2407 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
About 100 human rights activists from 44 African countries have gathered 
in South Africa for the first ever All-African Human Rights Defenders 
Conference. The meeting was organized by Amnesty International. VOA 
correspondent Alex Belida brings us up to date from Johannesburg. 
Amnesty International's Secretary General P.S. Sanay says independent 
human rights defenders have taken on an increasingly important role 
in Africa. He says many of the delegates gathered in Johannesburg 
come from countries on the continent whose governments do not protect 
human rights or which are themselves responsible for committing human 
rights abuses. And human rights defenders have more and more been 
assuming the central role that government cannot or will not play, 
and as a result, these defenders are themselves the target of abuses. 
Mr. Sanay says these defenders share a strong belief that their fellow 
citizens should be allowed to enjoy basic human rights. They also 
share what he calls an incredible commitment to working often under 
difficult circumstances to make those rights a reality. The threats 
that they face range from phone tapping to infiltration, torture, 
arrests, assassination. Mr. Sanay cites cases of attacks on human 
rights defenders, including journalists, in such African countries 
as Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Kenya, Rwanda, Tunisia, 
and Zambia. The conference, the culmination of several similar regional 
meetings, is to adopt a so-called Johannesburg declaration that will 
include plans for safeguarding human rights defenders who are at risk 
and for lobbying groups like the Organization of African Unity to 
take responsibility for their protection. The declaration is also 
to be presented to the first world summit of human rights defenders 
scheduled to take place in Paris in December. Faced with such attacks, 
we believe that it is the duty of the international community to provide 
protection to human right defenders, for without their courage and 
and their vision, there is no future for human rights in Africa. Among 
the human rights defenders attending the Johannesburg meeting is Paya 
Simjawe, editor of the independent Cameroon newspaper, "La Matage". 
He was arrested in December of last year after publishing an article 
questioning President Paul Biaz' state of health. He has just been 
released and says he hopes he does not get rearrested when he returns 
home. I just left the jail for some two weeks now to attend the conference 
here. I hope that I will not return in jail. He describes his present 
experience as an eye opener. He claims in the overcrowded conditions 
of Cameroon's prisons the detainees rights are abused every day. Alex 
Belida, VOA News, Johannesburg. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>