<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981103.1600.2644 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Malaria kills more than a million people around the globe every year, 
nearly 3,000 individuals every day. In an effort to fight what's been 
called one of the world's most costly disease, the United Nations 
Children's Fund, the U.N. Development Program, the World Bank, and 
the World Health Organization announced that they're joining forces 
to stamp out malaria. VOA's Jessica Berman reports. The joint international 
program called Roll Back Malaria, is being launched in more than 90 
countries where the mosquito-borne illness is endemic. According the 
WHO, these countries are home to 40 percent of the world's population, 
including the 300- to 500 million people who develop acute cases of 
malaria each year. More than 90 percent of all cases of the disease 
occur in Sub-Saharan African. At a briefing in Washington, U.S. Health 
and Human Services secretary Donna Shalala underscored the reason 
for the initiative. We are engaged in a great human drama that will 
test our ability to survive in the 21st century. Sometimes, we must 
defend ourselves against nature. Unlike other major global health 
threats, experts say malaria is spreading geographically because forested 
areas are being destroyed, the result of logging, road construction, 
and mining. As forests are cleared away, the habitats of malaria carrying 
mosquitoes are disturbed, and there are more opportunities for the 
insects to come in to contact with people. Participants in the Roll 
Back Malaria campaign say it differs from previous efforts which were 
fragmented. The latest initiative represents a unified global attack 
against the disease both by strengthening existing health deliver 
systems in affected countries, as well as introducing some new strategies. 
Gro Harlem Bruntlaund is the newly installed director general of the 
World Health Organization. We cannot eradicate malaria. We don't have 
the tools and we don't see that science gives us that opportunity. 
But that is no excuse not to roll back the morbidity and the mortality 
with the suffering of children especially under five that this disease 
carries with it. WHO Director General Bruntlaund adds that malaria 
is a debilitating disease which slashes economic productivity by an 
estimated 12 percent in countries where malaria is endemic. Some of 
the new tools to be employed by Roll Back Malaria include the distribution 
of insecticide treated bed nets. The use of satellite mapping of malaria 
at the local level and bringing anti-malaria treatments and prevention 
advice to people in remote villages. As for development of an anti-malaria 
vaccine, no version that's been tested on people has proven to be 
very effective, but the director of the U.S. National Institutes of 
Health, Harold Varmis, is hopeful there could be a drug in the next 
ten to 20 years that protects humans against malaria. Dr. Varmis notes 
the daunting task of trying to develop a vaccine against the malarial 
parasite since it undergoes numerous changes inside the body of an 
infected person. Each of those stages seems amazingly complex and 
difficult to think about but you recognize that each of those stages 
is, in fact, a vulnerability. Since each of those stages is necessary 
for the organism to thrive, every one of those stages represents a 
potential point of attack. As part of the Roll Back Malaria effort, 
Dr. Varmis says U.S. government funded researchers are contributing 
their considerable knowledge about the malarial parasite and efforts 
are underway to interest the private pharmaceutical industry in development 
of a malaria vaccine. Jessica Berman, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>