<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981229.1830.1278 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to take "A closer look" tonight at an extremely controversial 
trend in education. For years, there has been a vigorous debate about 
religion in public schools. But now, more and more evangelical Christians 
are giving up on the fight altogether. They're pulling children out 
of public school to give them a Christian education. Over the last 
decade, there has been a 400% increase in home-schooled children, 
most are evangelical Christians. And there has been a 35% increase 
in private evangelical schools. Our religion editor, Peggy Wehmeyer, 
takes "A closer look." Chris and Casey Chapman sppbt five years at 
their local public school. Then their parents decided the moral values 
and religious beliefs they were teaching their boys were being undermined 
at school. Sheila Chapman says her sons couldn't even talk about Jesus 
at Christmas. We did celebrate kwanza, which is an African religious 
holiday. We did celebrate hanukkah. But Rudolph the red-nosed reindeer 
or frosty the snowman was about as christmasy as you could get, and 
that really bothered me. He should ask God -- It bothered her so much 
that last year, the chapmans pulled Casey and Chris out of public 
school, and sent them to church. I pledge allegiance to the Christian 
flag, one savior, Our parents were saying, "please, please start a 
school. We need you to help us with our children." How can you educate 
a person completely without God? When we believe in Jesus -- So prestonwood 
Baptist church opened a school, where God is woven into the entire 
school day, from early morning chapel, to social studies and English, 
to afternoon Bible classes. They had a flood and it almost killed 
everybody. Parents are really concerned about the drug issue and the 
violence issues in the schools and the amorality in society and just 
the way the culture is going. And so, this is a huge backlash. Now 
a group of conservative Christian leaders is calling for the withdrawal 
of all evangelical children, millions of them, from the public school 
system. They say their efforts at helping change the schools have 
failed, and that it's time to give up and turn to the church. Florida 
minister James Kennedy has broadcast the campaign to educate children 
at home or at church on his national television program. When you 
send them off to some public school, keep in mind that you are shooting 
dice with your children's eternal souls. It's a Gamble that no Christian 
should be willing to make. Public education leaders call the movement 
extremist. Schools are not hostile to Christians. Lots more schools 
are working on teaching about religions in school and teaching moral 
values. That's what parents want and they can get that from public 
schools. No one is expecting a mass exodus from the public schools. 
But for 2 1/2 million children and growing, home and church schools 
are becoming the classroom of choice. Peggy Wehmeyer, ABC News, Dallas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>