<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981229.0225 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After years of debate and bureaucratic infighting, the top committee 
of China's legislature approved Tuesday a national law to police the 
country's freewheeling securities markets. The Standing Committee 
of the National People's Congress adopted the law on the last day 
of a six-day session. The law will take effect July 1, 1999, the state-run 
Xinhua News Agency reported. It said the 12-chapter, 214-article law 
governs all aspects of the securities industry, from the issue and 
trading of stocks to purchases of listed companies, registration and 
accounts settlement agencies, government regulatory bodies and penalties 
for violating the law. The new law retains a prohibition already in 
force against foreign investors buying shares in China's A-share market, 
which is open only to domestic investors, Xinhua said. Foreign investors 
remain limited to the smaller, less active B-share market. The law 
also will ban Chinese banks and state companies from equities trading. 
With core businesses crumbling, state-owned companies have poured 
unknown billions of yuan (dollars) into China's stock markets looking 
for higher returns on investments. Chinese banks have also financed 
stock purchases through loans, or have shifted their own cash in and 
out of volatile markets. The securities industry will be separated 
into two tiers, with brokerages required to separate their own trading 
accounts from those of their clients. Securities firms are also to 
be kept separate from banking, trust and insurance businesses, it 
added. The report said legislators had drawn lessons from the financial 
turmoil afflicting other Asian markets in formulating the law. Li 
Peng, who heads the legislature, said the law would be important in 
``protecting the legitimate rights and interests of investors, preventing 
and resolving financial risk and guaranteeing the healthy development 
of China's fledgling securities market,'' Xinhua said. At least five 
earlier draft versions of the law had been debated and rejected during 
the past six years, mainly due to disagreements between the various 
bureaucracies responsible for enforcing market regulations. The regional 
crisis may have finally pushed the legislature into approving the 
law, which codifies and unifies a hodgepodge of regulations that have 
been loosely enforced. Legislative debate over the securities law 
led to late revisions to firm regulations prohibiting state-owned 
companies or listed companies from trading shares, the newspaper China 
Securities News reported Tuesday. Investors who own 30 percent or 
more of a listed company's shares will be required to issue a takeover 
notice to all shareholders, the paper said. The new law is expected 
to help prevent the frequent trading irregularities and bouts of volatility 
that have troubled the stock exchanges and other financial markets 
since their inception in the early 1990s. In the latest case, the 
China Securities Regulatory Commission is investigating alleged illegal 
transactions by the investment banking unit of Shenyin Wanguo Securities 
Co., the country's second biggest brokerage, company officials told 
Dow Jones Newswires Monday. The probe could result in a suspension 
of Shenyin Wanguo's underwriting credentials, a lucrative source of 
income, as well as a shakeup among the firm's management, they said. 
There are now about 827 companies listed on China's stock exchanges 
in Shanghai and Shenzhen, with total market capitalization of more 
than 2 trillion yuan (dlrs 242.1 billion). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>