<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981229.0784 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The presidents of Uganda and Rwanda agreed Tuesday that their forces 
in eastern Congo to support a rebellion against President Laurent 
Kabila will remain there until security along their western borders 
is assured. They also dismissed as fabrication newspaper reports of 
growing tensions between Uganda and Rwandan troops. President Yoweri 
Museveni and his Rwandan counterpart Pasteur Bizimungu discussed regional 
security matters, particularly the war in neighboring Congo, during 
four hours of talks, Museveni's spokeswoman Hope Kivengere said in 
a statement. Meanwhile, the government-owned New Vision newspaper 
said Tuesday Museveni had ordered the arrest of several Ugandan army 
officers suspected of dealing illegally in gold, timber and other 
resources in Congo. Museveni and Bizimungu, joined by senior defense 
and political officials from their countries, met in the southwestern 
town of Kabale on the Rwandan border. The meeting was held against 
a backdrop of conflicting and unconfirmed newspaper reports of tensions 
between the Ugandan and Rwandan troops backing Congolese rebels in 
their five-month war to oust Kabila. The leaders dismissed reports 
Sunday and Monday in the independent Monitor newspaper that clashes 
between Ugandan and Rwandan troops in mid-December week had left 30 
Rwandans and eight Ugandans dead, Kivengere said. The reports said 
the fighting erupted over disagreements about strategy and alleged 
brutality against civilians by Rwandan forces. ``The two presidents 
also took the opportunity to discuss some media rumors that have alleged 
that there were conflicts or problems between the UPDF (Uganda People's 
Democratic Forces) and the RPA (Rwandan Patriotic Army) and dismissed 
these as baseless fabrications,'' the statement said. Both Rwanda 
and Uganda have acknowledged sending men and military equipment to 
the region in support of the rebellion that broke out Aug. 2 to oust 
Congolese President Laurent Kabila. Both countries maintain their 
forces are in eastern Congo to clear the area of Ugandan and Rwandan 
rebels operating from bases there. The statement said the two leaders 
``reaffirmed that their armed forces will remain'' in Congo until 
better security measures are put in place, but said they also remained 
committed to efforts at finding a peaceful solution. However, common 
interests appeared to diverge last month when Congolese businessman 
Jean-Pierre Bemba declared himself, apparently with Ugandan support, 
to be leader of a new rebel faction that was an alternative to the 
Rwandan-backed Congolese Democratic Coalition led by Ernest Wamba 
dia Wamba. Adding to the confusion Tuesday, New Vision, citing an 
anonymous army officer, said Museveni ordered the arrest of the officers 
following newspaper reports that some of his soldiers posted in eastern 
Congo were spending most of their time trying to make money. Defense 
spokesman Steven Kavuma was not available for comment. A senior military 
officer and four other people were killed in September when a twin-engine 
Islander plane going from Kampala to northeastern Congo, reportedly 
on a gold-buying mission, crashed under mysterious circumstances in 
the foothills of the Rwenzori Mountains that straddle the border between 
Uganda and Congo. Contradictory government statements and reports 
further clouded the actual events. Citing other unnamed sources, New 
Vision said since the start of the rebellion, there has been an influx 
of Ugandans, most of them relatives of army officers, on trading missions 
in eastern Congo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>