<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981229.0190 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Authorities recovered the bodies of four sailors and gave up hope 
Tuesday of finding two others after a monstrous storm decimated the 
Sydney-to-Hobart yacht race, its 90-mph (145-kph) winds and 35-foot 
(10.5-meter) swells snapping masts and flipping boats over. A former 
British Olympic sailor and an Australian competitor were missing and 
presumed drowned, Australian Maritime Safety Authority spokesman Brian 
Hill said. ``We wouldn't stop searching for them if we thought they 
were still alive,'' Hill told The Associated Press. ``It's tragic 
but most people would realize that we do have to be realistic.'' Australian 
officials on Tuesday halted one of the country's largest maritime 
rescue operations ever after finding the bodies of four sailors over 
two days. Military helicopters plucked about 50 other sailors to safety 
off Australia's southeastern coast, 250 miles (400 kilometers) south 
of Sydney. The race continued, however, finishing Tuesday morning 
when American Larry Ellison and his maxi yacht Sayonara arrived in 
Hobart, Tasmania, to take line honors ahead of Brindabella. Ellison, 
the chief executive officer and founder of Oracle Corp., also won 
the race in 1995. The 23-member crew arrived at Constitution Dock 
to a funereal atmosphere, rather than the usual popping of champagne 
corks and booming of cannons. ``It was just awful. I've never experienced 
anything remotely like this,'' Ellison said of the raging seas that 
peaked Sunday and Monday. ``It's been a very emotional experience 
to get here. This is not what this is supposed to be about. It's a 
tough crew, but the guys were choked up.'' One of the missing sailors, 
33-year-old Briton Glyn Charles, had represented Britain in the Star 
Class at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, where he finished 11th. 
The other missing sailor was Australian John Dean, a crew member on 
the yacht Winston Churchill, which sank. The bodies of two other Winston 
Churchill crew members, Jim Lawler and Michael Bannister, were found 
Tuesday. Two other sailors were found dead Monday after the 40-foot 
(12-meter) boat Business Post Naiad capsized 60 miles (96 kilometers) 
off the New South Wales town of Merimbula. The dead were both Australians: 
the yacht's owner-skipper Bruce Guy and crewman Phil Skeggs. The four 
confirmed deaths from the storm have already made this the deadliest 
Sydney-to-Hobart race. Prior to this week's carnage, there had been 
only two reported deaths in the 54-year history of Australia's greatest 
yacht race. The 725-mile (1,160-kilometer) race starts the day after 
Christmas and attracts top-class sailors and yachts from around the 
world. Of the 115 yachts that entered this year, 70 withdrew from 
the race. Six boats were abandoned or sank. Race organizers said a 
full inquiry would be held into the world's worst yachting disaster 
since the Fastnet race off Ireland in 1979, in which 15 sailors died. 
Helicopters hovered over 35-foot (10.5-meter) swells to hoist dozens 
of sailors to safety. Many of the crew members were injured _ with 
broken bones, dislocated shoulders, cuts on the face and hands _ from 
being struck by broken rigging or tossed upside down when their boats 
capsized. The bodies of Lawler and Bannister were winched Tuesday 
from a 9-foot (2.7-meter) swell. Navy helicopter pilot Tanzi Lea found 
them two miles (3.2 kilometers) apart and 50 miles (80 kilometers) 
offshore. The three Winston Churchill crew members disappeared after 
six of their crew mates were plucked from two life rafts in the 30-foot 
(9-meter) seas of Bass Strait. Helicopter pilot Nic Trimmer said the 
three were washed away by a single wave. Winston Churchill skipper 
Richard Winning, who was rescued off one of the boat's life rafts, 
told of a frantic struggle to stay alive. ``After we got into the 
life raft and became separated from the others, the damned thing capsized 
twice on these great seas at night, which is bloody frightening, let 
me tell you,'' Winning said. Chris Dickson, helmsman of the first-place 
Sayonara, said his boat's crew was thinking more about the sailors 
in trouble than the victory. ``Being here first is nice, but being 
here at all is a big thing, and we're thinking about those who are 
still out there, not thinking too much about how we've done,'' Dickson 
said. ``Anyone who is not scared in those conditions is not human,'' 
he added. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>