<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981229.0201 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yemeni officials started negotiations Tuesday with Islamic extremists 
for the release of 16 Western tourists as security forces encircled 
the area where the militants are said to be holding the hostages. 
Gov. Ahmad Ali Mohsen of Abyan province, where the kidnappings occurred, 
is talking with leaders of the Al-Fadl tribe, an official at the governor's 
office said. Mohsen was accompanied by Islamic personalities influential 
with the abductors, the official said on condition of anonymity. A 
security official said about 200 troops were deployed Tuesday in Abyan. 
Tribes often kidnap tourists in Yemen to gain government concessions 
such as new roads, water supply or clinics. The hostages are usually 
released unharmed. This was the first time an abduction has been carried 
out by Islamic extremists. Security officials said the kidnappers 
belong to Islamic Jihad, many of whose leaders fought in Afghanistan 
and are believed to have connections with Egyptian Muslim radicals. 
The kidnapping occurred Monday near the southern town of Mawdiyah, 
about 200 kilometers (175 miles) south of the capital, San`a. The 
hostages include 12 Britons, six of them women, two American women 
and two Australian men. Britain's ambassador to Yemen, Victor Henderson, 
told Britain's Sky News that none of the hostages has been harmed. 
The group is demanding the release of its leader, Saleh Haidara al-Atwi, 
who was arrested two weeks ago as part of a government crackdown on 
Islamic vigilantes enforcing strict Islamic rules in southern Yemen. 
The kidnappers also want the release of another leader, said security 
officials who did not identify him. They said Islamic Jihad members 
flog women for ignoring the Islamic dress code and men for selling 
and drinking alcohol, which is forbidden in Islam. The group, which 
has no more than 200 members, also ran a military camp in southern 
Yemen, officials said. The kidnappers, who included 10 gunmen and 
eight others, ambushed a convoy of five vehicles in which the tourists 
were traveling and opened fire on a number of policemen escorting 
them, officials said. The gunmen threatened to kill the hostages if 
the police didn't back off, said one official. He said all the gunmen 
sported beards typical of Islamists and had military training. During 
the melee, the British tour leader and a Yemeni guide escaped. The 
Australian Embassy in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, which handles Yemen, said 
a diplomat was on his way to San`a on Tuesday to try to secure the 
release of the hostages. In April, a British couple and their teen-age 
son were kidnapped but released unharmed a month later. Four Germans 
are also being held at present by a tribe in northeast Yemen. The 
kidnappers are demanding more schools, hospitals and telephone lines 
in their area. Yemen was once a haven for Islamic militant fugitives 
from other countries, but the government has expelled many of them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>