<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981229.0184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Police used ``highly questionable'' procedures in collecting DNA samples 
from sacked Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim, a state doctor testified 
Tuesday in Anwar's sex and corruption trial. Dr. Zahari Noor, a forensic 
expert at the state-run General Hospital, the prosecution's 20th witness, 
testified that he took blood samples from Anwar on Sept. 28th. Anwar 
was at police headquarters, eight days after his arrest. He agreed 
to give blood samples that were to be tested for the HIV virus, hepatitis 
and venereal disease, Noor said. Anwar was fired by Prime Minister 
Mahathir Mohamad on Sept. 2, after Mahathir deemed him morally unfit 
to lead the country. He is on trial for abuse of power and will be 
tried separately on charges of engaging in illegal sex acts, including 
sodomy. Anwar has denied all the accusations against him, saying they 
were trumped up to eliminate his challenge to Mahathir's 17-year rule. 
Noor testified Tuesday that Anwar never gave permission for his blood 
to be tested for DNA. He said police demanded the blood more than 
two months later so they could test it for DNA. Defense attorney Christopher 
Fernando asked whether the blood would still be viable for DNA testing. 
``The results of the DNA testing done on this sample would be highly 
questionable,'' Noor said. ``The blood being sent after about two 
and one-half months ... is an inordinate delay by any standard.'' 
Noor said the blood cells containing the DNA would have perished because 
no anti-clotting chemicals had been added to Anwar's original blood 
samples. When the prosecution went back to Noor, however, he conceded 
``it's possible to obtain DNA from a substantially degraded blood 
sample.'' On Monday, Dr. Halim Haji Manzar, a pathologist at General 
Hospital, testified that the blood taken from Anwar was given directly 
to police and they never had a chance to test it for sexually transmitted 
diseases. The prosecution was expected to put state DNA experts on 
the stand to testify that DNA samples taken from Anwar matched those 
of semen stains found on a mattress in an apartment where Anwar allegedly 
carried on sexual trysts. The defense, anticipating this tactic, is 
trying to show that at no time did Anwar give permission for his blood 
to be tested for DNA. Defense attorneys Monday implied that hair and 
semen samples may have been taken from Anwar while he was unconscious 
after his beating in police custody. Fernando on Tuesday popped a 
question that led to strenuous prosecution objection, which was overruled 
by trial judge Augustine Paul. He asked Noor: ``When you examined 
Sukma Darmawan, you found that he had no homosexual history when you 
conducted an anal test on him?'' Sukma, Anwar's adopted brother, was 
sentenced to six months in jail on Sept. 19 after confessing that 
he allowed Anwar to sodomize him in April. Homosexuality is a crime 
in this predominantly Muslim nation. Sukma, currently out on bail, 
says he was mentally and physically abused by police and coerced into 
making a guilty plea, which he is now appealing. Noor testified that 
he examined Sukma on Sept. 9 and determined there was no evidence 
of anal intercourse. ``He denied any history of homosexual activity,'' 
Noor said. ``When I examined his private parts there was no evidence 
of injuries, whether recent or old.'' The prosecution's next witness, 
Lim Kong Boon, a state DNA expert, said police gave him several bags 
containing different samples of Anwar's body hair obtained in November. 
His department, which conducts DNA analysis, also received the mattress 
and a pillow allegedly being used by Anwar during illegal trysts, 
Lim said. Lim pulled out a pair of white latex gloves and donned them 
in court when he was asked to examine the samples. Paul, looking bemused, 
asked Lim why he had to do that. ``I'm the DNA man,'' replied Lim, 
drawing laughter from the public gallery. The day's proceedings were 
adjourned before Lim established whether the DNA samples taken from 
Anwar actually matched the semen stains found on the mattress. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>