<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981229.2130.1516 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Going from the stage to screen, and covering all points of depravity 
in between, the new film, "hurlyburly," is indulging itself in the 
dysfunctional side of Hollywood. Paul Vercammen reports. I know you 
think you know what you're saying, but you're not saying it. No, I 
know what I'm saying. I don't know what I mean, but I know what I'm 
saying. Is that what you mean? "hurlyburly" showcases Sean Penn, Kevin 
Spacey, chazz palminteri, garry Shandling, Robin Wright Penn, Meg 
Ryan and Anna Paquin. It's an adaptation of the 1980s play involving 
decadence, debauchery and desperation among Hollywood players. And, 
yes, I've met those kind of guys. But certainly otherwise I've never 
spent long evenings doing drugs with anyone other than my dad. No, 
that's a -- I can't -- that's a joke. That's a joke. He was doing 
them on his own. Well, it's like Garry Shandling said, you know, "if 
you can't make it home to see your own dysfunctional family, come 
spend it with ours in 'hurlyburly.'" We all know each other so well, 
and Garry fit into this group like he'd been a member of the family 
for a long, long time. There were many nights where we actually could 
not stop giggling. "night" is the operative word here. Most of "hurlyburly" 
was shot well past midnight. Strange things happen at 3:30 A.M. It 
helped us to stay into that zone and to stay tortured and to use those 
vibes and those feelings, so everything came out organically. We had 
a lot of fun. You know, there's -- a lot of the material is very serious 
and sort of emotionally burdensome. So it had -- there's a lot of 
levity amongst that group, and it was a Pleasure, really. The second 
whack I put on this guy was beyond the realm of normal human punches! 
He could have disintegrated. He's got violent karma, I'm telling you. 
Spacey made a confession. He sported a yak hair wig for the role of 
Mickey, played previously by christopher walken in the play. One night 
while filming, Spacey and walken randomly crossed paths. He looked 
at me and had that instant reaction to what was on my head, you know, 
the yak we were speaking of earlier. And he looked at me and went, 
"nice hair." And then he left. Filming "hurlyburly" just inspired 
offbeat storytelling. I did have the makeup department cut me off 
last week. I've never had that, like a bar where they said, "that's 
enough." And then, they were so worried, they said, "do you have someone 
driving you home?" That's how much makeup I had on, evidently. In 
"hurlyburly," the whole cast could use a designated driver. Paul Vercammen, 
"CNN Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>