<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981229.0130.1467 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The actors that made the most noise in Hollywood this year come from 
different backgrounds. One has been making hit movies for years, and 
the other is just coming into her own. Paul Vercammen reports. Tom 
Hanks and Cameron Diaz, unofficial Hollywood cover king and queen 
of the year. 1998 brought them hit movies that dominated the late-summer 
box office and award recognition, including golden globe acting nominations 
-- Cameron Diaz, "there's something about Mary." -- Diaz for the raucous 
comedy. She captured the New York film critic's best actress as well. 
Tom Hanks, "saving private Ryan." The golden globes honored Hanks 
for the world war II epic. You know -- and finding him so he can go 
home. If that earns me the right to get back to my wife, well, then 
-- then that's my mission. The exhausting project united Hanks with 
his friend, director steven Spielberg. Steven's a genius, you know? 
And I -- I'd walk through hell in a gasoline suit to work with a good 
filmmaker like Steven is. He was a friend of mine. It was like, "look, 
I'll do this but you gotta promise to treat me like anybody else," 
you know. Let's not -- let's not sugar-coat anything. The zany ferrelly 
brothers directed Diaz in "there's something about Mary." And she 
dead-panned about the experience. It was all right. I mean, it's not 
everything that everybody says it was, you know? You have lollipops. 
They have fudgesicles. They have popsicles. But they don't have any 
other meat on a stick. Meat -- yes. Now Diaz is being called a budding 
comedy star. I grew up -- my family, we -- laughing is what we did 
together. We were always laughing. And we were -- I was always being 
encouraged to say something funny, because my mom laughed at anything. 
Literally. You calling me from jail? Diaz also starred in a dark comedy 
in 1998, "very bad things," while Hanks re-entered the romantic comedy 
genre with yet another number one hit, "you've got mail." Glad to 
be here. The main chute is green. Plus, Hanks produced "from the earth 
to the Moon," HBO's Emmy award winner for best miniseries. The great 
thing that I think we all wanted to capture in the course of these 
12 hours was this concept of national will and consensus and optimism, 
by the way, and faith in the fact that enough people working together 
for a long enough time can do anything. More award possibilities on 
the horizon. Hanks is considered a shoo-in for an academy award nomination 
for "saving private Ryan." Diaz is a long shot. The academy is notoriously 
cruel to comedies. Diaz appears to take everything in stride. No gloating 
over her performances. You always look at it and go, "what the hell 
was I thinking? And can I please do it again? I know what I'm going 
to do now. I know what -- I know how to play the character. I know 
how to say that line." Modesty also defines Hanks. Many world war 
II veterans believe he deserves the Oscar for "saving private Ryan." 
Just as Hollywood outsiders applauded Hanks' academy award-winning 
performances in "Philadelphia" and "forrest gump." It's all about 
the reason you've been nominated. And it's all about the movie that 
you made. And it's always about whatever that did to, you know, to 
the social consciousness of it. Hanks and Diaz became part of the 
national consciousness after their great '98. Paul Vercammen, "CNN 
Entertainment News," Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>