<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981229.0130.0157 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the 106th Congress prepares to convene, preparations for a Senate 
trial of President Clinton are intensifying. Candy Crowley looks at 
some undecided senators who could swing the verdict. When the going 
gets tough, the Senate's 45 democrats go to republicans -- speed-dial 
republicans that democrats frequently call on when they're trying 
to put together a majority. The most seasoned of the republican moderates, 
Rhode Island's John Chaffee, consistently searches for ways to soften 
GOP bills he thinks are too rigid. Up for his fifth term in 2000, 
the senator remains open to all possibilities -- emphasis on "all." 
You're not saying yes to a censure right now, or you're not saying 
no to a Censure. That's right. I'm not saying yes, and I'm not saying 
no. I want to see the lay of the land, see -- we'll start with some 
evidence and actually, I think that will be one of the big items right 
at the beginning to decide, "do they have to put in fresh evidence 
or can we go by the record?" The most liberal republican in the Senate, 
Vermont's Jim jeffords, votes with democrats more often than any other 
republican. Jeffords thinks a protracted trial is not in the country's 
best interests. He is inclined to support some sort of censure. Jeffords 
is up for re-election in 2000. As is Maine's Olympia Snowe. A first-termer, 
Snowe has frequently tried to smooth the edges of GOP legislation. 
On this issue, she thinks the punishment should fit the offense. She 
has not embraced censure but remains open to it. Moving into her third 
year, Maine's other republican senator, Susan collins, has shown surprising 
independence for a freshman. She is open to all possibilities, but 
may well want a presidential admission to lying under oath as part 
of any censure deal. The highest profiles in the moderate cadre are 
two possible presidential candidates in 2000. Conventional wisdom 
would dictate that neither Arizona's John McCain or tennessee's Fred 
Thompson would want to upset the party's conservative base. But neither 
man has proven particularly conventional. The problem with the go-to 
list is that it assumes a lot that is unknown. It assumes that all 
republicans, except those on the go-to list, want a Full-blown trial 
and a conviction. not so. It assumes that all democrats want a censure. 
not so. It assumes most of all that that everyone has made up their 
minds. not so. The one assumption we can take for granted, is that 
some of these assumptions will prove not true. Candy Crowley, CNN, 
Capitol Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>