<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981229.2100.2375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Our next two guests tonight remember the events that unfolded in 1968 
quite well. Doris kearns Goodwin is one of the foremost historians 
in this country having written biographies of Lyndon Johnson and the 
Kennedy family. She is in Boston tonight. Also with us from Boston, 
oddly a man who shares the same last name, richard Goodwin, assistant 
special counsel to President John Kennedy and later a speechwriter 
and campaign advisor to R.F.K., also worked for L.B.J. but that's 
a whole other story. To the goodwins, we welcome you both tonight. 
Doris, we'll begin with you. Have you any doubts that we would have 
been talking about President Robert francis Kennedy? I'm not so sure 
of that actually. I think that it's possible that it would have been 
a very tough problem for him to actually win that convention. Hubert 
Humphrey had come in. He had lots of delegates. Obviously the spirit, 
the passion, the desire of a lot of people was for bobby Kennedy but 
I'm not sure he would have become president. Years later George bush 
coined the phrase big Mo for momentum. That's what he did have at 
the time of his assassination. Could you argue, could you make a case 
that he would have steamrolled into the convention that he could have 
painted coyly let's say Humphrey as a Product of the past, all the 
right reasons to go against the war that kind of thing? Brian, that's 
exactly the tactic he would have used. But you couldn't win on the 
primaries alone. Most of the candidates -- a lot of the delegates 
were chosen by state political leaders or bosses as we used to call 
them. A lot of those had been pressured to go to Humphrey who wanted 
to make sure bobby Kennedy didn't get the nomination. The night Ken 
bee was killed I was in the ambassador hotel with him. We had to retreat 
to a bathroom there and have a private conference, there were so many 
people. He started going over all the delegate counts and what we 
now knew. At that point he figured the chances were 50-50. He was 
anxious to get McCarthy to drop out after California so as he said 
he could chase Hubert's ass all over the country. When you look at 
Doris, 1968 and the images, everyone thinks of "life" magazine because 
that was the leading medium as chronicler and you think of the daisy 
and the barrel of the gun and you think of L.B.J. and you think of 
R.F.K. does any one image jump out at you? I think the image that 
jumps out at me because of my emotional involvement with it is that 
image of L.B.J. making the shocking announcement that he was withdrawing 
from the presidential race. I can still remember the picture of his 
face and the lines on his forehead when he told the nation that he 
would not stand for the presidency. He told me later about what was 
going on in his mind before that night. He said he felt so many pressures 
on him. There was a fear there would be more riots in the summer. 
There was a fear there was inflation out of control. Students were 
gathering in thousands of numbers. He said he felt like he was being 
stampeded on all sides and he started dreaming somehow that he had 
become paralyzed in the midst of all this chaos, that his body was 
now Woodrow Wilson's body who had been paralyzed at the end of his 
presidency while his head was still Lyndon Johnson's and that all 
of his advisors were dividing up his power and he couldn't do anything 
about it. He used to wake up and take a flashlight and go out into 
the corridor, see wilson's picture on the wall and convince himself 
he was still Lyndon johnson. So many pressures he couldn't bear it 
any longer and thus he did withdraw. That's the image that sticks 
with me. Dick, it's hard to tell a modern day audience how shocking 
that was. People were not expecting that to come up in the speech. 
This is a president who we now know on tape talking about the other 
President Johnson who proceeded him in the White House and how he 
didn't want to be that kind of troubled man presiding over a troubled 
administration. When we say a handful of people knew about what Johnson 
had planned that night, how many people did know? I would say probably 
a couple of people, close advisors, knew he had it in mind but I don't 
think until he actually said it anyone with certainty knew it would 
happen. I don't think he knew when he started the speech that he was 
going to do it. Remember, I was out in the Wisconsin primary campaigning 
against Johnson that night, and I was watching him on television. 
He looked terrible. He was a very vigorous fellow, a powerful man, 
a great man in many ways. You could see his essence had been drained 
from him. He looked old and debilitated. Then he announced it. We 
were at the hotel full of hundreds or thousands of kids at the hotel. 
They all started yelling celebrations on the streets of Milwaukee 
that night as a result. Dick, let's talk about the relationship between 
R.F.K. and Martin Luther king. R.F.K. was having phones tapped at 
the time. It's probably unfair to call them bosom buddies or close 
friends. There was healthy fear on both sides, correct? That's absolutely 
right. I think that's true and of course, Kennedy had told king that 
he put the taps on at the request of the F.B.I. that was President 
Kennedy who told martin Luther king that so that king was warned of 
it. But I think Bobby and king had essentially the same beliefs, talking 
about -- Thinking about the plight of blacks in America and poverty 
and on issues -- On the issues I don't think they were very far apart, 
at least not at the end. But I do think personally they never were 
very close. Doris, what -- not to sound maudlin, but what died with 
Bobby Kennedy? Well, I think what died with the combination of Bobby 
Kennedy and Martin luther king's death was that sense of forward movement, 
the sense that people could make a difference, that if they work together, 
the country could be changed. So many people when they look back on 
the 1960's remember only those turbulent last months rather than remembering 
what the whole decade represented which was that people felt the public 
issues were cutting into their private lives. They cared about the 
country. They felt they could change the country. I think the combination 
of J.F.K.'s and king's and Bobby Kennedy's assassinations took the 
forward progress away and it sent us into a more private seeking different 
generation that we now still see with us today. Dick, a lot of people 
forget who broke the news to R.F.K.'s children that their father died, 
a man we saw go up into space a second time, John Glenn. Right, John 
Glenn did it. You asked about enduring images. I was at the ambassador 
that night and the image of Bobby Kennedy on the floor of that kitchen 
is one that will live with me and a lot of other people who have seen 
that picture. But a lot more than that was dying. It was a fantastic 
year, 1968, because it began -- although the country was in the middle 
of a war, it began with a flush of hope. The McCarthyids were walking 
the streets of New Hampshire. King was leading the civil rights revolution. 
Bobby was preparing himself for a race which he wasn't certain would 
happen. There was a lot of hope in those first few months. Then it 
all began to unravel. King died. Bobby himself was shot, and by the 
end of the year, Richard Nixon had won the election. And the past, 
which had been assaulted and the old order, which the people had thought 
-- we thought we were going to successfully assault was back in the 
saddle and would continue to reign. To former presidential aide Dick 
Goodwin and to the woman who was at that time just a scholar named 
Doris kearns thank you for coming in tonight. It's been interesting 
talking about the year 1968. You're welcome, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>