<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981229.2100.0922 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The timing couldn't be worse but that is often the case this time 
of year. All across the country, various weather systems have caused 
watches and warnings to be posted tonight during this time of very 
heavy travel for millions of Americans. The situation appears to be 
worse in the pacific northwest where after a Three-day deluge they've 
suffered the worst flooding in years and for some it's getting still 
worse. Our report from NBC's Mike Boettcher. No relief for the pacific 
northwest, just more rain. And today Oregon is taking the brunt of 
it. Rivers are spilling over their banks, inundating homes and farm 
land. Heavy rain swamps a plant in corvallis and sewage spilled into 
the willamette. Hardest hit the small town of tillamook which was 
isolated by flood waters and mudslides. The water receded today leaving 
behind a mess that will take months to clean up. The amount of rain 
and amount of predicted rain -- we could have them everywhere. Dozens 
of mudslides blocked numerous roads creating a traffic nightmare all 
through Oregon's west coast. Whenever you get freezing conditions 
and then a warming spill, you can get these kind of slides. One of 
those mudslides swept away this house leaving only the Christmas lights 
intact. Further north flood warnings were issued for six Washington 
rivers. They are barely holding within their banks but constant rain 
today could spell trouble tomorrow. A nursing home near McKenna, Washington, 
which was threatened by flood waters, was evacuated as a precaution. 
The residents sought Shelter in a nearby church. Everybody is asking 
when we can go home. So I'm ready. The culprit behind the rising rivers 
is a warm wet weather system known across the pacific northwest as 
the pineapple express. The system pumps an enormous amount of moisture 
from the south pacific all the way to the northwest U.S. a giant rain-making 
machine that oceanographer Bill patzert blames on El Nino's cold water 
cousin, La Nina. This winter we are seeing a cool La Nina situation 
which tends to steer our weather delivery systems right into the pacific 
northwest. A by-product of that weather system is still causing travel 
delays in San francisco, fog. San Francisco international was operating 
at half capacity today after being closed much of yesterday. Looking 
out the window to see if there is any fog. But thankfully not. Rain, 
sleet, snow and fog, take your pick. It's here in the pacific northwest 
and heading east creating headaches for the holidays. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>