<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981229.2100.0203 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As we mentioned, today's meeting on the hill was the first of many 
designed to map out what is the trial of the president in the Senate. 
NBC news correspondent chip Reid was there and is with us for a look 
at what went on and what is next for all of us. Good evening, Brian. 
When those republicans emerged from that meeting today there was enough 
talk of process and procedure to make one's eyes glaze over so let's 
skip that and go to the issues that they did address after repeated 
questioning from the press. Number one, the question of witnesses. 
Will there be real people, live witnesses on the floor of the Senate? 
Some of those republicans in the house agree with Trent Lott that 
there should not be live witnesses that they should do it on the basis 
of documentary evidence but there are a number of them who disagree. 
Here is Bill McCollum, republican of Florida. I personally believe 
they ought to hear from witnesses and if there could be stipulations 
of this material then so be it. Stipulations to a certain extent help. 
But I would think they would want to hear from some people live because 
you do have the opportunity and should have it for cross-examination. 
This is the trial. Brian, most of the house managers conceded that 
it is the Senate's responsibility, they are in charge. It's their 
decision. The house does have some input but the Senate will ultimately 
decide. Contentious issue number two, remember last week the republican 
whip saying there is material locked away in the house document room 
or house vault that has not seen the light of day that he recommended 
senators go over and read and that 67 votes to remove the president 
might appear out of thin air if they do so. Well, some of the members 
of the house management team, managers team were asked about that 
today. Some of them believe it would not be fair at this point to 
bring out that evidence. Here is James Rogan of California. I personally 
don't think that material should be used in the trial that was not 
brought up before the house Judiciary committee or members of the 
house were not privy to formally before we voted on the articles of 
impeachment. It would be somewhat tough in fairness to the president 
and the White House to ask them to defend against potential evidence 
that's still under seal that nobody has the right to talk about or 
acknowledge. Brian, Trent Lott tried very hard today and seems to 
have succeeded. Yesterday all the buzz was about censure. That buzz 
was created by the democrats. Today the buzz was about moving to a 
short trial and moving to it quickly. And he started off the day by 
being quoted in "the Los Angeles times." He told the democrats to 
calm down on this issue of censure. What they need to do is focus 
on the facts and the way to do that is to actually get to a trial 
very quickly. He said -- Under Trent Lott's plan, they coo skip over 
this issue of censure at this point and they would go directly to 
a vote. Many democrats concede, the president would win. There would 
not be 67 votes to remove him. After that they could take up a censure 
resolution but at that point there is very little incentive for the 
White House to participate. Brian? Chip Reid with a view from the 
hill. Now let's talk to two members. With us tonight one manager of 
the impeachment effort and a strenuous dissenter. Congressman Asa 
Hutchinson from Arkansas, one of the 13 so-called house impeachment 
managers who attended today's meeting on the hill. Congressman Barney 
Frank of Massachusetts. He voted against impeachment of the president. 
He is with us from Washington as well. Congressman Hutchinson, you 
know I'm anticipating you're going to say that we have no right telling 
the Senate how this should be handled. But this is, counselor, your 
case. You brought the case in a sense to the upper chamber. Now what? 
Well, I think it's important for us to present a case. That's our 
constitutional responsibility. Look at it this way, Brian, that on 
January 7 when the chief justice of the United States Supreme Court 
swears in the senators to do impartial justice, they're sworn. They're 
to have a clean slate, set aside all prejudices. What's going to fill 
that slate? What's going to fill the evidence? And that's what they're 
going to have to make a decision on. If there's not any evidence presented 
they have nothing except their biases in which to form a judgment. 
I think it's important to present witnesses, to present a trial as 
we're obligated to do so they can do justice and determine the facts 
and make a Conclusion for our country. Congressman Frank, what is 
this -- I know you can't say but perhaps you can characterize this 
-- evidence Tom delay keeps alluding to that is under seal and wait 
till you see this. It is evidence that the spirit of the late Joe 
McCart theism is alive and well. It's despicable to overcome the weakness 
of the real case. No we can't talk about it. I think Mr. delay was 
counting on that. This really is McCarthyism of the worst sort. Congressman 
Rogan said it would be unfair. This is part of the problem. Tom delay 
has been a major factor in the process. He is bidding to lead the 
right wing to power. This effort -- it was one of the things I found 
particularly outrageous in david schippers' presentation. When he 
began his presentation by saying here are the facts but boy, there 
are a lot of other bad things I can't bring up. This whole history, 
the assault on Bill Clinton, has been a series of things presented 
almost all of which have gone away. The F.B.I. files, the travel office, 
Whitewater. The house Judiciary committee at the end of this process 
went up the hill to look at campaign finance and came back down again. 
So what you have is this. They want to impeach the president, remove 
him from office because when he went to the grand jury and admitted 
there had been inappropriate contact between him and Monica Lewinsky, 
he denied he had touched her in certain places and he denied that 
they had had phone sex as many times as Mr. schippers said. They understand 
it's a weak case for throwing a man out of office who won an election. 
You get this outrageous McCarthyite from Tom delay. Congressman, though, 
to buy that you have to buy the whole package that to want him out 
means that they like the prospect of a President Gore campaigning 
for re-election with that big shiny blue, white and silver plane that 
he would fly into cities and towns across the country and make him 
a lot tougher as a competitor? Not necessarily. It didn't help Gerald 
Ford but that's not the point. This isn't being driven by calculating 
politicians on the whole. It's being driven by the right wing's obsessive 
anger against president bill Clinton. Tom delay I think sees himself 
as the leader of the right wing. Newt Gingrich is gone. He has become 
the leader of the republicans in the house. I agree, this is not a 
rational calculation on the part of mainstream conservatives, people 
like Bob Dole and Gerald Ford are not for this. This is the right 
wing. This is the anger they have against Bill Clinton. This is their 
effort to get revenge on him. Congressman Hutchinson, do you feel 
the process would be subverted by a Deal, do you feel it should continue, 
play itself out and maybe after some semblance of a trial perhaps 
announce something? Well, first I would agree with Mr. Frank that 
the determination of the senate should be based upon the evidence 
presented and not based upon what might be in some evidence locker. 
I think we need to deal with the facts. That's what I hope that we 
can present to the Senate in a fair fashion. In regards to the censure 
or other possible deal that might be out there, we're at the mercy 
or we're at the structure of the United States Senate. They're there 
to call the shots to determine the direction that we're going to go. 
So they're going to have a lot to say about that, but our obligation 
is to present the evidence. We have a trial. That's what our founding 
fathers designed. To make a determination of it. By way of thanking 
you both, we have to leave it at two questions each. I appreciate 
you coming on the broadcast tonight. Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>