<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981229.2100.1803 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
24 years after Richard Nixon became the first American president to 
resign from office, four years since his death, lawyers for his estate 
are still deep in legal battle with the federal government. It's been 
going on for almost a quarter of a century. The two-term presidency 
left a lot behind, and that is what a lot of this fight is all about. 
NBC news justice correspondent Pete Williams prepared our report tonight 
for "today" on NBC. It's one of Washington's longest-running legal 
battles. Lawyers for Richard Nixon's estate and the federal government 
still fighting over the papers he amassed as president. 42 million 
pages along with 2,700 hours of audiotapes he secretly recorded in 
the White House, a quarter century of legal wrangling comes down to 
one issue, how much does the government owe Mr. Nixon's children and 
estate for all of it? Stanley Mortenson, the Nixon family lawyer, 
puts the answer in eight figures. We have asked the court to award 
a figure of approximately $35 million. When Nixon resigned in 1974, 
he wanted to take his papers with him as every president before had. 
But the Watergate special prosecutor feared Nixon would destroy some 
of it. So Congress declared that all the material now in the national 
archives belonged to the government, not Mr. Nixon. For the last 20 
years of his life, he fought that restriction bitterly but had only 
one big legal victory. A federal court ruled he must be compensated 
for the government's confiscation. Were his papers worth $35 million 
at the time they were confiscated? That is a figure that is placed 
on the value by our experts of the total archive, that being the famous 
White House tapes, the president's own files that include massive 
amounts of his own personally handwritten materials. He says Mr. Nixon's 
daughters and other heirs should get $5 million with the rest going 
to the Nixon library in California. But government lawyers say the 
estate should get nothing, insisting that mr. Nixon never intended 
to sell his papers. They say when Nixon was in office he always talked 
about donating them. I am stuck with a lot of papers now that I've 
got to find a way to give away or my heirs will have a terrible time 
to pay the taxes. A recertainer says the former president would never 
have cashed in on the very evidence that cost him the White House. 
But the idea that he would depict certain parts, the juicy parts and 
try to profit from them that doesn't seem plausible or characteristic. 
The only president ever to resign in disgrace still fascinates, inspiring 
a Big Hollywood movie just two years ago. But justice department lawyers 
say if the government does have to pay for documents that never would 
have been sold in the first place, then they're worth about $2 million 
tops. Pete Williams, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>