<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981229.2100.3045 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just try it. The hype surrounding the coming of the year 2000 is impossible 
to avoid. A document published by the California-based wine market 
report warns that for all those hoping to ring in the year 2000 next 
new year's eve with a Bottle of champagne it turns out supply may 
not meet demand. Though there might not be enough to go around, it's 
just a warning and it's early yet. It is either a warning or a brilliant 
piece of marketing. Either way, the bottom line appears to be there 
may be a champagne shortage the night the new century arrives. Can 
hoarding be far behind? Our report on this tonight from NBC news correspondent 
Soledad O'Brien. Tonight I'm going to party like it's 1999 It will 
be the party of the millennium to close the curtain and say farewell 
to the end of the century. The countdown will begin, the ball will 
drop, the champagne will flow, unless they run out. It is a possibility, 
as some analysts now predict a worldwide shortage of champagne just 
in time for the year 2000. It's as if the whole world wanted to celebrate 
Thanksgiving on one day, where would turkeys be? That's the kind of 
thing that we're facing here. David brown, the marketing director 
for California sparkling winemaker gloria Ferrer, has predictions 
that are almost dire. The reason -- the already strong sales of champagne 
are expected to grow even more because of the big day. It's up 43% 
this year. That's on top of a couple years. Now going into a millennium 
year with that kind of success, we won't have enough. Last year, 43 
million Americans bought bottles of bubbly. In 1999, that number could 
triple. Match that with the 270 million bottles shold worldwide and 
you're left with only two bottles per person, a short supply for partygoers 
in this country and around the world. At Gloria Ferrer, they have 
set aside one million bottles of sparkling wine for the millennium 
and that's it. You can blame natural limitations. There is no more 
space in the caves, no more grapes and the U.S. harvest has been affected 
by El Nino. The shortage has led to hoarding by retailers and customers. 
I've never seen anything like this in 40 years. Our champagne business 
for the month of December has increased over 30%. So there must be 
some hoarding going on. Michael Aaron, chairman of Sherry Lehman wines 
in New York, predicts even the mid-priced champagnes that run $30 
a bottle could be hard to find and difficult to buy in bulk. There 
could easily be shortages of basically the whole range of champagnes, 
from the mid range right up to the $200 bottles. The once-in-A-lifetime 
occasion is expected to spur people into not only drinking more but 
drinking better champagne. People are going to trade up, and they 
know it will be more expensive. But they will go for it because it's 
a unique experience in mankind. Dom perignon, the high-end champagne 
of choice that costs over $100 per bottle, will be in big demand next 
year but its makers have no intention of emptying their store rooms. 
We have to make sure that having been in business since 1743, for 
255 years, we want to be in business for another period, at least 
as long. Some of the more inexpensive brands of champagne should be 
widely available and while no one is recommending rationing, the advice 
is to stock up now or face the prospect of an empty glass. Soledad 
O'Brien, NBC news, Sonoma, California. And the news gets worse. At 
least for consumers, perhaps better for some suppliers. They expect 
some high end French and California brands to be gone, period, as 
early as September of next year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>