<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981229.2100.1980 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
30 years ago, at about this time of year, at about this time of night, 
television newscasts and some newspapers and magazines were putting 
out special editions, looked back at an extraordinary year that ended 
one era. That year was 1968 and as 1998 draws to a close this evening, 
we begin a Two-part examination of how and why 1968 became so important 
in contemporary American history. It may be remembered most for those 
who were taken from the political scene through assassination. Among 
them, senator Robert F. Kennedy. Robert Kennedy rose to power first 
as his brother John's campaign manager, then his attorney general. 
He continued under President Johnson, then in 1964, Bobby was elected 
the state of New York's junior senator. In the spring of 1968, L.B.J. 
was increasingly identified with an unpopular war that was going against 
him. Members of his own party were going against him as well. The 
Kennedys' relationship with Johnson had always been uneasy, but when 
senator Eugene McCarthy came within a few hundred votes of defeating 
L.B.J. in his own party primary in New Hampshire, Robert F. Kennedy 
decided it was time to go out on his own. He saw opportunity. He sensed 
a beatable president. He had an issue to run on. That is that the 
American people want no more vietnams. Two weeks later, President 
Lyndon Johnson of Texas went on national television and stunned a 
national viewing audience with news he had only shared with a few 
people prior to air time. I shall not seek and I will not accept the 
nomination of my party for another term as your president. Suddenly 
the democratic nomination looked like it was Robert Kennedy's to lose. 
The favorite up till then, vice President Hubert Humphrey, had Lyndon 
johnson's war problem. McCarthy's anti-war message resonated with 
younger voters. But he wasn't Bobby Kennedy. 42 years old, charged 
with passionate idealism, Bobby Kennedy felt poised to unite the warring 
factions that he saw as tearing the country apart. It's on to Chicago 
and let's win there. Thank you. Moments later in the ambassador hotel 
in Los Angeles, California, walking from a ballroom into a kitchen 
packed with supporters cheering on his victory in the California primary, 
Robert Kennedy was shot by 24-year-old surhansurhan. He died the next 
day. A good and decent man who saw wrong and tried to right it, saw 
suffering and tried to heal it, saw a war and tried to stop it. Coming 
almost two months to the day since the king assassination and against 
the backdrop of the growing daily body count out of Vietnam, america 
was growing numb to violence. Shortly after Chicago mayor Richard 
Daly opened the democratic convention, the demonstrations outside 
turned into riots. Again violence replaced any talk of peace on American 
city streets. As the democrats less than wholeheartedly nominated 
Hubert Humphrey, chicago police turned into Warriors outside, savagely 
beating protestors at times. Chicago mayor Daly was even criticized 
by fellow democrats, like respected connecticut senator Abraham ribikoff. 
We wouldn't have to have Gestapo tactics in the streets of Chicago. 
Daly quickly returned the favor. The damage was done. The democratic 
party could not recover in time for the election. A third party challenge 
from Alabama governor George Wallace, a democrat, further divided 
the party and siphoned southern support. Former republican vice President 
Richard Nixon edged Hubert Humphrey by barely half a million votes, 
beginning a whole new and ultimately tragic era in American presidential 
politics. That is one view of 1968. When we come back, we'll get two 
more from two who were there. We will be joined by Doris kearns Goodwin 
and her husband Richard Goodwin. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>