<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981229.1830.1272 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And in Washington, president It is struggling for a reputation of 
homicide at a time when crime is going down almost everywhere else. 
Our stoirp tonight from Pete Williams. Tonight, the city of Baltimore, 
Maryland, is on the verge of becoming a national headline, a grim 
distinction it's fighting to avoid. Two more murder victims overnight, 
bringing this year's total to 312, the same as last year. Hoping to 
keep homicide from passing last year's toll, police have pulled officers 
from their desk jobs. Many cops who don't normally walk a beat, like 
sergeant Marvin froneberger, a 31-year veteran of the force, now in 
community relations. One of about 100 officers sent out on the street 
in only the past month. We have spread this out so that everybody 
gets to work some of it, so that our normal duties aren't entirely 
neglected. But while most big cities like New York and Los Angeles 
can brag of big drops in murder, Baltimore's annual rate stands stubbornly 
high, averaging well over 300 for the past seven years. That works 
out to 46 murders for every 100,000 people there, more than six times 
the national murder rate. Why so bad in Baltimore, the city that's 
the setting for the TV series, "Homicide: life on the street"? Police 
say more than three quarters of their murders are related to the drug 
trade. So the extra patrols concentrate on street corner drug markets. 
But some community groups say December is just too late to make a 
Difference. Unfortunately, I think it's something we need to start 
on earlier in the year. Something we need to start January first. 
Police say they have been steadily putting more cops on the street. 
They defend their last-minute push to put desk officers in squad cars. 
We can stop our administrative processes for a certain period of time. 
We can't stop them forever. As we close out this year, I think it's 
our obligation to do as much as we can to keep those crime numbers 
down. Criminologists say Baltimore has been hobbled by a chronic heroin 
problem and a lack of money to fight murder, as other cities have, 
by giving crime-prone young people something else to do. The answer 
that has worked in other cities is to get more adults back into the 
lives of our teenagers, to supervise them, to guide them, to encourage 
them. To give them support. But for now, Baltimore will fight with 
what it has, extra cops for another few nights, hoping to slow the 
killing, but no longer able to make this year safer than last. Pete 
Williams, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>