<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981229.1830.0073 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. The timing of our first item tonight count be worse 
but that is often the case at this time of year. All across the country, 
from the west coast to the east, various weather systems have caused 
watches and warnings to be posted. For millions of Americans, the 
situation appears to be the worse in the pacific northwest this evening, 
where after a three-day Dell you'll, they are suffering the worst 
flooding in years. And for some, it's getting worse. That's where 
we'll begin with NBC's Mike Boettcher. No relief for the pacific northwest. 
Just more rain. And today, Oregon is taking the brunt of it. Rivers 
are spilling over their banks, inundating homes and farmland. Heavy 
rains, swamp, a waste water treatment plant in corvallis and millions 
of gallons of untreated sewage spilled into the Willamette river. 
Hardest hit, the small coastal town of tillamook, which was isolated 
overnight by flood waters and mudslides. The water receded today, 
leaving behind a mucky mess that will takes months to clean up. With 
the amount of rain and the amount of predicted rain, we could have 
them everywhere. Dozens of mudslides block numerous roads and highways, 
creating a Traffic nightmare all through Oregon's west coast. Whenever 
you get freezing conditions and then a warming spell, you can get 
these kinds of slides. One of those mudslides swept away this house 
leaving only the christmas lights intact. Further north, flood warnings 
were issued for six Washington rivers. They are barely holding within 
their banks. But constant rain today could spell trouble tomorrow. 
A nursing home near McKenna, Washington, which was threatened by floodwaters 
was evacuated as a precaution. The residents sought Shelter in a nearby 
church. Everybody is asking when we can go home. I'm ready. The culprit 
behind the rising rivers is a warm and wet weather system known in 
the pacific northwest as "the pineapple express." The system pumps 
an enormous amount of moisture from the south pacific all the way 
to the northwest U.S., a giant rainmaking machine that oceanographer 
Bill patzert blames on El Nino's cold water cousin La Nina. This winter 
we're seeing a very cool La Nina situation that tends to steer our 
weather deliver system right into the pacific northwest. a by-product 
of that weather system is still causing travel delays in San Francisco 
fog. San Francisco international was operating at half capacity today, 
after being closed much of yesterday. We're looking at the windows 
to see if there was any fog 37 but thankfully not. Rain, sleet, snow 
and fog. Take your pick. It's here in the pacific northwest and heading 
east, creating headaches for the holidays. Mike Boettcher, NBC news, 
Seattle. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>