<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981229.1830.1589 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
"Living better" tonight -- for about 3 million Americans, it's the 
first thing they think of in the morning, and the very last thing 
at night. Rheumatoid arthritis can cripple quality of life. Tonight, 
there's word that new medications are on the way. But that raises 
the question, "at what cost?" Here's NBC's chief science correspondent 
Robert Bazell. John DeSheplo suffered terrible debilitating pain from 
rheumatoid arthritis, but he suddenly feels better. My first injection 
was on a Thursday night. And really, by that weekend, my life was 
substantially different. The improvement comes from a new drug approved 
last month by the food and drug administration. It's a product of 
biotechnology where drugs are discovered by directed scientific research, 
not at random like they used to be. This is the most dramatic new 
drug that has come across in the last decade. Researchers at the immune 
response corporation designed the drug, called enbrel, based on new 
discoveries about how body fights infection. Rheumatoid arthritis 
occurs when the immune systems goes haywire, what's called an autoimmune 
disease. For reasons we don't understand, the body tends to attack 
its own tissue rather than protect it. Here is how rheumatoid arthritis 
does its damage. White blood cells that usually fight germs, instead, 
attack the cartilage that cushions the joints. The result -- a smooth, 
healthy joint becomes as pockmarked as the surface of the Moon, stiff 
and often painful. I feel like a tin man, very stiff. I wish someone 
would come along and oil me. To stop the attack on the joints, scientists 
first learned that a Chemical messenger in the body summons the white 
blood cells to the joints. Then they designed the drug to block the 
messenger and shut down the inflammation. Doctors emphasize that though 
effective, it is not a cure. I don't think there will be a cure for 
rheumatoid arthritis. What I am hoping for is that we would be able 
to develop better drugs where we truly can put a larger percentage 
of the patients into remission. Indeed, the FDA also approved a second 
cutting-edge drug called arava. And companies are developing several 
more. But there can be a big problem with these new biotechnology 
drugs. Price. A year's course of enbrel costs more than $12,000 and 
often insurance does not cover medications. But when other treatments 
have failed, for rheumatoid arthritis and many other conditions, the 
new biotech drugs, whatever the price, offer the best hope for "living 
better." Robert Bazell, NBC news, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>