<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0372 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The search has been called off for two missing sailors in the Sydney-to-Hobart 
yacht race, and with four others confirmed dead, the 54th running 
of the event is already the second worst disaster in modern yacht-racing 
history. But beyond the loss of life and vessels, the Australian disaster 
also pointed out that no matter how sophisticated and integral weather 
forecasting has become in modern yacht racing and how well yachts 
are built to withstand extreme conditions, there will always be yachtsmen 
and women who challenge Nature's primacy on the high seas. And that, 
even with warning, man and boat are little match for 90-mile-per-hour 
winds and 35-foot waves. Forecasts for the Hobart race predicted a 
fierce storm along the route, which runs south along Australia's east 
coast, across the eastern edge of Bass Strait, down the east coast 
of Tasmania and up the Derwent River to the city of Hobart. ``It was 
definitely going to occur, it was just a matter to determine where 
it would happen,'' Roger Badham, a professional forecaster for yachtsmen, 
told Reuters on Tuesday. ``On the day of the race, just after it started, 
I saw the next global prediction and I said, `This is Armageddon.''' 
But the boats raced on. ``There was never a concern whether to continue 
on,'' said Bob Wylie, a sail trimmer on Sayonara. ``We were well-informed 
by our navigator about the treacherous weather that was ahead. Last 
evening, we heard the news of people missing, sailors down, on a little 
a.m. radio on boat. The trip had been manageable, and then, we knew 
how deadly it was.'' The Hobart-to-Sydney race also raised questions 
as to where the responsibility of race organizers ends and that of 
the sailors takes over in the decision to continue racing in abject 
conditions. The Australian race showed that officials are loathe to 
infringe upon a sailor's pride or courage when it comes to calling 
off a contest with the sea, and on Tuesday, race officials defended 
themselves from sharp criticism over continuing the contest. But when 
the storm had finally cleared, and as the race continued on Tuesday, 
observers were left to ponder a yacht-racing tragedy, second only 
in scope to the 1979 Fastnet race off Britain when 15 yachtsmen died 
in a storm. Prior to this week's debacle, there had been only two 
reported deaths in the Sydney-to-Hobart, Australia's greatest yacht 
race. The 725-mile race starts the day after Christmas and attracts 
elite sailors and yachts from around the world. Of the 115 yachts 
that entered this year, 70 withdrew from the race because of the hurricane-strength 
winds; six boats were abandoned or sank; and some 56 sailors were 
hauled to safety in a massive airlift operation. ``It was as if I 
were on a wild bronco,'' said Bill Erklens, the captain of Sayonara, 
the American maxi-yacht that won the race, ``and 60-mile-an-hour fire 
hoses of water were shot at me. A solid wave would come in the black 
night in unexpected movements and knock you flat. It hits hard and 
bruises your ribs in smashing waves. One crewman broke his ankle when 
he was pushed off the side of the boat. We were clipped in our safety 
harnesses. We did what we had to to get here and keep the boat in 
one piece.'' ``We wanted to win, but we wanted to get here in one 
piece,'' said Wylie. ``After the news of the injured and missing, 
the crew was real quiet. Ours was an experienced group. We had sailed 
together for three or four years. The other boats didn't have the 
depth _ they might have sailed together in an off-season. ``The sea 
state was the hardest task for us. It was a confused seaway, with 
a sharpness of waves. We had damage, we didn't get off scot-free. 
At night, you don't see the waves coming, there is no rhythm. ``You 
had to anticipate the impact. The jet wash swept me across the deck 
and there was a concern I wouldn't stop. We were mostly ahead of the 
system, with 30-50 knots batting at us. it was really windy and the 
top of the waves dashed on the boat. Just to get through the weaves, 
we told ourselves. They were falling on us, loud, crashing, shuddering. 
And everyone shakes.'' Hugo van Kretschmar, the commodore of the Cruising 
Yacht Club of Australia, the race organizers, promised a review into 
all aspects of the way the race was conducted and the safety standards 
employed. The Australian Maritime Safety Authority, which coordinated 
the massive search and rescue operation for stricken yachts and missing 
crew, has agreed to help. Van Kretschmar said there was a case for 
more frequent and comprehensive weather reports, but he was opposed 
to delaying the start because of adverse forecasts. He said that because 
of the length of the race and the difficulty in accurately predicting 
weather more than two days ahead, a delay could result in the yachts 
ending up in even worse weather. The fleet, which left Sydney in bright 
sunshine on Saturday, was torn apart the next day by the storm that 
strafed the 115 starters with 60-to-80-knot winds and mountainous 
waves. According to John Finch of the Australian Maritime Safety Authority, 
the Australian navy frigate Newcastle and local fishing and merchant 
vessels also joined in the three-day effort over 8,600 nautical miles. 
The Newcastle's final assignment was assisting police in towing the 
40-foot yacht, Business Post Naiad, with two dead sailors aboard. 
``This was horrendous,'' said Finch, a veteran mariner and Maritime 
officer. ``We are career mariners and ex-pilots and this was as horrendous 
as we've witness. We have suspended the search and rescue at 5:15 
p.m. Australian time today. We may never find the two who are still 
missing. It's a big ocean out there.'' One of the missing sailors, 
33-year-old Briton Glyn Charles, had represented Britain in the Star 
Class at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta. The other missing sailor 
was John Dean of Australia, a crew member on the yacht Winston Churchill, 
which sank. The bodies of two Winston Churchill crew members, Jim 
Lawler and Michael Bannister, were found on Tuesday. Two other Australian 
sailors, skipper Bruce Guy and crewman Phil Skeggs, were found dead 
Monday after Business Post Naiad capsized. Of the 39 yachts that survived 
the storm, the 80-foot maxi yacht Sayonara, skippered by the New Zealand 
America's Cup veteran Chris Dickson and owned by the American billionaire 
Larry Ellison, crossed the finish line first in a winning time of 
2 days, 3 minutes, with Brindabella second and Ragamuffin third. The 
last boat is expected to finish on Saturday. Ellison was distraught 
and did not wait around for the winner's ceremony on Saturday, immediately 
flying home to San Francisco. Before he left, however, he lambasted 
officials and said he would never return to the race, ``not if I live 
to a thousand years. ``It was just awful, I've never experienced anything 
remotely like this,'' Ellison said. ``Everyone lines up for this race 
expecting a difficult race, but no one expects a dangerous race. You 
know this is not what this is supposed to be about ... Difficult yes, 
dangerous no, life-threatening definitely not. And I think a lot of 
us are upset.'' Erklens, Sayonara's captain and Ellison's boat project 
manager, put Ellison's words in context with the rest of the crew, 
``He hasn't done a lot of this kind of sailing,'' said Erklens. ``It 
brought it home how dangerous it can be when you are at the mercy 
of the weather. Somehow, I doubt he will ever return here. We all 
have mixed feelings. The adventure of our achievement was one piece 
and then the human loss. That changed our whole psyche and dampened 
the rest of our race.'' Van Kretschmar, who sailed in the 1979 Fastnet 
race, said there were similarities between the two disasters. In both 
cases the problems arose from the weather turning suddenly and unexpectedly 
worse. ``The unsinkable and uncontrollable yacht, like the Titanic, 
doesn't exist,'' van Kretschmar said. ``But we must learn from this 
experience and seek to make the sport safer.'' He also defended the 
international rules that the Australian club follows, which place 
the responsibility on deciding whether to retire firmly on individual 
skippers. ``In 54 years, we've only had two deaths before now,'' van 
Kretschmar said. ``On an international scale, Hobart sets the highest 
standards. We've learned a lot from the experience. I've sailed 18 
races and I'm confident I will do another. But I fear others don't 
know how this race is run and we risk the regulation of government 
authorities. That would run us out of business.'' A Australian Maritime 
Safety Authority spokesman Rick Burleigh supported him. ``In the end, 
it's the skipper's responsibility if he wants to race or not,'' he 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>