<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0394 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On a sunny afternoon four years ago, Richard Rivera stood up from 
his couch, blew a tense stream of air between his lips, picked up 
the telephone and changed his life forever. He called the FBI to say 
that the West New York Police Department, where he worked as a police 
officer, was corrupt. For months, he had heard the rumors and seen 
the indications in this town of 37,000 people across the Hudson River 
from mid-Manhattan. Brothels flourished. Illegal after-hours clubs 
stayed open. Gambling parlors were never raided. ``I finally had to 
ask myself,'' he said, ``whether I could let the corruption just go 
on, or whether something had to be done.'' So Rivera, who comes from 
a family of police officers, said he did something many officers would 
never do. He offered to work with the FBI to gather information on 
his corrupt colleagues and friends. After his initial contact with 
the FBI, Rivera said he embarked on an 18-month undercover journey 
into the criminal underbelly of West New York, posing as a crooked 
officer, taking bribes from businessmen and wearing a body wire to 
tape shopkeepers and tavern owners, some of whom he had known his 
entire life. He spent hours reviewing taped transcripts, and said 
he was so highly esteemed by federal investigators that one official 
told him he had done as much work in his first six months as three 
full-time agents. (The FBI has refused to confirm or deny whether 
Rivera engaged in undercover work.) Rivera's call to the FBI ignited 
the largest police-corruption investigation in New Jersey history, 
which has resulted in the indictment of 34 people in West New York, 
including the chief of police, on charges that included taking bribes 
to protect prostitution; illegal gambling; illicit liquor sales, and 
extorting money from towing companies. Twenty-two people, including 
the chief, have pleaded guilty. In the courthouse, officers like Rivera 
are known as confidential informants. But in the station house, they 
are known as Serpicos (after the officer who exposed extensive corruption 
among the New York City police in the early 1970s), rats and cheese 
eaters. In most cases, police officers who go undercover to catch 
their colleagues in wrongdoing have no choice. Most have committed 
crimes themselves, and strap on body wires to please the authorities 
and reduce whatever penalties they face. But a rare handful, like 
Rivera, come forward of their own accord. Untouched by allegations 
of corruption, these officers are driven by forces from altruism to 
a simple desire to know whether corruption really exists. If their 
motives vary, the consequences rarely do. They often receive harassment 
and death threats. They are sometimes fired by the very police departments 
they put themselves at risk to help. Since making that call in 1994, 
Rivera said, he has been threatened by fellow officers and has moved 
a half-dozen times out of fear for his safety. Most cruelly, he said, 
he was dismissed from his job in July 1996. He said police officials 
fired him in retaliation for his undercover work. Town officials, 
however, said Rivera was fired over several disciplinary charges, 
including an accusation that he asked for a bribe from a construction 
company. Prosecutors say these honest police officers often suffer 
terrible pangs of guilt even as they uphold the law, and contend that 
calling an officer who helps the government an informant or a rat 
reverses the true nature of betrayal. ``It buys into police culture, 
the darkest side of it, to call them informants,'' said Zachary Carter, 
the U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of New York, whose office 
is preparing to prosecute several New York City officers who are accused 
of torturing a Haitian immigrant, Abner Louima, and then trying to 
cover it up. ``Informant, in the vernacular of the street, connotes 
betrayal,'' Carter said. ``But when a police officer bears witness, 
it's not betrayal. It's honoring an oath of office.'' Despite having 
volunteered for the job, Rivera said, he is still surprised that he 
was able to turn his back on people he had known since childhood. 
``I never imagined myself betraying another police officer,'' he wrote 
in an account of his experience that appeared in Law Enforcement News, 
a publication of the John Jay College of Criminal Justice, ``until 
I discovered that it was me, along with law enforcement and the general 
public, who was actually being betrayed.'' Not many police officers 
are willing to pay the price of honor. ``I think the best that can 
be said, given the culture of police work,'' Carter said, ``is that 
there are police officers who are prepared, if asked, to tell the 
truth.'' She said she initially agreed to wear a wire to determine 
the truth of the charges against a few of her friends. But once she 
started, she wrote in a letter describing her experiences, ``It snowballed.'' 
Soon, she was wearing a body wire to tape conversations with several 
officers, their spouses, even their spouses' friends. Once, Ms. Calvert 
said, she took the keys to a department squad car from the station 
house, ran across the street to have them copied at a hardware store 
and returned them before anyone noticed they were missing. Prosecutors 
needed the keys, she said, to bug the squad car. ``I was spying on 
my friends and ratting them out almost every day,'' she said, and 
the guilt preyed on her mind. ``I always thought I would lie or die 
for my friends. I never thought the day would come when I'd actually 
become a rat.'' But as her undercover work increased, so did the threats 
against her, she said. She said that late one night, during the investigation, 
she was drinking coffee with several officers in the station house 
when one began complaining that he had found some squirrels and groundhogs 
digging up the grass in his backyard. The officer then turned to Ms. 
Calvert, she recalled, and asked where he might find a rifle to shoot 
the pests. When she tried to dissuade him from violence, the officer 
looked her in the eye, she said, and told her in an icy voice, ``I 
just want to send a message to all the rats, rodents and varmints 
out there.'' Ms. Calvert, who was never a suspect in the burglary 
investigation that led to convictions or guilty pleas from five Palisades 
Park officers, now wonders if it was a mistake to help prosecutors. 
``I had nothing to gain,'' she said, ``and everything to lose.'' Like 
Rivera, she has lost her police job and her reputation, and has suffered 
physically and mentally. Most days, she said, she is too depressed 
to rise before noon. Such problems are common among police officers 
who turn in peers suspected of corruption, law enforcement experts 
say, and that they are brought on by upholding the law can be cold 
comfort. ``It's always worth it to be at peace with yourself,'' Frank 
Serpico said in a telephone interview. ``But sometimes you realize 
that to do the right thing you have to go against the system. It takes 
a strong character to go against a system of beliefs that is a total 
lie, especially when you're the one left holding the bag.'' In February, 
Rivera sued the town of West New York and its municipal officials, 
seeking $17 million in damages and his job back. Ms. Calvert said 
she planned to renew her own lawsuit for wrongful dismissal against 
the town of Palisades Park. (She allowed the suit to lapse last year.) 
The borough attorney said he had no comment on the lawsuit. Rivera's 
suit contends that the disciplinary charges that led to his dismissal 
were a form of revenge by police officials who could not attack him 
directly for cooperating with the government. West New York officials 
disagree. ``We don't think he was a good cop, and we don't want him 
back as one,'' said George Campen, the town attorney. ``If he was 
out there helping the feds, that's great. But it wasn't a situation 
where we terminated him because of his actions with the feds.'' Before 
he lost his job, Rivera said, he always believed that the federal 
government would come to his aid if he were fired. But when he told 
federal officials that he had been thrown off the force, he said they 
told him it had nothing to do with what he described as his role in 
the corruption investigation, which is continuing. He added that his 
most frustrating experience with federal officials came, according 
to his account, when they turned down repeated requests for a letter 
that would have stated he worked as a confidential informer. The letter, 
he said, would have eased his search for another job and given potential 
employers an explanation for his dismissal from the police force. 
Michael Drewniak, a spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office in Newark, 
which is handling the West New York case, said it is not his agency's 
policy to admit the existence of confidential informers, especially 
in a continuing investigation. Usually, he said, such silence is imposed 
to protect the informer as well as the case. Rivera now spends his 
days working part time as an insurance investigator, a job he says 
does not provide him with enough income to pay his bills. Many nights, 
he said, he swings between exhaustion and insomnia and suffers dizzy 
spells and headaches from the stress. ``There are nights when I sit 
up and think about what's happened, what the future holds,'' he said. 
``My life has been on hold since this investigation began. I'm still 
in limbo to this day.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>