<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0296 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ten years ago, Wayne Williams, a peanut farmer here, would no more 
have considered voting for a black man for Congress than he would 
have planted his crop in the chill of December. Louie Perry Jr., down 
in Colquitt County, felt pretty much the same way. So did J.L. Tillman 
and, truth be told, most every other white farmer who tills the clay 
of southwest Georgia. But in November's election, Williams, Perry, 
Tillman and tens of thousands of others voted enthusiastically for 
Rep. Sanford Bishop, a moderate black Democrat who won re-election 
convincingly in a rural, conservative district where nearly two-thirds 
of the voters are white. Bishop won almost 4 out of every 10 white 
votes in the 2nd District of Georgia, an achievement that would have 
been inconceivable a few years ago. By comparison, David Dinkins won 
just a fourth of the white vote in 1989, when he was elected the first 
black mayor of New York City. Many of Bishop's white supporters acknowledge 
they had to overcome deep prejudices to vote for him. ``I just wouldn't 
have thought a black man would know enough to do the job,'' Williams 
explained. Other white farmers referred to the congressman matter-of-factly 
with the coarsest of racial epithets before explaining what it was 
they liked so much about him. That may seem a perverse compliment. 
But whatever whites want to call Bishop, their willingness to vote 
for him may signify one of the most hopeful developments in Southern 
politics in decades. Many black politicians have managed to attract 
white support in urban, New South areas like Atlanta. But Bishop's 
electoral success suggests that even in the most rural and impoverished 
districts, a significant number of white Southerners can overcome 
race as an absolute obstacle to voting for a black politician who 
shares their thinking, votes their interests and hauls home plenty 
of pork. For years, the unwillingness of such whites to vote for blacks 
has been the cornerstone of redistricting policies aimed at maximizing 
minority representation. As legislatures prepare to reconstitute Congress 
after the 2000 census, the opponents of such redistricting view Bishop 
as the most compelling evidence that black candidates can win in white 
districts. Conversely, those who support race-based redistricting 
attribute Bishop's success to his incumbency, which was gained in 
a majority black district before the Supreme Court ordered a remapping 
in 1992. Bishop's story does not mean that racism is dead in southwestern 
Georgia. Nor does it mean that there are no longer deep racial disparities 
in the rural South in income, housing, education and health care. 
But it does suggest, some three decades after the culmination of the 
civil rights movement, that the racial bitterness born of forced desegregation 
has started to fade, and that old prejudices are giving way to a more 
pragmatic politics of racial cooperation and interdependence. ``There's 
no revolution that's occurred down here,'' said Thomas Chatmon, the 
son of a black civil rights pioneer who has been selected by the power 
structure in Albany, the largest city in the 2nd District, to direct 
a downtown redevelopment effort. ``It doesn't show that whites or 
blacks are willing to be colorblind. But what it does show is that 
southwest Georgians are willing to cohabitate, are willing to work 
together, that they know that there must be compromise on both sides 
in order to move together on our collective agenda. That's the reality. 
And absolutely that is progress.'' It is hard not to see a measure 
of progress here in the gradual subjugation of race by the more natural 
politics of self-interest. During Bishop's three terms in Congress, 
large numbers of white south Georgians have concluded that his accessibility 
and his influence _ particularly with other black Democrats in the 
House _ far outweigh any consideration of race. ``To start with I 
wasn't wild about him, because he was black,'' explained Williams, 
55, a lanky third-generation farmer who grows peanuts and tobacco 
on 84 acres here. ``So many black people around here, you just can't 
count on them. But he went around and made some talks and we liked 
the way he talked. I've met him twice and he talks to you, not above 
your head. If you have a problem, he'll help you out with it.'' Bishop 
has earned the fealty of white constituents through his aggressive 
advocacy for federal farm programs, balanced budgets, welfare reform, 
school prayer and gun ownership. To suit his district, he has switched 
positions on issues like the assault weapons ban, which he first supported 
and later opposed. He advertises himself as a conservative, and reinforced 
that claim by becoming the only black member of the right-leaning 
Democratic caucus known as the Blue Dogs. Bishop also has put his 
white constituents at ease with an affable, nonthreatening manner 
and a determined resistance to playing the firebrand on racial issues. 
He has protected military bases, secured financing for road widenings 
and historical sites, and become a regular at local events like the 
Big Pig Jig in Vienna and the Rattlesnake Roundup in Whigham. He has 
even joined the National Rifle Association and taken up bird hunting, 
although his farmer friends report that the doves are never safer 
than when Bishop is walking the brush. Like many of his constituents, 
James Lee Adams, a prominent white farmer in Camilla, said Bishop 
made a lasting impression by using his seat on the Agriculture Committee 
to persuade black Democrats and urban Northerners to preserve federal 
price supports for peanuts in 1996. ``It's questionable whether it 
would have survived without the votes he brought to it,'' said Adams, 
who is chairman of the agency that administers federal farm programs 
in Georgia. He added: ``I think most of us have gotten beyond the 
white and black issue. We prefer to focus on the green.'' Tillman, 
70, who farms cotton and peanuts just south of Moultrie, also cited 
the peanut program in explaining his support for Bishop. ``Now when 
he came in, he didn't know a thing about peanuts, probably thought 
they grew on trees,'' Tillman said. ``But he's educated himself.'' 
How did Tillman feel about voting for a black man? ``A nigger?'' he 
asked, finishing the question. ``I couldn't have seen doing it before, 
wouldn't even have thought about it. But I think he's done a lot for 
farmers, more than any of them up there in a long time.'' That is 
precisely the message that Bishop, 51, has promoted in campaigns. 
``There were people who never would have imagined voting for me, who 
didn't vote for me the first time,'' he said. ``But the majority vote 
their pocketbooks. They understand the precarious situation that the 
farming community is in and they'll support people that help them.'' 
He added, ``That was actually the key element of Dr. King's dream, 
that blacks could be known by the content of their character rather 
than the color of their skin.'' Nine blacks were elected to Congress 
from majority white districts this year, including several, like Rep. 
Cynthia McKinney of suburban Atlanta and Melvin Watt of Charlotte, 
N.C., who won with notable white support. But none won in a more unlikely 
place than the 2nd District of Georgia. Only 36 percent of the district's 
registered voters are black. The largest city, Albany, has but 78,000 
residents. While the 31-county district remains marginally Democratic, 
whites now support Republicans regularly. The landscape here is a 
patchwork of pecan groves, cotton and peanut fields and quail-hunting 
plantations interspersed with small towns built around courthouse 
squares and cotton gins. This time of year, with the cotton crop just 
in, white tufts litter the roadsides. Blue harvesters churn through 
the pecan groves, sucking fallen nuts off the ground and spewing out 
a mulch of twigs and leaves. Much of this land was first cleared and 
planted by slaves, and the phrase ``plantation mentality'' still resonates 
with many blacks. It was in Albany, where asphalt turned to dirt when 
white neighborhoods turned to black, that the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther 
King Jr. encountered some of the staunchest resistance to the civil 
rights movement. And while south Georgia now has black police chiefs 
and county commissioners, time has not eased all tensions. In Albany, 
for instance, whites and blacks have feuded over whether to rename 
Jefferson Street for King. A black-majority City Commission approved 
the change in 1996. Two months after the signs went up, a newly elected 
white-majority commission ordered them down. And yet there are signs 
of increasing sensitivity. A new civil-rights museum in Albany opened 
in November with biracial backing. A number of the city's civic leaders 
have started to meet regularly to discuss racial issues, with one 
group calling itself White Men Coming to Terms With Our Own Racism. 
But churches and country clubs remain largely segregated, and whites 
tend to move out of neighborhoods that become more than 20 percent 
black, said Michael Rogers, a business professor at Albany State University 
who leads the city's Coalition for Diversity. And blacks in the 2nd 
District, the poorest district in the state, are nearly twice as likely 
as whites to have dropped out of school, more than three times as 
likely to live in poverty and more than 10 times as likely to live 
in homes without adequate plumbing, census figures show. On paper, 
Bishop might not seem a natural fit with the farmers of southwest 
Georgia. He was raised in Mobile, Ala., the son of a black college 
president who demanded that his students register to vote. At age 
10, he defied a Mobile bus driver by sitting in the whites-only section 
of an otherwise empty bus. At Morehouse College in Atlanta, Bishop 
became an admirer of King, the school's most famous graduate. He marched 
in a downtown civil-rights demonstration, served as student-body president 
in 1968, the year that King was assassinated, and sang with the Morehouse 
glee club at his funeral. After graduating from Emory Law School, 
he joined the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund in New York 
City, and later accepted NAACP help in establishing a civil-rights 
law firm in Columbus, Ga. Bishop served in Georgia's General Assembly 
from 1977 to 1992, the year he first ran for Congress. The state legislature, 
encouraged by the Bush administration to create majority black districts, 
had designed a 2nd District where the voting-age population was 52 
percent black. Bishop defeated a vulnerable white incumbent in the 
Democratic primary, and then cruised to victory in the general election. 
He won re-election easily in 1994. By 1996, however, new lines had 
been drawn by federal judges after the Supreme Court ruled that it 
was unconstitutional to use race as a dominant factor in redistricting. 
By redrawing the lines to eliminate concentrations of blacks in Macon 
and Columbus, where Bishop lived, the judges reduced the district's 
black voting-age population to 35 percent. Bishop moved to Albany 
and won anyway, with 54 percent of the vote and an estimated 36 percent 
of the white vote. This year, against a capable and adequately financed 
Republican opponent, Joe McCormick, he polled even better, winning 
57 percent of the total vote, an estimated 38 percent of the white 
vote and 98 percent of the black vote, according to an analysis by 
Charles Bullock, a University of Georgia political scientist. Bishop 
did not, however, do as well with white voters as did some white Democratic 
candidates. For example, in the 12 Colquitt County precincts where 
at least 90 percent of the registered voters were white, Gov.-elect 
Roy Barnes won 53 percent of the vote and Bishop won 41 percent. Still, 
A. Lee Parks Jr., the Atlanta lawyer who successfully challenged the 
racial foundation of Georgia's redistricting plan, said that Bishop 
proved that blacks could be elected to Congress ``without racially 
biased districts.'' ``Sanford actually represents people without regard 
to race, and when he does that people forget his race,'' Parks said. 
Many black politicians, he said, alienate white voters by ``communicating 
that they prefer their black constituents, that their priority is 
serving their black constituents. Often that's what polarizes elections 
on racial lines.'' But supporters of race-based redistricting counter 
that voting remained racially polarized in Bishop's last two elections. 
And they emphasize that a crucial advantage for candidates like Bishop 
was that he was first elected in a majority black district and then 
took the benefits of incumbency to his new white district. ``I'm not 
ready to conclude that we are suddenly a race-blind electorate,'' 
said Laughlin McDonald, director of the Southern office of the American 
Civil Liberties Union. Adams, the farmer from Moultrie, put it a different 
way. ``We haven't arrived yet,'' he said. ``I don't know if you ever 
arrive, if you ever wipe every vestige from your mind. But what's 
most important sometimes is what direction you're going.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>