<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0365 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the prospect of the National Basketball Association season being 
canceled increases, so has talk that a rival league will be formed. 
Many player agents have said recently that if the season was terminated, 
a new league involving some of the NBA's biggest stars could be in 
place by next fall. And in a nationwide conference call on Monday, 
the players association director, Billy Hunter, mentioned for the 
second time in two weeks that the season's cancellation would make 
room for a competing league to step in and ruin the lucrative monopoly 
the NBA has enjoyed for two decades. ``I know that the owners have 
to be aware that there are people out there who are probably anxious 
to replace them,'' Hunter said. ``These people don't have a monopoly 
on money. They're not the only millionaires and billionaires in the 
country. There are a lot of people who would like to have an in when 
it comes to professional basketball.'' But when asked if he had received 
any concrete offers from networks or potential owners, Hunter admitted 
that he had not. And that is why many observers believe that agents 
and union leaders are simply not being realistic when they speak matter-of-factly 
about the possible formation of a new league, one that, as Hunter 
said two weeks ago, would leave the NBA ``decimated.'' ``I have great 
skepticism that this is the case,'' said Neal Pilson, owner of the 
Pilson Communications sports consulting company and a former president 
of CBS Sports. ``The logistics of starting a new league and commanding 
the level of salary that these players feel they are entitled to is 
immense. I don't know where to begin in terms of the difficulties.'' 
Hunter and agents Arn Tellem, Steve Kauffman, Bill Duffy, Mark Bartelstein, 
Anthony Dutt and Eric Rudolph have all said a new league would be 
a viable option for the players if the season were canceled, but none 
of them is advocating such a venture. They maintain that reaching 
a settlement and keeping the NBA intact is their priority. But they 
also believe that if the season is lost a league that could offer 
a significant challenge to the NBA would be created. ``I think a new 
league is an inevitability if they cancel the season,'' said Duffy, 
who represents Michael Olowokandi, the No. 1 selection in last summer's 
NBA draft. ``Everyone's focus will go toward that.'' Kauffman said, 
``If this season collapses, the whole basketball landscape will change 
dramatically.'' David Falk, the powerful agent who represents Michael 
Jordan, Patrick Ewing, Alonzo Mourning and other star players, said 
he had been contacted by several parties interested in pursuing the 
idea of a competing league. But skeptics such as Pilson believe a 
new league would be unable to overcome the large obstacles of securing 
network broadcasting contracts and finding adequate arenas in which 
to play, not to mention putting together a solid infrastructure complete 
with front offices and public and community relations staffs. Perhaps 
the most significant impediment would be in the area of broadcasting. 
The NBA already has deals with NBC and Time Warner's TNT and TBS cable 
networks, and those entities are not likely to risk endangering that 
relationship. For the same reason, Time Warner's WB Network is unlikely 
to try to use professional basketball to propel itself onto the broadcasting 
map, as Fox did in 1993, by signing on to broadcast NFL games. Much 
of the speculation about a new league has centered on the news-media 
mogul Rupert Murdoch, who controls cable television's Fox Sports Net. 
Rudolph said it was his understanding that Murdoch was prepared to 
invest heavily in a new league once Commissioner David Stern cancels 
the season. But Vince Wladika, senior vice president of media relations 
for Fox Sports, calls such talk unfounded, pointing out that Fox carries 
games locally for 26 of the 29 NBA teams (with average contracts lasting 
seven years) and that Murdoch is also a minority owner of the Knicks 
and thus in both instances would be competing against himself by trying 
to form a new league. ``The agents are having a fun time trying to 
spread that around, but we're not a company that has a tendency to 
devalue its properties,'' Wladika said. ``Those rumors are being spread 
by people who don't know the reality.'' Others have intimated that 
CBS would have an interest in a rival league because it held the broadcast 
rights to NBA games during the 1980s, and also because Tellem's wife, 
Nancy, is the network's president of entertainment. But LeslieAnne 
Wade of CBS, which reacquired rights to part of the NFL package this 
season after losing them in 1993, shot down that theory. She admitted 
that the network had talks with agents months ago but said nothing 
they proposed made good business sense for CBS. ``We would have had 
more of a need and desire before we got the NFL back,'' said Wade, 
the vice president of communications for CBS Sports. ``But with pro 
football, college football, college basketball, Nascar and a very 
big golf schedule, we don't have the room to broadcast professional 
basketball.'' ABC also denied having any interest in a new league. 
Such talk, however, does not discourage Hunter and the agents. In 
fact, they said, it is what they expect. ``One of the dilemmas you 
encounter in a situation like this is that folks who may be interested 
_ and there have been some expressions of interest _ are not inclined 
to be used,'' Hunter said. ``So no network or anybody else who's of 
any consequence is going to permit you to use them as a leverage in 
an effort to get a deal from the NBA. ``So people let you know directly 
or indirectly that they're interested. But their position is that 
they're waiting to see if the season's canceled. If and when the season's 
canceled, I think that there will be people forthcoming.'' The degree 
of difficulty of finding arenas to play in would depend on where the 
league put franchises. Seventeen of the NBA's 29 buildings are publicly 
owned so they would presumably be open to new tenants. Several are 
team-owned, such as Madison Square Garden, the MCI Center in Washington 
and Detroit's Palace of Auburn Hills, Mich., and would certainly be 
off limits to a competing league. Others are privately owned, but 
not wholly by team owners, and might or might not be available.r Several 
teams _ Miami, Indiana and Dallas _ are building new arenas for the 
1999-2000 season, so their old buildings would be available. But those 
arenas, as well as many college facilities a new league might use, 
would lack the revenue-generating ability (such as luxury boxes and 
capacity) of the glitzy new NBA arenas. That would make it difficult 
for a new league to compete with the NBA in the critical area of player 
salaries and to afford the many extravagances such as charter planes 
and five-star hotels to which players have become accustomed. Kauffman 
said a rival league would counter that by fielding far fewer teams 
_ perhaps 10 _ than the 29 now enrolled in the NBA, thereby allowing 
it to offer competitive salaries by spreading the money among fewer 
players. And Hunter, while admitting that a new league would not be 
able to pay rank-and-file players what they make in the NBA, said 
it could perhaps pay superstars their market value. And with about 
100 free agents possibly joining the list of 200 current free agents 
in the summer of 1999, plenty of players might be available. ``If 
a Michael Jordan were around and inclined to play, I'm sure that anybody 
starting a new league would be happy to have him and I don't think 
they would probably have any reservations about paying him whatever 
it was he dictated because they know of the credibility he would give 
to the league,'' Hunter said. ``Not only Michael, but other ballplayers 
_ Patrick, Alonzo, Shaq. You name it.'' But Hunter, who was referring 
to Ewing, Mourning and Shaquille O'Neal, may be wrong in assuming 
that players would leave the NBA for an experimental venture. The 
All-Stars Vin Baker of the Seattle Supersonics and Chris Webber of 
the Sacramento Kings, speaking before the recent player-sponsored 
``Game on Showtime'' in Atlantic City, did not like the idea of splitting 
up the league's tremendous talent pool. Playing against watered-down 
competition that perhaps would not include some of the game's greatest 
players did not appeal to them. ``Playing in a new league is something 
that I really wouldn't consider,'' Baker said. ``I like watching the 
ABA on the Classic Sports Network, but I don't want to be a part of 
any red, white and blue basketball. I grew up watching the NBA and 
I've got some time left in my career, so I'll wait until something's 
resolved in this league.'' Webber said: ``The NBA is the epitome of 
basketball and unless every single player were to go, I don't think 
I would want to. If we don't have a season, yes, maybe I would participate 
in other charity games, but as far as another league, I think I would 
wait for the NBA.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>