<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0360 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While an unprecedented five National Football League head coaches 
were getting pink slips on Monday _ the biggest day of firings this 
side of George Steinbrenner on a bad day _ the Giants' defensive coordinator, 
John Fox, and defensive backs coach, Johnnie Lynn, had their best 
suits on and were staring into a camera. And they weren't making home 
movies. Fox and Lynn were taking part in a groundbreaking project 
that several years from now could change the face of professional 
football. Commissioner Paul Tagliabue has begun a program in which 
an independent consulting company is videotaping interviews of a select 
group of 20 to 30 assistant coaches, most of them black, who have 
been recommended by individual teams as having high potential to become 
head coaches and coordinators. Those taped interviews are to serve 
as a coaching database; the idea is to introduce owners and executives 
to new faces. Fox, a former defensive coordinator for the Oakland 
Raiders, is white, and Lynn, who was defensive backs coach for San 
Francisco and Tampa Bay and played eight years as a defensive back 
for the Jets, is black. They were among the first coaches to participate. 
``It is basically a living resume, and very professional,'' Fox said. 
Was it tough to tape such an interview the same day five coaches were 
fired? ``It was very tough because a lot of those guys are my friends,'' 
Fox said. ``But that is the business we're in. The time a coach has 
to turn things around is getting shorter and shorter.'' Owners from 
Philadelphia, Carolina, Baltimore, Seattle and Chicago fired their 
coaches. June Jones resigned from San Diego to coach at the University 
of Hawaii, and the expansion Cleveland Browns are looking for a head 
coach, so in all, there are seven positions open, and by the end of 
the month, there could be more. You will hear about the usual suspects 
to replace them. There will be the hot coordinator, like Minnesota's 
offensive coordinator, Brian Billick, who interviewed with the Browns 
on Monday; Denver's offensive coordinator, Gary Kubiak, who visited 
Cleveland on Tuesday; Pittsburgh's defensive coordinator, Jim Haslett, 
and the Jets' defensive coordinator, Bill Belichick. The can't-miss 
college coach, like Florida's Steve Spurrier. The sexy head coach 
who wants more power, like Green Bay's Mike Holmgren. And retreads, 
retreads, retreads. Former San Francisco coach George Seifert, the 
failed television analyst who has not coached in two years, interviewed 
with the Panthers on Tuesday afternoon. There are few fresh faces 
here. And no black ones. If black head coaches are shut out this round, 
as they have been since Tampa Bay hired Tony Dungy after the 1995 
season despite dozens of openings since then, it would be one of the 
sorriest travesties in sports. But this time, black coaches may not 
sit silently by and watch while their white counterparts _ some with 
less experience _ pass them by. There is again talk among some black 
assistant coaches of a possible discrimination lawsuit against the 
NFL, or joining forces with the Rev. Jesse Jackson. So Tagliabue is 
taking a major step to correct the problem with this program, coordinated 
by George Young, the former Giants general manager, who is now a league 
vice president. Tagliabue has a sincere desire to fix a terrible predicament, 
but he is also not a fool. The issue is a major embarrassment to his 
league, and leaves the NFL liable in the court of public opinion and 
maybe even in a court of law. The new initiative by Tagliabue is a 
smart one because it brings more blacks into the coaching soup. But 
also, by assembling this database, it discreetly counters a ploy that 
owners and general managers have used for years. The common refrain 
is that there are not enough qualified blacks to fill head coaching 
and coordinator positions. Yet the database is full of top candidates 
the teams themselves have recommended. So any talk now of a lack of 
qualified blacks is a hollow excuse. There will be problems. Already, 
some white assistant coaches are privately complaining about preferential 
treatment for blacks. There are also going to be awkward situations 
because some members of a staff are going to take part in the program 
while others are not. Tagliabue has had to walk a fine line in other 
ways: push owners too hard, or go public, and they become resentful 
of him. Black coaches, despite Tagliabue's efforts, could still be 
shut out this time. But Tagliabue's idea is the best the NFL has developed 
to combat this situation. Will it work? That's up to the owners. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>