<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraq defiantly vowed Tuesday to fly over the large swaths of the country 
where the United States and its allies bar its flights. But the Pentagon 
said Iraq had not yet provoked a military confrontation. A day after 
U.S. jets attacked an anti-aircraft battery in northern Iraq when 
they came under fire, Iraqi Vice President Taha Yassin Ramadan said 
his air force would fly at will in the ``no flight'' zones created 
by the United States and its allies in northern and southern Iraq. 
There were sketchy reports early Tuesday that Iraqi helicopters had 
entered the restricted zones, but U.S. officials later said they had 
not spotted any violations by Iraqi aircraft, despite intensifying 
oratory from President Saddam Hussein's government. Ramadan called 
the U.S.-led patrols of the zones a violation of Iraq's sovereignty 
and threatened to try again to shoot down U.S. or British aircraft 
flying over Iraq. ``The so-called air exclusion zones exist only in 
the sick imagination of the British and American administrations,'' 
he said. The United States suspended patrols over northern Iraq on 
Tuesday, but the Pentagon said that was a routine decision made because 
of thunderstorms and not a response to the exchange of missile fire 
with Iraqi forces Monday. The patrols continued in the southern zone, 
and the Clinton administration insisted that it would not ease enforcement 
in either zone, calling the restrictions an important part of the 
strategy to contain Saddam. In the skirmish in the northern zone Monday, 
an Iraqi air defense battery fired three surface-to-air missiles at 
a patrol of U.S. aircraft that included F-15 and F-16 fighter jets 
and EA-6B communications-jamming jets that are also armed with radar-seeking 
missiles, according to the Pentagon's account. The jets, which patrol 
the zone from a base in Incirlik, Turkey, then counterattacked, the 
account said. The commander of the jets in Turkey, Brig. Gen. David 
Deptula of the Air Force, Tuesday day released videotape that he said 
confirmed the Pentagon's account that Iraq had fired first. Baghdad 
has contended that it launched surface-to-air missiles in self-defense 
after an American attack began. One of the videos showed what the 
Pentagon officials said was the Iraqi missile launching before the 
U.S. response. The others showed three F-15Es striking the Iraqi site 
with six 500-pound, laser-guided bombs, evidently destroying the battery's 
radar, optical guidance unit and a van that served as the command 
center for the missiles. The video showed additional explosions after 
the initial strikes, a Pentagon official said, suggesting that the 
attack destroyed at least some Iraqi missiles. A fourth F-15E also 
tried to attack the site but was unable to identify the target with 
its sensors, the official said, probably because the target had already 
been destroyed. Pentagon officials played down the significance of 
the latest incident and Iraqi statements and said there was no need 
to bolster forces in the region or to change tactics. ``Today was 
no different than yesterday or last week,'' said Maj. Joseph LaMarca, 
a spokesman for the U.S. Central Command, which oversees U.S. forces 
in the region from its headquarters in Tampa, Fla. The officials also 
minimized the threat posed by Iraq's air force. It is estimated to 
have more than 300 fighter jets and helicopters, but no more than 
half are in condition to fly, military analysts say. Iraq has sophisticated 
Soviet-era MiG fighters and French Mirages, among others, but its 
air force took a beating in the Persian Gulf war of 1991 and has suffered 
under United Nations sanctions. Iraqi officials have been able to 
smuggle in spare parts from Russia, though. Although the surface-to-air 
missile attack was the first against U.S. planes over Iraq since September 
1996, the officials said Baghdad had repeatedly _ and ineffectually 
_ tested the enforcement of the no-flight zones in the past. Senior 
Pentagon officials say they expect Saddam's forces to continue to 
play a cat-and-mouse game with the U.S. and British jets that patrol 
the zones. It is not clear why Saddam's seems determined to provoke 
new confrontations after the U.S. and British strikes against 100 
military and industrial targets in his country earlier this month. 
Officials speculate that Iraq hopes that new clashes will erode international 
support for maintaining sanctions and enforcing the no-flight zones. 
The zones were created in 1991 in the north and a year later in the 
south to protect ethnic and religious groups facing repression from 
Saddam's forces. By firing at planes operating in the northern zone, 
Iraq put pressure on Turkey, whose government warily permits U.S. 
and British jets to use the base in Incirlik, though with restrictions 
on the number of combat jets. Turkish Defense Minister Ismet Sezgin 
called Tuesday for ``the use of the base with sensitivity.'' After 
a series of the U.S. and British strikes on Iraq this month, French 
jets stopped patrolling the southern zone. France withdrew from taking 
part in enforcement of the northern zone in 1996 after a previous 
attack. But Saddam's government has been unable to rally support, 
even in the Arab world, where reaction to the U.S. and British raids 
has been divided. Iraq traded sharp words with Egypt, where President 
Hosni Mubarak has blamed Saddam for the suffering of Iraq's people. 
On Monday the Arab League postponed for a month a meeting that had 
been set this week to discuss the attacks on Iraq. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>