<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0333 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Nasdaq composite index, long home to the market's hottest technology 
stocks, is on track for one of its best years ever. Through Tuesday, 
the index had risen nearly 39 percent, far ahead of the 28 percent 
gain in the Standard &AMP; Poor's 500-stock index and more than double 
the 18 percent gain in the Dow Jones industrial average this year. 
The reason for the surge is both a large number of Internet stocks, 
which have been the object of investors' lovesick affections _ and, 
according to one estimate, account for one-fifth of this year's gain 
in the overall market _ and a dearth of cyclical companies, whose 
values have been crushed by the collapse in commodity prices. Even 
a surge in oil and agricultural prices, however, would have trouble 
getting investors as excited as they have become by big Internet companies 
like Yahoo, Amazon.com and Netscape. Those stocks, which have recorded 
three- or four-digit percentage gains this year, plus smaller companies 
like Ebay, Mindspring Enterprises and Infoseek, which have recorded 
similar gains, have put the Nasdaq in line for its third-best performance 
since it was begun in 1971. There are other differences. The 10 largest 
stocks in the Nasdaq index account for more than 39 percent of its 
value, nearly double the weighting of the 10 largest stocks in the 
S&AMP;P 500. The effect of those differences is that movements in 
the value of the biggest stocks, like Microsoft, Intel and Cisco Systems, 
have a greater impact on the Nasdaq index than on the S&AMP;P 500. 
That effect can especially be seen in the performance this year of 
the Nasdaq 100 index, a subset of the composite, comprising, as its 
name suggests, the 100 largest Nasdaq companies. The Nasdaq 100 index 
has gained 84 percent this year, a blazing performance that is unmatched 
in its history, which dates to 1985. Nasdaq and the American Stock 
Exchange, which merged earlier this year, will soon attempt to capitalize 
on the success of the Nasdaq technology stocks by offering a new product 
that tracks the Nasdaq 100. The new product, a unit investment trust, 
is similar to the Amex's popular Spiders, Diamonds and Webs unit trusts, 
which, respectively, track the S&AMP;P 500, the Dow industrials and 
a variety of foreign stock indexes. But in designing the Nasdaq unit 
trust, the exchange has changed the way it calculates its 100-stock 
index, restricting the influence of technology stocks and thus removing 
some of the fuel that has thrust the index to such historic heights. 
Whether that dampens investors' reception of the new product remains 
to be seen. Judging by their willingness to pay virtually any price 
for Internet stocks, however, it is easy to imagine that investors 
will care not a whit. Consider some numbers. Wilshire Associates, 
which manages money for institutions and also compiles a series of 
stock indexes, recently measured the contribution of Internet-related 
stocks to the performance of the Wilshire 5000 index, a yardstick 
that includes all of the 7,400 publicly traded companies based in 
the United States. For that purpose, Wilshire defined as Internet-related 
any company whose business would be materially affected if the Internet 
ceased to exist _ a broad definition that included some giant companies 
like Microsoft, but not others, like Dell Computer. Wilshire found 
that through Dec. 23, 4.1 percentage points of the 21.8 percent gain 
in the Wilshire 5000 _ or roughly one-fifth of the total _ came from 
Internet-related stocks. During that time, the value of those Internet 
stocks climbed to 6 percent of the overall market from 3 percent. 
It is only logical to assume that the effect of Internet stocks on 
the Nasdaq composite index is as large or larger. At the beginning 
of 1998, Yahoo, the 65th-largest stock traded on Nasdaq, accounted 
for only about 0.2 percent of the Nasdaq composite index. By the end 
of November, it had grown to 0.8 percent of the index _ a fourfold 
increase that placed it among the 10 largest Nasdaq companies. And 
since the end of November, Yahoo has climbed even further. Nasdaq 
is betting that individual investors, in search of a piece of that 
action, will snap up shares of the Nasdaq 100 unit trust, just as 
they have the Spiders, Diamonds and Webs. But Nasdaq ran into a problem. 
For tax and other reasons, Nasdaq had to adjust downward the influence 
of the biggest stocks in the index _ Microsoft, Intel, Cisco, MCI 
Worldcom and Dell Computer _ which together accounted for more than 
60 percent of Nasdaq 100. Before the adjustment, Microsoft alone made 
up 25 percent of the index. Now, those five stocks account for about 
40 percent of the index. In the future, the index will be reassessed 
quarterly, and if the biggest stocks grow to account for more than 
48 percent of the index, they will again be scaled back to 40 percent. 
Similarly, Microsoft now measures about 15 percent of the index; if 
it grows to 24 percent, it will be cut back to 20 percent. Sound complicated? 
Think of it as selling the portfolio's winners. If investors continue 
to favor large technology stocks, as they have this year, the Nasdaq 
100 index, and therefore the trust, will be forced to scale back those 
stocks. Diane Garnick, an equity derivatives strategist at Merrill 
Lynch, says the reconfiguration is in fact a good development because 
it makes the index less of a sector product and therefore more attractive 
as a general equity-market benchmark. Gaining weight are sectors that 
are not traditionally associated with Nasdaq _ like consumer cyclicals, 
which feature companies like Costco, the operator of wholesale warehouses. 
The cyclicals went to 8 percent of the index from 4 percent, Ms. Garnick 
said. And overall, technology stocks make up about 67 percent of the 
index, compared with 76 percent before the adjustment. The question 
is whether investors are looking for another general market index 
_ or worse, whether Nasdaq's attempt to reduce the influence of technology 
stocks on its new index product portends an end to the technology-stock 
boom. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>