<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0221 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Growing up in a traditional Italian family, I ate pork in all its 
many forms, including ham, sausages _ sweet and hot _ double-thick 
chops and slowly braised shoulder roasts. The mild flavor and appealing 
texture of pork, which always retains a measure of firmness, make 
it ideal to play around with, as it takes to almost any kind of seasoning. 
Unfortunately, pork is now so lean that it's not nearly as flavorful 
as it used to be. Certainly, it's not as flavorful as Italian pork 
_ it was a trip to Italy that inspired me to develop this fennel-crusted 
roast. When my family and I vacationed in Cortona, we shopped in the 
local market, where we would buy sandwiches of sliced pork on warm 
focaccia for lunch. The pork was moist, had its own distinctive taste 
and was thoroughly infused with the inviting flavors of the herb-covered 
Tuscan countryside. I was determined to recapture those flavors back 
home in New York. To compensate for the subtle flavor of American 
pork, I wanted to use assertive flavors as a marinade and crust. Fennel 
had to be the main ingredient, as it is in Italy, and to that base, 
I added onion, garlic and the herbs that evoked memories of Tuscany. 
The challenge was to get this flavor into the pork and to keep the 
pork moist. Where there's fat, there's flavor, so I chose a pork rib 
roast with a layer of fat on it. I first covered the fat with the 
chopped fennel and herbs; they promptly fell off in the oven. In my 
next attempt, I pureed the ingredients in a food processor and then 
patted them onto the meat. They stayed put, and their flavors seeped 
into the meat as I let it marinate in the refrigerator. This crust 
also kept the roast moist as it cooked. The first bite took me back 
to Cortona. To make cutting the roast easier, ask your butcher to 
trim the chine bone to a thickness of \ inch. You can serve the roast 
with pureed potatoes or braised cabbage, but I hope you will try the 
apple-quince compote. It is sweet, spicy, soft and chunky at the same 
time. Best of all, it stands up to the crust's he-man flavors. FENNEL-CRUSTED 
PORK WITH WARM APPLE AND QUINCE COMPOTE Time: 3 hours 1 4{-pound pork 
rib roast, chine bone trimmed to \ inch thick Kosher salt 1 cup chopped 
fennel (including some of the feathery tops) { cup chopped onion 6 
cloves garlic, coarsely chopped 2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh thyme 
2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh rosemary leaves 2 teaspoons finely 
chopped fresh sage 2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh oregano 2 teaspoons 
fennel seeds 1{ teaspoons coarsely ground white pepper 2 tablespoons 
butter 1{ teaspoons finely minced fresh ginger 2 large Rome or Cortland 
apples, peeled, cored and cut into \-inch dice 2 large quinces, peeled, 
cored and cut into \-inch dice { cup apple cider Freshly ground white 
pepper. 1. Using a sharp knife, score a crosshatch pattern on surface 
of roast. Rub skin with salt to taste, and place pork in a roasting 
pan. In bowl of a food processor, combine chopped fennel, onion, garlic, 
thyme, rosemary, sage and oregano. Pulse to coarsely chop. Scrape 
down the sides and add fennel seeds and coarsely ground white pepper. 
Pulse until mixture is very finely chopped. 2. Pat fennel mixture 
onto surface of roast to form \-inch crust. Cover roast and pan with 
plastic wrap, and refrigerate 40 minutes. 3. Preheat oven to 350 degrees. 
Remove roast from refrigerator, and let it rest at room temperature 
20 minutes. Discard plastic wrap, and roast pork until internal temperature 
reaches 150 degrees for a pink center (or, if desired, adjust cooking 
time according to taste). Begin to check temperature after 1 hour 
30 minutes; cooking time will vary according to initial temperature 
of roast. Remove from oven, cover roast with foil and let rest 20 
minutes before carving. 4. While roast is resting, prepare compote. 
Place a large skillet over medium heat and melt butter. Add ginger, 
and stir until ginger softens but does not color, 1 to 2 minutes. 
Add apple and quince, and raise heat to medium-high. Cook, stirring 
occasionally, until apples are very soft and mixture is lightly browned, 
10 to 12 minutes. Mix in the cider and let it reduce slightly, 1 to 
2 minutes. At this point the apples will have the consistency of applesauce 
and the quince will be tender but still hold its shape. Season the 
compote with salt and freshly ground pepper, and keep warm. 5. To 
serve, place slices of the roast and crust on each of six plates, 
and serve with warm compote. Yield: 6 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>