<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0244 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It takes a lot of courage nowadays for a director to tackle anything 
resembling a classic western. But in adapting Max Evans' 1961 novel, 
``The Hi-Lo Country,'' to the screen, that is precisely what Stephen 
Frears, the British director of ``My Beautiful Launderette'' and ``The 
Grifters,'' has attempted in his wildly ambitious new film. If the 
threads of the story ultimately slip from his grasp, in its best moments 
the movie feels like an epic hybrid of ``Red River'' and ``The Last 
Picture Show.'' Set in the arid cattle country of northeastern New 
Mexico in the late 1940s, ``The Hi-Lo Country'' is the story of a 
friendship between two young cowboys who, after returning from World 
War II, go into the cattle business together. Pete Calder (Billy Crudup), 
who narrates the film, is a laconic country boy who dreams of owning 
his own cattle ranch. Big Boy Matson (Woody Harrelson), his best friend 
and idol, is a gun-toting, whisky-swilling, rodeo-riding, high-stakes 
gambling, hooting and hollering live wire. Big Boy, who dominates 
the film, is a role that seems custom-made for Harrelson's brand of 
whiplash ferocity. And in a spectacularly kinetic performance, he 
whirls and dances through the part like a man on fire. A spiritual 
first cousin of the actor's lethal character in ``Natural Born Killers,'' 
Big Boy is charismatic, but he is also more than a little frightening. 
He's the kind of person who in a fit of enthusiasm would accidentally 
break a few of your ribs while giving you a hug. ``The Hi-Lo Country'' 
has two big themes it proves unable to balance. The grander of the 
two is the changing cattle business and the friends' struggle against 
a sinister, wealthy cattle baron named Jim Ed Love (Sam Elliott) who 
is assimilating all the region's smaller cattle operations into his 
growing empire. Pete, Big Boy and their partner, Hoover Young (James 
Gammon), are defiant holdouts against Jim Ed's brand of mechanized 
agribusiness. The other theme, which ends up taking over the film, 
is Big Boy's and Pete's passion for the same woman, Mona (Patricia 
Arquette), the sultry redheaded wife of Jim Ed's foreman, Les Birk 
(John Diehl). While Pete secretly pines for Mona, Big Boy conducts 
an increasingly flagrant affair with her that elicits death threats 
and precipitates more than one full-scale bar brawl. Ms. Arquette 
certainly looks right for the role of the slatternly married siren 
who tells Pete that, since meeting Big Boy, for the first time in 
her life she isn't bored. But for all the sultry glances she casts, 
Ms. Arquette fails to convey her character's fiery animal magnetism. 
Even when she's in Big Boy's arms, Ms. Arquette's Mona is more dumb 
cow than molten lava. And her absence of erotic energy leaves a blank 
space in the movie. While Pete aches for Mona, he turns for solace 
to his loyal longtime girlfriend, Josepha O'Neil (Penelope Cruz), 
to whom he halfheartedly pledges his love. ``The Hi-Lo Country'' spends 
so much time tracking its characters' love lives that it loses sight 
of several crucial minor characters, of whom the most important is 
Big Boy's younger brother, Little Boy (Cole Hauser), who works for 
the menacing cattle baron. Because the movie glosses over their embattled 
fraternal relationship, the movie's climax, in which the brothers 
confront each other, comes almost out of the blue and seems like a 
sidetrack. Walon Green's screenplay tends toward the portentous. Pete's 
voice-over speeches often have a stilted, oratorical ring. While Crudup's 
Pete is well enough acted, he never emerges as much more than a brooding 
observer. For all its deficiencies and misplaced emphases, ``The Hi-Lo 
Country'' still offers plenty of action and color. The movie is drenched 
in austere Southwestern atmosphere. You feel the harshness of the 
land and feel how physically grueling, dangerous and at the mercy 
of the elements a cowboy's life really is. The ``Hi-Lo Country'' is 
finally an elegy to a vanishing breed epitomized by Harrelson's electrifying 
and scary wild man. He is a creature who is really and truly at home 
on the range. PRODUCTION NOTES: `THE HI-LO COUNTRY' Directed by Stephen 
Frears; written by Walon Green, based on the novel by Max Evans; director 
of photography, Oliver Stapleton; edited by Masahiro Hirakubo; music 
by Carter Burwell; production designer, Patricia Norris; produced 
by Barbara De Fina, Martin Scorsese, Eric Fellner and Tim Bevan; released 
by Gramercy Pictures. WITH: Billy Crudup (Pete), Woody Harrelson (Big 
Boy), Sam Elliott (Jim Ed Love), Patricia Arquette (Mona), Penelope 
Cruz (Josepha), John Diehl (Les Birk), Cole Hauser (Little Boy) and 
James Gammon (Hoover Young). Running time: 114 minutes. `The Hi-Lo 
Country' is rated R (under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult 
guardian). It has sexual situations and some profanity. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>