<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0190 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the first loaf of white bread enriched with three vitamins and 
a mineral appeared in the grocery store in 1943, only a mad scientist 
could have imagined where the manipulation of food would lead. Today, 
the fastest-growing category of foods is made up of those that contain 
not just added vitamins and minerals, but also elements intended to 
prevent heart disease and cancer or to fight colds and depression. 
Called nutraceuticals, designer foods or functional foods, these pumped-up 
products blur the line between food and medicine. They are causing 
confusion among federal regulators and the food industry, and concern 
among nutritionists and doctors. ``Consumers are looking toward self-medication 
and for ways to enhance their health,'' said Dr. Michael Heasman, 
a senior research fellow at the Center for Food Policy at Thames Valley 
University in London. ``It's sort of a tidal wave waiting to crash, 
driven by corporate ambition to add more value in a basically static 
food market, and by baby boomers disillusioned with conventional health 
care.'' There's calcium in Tropicana orange juice and echinacea in 
Fresh Samantha drinks; Stonyfield yogurt has L. reuteri bacteria to 
protect against salmonella and E. coli 0157:H7. Psyllium has been 
added to cereal, frozen entrees, bread and pasta in Kellogg's Ensemble 
line. As functional foods have moved from natural-food stores to supermarkets, 
sales have reached $17 billion, said Gene Grabowski, the vice president 
for communications of the Grocery Manufacturers of America in Washington. 
``According to several surveys we've taken, people would rather get 
their cholesterol-lowering elements or prevent osteoporosis or hypertension 
through tasty foods instead of pills,'' he said. ``You are going to 
see a barrage of functional foods in 1999 and 2000.'' The problem 
is that this trend is moving faster than federal regulation. Are these 
new products food additives, dietary supplements or new drugs? Each 
of those is regulated differently. While new drugs must always have 
approval of the Food and Drug Administration, for instance, dietary 
supplements are barely regulated at all. And that leaves the public 
inadequately protected, because there is often little scientific evidence 
of their efficacy to begin with, and because there are no standards 
for their purity or for their levels in food. Right now, a delegation 
from the Grocery Manufacturers has been meeting with the FDA to lobby 
on the definition of functional foods and the way they should be regulated. 
The list of participants reads like a supermarket Who's Who: Nabisco, 
Lipton, Nestle, duPont, Ocean Spray, Hershey, Coca-Cola, Quaker Oats, 
General Mills, Pepsico, M&AMP;M/Mars, Best Foods. Marion Nestle, the 
chairwoman of the nutrition and food studies department at New York 
University, said that behind the confusion over regulation is an interesting 
example of the politics of food. The Nutrition Education and Labeling 
Act of 1993 requires the labeling of food with its nutrition content. 
That has created a huge demand for foods perceived as healthful, like 
those with no fat. But the law also provides a way for food manufacturers 
to make health claims, even though the rules are quite restrictive. 
In 1994, the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act was passed 
over objections by the FDA. That law provides far looser regulation 
of health claims for supplements, and significantly weakens the agency's 
authority over them. Now, Dr. Nestle said, ``The food manufacturers 
want to know why, if the FDA could do this for supplements, why can't 
they do it for foods? The whole point of functional foods is to be 
able to take advantage of health claims.'' Grabowski of the Grocery 
Manufacturers acknowledged that his group felt both ``anger and envy'' 
about the supplement-industry ruling. Already, Johnson &AMP; Johnson's 
McNeil Consumer Products Co. is battling the FDA over the introduction 
of Benecol margarine, which the company claims lowers cholesterol. 
It says the plant components it has added, which are made from wood 
pulp, are a dietary supplement and therefore do not need the agency's 
approval. But because the company is making the health claim, the 
FDA says Benecol is either an unapproved food additive or a drug and 
must either go through an approval process or change its labeling. 
While the FDA and McNeil argue over arcane regulations, other companies 
are adding such medicinal herbs as Ginkgo biloba to energy bars, green 
tea to candy bars and kava to corn chips. As long as they do not make 
health claims, the agency must leave them alone. The label on Fresh 
Samantha Super Juice with echinacea, for example, simply says ``Defender 
of your health.'' By contrast, Kellogg had to go through a two-year 
process to get the agency's permission to make the health claim that 
its Ensemble line lowers cholesterol. Other functional foods already 
on the market or on their way include Lipton's Take Control line, 
currently two margarine-style products, which contain a soybean extract 
believed to help prevent cancer; Eggland's Best eggs, from chickens 
fed a diet that gives the eggs 10 times more vitamin E than ordinary 
eggs; Herbal Kitchen Prescription soups from Hain, and green teas 
from Yogi Tea Co. with ginseng, kombucha or echinacea. Even Heinz 
is making a health claim for its ketchup, because cooked tomato products 
are higher in the anti-oxidant lycopene than raw tomatoes. Milk solids 
are being added to milk to increase the calcium. Even doughnuts are 
being supplemented with protein. And there are dozens of drinks, usually 
found in natural-food stores and gyms, that contain medicinal herbs. 
``These are not wonder drugs,'' Grabowski said of the supplements 
whose manufacturers are entitled to make health claims about them. 
``We have to be careful not to overpromise, but at the same time we 
don't want to diminish some of their magic, some of the excitement 
they are creating.'' But, Dr. Nestle said, ``These products are deluding 
the public into thinking that they are going to give greater benefits 
than plain old fruits and vegetables.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>