<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0309 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chinese officials Tuesday reinforced their recent efforts to silence 
political opposition, sentencing two New York-based dissidents who 
had recently sneaked back into China to work to promote democratic 
change to three years in a labor camp. Officially, the two men, Zhang 
Lin and Wei Quanbao, were charged with hiring prostitutes and evading 
border police, a Foreign Ministry spokesman said. Both had been denied 
entry to China. But the ministry noted that the two are members of 
a New-York-based group of dissidents, which it identified as a ``hostile 
foreign organization.'' The two men were longtime democracy activists. 
Each had moved to New York within the last five years and continued 
campaigning for democratic change in China. In late October, the pair 
planned a return to China in the hope of working with the fledgling 
China Democracy Party, said Wang Bingzhang, another New York-based 
dissident who is a friend of the men. The party is a lose association 
of mainland dissidents that had been trying to go through legal channels 
to organize China's first opposition party. Attempts to gain official 
recognition for the Democracy Party have come to a crashing halt in 
the last month as three of the party's key organizers have been arrested, 
tried and sentenced to more than 10 years each in prison. Zhang and 
Wei ``went back in the context of rising activity from the China Democracy 
Party and other activism, and this encouraged people to participate 
each in their own way,'' said Xiao Qiang, executive director of Human 
Rights in China, from New York. ``And of course, their arrests show 
the Chinese security apparatus keeps very close eyes on these people.'' 
The men were arrested Nov. 12 in a barber shop that authorities said 
was a brothel, just days after entering China illegally in the back 
of a truck. It is not clear if they were able to contact any members 
of the party, a number of whom they knew at least casually from their 
involvement in pro-democracy protests centered in Tiananmen Square 
in 1989. ``They knew there was danger involved in their trips and 
they were mentally prepared for a sentence,'' said Wang. He, like 
the two men sentenced today, has been associated with a group called 
the China Democracy and Justice Party, a New York-based group that 
has no official relation to the China Democracy Party. Last spring, 
Wang sneaked into China, also trying to promote the development of 
democracy and was also detained by authorities. He was quickly ejected. 
Zhang and Wei were dealt harsher treatment, probably in part because 
they still hold Chinese passports. Both were granted political asylum 
and have legal residence in the United States, although Zhang, who 
arrived last year, does not yet have a green card. It is unclear whether 
the government's harsh treatment of activists in the past month represents 
a true hardening of official attitude or is merely a reaction to a 
dissident community that has become increasingly outspoken and organized 
this year. Some China experts have suggested that the Communists are 
trying to get their house in order and their dissidents under control 
in preparation for 1999, a momentous and potentially explosive year. 
The 50th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China 
will be in October. And the 10th anniversary of the military suppression 
of the Tiananmen Square demonstrations will be in June. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>