<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0270 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This border city in Alsace-Lorraine has been French and then German 
and then French again, depending on who won the last war. But today 
it is a placid outpost in more unified Europe: a home for the European 
Parliament, and a mecca for cross-border shoppers. So it is not surprising 
that Europe's single currency, the euro, arrived well before its official 
introduction this Friday. At the Cora supermarket just outside of 
town, everything from bananas to televisions have been priced in euros 
(as well as French francs) for months. At upscale restaurants like 
the Roma, euro-pricing on menus is a fashion must. And residents like 
Michel Raymond, who shops for Grand Marnier in France but port wine 
Germany, are opening euro checking accounts right after the New Year. 
``It will make things simpler for everybody,'' said Raymond, a retired 
French businessman. ``Some things are cheaper here and others are 
cheaper on the German side. This will make the payments easier.'' 
After decades of dreams, diplomacy and delays the euro is suddenly 
real. On Thursday, 11 European countries are to lock their exchange 
rates to the euro, now worth about $1.17, and cede to the new European 
Central Bank the power to set interest rates and monetary policy. 
On the street it may look as if little has happened. But currency 
conversion represents the most important step in Europe's long quest 
for political unity. In getting to this point, the 11 euro nations 
for the first time have adopted a common economic policy that has 
reined in public spending, reduced debt and tamed inflation. This 
achievement has altered the political debate dramatically; indeed 
governments in Germany, France and Italy have fallen in large part 
because of the spending cutbacks required to create the euro. Business 
strategy has been transformed, and more and more residents and visitors 
are thinking of Europe as a single place instead of a jigsaw of nationalities 
and a hodge-podge of currencies and laws. Today's German marks, French 
francs, Italian lire and eight other currencies may be used for three 
and a half years more. (Euro notes and coins arrive on January 2002.) 
But beginning Monday, the value of each currency will be based only 
on the value of the euro. Local currencies are to be removed from 
circulation by July 2002. Also on Monday, European stock and bond 
trades will be denominated entirely in euros. All transactions between 
banks, which is frequently how Europeans pay their bills, will be 
in euros, even within the same country. Bank customers can write checks 
in euros, and many credit-card purchases will be calculated in euros. 
Euro traveler's checks are making their debut. Though Americans are 
largely bystanders, the euro will affect them, too. Travelers will 
be spared the necessity of changing dollars into several different 
currencies, and currency headaches and risks will be reduced for money 
managers handling multinational accounts. That alone is expected to 
yield substantial savings. While the euro was once viewed as a currency 
weakling because of doubts that Spain and Italy would have the discipline 
to get into fiscal trim, all signs now suggest the euro will start 
off strong and may come to rival the dollar as a reserve currency 
held by central banks around the world. If that happens, economists 
say, it could push up U.S. interest rates slightly. It could also 
make European goods more expensive for Americans to buy. The new currency 
may also be a means for Europe to grow into a stronger competitor 
with the United States: The move to a unified market and a single 
currency has forced the transformation of Europe's biggest industries. 
Many are merging with rivals to cut costs; others selling off businesses 
to refocus on their strengths. And quite a few, like DaimlerChrysler 
AG, have been doing both. One major European country that is not party 
to the euro is Britain, which has always viewed itself as separate. 
It is taking a wait-and-see attitude because of public fears that 
using the euro would erode Britain's independence. British businesses 
definitely favor the currency, however, and worry that they will suffer 
a disadvantage by holding on to the pound. But Prime Minister Tony 
Blair insists Britain will consider using the euro after the next 
round of national elections, which are likely by 2002, and only after 
a national referendum. Why did the 11 other nations go to all the 
trouble? The idea of a single currency dates back to the 1950s, when 
postwar leaders like Jean Monnet, a diplomat and president of a precursor 
to the European Union, sketched out sweeping visions for economic 
and political unification aimed at avoiding another war. The idea 
was that the more each nation relied on the others for economic and 
political security, the more reluctant they would be to send their 
armies into battle. But the real impetus came with the fall of the 
Berlin Wall in 1989. The prospect of a reunited German powerhouse 
alarmed many Western European governments, French President Francois 
Mitterand pressured German Chancellor Helmut Kohl: France would support 
German reunification if Kohl would commit his government to replacing 
the German mark with a plan for a single currency and administered 
by an independent European central bank. Kohl quickly became the euro's 
strongest champion, driven in part by his desire for a place in history 
and in part by his own memories during World War II. ``I have often 
been told that the euro was a technocratic idea, invented by finance 
ministers,'' remarked Christian Noyer, vice president of the European 
Central Bank. ``That is clearly not the case. They had the simple 
idea that the money, the currency that people use every day, was a 
way to foster European integration.'' Two years after the fall of 
the Berlin Wall, in the Dutch city of Maastricht, European leaders 
reached a basic agreement, with a strongly German imprint. Countries 
would have to meet strict limits on budget deficits and would have 
to bring inflation rates down to Germany's levels, or about 3 percent. 
But the Bundesbank, the influential German central bank, would take 
a back seat to a new and independent European Central Bank, which 
would focus almost exclusively on fighting inflation. The euro's proponents 
argue that it will make Europe more efficient and competitive because 
pricing differences will stand out. Trade will be enhanced because 
foreign-exchange risks will be minimal. (Europe abolished most tariffs 
and other trade restrictions six years ago.) But more important, supporters 
predict that the greater attention to prices will force cost-cutting 
by manufacturers. And while that may contribute to Europe's high unemployment, 
it may also trigger much-needed changes in costly regulations that 
hinder competitiveness today. ``This can work like a reform program 
for Europe, and be very good for the competitiveness of Europe,'' 
said Juergen Stark, vice president of the Bundesbank. ``On the one 
hand it is a great political challenge. But on the other it is a great 
opportunity for Europe to combine sound monetary and fiscal policy 
with more flexibility.'' In many respects, the euro will seem at first 
like a phantom currency because notes and coins are not slated to 
enter circulation until Jan. 1, 2002, to give Europeans a chance to 
get used to the new currency and merchants time to adjust. And while 
euros will be usable beginning Monday in the ether of electronic payments, 
nobody can be forced to accept them before 2002. ``I've gotten lots 
of mail about the euro from my bank, but I have not read much of it,'' 
said Karine Rousselle, a school teacher in Strasbourg. Many bankers 
argue that the long transition period simply makes the process needlessly 
costly and complicated. Instead of just converting to a new currency, 
banks have to change first to a system of dual currencies, which will 
become obsolete in 2002. Deutsche Bank, Germany's biggest bank, estimates 
that it will spend more than $200 million on the conversion over the 
next four years. ``The dual currency makes it much more expensive 
than it would have been otherwise,'' said Peter Wolf-Koeppen, at Commerzbank 
in Frankfurt. But European merchants are reaching very different conclusions 
about how fast to offer goods priced in euros. In France, big supermarkets 
like Le Clerc and Caro are already posting all prices in euros and 
plan to accept euros for credit-card payments soon after the new year 
begins. In Germany, where many people are still hostile to trading 
in their solid marks for untested euros, big retailers are moving 
more slowly; most plan to post dual prices on some items right away, 
mainly to educate customers, but they are reluctant to make a full 
conversion in 1999. For the moment, managers at the Cora hypermarket 
simply steer attention away from the euro price. A big sign promoting 
a widescreen television announces a price in francs: FF 7,990.00. 
The euro price _ e 1,206.97 _ is only printed in small letters on 
the price tag. In part because of marketing uncertainties, some consumer-product 
companies are delaying the switch. ``We are keeping the national currencies 
as long as possible, because God knows what is going to happen,'' 
said Peter Csandi, a spokesman for Adidas, the big sportswear company. 
``We're going to let someone else find out the answers on how to teach 
consumers about the euro. We don't intend to be pioneers.'' But a 
growing number of Europe's biggest industrial companies are converting 
rapidly, convinced that they can quickly recoup the cost by saving 
money on foreign-exchange dealings. DaimlerChrysler and Siemens plan 
both plan to convert all their business systems early in 1999. They 
are also pressing suppliers to bill in euros, which is likely to speed 
up acceptance. The euro has confounded naysayers ever since European 
leaders laid down the timetable in the early 1990s. As recently as 
four years ago, many market analysts were convinced that few countries 
would overcome national pride to abandon their currencies. When it 
became increasingly clear that monetary union would indeed occur, 
most people assumed it would be limited to about eight ``core'' countries, 
led by Germany and France. But Europe's poorer and shakier countries 
_ Italy, Spain and Portugal _ started clamoring to join the club. 
And to the amazement of many, they brought their budget deficits and 
inflation rates down enough to qualify. But there could be some nasty 
surprises. European economic growth is uneven. There are inflation 
risks in some fast-growing countries like Spain and Ireland; at the 
same time growth is slowing in countries like Germany and France, 
where unemployment rates remain above 10 percent. The challenge for 
the new central bank is set uniform interest rates that will foster 
growth everywhere. The political landscape has also changed dramatically. 
Some leading politicians who pushed for the euro are out of power 
now, casualties of voter objections to relentless budget cutting, 
especially on social programs. New governments in Germany, Italy and 
France are not so beholden to the rules set out to create the euro. 
After Kohl and his center-right coalition were defeated last September 
by Gerhard Schroeder and the left-of-center Social Democratic Party, 
Germany's new finance minister, Oskar Lafontaine, quickly became a 
vocal critic of both the Bundesbank and the European Central Bank. 
He argued that tight-money policies brought about by the euro were 
the real reason that European unemployment mostly remains high. Under 
the Maastricht Treaty, political leaders have no authority over the 
European Central Bank, which is led by a former Dutch central banker, 
Wim Duisenberg. And a separate treaty theoretically calls for huge 
fines on governments whose spending generates deficits of more than 
3 percent of gross domestic product. The rules also say that once 
a nation enters the euro union, it cannot withdraw. In practice, many 
experts are skeptical that European leaders would ever impose such 
punishments. ``Countries have to realize that the misbehaviors of 
one country can damage all the others,'' said Stark, the Bundesbank 
official. ``If a big country runs a high deficit, it is pretty clear 
the European Central Bank will have to react with a rate increase.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>