<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0405 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The excursion to a boulder field in northern Pennsylvania seemed like 
any other field trip. Ninth graders from Ed Greaney's earth science 
class at Hunterdon Central Regional High School in New Jersey collected 
slivers of mammoth volcanic stones, measured them, snapped pictures 
and recorded the rushing of waterfalls. This time, however, the students 
were armed with digital cameras, laptop computers, tape recorders 
and the technological capability to transfer their information directly 
to computers, capitalizing on their school's sophisticated use of 
technology. The images are now on the school's Web site; they emerge 
in a 3-D panoramic tour complete with sound. In the classroom, pairs 
of students huddled before computer screens awash in multicolored 
graphics as they clicked, downloaded and typed in the information 
they had collected for 12-page multimedia reports on the field trip. 
``I like the computer a lot better than just the teacher telling us 
or stapling pictures to a piece of paper,'' said Jennifer Bastian, 
a 14-year-old in the class. At Hunterdon Central, in Flemington, N.J., 
cutting and pasting no longer means construction paper and glue. The 
school is among a handful nationwide that are infusing computers into 
almost every aspect of learning. Multimedia software programs, once 
the province of graphic art classes, are now being absorbed into every 
subject. At Napa New Technologies High School in northern California, 
students take notes on computers at their desks and turn in assignments 
on disk or by e-mail. In the Olympia, Wash., school district, students 
coach teachers in new technologies. In Tucson, Ariz., students design 
the layout of computer labs and create and maintain Web sites. ``The 
technology sucks the students in to the point where they end up doing 
additional research and more work on a project simply because it's 
fun,'' said Pamela Lee Hopkins, an English teacher who leads the Tucson 
program. Dennis Harper of the Olympia school district agreed. ``If 
we're training kids to be the future workers in the 2060s, then we've 
got to at least move beyond the teaching tools of the 1960s and reach 
them on a level and with materials they're used to,'' he said. ``And 
that's computers and technology.'' Judy Salpeter, editor of Technology 
and Learning magazine, says that Hunterdon, Tucson, Olympia and Napa 
are among only 20 to 30 high schools in the United States using computer 
technology. Most schools are just beginning to delve beyond word processing 
and surfing the Internet. Hunterdon Central officials began in 1990 
with a plan to embrace multimedia technology, which combines text, 
sound, animation and still and video images. Today, Hunterdon has 
more than 1,200 PCs for its 2,160 students. Every classroom has at 
least six computers linked by a high-speed network. All students have 
e-mail accounts. Florence McGinn's creative writing class, which looks 
more like a computer lab than a traditional classroom, is a hotbed 
of experimentation. Two-dozen computers line the walls, and several 
have digital cameras mounted on them for videoconferencing with student 
mentors at Rider University, 30 minutes away in Lawrenceville, N.J. 
Mrs. McGinn created the school's online multimedia literary magazine, 
Electronic Soup, which some 50 Hunterdon students produce with peers 
at Asbury Park High School and at a high school in Bangladesh. The 
students edit poetry together by e-mail and digital video cameras. 
Mrs. McGinn's desk is an L-shaped workstation with a 21-inch monitor 
linked to her personal computer. A second monitor connects with each 
computer in the room so she can scan students' work or the Web sites 
they are visiting from her desk, allowing her to make immediate corrections 
or suggestions by e-mail. ``The intensity of their interest becomes 
so strong that the learning goes beyond grades,'' Mrs. McGinn said. 
In a corner, Rick Morrison, 17, was revising his multimedia interpretation 
of a poem he wrote using Milton's title, ``Paradise Lost.'' ``You 
can convey your feelings so strong, even more than on paper,'' said 
Rick, a senior who knew little of computers and less of poetry last 
year. He slid a disk into the CD-ROM drive. The poem came to life 
in a presentation that conveyed a feeling of isolation. Images of 
Rick's face and body swirled around the screen, superimposed on backdrops 
of New York City and a deserted beach and accompanied by classical 
music and the fading words of the poem. ``I'm definitely more interested 
in poetry and creative writing now that I can use the multimedia graphics 
as part of the process,'' he said. Neela Mookerjee, a junior in Mrs. 
McGinn's class, was also relatively unacquainted with computer graphics 
in September. In three months, Neela, 16, has become so adept at graphics 
programs that she now opts for multimedia presentations for most of 
her large assignments. In a project on censorship for a history class, 
she created a Web site rather than a written report. In the Napa Valley 
of California, the idea for a technology-centered high school was 
proposed by local business leaders. Napa New Tech opened in 1996 with 
a $250,000 grant from the federal Department of Education, plus help 
from nearby technology companies. There is a computer at every classroom 
desk for the 220 11th and 12th graders. Teachers recruited for their 
knowledge of technology create lesson plans from online video files, 
CD-ROMs, Web sites and textbooks. Students are assigned to unpaid 
internships at technology-based companies in the Napa Valley for 15 
hours a semester. ``Through technology the kids see what they can 
do differently in school, and better in many cases,'' said JoAnne 
Miller, director of external relations at Napa New Tech. At Desert 
View High School in Tucson, Ms. Hopkins' business technology students 
often arrive with C averages, but improve to B's or better, spurred 
on by the prospect of admission to Desert View's business technology 
program. Financed with federal school-to-work funds, the program operates 
like a small business inside the school, a sort of internal consulting 
company. Larry Cuban, a Stanford University education professor and 
critic of education technology, concedes that computers engage students 
around enticing projects. But he worries about a growing technology 
gap. Computer access depends in part on a community's wealth and in 
part on administrators who know how to apply for grants. Hunterdon 
Central was blessed with both. The school is located in a reasonably 
affluent area in southern New Jersey, and district officials have 
been able to secure grants from large foundations and companies like 
AT &AMP; T. This has enabled the school to pay $40,000 per classroom 
for computer equipment, said Ron Pare, director of information systems 
at Hunterdon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>