<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0197 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As exhilarating as the fast-moving food world can be, over the last 
few years it has felt to me increasingly like a car careering out 
of control. Cooking trends have bombarded us from all directions, 
cookbook sections in bookstores have grown into multicolored labyrinths, 
restaurant dishes have become ordeals to deconstruct _ both physically 
and sensually. And many home cooks have followed these trends into 
the chaos. I remember going to a dinner party that included dishes 
from nearly every continent. I left dazed and confused. It was just 
too much. In response to this overload, I started retreating. At home, 
I find I'm now cooking straightforward traditional dishes. When I 
go out, I gravitate toward restaurants like Etats-Unis, Il Buco and 
Le Bernardin, whose chefs understand restraint and simplicity. I have 
cravings for the clean, honest flavors of sushi. I'm not alone. I 
have noticed a growing number of home cooks, chefs and cookbook authors 
who seem to share my sentiment. In the same way that many food professionals 
two decades ago tossed aside overwrought French cooking to revel in 
the purity of nouvelle cuisine, many are now pulling away from fusion 
cooking and free-wheeling experimentation and heading for an entirely 
new ideal _ simplicity. This growing respect for the pure and uncomplicated 
is looking like an engine for a whole new movement in cooking. ``It 
was inevitable,'' said Rozanne Gold, a food consultant and cookbook 
author in Brooklyn who is known for her pared-down approach to food. 
``My feeling was we needed that kind of antidote to the fussiness 
of the food in the '80s. Chefs could no longer compete with the number 
of ingredients in a dish or how high it was on a plate.'' As with 
many shifts in the food world, this one was born in the restaurant 
kitchen. A couple of years ago, a few chefs began forgoing garnishes, 
cutting down on the number of ingredients and focusing on techniques 
that coaxed the essential flavors from the foods they used. The results 
are spare in appearance and impeccable in flavor. Most important, 
they are easy for the palate to comprehend. For chefs once absorbed 
by the idea of cooking with a multiplicity of components, this has 
been an about-face. ``When we used to do desserts at Montrachet,'' 
said Bill Yosses, who is now the pastry chef at Bouley Bakery, ``our 
idea was contrast and juxtapose. The big catchword was marriage of 
flavors, and who could marry the most.'' Now, it is who can marry 
the least. ``When we opened up Bouley Bakery,'' Yosses said, ``I thought 
it would be great to focus on a more direct and powerful experience 
on the plate. I wanted to limit what was going on.'' These days, his 
acclaimed desserts can be as simple as a supercreamy rice pudding 
or a rich chocolate tart. The ``zinger,'' as Yosses calls it, is not 
candied orange peel on the side of the plate or a chocolate fork poking 
into the dessert, but the intensity of flavor in the dessert itself. 
Chocolate is what makes the chocolate tart memorable. And it is probably 
no coincidence that I can still recall a decadent brioche pudding 
I had there three months ago, while all those fusion feasts have become 
a blur. Tom Colicchio, the chef at Gramercy Tavern, has also done 
a bit of nipping and tucking in his cooking in recent years. ``I think 
for me, anyway, it's a question of maturity,'' he said. ``The older 
I get, I think less is more.'' Instead of adding elements to a plate, 
he has started taking them off. Items like ``roasted farm chicken 
in consomme with black truffle'' at Gramercy Tavern may seem blunt 
when compared with the grocery lists on many restaurant menus. But 
what the chef is really telling diners is that they are getting a 
perfectly roasted, high-quality chicken with two accompaniments they 
can make sense of. It takes courage, though, to serve such unadorned 
food. ``Many people spend a lot of money in restaurants,'' said David 
Rosengarten, the host of the ``Taste'' program on the Food Network, 
``and it's easier to see the evidence of the money they've spent in 
froufrou on the plate _ swirls, complexity, multiple garnishes.'' 
Diners in search of those circuses may find themselves outraged by 
chefs like Laurent Gras of Peacock Alley, who has served a slab of 
pristine salmon on a white plate with zero garnishes and a gravy boat 
of sauce bearnaise on the side, or an entree with all of two ingredients: 
sea bass and salsify batons. These may seem excessively spare, but 
we depend on chefs to take risks and shape the way we eat. The changes 
they are making in their kitchens are starting to trickle down to 
home cooks, not just through inspiration, but by way of their cookbooks 
as well. Tomes with recipes that call for foie gras and quail eggs 
and take three days to prepare are being challenged by books by top 
chefs that are surprisingly accessible. Take ``Le Bernardin Cookbook: 
Four-Star Simplicity'' (Doubleday, 1998) by Eric Ripert and Maguy 
Le Coze: As long as you have a good fish store nearby, you can count 
on achieving the pure, powerful flavors of Ripert's cooking with little 
effort. More mainstream cookbooks are also responding to home cooks' 
desire for clarity. Ms. Gold's books ``Recipes 1-2-3'' (Viking, 1996) 
and ``Recipes 1-2-3 Menu Cookbook'' (Little, Brown, 1998), for instance, 
make the stripped-down approach even stricter by limiting recipes 
to three ingredients or fewer. Simplifying what we eat and how we 
cook is being done in other ways, too. Some cookbook authors have 
taken a more definitive approach, answering a question that plagues 
all home cooks: Which is the best recipe for a well-known dish? They 
are moving away from presenting their version, or a version, and are 
declaring the version. ``There are so many cookbooks in almost any 
given area that there is confusion on the part of consumers as to 
which is the most authentic, authoritative voice,'' said Jennifer 
Josephy, a cookbook editor at Little, Brown &AMP; Co. ``They don't 
want to try five different recipes and see which is the best.'' In 
other words, cooks want one recipe that they know is going to be great. 
It needn't be something original: They want a basic repertory of things 
that really shine. When she was writing ``The Perfect Recipe'' (Houghton 
Mifflin, 1998), Pam Anderson tested dozens of variations of dishes 
like macaroni and cheese, chicken pot pie and lobster salad until 
she developed recipes she considered the very best. Her recipes will 
not change your life, but the book gives you confidence that they 
will work and you will not be disappointed. Although Ms. Anderson's 
recipes are of the down-home variety, the techniques are not always 
conventional. For macaroni and cheese, for instance, she calls for 
stirring the mixture every five minutes while it is baking. This, 
she says, gives it the ideal balance of lightness and creaminess _ 
a detail that is missing from most macaroni and cheese recipes. Rosengarten's 
latest book, ``Taste'' (Random House, 1998), takes a similar tack 
as he explores an eclectic mix of traditional and trendy dishes from 
around the world. In a section on moussaka, he lays out the problems 
he has found with most versions and highlights the ``criteria for 
quality'' to help the reader tell a good one from a bad one. Then 
he offers a recipe he calls ``the lightest, least oily, least tomatoey, 
most eggplanty, most refined moussaka that you've ever tasted.'' Isn't 
that just what you want as you plan a dinner party? Rosengarten writes 
with bravado, but he certainly persuaded me to try his recipe. And 
it delivered. Home cooking is also influenced by food magazines. And 
even they are devoting energy to sorting the glut of information in 
the food world. You can read a new spirit in the definitive cover 
lines. ``True Bagels,'' offered the November issue of Saveur; ``Perfect 
Beef Tenderloin,'' promised Cook's Illustrated for November-December. 
Instead of ``unforgettable'' and ``festive,'' the lures are now ``authentic,'' 
``perfect'' and ``best.'' In many magazines, the recipes themselves 
are moving toward restraint. A recent Cook's Illustrated, for instance, 
did not claim that ``the best lemon bars'' had a revolutionary twist 
or culinary acrobatics: They simply promised to be traditional lemon 
bars from a perfected recipe. Readers were made to feel they could 
trust it. So what do all these signs mean? That chefs are maturing 
and that cookbooks and magazines are offering more substance and less 
fluff? I hope so. Will chefs who fail to prune their creativity fall 
off the map? Will cookbooks that lack authority sit on the shelves? 
Will the food world ever be one cohesive, organized unit? Certainly 
not. Cooking is an art, after all. But it seems clear that among the 
forward-looking, the brash, over-the-top '90s style of cooking may 
be simmering down. And a pared-down approach to cooking and eating 
does seem a logical progression. And I, for one, am ready to embrace 
it. ROASTED GARLIC FLAN Adapted from ``Recipes 1-2-3 Menu Cookbook,'' 
by Rozanne Gold (Little, Brown &AMP; Co., 1998) Time: 1 hour 2 large 
heads elephant garlic 1{ cups heavy cream 3 extra-large eggs 1 teaspoon 
salt Freshly ground white pepper to taste. 1. Preheat oven to 400 
degrees. Wrap garlic in foil and place on a baking sheet. Bake for 
1 hour. Allow to cool. 2. Lower oven temperature to 350 degrees. Cut 
garlic heads in half, exposing cloves. Squeeze pulp from skins. Place 
in a food processor and puree until a smooth paste is formed. Add 
cream, eggs, salt and white pepper. Process again until smooth; do 
not overprocess, or the cream will thicken. 3. Bring a tea kettle 
of water to a boil. Ladle custard into 6 custard cups or ramekins. 
Place cups in a deep baking pan. Pour boiling water into the pan two-thirds 
of the way up the sides of the cups. 4. Place baking pan in oven. 
Bake until custard is set, 35 to 40 minutes; do not overcook. Remove 
cups from the water bath, and allow to sit for 5 minutes. Serve immediately. 
Yield: 6 servings. Note: Flan may be baked early in the day before 
it is to be served, and refrigerated in the baking molds. To reheat, 
place in the hot-water bath, cover with foil, and place in a preheated 
oven at 400 degrees for 10 minutes. THE BEST MACARONI AND CHEESE Adapted 
from ``The Perfect Recipe,'' by Pam Anderson (Houghton Mifflin, 1998) 
Time: 1 hour 1 cup fresh bread crumbs from French or Italian bread 
2 teaspoons salt, plus a pinch 1{ tablespoons melted butter, plus 
4 tablespoons butter at room temperature { pound elbow macaroni 2 
large eggs 12 ounces evaporated milk, heated until warm \ teaspoon 
hot red-pepper sauce \ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 1 teaspoon 
dry mustard, dissolved in 1 teaspoon water 10 to 12 ounces mild cheddar 
cheese, grated. 1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Place a 1{-quart heatproof 
dish, such as a souffle pan, in oven to warm. 2. In a small baking 
pan, combine bread crumbs, a pinch of salt and the melted butter. 
Mix well and set aside. 3. In a large pot, bring 8 cups of water to 
a boil. Add 1{ teaspoons of salt and the macaroni. Cook until almost 
tender but still a little firm to the bite. Drain and transfer to 
preheated dish. Stir in remaining 4 tablespoons of butter. 4. In a 
small bowl, combine eggs, 1 cup of the evaporated milk, the pepper 
sauce, { teaspoon salt, the black pepper and the mustard mixture. 
Mix well. Pour egg mixture over macaroni. Add } of the cheese, and 
stir until thoroughly combined and cheese starts to melt. 5. Place 
dish of macaroni and cheese in the oven, and bake for 5 minutes. Remove 
dish from oven and add about half of the remaining evaporated milk, 
and half of the remaining cheese. Stir well, and return pan to oven. 
Bake 5 minutes longer, remove pan from oven, and stir thoroughly. 
If mixture does not look moist and creamy, add a little more of the 
milk and cheese. Return to oven for an additional 20 minutes, removing 
pan from oven halfway through to stir in remaining evaporated milk 
and cheese. 6. While macaroni is baking, add pan of bread crumbs to 
oven. Bake until bread crumbs are toasted and golden brown, 10 to 
15 minutes. Remove from oven and set aside. When macaroni has baked, 
sprinkle surface with toasted bread crumbs, and serve immediately. 
Yield: 4 servings. MOUSSAKA Adapted from ``Taste,'' by David Rosengarten 
(Random House, 1998) Time: About 4 hours 4 large eggplants, about 
1{ pounds each 6 tablespoons Greek olive oil, plus a little for coating 
the eggplants Kosher salt, to taste 4 medium onions, chopped 6 garlic 
cloves, chopped 1 28-ounce can crushed tomatoes in tomato puree \ 
cup parsley, minced 2 teaspoons dried oregano { teaspoon ground cinnamon 
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar 2 pounds ground lamb { cup dry white 
wine Black pepper to taste 4 pinches freshly grated nutmeg 6 tablespoons 
unsalted butter 4 tablespoons flour 2 cups hot, scalded milk White 
pepper, to taste 4 eggs 10 tablespoons fresh bread crumbs 1 cup grated 
kefalotyri cheese or pecorino-Romano. 1. Preheat oven to 375 degrees. 
Prick eggplants several times with a fork. Rub a little olive oil 
into their skins. On a large baking sheet, roast eggplants until soft, 
about 30 minutes, turning frequently. Remove from oven and let cool. 
Cut into {-inch-thick round slices. 2. In a saute pan, heat 4 tablespoons 
olive oil over high heat and brown eggplant slices lightly on each 
side. Do this in batches, adding more oil as necessary. Drain on paper 
towels and sprinkle with salt. Set aside. 3. Make tomato sauce: In 
a saucepan heat 1 tablespoon olive oil over medium heat. Add 1 chopped 
onion and 2 chopped garlic cloves, and saute until tender. Add tomatoes 
and their puree, squeezing them into coarse chunks. Add parsley, oregano, 
cinnamon and vinegar. Stir well. Simmer, uncovered, for 25 minutes. 
Reserve. 4. Prepare lamb: In a large saute pan, heat 1 tablespoon 
olive oil over medium-high heat. Add remaining onions and garlic. 
Saute for 5 minutes. Add lamb, in stages if necessary, and brown well, 
breaking up pieces with a wooden spoon. Add wine and bring to a boil. 
Cook until wine has nearly evaporated. 5. Season lamb with salt, black 
pepper and 2 pinches of nutmeg. Stir in 1 cup of reserved tomato sauce. 
Bring to a boil, reduce heat and simmer, covered, for 1 hour. 6. Prepare 
bechamel: In a large saucepan, melt 4 tablespoons of butter over medium-low 
heat, and gradually whisk in flour. Cook for 2 minutes, whisking constantly. 
Do not let this brown. Add hot milk and whisk rapidly to combine. 
Bring to a slow boil, whisking constantly. Reduce heat and simmer 
for 25 minutes, stirring frequently, until smooth and thickened. Season 
with salt, white pepper and remaining 2 pinches nutmeg. Let cool slightly. 
7. In a mixing bowl, beat eggs and whisk in a spoonful of bechamel. 
Whisk in remaining bechamel in a thin stream, and adjust seasoning. 
8. Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Assemble moussaka: Sprinkle 2 tablespoons 
of bread crumbs across the bottom of a large baking dish (18-by-8-by-3 
inches) and cover crumbs evenly with half the eggplant slices. Drain 
as much oil from lamb mixture as possible, and spread the meat over 
the eggplant layer. Top meat with half the cheese, then with half 
the remaining bread crumbs. Place remaining eggplant slices on top 
of the bread crumbs, then add the bechamel, remaining cheese and remaining 
bread crumbs in even layers. Dot with remaining butter. 9. Bake for 
45 minutes, until well browned. Remove from oven and let cool slightly, 
about 15 minutes. Cut into 3-inch squares to serve. Serve with the 
extra tomato sauce. Yield: 15 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>