<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0222 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thurgood Marshall's is the quintessential American story. Born to 
a modest, racially mixed and determined family, he rose on the basis 
of talent and hard work to become the first black justice of the U.S. 
Supreme Court. Most important, of course, he deployed the law like 
an army to force the United States to live up to the principles on 
which it was founded. He was quintessentially American because he 
used his brilliance and his sweat to beat the racist establishment 
at its own game, defeating it on the very terrain of the law that, 
until Marshall came along, it had exploited to maintain its ascendancy. 
That identity as an American original underlies this fine biography 
of Marshall by Juan Williams, a journalist at The Washington Post 
and a historian of the civil-rights movement. Williams, whose previous 
book was a companion volume to the public television series ``Eyes 
on the Prize,'' has written the first major biography of Marshall, 
giving him importance in the struggle for racial justice in America 
equal to that normally given to his sometimes friend, sometimes rival, 
the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Williams interviewed Marshall 
over a period of several months not long before his death in 1993, 
and his text is sprinkled with Marshall's own breezy comments on key 
incidents in his life. As a stylist, Williams is more workmanlike 
than brilliant, and his work does not have the rich detail or narrative 
power of the very best historians of recent events _ say, Robert Caro 
or Taylor Branch. But his story of Marshall's life is briskly paced 
and scrupulously fair, informed by the same trans-racial vision that 
inspired Marshall himself. Williams avoids the temptation to wax rhapsodic 
about Marshall's legal victories or to paint a melodramatic picture 
of the racial battles that took place from the 1930s through the '60s. 
He clearly admires his subject, but he does not turn away from the 
less saintly of his attributes: his drive for recognition, his bureaucratic 
ruthlessness, even his willingness to engage in secret dealings with 
J. Edgar Hoover and the FBI. The Marshall who emerges from Williams' 
pages is in many ways an American revolutionary (as Williams' subtitle 
has it) but a more conservative revolutionary than his common image 
would suggest. He was, first and foremost, an integrationist who repudiated 
the black radicalism of the Black Muslims and Malcolm X. While he 
admired King, he was distrustful and a bit contemptuous of King's 
showy, attention-grabbing methods of protest. ``In his heart,'' Williams 
writes of Marshall's reaction to the famous Montgomery bus boycott 
of 1956, ``he viewed the bus boycott and King's speeches as street 
theater that did not come close to equaling the main event _ the NAACP's 
effort to get the courts to end legal segregation.'' Marshall's core 
belief was in the law and in the facts: he was the very opposite of 
a demagogue. In one instance, investigating angry Muslim-led accusations 
that police had brutally beaten a black woman in New York in 1959, 
``I sided with the policemen,'' Marshall told Williams years later. 
Marshall's core belief was not the radical one that the law itself 
is an instrument of white power, as, say, critical race theory would 
have it, but that it was a neutral instrument that could be put to 
the task of forcing whites to accept blacks as equals. Williams traces 
the full story of the man and the achievements, beginning with Marshall's 
origins in the assertive, upwardly mobile black community of Baltimore. 
Marshall went to segregated Colored High and Training School there 
and then to Lincoln University in Oxford, Pa., where the student body 
was black and the faculty entirely white. He was among 36 matriculating 
students at Howard University Law School in 1930 when its president 
was Charles Hamilton Houston, whose chief quality was an uncompromising 
insistence on high standards. He was the top student of the six left 
standing at graduation three years later. Marshall quickly found his 
way to the Legal Defense Fund of the National Association for the 
Advancement of Colored People, where he pursued his now legendary 
career in beating back segregation one difficult case at a time. Some 
of the most interesting and inspiring of Williams' chapters detail 
the early anti-discrimination cases through which Marshall built both 
the legal precedents and the personal experience for Brown vs. Board 
of Education, by which the Supreme Court finally ruled against segregated 
education in 1954. Only two years out of law school in 1935, Marshall 
won the first in a long series of cases against segregation in education, 
persuading a court to force the University of Maryland to admit a 
black applicant to its law school. In 1944, in a case argued by Marshall 
and his colleague, Bill Hastie, the Supreme Court ruled that an all-white 
Democratic primary election in Texas was unconstitutional. In 1947 
and 1949 the Supreme Court overturned convictions of black defendants, 
accepting Marshall's argument that blacks had been systematically 
excluded from serving on juries. During these years, Marshall lost 
some heartbreaking cases, but, by 1950, when his victory in Sweatt 
vs. Painter effectively integrated the University of Texas Law School, 
he had won 10 cases before the Supreme Court. Williams sensibly devotes 
more attention to Marshall's career as a civil-rights advocate than 
he does to his record as a judge which, interesting as it is, is far 
less revolutionary and less historically important. Along the way, 
Williams deals with other aspects of Marshall's life: his battles 
against communists and black radicals within the civil-rights movement, 
his strangely cooperative relationship with Hoover, his battles to 
retain control of the NAACP, his two marriages, his tenure as solicitor 
general under President Lyndon B. Johnson. Marshall's life, in short, 
was a seminal one for 20th-century American history, and it is well 
told in Williams' readable and important book. PUBLICATION NOTES: 
`THURGOOD MARSHALL: American Revolutionary' By Juan Williams Illustrated. 
459 pages. Times Books. $27.50. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>