<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0403 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As investigators seek the causes of three serious bus accidents in 
five days, federal regulators and lawmakers in New York and New Jersey 
are considering tough new rules and enforcement measures, ranging 
from requiring seat belts or defensive-driving instruction to restricting 
drivers' time behind the wheel after midnight. But despite the heightened 
concerns prompted by the recent tour-bus crashes on the busy route 
between New York and Atlantic City, including one that killed eight 
people last Thursday, transportation officials say that riding a bus 
remains one of the safest ways to travel. The Christmas Eve accident 
on the Garden State Parkway was a statistical anomaly, officials said: 
Nationwide, over the last decade, an average of only six people riding 
on tour buses have died annually in crashes, according to the federal 
Office of Motor Carriers, which regulates interstate truck and bus 
companies. Out of 37,280 fatal crashes and 41,967 deaths on the nation's 
highways in 1997, only 32 crashes and 41 deaths involved tour buses, 
the agency said. By contrast, large trucks accounted for 4,572 fatal 
crashes and 5,355 deaths last year. Nonetheless, the Office of Motor 
Carriers, part of the federal Highway Administration, is revising 
its rules dictating how long bus drivers may stay at the wheel before 
resting. Now, bus drivers must keep track of their hours at work, 
and once they have accumulated 10 hours of work, not including short 
breaks, they must rest for eight straight hours. But trips to Atlantic 
City often include three- or four-hour stretches of work with six- 
or seven-hour breaks between. A driver thus could legally make an 
overnight trip from New York to Atlantic City and back and then make 
another run to Atlantic City before being required to take an eight-hour 
break, officials say. A number of accidents on the Atlantic City route 
in recent years have taken place in the early morning hours, including 
a 7:34 a.m. crash Sunday on the New Jersey Turnpike, in which passengers 
said they believed the driver had fallen asleep at the wheel. State 
police have not determined the cause of that accident, and they are 
investigating a third crash, which occurred Monday night on the Garden 
State Parkway near Wall Township. Paul Brennan, director of the Office 
of Motor Carriers, said that the numbers of fatal bus accidents were 
too few to be able to draw conclusions about whether the time of day 
was a potential factor. But he said that a study of 80 long-haul truckers 
in the United States and Canada who were hooked up to monitors and 
videotaped in their cabs had found that signs of fatigue, from drooping 
eyelids to slumping chins, were most evident between midnight and 
6 a.m., even if a driver was accustomed to his schedule. ``The circadian 
forces on the body are very prevalent,'' he said, referring to the 
human body's natural rhythms. ``During the hours of particularly 1 
to 6 a.m., your body is telling you you should be sleeping, no matter 
how much sleep you've gotten.'' The office is considering several 
recommendations by experts on sleep deprivation, Brennan said. It 
could set new rules according to a 24-hour clock, to insure that drivers 
would reliably work the same hours every day. Or it could limit, perhaps 
to 18, the hours in a week that a driver could work between midnight 
and 6 a.m. Although the agency had been studying the issue well before 
the recent crashes, representatives of the bus industry said they 
were concerned that the spate of accidents could lend undue urgency 
to the study. Victor Parra, director of the United Motorcoach Association, 
which represents 760 tour bus companies, said it would be unfair to 
tighten rules for bus drivers based on a study of truckers, who, he 
asserted, operate under vastly different conditions. Noting the paucity 
of bus accidents due to fatigue, he said, ``My question is, `What's 
the problem that you're trying to solve?''' In the last few days, 
lawmakers ranging from Sen.-elect Charles Schumer to City Councilman 
Noach Dear, both of New York, have called for mandatory seat belts 
on buses, now required in several European countries. The National 
Transportation Safety Board, which is studying bus crashes and preventative 
measures, is considering the issue. Bus operators, again, oppose any 
changes, saying the relative rarity of fatal accidents means regulators 
should not fix what is not broken. Parra said there was no evidence 
suggesting seat belts would help and even some indications that they 
could do harm, especially with young children, whose pelvises are 
more vulnerable, he said, to the strains of a lap safety belt. Bus 
owners, who could be required to pay the huge costs of retrofitting 
their buses if the rules are changed, also say that seat belts can 
be an obstacle in evacuating a bus. Those arguments are not convincing 
to lawmakers, however. Dear, chairman of the Transportation Committee, 
who has set hearings on bus safety for Jan. 27, said he anticipated 
resistance to a push for seat belts. ``People come up with every story 
they can,'' said Dear, who also advocates required defensive-driving 
instruction. ``But it's been proven, time in and out, that seat belts 
do save lives.'' As part of the National Transportation Safety Board's 
bus safety study, a team of five investigators has begun an inquiry 
into Thursday's fatal accident in Sayreville, N.J. A spokesman, Matthew 
Furman, said Tuesday that investigators had found two mechanical irregularities: 
a jammed brake shoe and a push rod that was too far from its brake 
drum, reducing the brake's effectiveness. But it is too soon to tell 
whether the two problems were caused before or during the crash, Furman 
said, and investigators will not determine the probable cause of the 
crash for at least six months. Among the other factors being examined 
are weather conditions and possible driver error. (MORE OPTIONAL MATERIAL 
FOLLOWS) In Trenton, Democrats in the state Senate have used the recent 
accidents to criticize Gov. Christie Whitman for her administration's 
three-year delay in exacting tougher penalties for operators of unsafe 
buses. In 1995, the Legislature passed a bill that would sharply increase 
fines against unsafe buses from $40 to a range of $500 to $5,000, 
depending on the infraction. But the state Department of Transportation 
delayed implementation of the new fines because of opposition from 
lobbyists for bus companies, a department spokesman said. State Sen. 
Richard Codey, the minority leader, a Democrat of Essex County, said 
the failure to adopt the stricter penalties was unfair to the 10 million 
passengers who traveled to Atlantic City by bus each year. James Weinstein, 
who recently left a job as a lobbyist for Mirage Casinos to become 
the state's new transportation commissioner, said he planned to announce 
the new regulations next month and implement them by spring. ``There's 
no excuse for it taking so long,'' he added. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>