<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There's nothing like a quarterback debate to monopolize the off-season 
dialogue. The Kent Graham-Danny Kanell saga should have a considerable 
shelf life, but unfortunately for the Giants, there are vexing personnel 
decisions to be made all over the field. Right up the middle of the 
defense, for example, linebacker Corey Widmer is an unrestricted free 
agent. Right behind Widmer, the Giants would probably like to find 
a way to replace free safety Tito Wooten with Shaun Williams. But 
what happens if the team's only other free safety, Percy Ellsworth, 
who is a restricted free agent, draws a contract offer the Giants 
can't or don't care to match? And then there's that gifted Giants 
quartet, the Four Cornerbacks. Phillippi Sparks, Jason Sehorn, Conrad 
Hamilton and Carleton Gray all want to start. Only two can. On offense, 
two starting offensive linemen (Greg Bishop and Lance Scott) are unrestricted 
free agents and a third, tackle Roman Oben, is a restricted free agent, 
which means the Giants can match any offer he receives, as with Ellsworth. 
Wide receiver Amani Toomer is a restricted free agent, too. ``If you've 
got my job, there is no greater misnomer than the off season,'' Giants 
General Manager Ernie Accorsi said Tuesday. Accorsi was already helping 
prepare the Giants for the expansion dispersal draft, which will help 
stock the Cleveland Browns roster. The Giants will have to expose 
five players with the chance of losing two. It's not just a place 
to deposit your scrubs, it might be a chance to dump an unwanted high-salaried 
player. The Giants' coaches and executives will meet next week to 
plot strategies. By mid-February the new salary cap figure will be 
announced, and with more money to spend, the pursuit of free-agent 
players will begin in earnest. ``It's about setting priorities,'' 
Coach Jim Fassel said Monday. ``That's the first thing you do in this 
process.'' Although the Giants have seven restricted free agents, 
Oben and Toomer are the priorities in that group. Toomer showed the 
value of a tall receiver this season, and his vast improvement _ along 
with the potential exhibited by the underused rookies Joe Jurevicius 
and Brian Alford _ means the Giants finally view their receiving corps 
as adequate, or even a potential strength. It has been years since 
anyone said that. Oben is in the prototypical quick-footed left tackle 
mold. Teams can tender their restricted free agents at various levels, 
which set prospective, one-year salary levels and the compensation 
a competing team would have to pay if it lured the player away. Expect 
Oben to be tendered by the Giants at a high level, which would mean 
a potential suitor would have to give the Giants at least a first-round 
pick _ major compensation _ for signing Oben. Of the unrestricted 
free agents, Widmer is expected back and may even agree to terms before 
testing the open market. Defensive end Chad Bratzke, who had a breakout 
year in 1998, seems destined for the big free-agent sweepstakes. Fassel 
said he wanted to keep both Widmer and Bratzke. Bishop, another free 
agent, doesn't figure in the Giants' plans and since center Brian 
Williams is coming back from his eye problems, the current starting 
center Lance Scott, who is also a free agent, may find he can get 
more money elsewhere. The Giants have an overloaded secondary. Hamilton, 
a restricted free agent who surprised even his supporters with his 
determined and reliable play in place of Sehorn this year, should 
be brought back as the third cornerback to starters Sehorn and Sparks. 
That probably leaves Gray as the odd man out. He said Monday he didn't 
want to return to the Giants unless guaranteed a chance to compete 
for a starting job. Of course, Hamilton said the same thing, but he 
doesn't have the leverage Gray does. Gray has a big 1999 salary cap 
number ($2.25 million) and the Giants agreed to help him find another 
team if he was unhappy as a Giant. Sam Garnes is the strong safety 
and the grand plan is get Williams, the Giants' top pick in 1997, 
into the mix at free safety. Wooten, earning $2 million annually, 
had a dreadful season. Wooten would be a natural for the Giants' expansion 
list since Ellsworth is the better investment. But Ellsworth has gaudy 
interception numbers for a player who doesn't start _ 12 in three 
seasons _ and they may entice another team to offer him a big contract 
offer. Given their other pressing needs, the Giants may not chase 
Ellsworth, so maybe Wooten survives. Elsewhere, the Giants are going 
to be looking hard at finding a pass-catching tight end. They will 
need a guard to replace Bishop, unless right tackle Scott Gragg switches 
to guard, which has been discussed by the Giants coaches. That would 
mean the Giants either promote the rookie Toby Myles, who has no NFL 
experience, to right tackle or draft a right tackle, or sign one during 
free agency. The strongside linebacker Marcus Buckley needs help on 
first down against the run, so the Giants may be in the market for 
a linebacker who can do just that, which is what Corey Miller did 
for the Giants in 1997. But don't expect Miller back. Miller's neck 
injury may not be career-threatening after all and he may play again 
next season, but the Giants coaches don't want Miller back. Miller 
can compare notes with running back Tyrone Wheatley. We may never 
know what Fassel didn't like about Tyrone as a player, but by this 
spring it shouldn't matter because Wheatley will be gone. The Giants 
expect running back LeShon Johnson _ it was diagnosed that he had 
lymphoma last spring _ to rejoin the team by the team's first minicamp 
May 11. Don't be surprised if Johnson is not the only new Giants running 
back in that camp. In fact, the entire Giants backfield should be 
crowded since there could be another quarterback in there, too. Can't 
have enough quarterbacks _ or enough of that quarterback controversy. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>