<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0282 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Going for impeachment in the House, Republicans behaved like giddy 
hedonists. They did what felt good, heedless of harm to their party 
or the country. So now it's Bill's turn. And this is a man who will 
not be outdone in the hedonism department. After the GOP's selfish 
performance, why shouldn't the president do what feels good? Why should 
he start putting the interests of his party and country ahead of his 
own at this late date? Officially, the White House is lying low these 
days, letting senators brush up on the Federalist Papers and chew 
over a censure deal. Clinton aides are telling senators that the president 
wants a deal by the time he gives the State of the Union address on 
Jan. 19. But some who know Bill Clinton wonder if the Hot Springs 
gambler, the man who loves life on the edge, the pol who always defies 
impossible odds, is tempted by a bolder play: a full acquittal. If 
the president goes for an acquittal, he will be doing what he does 
best: campaigning and spinning. But if he succumbs to the Senate demand 
to admit that he lied, he will be doing what he does worst: telling 
the truth and accepting the blame. Clinton loves playing the numbers 
_ be it polls or congressional vote tallies. He knows there is little 
chance the Republicans will get the 67 votes needed to convict. The 
high-roller in the Oval Office might look at it this way: If Sen. 
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who has scorned Clinton in the past and who 
endorsed the upbraiding of the president as ``immoral'' _ if this 
senator is looking for a censure deal, why shouldn't the president 
go one better? If Clinton could swing an acquittal, he'd have a whole 
year to drive home the case that history must nullify the House judgment 
as a partisan witch hunt. The liberal Democratic senator Tom Harkin 
and others have been egging on White House lawyers to have the brass 
to go for the gold. ``Quit pushing for censure,'' Harkin said he told 
them: ``You don't want to be the only president in history to be impeached 
and have it hang over your head the rest of your life. You want to 
be exonerated.'' White House lawyers have been busily deconstructing 
the two articles of impeachment passed by the House. They are confident 
that they can surmount the obstruction-of-justice count, which is 
largely based on conflicting testimony from a host of witnesses, including 
the president, Monica Lewinsky, Betty Currie and Vernon Jordan. And 
while they risk further Republican fury over legal hair-splitting, 
White House lawyers are also prepared to argue that Clinton did not 
lie before the grand jury. Most important of all, the president himself 
still insists that he didn't lie and thinks he can convince the Senate 
that he didn't. This would be the essence of the case: When Clinton 
testified before the grand jury in August, he didn't deny having any 
sexual contact with Ms. Lewinsky. He admitted having had an ``inappropriate, 
intimate'' relationship with her that involved sex, just not sex as 
defined in the Paula Corbin Jones sexual misconduct lawsuit. As absurd 
as it seems, his guilt _ and presidency _ may rest on whether Clinton 
directly touched Ms. Lewinsky's breast and genitals with the intent 
of arousing or gratifying her. It might not be that tough for the 
president to prove that his sexual encounters with Ms. Lewinsky fit 
his own convoluted (and selfish) interpretation of the definition 
of sexual relations. It may sound tortured to anyone else, but then 
Clinton's encounters with the former intern were truly tortured and 
full of strange boundaries. And the House prosecutors will have to 
build a much stronger case than they did in their final report. The 
president may also be emboldened to fight because he knows that Kenneth 
Starr might still prosecute him after he leaves office if he agrees 
to admit to lying in return for censure. Conservative Republicans 
in the Senate are not talking openly, as some in the House did, of 
casting out the president. But they are talking about ``censure with 
teeth'' and forcing Clinton to admit he lied under oath. White House 
lawyers say the chances of that are zip. Unless, hmmmmm, could the 
White House be lying when it says the president will never admit to 
a lie? Yup, it's convoluted. An acquittal would be the artful dodger's 
greatest dodge. And as an ending, certainly, it would have a delicious 
symmetry. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>