<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0240 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A young instrumentalist of promise, identified in the movie with a 
grand post-Romantic concerto, cut down by mental and physical illness: 
Haven't we seen this film before? In part, yes. Anand Tucker's new 
``Hilary and Jackie,'' the ``true'' story of the English cellist Jacqueline 
du Pre and her elder sister, draws formulaically on Scott Hicks' ``Shine,'' 
the 1996 film biography of the Australian pianist David Helfgott, 
notably in the way it evokes a disastrous breakdown in midperformance. 
But there are great differences as well, especially in ultimate effect. 
Whereas ``Shine'' elevated to the status of genius a ravaged performer 
whose talent may never have been huge to begin with, ``Hilary and 
Jackie'' seems bent on deflating a great artist of genuine inspiration 
to the level of her frustrated sister. Then, too, Jacqueline du Pre's 
nervous breakdown, as enacted by Emily Watson, has none of the charm 
of David Helfgott's mental illness, which yielded mannerisms that 
were undeniably entertaining, at least as portrayed by Geoffrey Rush. 
What the du Pre story offers instead is sexual titillation, without 
which, you can bet, this film would never have seen light of day. 
Much of the du Pre story _ the Jackie part, at least _ is well known. 
Jacqueline du Pre, who was born in 1945, rose to fame in England and 
around the world as a prodigy, swept triumphantly and glamorously 
through her early adulthood, married the pianist and conductor Daniel 
Barenboim, then fell victim to multiple sclerosis. She had to stop 
performing in 1973 and died after years of immobility in 1987. What 
was not widely known until the 1997 publication of ``A Genius in the 
Family: An Intimate Memoir of Jacqueline du Pre,'' by Hilary and Piers 
du Pre, the cellist's sister and brother, was that for some nine months 
in 1971, Jacqueline enjoyed sexual relations with her sister's husband, 
Christopher Finzi (played by David Morrissey), with all parties in 
the know. The revelation created a sensation in the English music 
world, where du Pre is revered. As distasteful as the book is in its 
venting of petty familial jealousies, it has virtues over the film. 
It makes clear, at least, that the cellist's poaching on her sister's 
marriage came in the midst of a serious breakdown, which may in turn 
have been related to the onset of her terminal illness. The film tends 
to blur chronology even when it is not backtracking, and in this case, 
before a breakdown is evident on screen, Jacqueline whispers into 
Hilary's ear with seemingly cool calculation that she wants to sleep 
with Kiffer, as Finzi is called. In fact, the breakdown can be read 
as a fit of petulance after the initial rejection of sexual advances. 
Whether the world needed to know any of this is moot. Hilary du Pre 
(Rachel Griffiths) evidently needed to reveal it, despite the bizarre 
light it casts on her judgment and that of her husband. (``Not much 
had changed,'' she blandly writes of Jacqueline's frame of mind after 
long months of home sexual remedies. ``She was still strongly attached 
to Kiffer, but he felt her dependence on him might be a hindrance 
to her finding her own sense of direction. He thought he should try 
and find professional help.'' None too soon, one might add.) It is 
perhaps kindest to assume that Hilary du Pre, in revealing all of 
this, was acting as an avenging angel. It is hard to believe that 
she would have spilled such beans for profit, even if she could have 
anticipated a major motion picture contract. But a reader could not 
help but suspect at times that Hilary, a pianist and flutist of some 
accomplishment, was simply trying to bring her famous sister down 
to her own size. ``In my heart of hearts I knew that Jackie was speeding 
ahead of me and I couldn't keep up,'' she writes, and she seems to 
realize that she did not really want a globe-hopping lifestyle like 
her sister's. Yet she keeps toying with the notion that but for her 
mother's favoring of Jacqueline, an encounter with an overbearing 
teacher or some other bad break, fortunes might have been reversed. 
Hardly. Even bereft of a mature career, Jacqueline du Pre was a world-class 
talent, one of the finest cellists of the century. ``Of all the cellists 
I've met of this generation, you are the most interesting,'' said 
the great older cellist Mstislav Rostropovich. ``You can go the farthest 
_ farther than me.'' To an already problematic book, the film adds 
layers of phony intimacy and exactitude. It makes much, for instance, 
of the sisters' ability to read each other's minds with great literalness, 
even, as Jacqueline approaches her end, at considerable distances. 
In the book Hilary claims less: ``Within our family, we always knew 
exactly what the others were feeling without a word being said, just 
as Jackie and I understood each other instinctively.'' The book presents 
the story alternately through the eyes of one or the other of Jacqueline's 
siblings (though Piers du Pre seems slow to warm to his sister's project), 
and there is conjecture aplenty in, for example, the detailed reconstructions 
of conversations a quarter-century old. The film, in its backtracking, 
pretends to relate the crucial events not only through Hilary's eyes 
but also through Jackie's, as though anyone could at this late date 
know with any assurance what Jacqueline might have been thinking as, 
for example, she toured on the Continent. Yes, of course: art, poetic 
license and all that. But those are not the terms in which such information 
is generally received, as the Helfgott example showed: The real Helfgott 
came as a disappointment to some who might have preferred to encounter 
Rush's enactment in the flesh, but the myth of genius persisted in 
the public imagination despite the sobering reality of Helfgott's 
performances. Viewers not armed with facts in advance tend to take 
what appears on screen as fact. And for that matter, shouldn't history 
have as much franchise as poetry in a ``true'' story? In any case, 
the Jacqueline du Pre depicted here, who seems to find little joy 
in her teeming gifts and regards her career as a burden, rings untrue 
to many who knew her well. (Those closest to du Pre, including Barenboim, 
declined any comment.) Indeed, it is questionable how well Hilary, 
for all her protestations of intimacy, actually knew Jacqueline in 
her professional years. Du Pre's own feeling late in life was that 
``her parents hadn't loved her'' and ``her siblings had resented her,'' 
Carol Easton reports in ``Jacqueline du Pre: A Biography,'' of 1989. 
Ms. Easton is undoubtedly one of those earlier chroniclers whose work 
is now reflexively dismissed as hagiography by the exponents of the 
new candor. Yet she proves relatively generous in her remarks about 
Hilary, who, along with Piers, declined to talk to her, and she seems 
straightforward in passing on the views of those who knew de Pre. 
``A high proportion of musicians will say that she's the most musically 
gifted person they've ever encountered,'' Stephen Bishop Kovacevich, 
a pianist who teamed with du Pre professionally and romantically for 
a time, told Ms. Easton. To catch glimpses of that artistry one need 
only turn to a series of videos on Teldec, directed by Christopher 
Nupen and centered on individual works: the Elgar Cello Concerto, 
of the film; Schubert's ``Trout'' Quintet, and Beethoven's ``Ghost'' 
Trio. Nupen's affection for the cellist is everywhere apparent, but 
he gives more insight into her extravagant artistry _ and for that 
matter, her ebullient personality _ in a few minutes than Tucker's 
film does in its entirety. For the rest, of course, there are those 
wonderful recordings, including no fewer than three versions of the 
Elgar concerto. From her earliest tries, du Pre penetrated to the 
heart of this autumnal creation in a way that few of her elders could 
hope to do. With her trademark expressiveness and abandon applied 
to a lush tone, she defined the work for many listeners and, indeed, 
for many performers, some of whom gave it up for good with her passing. 
The moral of the story of the du Pre sisters, meanwhile, is obvious. 
In an era when inquiring minds rule and ``everything'' must be revealed, 
you want to be the one left behind to write the history. Even then, 
you may not come off looking very good. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>