<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0356 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
No composer since World War II has been more resistant to pigeonholing 
than Hans Werner Henze. At 72, Henze is still a force in European 
modernism. Yet his life's work can be seen as an attempt to revitalize 
classical forms and genres _ sonata, concerto and symphony, theme 
and variations, and especially opera _ through cutting-edge innovation. 
His early works, remarkably assured for a composer who came relatively 
late to music, were steeped in the polytonal techniques of Hindemith 
and the neoclassical aesthetic of Stravinsky. Then, in the late 1940s, 
he attended the annual classes offered by Rene Leibowitz in Darmstadt, 
Germany, which soon became a hotbed of 12-tone radicalism. Henze was 
among the first composers of his generation to adopt serialism, and 
among the first to abandon it for freer procedures. Henze's national 
identity is complex. Born in Westphalia, the eldest of six children 
of a high-minded schoolteacher, Henze had a thorough German middle-class 
education, and played piano and percussion in a local music-school 
orchestra. In 1944, at 18, he was drafted into the army, spending 
most of his time in a unit that made propaganda films. He served a 
brief spell as a prisoner of war under the British. But the Nazi taint 
never took, for from his early adulthood, Henze was a powerful intellectual 
with avowed leftist leanings; after the war, he was an outspoken critic 
of his country, which he left in 1953 to take up residence in Italy. 
Those who have heard works by Henze should not assume that they know 
him. Take his three-act ballet ``Undine,'' which has just been released 
in its first recording, with Oliver Knussen conducting the London 
Sinfonietta (Deutsche Grammophon 453 467-2; two CDs). This enthralling 
work, commissioned by the choreographer Frederick Ashton for the Royal 
Ballet of London and completed when Henze was just 31, is a lush, 
rhapsodic homage to the 19th-century romantic ballet. Yet with its 
audacious mixing of styles and its rigorous compositional procedures, 
it could not be more fresh and modern. The ballet, which was adapted 
from a fairy tale by Friedrich de La Motte-Fouque and had its premiere 
in 1958, was one of Ashton's most ambitious works. It was also a milestone 
in the career of Margot Fonteyn, who created the title role of the 
water nymph, fatally loved by a mortal, an inconstant young prince 
named Palemon. Ashton's ballet has been revived only occasionally, 
and until now, few besides those acquainted with the ballet have had 
a chance to hear Henze's score. Why has ``Undine'' languished, when 
so many ballet scores by Stravinsky and other composers have entered 
the concert repertory? The neglect may simply have to do with the 
work's length. Most of Stravinsky's ballets run less than 30 minutes, 
and even longer scores, like ``Le Sacre du Printemps,'' occupy just 
half of a typical symphony program. ``Undine'' lasts about one hour 
40 minutes, a length that, as Knussen writes in his liner notes, has 
perhaps doomed it to ``a restricted life beneath the dancers' feet 
in the orchestra pit.'' Another reason for the score's neglect, Knussen 
suggests, was its mixed initial reception. The music's roots in early 
German romanticism and the neoclassicism of Stravinsky ``automatically 
made it anathema to the avant-garde of the 1950s,'' Knussen writes. 
On the other hand, Henze's ``absorption of aspects of Schoenbergian 
practice into his musical language'' probably made the score ``an 
adventurous listen'' for traditional ballet audiences. Although the 
musical synthesis of historic models and new practices that Henze 
achieved in this work in 1957 anticipated the current fashion for 
rich tonality and lyricism, his edgy, daring music makes many neo-romantic 
works by younger composers today seem tepid and safe. In the brief 
opening episode, Henze evokes the dangerously mingling worlds of Palemon 
and his courtiers, and Tirrenio, the king of the waters and Ondine's 
father. Quiet sustained chords in the high winds, beguiling yet pungent 
with dissonance, hover over ominously meandering lines in the low 
strings, as fragments of folkloric tunes and a hint of hunting horns 
sound. In the first full scene, when hunters and guests gather at 
Palemon's castle for his wedding to Beatrice, the driving rhythms 
and brassy fanfares recall in spirit the fairy-tale operas of German 
romanticism: Imagine Carl Maria von Weber as a 1950s modernist. A 
ruminative solo dance for Palemon, with its restless clarinet line 
and gently fractured accompanimental patter, reveals the young knight's 
restless inner life. Then, in an ethereal passage, Ondine emerges 
briefly from the water world, and Palemon, entranced, tries to pursue 
her. Tirrenio intervenes, but the mortal and the nymph will not be 
denied, and they run off and find a hermit to marry them. In the pivotal 
scene of the second act, Beatrice catches up with the man who betrayed 
her and his nymph bride, who are about to embark in a boat manned 
by sailors. Beatrice confronts the newlyweds, and in the confusion 
they allow her to join them. As the boat sails, the music sways atop 
a lolling, fateful four-note bass figure; an upper voice spins a melodic 
line of Bergian contours for solo violin. Tirrenio conjures up a violent 
storm, with slashing orchestral chords, which returns Ondine to him. 
In despair, Palemon again agrees to marry Beatrice. But the wedding 
is ill-fated, as the extended party scene in Act III makes clear. 
Tirrenio and his followers, all masked, show up at the festivities, 
which are inaugurated with an exuberant ``wrong-note'' brass fanfare. 
This is soon followed by a muted Adagio for horns, like some somber 
chorale, with a reflective, every-which-way line for solo flute providing 
quizzical commentary after each verse. The party is interrupted by 
a wild, extended Divertissement: an ecstatic series of dances and 
variations, scored for clattering winds, raucous strings and frenetic 
piano, with neoclassical counterpoint and spiraling passage work run 
amok. The music is unhinged and jazzy, like some Prokofiev concerto 
for honky-tonk piano. Peter Donohoe, the piano soloist, plays with 
unflagging energy and impressive clarity. By the end of the work, 
Palemon tries again to return to Ondine, but on kissing her, he falls 
dead. As the sea engulfs the castle, Ondine is slowly enveloped by 
watery depths and tremulously sustained orchestral chords. Though 
not employing full orchestral forces, the instrumentation is remarkably 
rich and strikingly colored. Knussen conducts with the keen understanding, 
character and command of a composer with a demonstrated gift for theatrical 
music. The playing of the London Sinfonietta is scintillating. The 
recorded sound is clear and present; the liner notes are extensive 
and helpful. Knussen writes that during recording sessions, the orchestral 
musicians crowded into the playback room to hear the results. In more 
than 15 years of studio recording, he adds, he had never experienced 
``such collective enthusiasm, involvement and sense of `discovering' 
something very special indeed.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>