<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0256 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Gasoline prices have plunged and sport utility vehicle sales are soaring, 
yet many of the world's biggest automakers plan to introduce fuel-sipping 
small-car models in the United States in the coming months. Are they 
crazy? Not really. The interest in small cars is partly driven by 
regulations _ automakers need to sell a lot of small cars to avoid 
violating federal fuel-economy laws. The coming surge is also partly 
a coincidence, as many automakers happen to have completed new designs 
at the same time. More important, the new models reflect a shift in 
how automakers, particularly U.S. and Japanese automakers, look at 
small cars. Disappearing are the economy boxes of even two or three 
years ago, with their tiny wheels, plastic bumpers and sometimes gaudy 
paint schemes. In their place will be more expensive models that look 
and perform like shorter versions of midsize cars. The new small cars 
will also have almost as much interior room as midsize models, thanks 
to higher roofs and clever designs. A big reason for building small 
cars that look like undersized Ford Tauruses is that a greater number 
of older, more affluent Americans are buying them. They expect better 
comfort and amenities. Younger buyers, meanwhile, are increasingly 
turning to used cars and sport utility vehicles instead. The older 
buyers include people like Paul Wishnow, a 65-year-old antiques appraiser 
in Houston. He has owned a huge, black Chrysler New Yorker sedan for 
years but bought a new, metallic gray Plymouth Neon small sedan last 
month. ``Parking is convenient and mileage is great,'' Wishnow said. 
``My kids are all gone, and it basically just works for me.'' The 
recent success of Volkswagen AG's New Beetle, which starts at $16,425, 
has also reminded executives that small cars can be profitable after 
all. At the same time, the huge excess of small-car factories in South 
Korea and elsewhere in emerging markets, capable of producing extremely 
cheap cars, has left U.S. and Japanese automakers despairing of profits 
at the very bottom end of the market. Last year, Ford Motor Co. stopped 
selling two of its smallest cars, the Aspire and the spartan Ford 
Probe. Another important reason for selling plusher small cars lies 
in the growth of the late-model used-car market, as ever more 2- and 
3-year-old cars come on the market at the end of leases. Given a choice 
between a stripped-down small car and a similarly priced, late-model, 
midsize car with lots of options, more Americans have been choosing 
the used car. Falling gasoline prices have removed what little financial 
incentive remained for cash-strapped young buyers to choose a no-frills 
small car instead of a bigger, older model. ``A lot of people are 
choosing to move to the used vehicle rather than buy a smaller car, 
so what we're seeing is a very weak market for small cars, and the 
very small cars have virtually gone out of business,'' said John F. 
Smith Jr., General Motors Corp.'s chairman and chief executive. Every 
big automaker seems to have drawn the same conclusion _ that the future 
lies in somewhat larger and more expensive small cars, typically costing 
$13,000 to $17,500. The danger for automakers is that it may be only 
a matter of time before profit margins in this niche also evaporate. 
This could come sooner rather than later if automakers start cutting 
prices so as to maintain sales and improve their overall compliance 
with federal fuel-economy laws. And Korean automakers are also moving 
to develop ever more attractive models, so the overhang of capacity 
for bare-bones economy cars costing less than $11,000 could spread 
to the larger small cars. Midsize car prices are actually creeping 
down now, as automakers pass along the savings from manufacturing 
improvements. But even though the costs of manufacturing small cars 
are dropping even faster, as automakers rely on mostly nonunion suppliers 
to assemble ever larger chunks of vehicles, the prices that consumers 
pay for small cars are likely to edge up by a few hundred dollars 
over the next couple of years. Automakers are taking all their manufacturing 
savings on small cars and spending the money and more on making small 
cars fancier, rather than cheaper. None of the new small cars have 
been priced so far, including the new Neon sedan, which Chrysler recently 
displayed at its highly guarded test track here, 55 miles west of 
Detroit. Yet the industry's consensus is that automakers that do not 
upgrade their small cars will end up with few sales, which will help 
neither profits nor compliance with fuel-economy laws. ``They have 
to be good to sell,'' said James Hall, an analyst with Auto Pacific 
Inc., a consulting company in Santa Ana, Calif. ``There was a time 
when being small was good enough.'' The auto industry's new emphasis 
on costlier small cars will be evident at the North American International 
Auto Show in Detroit in early January. Ford will be promoting its 
new Focus, which will replace the aging Escort. DaimlerChrysler AG 
will be showing off the completely redesigned Dodge and Plymouth Neon, 
which is becoming a taller, sportier small car. Toyota will introduce 
the Echo, which will replace the diminutive Tercel while having almost 
as much interior room as the Corolla. Honda plans to roll out a prototype 
for its next small car. And GM will show off several prototypes as 
it continues to work on substitutes for the Chevrolet Cavalier and 
Pontiac Sunfire. What all these small cars have in common is that 
they are more spacious than the cars they replace. The new Ford Focus, 
for example, does not just have more headroom, legroom and shoulder 
room than the Ford Escort it replaces. It is also bigger in all three 
critical interior measures than the Ford Contour, the next-larger 
sedan in Ford's inventory. Yet the overall length of the Focus is 
similar to an Escort and nearly a foot shorter than a Contour. While 
Ford insists that the Focus only succeeds the Escort, a Ford manager 
who insisted on anonymity said that the automaker had already begun 
planning to convert its Contour factory in Kansas City, Mo., to the 
production of sport utility vehicles. Drivers typically sit slightly 
higher off the road in the new models, and automakers hope that this 
will also reassure buyers about safety. The manufacturers' own research 
reveals that many drivers are more nervous about driving small vehicles 
as big sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks become ever more common. 
``With all the trucks and SUVs on the road now, people want to sit 
a little higher,'' Ernest Laginess, DaimlerChrysler's executive engineer 
for the Neon's body said as he rode in the new Neon at the Chrysler 
test track here. As small cars move upscale, automakers face a problem 
in persuading buyers to spend a little more for them. The response 
has been to undertake particularly drastic redesigns and to rename 
cars, as Ford and Toyota are doing, in the hope that shoppers will 
forget the older, cheaper models. In its styling, ``the Focus is definitely 
not an Escort,'' Hall, the analyst, said. ``If you call it an Escort, 
you set expectations for pricing.'' And many small-car buyers can 
afford to pay higher prices. In 1990, for example, the best-selling 
small car was the Ford Escort, which typically went for about $9,600, 
or $11,958 in today's dollars. The best-selling small car this year 
is the Honda Civic EX sedan, which sells for $17,145 _ although the 
Civic has become so large that by some definitions it no longer qualifies 
as a small car. DaimlerChrysler has found that 70 percent of its Neon 
buyers now live in households owning one or more other new vehicles, 
most often a Chrysler minivan. The original Neon in 1994 was sold 
in bright pastel colors like ``nitrous green,'' intended to lure 20-something 
buyers. By contrast, the all-new Neon going on sale in February will 
be sold in colors like silver and deep cranberry. The median target 
age for the new vehicle is 39 _ Chrysler actually anticipates that 
roughly half the buyers will be in their 40s, 50s and 60s and only 
half will be the young people for whom the original Neon was designed. 
Still, all of these new small cars will have to be shoehorned into 
a shrinking market. Sales in the United States have slid steadily 
to about 2 million this year from 2.77 million small cars in 1993; 
within this category, sales of the smallest, cheapest cars have plunged 
in the same period to 152,000 from 518,000. But small cars remain 
the biggest segment of the auto market in the rest of the world. This 
allows automakers to spread the design and engineering costs of new 
small-car models across many more vehicles. Indeed, Ford has already 
begun selling the Focus in Europe. DaimlerChrysler hopes to export 
close to 40,000 Neons annually, but its ambitious redesign of the 
vehicle is only aimed at maintaining sales in the United States at 
200,000 or so a year. Auto executives also view small cars as a way 
to reassure Washington that they have not lost interest in fuel economy 
even as sales soar for high-profit, gas-guzzling sport utility vehicles. 
``By improving fuel economy, we fend off legislative or regulatory 
improvements in fuel economy, and that's a reason to do it, obviously,'' 
said Richard Wagoner Jr., GM's president. In addition, developing 
small cars represents an insurance policy against the possibility 
that gasoline prices may someday rise again to a level at which they 
seriously influence Americans' car-buying decisions. And small cars 
remain the first purchase for some young buyers who may form a lifelong 
attachment to the brand of their first set of wheels. For such reasons, 
``You don't ever want to get completely out of a market,'' said Thomas 
Stallkamp, the president of DaimlerChrysler AG's North American operations. 
To meet all these goals, Cynthia Hess, DaimlerChrysler's general manager 
for small-car engineering, said here, automakers hope to bring refinement 
and sophistication to the end of the market previously known for just 
the opposite. ``Gone forever,'' she predicted, ``are the 13-inch wheels 
and the gray plastic bumpers.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>