<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During a lifetime of obsessive creativity, Nellie Mae Rowe apparently 
gave little thought to her place in art history. The hundreds of drawings 
and collages she made in her three-room house in rural Vinings, Ga., 
the figures she fashioned out of old stockings and chewing gum, and 
the densely decorated found-object environment she created in her 
home and yard were to her simply an intense and deeply satisfying 
form of play. Indeed, when visitors began coming to the place she 
called Nellie's Playhouse asking to buy her pictures, Rowe was pleased 
to learn she was an artist. ``I didn't even know that I would ever 
come to be an artist,'' she told one interviewer. ``It is just surprisin' 
to me.'' This month, however, the Museum of American Folk Art in Manhattan 
is presenting Rowe not only as an important 20th-century artist but 
as one whose work bridges several categories in the sometimes contentious 
world of folk, outsider and self-taught art. Titled ``Nellie Mae Rowe: 
Ninety-Nine-and-a-Half Won't Do'' (a reference to one of the artist's 
favorite gospel hymns), the show runs from Jan. 16 through May 16 
and includes some 75 drawings and sculptures. To underscore Rowe's 
multifaceted appeal, the museum points out that the show's opening 
comes just in time for both the Outsider Art Fair, which runs Jan. 
22-24 at the Puck Building in Manhattan, and the National Black Fine 
Art Show, taking place the following weekend (Jan. 29-31) in the same 
SoHo location. While there's no argument that Rowe was African-American 
_ her father was a former slave and her grandfather, according to 
family lore, was born in Africa _ it's less clear whether she was 
a fine artist, a folk artist or an outsider. Lee Kogan, director of 
the museum's Folk Art Institute and curator of the exhibition, contends 
that although these labels are often regarded as mutually exclusive, 
Rowe's work comfortably fits them all. ``Her virtuosity and range 
of expression are diverse and broad and elusive and very interesting,'' 
Ms. Kogan said in regard to Rowe's fine-art credentials. ``She's an 
important artist who has been underappreciated and deserves wider 
recognition.'' At the same time, Ms. Kogan's essay in the richly illustrated 
exhibition catalog offers an in-depth exploration of the myriad folk 
roots of Rowe's work, ranging from possible African influences to 
explicit references to gospel and Southern folklore. And although 
Rowe was, by all accounts, perfectly sane, Kogan believes her work 
displays many of the classic characteristics of outsider art, customarily 
defined as art created out of insanity, isolation or extreme eccentricity. 
``Nellie Mae Rowe created an alternate world, her playhouse,'' Ms. 
Kogan explained. ``She's obsessive _ she drew all the time, constantly. 
Her expression shows a disregard for logical constraints and is based 
on dreams, fantasies, imagination. We don't use the term `outsider,' 
because of its negative connotations, but she has many of those characteristics.'' 
Rowe was born in 1900 on a small farm outside Atlanta and died 82 
years later in a town just a few miles away. She attended three or 
four years of school but spent most of her childhood working on the 
family farm. Whenever she could, she would sneak away to draw and 
make dolls. ``She told me when she was a little girl she'd take the 
laundry, the dirty stockings and socks, and tie them up and make dolls 
out of them,'' said Joe Brown Sr., Rowe's 85-year-old nephew. ``Her 
parents'd whup her. They didn't know nothing about art.'' Rowe married 
at 16 and worked most of her life as a domestic. She never had children. 
After her second husband died, in 1948, she began to adorn their small 
house and garden with Christmas ornaments, plastic toys, stuffed animals, 
found junk and hundreds of her own drawings and collages. She sewed 
eerily expressive dolls out of old stockings, with yarn wigs and elaborate 
outfits. She pulled and kneaded her used chewing gum into small, fierce 
figures that she hardened in her freezer, then painted in bright colors. 
``I'm back to a child again,'' she explained in a taped interview 
in the 1970s. ``I've worked all my days. Now I want to play these 
other days out.'' Most of Rowe's neighbors probably regarded her as 
a little odd; according to Brown, one or two called her ``an old hoodoo 
woman.'' But in the 1970s, art students and collectors of traditional 
folk art began turning their attention to living artists and craftsmen 
in the American countryside. What to others looked oddball to them 
looked like art. ``It was a densely packed hodgepodge environment 
that would make your mouth fall open,'' recalled Xenia Zed, a Georgia 
artist and arts administrator who first saw Rowe's house in 1979. 
``Everyone from architects to the local deliveryman would stop and 
stare, because it was an astounding creation.'' In 1978, Rowe was 
taken up by the dealer Judith Alexander, who in the 1950s opened the 
first gallery in Atlanta to show work by Yves Kline, Mark Rothko and 
other abstract expressionists and who two decades later opened the 
city's first gallery devoted to folk art. Thanks to Ms. Alexander, 
Rowe earned enough money to live comfortably in the final years of 
her life and gained access to higher-quality materials. After 1978, 
small crayon and pencil renderings, usually of single figures, sometimes 
of disembodied hands or feet, gave way to densely colored pastel, 
crayon and felt-tip pen drawings of fantastic plants, animals and 
human figures intertwined with abstract shapes and quiltlike patterning. 
Her art was a sort of visual stream of consciousness. ``Whichever 
way my pencil turn, that's what I draw,'' Rowe told the documentary 
filmmaker Linda Connelly Armstrong in the 1970s. ``I may start drawing 
a flower, but if it come to me I put an eye up over it or a nose or 
something and it's going to look like a person, or I turn it over 
to a mule. I don't know what it is till I finish it.'' Rowe died of 
cancer in 1982, and her house was dismantled and eventually torn down. 
A hotel stands on the site. The only record of the outlandish, enchanting 
world she created is contained in a few photographs, a short film 
by Ms. Armstrong that will be on view as part of the exhibition, and 
the dolls and drawings that today exist only as individual artworks. 
According to the Folk Art Museum's executive director, Gerard Wertkin, 
the Rowe exhibition underscores the importance of moving beyond narrow 
definitions of ``folk'' and ``outsider'' in order to do justice to 
some of the most interesting material by artists working far outside 
the mainstream art world. ``You need institutions and individuals 
who will seek out and study this work in order to bring it forward 
and have it appreciated,'' he said. ``But there's a growing sense 
that `folk art,' because of the term's emphasis on rootedness and 
deep connection with tradition, is not appropriate for work that's 
highly idiosyncratic. And `outsider' is hardly the word for work that's 
created very much within the context of the artist's culture.'' Hence 
the museum's use of the term ``self-taught'' for the work it will 
be gathering into its new Contemporary Center. A separate division 
within the museum devoted to 20th-century work, the center will embrace 
both contemporary folk art and outsider art. This month the museum 
is expected to announce major gifts to the center from museum trustees, 
running the gamut from American memory paintings to the works of institutionalized 
European psychotics. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>