<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0253 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Five major Japanese banks announced Wednesday that they would raise 
mortgage rates by as much as 8/10 of a percentage point next month, 
the first sign that soaring interest rates here will squeeze the already 
embattled Japanese consumer. One bank had already raised its rates. 
Interest rates, which were at historic low levels earlier this year, 
have recently been rising as the government sinks deeper and deeper 
into debt while trying to lift the economy out of recession with expensive 
stimulus measures. The yield on the benchmark 10-year Japanese government 
bond closed higher again Tuesday, at 1.865 percent, an increase of 
more than 1 percentage point since it hit a record low of 0.695 percent 
in October. Rates are still well below those in the United States, 
however. For example, the yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note 
fell to 4.67 percent Tuesday. Just Monday, the government was celebrating 
a 2 percent rise in consumer spending in November compared with the 
month a year earlier, driven largely by sales of personal computers. 
That was the first jump in consumer spending in five months, but higher 
mortgage rates are virtually certain to dampen any trend that might 
have been emerging. ``Most existing housing loans here are fixed rate 
and thus won't be affected by this,'' said Robert Alan Feldman, the 
chief economist at Morgan Stanley Dean Witter in Tokyo. ``But it's 
psychologically important because it will have a negative effect on 
those who might have been thinking about building or buying a house 
and all of the subsequent spending that accompanies those activities'' 
such as buying appliances and furniture. Sakura Bank announced Monday 
that it would raise rates on 10-year mortgages by 3/4 of a percentage 
point, to 3.95 percent, and Tuesday it was joined by Fuji Bank, Sanwa 
Bank, the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi, Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank and Sumitomo 
Bank, which all raised their rates to levels between 3.8 percent and 
4.05 percent. Other financial institutions are likely to follow suit. 
Although there is not a widely used comparable 10-year rate in the 
United States, the average rate on a 15-year fixed-rate mortgage was 
6.41 percent last week. Raising interest rates in the midst of the 
worst recession since World War II seems counterintuitive. Japanese 
banks, however, are struggling to clean up their balance sheets by 
reducing their assets, and higher interest rates help in that process. 
The Construction Ministry, on the other hand, has apparently been 
pushing a plan to ease the terms of housing loans that will interfere 
with that effort. Earlier this month, the ministry ordered the Housing 
Loan Corp. to revise its terms in various ways, including extending 
repayment periods by 10 years and offering borrowers zero percent 
interest for up to three years. The government is now worried that 
financial institutions will force mortgage holders in both the private 
and corporate sectors to increase payments using the money saved through 
the revised terms, according to the Tokyo Newspaper. The ministry's 
plans will increase the portion of questionable loans held by banks, 
Feldman said. ``That's exactly what the banks don't need,'' he said. 
There is the possibility, of course, that mortgage rates will drop 
just as quickly as they have risen. The yield on 10-year Japanese 
government bonds is expected to be 1.3 percent at the end of the fiscal 
year March 31, according to the average estimate of nine economists 
based in Japan who were surveyed by Bloomberg News. In other words, 
they expect prices to rise and yields to fall over the next three 
months. But Feldman thinks Japan's higher interest rates are likely 
to remain as long as the economy continues to flounder. He said investors, 
particularly large Japanese institutions, were avoiding longer-term 
investments in favor of shorter-term investments, seeking ever-greater 
liquidity and more limited exposure to Japan's economic troubles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>