<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0238 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The powder keg in the small New Hampshire town has a name: Wade Whitehouse, 
keeper of the peace. As played with fierce, anguished intensity by 
Nick Nolte, who gives the performance of his career in Paul Schrader's 
quietly stunning new film, Wade works part time as Lawford's policeman 
and knows that his hardest job is policing himself. But during the 
devastating course of ``Affliction,'' Wade begins losing a lifelong 
struggle with his army of demons, and his carapace starts to crack. 
With gut-wrenching pity, the film watches pressures mount until Wade 
explodes. ``Affliction'' is adapted, as ``The Sweet Hereafter'' was, 
from a penetratingly astute, grief-tinged novel by Russell Banks, 
whose stirring voice is much in evidence here. But its story is also 
well suited to Schrader, who finds in Wade's suffering a workaday 
``Taxi Driver'' in the snow. Schrader coaxes forth the oppressive 
forces around Wade until they achieve microcosmic fullness, ranging 
from childhood beatings by his father to the covert economic rape 
of a working-class town. Though ponderous literary voice-overs (from 
Willem Dafoe as Wade's brother) provide armchair psychology, the film 
is about much subtler signposts on the road to destruction. Forgoing 
any fanfare beyond the mournful strains of Michael Brook's score, 
Schrader has made a film that needs to be watched carefully. He gives 
it the deliberate plainness that makes every small exchange matter. 
It begins, for instance, with Wade trying to entertain his doleful 
little daughter Jill (Brigid Tierney) on Halloween. As they drive 
through Lawford, the girl (who is comfortable with neither the town 
nor her father) asks Wade if he ever engaged in Halloween vandalism 
and says she thinks that he used to be bad. Forcing the smile that 
will soon desert him, Wade tries to give a kindly, fatherly answer, 
but he can't. The voice of Wade's own raging father is still too loud. 
In a shockingly savage performance, James Coburn rampages through 
the film as alcoholic Glen Whitehouse, the man who first cowed Wade 
into submission. Jumpy black-and-white flashbacks depict Glen's viciousness 
as this family's most fundamental fact of life and capture the terror 
of being a small boy at Glen's mercy. These glimpses of the past are 
juxtaposed with Wade's habit of not making waves, either on the job 
or with the few people who care about him, unless something pushes 
him off balance. The first such shove here: betrayal by Jill, who 
has her angry mother (Mary Beth Hurt) come rescue her from Wade's 
Halloween. ``She never talks about you,'' Jill says with a shrug to 
Wade about his ex-wife. Frozen into a posture of crucifixion as he 
plays crossing guard next morning, watching over every child except 
his own, Wade is further humiliated by a speeding hotshot in an expensive 
car. New money hovers around bleak little Lawford, as personified 
by this driver and his father-in-law. The older man, a powerful union 
official from Massachusetts, comes to Lawford just for the hunting, 
and on that very day is being guided through the woods by Jack Hewitt 
(Jim True), a smooth young man whose complacency rankles Wade. Alone 
with Jack, the union man is mysteriously killed, and suddenly Wade 
is one more inch off balance as he tries to investigate the shooting. 
The most dangerous threat to Wade comes when, after trying to rekindle 
his relationship with a sweet, patient waitress named Margie (Sissy 
Spacek, luminous as ever), he takes her to his parents' home and stumbles 
into an unimaginable nightmare. Glen, now old and infirm but no less 
monstrous, is too chronically drunk to acknowledge the death of his 
wife upstairs, whom he always ignored anyway. Though Wade tries, with 
Margie's help, to deal sanely with Glen even when it comes to this 
catastrophe, it's too late. The son has been drawn within range of 
his father's blistering contempt, and finally made to face his long-hidden 
fury. This time there will be no getting away. Schrader guides ``Affliction'' 
through these momentous events in a spare, sorrowful spirit that exposes 
their universality. Like ``The Sweet Hereafter,'' a more meditative 
and elegant but less immediate, volcanic film, ``Affliction'' finds 
the deeper meaning in an all too believable tragedy. In Wade's story, 
of the strong trampling the weak and of a man suppressing every need 
and impulse until he collapses beneath his burden, ``Affliction'' 
succeeds in finding something larger than one man's misery. Like ``Hilary 
and Jackie,'' ``A Simple Plan,'' ``The General'' and ``A Civil Action,'' 
it turns dark truthfulness into the cinematic sentiment most worth 
celebrating this season. PRODUCTION NOTES: `AFFLICTION' Directed by 
Paul Schrader; written by Schrader, based on the novel by Russell 
Banks; director of photography, Paul Sarossy; edited by Jay Rabinowitz; 
music by Michael Brook; production designer, Anne Pritchard; produced 
by Linda Reisman; released by Lions Gate Films. RUNNING TIME: 114 
minutes. This film is rated R. RATING: ``Affliction'' is rated R (Under 
17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It includes violence 
and profanity. CAST: Nick Nolte (Wade Whitehouse), Sissy Spacek (Margie 
Fogg), James Coburn (Glen Whitehouse), Willem Dafoe (Rolfe Whitehouse), 
Mary Beth Hurt (Lillian), Jim True (Jack Hewitt), Brigid Tierney (Jill) 
and Marian Seldes (Alma Pittman). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>