<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0216 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A Japanese product named Panko sounds as if it might be the next toy 
craze. But a kitchen craze is more like it. Panko is Japanese for 
``bread crumbs,'' and chefs and home cooks are discovering that this 
light, airy variety is worlds away from the acrid, herb-flecked, additive-laden 
bread crumbs in the supermarket, the more upscale crumbs from a bakery 
like Ecce Panis or even homemade bread crumbs from leftover loaves. 
Panko has a texture more like crushed cornflakes or potato chips, 
but with a neutral flavor, only a trifle sweet. Some panko is made 
with honey, some with sugar, but all contains a sweetener and some 
kind of fat, which makes the crumbs brown more easily. Panko is what 
gives tonkatsu, the fried pork cutlet served in Japanese restaurants, 
its coarse-grained, crunchy crumb coating. Some caterers in New York 
and California have also started using panko to give deep-fried cocktail-party 
shrimp a textural boost and keep sogginess at bay. ``The texture of 
the crumbs is very important in the way it performs,'' said Wayne 
Nish, the chef and an owner of March restaurant, who was among the 
first to use panko to bread chicken, fish and even rack of lamb in 
non-Japanese recipes. ``The structure creates little air pockets to 
help keep it crispy.'' In a way, panko is coming full circle around 
the globe these days. It actually reached Japan via Western cuisines. 
In 1543, bread was introduced to Japan by Portuguese traders, the 
first Europeans to land there. The Portuguese word for bread, ``pao,'' 
became ``pan.'' Around 100 years ago, the Japanese interest in Western 
food grew, said Elizabeth Andoh, a cookbook author and teacher, who 
is based in Tokyo. ``In particular, there was a fascination with German 
and Prussian food, a result of the Japanese envy of German military 
prowess,'' she said. ``They thought the diet was an important factor 
in German might, so the Japanese imitated Wiener schnitzel with pork, 
calling it ``katsudetsu,'' which became ``tonkatsu.'' They used ground 
dried bread, or panko, as a coating. And they began serving it in 
the military academies.'' Japan won its war with Russia in 1905, and 
that did it, Ms. Andoh said. Guns, tonkatsu and panko were there to 
stay. Japanese bread is essentially a dense, white squared-off sandwich 
bread, what might be called a Pullman loaf. But it has a striated 
texture, and when it dries and is pulverized, it breaks into spiky 
little shards, instead of fine, sandlike crumbs. Masayuki Shimura, 
the manager of Inagiku restaurant in the Waldorf-Astoria hotel, said 
that most Japanese panko makers no longer bake bread and pulverize 
it but have machines that spray unbaked bread dough directly onto 
heated iron sheets and bake it into shards. Panko in Japan is sold 
in rough, medium and fine textures, Shimura said. He said panko is 
not for fancy food; at his restaurant it is used only for dishes served 
to employees, not on the regular menu. In takeout shops in Japan, 
Ms. Andoh said, panko is used to coat croquettes, which are eaten 
at room temperature or reheated. Yet the Fauchon store in Tokyo makes 
its own panko from white bread like the kind the Japanese delight 
in slicing thick and toasting for breakfast. Panko not only provides 
a crispy coating, but it also makes a lighter stuffing for anything 
from mushrooms to trout, especially when the crumbs are toasted first. 
And it's even good to sweeten and use to layer phyllo or put in a 
pie shell. Barry Wine, the restaurant consultant, who often travels 
to Japan, said he has used panko as a topping for macaroni and cheese, 
and to add extra texture to French toast. Whenever a crunchy coating 
is desired, and especially if the breaded food will be in contact 
with moisture, panko delivers abiding crunch. Buying panko, which 
costs about $2 for 12 ounces, still takes an excursion to a Japanese 
or Asian market. High on the list are Sam Bok, 127 West 43rd St.; 
Katagiri, 224 East 59th St., and Sunrise Market, 4 Stuyvesant St., 
at Third Avenue. Unfortunately, it comes in a cellophane bag, which 
tends to spill willy-nilly as you pour. The cardboard canisters used 
for American bread crumbs would be an improvement. Meantime, just 
transfer it to a jar or other container. FRENCH TOAST WITH PANKO Adapted 
from Barry Wine Time: 15 minutes 2 eggs 1/3 cup half-and-half Salt 
and freshly ground black pepper 1 cup panko 2 slices good-quality 
white bread, each an inch thick 1{ tablespoons butter Marmalade, jam, 
maple syrup or confectioners' sugar (optional). 1. Beat eggs in a 
shallow bowl, and stir in 2 tablespoons half-and-half. Season lightly 
with salt and pepper. Place half the panko on each of two salad-size 
plates. 2. Place a slice of bread in the egg mixture, allow to soak 
30 seconds on each side, then place on top of the panko on a plate. 
Repeat with the second slice of bread. Move bread slices around in 
the panko. With a fork, get as much of the crumbs as possible to adhere 
to the bottom and sides of the bread. 3. Place a nonstick skillet 
large enough to hold both slices of bread over medium-high heat. Divide 
the butter in half, and place each piece in a spot in the skillet 
where a slice of bread will go, then immediately put the coated bread 
on top of the butter, panko-side down. Saute until the panko is golden, 
about 3 minutes, then pour the remaining half-and-half on top of the 
bread. Don't worry if some of the liquid spills into the pan. Turn 
the bread, and saute until golden on the other side. Then serve at 
once, with any of the optional toppings. Yield: 2 servings. PEPPERY 
PANKO PERCIATELLI Time: 40 minutes 1/3 cup extra virgin olive oil 
1{ cups panko 1 tablespoon hot red-pepper flakes 1 cup golden raisins 
2 tablespoons drained capers Salt 1 pound perciatelli, bucatini or 
spaghetti 1 tablespoon finely chopped flat-leaf parsley. 1. Heat \ 
cup oil in a heavy skillet. Add panko, and saute over medium heat, 
stirring constantly, until golden brown, about 10 minutes. Remove 
from heat. 2. Heat the remaining oil in a small pan, add pepper flakes, 
cook over low heat a few minutes, then add raisins and capers. Cook 
for two minutes, then set aside. 3. Bring a large pot of salted water 
to a boil. Wrap the pasta in a clean kitchen towel. Holding it on 
the edge of the counter, break it in four places inside the towel. 
Drop the pasta from the towel into the pot, cook about 10 minutes 
until it is al dente, then drain it, leaving it moist. Return it to 
the pot, toss with the raisin mixture, then with the panko and parsley. 
Season to taste with salt, and serve at once. Yield: 6 servings. BROOK 
TROUT WITH PANKO STUFFING Time: 1 hour 2 tablespoons extra virgin 
olive oil 3 ounces slab bacon, diced 1 medium onion, finely chopped 
{ cup finely chopped fennel bulb 2 cloves garlic, minced 1 1/3 cups 
panko 1 tablespoon finely chopped flat-leaf parsley 1 tablespoon finely 
chopped fresh sage Juice and zest of 1 lemon, plus a second lemon 
Salt and freshly ground black pepper 4 small fresh trout, each about 
} pound, boned but left whole. 1. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a heavy 
skillet, add bacon, and saute over medium heat until it starts to 
brown. Add onion, fennel and garlic, and continue to saute until vegetables 
are golden. Stir in all but 2 tablespoons panko. Continue to saute 
until panko is golden brown. Stir in the parsley and sage, and grate 
in the zest of one lemon. Season to taste with salt and pepper, and 
remove from heat. 2. Heat oven to 400 degrees. Line a baking pan with 
foil, brush with { tablespoon of remaining oil and scatter remaining 
panko into pan. 3. Rinse and dry the fish. Sprinkle the insides with 
the juice of half the zested lemon, then season with salt and pepper. 
Fill each fish with the bacon and panko mixture, reserving a couple 
of tablespoons. Fold the fish over to enclose the stuffing. Skewer 
the sides of the opening together if you wish. Place the fish in the 
pan, brush with the remaining oil and lemon juice, and scatter the 
remaining panko mixture over. 4. Place in oven and bake 15 minutes. 
5. Remove fish from pan and serve, with wedges of the remaining lemon. 
Yield: 4 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>