<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Eric Breeden and his classmates at Hampshire College in Amherst, Mass., 
are eagerly awaiting fresh powder at nearby Ascutney Mountain. It's 
not that they plan to do much skiing. Rather, they'll be testing a 
new snowboard for the disabled that they are developing under an unusual 
program to foster inventors. ``Last semester was frustrating,'' said 
the 21-year-old Breeden, who devotes much of his spare time to the 
project. ``We finally got a prototype together, and all the snow melted.'' 
The Hampshire program, financed by the Lemelson Foundation, has helped 
reshape the image of a small, experimental central Massachusetts college, 
long saddled with the nickname Frisbee U. because of its eccentric 
student body and grade-free curriculum. Gregory Prince Jr., Hampshire's 
president, has championed the 5-year-old program as a way to promote 
the college among business and community leaders. ``They suddenly 
see us as a very entrepreneurial, business-friendly institution,'' 
Prince said. ``Prior to that, we were seen as somewhat radical, different 
and, I suspect, a little bit flaky.'' While the college, founded in 
1970, has not entirely shed that reputation _ there are no grades, 
no departments, no majors _ the Lemelson program has given students 
a grounding in real-world economics. In addition to the snowboard, 
undergraduates have dreamed up an ergonomic bass guitar, off-road 
in-line skates and an inflatable playhouse. The goal is that the inventions 
created under the program someday be marketed. Grants ranging from 
a few hundred dollars to several thousand are awarded to students, 
teams or professors to develop their ideas. Mass Ventures, a company 
based in Amherst, has been enlisted to help students get their inventions 
to market. One student product, an Internet calendar, has raised $150,000 
in seed capital, and an organic method of pest control for corn is 
expected to be on the market next year. The foundation was created 
by Jerome Lemelson, an independent inventor who died last year. Lemelson 
held more than 500 patents, including one on the cassette drive mechanism 
that made the Sony Walkman possible. He spent much of his life battling 
corporations for royalty payments, and ultimately won hundreds of 
millions of dollars in settlements. He devoted himself in later years 
to helping the next generation of entrepreneurial inventors. The idea 
for the Hampshire program was hatched over dinner in 1993. Lemelson, 
whose son and daughter-in-law attended Hampshire and who believed 
in the college's cross-disciplinary approach, asked Prince whether 
it was possible to teach creativity. ``I said, `All I want to do is 
just unleash it,''' Prince recalled. Since then, the Lemelson Foundation 
_ currently endowed at $30 million but with a commitment from the 
Lemelson family for an endowment of at least $100 million by the end 
of 1999 _ has spent $5 million on the Hampshire program, with $705,540 
awarded in grants. A separate national program, also based at Hampshire, 
has awarded more than $1 million to innovation courses or individual 
inventors at some 80 universities and colleges since its inception 
three years ago. Courses offered at Hampshire under the Lemelson banner 
have names as unusual as their subjects: ``How People Move,'' ``Pesticide 
Alternatives'' and ``Is the Mouse Dead: The Psychology of Human-Computer 
Interface.'' College officials estimate that 20 percent of their 1,000 
or so students take one or more Lemelson courses by graduation. The 
classes are spawning grounds for ideas, although only a few of those 
ideas get to the design stage or even closer to realization, as prototypes. 
None of the student-developed products has yet been widely marketed 
or made it through the patent process, which can take years. But several 
patent applications are pending, among them one for the snowboard 
designed for the disabled. The patent would be in the name of Collin 
Twitchell, the instructor who conceived the idea, and two students, 
Matt Capozzi and Nate Henshaw-Plath, who helped develop the prototype. 
Hampshire would actually own the patent, however, and then grant commercialization 
rights back to the inventors, who would be entitled to all royalties 
except 5 percent divided between the college and the foundation. Donning 
a paint-spattered blue jumpsuit, Breeden now spends four or five nights 
a week working on the snowboard prototype in the on-campus machine 
shop of the program's Center for Assistive Technology, devoted to 
design for the disabled. The shop is equipped with a lathe, welding 
equipment and a machine for plastic injection molding. Breeden and 
his class inherited the snowboard project from the original team after 
its members graduated. In fact, few students seem to want to see a 
project through to completion, an inclination that has frustrated 
the program's officials. Capozzi, who has since graduated, chafed 
at what he perceived as pressure from the program to start a business 
based on the snowboard prototype. ``I had to fight tooth and nail 
not to set up shop in a garage,'' said Capozzi, who had received $8,000 
in grant money. Of the snowboard, he said, ``I want to see it out 
there, I just wasn't willing to commit the rest of my life to it.'' 
Leaders of the program are beginning to understand that most students, 
no matter how focused and independent, are like Capozzi: not ready 
to start a business right out of college. Denis Praeger, vice president 
of the foundation, acknowledges the kinks. ``There's a Bill Gates 
every once in a while,'' Praeger said, ``but it doesn't happen very 
often. Maybe we should take a longer view: They'll go work for a big 
business and then start their own business at 28 or 29, when they 
are mature enough.'' Whether or not its graduates ever create businesses 
of their own, the program will have benefited them, says its director, 
Brenda Philips. ``The critical thinking skills that you learn, can 
be very effectively applied in work settings,'' she said. Students 
agree that the program helps focus their career goals and gives them 
an inside track in the job market. One recent graduate, Jerome Little, 
developed a bass guitar with a twisted neck so aging rockers could 
avoid carpal tunnel syndrome. He has since landed a job with the renowned 
guitar maker Ken Parker. When he enrolled at Hampshire, Capozzi thought 
he would study ornithology. ``But after taking all these classes, 
I found I was doing all this design in my spare time,'' he said. ``The 
program gave me confidence to go out there and do something.'' Having 
graduated last year, he now works in product design at Burton Snowboards 
in Burlington, Vt. Prince, who previously was an associate dean at 
Dartmouth College, expresses pleasure at the strides Hampshire has 
taken toward providing a practical education. ``When I came in as 
president 10 years ago, my colleagues tended to be supportive, but 
basically dismissed Hampshire,'' he said. ``It was quaint, different 
and irrelevant. Ten years later they see Hampshire and they know that 
we are doing what they want to do.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>