<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0417 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Not so long ago, the Islanders dominated the Lightning. Really, really, 
dominated the Lightning. Tuesday night they faced a Tampa Bay team 
that everyone but the Islanders seems to be dominating. Tampa Bay 
(9-23-3) has the worst record in the National Hockey League. The Lightning 
had not won in six games and was trying to avoid losing its ninth 
straight game at the Ice Palace, which would have been two short of 
the NHL record for home futility. Tampa Bay was reeling, all right, 
but all the Islanders could muster before a small Nassau Coliseum-like 
crowd was another halfhearted effort that landed them a 3-0 loss and 
sent them on to Chicago with a two-game losing streak after a 5-1 
thrashing by the Florida Panthers on Monday night. After running off 
six consecutive victories against the Lightning, many of them snapping 
lengthy losing streaks, the Islanders (13-21-2) have dropped two straight 
to Tampa Bay, which had last won on Dec. 9 _ against the Islanders. 
The Lightning, which was without its sniper, Chris Gratton, because 
of a suspension, was outshot, 35-17, by the Islanders, but was saved 
by Bill Ranford's sublime effort in goal. Ranford was impenetrable, 
notching his 15th career shutout and winning for the first time since 
Oct. 23, 11 games ago. His best save came in the first period when 
he turned away Zigmund Palffy on a breakaway. Tuesday night's game 
was sloppy. Passes seldom connected. Shots clanked off the back boards 
and the side of the net. But it was the Lightning that made the most 
of its chances, scoring two goals on its first 11 shots. Vincent Lecavalier, 
the Lightning's talented rookie center and the league's top draft 
pick last spring, scored the first goal 6 minutes 43 seconds into 
the second period. On a breakaway, he beat Marcel Cousineau, the Islanders' 
third-string goalie, with a shot through the pads. Lecavalier was 
dragged down by Islanders defenseman Zdeno Chara as he released the 
shot. Cousineau was making his ninth NHL start because of an injury 
to Tommy Salo and the ineffectiveness of Wade Flaherty. Salo has missed 
three games with a broken finger on his stick hand; he could return 
as soon as Saturday. Sandy McCarthy, the Lightning enforcer, scored 
the second goal at 14:29 of the second period on a power play, which 
was five minutes long because of a flagrant foul by Claude Lapointe. 
The Islander was ejected for leaving the ice before slamming defenseman 
Mike McBain into the corner boards. Aleksandr Selivanov clinched matters 
for Tampa Bay when he scored a power-play goal at 17:42 of the third 
period. That fashioned a 3-0 lead, big enough even for a team as poor 
as the Lightning. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>