<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0428 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During a season when consumers are bombarded with marketing that is 
wrapped in messages of holiday greetings and good will, some companies 
are expanding their campaigns to include cultural holidays and festivals 
like Kwanzaa and the Lunar New Year. Companies that sell everything 
from banking services to apparel view such marketing as a way to build 
credibility and broaden their appeal to ethnic consumers, who have 
a rapidly accelerating amount of purchasing power. ``It goes to the 
essence of good marketing, which is tying into something that is important 
to the consumer,'' said Lisa Skriloff, president of Multicultural 
Marketing Resources Inc. in New York. ``Certainly there are opportunities 
where marketers reach out to the general market, whether its Presidents' 
Day sales or a seasonal holiday shopping opportunity,'' she added. 
``It is the smart marketers who are looking for opportunities that 
are not overexploited and where they can cut through the clutter.'' 
Corporations looking to reach new markets not just by expanding across 
the globe but also by reaching more underserved markets in their backyards 
are creating ads and commercials tied to occasions like Kwanzaa, the 
African-American holiday that runs from Dec. 26 to Jan. 1, Three Kings 
Day on Jan. 6. and the Lunar New Year in February. McDonald's is running 
Kwanzaa ads created by Caroline Jones Inc. in New York that do not 
show a single Big Mac. The message is not so much about french fries 
and burgers as it is to show the company as understanding and respecting 
African-Americans' sense of family and community. One commercial, 
for instance, shows families in festive settings, including a choir 
performing to a jubilant congregation. Wal-Mart Stores Inc. will continue 
to use Christmas advertizements in Hispanic communities until Three 
Kings Day, when many Hispanic families worship and exchange gifts. 
``If you have a marketer that has obviously made a commitment to your 
community, that will be the one that wins out,'' said Alex Lopez Negrete, 
whose agency, Lopez Negrete Communications in Houston, specializes 
in marketing to the Hispanic community. The agency assists Wal-Mart, 
Nationsbank and Goya Foods with marketing aimed at this consumer group. 
The experts say that while speaking to an ethnic market during cultural 
festivals or holidays can provide access to new consumers, companies 
should take caution not to offend or patronize potential new customers 
by not doing their homework or by reaching out to them only during 
festive times. ``We always advise our clients to be committed throughout 
the year,'' said Michelle Flowers, president of Flowers Communications 
Group in Chicago, a public relations firm that specializes in marketing 
to the African-American market. ``But during times of the year of 
major significance to the market, you can make sure you are visibly 
showcasing your commitment.'' Flowers Communications has advised companies 
like Mary Kay Inc. and the Lawry's Foods Inc. unit of Unilever PLC 
on ethnic-specific promotions. Lawry's, for one, promotes Martin Luther 
King Day and Black History Month. The maker of Lawry's Seasoned Salt 
also supports the Billiken Day Parade, a large parade held each August 
in Chicago and sponsored by African-American newspaper, The Chicago 
Defender, to pay tribute to a mythical figure that protects children. 
Lawry's conducts a ``Jeopardy''-like quiz show in Chicago public schools 
during Black History Month, and the winners ride on the company's 
Billiken Day Parade float. The company is also coming out next month 
with a cartoon video called ``Our Friend Martin'' in celebration of 
Martin Luther King and the holiday commemorating him. Of course, companies 
are not simply being altruistic. The ultimate goal is to persuade 
more consumers to view the companies in a favorable light and therefore 
to buy more of their goods and services. ``Is it measurable in sales?'' 
said Wanla Cheng of Asia Link Consulting Group in New York, a research 
and consulting firm that specializes in the Asian market. ``Nobody 
can say, but it goes a long way toward building good will. I think 
it's the cost of doing business in a way if you want to court these 
audiences. And it really is a good time to reach them because holidays 
are a very festive time and to be part of that creates a very positive 
atmosphere that I think adds to the impact of the message.'' For Asian 
consumers, for instance, the Lunar New Year in February provides an 
opportunity to target these potential new customers. Companies tend 
to run celebratory ads in Asian newspapers for the occasion as well 
as to participate in parades tied to the holiday. Ms. Cheng maintains 
that while numbers for sales generated by promoting such events may 
be hard to come by ``everything we have done says these immigrant 
consumers are very appreciative of American companies that recognize 
them as a valuable customer.'' ``They feel they are being respected 
in their own way and for who they are as an immigrant,'' she added, 
``and they listen.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>