<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0340 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The first official data from the federal government show that most 
states are meeting the work requirements of the 1996 welfare law, 
with 28 percent of adults on the rolls participating in some type 
of work activity, administration officials said on Tuesday. But it 
is unclear whether states will be able to meet the more stringent 
requirements that take effect in the next few years. ``The welfare 
reform law was designed to promote work, and that's exactly what's 
happening,'' President Clinton's chief domestic policy adviser, Bruce 
N. Reed, said. ``More people on welfare are working, and more people 
are leaving welfare to go to work.'' All 36 of the states reporting 
data for 1997 met the work requirement, with work participation rates 
ranging from 13.5 percent in Louisiana to 96.7 percent in Oregon. 
The 1996 law reversed six decades of social welfare policy, eliminated 
the federal guarantee of cash assistance for the nation's poorest 
children and gave states vast new authority to run their own welfare 
and work programs with lump sums of federal money. In general, the 
law stipulates that adults must be working in no fewer than 25 percent 
of the families on welfare, or else states are subject to financial 
penalties. This figure rises by 5 percentage points a year, to 50 
percent in 2002. Under the 1996 law, states get credit for reducing 
the number of people on welfare. The federal work requirements are 
reduced, or liberalized, for states that have reduced their welfare 
rolls since 1995, as almost all states have. Nationwide, the number 
of people on welfare has dropped by nearly one-third, to 8.4 million, 
since August 1996, when the welfare bill was signed. At that time, 
many welfare experts doubted that the states could meet the law's 
work requirements. State officials say doing so required fundamental 
changes in the expectations of welfare recipients and the culture 
of welfare offices, shifting the focus from the issuance of checks 
to employment and jobs. In 10 states, fewer than 25 percent of the 
adult welfare recipients were working in 1997, but the states still 
met the law's requirements, because these states reduced their welfare 
rolls and were rewarded by having their work requirement lowered. 
States in this category include California, with a work participation 
rate of 20.6 percent, Georgia (20.6 percent), Louisiana (13.5 percent), 
Maryland (18.3 percent), Mississippi (17.2 percent) and Texas (19.4 
percent). Connecticut, Iowa, Oregon, Wisconsin and Wyoming were among 
the ``high performers.'' In each of these states, more than half of 
the adult welfare recipients were working or participating in work 
activities. Valerie R. Marino, acting commissioner of the Connecticut 
Department of Social Services, said the state, with a 58.4 percent 
work participation rate, had a strong economy and had helped people 
move from welfare to work by providing Medicaid, child care, rental 
assistance and transportation services. Ms. Marino said the 1996 law 
provided ``a sense of empowerment, allowing people to realize that 
they could do something productive with their lives, and that we would 
do something to help them.'' (OPTIONAL TRIM CAN START HERE) Elsewhere 
in the metropolitan region, New York state, with 27.9 percent of its 
adult welfare recipients working in 1997, was right around the national 
average, while New Jersey, at 20.7 percent, was below. New York has 
about one-tenth of the nation's welfare families, and slightly more 
than two-thirds of the state's welfare recipients live in New York 
City. (OPTIONAL TRIM CAN END HERE) James D. Neely, deputy director 
of Oregon's welfare program, said the state had enforced stringent 
work requirements since the early 1990s and had spent ``a substantial 
amount of state money, over and above what we had to spend,'' to help 
people move from welfare to work. ``Anybody who comes through the 
door has to work or perform some activity to get ready for work as 
soon as possible,'' Neely said. Presumably, welfare experts said, 
people who remain on the rolls will be harder to place in jobs because 
they have fewer skills, less education and less work experience, and 
are more likely to have physical or mental impairments. On the other 
hand, states will have more money to spend on training and preparing 
each person who remains on the rolls, because the amount of the federal 
grant for each state is fixed even though the welfare rolls are plummeting. 
Very few welfare recipients are exempt from the work requirements 
of the 1996 law. States may, if they choose, exempt single parents 
caring for children under 1 year old. But Sharon M. Daly, vice president 
of Catholic Charities USA, said: ``If you, as a single mother, have 
one or two children between the ages of 1 and 5 and you have to work 
too, it's very hard. Often you don't have time for school or training, 
so you're locked into a low-paying job.'' The new calculations were 
made by the federal Department of Health and Human Services, from 
data submitted by the states. They are consistent with new data from 
the Census Bureau that show a substantial increase in the proportion 
of single women on welfare who have earnings from employment. Michael 
Kharfen, a spokesman for the department, said the census data also 
showed an increase in average monthly earnings for welfare recipients 
with jobs, to $592 in the final months of 1997 from $500 at the beginning 
of the year. While most states have been focusing on the numerical 
goals for employment of welfare recipients in general, the 1996 law 
set separate goals for two-parent families, and many states have failed 
to meet these goals. Nationwide, 34 percent of two-parent families 
were working or participating in work activities in 1997. The basic 
goal, set by the 1996 law, was that 75 percent of such families should 
have been working in 1997, but the specific goal for each state was 
adjusted to give states credit for reducing their welfare rolls. A 
family was in compliance if one parent, or both parents together, 
worked 35 hours a week. Of the 32 states reporting data on two-parent 
families, 17 failed to meet their goals, even after the goals were 
reduced. Two-parent families account for a small proportion of all 
welfare families, just 7 percent of the national total. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>