<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0400 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The day after Christmas dawned bright and sunny in Sydney harbor, 
creating a flawless backdrop for the start of the 54th annual yacht 
race that runs from the shadow of the famous Opera House to the island 
of Tasmania just south of Australia. Powerboats by the hundreds bobbed 
through the blue water and spectators lined the shores, the tens of 
thousands of picnickers drinking beer or champagne as they waited 
for the noon cannon that would launch the 115 yachts. The start of 
the race, which draws vessels from around the world to the Southern 
Hemisphere, is considered one of the most effervescent days of Australia's 
summer. The headlands a mile apart that frame the harbor were especially 
packed in this year's 84-degree weather, and the crowds burbled as 
the sleek vessels flowed out into the Tasman Sea, lofting their spinnakers 
to catch the warm breeze. This year was considered something of a 
banner start because _ for once _ none of the giddy revelers sent 
a motorboat slamming into a yacht, knocking it out of the race before 
it left the harbor. But far worse than an inadvertent collision lurked 
beyond the headlands. Within hours, winds of hurricane force and waves 
like mountains slammed into the tender thoroughbred boats, frequently 
sending crew members into the chilly water, saved only by their harnesses. 
The wind howled with a ferocity that made simple conversation impossible, 
and the cold, lurching sea prompted horrible bouts of seasickness. 
By the time it was over, several yachts sank and at least four yachtsmen 
died. Two more are presumed dead. ``It was as if I were on a wild 
bronco and 60-mile-per-hour fire hoses of water were shot at me,'' 
said Bill Erklens, captain of the 80-foot American yacht Sayonara, 
the first to finish the race. Why did one of the five great ocean 
races in the world spin so quickly out of control, forcing the largest 
maritime civilian rescue operation in Australia's history? In part 
it was because of the unexpected fierceness of the storm. Although 
severe weather was forecast, winds of 90 mph are unusual for the summer. 
In part it was because of the nature of the race. It is known as something 
of a macho challenge, one of the few such races that takes the boats 
out into the open ocean. And finally, for some yachting experts, it 
was a sign that the sport may have lost a sense of balance, with rich 
yachtsmen ignoring the possibility that the ocean might throw up conditions 
they do not have the experience to handle. ``Some crews are more experienced 
than others, but there are amateurs out there for fun,'' said John 
Rousmaniere, a boating writer who is a veteran of the last major yachting 
disaster, off England in 1979, when 15 people died in the Fastnet 
race. In the years since, satellite images and long-range forecasts 
have made weather predictions much more sophisticated. Many boats 
now carry fax machines to get up-to-the-moment weather maps or can 
see the latest predictions by calling them from the Internet. In addition, 
experienced sailors can get a sense of approaching conditions by the 
gathering of the clouds and the change in the motion of the waves. 
In the case of this year's Sydney-to-Hobart race, weather forecasters 
quoted by The Sydney Morning Herald said that they informed the race 
organizers 24 hours before the storm hit that severe weather was approaching. 
But even so the scale of the winds caught many by surprise. ``I didn't 
think it would get much worse than 50 to 55 miles per hour,'' said 
Roger Badham of Maritime Weather systems, the meteorologist for 20 
boats that all made it through the race. ``By Sunday at 9 a.m. it 
was clear that it would be horrendous. The land-based lighthouse reporting 
100 mile per hour winds was shocking. I was a bit nervous then.'' 
Erklens, the Sayonara's skipper, described the conditions at sea. 
``A solid wave would come in the black night in unexpected moments 
and knock you flat,'' he said. ``It hits hard and bruises your ribs. 
One crewman broke his ankle when he was pushed off the high side of 
the boat.'' The Sayonara's crew included its owner, Larry Ellison, 
chairman of the Oracle Corp., one of the largest software makers in 
the world. As he looked back on the ordeal, he said: ``This is not 
what it's supposed to be about. Difficult, yes. Dangerous, no. Life-threatening, 
definitely not.'' Race organizers said it was not up to them to call 
off the race as the weather intensified. For one thing, yachting rules 
generally specify that it is the skipper's decision whether to sail 
or not. For another, once the boats are at sea there is little that 
can be done. ``It's not like you can go into the dugout when it starts 
to rain at Yankee Stadium,'' said Rousmaniere. ``If you are 50 miles 
offshore it would take six to eight hours to reach land. And in a 
big storm it is sometimes more dangerous near land than out in the 
ocean. You can get tossed up onto the rocks.'' It is also a tough 
decision to back out of a competitive event, especially one that involved 
months of preparations and about 10 crew members apiece on the 35 
to 80 foot boats. ``It's a race so people want to keep going, they 
want to get there, they have their families waiting for them,'' said 
Rousmaniere. ``People tend to be optimistic.'' But with waves running 
three and four stories high, towering over the racing vessels, 70 
boats abandoned the race and sought shelter. Six were abandoned or 
sank and 39 finished the race. Among those stuck in the tempest, Royal 
Australian Navy helicopters plucked almost 60 people out of the ocean. 
For some the help came too late. Three of the sailors were lost from 
the yacht Winston Churchill, a 56-year-old vessel that sank; two were 
confirmed dead and one was missing. Two Australian sailors were found 
dead after their yacht, the Business Post Naiad, capsized. The other 
missing sailor, Glyn Charles, 33, was swept off the Sword of Orion. 
He had been a member of Britain's sailing team at the 1996 Olympics 
in Atlanta. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>