<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0381 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two recent deadly fires in high-rise apartment buildings have prompted 
the Giuliani administration and the City Council to consider legislation 
that would require sprinkler systems in at least some residential 
buildings. But the renewed interest in an old debate also has each 
side accusing the other of failing to champion similar measures in 
the past. Mayor Rudolph Giuliani said Tuesday that he supported in 
principle some form of legislation that would require sprinklers in 
residential buildings. But he added that he had directed his aides 
to study such issues as which buildings should be covered by such 
a law and where the sprinklers would be required. ``Sprinklers are 
a good idea; they certainly help,'' he said. ``The question is just 
exactly how they're used.'' City Council members said the coming debate 
was likely to center on whether the city should require sprinklers 
only in new buildings, or whether it should require their installation 
in existing buildings as well. A further point of contention is whether 
to call for sprinklers only in hallways and other common areas, or 
in all apartments. Council members say privately that they expect 
to pass a bill that would require sprinklers only in hallways and 
other common areas. Any bill is likely to face opposition. Last year, 
a Council-sponsored bill calling for sprinkler systems in high-rise 
apartment buildings died quietly because it was opposed by the Giuliani 
administration, ignored by the Council leadership, and lobbied against 
by the real-estate industry, whose ability to make sizable campaign 
contributions has historically made it a force to reckon with in city 
politics. In 1994, the Fire Department drafted a proposal to require 
sprinklers in new multiple-dwelling buildings. But that plan, which 
was also opposed by the real-estate industry, was eventually dropped 
by the Giuliani administration. Tuesday, Giuliani and City Council 
leaders accused each other of not pursuing past legislative proposals 
that would have brought the city in line with sprinkler regulations 
that are standard in many other parts of the country. That squabble 
played against a backdrop of ongoing lobbying by the real estate industry 
and sprinkler manufacturers, whose interests are opposed. Archie Spigner, 
the chairman of the City Council's Housing and Buildings Committee, 
said Tuesday that he received a telephone call this week from developer 
Donald Trump, who expressed concern about the high cost of installation 
and other problems that he had with sprinklers. Trump confirmed Tuesday 
that he had ``received and placed calls'' from and to various city 
officials. It is that kind of easy access to city leaders by the opposition 
that proponents of sprinkler legislation fear. ``It is a hard battle, 
because real- estate interests make political contributions,'' said 
John Viniello, the president of the National Fire Sprinkler Association, 
which has also made contributions and whose members stand to profit 
from laws requiring sprinklers. ``If they are financially supporting 
the City Council and the mayor, it is difficult for politicians to 
take action that is unpopular with them.'' While most cities across 
the country require sprinklers in residential buildings, New York 
City's fire code relies heavily on fire-resistant construction intended 
to contain a fire until firefighters arrive. Both fire officials and 
people in the real-estate industry note that fire deaths in the city 
have decreased dramatically recently; 101 people have died in fires 
this year, the fewest in 42 years. Steven Spinola, the president of 
the Real Estate Board of New York, an industry group, said Tuesday 
that most fatal fires occur in two- and three-family homes, not in 
high-rise buildings that have fire-resistant construction. He and 
Trump said that in addition to being costly, sprinklers were also 
prone to vandalism and mishaps, and widely disliked by tenants for 
esthetic reasons. But advocates for sprinkler systems say they vastly 
increase safety. A 1994 memorandum drafted by the Fire Department 
states, ``Statistics show that sprinklers are the most effective fire 
prevention tool available _ aside from casualties due to firefighting 
and explosions, there are no recorded multiple losses of life in fully 
sprinklered buildings.'' The renewed interest in sprinkler legislation 
came after two high-rise fires in the last two weeks claimed seven 
lives. On Dec. 19 three firefighters were killed in a fire at a city-managed 
apartment house for the elderly in Brooklyn. Because that complex 
was built with federal funds, it was required by law to have sprinklers 
in the hallways. But those sprinklers were turned off, and the city 
has begun an inquiry to determine why. Five days later, on Dec. 24, 
four people were killed in a fire in a 51-story building on the Upper 
West Side of Manhattan when they fled to the stairwells and were overcome 
by smoke. In keeping with city regulations, there were sprinklers 
only on the first 10 floors of that building, which are for commercial, 
not residential, use. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>