<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Proust had his madeleine. For me, the catalyst was seared foie gras 
with pomegranate seeds and a spicy pear-and-pepper chutney. Proust's 
little cake sent him on a journey back in time, but my savory plate 
made me contemplate the future. And it looks very promising. When 
this epiphany occurred I was sitting in Tabla just after it opened. 
As the rich, spicy flavors went rolling through my mouth, it suddenly 
hit me that I had never tasted anything quite like them. The novelty 
was not in the newness; to a restaurant critic, unaccustomed flavors 
are an everyday occurrence. What intrigued me was the fact that the 
ingredients went together in a way that seemed completely natural. 
Looking around, I realized that everything about the restaurant felt 
natural. Only a week old, Tabla seemed to have been open for years. 
As I sat there thinking about this, it hit me that Tabla was not the 
only restaurant that had seemed so good so soon. With growing excitement 
I started to review the events of the last year, understanding that 
a momentous change has occurred: The booming economy has emboldened 
chefs and restaurateurs to take their craft to a whole new level. 
Never have so many excellent restaurants opened in such a short time. 
Consider the best new restaurants of 1998: EQ, Babbo, Cena, La Fourchette, 
Mercer Kitchen, Michael Jordan's: The Steakhouse, The Tonic, Chianti, 
Eleven Madison Park, Bolivar and of course, Tabla. Each serves food 
that is particularly its own, and each does so in a space with a distinct 
personality. What is most astonishing, however, is that all of these 
restaurants displayed a remarkable maturity on opening day. Why? I 
think it is because American restaurants have, finally, come of age. 
The cocky young chefs who strutted onto the stage in the 1970s and 
'80s have evolved out of the stupid-food stage. No longer fresh out 
of school, these American chefs have traveled widely. They have tasted 
and learned, and they now have enough experience to produce signature 
food without showing off. Heading into middle age, the best of them 
display both creativity and restraint. The cocky young restaurateurs 
have grown up, too. They have gone beyond the ``Let's open a restaurant 
and have some fun'' attitude of the early days. They have professionalized 
the restaurant profession. In doing so, they have made their patrons 
part of the equation. Architects who were once content to make statements 
in public dining rooms are being asked to consider the comfort quotient. 
Industries have grown up to deal with lighting and acoustics. Employees 
from reservation-takers to busboys are being trained. Waiters are 
no longer out-of-work actors trying to pick up a few dollars between 
parts. And there is a growing demand for serious sommeliers who can 
create wine and beer lists as interesting as the menus with which 
they are paired. What does this mean for the future? Plenty. The fate 
of restaurants, as everybody knows, is tied to the economy. It's not 
just because people spend more in times of prosperity. Diners also 
become more adventurous when they are flush; it is no coincidence 
that the great advances in American dining have all occurred during 
bull markets. Remember the early '80s? It was an exhilarating time 
when restaurants reinvented themselves to give us New American cooking, 
open kitchens and casual chic. But afterward came the recession of 
the early '90s, and a spate of the safe and the dull. People walked 
around saying, ``It's the economy, stupid,'' while they settled for 
plowing through endless plates of pasta. When times turn tough, customers 
turn conservative. In response, restaurateurs get frightened; many 
close their doors, and those who don't, stick to the tried and true, 
producing copycat cuisine that is the edible equivalent of Hollywood 
studios churning out Jaws 3, 4 and 5. But the latest changes in the 
restaurant industry mean that even another recession should not take 
us back to those dreary days. For one thing, this generation of restaurateurs 
will be equal to the challenge. For another, they will not be alone, 
because there has been one more significant change in the realm of 
restaurants: The people who go out to eat have matured as well. Americans 
have become confident restaurant patrons. We know what we like, and 
are not shy about asking for it. The new American diner is savvy enough 
to demand good service, and knowledgeable enough to demand good food. 
Because we would rather be comfortable than correct, the European 
style of service has almost disappeared. Because we like big flavors, 
our food has become increasingly bold. Another recession may force 
us to eat less expensively, but we will not tolerate eating less well. 
What will tomorrow's restaurant be? That is anybody's guess. The smart 
money says it will be increasingly eclectic, with more Asian, Indian 
and Latin American ingredients turning up on the table. Judging by 
what we are eating today, though, one thing is certain: The food will 
be very, very good. The Restaurant as Appetizer The best new restaurants 
of 1998 in New York may be viewed as indicators of the promise of 
1999. Among them are these 11: BABBO 110 Waverly Place (Macdougal 
Street); (212) 777-0303. BOLIVAR 206 East 60th St.; (212) 838-0440. 
CENA 12 East 22nd St. (Broadway); (212) 505-1222. CHIANTI 1043 Second 
Ave. (55th Street); (212) 980-8686. ELEVEN MADISON PARK 11 Madison 
Ave. (24th Street); (212) 889-0905. EQ 267 West Fourth St. (Perry 
Street); (212) 414-1961. LA FOURCHETTE 1608 First Ave. (84th Street); 
(212) 249-5924. MERCER KITCHEN 99 Prince St. (Mercer Street); (212) 
966-5454. MICHAEL JORDAN'S: THE STEAKHOUSE Grand Central Terminal; 
(212) 655-2300. TABLA 11 Madison Ave. (25th Street); (212) 889-0667. 
THE TONIC 108-110 West 18th St. (Seventh Avenue); (212) 929-9755. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>