<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0307 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Anyone who listens to new music these days will be familiar with the 
experience of deja entendu evoked by the works of many composers favored 
by our musical institutions. The name in the program may be that of 
a contemporary; there may even be a live person sitting in the audience. 
But the piece turns out to be shamelessly reminiscent of the style 
of someone long dead, and the individual among us _ now perhaps taking 
a bow onstage _ is yet another ghostwriter on behalf of the past. 
Most often the style evoked will be one formed in the first third 
of the century, with Shostakovich and Prokofiev particularly common 
models, followed by Bartok and Ravel. Why these? The reason is not 
hard to discern. Such composers still sound modern, but not too modern. 
They are also not hard to imitate, at least superficially. If today's 
pasticheurs were to try to copy, say, Schubert, they might find the 
task more troublesome, and their game would be exposed. The results 
could also be a lot more interesting. A creative imagining of what 
Schubert might have composed had he lived into old age would be a 
fascinating project. Perhaps someone could be persuaded to write his 
Symphony No. 25 in E flat minor, an hourlong single movement, ending 
with an adagio based on a sublime viola melody. Or there might be 
the possibility of his opera on ``As You Like It.'' Other composers 
could devote themselves to works that once existed but have been lost, 
as Alexander Goehr did recently with Monteverdi's opera ``Arianna.'' 
Mozart's melodrama ``Semiramis'' awaits its reinventor, as does Bach's 
``St. Luke Passion.'' There are even whole repertories waiting to 
be brought back to life, like that of English choral music at the 
end of the 15th century. To venture into any of these areas would 
be to make it clear that one was creating a deliberate fake _ not 
that there need be any opprobrium attached to that activity. Fakes, 
if made with sufficient skill and a satisfactory blend of seriousness 
and humor, can be excellent things to have around, as the example 
of the pseudo-``Arianna'' well shows. And if the practice of faking 
needs to be dignified with a classic example, Berlioz's ``Enfance 
du Christ'' exists for that purpose. (Now could be the time, also, 
to explore historical fakes of a less august nature, like ``Mozart's 
12th Mass,'' once widely sung and widely loved.) The many who fake 
Shostakovich or Ravel, however, do so covertly. Their aim, they imply, 
is not to create more Shostakovich symphonies or Ravel songs but to 
write their own. Moreover, in a sleight-of-hand maneuver that projects 
faking as genuine fresh creativity, they declare that the language 
of Shostakovich or Ravel is the only language available to them in 
which they can express themselves. Sadly, things do not work that 
way. Musical languages are not like English and Spanish: languages 
that many people can use in different, personal ways. In the work 
of a great composer, a single measure _ often a single chord, sometimes 
even a single note _ can be distinctive, as if the very words of the 
language were being newly created. If other composers try to speak 
with those words, what results can only be a plagiarism. Shostakovich's 
language, so poignant when spoken by him, becomes the mouthing of 
a ventriloquist's dummy. The intensity of Shostakovich's style must 
be one reason for its current appeal to composers, but there is also 
a more ideological issue at stake. The works of Shostakovich and other 
composers of roughly his generation remind one that tonality did not 
abruptly die when Schoenberg, in 1908, began writing atonal music. 
By another cunning maneuver, Shostakovich and the rest can be presented 
as continuing a line from which Schoenberg broke away. And we, too, 
in the 1990s (so the theory goes), can continue the line by taking 
it up from them. History's web, though, is much more tangled. No composer 
of the 20th century was more acutely, heavily, painfully aware of 
his debts and obligations to tradition than Schoenberg. And no composer 
was more scarily iconoclastic than Shostakovich. Quite apart from 
anything else, to offer Shostakovich as an example of steady conservatism 
is to misremember a complex mind and a difficult, complex career. 
If, since his death in 1975, Shostakovich's music has come to seem 
more germane to the needs and thinking of composers, it must be partly 
because they, too, are having to deal with manifold pressures and 
uncertainties _ in a safer political climate, to be sure _ and partly 
because, in one of the unpredictable and incomprehensible sea changes 
of history, tonality has again become unavoidable. In the current 
music even of such deeply self-aware radicals as Milton Babbitt and 
Pierre Boulez, the 12 notes are no longer equal (if indeed they ever 
really were). Neither composer is exactly writing in C major, but 
insisted-upon notes or groups of notes have taken a greater significance 
in their music. At the same time, John Adams and Gyorgy Ligeti have 
begun exploring new scales, as have the great many composers now working 
with alternative kinds of tuning. The world is humming with tonality, 
and there is no stopping it. But equally, there is no going back. 
At least, there is no going back in the name of musical or expressive 
truth. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>