<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0336 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
KINSHASA, Congo _ ``Je suis low bat.'' Whenever ``low bat'' starts 
flashing on their cellular phones, people here know that their batteries 
are nearly drained. The phrase is a fashionable one here in the capital's 
deluxe hotels and gated villas, a coinage peculiar to a place where 
regular phones don't work and only the thin upper layer of society 
can afford alternatives. But these days, as Congo approaches its fifth 
month of a war that has drawn in at least seven of its neighbors, 
the phrase has acquired a wider meaning. People now are as likely 
to utter ``I am low bat'' in describing their feelings toward the 
war as their phones. ``We don't have an army that can stand on its 
own,'' said Moise Musangana, an editor of Le Potentiel, an independent 
daily newspaper. ``We have to rely on our allies. War costs money 
that the Congo doesn't have. With each passing day, things are getting 
worse for Kabila. Why does he refuse to negotiate? People are sick 
of this war. They're low bat.'' Such comments stand in sharp contrast 
to the wartime euphoria in August and September, when at the last 
minute the government of President Laurent Kabila won the support 
of Angolan and Zimbabwean troops to repel rebel soldiers on the outskirts 
of Kinshasa. But after the government's dramatic victory here, the 
Congolese appear increasingly weary of a war that has brought hardships 
and that the government warns will be long. Mawapanga Mwana Nanga, 
Kabila's minister of finance and agriculture, waved away reports of 
rapidly deteriorating economic and living conditions. ``Freedom has 
no price,'' he said. ``Whether it takes us 50 years or 100 years, 
we will resist until they leave us alone.'' Kabila, whose popularity 
soared after the failed assault on Kinshasa, seems to have squandered 
those dividends by failing to rally the support of the internal political 
opposition and the West. Instead, Kabila has become more isolated 
inside his own country and more dependent on foreign allies whose 
stomach for a long war is uncertain, said officials in government 
and the opposition, as well as Western diplomats. And so Kabila's 
standing has slipped, even as it has been confirmed that his government 
and nation have been the victims of aggression by foreign countries; 
after long denying any involvement in the war, Rwanda and Uganda have 
acknowledged that their soldiers are backing Congolese rebels. ``I 
have a lot of sympathy for the government, more than in August, because 
it's clear to me now that there was an invasion,'' said a senior European 
diplomat in Kinshasa. But he and other diplomats said they were reluctant 
to defend Kabila, who has consistently alienated the West since taking 
office. What is more, a show of support would be interpreted as a 
rebuke of the leaders of Uganda and Rwanda, who are considered loyal 
allies, especially in Washington. During the assault on Kinshasa, 
the Kabila government mobilized popular support for the war through 
anti-Tutsi propaganda, and international relief organizations raised 
concerns that the campaign would lead to a witch hunt for ethnic Tutsi 
in the country. The ethnic Tutsi who have lived in eastern Congo for 
generations but who have never been granted citizenship are part of 
the movement trying to overthrow Kabila. They are believed to have 
close ties with the Tutsi-led government in Rwanda, where in 1994 
the Hutu majority killed half a million Tutsi in a genocide that has 
had profound repercussions on the Congo. The government denies that 
it targeted Tutsi in August. Even so, opposition officials, Western 
diplomatic officials and others said the government had toned down 
its anti-Tutsi drive in the last couple of months. ``They understood 
that their anti-Tutsi campaign was looked at very negatively by the 
international community,'' said Olivier Kamitatu, the director of 
Berci, the leading polling agency here. Uganda and Rwanda helped Kabila 
overthrow the enduring dictator, Mobutu Sese Seko, in 1997, but Kabila's 
closeness to the Tutsi-led Rwandan government made him extremely unpopular 
at home, and he eventually severed his ties with his former allies. 
The president's popularity has eroded in the last month as memories 
of the Kinshasa victory and the anti-Tutsi propaganda recede before 
the grim realities of economic hardship and a war without any apparent 
end, Kamitatu said. Living under a military regime, in a state of 
war, most residents interviewed in Kinshasa expressed support for 
Kabila. But the responses were measured compared with the full-throated 
answers of August; few nowadays echoed the universal response in August, 
when residents of Kinshasa would raise their voice indignantly at 
the subject of the rebels trying to depose Kabila, and say: ``Let 
him work!'' In La Cite, where most of this city's five million Congolese 
live, many said the government should negotiate with the rebels, making 
an important distinction between foreign troops and Congolese rebels. 
So far, Kabila has refused to meet the rebels, arguing that they are 
only puppets of Rwanda and Uganda. Gabriel Katupo-Thenza, 59, stood 
in the backyard of his squat, gray house in Mikondo, a slum that was 
shelled heavily by the government because it had been infiltrated 
by rebels. ``Negotiations are OK,'' Katupo-Thenza said, near a wall 
whose bricks had been dislodged by gunfire here and there. ``The Congolese 
rebels, we need to negotiate with them. They're our brothers after 
all.'' Most opposition parties also support negotiations with the 
rebels. Etienne Tshisekedi, the country's most popular opposition 
leader, has proposed a national peace conference that would include 
the Congolese rebels, said his political adviser, Jean-Joseph Mukendi. 
But it is a measure of how entrenched the no-negotiation position 
is in Kabila's government that even a minister who said he has lost 
great faith in the president ruled out talks with the rebels. ``What 
would the goals of negotiations be?'' he said, adding that two possibilities 
_ territorial concessions or sharing of power with the rebels _ were 
both unacceptable. The minister said he now had only ``25 percent 
confidence in Kabila.'' In recent months, he said, the circle of advisers 
around Kabila had grown smaller, and included mainly men from his 
native province, Katanga. The circle was one reason that Kabila had 
not reached out to opposition groups, the minister said. Mukendi said: 
``In September, there was a lot of goodwill toward Kabila. But there 
has been no movement toward greater political openness. It was a missed 
opportunity.'' The continuing war has made openness impossible for 
now, said Leonard She Okitundu, the minister of human rights. ``If 
we had liberalized,'' he said, ``it would mean that everyone would 
be able to hold demonstrations, and that the enemy would be able to 
exploit that.'' Besides, Okitundu said he believed that neither politics 
nor diplomacy would end the war. ``The stronger one on the battlefield 
will win,'' he said. ``This could last a long time.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>