<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981229.0266 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Toulouse, the city of ancient pink-brick churches and stately homes 
on the Garonne River in southwestern France, may be noted for foie 
gras, but it is just as proud to be the aerospace capital of Europe. 
The first regularly scheduled airline flights in France took off from 
the Toulouse airport in the 1920s, and now long-range passenger planes 
of the Airbus consortium, Boeing's most important rivals in world 
markets, are assembled in a vast hangar in the suburb of Colomiers; 
the National Center for Space Research has been centered in Toulouse 
for 30 years. When the mayor, Dominique Baudis, launched an air and 
space museum, La Cite de l'Espace, which opened on the eastern outskirts 
of the city in mid-1997, he hoped it would attract 160,000 people 
in its first year. ``We wanted a place where the general public could 
come to learn what space exploration was all about, and how it's done,'' 
said Jean-Noel Plachez, who worked with the mayor and conceived the 
museum's exhibits, overseeing their design and construction in a bit 
more than three years. Space City succeeded beyond their wildest dreams. 
In its first 18 months, nearly half a million visitors have flocked 
to see it, spending an average of five and a half hours a visit, lingering 
over scores of interactive computer displays that let you find out 
what it's like to program the launch of a satellite into orbit, how 
satellites are maneuvered in space, and how they send the information 
they gather back to Earth. Mechanical displays give a realistic sense 
of how difficult it must be to close a valve on a space station in 
conditions of weightlessness, or how easy to lose a satellite in space 
by putting on a burst of speed at the wrong point during a launch. 
Life-size structural models abound, both inside _ where a huge Soho 
solar observation satellite hangs in midair _ and in the grounds outside, 
you can walk through part of the Mir orbital station built by the 
Russians. The dials and controls look curiously like something you 
might put together from a kit in your basement, not high-tech at all. 
As Mir is replaced in space by the new international space station 
whose first two stages have now been assembled, the museum will develop 
exhibits on that, too. ``The idea behind the museum is that people 
will come out of here a little more intelligent about space than when 
they came in,'' said Bernard Burel, the general director. Space City 
may indeed make you feel smarter, though it is an enormous help if 
you can read French. There are abridged explanations of the static 
and interactive displays in English (and other foreign languages including 
Catalan) that you can listen to with headphones. Computer programming 
that will allow fuller explanations over the headphones may take some 
time. But there's a lot you can figure out even without the language. 
If you're a 55-year-old child like me, you may find illumination in 
the simplest displays, such as the tilted globe moving in a circle 
like the Earth's orbit around the sun, represented here by lamps that 
show how the planet's inclination on its axis creates the seasons. 
More complicated displays show, for example, how satellites using 
radar measurements of the ocean's surface can determine wave heights, 
and thus wind speeds, and how global positioning satellites tell you 
precisely where you are on the ground. ``I was very impressed,'' said 
Sir Valentine Abdy, the European representative of the Smithsonian 
Institution, who is intimately familiar with its National Air and 
Space Museum in Washington. ``I expected to see a pale imitation, 
and instead what I discovered was something entirely new and original, 
dealing with the problems and realities of space,'' he said. If Space 
City is a teaching tool, it's also terrific fun, as Plachez showed 
while demonstrating, with the benefit of a clever optical illusion, 
how easily he seemed able to leap half his own height in the feeble 
gravitation of the earth's moon. The moon finally came to the museum 
on Dec. 10, 1998, when a moon rock brought back on the Apollo 15 mission 
by the astronaut David Scott was put on display until March 7, 1999. 
On loan from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the 
rock is the centerpiece of a series of temporary exhibits on the moon 
and the American rockets and space vehicles that first put astronauts 
onto its surface 30 years ago. Most of the space hardware on view 
is European, with the two biggest pieces being the Russian Mir station, 
sold to the museum indirectly by authorities of the cash-starved Russian 
space program for $1 million, and a model of a towering Ariane 5 rocket 
developed by the European Space Agency and its partners in France 
and elsewhere to launch private satellites at $80 million a whack. 
But, according to Space City officials, NASA gives most of its obsolete 
hardware to the National Air and Space Museum. ``We would like to 
have more American objects on display,'' Burel said. ``The greatest 
space power in the world isn't well represented here, and it ought 
to be.'' Nevertheless, John Glenn is here, holographically, in his 
Mercury Friendship 1, as is Yuri Gagarin in Vostok 1. And when John 
Glenn went aloft again in the space shuttle Discovery in October, 
the Space Museum showed the launching live on a giant screen. Originally 
planning a museum of sculpture on the site, in an open plain near 
the city's first airport, Toulouse set its sights on space instead 
in 1994, forming a semipublic company that raised more than $27 million 
to finance the museum. About half the money came from funds provided 
by the city, various French state ministries and agencies, and the 
Midi-Pyrenees regional council. The rest came from other founding 
members or associates including the European Space Agency, the National 
Space Study Center, Aerospatiale (the French component of the Airbus 
consortium), Matra Marconi Space, the national gas and electricity 
utilities, and Meteo France, the national weather agency. Now, with 
an operating budget of around $5.5 million a year, the challenge, 
Plachez says, is keeping the exhibits up with the fast-changing environment 
the museum represents. Overenthusiastic schoolchildren also take a 
toll on sensitive toggles on the interactive displays, and keep the 
small maintenance staff, in black jeans and dark-blue windbreakers, 
on the run. The central part of the building, behind a striking metal 
screen that resembles a deep space radio telescope, has three levels. 
You start by passing a scale model showing various satellites orbiting 
the earth, beginning with the space shuttle and going farther out 
in space to geostationary communications satellites at 22,500 miles. 
Interactive displays farther along explain how all those satellites 
get up there, and what they're used for. One of the first is a ``satellite 
table'' that challenges you to launch a little red satellite and observe 
the shape of the orbit achieved by applying or not applying speed 
at various points in the trajectory with a booster _ one of 170 such 
interactive devices visitors come across, this one teaching a bit 
of celestial mechanics. A little farther on, you choose your own rocket 
launcher and satellite, program the launch on a computer, and then 
go inside a realistic-looking control room to watch, on large monitoring 
screens on the wall, blastoff and entry into orbit, all in real time, 
though the images are of course films or computer simulations. As 
you move along, holographs of actors playing key scientists from Isaac 
Newton to Albert Einstein and Wernher von Braun can be summoned up 
to tell you what their discoveries meant for space exploration, and 
a little about their lives. The choice of von Braun, who used to do 
this sort of thing on Walt Disney television shows before the Eisenhower 
administration drafted him to help the United States catch up to the 
Russian Sputnik with the launch of the first American Explorer satellite 
in 1958, initially caused some controversy. Some visitors thought 
the museum let him off too easily for his work on the killer V-2 rockets 
built by the Nazis during World War II with the help of forced labor 
at the rocket research center in Peenemunde. A model of Sputnik hangs 
over the stairs to the second floor, which explores the uses of satellite 
observation of the earth, with demonstrations of what satellites have 
discovered about vegetation, tidal action, ozone levels and winds, 
and how they are used to forecast the weather. Here was the clearest 
explanation I have ever seen of how photographic images in space are 
converted into digits for transmission to earth and then reconverted 
into pictures, and I understood for the first time how satellites 
using radar can scan the ocean's surface and produce an approximate 
picture of the sea bottom _ the surface is full of bumps and dips 
that roughly mirror the ones thousands of feet below, it seems. The 
top floor focuses on exploration of the universe. Here are fascinating 
close-ups from fly-bys of the moons of Jupiter, and explanations of 
how the Hubble Telescope has changed notions of the age and size of 
the cosmos. Coming back to earth, on the ground floor again, the Planetarium 
(reserve a seat for a showing when you buy your tickets) takes you 
on a quick virtual tour of the solar system and the galaxy, using 
an American Digistar 2 three-dimensional projector with some seats 
that recline almost horizontally for a better view. A simulated collision 
with an asteroid acts as an alarm clock for those who need one. The 
small museum shop is full of toys, models, souvenir meteor fragments, 
books and even ``space wine'' from the Domaine de Ribonnot nearby, 
a red that costs about $10 a bottle, but leaves you guessing about 
whether French astronauts needed any to put themselves in orbit. Getting 
There Air France flies to Toulouse from the Orly Ouest terminal in 
Paris, and its competitor Air Liberte flies from Orly Sud. Round trips 
paid for two weeks in advance start at $130 (at 5.5 francs to the 
dollar) for adults on Air Liberte, $151 on Air France; there are also 
discounts for travelers under 25. High-speed trains from Paris Montparnasse 
cost $157 round trip; there are discounts for a two-week advance purchase, 
for families and for travelers in certain age groups. The trip takes 
five hours each way. The Museum The Cite de l'Espace, (33-5) 62.71.48.71, 
on the Avenue Jean Gonord, is a 20-minute, $11 taxi ride from the 
center of Toulouse, at Exit 17 of the East Peripheral highway. It 
is open daily except Mondays 9:30 a.m. to 6 p.m., 7 p.m. on weekends, 
holidays and during the summer. The museum is closed on Mondays except 
during school holidays. Buses, available only on weekends and school 
holidays, on Line 19 from the Toulouse railroad station; about $1.40. 
Entrance fee, including planetarium admission: $11.80 for adults, 
$8.20 for children 6 to 17, $10 for those over 60, free for those 
under 6. Family tickets for two adults and two children cost $32.75. 
Parking for private cars is free. Headset guides rent for $5.45. Guided 
tours in English can be arranged for a minimum of five, for about 
$64; call (33-5) 62.71.56.00 at least a week in advance. Special exhibits 
include the Oceans and Space, from April 25 through September, and 
``Living Planet Year 2000,'' an exploration of the earth and its place 
in the cosmos, starting next June. On the Internet: www.cite-espace.com. 
The restaurant, not a cafeteria, has meals from $8.20 for children 
to $22.75 for adults, including everything from foie gras to steak 
and French fries. Packages combining meals with admission to the museum 
and planetarium range from $30 a person, for three courses, to $45.50, 
for five courses, with wine and coffee included. Places to Stay The 
Hotel des Beaux Arts, 1 Place Pont-Neuf on the Garonne in the old 
town, (33-5) 61.23.40.50, is a four-story brick inn with doubles starting 
at $142; all but two rooms, both singles, have river views. Continental 
breakfast, $14.55. The Grand Hotel de l'Opera, 1 Place du Capitole, 
(33-5) 61.21.82.66, with old-fashioned decor and a grand air off the 
main square of the old city. Doubles, $173; Continental breakfast, 
$15.50. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>