<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981229.2000.1184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "The World." I'm Lisa Mullens. In Hollywood, movies, or at 
least most of them, are about money, how much they cost to make, how 
much they earn at the box office, how much the stars take home, and 
so on and so forth. In Cuba, movies are, in a sense, also about money. 
That is can enough money be put together to make one. The answer is 
generally, no. And those few directors who are able to get financing 
for a film have to overcome other obstacles that have nothing to do 
with money. "The World's" Mario Zarias tells us about one of those 
directors whose latest movie premiered this month at the International 
Film Festival in Havana. When it comes to film production, Cuba is 
definitely not Hollywood. The - film industry produces barely two 
or three films every year. Resources are scarce and directors compete 
fiercely for the little money that's available. This month's international 
film festival, was the scenario for the premier of a new Cuban film: 
LaVita es Silvar" or "Life is a Whistle." It's about the dilemmas 
of three ordinary Cubans trying to find happiness in Havana. The director 
is Fernando Perez, an experience filmmaker dedicated to telling stories 
about life in today's Cuba. This film is the most difficult project 
I've ever embarked on. The theme in this film is the search for happiness 
in Cuba. I tell three stories which are really love stories that develop 
around issues like the purpose of life and all sorts of existential 
dilemmas. "Life is a Whistle" is Fernando Perez's fourth film. He 
made his last film in 1994. Perez says making a film in Cuba is not 
easy. I think of this moment in Cuba, it's a privilege to be a filmmaker 
because, like any other Third World country, Cuba faces serious economic 
problems. We make films with very little resources. Budgets for films 
are very low. Here you have to make film with $200,000. I don't think 
there's any other country in the world where you make films with that 
kind of money. As he speaks, Fernando Perez is preparing the edit 
machine to play one of his films' reels. It's an old and bulky machine 
that's been there for 15 years -- not the latest in film editing technology. 
I think this lack of resources is what allows us to be more creative. 
I've had a lot of artistic freedom to do what I like. I've done the 
films I wanted to do without worrying about the economic results. 
Cuban filmmakers don't worry about how much they make at the box office 
mainly because the state subsidizes their work. The big dependency 
on public funds may seem more vulnerable to government controls, even 
if Cuban officials denied that censorship exists. Fernando Perez says 
he's never had any censorship problems, but he knows of other directors 
who have. Every film I've made, I made freely, which doesn't mean 
that's the case for everyone. There have been cases in which pressure 
has been exerted to try to bar a film and avoid its extradition. I 
remember at the beginning of the `80s, the government barred a film 
called "Los Tetros de Crystale," or "Crystal Roofs." It wasn't a great 
film, artistically speaking, but the theme was interesting. It told 
a story of a government official involved in corruption. At the time, 
it seemed like a big deal. But years later, the film was finally shown 
and it looked harmless, really. Fernando Perez doesn't see himself 
anywhere but in Havana. This is a place he says he wants to tell stories 
about, even if it means fighting with the government from time to 
time. For "The World," I'm Maria Zarias, in Havana. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>