<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981229.2000.0375 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "The World." I'm Lisa Mullens. The simple words "I'm sorry" 
can be among the most powerful in the English language or they can 
fall woefully short of what the situation calls for. Today a leader 
of Cambodia's killing fields of the 1970s, one of Paul Pott's most 
trusted advisors said, "I'm sorry." That apology may have been enough 
for Cambodia's Prime Minister Hun Sen, but it wasn't enough for international 
human rights groups who want to see the Kamir Rouge's former leaders 
tried for genocide and crimes against humanity. "The World's" Jeb 
Sharpe, has our story. Hun Sen has made an apparent about-face. Last 
year, he signed a letter to the United Nations asking for help in 
bringing former Kamir Rouge leaders to trial. Yet, now that these 
two men have left the jungle and the Kamir Rouge behind them, Hun 
Sen has asked Cambodians to welcome them, not with handcuffs, but 
with flowers, in the interest of national reconciliation. Que Sampan 
used the phrase himself in a news conference today. Let bygone be 
bygone. Leave the -- for our country. It's the only way to reach national 
reconciliation. Are you prepared at home to say sorry to the Cambodians 
who died under your regime? Are you prepared, in any way, to show 
any remorse for what--? Yes. Sorry, very sorry. But human rights advocates 
are troubled by the notion that Que Sampan and others like him might 
go free. I don't think that national reconciliation can be an excuse 
when you're talking about mass murder. Sydney Jones is Asia director 
of Human Rights Watch. And I think it's particularly ironic that these 
people associated with the Paul Pott leadership could be welcomed 
back into the fold when the Hun Sen government has gone off and done 
arrests of people who've done far, far less egregious things than 
these men are accused of doing. But Hun Sen's behavior is not surprising 
to legal experts who have watched Cambodian politics unfold over the 
past decade. Bala Krishnan Roger Gopol is an international lawyer 
who worked for the U.N. Human Rights offices in Cambodia from 1992 
to 1996. He says Hun Sen has often said one thing and done another. 
Throughout this time, while he was maintaining that, you know, a trial 
is the best way to bring these people to justice, he was also making 
deals with the Indujul Marush to give them so-called amnesties. The 
first one to get their amnesty was senior Marush leader, Ying Sari 
in 1996. What you've seen right now with Nun Chian and Key Sampan 
is simply a pattern of double talk that Hun San has been maintaining 
in order to achieve his own political strategic goals. In fact, even 
as Hun San appears to be reversing himself, he seems to be keeping 
his options open. His government spokesman said yesterday that Cambodia 
realizes the former Kamir Rouge leaders are not immune from international 
law, nor can Cambodian unilaterally close their cases, since it has 
signed the International Convention on Genocide, which prohibits amnesty 
for perpetrators of genocide. International voices, including the 
United States, the United Nations, and human rights groups are all 
calling for some sort of trial. But as international lawyer Bala Krishnan 
Roger Gopol points out, western rhetoric means nothing without western 
action. If you look at the overall record of the west towards the 
crimes committed by the Kamir Rouge, the overall impression that you 
have is that either the western governments have never been serious 
about pursuing the crimes that are committed by the Kamir Rouge or 
that they had actually very little clue about how to go about it and 
they completely bungled the job. But Roger Gopol still hopes to see 
justice in Cambodia perhaps through an international court based in 
Pinam Penn with Hun Sen's cooperation. Thomas Hamerburg, the top U.N. 
human rights official on Cambodia believes it's essential to Cambodia's 
future. After all the atrocities that took place during these 3 1/2 
years, where of historic dimensions. 1. 7 million people died during 
those years and that should not be swept under the carpet. For "The 
World," I'm Jeb Sharpe. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>