<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981229.2000.0641 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Nate Thayer is a correspondent for the Far Eastern Economic Review. 
He has lived and worked in Cambodia for 10 years. And last year, he 
was the first journalist to interview Paul Pott after the former Kamir 
Rouge leader went into hiding in 1979. Nate THAYER, Hun San's overtly 
conciliatory tone toward these two defectors, I think, is sunrising 
or maybe even shocking here in the west, given what were obviously 
horrifying deeds of the Kamir Rouge. Is the feeling that much different 
in Cambodia? How do you interpret these conciliatory measures? Well, 
actually, I think that most of us here in Cambodia would have expected 
it. He has given amnesty to hundreds and hundreds of others who were 
senior officials during the so-called killing fields of the late 1970s 
of which Paul Pott was in control. There is no question that the Hun 
San and the current government in Cambodia, in fact, are controlled 
by former Kamir Rouges who defected at various times over the last 
few years. Well, how do you explain the fact that at one point Hun 
Sen was actually talking about putting these men on trial and now 
we're talking about offering amnesty to more Kamir Rouge officials? 
What are the political stakes in the kind of calculations that are 
involved in this? This is something that's essentially for almost 
exclusively foreign consumption. Internally in Cambodia, it would 
be almost impossible to have a real neutral trial of those guilty 
of crimes against humanity and war crimes during the killing fields. 
The current prime minister, the foreign minister, the defense minister, 
interior minister, finance minister, justice minister, thousands of 
others were, in fact, Kamir Rouge during the periods that we call, 
in the west, the killing fields. Now what we hear is rhetoric from 
Washington and London and Kambra and Paris and the United Nations. 
But in fact, it's nothing more than rhetoric. They're not going to 
push the authorities in Penam Pan who they not only recognize, but 
fund to bring these people to justice. In light of the fact that, 
as you said, so many Kamir Rouge -- former Kamir Rouge have now become 
part of the government, including Hun Sen himself, what kind of opposition, 
either military or political, does the current Kamir Rouge present 
these days? We know about at least one leader who has not defected 
and he remains in the jungle, in fact. He is literally a man alone. 
This one man left is so unpalatable that he will be protected in the 
jungles and it's a quid pro quo that he will not be arrested. But 
essentially the Kamir Rouge, as we know them, are finished. But there's 
another way to look at it and that is that this is the beginnings 
of a -- of a new Kamir Rouge, the same people who we recognize as 
being authorities during the terrible years in the late 1970s are, 
in fact, in full control of the current authorities which are recognized 
by the west today. So then, when you talk about reconciliation, is 
-- is that simply a term of rhetoric that is used by those in government 
or is that something actually that the Cambodian people themselves, 
at least those to whom you've spoken can embrace? The choice is to 
tear apart the very fabric of society today or to let bygones be bygones 
and try to build society up from what it is today and most Cambodians 
would choose the later choice. Does that mean, do you think, we could 
possibly be seeing some sort of a Truth in Reconciliation Commission, 
as we did in South Africa? Well, you know I asked this question about 
Hun San and -- and you know they'd never heard of the Truth in Reconciliation 
Commission. Cambodia is, in some way, in a different world. No, I 
don't think we'll see that and I don't think we'll see justice. Well, 
Nate Thayer, we appreciate your speaking with us. Thank you. Nate 
Thayer is a correspondent for the Far Eastern Economic Review. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>