<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981229.2000.1425 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite a year of global financial turmoil, the U.S. economy appears 
ready for another year of growth. From our business desk in New York, 
Patrick O'Connell profiles a man many observers credit for this remarkable 
stability, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan. Arguably one of 
the most powerful men in the world. Alan Greenspan is not king of 
the soundbite. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Very much appreciate 
your kind opening remarks. When he speaks, veteran Greespan watchers 
will tell you, you don't so much listen, as translate. In fact, he 
likes to write speeches in the bathtub, by some reports, soaking there 
for up to an hour and a half. Our objective has never been to contain 
inflation as an end in itself. Born in March 1926, the reports say 
Alan Greenspan's parents separated when he was four and he lived with 
his mother Rose and grandparents. The young Greenspan attended the 
Juliard Music School in New York before pursuing his economic studies. 
Lynn Garnette, now a Washington lawyer, first met him in the `40s 
when the two men played in the same jazz band. Alan Greenspan's instruments 
included the saxophone. I was the band manager. It was a sixteen-member 
swing orchestra and that was Henry Jerome's band. He did the income 
tax returns at seven -- seven bucks a throw. He also looked at the 
band's books, which was a very important responsibility. A number 
of big band leaders went bankrupt and were pursued to the end of their 
day by the Internal Revenue authorities in this country. For 20 years 
he was chairman and president of Towns and Greenspan, an economic 
consulting firm in New York. Then in the `70s, Washington beckoned. 
His term as chairman of the Federal Reserve began just months before 
the stock market slump of 1987 when Ronald Reagan was president. Running 
the Fed during the Clinton administration includes regular breakfast 
meetings with Robert Rubin, the treasury secretary and his deputy. 
Wayne Angel has known him for 10 years as a former Fed governor and 
tennis partner. Sometimes he sounds as if he's thinking out loud, 
but that's quite an admirable trait, because some people don't seem 
to think that much. In 1997, Alan Greenspan married his long-time 
companion, NBC news correspondent Andrea Mitchell. It was his second 
marriage. At a Washington charity event in her honor, not long afterwards, 
he joked about balancing the household budget. My dear, as a suggestion, 
those CDs we bought the other day were clearly overpriced. They could 
have been made and sold a good deal cheaper. For example, all 12 violins 
were playing identical notes on that Mozart. Hissings and unnecessary 
duplication that might be remedied by a downsizing of staff. Amid 
the current expansion in the United States, there could be a debate 
over how much of it is down to him. But some would claim the question 
doesn't matter. Seen as a private man in a public office, Lynn Garnett 
says the job is his passion. He doesn't give a damn about how engaging 
or disengaging he is as a personality. He is interested in the stability 
of the work of the Federal Reserve Board and his relationship with 
his wife and that's about it. Alan Greenspan has been steering through 
cuts in interest rates which have helped stocks ride high to near 
records. That's hardly their intent, since the U.S. economy is expected 
to slow next year and the chairman of the Federal Reserve, who will 
be turning 73, may well be working harder than ever. For "The World," 
I'm Patrick O'Connell in New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>