<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981229.2000.3032 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Bask provinces are geographically in Northern Spain, bordering 
France. But culturally, the region has little to do with either country. 
In fact, not much is known about the origins of the Basks and, for 
that matter, their language. As "The World's" Marco Worman tells us, 
Bask accordion player Capo Huntida and his band are helping to clear 
up Bask identity by showing just how complex it really it is. Bask 
accordionist Capo Huntida spend his life making irresistible indigenous 
dance music. In the liner notes to his album, -- "Zero Hour," Capo 
Huntida writes in his native Bask language. Now, I don't speak Bask, 
but Huntida tells us that this means an indication to dance. Men on 
horses, foot-stomping and young men and women skipping. The Bask language 
and, to some extent, the Bask culture, have little resemblance to 
surrounding France and Spain. The origins of the Bask people have 
mystified scholars, some of whom have even speculated about ties with 
the Eskimos. Itor Narbyka, who manages accordionist Capo Huntida and 
his ensemble says the Bask culture is unique. Bask cultures have various 
special situation because we have not contact with the -- or they 
cultures or their Arabic cultures or Africans, Mediterranean. It's 
a very mountainous, geographically, so we were, more or less, you 
know, apart from the rest of the world for a long time. And one the 
things could be our language. The Bask language is very old and it's 
for some people very difficult. It has not -- with Latin or Arabic 
languages. The origins of Bask music are, likewise, hard to pin down. 
But Itor Narbyka says any investigation should begin with the accordion. 
The instrument is very important. For some - - seem big influence 
from -- for a simple -- for example, a -- or a Italian influence in 
his music. And it's -- this could be possible because it's the same 
instrument, which is the accordion. It depends on the audience, what 
they listen before. If you consider the Bask music happy music, that 
music for dance -- the Irish music or Scottish music, it's more your 
point of view about what do you know about your music, what do you 
have inside. Which is a long-winded way for Itor to say he doesn't 
know, either, what the links are between Bask music and other cultures. 
As for Capo Huntida's, there has been a lot of influence from his 
travels, influences that range from Madagascar to Ireland. Two tracks 
on his new album have Malagash lyrics and others sounds like the sweetest 
little -- ever to emerge from county --. The logical assumption would 
be that Bask music is rooted in the music of Spain. But a couple of 
Capo Huntida's bandmates are only too eager to disagree. The base 
of the music is coming from totally another place and it's more like 
a flamingo, you know. Spain is very curious culture -- it's a very 
different, -- people and... Spain is -- a big... People from around 
the world, they think that Spain is the -- and the Mediterranean. 
But Spain is not that. Spain is a big country with different cultures, 
different people from the North or the East, from the South. And, 
you know, they show around the world what they want. And so, accordionist 
Capo Huntida and his band provide little help, if you are trying to 
unravel the mystery of the Bask culture. But Huntida and his music 
will help you move your feet. For "The World," I'm Marco Worman. Music 
from the Bask region of Spain brings this edition of our program to 
a close. In Boston, I'm Lisa Mullens. Joins us again tomorrow for 
another spin of "The World." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>