<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981229.2000.1936 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I'm Lisa Mullens. Last year, more than 80,000 foreign tourists visited 
Yemin, attracted by the Arab nation's temples, scenery and the beaches 
of the Red Sea. Vacationers always take a risk when visiting the country. 
Armed tribesmen have kidnapped more than 100 visitors there during 
the past few years. Yesterday 16 western tourists were kidnapped in 
Yemin. Today, four of them are dead. The others freed, after an operation 
by Yemini security forces. The BBC's Frank Gardener has been monitoring 
events in the region from Dubais the United Arab amoritz. Frank Gardener, 
what do we know about what transpired today and how these tourists 
were killed? Well, what we know, for certain, is that there was a 
shoot-out in a remote strong hold hideaway where the kidnappers had 
taken their hostages, having taken them at gunpoint from a road where 
they were traveling in the South of Yemin. Now, what we don't know 
is exactly what triggered this shoot-out and this is the really key 
as to -- because the Yemini government are saying possibly to deflect 
international criticism, they are saying that the kidnappers have 
begun shooting hostages before they themselves stormed the hideout 
and that they had to storm it in order to save lives. It really remains 
to be seen, once the -- the hostages, the survivors are able to talk 
to the media, whether they're going to corroborate the story because 
another report that I have heard from a source very close to Yemin's 
president, is that, in fact, this was a planned operation. And from 
the very beginning, the Yemini government had no intention of negotiating 
with the -- in good faith, with these kidnappers and that they intended 
to resolve the situation by force. To the -- to the issue of whether 
or not the Yemini government had a plan to deal with these hostage-takings, 
apparently, if they were involved at all, it's because they have become 
so routine. Can you explain exactly what the purpose is in taking 
hostages over the years? Sure. Over the past six years, they've been 
over 120 Western hostages, usually oil workers and tourists, who've 
been taken kidnapped -- taken prisoner by armed Yemini tribesmen, 
to be used as bargaining pawns with the government to try and force 
economic improvements from the government. But in the past, they've 
always been released unharmed and they've been treated very well by 
their captors. I think the other interesting issue is going to be 
in this case, just who were these kidnappers. They're reported to 
be from an Islamist group called El Jihad. They were reportedly asking 
for the release of their jailed leader who the Yeminis arrested two 
weeks ago. And there were other reports that they were calling for 
the listing of U.N. sanctions on Iraq. So that really changes the 
whole picture. Is there any kind of advice being issued at this point, 
Frank, to travelers to Yemin ? Well, they're not yet advising travelers 
not to go Yemin. I think people are going to think very carefully 
before traveling off the beaten track. What is so unfortunate about 
this kidnap case is that the route used by the tourists when they 
were kidnapped is -- has always been thought to be a relatively safe 
route. There haven't been any kidnappings on that route before and 
the police escort stopped some kilometers short of that, some miles 
short of that because it wasn't thought that they needed to come with 
them that bit. But certainly the kidnappers thought that they knew 
they were coming. This was a planned operation, as far as the kidnappers 
are concerned. They put a vehicle across the road and then fired warning 
shots above the heads of the tourists. And that's -- that's how they 
kidnapped them. So I think, from now on, anyone who travels off the 
beaten track in Yemin is certainly going to be taking their lives 
into their own hands. Well, thank you very much for the update. The 
BBC's Frank Gardener speaking to us from Dubais. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>