<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981229.2000.0901 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Saddam Hussein's Arab neighbors are divided over Iraq's continuing 
standoff with the United States. Arab foreign ministers were going 
to discuss the U.S.-British airstrikes against Iraq at an Arab League 
summit tomorrow in Cairo. But today, they postponed the meeting and 
Abduhl Bari Adwan, who edits the London-based Arabic language newspaper 
Alkuns, says that can't be welcome news for Iraq's president. The 
postponement would be a -- blow to Saddam Hussein because he was hoping 
this summit will shorten the time of the sanction and would -- it 
will help his cause to challenge the United States and to actually 
formulate a strong position in the United Nations in order to put 
an end to the sanction and also to the attacks. So he was counting 
on a vote of support coming from -- from this meeting which has been 
canceled. Is the fact that it's been postponed a sign of the divisiveness 
of Arab nations themselves? There is a huge division, a division -- 
in the Arab ranks, especially the official ranks. I'm not talking 
about the popular ranks. There are two kinds, actually. The Gulf Cooperation 
Council, the Gulf Faith plus Egypt and Syria is against any left of 
the sanction for the time being. And they would like to see Saddam 
Hussein removed from power. And so, they gave the green light to the 
American strikes when they make Saddam Hussein be the responsiblity 
of any consequences of his non-cooperation with the United Nation 
inspectors. So this was interpreted as approval of any American or 
British attacks against Saddam Hussein. The other camps which, you 
know, consist of the -- Arab country, actually, was against this military 
strikes and they wanted Arab summit in order to support the Iraqi 
position in lifting the sanction. For those nations that do not support 
Saddam Hussein, what it is that they object to, in terms of his regime 
and how are they different in terms of other Arab -- their Arab neighbors? 
You know, this country -- I mean, Egypt, Syria and six Gulf states, 
they set a precedent in 1990 and that a summit meeting which took 
place in August in that year, when they gave the legitimate umbrella 
for the American military existence on -- on the Saudi Arabia and 
Gulf states territory, in order to liberate Kuwait or under the -- 
of liberating Kuwait. These countries actually were shocked when they 
saw Saddam Hussein after this still surviving. They thought the American 
bombardment and the ground troops will finish him forever, so they 
wouldn't be embarrassed in front of their people. That's why there 
is a personal hatred from these countries and from the government 
of these countries -- Saddam Hussein. He -- he represents a huge embarrassment 
for them. So does that disdain for Saddam Hussein translate into support 
for an opposition, either inside the boundaries of those countries 
that you mentioned, including Egypt and Saudi Arabia or outside? Saddam 
Hussein now is gambling that the Arab masses will take his side. He 
is encouraged by the reaction in the Arab states by this demonstration 
which took place in Morocco and Egypt and Syria and Yemin and occupied 
territories. So he -- he felt that, you know, these military strikes 
revived the Arab nationalism. It revived the Arab solidarity, especially 
in the streets. But he is not fearful anymore from these military 
strikes. So I anticipate a lot of skirmishes in the future. Maybe 
more than that. I'm not surprised if he tried to, you know, send maybe 
troops, maybe guerrillas. And so, and -- more causalities among the 
American soldiers or -- I mean, even American personnel to make -- 
to make the American government position very, very weak and very 
critical. Abduhl Bari Adwan is the editor of Alkuns, an Arabic language 
newspaper published in London. Thank you very much. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>