<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981229.2000.2150 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Time for today's geography quiz. And today, we're looking for a South 
African city that began as the country's first European settlement. 
It was founded in 1652, as a supply station for the Dutch East Indies 
Company. Sitting in the shade of Table Mountain and flanked by two 
oceans, this is South Africa's legislative capital. It's famous for 
its beaches, its jazz them. Because, you know, when -- when people 
feel that there is some love, then... That's right. The whole thing 
was your love. The whole thing was the love. He wanted to go to art 
school. He wanted to go to medical school. He really had ambitions 
and his brothers who took over when the parents were dead, they booted 
him out and said you go get a job and you do this and that. And so, 
I -- I think he felt all the time that he didn't get all of the opportunities 
that he would have liked to have, but he was going to make sure that 
he provided for kids. But in spite of all of that pressure, he never 
regretted anything. He always seemed to say, oh, this is the hand 
I was dealt and life is good. But for Hai, Alzheimer's ultimately 
is a road to nowhere. And even his awareness of his own family, the 
one thing he probably worked hardest for in his life, is fading fast. 
You've got three sons. yes. What are their names? Ricky, Shalom, and 
I don't -- I don't remember the name anymore. Do you remember what 
it is I do? I don't know. Does it both you that you can't remember 
your kids' names sometimes and you can't remember what they do? Well, 
I tell ya', yeah. I see them, hello, good-bye. For 20 years, we were 
there for him. That's 1171 Morrison Avenue. The end of the journey 
is the Myrowitz family's old neighborhood in New York City where Hai 
raised his children and was a man of consequence, the de facto mayor 
of the block. He can't remember. The tenements of the first-generation 
American Jews, like Hai, have been replaced here. Just as fleetingly, 
you feel, by the crumbling projects for Latinos and blacks. In a sense, 
the entire territory of this film, from the towers of Manhattan to 
the 1200 featureless flat miles they crossed has been a foreign country. 
Foreign, too, in a quality we don't think of as particularly American 
these days: simple human decency. Toward the end of the film, Hai 
turns to Joel with a secret he never revealed. The meaning to him, 
of Charlie Chaplin's "Little Tramp," the ultimate nobody on the road 
to nowhere, a character that Hai used to imitate to charm his children 
and his friends. He was here since he was -- in the height of the 
little midgets, he was this little guy there righting all the wrongs, 
helping others. There was a beautiful -- do you think that. That was 
what I loved, the goodness, the goodness. Did you feel connected to 
him? Always, always, always. If anybody would show a little bit something 
to me that I was accepted or allowed and they would talk to me, and 
I'd think -- pat me on top of the head or put their hands around me. 
I'm home. I loved everybody. I loved everybody. I'm very sorry. Nobody 
remembered me. Nobody knew me. Nobody saw me, but I was there. I'm 
very sorry. We're all sorry. It's an amazing self image for a man 
to have, after so much of his life had faded away. And an incredible 
picture for an old salesman, like Hai to be selling at the end of 
his days. An image of an America great, not for its winners, but it's 
so- called losers. And to the people rich in the wisdom, it is not 
what you're left holding on to that matters, but whom you touched 
along the way. I loved when you were the strong man in the neighborhood. 
You can take a guy who was a doctor or a principal of the school or 
a businessman and you can take -- you can take another guy who was 
just an ordinary worker and you would treat them the same and you 
would bring them all to the same level and that would be the level 
of laughter. You saw me. You saw Papa. That's right. Tony Kahn's Journal 
is a regular feature of "The World." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>