<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981229.2000.2831 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "The World." I'm Lisa Mullens. Time now for the answer to 
today's geography quiz. We were looking for a city in South Africa, 
distinguished by, among many things, a strong Muslim presence and 
the presence, in particular, of a six- year-old phenomenon. To tell 
us what that recitation is all about and to give us the answer to 
our geography quiz today, we turn to "The World's Muhammad Ali, who 
lives in the city. Muhammad, where are you and what is the answer? 
Sunny Cape Town in South Africa. Cape Town in South Africa. And that 
also happens to be the home of six-year-old Pierdos Alexander who 
has accomplished a rather mind-boggling feat. Absolutely. She has 
learned to memorize the Kouran, which is the Islamic religious scripture, 
about 745 pages, over 6,000 versus. And according to her teacher, 
it's the equivalent to memorizing three Shakespearean plays, without 
even understanding what she is reading. That is simply amazing. And 
how long did it take her to commit the Kouran to memory? It took her 
all of two years and, amazingly, as well, she started at the age of 
four, when she couldn't even read the Arabic script and she -- she's 
just about starting to learn to the read the English script right 
now. Wow. That is really an amazing story and it's interesting because, 
simply, the Muslim presence in southern African is not something that 
we think of very often. But certainly, there is a large Muslim population 
in Cape Town, in particular. And I wonder, in terms of going through 
the city, is it detectable, particularly around this time of Ramadahn? 
What are the signs of Muslim life there? In -- in the city center, 
especially, just on the outskirts of the city center, there's a strong 
detectable presence in the form of what's known as the Malay quarter. 
When -- when the Malay slaves were brought here by the Dutch settlers 
in the 1650s, they settled there and they -- about marks, which -- 
and it's very detectable in the supermarkets, even. You know, when 
you buy meat, most of the chicken, for example, is halal-- which is 
the Muslim form of slaughtering. Kind of a similar idea to kosher 
cooking? Absolutely. Yeah. In terms of the celebrations of Ramadan 
or the marking of Ramadan there, what can you tell us about that? 
Well, you see, for example, many females who would normally not wear 
a scarf, you know, for the month of Ramadan out of respect, wearing 
a scarf, so they are easily detectable. And you know, they're supposed 
to pray five times a day, which can be clearly heard throughout the 
city. And you can smell the sweet smell of foods, which people normally 
cook when they -- when they break their fast in the evening. And then 
what about the celebrated Muslim --? Does Alexander, do you know, 
in terms of her future, are there any other recitations that she's 
planning? Anything else aside from the Kouran, as if that's not amazing 
enough? Well, she is actually such a celebrated little individual. 
She's received so many invitations to visit in the Middle East. We 
-- just been received with great astonishment because, remember, although 
she can't read the Arabic scripture, she doesn't actually understand 
what she's reading and she's got to revert to translation. And she's 
actually been given a free computer course, as well. And because of 
memorization abilities, she's just doing so well that she's accelerated 
at development in school, as well, so she started two grades ahead 
of other kids her si -- her age. That's an amazing story. "The World's" 
Muhammad Ali speaking to us from the site of our geography quiz today, 
Cape Town, South Africa. Thank you, Muhammad. Thank you very much, 
indeed, Lisa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>