<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.1600.1333 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Twenty-five years ago, composer Stephen Sondheim's musical, "A Little 
Night Music," opened on Broadway. Set in Sweden at the beginning of 
this century, it's a kind of fairy tale for adults, a comedy that 
takes place in an idyllic summer house in the woods. The main characters 
are either married to or engaged to or pining for someone who is not 
right for them. The play sorts out these mismatched pairs and unites 
them with their true loves. Sony has just released a newly mixed version 
of the original cast recording, and Carolyn Weaver talked with its 
producer, Thomas Sheppard. Curiously enough, when I first went to 
see "A Little Night Music," I thought it was so good that I didn't 
think it would find an audience. And because we had been burned rather 
badly on Broadway a few years before that, we decided that we weren't 
going to record it. Thomas Sheppard was director of Columbia's classical 
and Broadway division when he decided that "A Little Night Music" 
was a bad business risk. But he was overruled by the late Goddard 
Lieberson, a company president, who said he didn't care if the record 
didn't sell, it still had to be made. Mr. Lieberson returned to the 
studio to record the play himself with Thomas Sheppard assisting. 
The resulting album was lovely, but Mr. Sheppard says the new one 
is an improvement in every way. For one thing, he had only a few days 
to edit and mix the original recording. Having a chance to go back 
to it some 25 years later, where first of all, there's no time constraints, 
I can spend as much time remixing the original tapes as I felt they 
needed. Also, the state of the art has changed enormously. The equipment 
we're working with is so much better and so much subtler, and so much 
finer than what we had then, that there are things we can do in terms 
of quality, and transparency, in a dynamic range, and various uses 
of ambiance. It's just a whole new world, and we can take these original 
tapes which we thought we were kind of doing the best we could with 
them 25 years ago, and suddenly we find that there are far richer 
in what they can offer us than we ever dreamed of. Is it your favorite 
Sondheim? It's hard to - Yes, I guess it is. I was going to say it's 
hard to know because I'm enormously fond of "Sweeney Todd and Company," 
and "Sunday in the Park with George" but I guess just for pure beauty, 
just ravishing beauty from beginning to end, there's almost nothing 
like "A Little Night Music." Sony has chosen 20 or so other original 
cast recordings for remixing, including "My Fair Lady," "The Sound 
of Music," and another Sondheim play, "Company." Producer Thomas Sheppard 
says "A Little Night Music" has ended up a respectable seller after 
all. And the play is produced frequently by operas and theaters around 
the country. I'm Carolyn Weaver. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>