<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.0500.2547 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Authorities have given up hope of finding anymore survivors from racing 
yachts caught in a violent storm off the south coast of Australia. 
One yachtsman is still missing and presumed dead. The official death 
toll stands now at five. Reporter Nino Tessarero in Sydney spoke to 
one of the racers who survived the storm. He related that story VOA's 
Victor Beadie. I spoke to one of the sailors from the crew who was 
flung overboard. He said that the waves he had sailed were about nine 
Sydney to Hobart races, and he had never, ever seen anything like 
these conditions before. He said the waves were in some case as high 
as three story buildings, and that's unimaginable for the non-boating 
types to imagine a wave three stories high. And so, of course, they 
would take the boats, the waves would take the boats to the top and 
then they would be thrown into the bottom part of the wave, and then 
do a 360-degree roll. So many of the sailors would have just flung 
straight off. The guy that I spoke to was just holding on luckily 
to one of the ropes which was connected to sale, and he managed when 
the boat did a 360-degree turn to put himself back onto the boat. 
This sailor that you spoke with, did he indicate he would try a tenth 
race, or is he giving it up? No, he - I, of course, asked him that 
question, and he said this would be his last. But I have heard from 
many others. They often say this days after the event, but give them 
six months, and of course they can't help the temptation to come back 
and do it again. Will government authorities make some changes to 
this race? Well, the bottom line in this is that the skippers of the 
boat have the final say. If they want to pull out of the race, they 
can, and that's their prerogative. And, therefore, the shifting of 
responsibility has always been on the skipper to make that decision, 
and they all had fair warning of what the conditions were going to 
be like. And many of them, like I said, had started to pull out of 
the race. There has been a lot of talk obviously because of the extensive 
search and rescue effort that maybe there should have been. They should 
have called the race off beforehand. But in fairness, nobody was able 
to predict the severity of the storms in the first place. And so it's 
just one of those things where we have an incredibly large coast line 
around Australia, and we happen to have one of the best search and 
rescue efforts in the world for these types of events. But they are 
extremely costly, as you can imagine. That is reporter Nino Tessarero 
in Sydney. You're tuned to VOA News Now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>