<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.1600.3193 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
International football or soccer, as we call it here in the United 
States, rolled into France in 1998, the final stop for competition 
in the 16th World Cup Tournament. The French not only gained respect 
as good hosts, they also fielded the winning team. VOA's Jim Stevenson 
looks back at the games that broke the hearts of entire countries 
and fueled intense national pride in others. A record 32 nations qualified 
for the World Cup finals including first time appearances for Croatia, 
Jamaica, Japan, and South Africa. The tournament also included veteran 
powers like England, Germany, Italy, Argentina, and 1994 champion, 
Brazil. In between were teams hoping to break through to the pinnacle 
of the sport. Norway, the Netherlands, France, and the United States 
all had plans to score big victories at the finals. U.S. coach Steve 
Samson opted to field younger players with less international experience 
in place of several veterans who remained on the bench. Although the 
move led to three U.S. losses in the opening round and a last place 
finish in France, Samson told VOA Sports he was proud of his team. 
It just wasn't meant to be apparently, 'cause you can't fault the 
effort of the players, and especially in the last two games, which 
I think showed an awful lot of character. One of the U.S. defeats 
came during an emotional match against Iran on June 21st. Players 
from both teams exchanged gifts and posed for photographers as they 
temporarily put aside years of political strife between the two nations. 
After the game in Leone, Iranian fan Michael Jahan Garid told VOA 
Sports the 2 to 1 victory was very important to his country. Iran 
needed this win more than any other country in the world with everything 
that has happened to them in the last 20 years. This is perfect. This 
will hopefully start a new era for Iran. The poor U.S. performance 
led to a quick resignation by Samson. He has been replaced by Bruce 
Arena, the former head coach of the two-time Major League soccer champion 
DC United. While Arena enjoyed his MLS career, he is looking forward 
to the task of assembling a winning World Cup team. I've been fortunate 
to be part of this over three years, and I have a lot of fond memories. 
I regret leaving but I think the next challenge for me is a great 
one. It's one that I couldn't pass up. Croatia as the envy of the 
World Cup newcomers proving it could keep pace with teams from the 
more experienced nations. Feisty Croatians used speed and good ball 
control to oust the highly touted German team in the quarter finals. 
Croatia lost to France in the semi-finals before earning a third place 
finish with a victory over the Netherlands. Defending champion Brazil 
swept pass most of its opponents with ease, dropping just one game 
in the first round to Norway. Post France cruised through the tournament 
winning every match on the way to the finals. But the title match 
inside the massive Stod de France near Paris proved to be an anti-climactic 
ending. Brazil failed to show the finesse and raw scoring punch that 
had been trademarks of the South American power for decades. France 
meanwhile played like a true champion, scoring a three-goal shut out 
in front of the home fans. The victory sparked waves of celebrations 
in the streets across the country and gave France the title of World 
Champion for the next four years. For the first time in World Cup 
history, the next finals will be hosted by two nations in the year 
2002 when South Korea and Japan welcome the world. In club football, 
Spain's Real Madrid won the European Cup, while Brazil's Vasco Degama 
was the South American champion. Real won the Intercontinental Cup 
in early December in Tokyo beating Vasco 2 to 1. In the United States, 
professional soccer continued to flourish as Major League Soccer added 
two new names to kick off its third season. The Chicago Fire was an 
impressive newcomer, muscling its way to the MLS championship crowd. 
Chicago scored a 2 to nothing upset win in the final over DC United, 
the team that had dominated the MLS with back to back titles in the 
league's first two seasons. Jim Stevenson, VOA Sports. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>