<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.0500.2724 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the United States, one in nine women is stricken with breast cancer 
at some point in her lifetime. As 1998 draws to a close, women can 
now get a pill to protect themselves against breast cancer, but should 
they? VOA health correspondent Jessica Burman explains. The anti-breast 
cancer pill is called Tomoxafin. It's been available since the 1970s 
for women with breast cancer who want to keep the disease from coming 
back. But at the end of October, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
approved Tomoxafin to prevent the cancer in healthy women who are 
considered to be at high risk for the disease. The regulator's decision 
was based on the results of a five-year breast cancer prevention trial 
that found Tomoxafin cut in half a high risk woman's chances of getting 
cancer. The trial was designed by University of Pittsburgh oncologist 
Bernard Fisher. This is the first time that there has been an agent 
which has been used in a preventive setting, and by that, we mean 
to prevent the appearance of breast cancer in women at high risk. 
Factors that put otherwise healthy women at high risk for breast cancer 
include having a mother or sister with the disease, age of first menstruation, 
and advancing age. Cynthia Pearson is executive director of the National 
Women's Health Network. For a very small group of women who are at 
extremely high risk for breast cancer, Ms. Pearson says Tomoxafin 
is probably good news. But for women with only one or two risk factors, 
she thinks the drug's side effects are not worth it. It has already 
killed healthy women by causing blood clots that travel to the lungs. 
It's killed other women by causing cancer of the uterus, which in 
some cases is fatal, although not usually, and other times, complications 
of the treatment can be fatal. So it's really a bargain with the devil. 
Tomoxafin proponents including Bernard Fisher acknowledge there are 
significant risks to healthy women. For that reason, the maker of 
Tomoxafin has developed computer software called The Risk Disc. The 
disc helps a woman and her physician computer her cancer risk and 
weigh it against the drug's potential side effects. It's imperative 
that the doctors the woman is going to talk to know about this, know 
about the risks, know about the side effects, and discuss this with 
the woman. You can't just go to a supermarket and get a disc and compute 
your risk, and then decide, you know, whether you should do it or 
not. Nevertheless, the pressure on some women to try Tomoxafin may 
be great. Cynthia Pearson of the National Women's Health Network claims 
the drug's maker, Zeneca Pharmaceuticals, plans to launch a massive 
media campaign in the spring. Drug companies don't advertise drugs 
because they hope that maybe more people will buy their drugs. They 
advertise drugs directly to the users of drugs because they know that 
ads sell more drugs. And this just isn't the way that women should 
be approached to consider something so risky as a blood clot that 
could kill you or cancer of the uterus that can kill you, especially 
when you're healthy to start out with. In a news release, Zeneca claims 
Tomoxafin is mostly safe with the most common side effect being hot 
flashes and vaginal discharge. But the company admits cancer of the 
uterus is a more serious complication that occurs two to three times 
more often among women taking Tomoxafin. Jessica Burman, VOA News, 
Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>