<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.0500.0531 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Iran, candidates for local elections in February have started to 
register. They will be the first local elections since the Islamic 
revolution in Iran almost 20 years ago. VOA's Scott Bob has more from 
our Middle East bureau in Cairo. The week-long registration for the 
first local elections in decades began Monday in Iran with officials 
pledging an impartial process despite accusations to the contrary 
by some members of parliament. As many as one million candidates are 
expected to register to compete on February 26th for the 200,000 posts 
in rural and urban districts. The councils will choose 700 mayors 
who until now had been appointed by the interior ministry. Candidates 
must be citizens without criminal records who uphold the Iranian constitution. 
They may not be members of banned political organizations or sympathizers 
of pre-revolutionary governments. Such restrictions are expected to 
prevent some political critics of the government from running in the 
elections. However, observers note the local councils are to advise 
the central government on social and cultural activities. As a result, 
they say they will influence the direction of Iranian politics in 
the years to come. The local elections were announced last October, 
a few days after the elections for Iran's council of experts. Those 
elections were boycotted by many moderates because most of their candidates 
were disallowed by a vetting company of religious experts. A debate 
has been raging in Iranian society since voters nearly two years ago 
elected Reformist President Mohammad Khatami by a two-thirds majority. 
President Khatami's supporters back greater freedom in the news media 
and less social restrictions, but they are fiercely opposed by conservatives 
who still dominate the courts and national assembly. As a result, 
some observers fear conservative forces again will try to limit the 
number of reform-minded candidates. Others, however, say this is less 
likely because of the sheer number of seats being contested, and the 
fact that campaigns will probably focus on local and administrative 
issues rather than on national and ideological ones. The Iranian news 
agency reports Iran's interior minister, Abdul Vahed Musabilari pledged 
Sunday that any violation of electoral regulations will be severely 
dealt with. He said a system of supervisory and executive boards has 
been established to insure fairness in the selection of the candidates. 
The pledge follows accusations by some members of parliament last 
week that the board members chosen are factional and not impartial. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>