<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.0500.1347 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Portland, Oregon on the northwestern coast of the United States has 
been called the whitest city in America because its proportion of 
non-white racial groups is smaller than in other urban centers in 
the United States. But during the past decade, Portland's Asian population 
has grown, and so has the number of Buddhists. The change has caused 
an unusual culture clash stemming from, of all things, the opening 
of a new commuter railway. The city's transit agency, Trimat, which 
operates the so-called Max Transportation System has routed its new 
west side light rail line beneath an old cemetery. That has upset 
some Buddhist spiritual leaders who worry that the tunnel disrupts 
and angers spirits of the dead. With more, here is Collin Fogerty 
in Portland. The Max Station at the zoo on the new west side light 
rail line looks modern and spiffy. The walls are filled with lit up 
works of art and chiseled poems. This stop far under ground is in 
the middle of a three-mile long tunnel that passes under the Sunset 
Hills Cemetery. The path under the graves has Buddhist spiritual leaders 
concerned. Rayno Catalan is a Laotian community organizer and a writer 
in Portland. He says no matter what the religion or ethnicity in the 
people buried above the tunnel, the train punches a hole into the 
spirit world. Where we come from, you would steer well around cemeteries. 
But since it has been done, it's proper and necessary for folks to 
know that the proper rituals have been done to make peace with those 
folks who are interrupting. Catalan points to a number of recent events 
he says demonstrates the spirit world has been knocked off balance 
by the light rail line. Max trains have gotten into two accidents 
with cars. And just a few days after the west side line opened to 
the public, an elderly man accidentally veered his car off the Sunset 
highway over a 15-foot drop off onto the train tracks. The accident 
disrupted commuters for hours. Some Buddhists consider such events 
omens, and news of them passed quickly through the Asian community. 
Concern about the Max prompted a ceremony to bless the tunnel. Buddhist 
monks wearing orange robes burn incense and sprinkle holy water in 
the west side tunnel. They are appeasing the spirits of the dead, 
they say, to make sure the Kharma of Max riders is left intact. Afterwards, 
the venerable Park Kam Song from the Lao Buddhist temple in Northeast 
Portland sent through a translator he hopes the ceremony puts an end 
to anymore omens. He thinks that the reason for those happens is because 
before you send the Max train to go through to the cemetery, you have 
to trade them first and ask for their permission. It's just like their 
house. And you don't go and make trouble in the house. Trimat hopes 
such ceremonies appease potential riders who worry about taking a 
train under a cemetery. Spokesman Steve Johnson acknowledged that 
some of officials worry a significant number of Asian commuters won't 
ride the train. Well, we hope that if anyone is not riding light rail 
because of a spiritual concern connected to the tunnel, that this 
ceremony will help ease that concern. Johnson says the Max line tunnel 
was built beneath the cemetery because the only other possible path 
along the Sunset Highway would have caused extensive environmental 
damage. But Catalan, the Laotian community organizer, says the Buddhist 
monks are concerned that the degree of technical care put into the 
Max line does not extend to spiritual matters. The West has accelerated 
in certain kinds of technologies, civil engineering, mass transit, 
urban planning, but at a cost of neglecting other kinds of technologies. 
Now you find old world cultures, archaic societies have been developing 
these technologies for several thousands of years. Organizers of this 
ceremony say it is one way immigrant cultures can reconcile their 
spiritual beliefs with advances in American society. When asked if 
the blessing put the spirits buried in the west hills at peace, the 
Lao Buddhist monks said it will be better. For VOA News Now, I'm Collin 
Fogerty in Portland, Oregon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>