<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.0500.0848 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Europe, severe weather conditions have claimed at least 29 lives 
so far during the Christmas holiday period. Authorities in Moscow 
say nine people froze to death in the Russian capital this past week. 
The death toll in Poland from a severe cold spell, which began in 
mid-November, has now reached 162. Eighty people have died in Hungary, 
17 during the Christmas holidays. In Budapest, Stefan Bos told us 
that one of the problems is the collapse of the so-called safety net 
provided by the former Soviet regimes. Since the fall of Communism, 
the government stopped many social programs, including subsidies for 
housing. There is still some subsidies are available but mainly they 
were cut down. So that is one of the reasons why many people really 
don't have a roof over their heads, and also there are a growing number 
of homeless people. Some estimates talk about 30,000 homeless people, 
but critics say these are very conservative estimates. They believe 
the figure may be higher than this. So there are many homeless people. 
Another problem is that the elderly, many of the elderly at least 
are not able to pay for the electricity and the heating bills, so 
they have risen - The prices have risen constantly in the last few 
years. There is again a new price rise in the making from Generate, 
so there will be a lot of problems with that as well. So perhaps many 
elderly people will perish this winter because they simply cannot 
heat their homes. Now in the United States a lot of times what we'll 
see is on particular cold nights, there will be an extra effort by 
the cities to go out and try to bring homeless people in from the 
cold or to create - use public meetings as shelters to shelter people 
who are not - who can only poorly heat their own homes. Do you have 
any of those activities going on? Yes. There are some homes here, 
for example, in Budapest for homeless people, but there are simply 
not enough homes to deal with the ever larger crowd of poor and homeless 
people. That is one of the problems. There are perhaps for two or 
three thousand people perhaps there is room for them. But there are 
thousands more left behind. There is also an interesting development 
within the churches. For example, the Mother Theresa Foundation here 
has opened a home for the homeless where they at least can have some 
food, some shelter, but they have only room for perhaps a few hundred 
people, and that's it. So there are really not enough institutions 
like this here available again because of the fall of Communism and 
the influence that has on the many social programs that existed before. 
Stefan Bos spoke from Budapest. Many authorities in Europe say some 
of the deaths have been from people who have been drinking heavily 
who may have laid down and fallen asleep before reaching home. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>