<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.1600.2153 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Although December is a season of peace for the majority of Christians 
around the world, the end of the year has seen a series of attacks 
on Christian minorities in Asia and the Indian subcontinent. Why are 
Christians being persecuted is the question examined on today's edition 
of Dateline. Here's Pamela Taylor. In India, the Christian minority 
celebrated Christmas last Friday with the usually festivities hoping 
a string of attacks on them by Hindu fanatics was over. Then on Sunday, 
unidentified attackers burned down a Christian church in the western 
state of Gujarat. Attacks on Christian churches and mission schools 
were also reported in several other locations. There were no reports 
of injuries in the latest incidents. But last September, several Catholic 
nuns were raped in a series of attacks on religious leaders, which 
included burning Bibles and churches. The extremist intolerance sparked 
a protest on December 4th in the Indian capital, New Delhi. More than 
5,000 people condemned the violence against India's Christian minority. 
VOA correspondent Doug Bakshun was there. Several speakers addressed 
the rally's newest religious song about injustice and silence in the 
face of injustice. In a brief speech, the Roman Catholic archbishop 
of Delhi, Alan Galastic, denounced recent attacks on Christians and 
said the church will continue to work to protect its people. In an 
interview with VOA, he said the rape of several nuns in a central 
Indian village during September was an affront to Indian civilization. 
When you violate a woman to bring down to the mire of lust, the religious 
life that she stands for, she's giving her body and soul, everything 
to God, you want to drag that down. I think this is very degrading, 
and it's a terrible slur on I would say the Indian civilization. Every 
right thinking Indian should say this is not Indian, and neither is 
it really Hindu. It is not Hindu. Archbishop Galastic says such actions 
mark the beginning of the disintegration of India's tradition of secularism. 
Later, he went to parliament with a letter asking the government to 
insure the safety of Christians who make up two percent of India's 
population. The letter also asks the government to denounce attempts 
to promote a philosophy of one nation, one people, one culture, a 
reference to slogans of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party. Critics 
say that since the BJP took power early this year, it has promoted 
religious tensions. According to the United Christian Forum for Human 
Rights, which helped organize Friday's rally, there have been almost 
90 instances of violence against Christians since January. The group 
says this is more than the total for the first 50 years of India's 
independence. Sarah Jacob, a student who took part in the rally, says 
it is important to speak out now before the situation gets out of 
control. I think they should just stand up today before it reaches 
a state when you can't say anything. ... solidarity for a cause that 
you feel that's important. It's not like I'm form here. I'm here because 
I'm a normal student. I have friends who are Muslims or Hindus or 
Christians. A normal person should not be treated badly because of 
their religion. Leaders of the BJP deny allegations of prejudice against 
minorities. Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee has asked the Federal 
Police Ministry to investigate instances of violence against Christians. 
VOA correspondent Douglas Bakshun in New Delhi. Intolerance against 
Christian minorities was also on the increase this year in Indonesia 
and China. In November, 13 people died in Indonesia when Muslim protesters 
attacked Christian churches in the capital of Jakarta. In China, human 
rights groups have accused authorities of arresting more than 100 
Chinese Christians in raids on unofficial church meetings. Chinese 
church leaders insist, however, that there is no persecution of Christians 
or other religious groups in China. VOA correspondent Stephanie Ho 
has more from Beijing. The China Christian Council denied a report 
from a New York-based human rights group that about 140 Chinese Protestants 
were arrested last month. The council has said five Europeans were 
briefly detained in central Phnam Province and held for two days in 
November. It added the five foreigners were released after they confessed 
to alien religious activity. But council said apart from this incident, 
there were no other arrests or imprisonment's. The group Human Rights 
in China issued reports last month saying Christians were arrested 
in Ungon and Nanyung cites in Phnam Province where leaders of the 
underground church were meeting. The China Christian Council's president, 
Hanwan Zhou, said there is no general religious persecution in China 
but he said individual cases do occur at the grass roots level because 
China is such a vast country. He praised the vitality of the various 
Christian churches in China saying there are officially more than 
12 million Protestants, 13,000 Protestant churches, and 35,000 home 
meetings in rural areas. These numbers do not include members of the 
underground churches whose total supporters outside China estimate 
it's several times larger than the official church. VOA correspondent 
Stephanie Ho reporting from Beijing. Intolerance of nontraditional 
religions is seen by many analysts as a product of a post Cold War 
world where open borders bring in new influences. One who holds that 
view is Thomas Quigley, a foreign affairs adviser to the U.S. Catholic 
Bishops Conference in Washington. What's happening in different countries 
is different. What's happening in India is partly kind of fanaticism, 
we call it fundamentalism out of when the BJP came into power. The 
BJP being the ruling party. BJP being the ruling party. They basically 
said that they were going to make this a Hindu state, and other groups 
have picked up the flag or the sense that they are being protected 
by the government. And there have been some terrible things. It was 
just last September this horrible rape and murder of four - rape of 
four nuns, and that has not been responded to by the government. Several 
priests in India have been killed over the last couple of years even 
before the party came into power, so there's a certain anti-colonial, 
what's viewed as colonial animus against the priest or religions who 
come from the West, from Europe and North America. But what is in 
common with both India and Pakistan, the two great countries of the 
subcontinent, is that while their governments have gotten - have got 
policies that are hostile to non-Muslim, in the case of Pakistan, 
non-Hindu, in the case of India, religious expression followers of 
these governments have, in fact, carried out horrible things. Now 
they aren't just government policy but we believe the government does 
have a responsibility to respond to them. So what is going on in China 
then? Well, China's a much more complex situation, this massive one 
billion people in a society that clearly does not have a high regard 
for human rights as we understand that concept especially in the West. 
And it's made it more clear in the last weeks with the continued repression 
of the democracy dissidents. In the case of religion, there are two 
or three main groups that have been particularly affected by the rigid 
Chinese policy. One is the under - so-called underground Catholic 
Church. The second major group is the mainly Pentecostal but in general 
Evangelical house churches, and they are growing by huge numbers. 
It's probably their numbers that concerns some of the Chinese authorities. 
Why is that? I think they regard anything as socially unacceptable 
that doesn't fit a certain norm. If it's not clear where their ties 
are, there's a view in some places that many of these churches, in 
fact, are encouraged or paid by Western groups that are hostile to 
the interests of, say, China or other countries. There is some charlatanry 
involved I think in some of the healing offers or promises of getting 
wealthy and so on. Religion can cover, depending on how it's defined, 
can cover a lot of variance of life, not all of which are what most 
orthodox people would say is really religion. Thomas Quigley is a 
foreign affairs adviser to the U.S. Catholic Bishops Conference in 
Washington. Why are Christians being persecuted was the question examined 
on today's Dateline. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>