<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.1600.2696 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For American agriculture, 1998 was a year of painful contrasts. Against 
the backdrop of huge grain harvests and booming livestock production, 
American farmers and ranchers took a financial beating from destructive 
weather and collapsing markets, and got a helping hand from Washington. 
Rob Sivak takes a look back. The warning signs for the U.S. farm economy 
were clear last January. A worsening financial crisis was swamping 
economies throughout Asia, the market for more than one-third of all 
American farm exports. As most analysts predicted, U.S. sales of grains 
and meats to Asia slumped badly as the year progressed. But U.S. producers 
were still geared to the red hot export markets they've enjoyed the 
past three years. By June, as bumper Midwestern crops and huge meat 
supplies loomed, prices for farm commodities were falling to historic 
lows. With the financial safety net of traditional federal crop subsidies 
eliminated by a new farm law, many growers faced a perilous market 
on their own for the first time. Nature delivered bad news of its 
own. Spring flooding and crop disease ruined grain crops in the northern 
plains, and a searing drought decimated crop and livestock farms from 
the American southwest to the northeast. By late summer, tens of thousands 
of farmers and ranchers across the country faced financial ruin. In 
Washington, as the White House and Congress sparred over federal budget 
priorities, President Clinton put the farm prices on center stage. 
There is suffering on the farm. There is agony on the farm, and we 
cannot afford to walk away from this session of Congress until we 
do something to stave off the failure of thousands of productive family 
farms in America. We cannot do it. In October, the U.S. Congress passed 
a $6 billion emergency farm relief package that provides a mix of 
cash payments, loans, insurance aid, and tax breaks to most producers 
hurt by natural disasters or market losses. Farm groups generally 
welcomed the aid, but many experts like North Dakota Senator Kent 
Conrad doubted it would solve the farm crisis. The hole in income 
and farm country is so deep that even $6 billion won't fill it, but 
it will certainly help. The federal aid has helped. In addition the 
Clinton administration has tried to prop up sagging commodity prices 
by purchasing millions of tons of surplus grain and meat for domestic 
and international food aid programs. As American farmers and ranchers 
face the new year, many analysts are warning of another season of 
big crops, large herds, and weak global markets. Texas rice producer 
and farm activist Bob Stallman thinks Congress and the Clinton administration 
must move swiftly to help repair international economies and remove 
foreign barriers to U.S. farm exports. Without a boom in those exports, 
says Mr. Stallman, American agriculture could face even bigger troubles 
next year than it did in 1998. If these same low prices continue into 
next year, I think we really are looking at a serious situation. Agriculture 
will survive. The question is how much is the structure in agriculture 
going to change in the face of these problems? Experts wonder, too, 
whether the Congress that helped so many farmers survive the farm 
crisis of 1998 will be able or willing to do it again in 1999. U.S. 
lawmakers have been urging farmers to do more to insure their own 
survival next year by purchasing new federal subsidized farm disaster 
insurance. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>