<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.0500.2226 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In Sierra-Leone, West African foreign ministers backed by peacekeeping 
soldiers are trying to get rebels to lay down their weapons and talk 
peace with the government. VOA's John Pitman reports. The appeal for 
a peaceful settlement came after a day of talks between the foreign 
ministers of the six West African countries either directly or indirectly 
involved in Sierra Leone's civil war. Nigeria, which provides most 
of the troops to the West African peacekeeping force in Sierra Leone 
called the meeting. It was joined by the Ivory Coast, which helped 
broker a peace agreement in Sierra Leone in 1996, as well as Ghana, 
Togo, and Sierra Leone's uneasy neighbors, Liberia and Guinea. Observers 
from the United States, Britain, and the United Nations also took 
part in the talks. Lansana Cuyatu, the executive secretary of the 
Economic Community of West African States, ECOWAS, read the final 
communique which echoed very closely the Sierra Leonean government's 
demand that the rebels first disarm before entering peace talks. Demand 
or rebel. This is an immediate to participate... Mr. Cuyatu says the 
rebels should put down their weapons, enter a dialogue with the government, 
and accept the government's amnesty proposal. A response from the 
rebels was not immediately available, but recently, the rebels have 
expressed a fairly dim view of peace talks calling instead for the 
immediate resignation of President Ahmed Tejon Caba. The ECOWAS communique 
tempered its call for peace talks with an appeal to ECOWAS member 
states to send additional troops to Sierra Leone to reinforce the 
West Africa peacekeeping force, ECOMOG. Nigeria has already sent 600 
fresh troops to Sierra Leone's capital, Freetown. Gambia, and Malli 
have also pledged 500 more soldiers. The communique also condemned 
the alleged participation of foreign governments and mercenaries in 
Sierra Leone. Liberia was singled out for specific blame in this regard. 
The commander of ECOMOG, Nigerian General Timothy Showpede, has long 
accused the Monrovia government of supporting the rebel revolutionary 
united front in its bid to unseat President Caba. At Monday's meeting, 
General Showpede repeated his allegation, however his charges were 
denied by the Liberian foreign minister, who in turn called for an 
international investigation into the matter. Speaking to reporters 
during a break in the talks, General Showpede said the problem of 
foreign interference in Sierra Leone was so great that it threatened 
to spread the war to other countries in the region. Whatever destabilizing 
situation in the I love to continue if Clinton very, very serious. 
There's still a way to affect every country in the. To combat this 
problem, the final communique from Monday's meeting called on all 
countries in the region to respect the United Nations arms embargo 
on Sierra Leone, especially as it applies to the rebels. The final 
communique also urged members of the international community outside 
of Africa to support ECOMOG's efforts in Sierra Leone, especially 
with logistical support. John Pitman, VOA News, Abidjan. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>