<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.0500.3205 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1998, the country music industry remained strong in the U.S., and 
country performers gained audiences around the world. Three country 
artists ranked among the year's top ten touring acts, and country 
music holds on as the leading format in U.S. radio. VOA's Mary Morningstar 
looks back at the artists and events that shaped country music in 
1998. "Just to See You Smile," by Louisiana native Tim McGraw held 
the top spot on the country chart for six weeks in early 1998 and 
is ranked at number one on the country singles year-end chart. A familiar 
name on the country charts, Tim McGraw has appeared in the top five 
on "Billboard" magazine's year-end listings for the past four years. 
Shania Twain set new records in 1998 to reign as the top selling female 
artist in country music history. Sales of her latest album, "Come 
on Over," surpassed the seven million mark this year, and Shania's 
recording of "You're Still the One" was the biggest selling single 
of 1998. In June, she launched her first ever U.S. concert tour, and 
by year's end, had performed before more than one million fans. Shania 
is credited with expanding the boundaries for women in country music, 
but she feels her phenomenal success is simply a sign of the times. 
I think it's just the '90s. Women are just getting ahead in every 
profession in this day and age, and music just happens to be one of 
those. During the past year, teenage country star Leeanne Rimes enjoyed 
crossover success on the pop, country, and contemporary Christian 
charts. Her pop and country hit, "How Do I Live," set a new record 
as the longest running single in "Billboard's" hot 100 chart history, 
after spending 69 weeks on that listing. The song also made history 
as the top selling single by a country singer. The biggest selling 
country group of the year was the Dixie Chicks, a Texas-based female 
trio that's being called the newcomer story of 1998. The band made 
it major label debut this year with "Wide Open Spaces," which went 
on to sell more than two million copies. The album's number one single, 
"There's Your Trouble," landed at number five on the top country singles 
year-end chart. One trade magazine said it best when referring to 
1998 as the year of Garth. The most successful solo artist in American 
music history, Garth Brooks dominated the country music scene during 
the past year. In addition to being named Top Country Artist of the 
Year, Garth's albums "Sevens" became the number one country album 
of 1998. With a career total of more than 85 million albums sold, 
he's closing in on the all-time sales record set by the Beatles. Garth 
hopes to reach the 100 million mark by the year 2000, but the Oklahoma 
native says he'll leave the tabulating to his record company. You 
know, we're all competitive. I think we're all competitive or we would 
not be here. But truthfully, my thing is I want to be remembered for 
the music, not a scorekeeper. Garth Brooks' new released, "Double 
Life," has sold more than three million copies. The collection features 
live tracks from his 32-month concert tour which ended in November. 
Nearly five million tickets were sold during the record-breaking tour. 
Garth Brooks '98 concerts this year brought in $34 million to rank 
as the highest grossing country tour of 1998. I'm Mary Morningstar. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>