<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.0500.1826 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A missile duel in the skies over Northern Iraq Monday has four Iraqi 
soldiers dead and several others wounded. Baghdad says Western war 
planes started the fight and that one aircraft was shot down. Pentagon 
officials say Baghdad fired first and that all planes and crews returned 
to their Turkish base safely. VOA's Jim Randle reports from the Pentagon. 
Pentagon officials say the incident began when U.S. planes detected 
Iraqi radar signals and saw two Iraqi surface-to-air missiles streaking 
toward four U.S. F-15s. Moments later, another missile, probably a 
powerful SA-3 went after a U.S. F-16. The SA-3 can go 3-1/2 times 
the speed of sound, but all of the U.S. planes managed to dodge the 
powerful weapons. Pentagon officials say the planes retaliated by 
dropping laser-guided bombs and specially designed anti-radar missiles 
on the missile site. A damage assessment is underway, but officials 
say at least some of the weapons hit the air defense site. Shortly 
after the 1991 Gulf War, U.S., British, and French planes began patrolling 
Iraqi skies to keep Iraqi war planes from attacking Kurds in Northern 
Iraq and Shiite Muslims in the South. Some members of these groups 
oppose Saddam Hussein and had been attacked by the Baghdad regime. 
United Nations resolutions ordered Baghdad not to suppress is people 
and banned threatening military build ups in the South. U.S. officials 
say this gives coalition forces the legal basis to ban Iraqi military 
flights from about half of the country's skies. President Clinton 
says American pilots will continue enforcing the no-fly zones calling 
them an important part of Western efforts to contain Iraq. Because 
we effectively control the skies over much of Iraq, Saddam has been 
unable to use air power to repress his own people or to lash out again 
at his neighbors. Our pilots have the authority to protect themselves 
if they're threatened or attacked. They took appropriate action today 
in responding to Iraq's actions. Over the past few days, Baghdad has 
warned it would shoot at U.S. and British planes flying in Iraqi air 
space. The Iraq government has long challenged the legality of the 
no-fly zones. Some analysts say Baghdad may be hoping to build on 
anti-Western sentiment, which has been heightened by recent air strikes 
against Iraq. This latest incident comes just over a week after the 
major Western air attacks on sites where Iraq is suspected of hiding 
facilities used to make banned weapons of mass destruction. Meantime, 
United Nations officials in New York say efforts to resolve the dispute 
with Iraq over weapons inspections and sanctions appear stalled, and 
continued tensions could lead to further military confrontations. 
Jim Randle, VOA News at the Pentagon. Iraq is vowing to continue shooting 
at U.S. and British war planes if they continue to enforce the no-fly 
zones. Meanwhile, Baghdad's U.N. envoy, Nizar Hamdoon, told Reuters 
that his government does not recognize the zones. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>