<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.0500.0694 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Another around-the-world balloon flight is preparing to lift off in 
Central Australia. Australian John Wallington, along with two Americans, 
Bob Martin and Dave Lininger, are planning to begin their flight Thursday 
or Friday from Alice Springs, Australia. Bad weather postponed their 
scheduled start today. VOA's Ray Kougell spoke with the American crew 
member, Dave Lininger, about the upcoming journey and some of the 
obstacles the balloonists hope to overcome. We chose the southern 
hemisphere so that we would not have any problem with air space over 
political areas that have been giving fits to all the other pilots 
-- China, Russia, Iraq, Libya, Iran - and that creates real problems. 
So we're actually going to launch in the southern hemisphere. The 
second reason we chose Australia is that there is a airport with NASA 
equipment and people available where they do launch these giant weather 
balloons. Are there any special plans to avoid weather problems? The 
fact that we are going to go to an altitude of 130,000 feet during 
the daytime and only descend to about 90,000 at night will keep us 
well above any potential weather. As a matter of fact, we're basically 
in near space with 99.7 percent of the atmosphere is gone. What about 
as far as how long it's going to take? Yes. The stratospheric lends 
at altitude are around 80 to 100-mile-an-hour during the day, and 
when we drop down to 90,000 at night, it's about 30 to 40. And so 
we hope to make about 14- to 1500 miles a day, taking the total time 
of 15 to 16 days. And landing where when it's all over? We need to 
land back in Australia someplace west of Alice Springs. And it is 
a huge desert and several hundred miles in all directions. Any special 
things on this balloon? Is this a large one or same as some others? 
No. All the other balloons that have been trying it are low altitude 
traveling 20- to 40,000 feet, and they're in the neighborhood of a 
half million cubic feet with a hot air burner. What we are is a sheer 
helium balloon, 40 million cubic feet, taller than the Empire State 
Building, and we do not have hot air at all. It's strictly helium 
loss balloon. That is American balloonist Dave Lininger speaking with 
VOA's Ray Kougell. The helium-filled balloon type has been used by 
the U.S. space agency for research but has never carried humans. The 
three-man crew will wear Russian-made space suits because of the altitude. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>