<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.1600.0358 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yemeni officials say four British hostages were killed Tuesday during 
a rescue of 16 western tourists kidnapped by Islamic militants. The 
officials say two men and two women died during the operation. The 
rest of the hostages were released, but three of the kidnappers were 
also killed in the shoot-out in the mountains northeast of the Yemeni 
city of Aban. Earlier today, Faith Lapidus and Russ Woodgates spoke 
with VOA's Middle East bureau chief, Scott Bob, about the situation. 
The kidnapping itself is not a terribly rare event or occurrence in 
Yemen. Often, tribes and their groups in the impoverished rural regions 
will take hostages in order to make a point with the central government 
or the press for a certain demand such as demands for better service, 
or road, schools, or hospitals. But this case appears to have been 
a bit different. Scott, have you ever been to Yemen? What's the attraction 
there for western tourists? Why would western tourists go to Yemen? 
Yemen has an attraction for tourists because it's - there's some historical 
ancient sites, for example, the queen of Sheba, according to legend 
was there. There are ancient ruins and so forth. It's a very exotic 
and beautiful place, and many people say it's the way the Middle East 
or the Arab peninsula used to be before modernism and modernity came. 
We heard that some German tourists were kidnapped a couple of weeks 
ago. Has there been any word on their condition or fate? No. They 
reportedly are all safe, and there are reports that a ransom has been 
demanded. Another report again is that this is in Northern Yemen that 
the people there, the abductors want schools and hospitals, telephones, 
even such things as luxury cars. You mentioned Northern Yemen. There 
used to be a North Yemen and a South Yemen. They were diametrically 
opposed politically. They have since united. Is this part of the background 
to the increasing use of hostages to get the attention of the government 
for social improvements? Not really, although it's true the taking 
of hostages only began after the union of the two Yemens about six 
years ago. Yemen is a place where traditional law and tribal law and 
customs still prevail by and large. People walk around in many parts 
of the country with guns openly. And the government has been trying 
to end this, but the government has been - does not like this image 
of lawlessness that gets reported in the media when incidents such 
as kidnappings and blowing up of pipelines occur. And recently, the 
government did try to disarm some of the population. This, of course, 
has been resisted by many people. The taking off hostages is also 
something that the government is trying to end and the government 
did warn recently that it would no longer tolerate such incidents. 
So you have a government trying to get better control of its people 
and a people that live in remote mountainous areas that are used to 
an old traditional way of life to a very independent way of life. 
And to a degree, there's a certain clash of cultures here. That's 
VOA Middle East bureau chief Scott Bob speaking with Russ Woodgates 
and Faith Lapidus. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>