<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.1600.3011 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Currency devaluations around the world are causing a trade flood, 
as goods from countries with devalued currencies easily undercut the 
prices of competitors in countries with strong currencies. Economics 
correspondent Linda Kashden has this report. In theory, trade competitiveness 
is grounded in corporate competency, a company's ability to produce 
something more efficiently than its competitors, not in shifts and 
currency values. In fact, Georgetown University business professor, 
Michael Chincoda says trade is supposed to be driving currency values 
not the other way around. Mr. Chincoda says floating exchange rates 
were established in the 1970s to create a system in which currency 
values changed in response to trade flows. If a country has a trade 
surplus, that means it sells more than it buys. That in turn means 
that others have to demand that country's currency more than that 
country requires other currencies. So that country's currency goes 
up in value. As it goes up, it becomes more expensive so that country's 
exports become more expensive. That means the trade surplus gradually 
will decline. That is how the system of floating exchange rates was 
designed: trade figuring the price of currency. But Mr. Chincoda says 
financial markets have been deregulated in recent years, and technological 
innovations have increased the speed at which both market information 
and money can travel around the world. As a result, he says, currency 
trading has taken on a life of its own, with currency flows today 
one hundred times greater than trade flows. Trade no longer drives 
currency, Mr. Chincoda says. Today, currencies drive trade with dire 
consequences. It's eschewed the established trade patterns in a significant 
way, and has put a lot of pressure on quite successful and competitive 
U.S. industries simply because all of a sudden, a lot of new imports 
are coming in, and some export markets are foreclosed because of the 
currency changes. What is needed, Mr. Chincoda says, is a new global 
regime to replace the one that has been rendered obsolete by changing 
times, a system that considers trade and finance together and seeks 
ways to prevent one from having an adverse impact on the other. He 
says until one is developed, expect trade pressures to rise, and with 
them, trade complaints and government restraints. Linda Kashden, VOA 
News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>