<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.1600.0799 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Banks and currency markets based in London are working overtime to 
prepare for E Day, the January 1st launch of the European Union's 
single currency, the euro. Only 11 E.U. members have signed on. Britain 
is not one of them. But as we hear from correspondent Laurie Kassman 
in London, that does not mean that Britain's banking system is not 
prepared. The financial district of London, the city, as it's better 
known, is Europe's largest currency trading center. Some say more 
U.S. dollars and Japanese yen were traded here during the year than 
in New York or Tokyo. More than 500 foreign banks have offices here. 
Angela Dickson monitors European Monitor Union developments, a J.P. 
Morgan investment house in the city. She says preparations have been 
underway for months to avoid any glitches when the euro is launched 
at the stroke of midnight on New Year's eve. We actually started our 
preparations over two years ago, and in the last three months, things 
have really increased in pace. And we've had people coming in over 
several weekends to carry out testing and dress rehearsals. Banks 
and investment houses in the city have set up their own war rooms 
to manage the complicated conversion process. More than 30,000 information 
specialists and other staff are expected to work right through the 
New Year's weekend adjusting computer systems, converting cash balances, 
and European debt bills, and redenominating bonds for the euro's first 
day of business on January 4th. Our work starts as soon as the rates, 
the conversion rates are announced by the ECB around about midday 
on the 31st of December. And then we work all the way through the 
weekend until we open for business on the 4th of January. Even though 
British currency is not a part of the euro, it will be affected. Most 
analysts expect it to float a bit but not too far off the euro exchange 
rate in order to remain competitive. A survey published this week 
in Britain's popular "Daily Telegraph" newspaper says two-thirds of 
Britain's citizens want no part of a single European currency. But 
J.P. Morgan's Angela Dickson says British banks will do business in 
euros whether they like it or not. Those of them that run international 
operations or have any international securities will have to go through 
these conversion processes as well. And also, if they want to make 
payments into other European countries, then they'll have to themselves 
be able to do so in euro or at least have made arrangements with their 
correspondents and custodians to be able to deal in euro. The actual 
euro coin will not be put into circulation for another three years. 
Most Britons say that is time enough to see if the euro really works 
before joining. They're quick to point out that Britain is not the 
only euro skeptic. Sweden and Denmark also remain outside the euro 
zone. Greece wanted to join but did not meet the economic and fiscal 
requirements. Economists expect Britain will suffer to some degree 
because it remains on the sidelines. A strong euro will bring down 
E.U. interest rates and inflation, making it harder for British firms 
to compete. Analysts and businessmen alike say British interest rates 
and prices will have to drop, too, so British firms can keep pace 
with the euro bargains. Britain's pro Europe labor government is taking 
no chances. Officials from Prime Minister Tony Blair on down are already 
talking about when not if Britain will join its neighbors in the euro 
zone. Laurie Kassman, VOA News, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>