<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981229.0500.2002 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli coalition and opposition lawmakers have agreed on May 17th 
as the date for early elections of a new prime minister and parliament. 
The date was announced Monday by Israeli public television. It must 
be approved by parliament but that approval is expected later today. 
A Labor Party spokesman said May 17th is a compromise between the 
opposition, which wanted April 27th elections, and the right-wing 
Likud Party, which favored mid-June. Meanwhile, the son of Likud Party 
founder, Menachem Begin, announced he is leaving Likud to lead a new 
far right challenge to Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Benjamin 
Begin, known as Benny, is the latest of five announced candidates 
to be Israel's leader. Jerusalem correspondent David Gullist reports. 
Menachem Begin founded the far-right Likud Party and his son was considered 
one of its rising stars. But Benny Begin announced he is faulting 
the party to challenge incumbent Likud chief and Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu at the head of a new right-wing faction. Mr. Begin is a 
staunch opponent of the Wye River interim peace accord Mr. Netanyahu 
signed in Washington last October. He told reporters at a campaign 
kick-off event in Tel Aviv that there can be no more territorial concessions 
to the Palestinians. Either we are dragged down the Wye River and 
give away more territory to these hoodlums, or we stand firm. Mr. 
Begin became the fifth candidate to enter the race against Mr. Netanyahu 
and the second after former finance minister Dan Meridor to leave 
the Likud Party to do so. However, the prime minister got a rousing 
show of support from hundreds of party loyalists at a central committee 
meeting Sunday night and appears to be in firm control of Likud. He 
told Israel radio his policy of pursuing peace by demanding reciprocity 
for concessions to the Palestinians is backed by most Israelis. I 
think the majority of the citizens identify with what we're doing, 
with the need for Palestinian compliance, with our insistence on a 
united Jerusalem, with our firmness on security, because they understand 
that these are the things that will make a real peace possible. Mr. 
Netanyahu's main rival on the left is main line Labor Party leader, 
Ehud Baraq, who accused the prime minister of dirty politics and incitement, 
this after Mr. Netanyahu suggested Sunday night that Labor was colluding 
with Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat to defeat him. Despite the harsh 
rhetoric, Labor and Likud Knesset members are continuing negotiations 
on a date for the elections, and an agreement could come as early 
as Tuesday. Leaders on both sides are said to favor a vote in mid 
to late May, but they are being pressed to set an earlier date by 
President Azer Weitzman, who is among many politicians and commentators 
arguing that neither the peace process nor Israel's shaky economy 
can tolerate a long period of uncertainty. David Gullist, VOA News, 
Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>