<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981010.0768 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While NATO allies moved to the brink of agreeing on airstrikes, Slobodan 
Milosevic reportedly softened his stand Saturday on international 
demands over Kosovo but refused to make a key concession in talks 
with a U.S. envoy. On a day of shuttle diplomacy by Richard Holbrooke 
between Belgrade and Pristina, sources close to Milosevic said the 
Yugoslav leader had signaled his willingness to comply with six main 
demands on him in order to head off intervention. Those measures would 
include withdrawing more troops from Kosovo, allowing humanitarian 
aid to the refugees and opening up serious talks with the secessionists 
on the restoration of their self-rule which he abolished in 1989. 
But the sources, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Milosevic 
refused to budge on an additional, U.S. demand to deploy an international 
monitoring force in the secessionist Serbian province. The force, 
aimed at seeing if he was living up to his commitments, would include 
some NATO troops. Washington is pressing for a monitoring force because 
Milosevic broke promises during Bosnia's 1992-95 war and violated 
a pledge earlier this year to halt his offensive against ethnic Albanian 
militants in Kosovo. Holbrooke has declined comment on specifics of 
his latest meetings with Milosevic, which lasted until after midnight 
for a second straight night. He said earlier the situation had not 
changed from the previous day. There was no immediate comment from 
either side following the talks' end early Sunday, and no indication 
on when or whether they would resume. His visit to Pristina and return 
to Belgrade for more talks signaled a glimmer of hope in efforts to 
avoid NATO action to halt a crackdown in Kosovo that has killed hundreds 
and displaced upwards of 300,000 from their homes. Stepping up the 
pressure on Milosevic, NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana said the 
16 members all but erased their remaining differences on airstrikes 
at a meeting of alliance ambassadors Saturday. ``If Milosevic does 
not comply, I can tell you that NATO is ready to act,'' Solana told 
reporters in Brussels. He said the final authorization would happen 
in the next few days unless Milosevic complies fully with demands. 
In another move showing NATO means business, U.S. Defense Secretary 
William Cohen ordered the deployment of six B-52 bombers, one reconnaissance 
aircraft and 13 tankers to Britain in preparation for possible intervention. 
Also Saturday, Bulgarian leaders said they were ready to allow NATO 
aircarft to use Bulgarian airspace for airstrikes against neighboring 
Yugoslavia but that Bulgaria will not get directly involved in military 
operations. President Petar Stoyanov announced the decision after 
a five-hour meeting of the Council on National Security, which was 
called after a request by NATO's North Atlantic Council to use the 
airspace. Milosevic issued no new statements Saturday. The independent 
Nasa Borba daily reported Saturday that Milosevic told Holbrooke that 
he wouldn't even consider accepting foreign troops in Kosovo. During 
his Pristina visit, Holbrooke was noncommittal when asked whether 
the continuing talks meant he has faith an agreement can be reached. 
``We always believe it's better to keep talking, and nobody wants 
to have to resort to violence or military action.'' It was not immediately 
clear whether talks would last through the weekend. But Milosevic 
on Saturday canceled plans to attend a summit of southeastern European 
leaders in Turkey starting Monday. In Kosovo, Holbrooke met with three 
ethnic Albanian negotiators _ Fehmi Agani, Iljaz Kurtesi and Edita 
Tahiri _ and then with political leader Ibrahim Rugova. Philip Reeker, 
a spokesman, said Holbrooke and his aides were conducting two-track 
talks _ on a political level and on Milosevic's compliance, ``because 
compliance has got to be full, durable and verifiable.'' Talks on 
self-rule would involve concessions by both sides: Milosevic would 
have to give up his full domination over the southern Serbian province; 
and the Albanian side would have to acknowledge that it might settle 
for less than full independence. Chief ethnic Albanian negotiator 
Agani has rejected the latest U.S. proposal, saying Kosovo could not 
remain in Serbia following the latest carnage. The Serbian side was 
close to accepting it, but rejects the idea that Kosovo police would 
be dominated by ethnic Albanians, Serbian sources said. No fighting 
was reported Saturday in Kosovo, but three people were reported killed 
on the Albanian side of the border when they walked into a minefield 
in the village of Pogaj, according to Albania's Interior Ministry. 
Meanwhile, a top Russian military official said Moscow was prepared 
to take Yugoslavia's side in case of NATO airstrikes, and provide 
weapons if necessary. ``If the norms of international law are violated 
... then they stop being in force for us,'' said Col. Gen. Leonid 
Ivashov, head of the Defense Ministry's main department for international 
cooperation, in an interview with the NTV television station. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>