<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981010.0725 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While NATO allies moved to the brink of agreeing on airstrikes, Slobodan 
Milosevic reportedly softened his stand Saturday on international 
demands over Kosovo but refused to make a key concession in talks 
with a U.S. envoy. On a day of shuttle diplomacy by Richard Holbrooke 
between Belgrade and Pristina, sources close to Milosevic said the 
Yugoslav leader had signaled his willingness to comply with six main 
demands on him in order to head off intervention. Those measures would 
include withdrawing more troops from Kosovo, allowing humanitarian 
aid to the refugees and opening up serious talks with the secessionists 
on the restoration of their self-rule which he abolished in 1989. 
But the sources, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Milosevic 
refused to budge on an additional, U.S. demand to deploy an international 
monitoring force in the secessionist Serbian province. The force, 
aimed at seeing if he was living up to his commitments, would include 
some NATO troops. Washington is pressing for a monitoring force because 
Milosevic broke similar promises during Bosnia's 1992-95 war, and 
violated a pledge earlier this year to halt his offensive against 
ethnic Albanian militants in Kosovo. Holbrooke refused to comment 
on the substance of his talks with Milosevic, which resumed Saturday 
afternoon after lasting into the early hours. He said the situation 
had not changed from the previous day. His visit to Pristina and return 
to Belgrade for more talks signaled a glimmer of hope in efforts to 
avoid NATO action to halt a crackdown in Kosovo that has killed hundreds 
and displaced upwards of 300,000 from their homes. Stepping up the 
pressure on Milosevic, NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana said the 
16 members all but erased their remaining differences on airstrikes 
at a meeting of alliance ambassadors Saturday. ``If Milosevic does 
not comply, I can tell you that NATO is ready to act,'' Solana told 
reporters in Brussels. He said the final authorization would happen 
in the next few days unless Milosevic complies fully with demands. 
In another move showing NATO means business, U.S. Defense Secretary 
William Cohen ordered the deployment of six B-52 bombers, one reconnaissance 
aircraft and 13 tankers to Britain in preparation for possible intervention. 
Also Saturday, Bulgarian leaders said they were ready to allow NATO 
aircarft to use Bulgarian airspace for airstrikes against neighboring 
Yugoslavia but that Bulgaria will not get directly involved in military 
operations. President Petar Stoyanov announced the decision after 
a five-hour meeting of the Council on National Security, which was 
called after a request by NATO's North Atlantic Council to use the 
airspace. Milosevic issued, 10th graf pvs 
</TEXT>
</DOC>