<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981010.0180 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A young ethnic Chinese activist who was counseling women raped during 
Indonesia's riots in May was found stabbed to death in her home, police 
said Saturday. Human rights groups say that at least 168 women, mostly 
ethnic Chinese, were raped during the unrest in Indonesia, which killed 
1,200 people and led to the resignation of President Suharto. Several 
activists helping the victims or investigating the cases have complained 
they have received death threats. But 18-year-old Martadinata Haryono, 
whose body was found Friday night by her father with stab wounds and 
a slashed neck, was the first volunteer to be killed, police said. 
Miss Haryono and her mother, Wiwin, both worked for Volunteers for 
Humanity, one of several such groups recently established to counsel 
ethnic Chinese victims of the unrest. Kompas, Indonesia's largest 
newspaper, reported Saturday that Miss Haryono and her mother were 
planning to help rape victims tell a foreign human rights group what 
had happened to them. ``This was so unfair. We just hope she wasn't 
killed because she and her mother were helping rape victims,'' said 
Ester Indahyani Jusuf Lubis, leader of Serambi Nusa Bangsa, a group 
formed in June to fight racial discrimination in Indonesia. ``People 
will now be afraid to tell anyone what happened during the riots. 
This is terrorizing for Indonesia's ethnic Chinese,'' she said in 
an interview. Police said the assailant did not rob Miss Haryono's 
home, located near a military complex in downtown Jakarta, but refused 
to speculate what had motivated the killing. They would not say whether 
she had been sexually assaulted. Miss Haryono, a student at Paskalis 
Catholic high school, had counseled at least four rape victims, the 
Jakarta Post reported. On Saturday, dozens of people visited her house 
in a densely populated neighborhood of modest homes and open sewers, 
where some people still make money by raising chickens and pigeons. 
Miss Haryono's casket sat in one room adorned with flowers, burning 
incense, her photograph and a crucifix. Her parents were consoled 
by friends in an adjoining room. Indonesians of Chinese descent are 
widely resented by the country's Muslim majority for their wealth, 
their business acumen and their Buddhist and Christian religions. 
They are the country's most powerful economic group, controlling about 
70 percent of its private wealth and banking sectors. During the rioting 
in May, which struck during Indonesia's worst economic crisis in 30 
years, many businesses and homes of the ethnic Chinese minority were 
targeted by mobs. Reports that mass rapes had occurred outraged Chinese 
communities around the world and resulted in calls for tough action 
by the governments of China and Taiwan. Indonesia's government set 
up an independent inquiry into the reported sexual assaults. It confirmed 
that rapes had taken place during the riots, but it has yet to determine 
how many. The military and police have repeatedly said they have no 
hard evidence that sexual assault was widespread. But that has left 
them open to criticism, especially from women's groups. ``Whatever 
motivated the killing, we see it as a form of terror against women 
activists,'' said Nursyahbani Katjasungkana, director of the Indonesian 
Women's Association for Justice. ``The armed forces and police must 
do more to guarantee our safety.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>