<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981010.0530 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While NATO allies moved to the brink Saturday of agreeing on airstrikes, 
Slobodan Milosevic reportedly softened his stand on international 
demands over Kosovo but refused to make a key concession in talks 
with a U.S. envoy. On a day of shuttle diplomacy by Richard Holbrooke 
between Belgrade and Pristina, sources close to Milosevic said the 
Yugoslav leader had signaled his willingness to comply with six main 
demands on him in order to head off intervention. Those measures would 
include withdrawing more troops from Kosovo, allowing humanitarian 
aid to the refugees and opening up serious talks with the secessionists 
on the restoration of their self-rule which he abolished in 1989. 
But the sources, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Milosevic 
refused to budge on an additional, U.S. demand to deploy an international 
monitoring force in the secessionist Serbian province. The force, 
aimed at seeing if he was living up to his commitments, would include 
some NATO troops. Washington is pressing for a monitoring force because 
Milosevic is known for breaking his promises during Bosnia's 1991-95 
war, as well for violating a pledge earlier this year to halt his 
offensive against ethnic Albanian militants in Kosovo. Holbrooke refused 
to comment on the substance of his talks with Milosevic, which resumed 
Saturday afternoon after lasting into the early hours. But his visit 
to Pristina and return to Belgrade for more talks signaled a glimmer 
of hope in efforts to avoid NATO action to halt a crackdown in Kosovo 
that has killed hundreds and displaced upwards of 300,000 from their 
homes. Stepping up the pressure on Milosevic, NATO Secretary-General 
Javier Solana said the 16 members all but erased their remaining differences 
on airstrikes at a meeting of alliance ambassadors Saturday. ``If 
Milosevic does not comply, I can tell you that NATO is ready to act,'' 
Solana told reporters in Brussels, saying the alliance's preparations 
was helping Holbrooke's negotiating efforts. Solana said the final 
authorization of an attack would happen in the next few days unless 
Milosevic complies fully with demands. While Milosevic had issued 
no new statements as of Saturday evening, a Serbian Foreign Ministry 
spokesman voiced objection to the proposal to include a small NATO 
troop contingent in a monitoring force. ``It is not understandable 
why foreign troops have to come to Kosovo _ to do what?'' the unidentified 
spokesman told BBC Radio 4. ``We cannot understand this.'' The independent 
Nasa Borba daily reported Saturday that Milosevic told Holbrooke that 
he wouldn't even consider accepting foreign troops in Kosovo. During 
his Pristina visit, Holbrooke was noncommittal when asked whether 
the continuing talks meant he has faith an agreement can be reached. 
``We always believe it's better to keep talking, and nobody wants 
to have to resort to violence or military action.'' Still, the flurry 
of weekend negotiations in Yugoslavia indicated U.S. officials were 
making a new push for a diplomatic settlement, with momentum toward 
airstrikes on hold pending the outcome. In Kosovo, Holbrooke met with 
three ethnic Albanian negotiators _ Fehmi Agani, Iljaz Kurtesi and 
Edita Tahiri _ and then with political leader Ibrahim Rugova. Philip 
Reeker, a spokesman, said Holbrooke and his aides were conducting 
two-track talks _ on a political level and on Milosevic's compliance, 
``because compliance has got to be full, durable and verifiable.'' 
``This is an intense time,'' he added. Christopher Hill, the U.S. 
ambassador to Macedonia, and Britain's ambassador to Yugoslavia, Brian 
Donnelly, accompanied Holbrooke to Pristina. Hill then held more talks 
with ethnic Albanians later. Resuming talks between the ethnic Albanians 
and the Milosevic-led government on the future of Kosovo is one of 
the key international demands. But holding talks on self-rule would 
involve concessions by both sides: Milosevic would have to give up 
his full domination over the southern Serbian province, and the Albanian 
side would have to acknowledge that it might settle for less than 
full independence. Chief ethnic Albanian negotiator Agani has rejected 
the latest U.S. proposal, saying Kosovo could not remain in Serbia 
following the latest carnage. The Serbian side was close to accepting 
it, but rejects the idea that Kosovo police would be dominated by 
ethnic Albanians, Serbian sources said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>