<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981010.0735 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
While NATO moved to the brink of airstrikes, Slobodan Milosevic reportedly 
softened his stand Saturday on international demands over Kosovo but 
refused to make a key concession in talks with a U.S. envoy. On a 
day of shuttle diplomacy by Richard Holbrooke between Belgrade and 
Pristina, sources close to Milosevic said the Yugoslav president had 
signaled his willingness to comply with six main demands in order 
to head off intervention. Those measures would include withdrawing 
more troops from Kosovo, allowing humanitarian aid to the refugees 
and opening up serious talks with the secessionists on the restoration 
of their self-rule which he abolished in 1989. But the sources, who 
spoke on condition of anonymity, said Milosevic refused to budge on 
an additional, U.S. demand to deploy an international monitoring force 
in the secessionist Serbian province. The force, aimed at seeing if 
he was living up to his commitments, would include some NATO troops. 
Washington is pressing for a monitoring force because Milosevic is 
known for breaking his promises during Bosnia's 1992-95 war, as well 
for violating a pledge earlier this year to halt his offensive against 
ethnic Albanian militants in Kosovo. Holbrooke refused to comment 
on the substance of his talks with Milosevic, which lasted until around 
midnight or later for a second straight night. He said the situation 
had not changed from the previous day. But his visit to Pristina and 
return to Belgrade for more talks signaled a glimmer of hope in efforts 
to avoid NATO action to halt a crackdown in Kosovo that has killed 
hundreds and displaced upwards of 300,000 from their homes. Stepping 
up the pressure on Milosevic, NATO Secretary-General Javier Solana 
said the 16 members all but erased their remaining differences on 
airstrikes at a meeting of alliance ambassadors Saturday. ``If Milosevic 
does not comply, I can tell you that NATO is ready to act,'' Solana 
told reporters in Brussels, saying final authorization for an attack 
would happen in the next few days barring a diplomatic breakthrough. 
In another move showing NATO means business, U.S. Defense Secretary 
William Cohen ordered the deployment of six B-52 bombers, one reconnaissance 
aircraft and 13 tankers to Britain in preparation for possible intervention. 
While Milosevic had issued no new statements as of Saturday evening, 
a Serbian Foreign Ministry spokesman voiced objection to the proposal 
to include a small NATO troop contingent in a monitoring force. ``It 
is not understandable why foreign troops have to come to Kosovo _ 
to do what?'' the unidentified spokesman told BBC Radio 4. ``We cannot 
understand this.'' The independent Nasa Borba daily reported Saturday 
that Milosevic told Holbrooke that he wouldn't even consider accepting 
foreign troops in Kosovo. During his Pristina visit, Holbrooke was 
noncommittal when asked whether the continuing talks meant he has 
faith an agreement can be reached. ``We always believe it's better 
to keep talking, and nobody wants to have to resort to violence or 
military action.'' Still, the flurry of weekend negotiations in Yugoslavia 
indicated U.S. officials were making a new push for a diplomatic settlement, 
with momentum toward airstrikes on hold pending the outcome. It was 
not immediately clear whether talks would last through the weekend. 
But Milosevic on Saturday canceled plans to attend a summit of southeastern 
European leaders in Turkey starting Monday. In Kosovo, Holbrooke met 
with three ethnic Albanian negotiators _ Fehmi Agani, Iljaz Kurtesi 
and Edita Tahiri _ and then with political leader Ibrahim Rugova. 
Philip Reeker, a spokesman, said Holbrooke and his aides were conducting 
two-track talks _ on a political level and on Milosevic's compliance, 
``because compliance has got to be full, durable and verifiable.'' 
Christopher Hill, the U.S. ambassador to Macedonia, and Britain's 
ambassador to Yugoslavia, Brian Donnelly, accompanied Holbrooke to 
Pristina. Hill then held more talks with ethnic Albanians later. Resuming 
talks between the ethnic Albanians and the Milosevic-led government 
on the future of Kosovo is one of the key international demands. There 
were no reports of fresh fighting in Kosovo on Saturday, but three 
people were reported killed on the Albanian side of the border when 
they walked into a minefield in the village of Pogaj, Albania's Interior 
Ministry said. Meanwhile, a top Russian military official said Moscow 
was prepared to take Yugoslavia's side in case of NATO airstrikes, 
and provide weapons if necessary. ``If the norms of international 
law are violated ... then they stop being in force for us,'' said 
Col. Gen. Leonid Ivashov, head of the Defense Ministry's main department 
for international cooperation, in an interview with the NTV television 
station. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>