<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981010.1000.1511 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One year after its introduction, the TV ratings system is getting 
mixed reviews from viewers and industry watchdogs. Lauren Hunter reports. 
"felicity" is one of more than a 100 network shows this fall using 
age-based ratings. Each show assigns its own rating. Most networks, 
with the exception of NBC, are also adding a content label to indicate 
levels of sex, violence and adult dialogue. After a year, the reviews 
are mixed. It's very, very dangerous when you start labeling things 
because you come down to "who's doing the labeling?" If everybody's 
labeling their own, then there's no consistency in labeling and it 
just becomes confusing. ABC gave the premiere of "sports night" a 
TV-pg "L" rating. I think they've been a bit of a nonevent. I don't 
think they have that much impact. It's something we're not thinking 
of at all. I don't think it's affected the way that people are viewing. 
This episode of "Nash bridges" on CBS received a TV-14 "V." I heartily 
endorse the ratings system. I think it's been a great tool for parents 
and, in some respects, it's given us an opportunity to expand the 
content. "Ally McBeal" on fox, rated a TV-14 "D." At fox, we were 
the first to appreciate and accept and to embrace the notion of ratings, 
and I'm not unhappy about that at all. The Kaiser family foundation 
recently completed a study of the ratings system. It found that content 
labels failed to identify the majority of sex and violence on TV shows. 
We're not in this business to point blame. We're not saying because 
the industry is doing something wrong, what we're saying is that the 
-- what koupts is the end result in the living room for the parents. 
And the fact of the matter is, if four out of five shows that have 
sex or violence aren't receiving those labels, for whatever reasons, 
that's probably not the system that parents thought they were getting. 
For the most part, though, parents and students at this suburban middle 
school in Los Angeles seemed to get it. I enjoy it because I don't 
have the worry that much about what is being seen when we look at 
the ratings. It's really to describe, to describe if you shouldn't 
watch the shows and if they're appropriate. It could be a little bit 
more detailed. I mean, it would be nice to know just how far they're 
going with the subjects, I mean, so you can have control over it. 
The Nielsen ratings? They just tell you, the parents, like, to tell 
them what it's rated and if their children should be watching it or 
not. And with this controversial subject, it's a safe bet that "growing 
pains" aren't over yet. Lauren Hunter, CNN entertainment, Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>