<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981010.1830.0084 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
good evening. it has become a familiar event on the political calendar, 
a showdown over the budgets, threats to shut down the government. 
it has led to a rare weekend session of congress when they are anxious 
to leave town and head home and campaign for re-election. good evening, 
soledad. congress is working overtime this weekend, extending deadlines 
over and over, as it tries to resolve conflicts over policy, money 
and politics. to hear the leaders of the two parties tell it, there 
is no common ground when it comes to agreeing on a federal budget. 
we're going to fight every day that we are here, we're not going to 
let them steal out of town! Reporter: IT'S PURE POLITICS. pure demagoguery. 
but democrats and republicans are not as far apart as they seem. with 
fundamental agreement reached on -- $18 billion in spending for the 
international monetary fund, and $9 billion for a limited tax cut 
that would help the self employed and aid struggling farmers. they 
disagree on how to pay $25-billion cost for rebuilding american embassies 
abroad, and $14 billion, the cost of upgrading government computers 
by the year 2000, and of maintaining peacekeeping forces in bosnia. 
republican leaders in congress also disagree with the white house 
on a host of policy issues, including $245 million for drug abuse 
reduction and $6 billion in education spending. we are committed to 
staying on the job for as long as it takes to deal with the urgent 
needs facing america's public schools. but republicans argue that 
democrats are busting the balanced budget and dipping into the surplus 
they promised to save for social security. and let's not let's not 
let this super heavy, politically charged superheavy environment color 
things such environment color things such that we're gonna take that 
surplus we surplus we take so much pride in, and find out in three 
months or four months that only 25% or 35% of it is left. for all 
of their promises to stay in town and complete their work their work, 
we're staying in congress until the work is done. many members of 
both parties left town today. many members have planes they'd like 
to catch. with no plans to return until late monday, both sides already 
predict they will extend the budget deadline for the third time on 
monday and stay in washington until somebody backs down. soledad? 
nbc's gwen ifill on capitol hill. thank you. nbc's john palmer at 
the white house. good evening, soledad. the white house said it is 
just too premature to address the question. the white house says progress 
was made in today's budget negotiations, but they say there are still 
many areas of serious disagreement with republicans on capitol hill. 
aides say mr. clinton has been personally involved in the negotiations. 
at one point today criticizing senate republicans for rejecting his 
bill to clamp down on managed health care programs, warning in his 
weekly radio broadcast the same fate should not happen to his education 
proposals. i don't want to see this congress walk away from america's 
school children, as it has walked away from american's patients. we 
should be able to make real, bipartisan progress on education. the 
president's point man in dealing with congress said two areas of disagreement 
remain, money for school construction and for teachers. reducing the 
size of classrooms so that teachers can actually teach, and adding 
100,000 teachers to the school system. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>