<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0039 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At a Mass in St. Peter's Square on Sunday, Pope John Paul II will 
pronounce Edith Stein, a renowned Jewish intellectual who became a 
Carmelite nun and died at Auschwitz, a saint and a martyr for the 
Roman Catholic faith. Edith Stein, while undoubtedly a remarkable 
woman, is perhaps one of the most contested choices for canonization 
of John Paul's pontificate, which celebrates its 20th year next week. 
Ever since she was beatified in 1987, many Jewish groups and members 
of her family have questioned the Vatican's logic and sensitivity, 
arguing that Edith Stein was sent to the gas chambers because she 
was a Jew, and not because she was a nun. In canonizing Sister Teresia 
Benedicta, the name she adopted when she took the veil, the Vatican 
feels it is paying homage to her as a Jew and as an extraordinary 
Christian _ and to the tens of thousands of Catholic priests and nuns 
who were also killed by the Nazis. By singling out a Jewish convert, 
though, the pope is reopening the Vatican to questions about the role 
of the Roman Catholic Church during the Holocaust and how the Vatican 
views that clouded history. The pope, who has sought to make reconciliation 
between Catholics and Jews a hallmark of his papacy and who earlier 
this year issued an ``act of repentance'' for the failure of Catholics 
to deter the mass killing of Jews, has also persistently chosen saints 
that, to critics, seem to undercut that healing process. The canonization 
of Edith Stein, which coincides with a roiling controversy in Poland 
over the erection of crosses in a gravel pit adjacent to Auschwitz, 
is not an isolated move. Last weekend the pope traveled to Croatia 
to beatify as a martyr Cardinal Alojzije Stepinac, who was persecuted 
by the Communists during the Cold War. Although the Vatican argues 
that the cardinal saved hundreds of Jewish lives during World War 
II, he is still viewed by Serbs and many Jews as a symbol of the Catholic 
Church's complicity with the Fascist regime in Croatia. ``It's an 
unnecessary and painful act,'' Abraham Foxman, national director of 
the Anti-Defamation League in New York, said of Edith Stein's canonization. 
``It's another step towards Christianizing or universalizing the Holocaust. 
By saying everybody was a victim, it's a way of saying the church 
had no role or responsibility.'' He continued, ``Given all the painful, 
unresolved issues, why her, and why now?'' John Paul II, who has beatified 
805 people and canonized 280, has made more saints than any other 
pope. He has revived the process and made it a cornerstone of his 
papacy. Like the encyclicals and apostolic letters he issued, the 
saints he named will define his papacy. Some, like the beatifications 
and canonizations of dozens of African and Asian saints, signal his 
long-stated desire to broaden the base of the church. The canonization 
of Edith Stein _ and the planned beatification of the wartime pope, 
Pius XII _ reflect the pope's stated wish to seek redemption for the 
church during the Holocaust. John Paul II, 78 and ailing but determined 
to usher in the third millennium, also seems in a hurry to complete 
goals that an eventual successor might not share. The selection of 
Edith Stein is the latest, perhaps most dramatic example of how the 
process of making saints has been changed, speeded up and streamlined 
by the pope. In a 1983 overhaul of the process, for example, the adversarial 
role of the promoter of the faith, commonly known as the devil's advocate, 
who argued the ``con'' in each case, was eliminated. Edith Stein's 
path to martyrdom is convoluted. In 1942, she was a refugee in a convent 
in the Netherlands. That year, the Dutch bishops were told by the 
Nazis that if they abandoned their intention to denounce the deportation 
of Jews, the Nazis would spare Jewish converts. When the bishops refused, 
Edith Stein and hundreds of other converts were deported. The Congregation 
for the Causes of Saints concluded that because the Nazis rounded 
up Jewish converts in retaliation for the bishops' defiance, they 
were persecuting the Catholic Church, and hence, Edith Stein. As the 
religion writer Kenneth Woodward described it in his book ``Making 
Saints,'' the Dutch bishops' act was a kind of ``class action'' that 
covered all converted Jews who died as a result of the bishops' resistance. 
The Rev. Simeon Tomas Fernandez, the 81-year-old Carmelite priest 
who has been the postulator, or chief church advocate, for Edith Stein's 
cause since 1962, does not disagree. ``They were all martyrs, of course, 
but nobody else was proclaimed a saint by the local population,'' 
he said in an interview. The Vatican reasoning baffles some of Edith 
Stein's survivors. ``If the Nazis wanted to persecute the Catholic 
Church, why didn't they arrest the clergy who wrote the letter?'' 
said Susanne Batzdorff, 77, a niece of Edith Stein who fled the Nazis 
by emigrating to the United States in 1939. ``Instead, they rounded 
up the Jewish converts.'' Mrs. Batzdorff, who said she planned to 
attend the canonization, explained that the family still views her 
as a Jewish martyr. There is little doubt that Edith Stein was an 
exceptional woman, as Jew and as Catholic. Born in 1891 on Yom Kippur 
to an Orthodox family in Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland), she 
was a brilliant philosophy student in Gottingen, where Edmund Husserl, 
a founder of phenomenology, made her his assistant and protege. She 
began her academic career as an atheist, but gradually grew intrigued 
by Christian theology. She became a Roman Catholic in 1922, inspired 
partly by the life of Saint Theresa of Avila. Despite Husserl's recommendation, 
she was denied a teaching position at the University of Freiburg because 
she was a woman. She taught at a Catholic girls' school, then in 1932 
became an instructor at the Institute for Scientific Pedagogy in Muenster. 
In 1933 she was forced to quit because of a Nazi decree banning Jews 
from teaching positions. That year she entered a Carmelite convent 
in Cologne. When she took her vows, she offered her life in atonement 
for the sins of her ``unbelieving'' Jewish people. The Vatican note 
omits that detail from her biography. She continued her philosophical 
and theological writings at the convent. Among her admirers was the 
Rev. Karol Joseph Wojtyla, a Polish priest who read her works while 
studying phenomenology and theology in Rome in 1948. Wojtyla is now 
Pope John Paul II. In 1938, after Kristallnacht, she fled Germany 
with her sister Rosa for a Carmelite convent in Echt, Netherlands. 
After the Nazis occupied the Netherlands, she began seeking refuge 
in Switzerland, but convents there could not find room for her sister, 
so they remained in Echt. After the bishops' letter, she was arrested 
on Aug. 2. As she was led away, one witness reported, she told her 
sister, ``Come, Rosa, we are going for our people.'' She died at Auschwitz 
on Aug. 9, 1942. The official quest for her sainthood began in 1962, 
when her cause was opened before the ecclesiastical tribunal of Cologne. 
At first local clergy members put her cause on the path of saintliness 
for ``heroic virtue,'' which required an exemplary life and, at the 
time, several miracles. Edith Stein's cause was one of the first to 
benefit from the 1983 reform of canonization, which relaxed some requirements 
and simplified many bureaucratic procedures. Among other things, martyrs 
were no longer required to perform a miracle for beatification, the 
last step before canonization. That year, the bishops of Poland and 
Germany petitioned the Vatican to consider Edith Stein a martyr. Within 
four years, she was beatified. The cure recognized by the church as 
a miracle, necessary for canonization, occurred in 1987. Benedicta 
McCarthy, who was named after Sister Teresia Benedicta, was 2 and 
a half years old when she swallowed a huge dose of Tylenol and was 
rushed to the hospital. Her family and friends prayed to the child's 
namesake and her recovery, which amazed her doctors, was pronounced 
a miracle before the pope in April 1997. In the Vatican's view, nothing 
else stood in the way of adding Edith Stein's name to the roster of 
Roman Catholic saints. ``We have no assurances that the climate will 
be any different in 20 years,'' the Rev. Peter Gumpel, a Jesuit priest 
and former top official of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints, 
replied when asked why the church was canonizing Edith Stein now. 
``Our task now is to set the historic record straight. We cannot make 
concessions that violate the truth.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>