<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0098 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of the English Children, Peggy Robinson Gibson, stood Friday in 
the backyard that once was as familiar to her as any place on earth 
and gazed at the placid vista of Tuxedo Lake and the wooded hills 
turning color above it. It seemed, she said after lunch, that a lot 
of the vivid red sumac beyond the stone retaining wall had been trimmed 
back. Otherwise, things were pretty much as they had been on the day 
she first saw it: Oct. 5, 1940. At home, the Battle of Britain was 
in its third month. German bombers had extended their raids to the 
Midlands, targeting industrial centers like Birmingham, Coventry and 
Sheffield. But in Tuxedo Park, the pastoral 2,200-acre retreat that 
tobacco heir Pierre Lorillard had built for himself and his successful 
friends, Mrs. Gibson and 17 other British children found respite from 
the terror their parents feared would breach the English Channel. 
They became known as the English Children, an affectionate sobriquet 
they retain in Tuxedo Park to this day, though all are well into their 
60s. Most were between 7 and 10 when they came to live in the baronial 
stucco house with 19 bedrooms that had been named Children's House 
and donated for their use. Village residents contributed money for 
their food, clothing and medical care and to pay for the housekeepers 
and cooks who served them. They attended the small, private Tuxedo 
Park School (40 pupils then, 183 through the ninth grade today), which 
is housed within the gated community in Orange County. They experienced 
baseball, went to the circus at New York City's Madison Square Garden 
and, for air defense purposes, learned to identify silhouettes of 
German fighter planes, a useless task as it turned out. And in 1944, 
when most of them learned they would be boarding the Cunarder Mauretania 
for the homeward crossing to Liverpool, some of them wept at the prospect 
of departure. Fifty-eight years later, on this weekend, seven had 
returned for their first, and probably only, alumni reunion. If there 
are soul-deep scars from being sent away by their families to cross 
the submarine-infested North Atlantic on their own, they do not show. 
In Tuxedo Park, they say, life was safe and good and, perhaps most 
important, normal. ``I'm just strolling over here,'' said one of the 
children, Tony Robinson, 65, of Worcester, as he ambled past a garden 
where he said he had once planted larkspur. He was making his way 
toward a large rock outcropping in the backyard of Children's House. 
He reached the outcropping, where two other alumni were already perched. 
``It's called Big Rock,'' Robinson said, ``because that's what it 
looks like when you're 7 years old. I proposed to Fiona on it in 1942.'' 
Fiona is Fiona Ross Buchanan, who is 67 and lives in Scotland. ``I 
turned him down,'' she said. ``Not mature enough.'' The gentle ribbing 
and reminiscing carried through a round of receptions and visits that 
began with lunch in the same dining room where they had taken most 
of their meals as war refugees. More than 30 people fit comfortably 
at three tables, just steps from the pantry where Maggie Ross Redfern, 
Fiona's sister, said she had suffered punishment tours folding napkins 
and making oleomargarine. But memories are selective and six decades 
have taken their toll. ``They told us at lunch, right here,'' Mrs. 
Redfern said, recalling how she was told that she would be sent home. 
Her sister said she had no recollection of the moment. What both of 
them recall, however, is the sense of youthful anticipation at the 
unexpected opportunity to visit the United States, a notion inculcated 
by their parents. ``They just said to us, `This is going to be a great 
adventure,''' Mrs. Buchanan said. ``You know, the States, an ocean 
crossing.'' She and her sister, ages 8 and 7, were both well aware 
of the war _ ``Hitler, the monster _ collecting newspapers, the bombings.'' 
But their comfortable lives at Rickerby Cottage, their Cumberland 
country home near the Scottish border, seemed remote from the devastation 
in London and elsewhere. ``We weren't at all worked up,'' Mrs. Buchanan 
said. At the same time, in Worcester, Robinson was hearing the news 
that he, too, would be heading to the United States. They were part 
of an effort, largely arranged by a two-country organization, the 
Children's Overseas Reception Board, under which about 5,000 British 
children were evacuated to the United States early in World War II. 
The connection to Tuxedo Park came through one of its residents, Alexander 
Tomes, whose sister was married to a son of former British Prime Minister 
Stanley Baldwin. Lead by Tomes, a group of Park residents arranged 
for the children's passage and housing. Robinson came from a family 
of eight. The two eldest children, both boys, would stay in Britain, 
anticipating conscription if the war continued. The two youngest were 
5 and 8 months, too young to travel. The four middle children, Tony, 
Phillip, Fay and Peggy, would be sent overseas together. ``I don't 
remember being frightened,'' said Robinson, a Cambridge graduate and 
professor whose speciality is teaching the teaching of reading. The 
18 children had gathered in Glasgow in mid-September and spent 10 
days stranded in port aboard the Empress of Australia after just missing 
a westbound British naval convoy. There is disagreement about why 
they were stranded. Either their ship was being outfitted with mine 
detectors, or a mine net was being installed in the harbor. What happened 
next made the Empress of Australia the last vessel carrying British 
children to cross the wartime Atlantic for the United States. The 
departed convoy had left with another passenger ship, the City of 
Benares, and several days out, the passenger ship was torpedoed. ``The 
children had been told they must sleep in their warm clothes,'' Mrs. 
Buchanan said. ``After a certain point, it was considered safe and 
they were allowed to wear pajamas.'' It was on that night that the 
ship was hit. According to Mrs. Buchanan and Robinson, the children 
and others on board scrambled safely to lifeboats. But in hostile 
waters, the naval convoy had strict orders to steam on. Abandoned, 
the passengers, including 77 children, died of exposure. Most of those 
on the Empress of Australia would not learn of the sinking until the 
war's end. Their ship made it safely to Halifax, Nova Scotia, where 
they boarded a train to Montreal and then another to Manhattan's Grand 
Central Terminal. There, they were met by their hosts from Tuxedo 
Park and received the first hugs they had had in weeks. ``It was a 
very difficult situation,'' Robinson said, describing the potentially 
awkward role the American caretakers would have to fulfill. ``They 
didn't want to take the place of our parents, and it wasn't a boarding 
school. They made sure we maintained a relationship with our parents. 
We wrote to them, we talked about them.'' Mrs. Buchanan recalled being 
taken to the British Broadcasting Corp. studio in Rockefeller Center 
to hear recordings of broadcasts that British parents were allowed 
to make for their children in the United States. The notion of the 
reunion, which included several American classmates of the English 
Children, emerged gradually from trans-Atlantic correspondence that 
began earlier this year with a letter from Robinson. He wanted ``to 
get in touch with the school and wondering if it was still here,'' 
said Vera Brigham, 89, the school historian, who has lived in the 
Park since 1940. The letter, received in January, was turned over 
to the school's headmaster, James Burger, who asked Mrs. Brigham to 
reply. ``I pulled out all the stops,'' she said. By this she meant 
that she and Robinson began lining up alumni on both sides of the 
Atlantic and elsewhere. (Two Robinson siblings, Philip and Peggy, 
came from Australia. Fay Robinson Schoelier came from Worcester. Jill 
Sieveking English came from Ireland.) The returnees, as well as some 
of their American classmates, appeared at an all-school assembly program 
Friday morning, donating a plaque to be awarded annually to a middle 
school student who best demonstrates a love of reading. One young 
man asked about the safety of the royal family, which later in the 
day put Robinson in mind of a popular wartime tune, ``The King Is 
Still in London.'' He explained that the royal family, including the 
two young princesses, remained in Britain. Later in the day, chatting 
on a patio at the rear of Children's House, Robinson was asked again 
about the song. He grew pensive, and then shyly broke into a light 
tenor: ``The sentry stands at the palace gate, Though he's no longer 
dressed in red. His eyes are looking everywhere, But he never turns 
his head. The royal standard waves above for everyone to see. The 
King is still in London town, That's where he wants to be.'' ``You 
get the idea,'' he said. Then he rose and walked out into the garden. 
``I want to see if I can find the larkspur,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>