<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0160 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even as its steel skeleton for a 420,000-square-foot office building 
at 90 Hudson St. on the Jersey City, N.J., waterfront is starting 
to rise, Hartz Mountain Industries has purchased another acre of Colgate 
Center, where it plans to erect an identical 12-story building at 
a location designated as 70 Hudson St. Development is proceeding apace 
on the west bank of the Hudson River, even as nervousness in financial 
markets is slowing transactions in Manhattan. At its Newport development 
in Jersey City, the Lefrak Organization is building a 575,000-square-foot 
office complex. Just to the north, in Hoboken, SJP Properties has 
full approvals for a 1.1 million-square-foot office tower called Waterfront 
Corporate Center and expects to begin building in the spring if an 
anchor tenant can be signed. It was the securing of an anchor tenant, 
the mutual fund manager Lord Abbet, to a 20-year lease for 150,000 
square feet _ and the rush to meet a deadline _ that motivated the 
$10 million purchase of the 70 Hudson site, said Emanuel Stern, president 
of Hartz Mountain. ``We believe in the location and we had an option 
we had to execute,'' Stern said. He said the Lord Abbet lease at 90 
Hudson, which enabled Hartz to secure longterm financing on the building, 
encouraged the company to invest its own money in the land at 70 Hudson. 
The 70 Hudson site includes the 25-foot-high Colgate clock, which 
was on the roof of the Colgate-Palmolive factory at the site until 
the factory was closed in 1989, and will be moved before excavation 
begins. Its future location has not yet been decided, but people associated 
with the project said the intention was to place it so that it will 
be easily visible. Hartz Mountain's actions at the two sites, Stern 
said, reflect the ability of private developers to move quickly, regardless 
of what is happening in securities markets. Indeed, he expressed some 
glee at the recent difficulties of real estate investment trusts, 
whose activities have been curtailed by their plunging stock prices. 
``The REITs are dead in the water,'' he said. ``They hit all their 
numbers, but Wall Street has turned fickle and they can't print stock 
anymore.'' The REITs, or real estate investment trusts, had been using 
operating partnership units, which eventually convert to common stock, 
to make acquisitions without immediately triggering capital gains 
taxes for the seller. With a low stock price, REITs are reluctant 
to issue more stock and dilute the value of existing shares. ``We 
put our own money into our deals,'' said Stern. And he said that the 
success in finding an anchor tenant at 90 Hudson demonstrates that 
traditional sources of finance are available for developers who build 
properties that are attractive and priced properly. ``If we get tenants, 
then we get taken out by insurance companies and pension funds,'' 
he said, referring to the long-term financing that replaces, or takes 
out, the developer's interim financing. Certainly the success of past 
projects is an encouragement for developers to press ahead. According 
to a third-quarter report by Cushman &AMP; Wakefield, the vacancy 
rate for Class A space in Hudson County, almost all of it on the waterfront, 
is just 2 percent. With Class A vacancy rates in midtown Manhattan 
in the low single digits and rents rising, many firms in New York 
are being forced to look elsewhere in the region for office space, 
observes Michael Cohen, president of Williams Real Estate, a Manhattan-based 
firm. ``Most service companies in New York _ and they constitute the 
bulk of tenants _ are looking for rents that begin with a 2 or a 3,'' 
Cohen said, explaining that he meant rents ranging from the high $20s 
to low $30s per square foot annually. ``That simply is out of the 
question in midtown,'' he said, adding that some formerly fringe areas 
in Midtown South that had previously been available were filled up 
as well. Given that the buildings on the New Jersey waterfront are 
new and equipped with the latest technology and just a few stops on 
the PATH trains from Manhattan, they become an attractive alternative. 
``It's the sixth borough,'' he said. Indeed, Steven Pozycki, president 
of SJP Properties, said it was wrong to think of the waterfront as 
part of the New Jersey office market, despite the political jurisdiction. 
``The west bank of the Hudson is really part of the New York market,'' 
he said. The availability of sizable tracts of land in the old industrial 
locations on the waterfront allows developers to offer prospective 
tenants large floors that are almost impossible to find in Manhattan. 
``We are offering floor plates of 95,000 square feet,'' Pozycki said. 
``In New York it would take two generations to assemble enough land 
for floors like that.'' Big footprints mean that buildings can be 
more efficient in several ways: For example, there is less need for 
common areas, such as elevator lobbies and reception areas, providing 
more work space. And 12- to 14-story buildings, which are what is 
being proposed and built on the waterfront, require fewer elevator 
shafts than much taller buildings erected on smaller plots of land. 
``There is less penetration by elevators, so the space is more efficient,'' 
said Joseph Hilton, who is a managing director of CB Richard Ellis 
and specializes in the New Jersey waterfront. ``And the availability 
of land means that it is easier and cheaper to build than in New York.'' 
He noted that the Lincoln Harbor development in Weehawken had the 
room to add 1.4 million square feet of office space. Both developers 
and brokers emphasize the extensive transportation infrastructure 
of the area, with train, bus and highway links that are available 
to take workers from the suburban areas of New Jersey to the waterfront. 
And they note that the PATH trains provide quick service to both midtown 
and downtown Manhattan, as do a growing fleet of ferries. In addition, 
construction has begun for a light-rail system on the west bank of 
the Hudson that will run north and south in an area where most public 
transportation is oriented east and west. Phase One of the system 
is scheduled to be completed from Bayonne as far north as Hoboken 
by the spring of 2000, with further extensions under consideration. 
This may add appeal for the young professionals who are drifting into 
places like Hoboken as it has recovered from the industrial drabness 
of the past. ``We are seeing the children of families that moved out 
of Hoboken moving back in for the quality of life,'' observed Pozycki. 
Development on the riverfront appears different from other office 
developments in northern New Jersey, said Norman Baker, a senior managing 
director of Insignia/ESG. ``As New Jersey grew, people clustered near 
the bridge and the two tunnels,'' he said. ``As they got comfortable 
they moved farther west. Companies that started out right by the bridge 
in Fort Lee are in Parsippany now. But the ones in Jersey City don't 
leave.'' With rents in midtown Manhattan moving north of $40 a square 
foot for less than state-of-the art space, brokers say brand-new waterfront 
space on the New Jersey side of the Hudson can be obtained from the 
high $20s for tenants who are the first to commit to a project to 
the low $30s for those who follow later. But rents alone do not constitute 
the whole economic picture, real estate executives say. New Jersey 
does not have New York City's occupancy or local personal income tax 
and there are a variety of financial incentive programs available 
to further lower corporate tax bills. ``There are a lot of area development 
programs available and the savings can be fairly substantial,'' said 
Joseph Romano, executive vice president of Grubb &AMP; Ellis' New 
Jersey office. Despite the attractions of the waterfront, many companies 
are apparently reluctant to pre-lease space, which favors companies 
like Lefrak and Hartz Mountain, which can finance their own projects. 
``As soon as a project gets into the ground, the corporate guys will 
make a commitment,'' Romano said. ``It really is, `If you build it, 
they will come.''' For all its economic attractions, the waterfront 
offers something that might be just as important as it is intangible 
_ magnificent views of Manhattan. Waterfront buildings offer an unbroken 
view across the Hudson to the city's forest of skyscrapers. ``People 
are attracted to the area because of the quality of life and the views 
of New York,'' Pozycki said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>