<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0129 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Fred Grubel, who as executive director of the Leo Baeck Institute 
expanded the organization into a respected historical research center 
for the study of German-speaking Jewry, died Oct. 4 at Lenox Hill 
Hospital. He was 89 and lived in Riverdale, the Bronx. Grubel had 
worked until three years ago when, his family said, failing health 
forced him to give up the position he had held for three decades. 
The institute was first conceived after World War II at a meeting 
in the Jerusalem apartment of philosopher Martin Buber, and was named 
for Leo Baeck, the Reform rabbi and theologian who, as head of the 
National Agency of Jews in Germany, struggled to protect Germany's 
Jews against intensifying Nazi oppression in the 1930s. Baeck, who 
became a symbol for German Jewry in its agony, was among those liberated 
from the Theresienstadt concentration camp in 1945. Shortly before 
Baeck died in London in 1956, the institute was set up with branches 
in London, Jerusalem and New York for the purpose of promoting the 
study of Jewish life. In the 1960s the New York branch acquired a 
mansion at 129 E. 73rd St., and under Grubel's leadership its archives 
and library were expanded, attracting such prominent historians as 
Fritz Stern, Peter Gay and Peter Demetz. ``Mr. Grubel's accomplishment,'' 
said Carol Kahn Strauss, the current executive director, ``was that 
he turned the institute into an international research facility that 
provided material not only on the period since 1933, when Jews virtually 
perished under the Nazis, but also on the long period when German-speaking 
Jews were so significantly involved in European history.'' Grubel 
was already 60 years old when he took over as executive director in 
1968. From childhood in his native Leipzig, he had wanted to study 
and teach history, but according to his daughter Lucille Goldsmith, 
he was thwarted in this ambition by anti-Semitic quotas and turned 
instead to the study of law. But as he was completing his law studies 
he was expelled from his university under Nazi laws. In 1936, Grubel 
became the director of the Jewish community of Leipzig, a position 
that brought him together with Baeck. It also brought him in tense 
contact with the Gestapo, which was then imposing greater and greater 
restrictions on Jews. In 1938, he was sent to the Buchenwald concentration 
camp for six months. A few months before the outbreak of the war, 
Grubel obtained a British visa that enabled him and his wife, Lisa, 
and their infant son, Henry, to emigrate to Britain. For two years, 
both husband and wife worked as domestic servants in a parsonage until 
1940, when they were able to enter the United States as refugees. 
After studying business and accounting, Grubel worked as an accountant 
for the Joint Distribution Committee, an amalgam of Jewish relief 
organizations. At the end of the war, he traveled through much of 
ravaged Europe, monitoring assistance for displaced persons. He later 
worked as a certified accountant at Maimonides and Montefiore hospitals. 
But it was not until 1968 that he attained his youthful dream, working 
to promote historical research. In his time at the institute, the 
library grew to 60,000 volumes, becoming one of the largest collections 
anywhere concerning German Jews. Officials and scholars in Germany 
and the rest of the world increasingly visited the institute, less 
as a shrine than as a living and valuable resource. Grubel also played 
a role in organizing the publication of a four- volume work from the 
institute in German whose translated title is ``German Jewish History 
in Today's World.'' In addition to his wife and son, he is survived 
by Ms. Goldsmith and another daughter, Eva Fischer, both of New York 
City, six grandchildren and five great-grandchildren. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>