<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0054 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The tidy, fateful day of partisan struggle was winding down as Judiciary 
Committee chairman Henry Hyde forwarded the recommended impeachment 
inquiry of President Clinton to certain approval by the House. But 
he suddenly looked up, recalling another bit of urgent business _ 
the committee's need to pose for its official group photograph. ``I 
plead with you to show up,'' Hyde said to the lawmakers, intent on 
replacing the existing class photo. ``I have a lopsided picture in 
my office, not very bipartisan.'' To his left, Rep. Barney Frank, 
the outspoken Democrat with the trigger instinct of a standup comic, 
interjected, ``Why should that be any different, Chairman?'' There 
followed some easy laughter that was rare and much needed as counterpoint 
in the rigidly partisan day as the committee launched the House impeachment 
vessel upon highly uncertain political seas. In the partisan debate 
that formally blessed the inquiry, the Watergate gavel wielded artfully 
24 years ago by Rep. Peter Rodino, Hyde's predecessor in the impeachment 
of Richard M. Nixon, was invoked as if it were the magic sword of 
Excalibur. ``Here we may be partisan in the highest sense,'' pleaded 
Rep. Christopher Cannon, R-Utah. ``We must argue our views, we must 
look for facts and characterizations that favor our side.'' But lurking 
about the 105th Congress are some of the darker insights of the Founding 
Fathers about partisanship, or factionalism, as it was then termed. 
``The latent causes of faction are sown in the nature of man,'' cautioned 
James Madison, the Constitution's architect, in the Federalist Papers. 
``An attachment to different leaders, ambitiously contending for pre-eminence 
and power,'' he warned, has ``divided mankind into parties, inflamed 
them with mutual animosity.'' Madison's words might well be carved 
in House stone in qualification of the more idealized Capitol chiselings 
on nonpartisanship that urge debaters onward and upward. ``Not long 
ago, partisanship was a tool with which one accomplished a policy 
agenda,'' said former Rep. Pat Williams, a Democrat looking back from 
his new and gentler career as an environmentalist in Montana. ``Now 
it's a mechanism whereby one destroys the opponent, embarrasses his 
family and puts him in jail at the end of the day. I think the American 
people despise it.'' With similar regret, other Capitol Hill veterans 
insist there truly were better times of partisan disputation focused 
on ideas _ before ``to Bork'' was coined as a political attack verb, 
from the undermining of Republican Supreme Court nominee Robert Bork. 
Those were days, too, before Newt Gingrich wielded the partisanship 
of personal attack in destroying his Democratic rival, Speaker Jim 
Wright, in a scandal assault. There are old-timers aghast that these 
days Speaker Gingrich and Democratic House Minority Leader Dick Gephardt 
can barely tolerate each other's presence, while the late Democratic 
Speaker Tip O'Neill was a beloved buddy of Republican Minority Leader 
Bob Michel when the sun set each day on their legislative wrangling. 
``Don't forget, the Republicans had 40 years to collect grievances,'' 
said former Rep. M. Caldwell Butler, R-Va., recalling his party's 
decades in the House wilderness. He well remembers his freshman year 
in the minority on the Judiciary Committee, when the Watergate partisanship 
was indeed heavy-handed at first, despite the fabled Rodino gavel. 
But this ultimately eased. ``As you get near the nitty-gritty and 
the rules are ironed out, you start addressing the facts. And the 
inclination becomes less partisan and more specific between yourself 
and your own conscience and not the party,'' said Butler, a 10-year 
House veteran who finally voted to impeach. ``My own perception of 
it was that as the Democratic majority became more aware of the importance 
of having a bipartisan vote on impeachment, the deliberations became 
more bipartisan.'' Hyde is hoping for a similar syndrome, provided 
the nitty-gritty is deemed to be there in the case against Clinton, 
and presumably with such partisan factors as Gingrich himself offstage. 
Initially, at least, the Clinton case seems problematic for the furious 
tangle of partisan animus and factual dispute at its heart. To win 
over Democrats and the public, the Republicans must move beyond some 
members' plain detestation of Clinton as their partisan engine, and 
prevail on the firmer historical ground of a two-party adversary proceeding 
rooted in demonstrated fact and Constitutional principle. The House 
vote approving the inquiry had a slight protective coloration of bipartisanship, 
with 31 Democrats voting with the Republicans, in fear, perhaps, of 
being demagogued as blatantly tolerant of the president's transgressions. 
But Democrats are fearful of gross partisanship in the coming inquiry. 
David Schippers, the Republicans' Judiciary counsel, while trumpeting 
himself as a die-hard Democrat, incensed committee Democrats with 
an emotional postscript to his initial reading of the case against 
Clinton _ a caution that America's hallowed generations ``are looking 
down and judging what you do.'' Hyde quickly struck the moralizing 
remarks from the record, but Schippers was unapologetic. ``If they 
don't like what I said, that's too bad,'' he told reporters. The politics 
of personal attack are rooted in well-funded campaign stratagems that 
can dominate politicians' styles even before they arrive here. The 
public plainly eschews partisanship as the sort of device that infamously 
saw the government shut down in a budget fight. But historically, 
partisanship can be viewed as a clarifying agent as much as a muddling 
device when the great issues are at stake. In the furiously fought 
impeachment of President Andrew Johnson, who was finally spared by 
the margin of one Senate vote, the real issue was how punitively or 
magnanimously to re-integrate the South into the Union _ nothing less 
than how to make the country whole again. In the Senate censure of 
Andrew Jackson in 1834 after his scuttling of the national bank (a 
censure soon reversed), the issues were federal versus local power 
and the shape of the nascent economy at a critical juncture between 
agrarianism and industrialization. Big stuff, and again necessarily 
ugly, perhaps, in the tooth-and-claw partisanship of debate. And the 
Nixon impeachment was about a White House's array of criminal behavior 
finally closing in on the nation's leader, with congressional partisanship 
itself the nation's last best adversary device for testing the charges. 
``There never was a nonpartisan in politics,'' President Harry S. 
Truman fervidly insisted, amused at the very idea _ long before such 
phenomena as Watergate and Monica Lewinsky _ that any critical dispute 
in the life of a nation can be somehow devoid of partisanship. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>