<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0076 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Faced with the prospect of pictures of emaciated, malnourished children 
as well as thousands of deaths in southern Sudan, the world's governments 
launched Operation Lifeline Sudan and appealed for funds to meet the 
``emergency.'' The year was 1989. By truck, plane and barge, tons 
of food and medicine were delivered to the suffering in Africa's largest 
country, where a civil war was the root cause of the starvation. Now, 
nearly a decade and more than $2 billion later, the situation is virtually 
identical, despite what Operation Lifeline describes as one of the 
largest relief operations ever. The impoverished in southern Sudan 
are still starving and dying, and the war goes on. Operation Lifeline 
Sudan, a consortium of two U.N. agencies and 39 nongovernment relief 
organizations, has become institutionalized, with offices and a staff 
at the bucolic U.N. campus here issuing a steady flow of press releases. 
The organization is now spending $1 million a day on the relief effort. 
The expenditure will grow endlessly, relief officials said last week, 
unless there is an end to the war, which has already gone on for 15 
years. That seems remote, not least because neither the United States 
nor the European Union is trying very hard to negotiate a settlement. 
The State Department will soon declare Sudan an emergency _ for the 
10th consecutive year _ so that another $70 million to $100 million 
in U.S. disaster aid can be sent there this year, U.S. officials said. 
The total U.S. contribution during the last decade has been more than 
$700 million. Officials in Washington and at the relief organizations, 
unable to explain even to themselves how an emergency can last for 
a decade, now talk about an emergency that is ``complex'' or ``protracted.'' 
Semantics do not resolve a far more serious question about a conflict 
usually portrayed as pitting African Christians and animists in the 
south against Muslim Arabs in Sudan's north: Is the aid helping perpetuate 
the fighting, giving the factions what they need to carry on a war 
in which both sides are guilty of atrocities against civilians? ``Absolutely, 
absolutely,'' said a senior U.S. diplomat who has served in Sudan. 
``They talk about the war as between the north and south, but the 
donors are a major factor.'' ``No question,'' said a Clinton administration 
official in Washington. Knowing that those views would not sit well 
with many in Congress or at the White House, the officials did not 
want to be identified. But the same view was expressed in a dozen 
interviews over the last week, by diplomats, officials and aid workers 
from different countries. And it does not please the donor governments 
and relief agencies that rebel leaders have bluntly declared that 
they expect the aid to continue so the war can. ``People are thinking 
hard about this ethical dilemma,'' said a European Union relief official. 
It is hard to call for an end to the aid, relief officials say, knowing 
that it would mean starving children. But they acknowledge that no 
one has calculated whether more lives can be saved in the long run 
by substantially reducing aid to press the parties to stop the war. 
The U.N. relief operation is now supplying food for about a million 
people in southern Sudan, and the death rate, which was as high as 
63 per 10,000 population in some areas a few months ago, has declined 
to about 3 per 10,000, relief officials said this week. ``It's wrong 
to make the humanitarian agencies the fall guys for the perpetuation 
of this war,'' said Brenda Barton, a spokeswoman here for the World 
Food Program, which is spending $154 million this year on the relief 
effort; UNICEF is the other U.N. agency that is part of Operation 
Lifeline Sudan. ``We're doing our job,'' Ms. Barton said. ``The politicians 
have to do theirs. Where are the governments who are funding this?'' 
The vast aid effort has allowed the United States and the European 
Union to avoid the more difficult task of pushing the parties to end 
the war, relief workers and diplomats agree. The war in Sudan is at 
once more complex and simpler than a Christian-Muslim, African-Arab 
conflict. Like most wars, ``it is basically about power and money,'' 
said a European diplomat who has followed the conflict for several 
years. Sudan's Arabs have long had both, and they do not want to share 
it. But if the rebels ever defeated the government, the warlords in 
the south, torn by ethnic loyalties and thirst for power, would turn 
their guns and forces on one another, students of the war and Sudan 
say. Recently, the strongest rebel leader at the moment, John Garang, 
the American-educated head of the Sudanese People's Liberation Army, 
delivered a blunt message to a U.N. delegation. ``The SPLA has decided 
to continue the war,'' he said, according to a diplomat. ``It is up 
to the international community to provide humanitarian aid.'' The 
delegation was ``outraged,'' the diplomat said. And at a recent meeting 
with the rebels, another European diplomat fairly shouted: ``What 
the hell has the SPLA done to help their people? Nothing.'' No rebel 
movement can succeed without the support of the people, and that requires 
that they be fed. Garang, whose soldiers always seem to have enough 
food, has no supply lines to get food or other stocks to the people 
in the south, which thus makes them dependent on the international 
relief effort. Although Operation Lifeline Sudan strives to be impartial, 
delivering relief to government areas as well, the overall aid program 
favors the rebels, relief workers and U.S. officials say. One of the 
principal nongovernment relief agencies working in Sudan is World 
Vision, a Christian organization that has its headquarters in Washington. 
World Vision, which has called on the U.S. government to reduce its 
ties to the Khartoum government, will double its programs in southern 
Sudan next year, to $20 million, with most of that money coming from 
the U.S. Agency for International Development. At the moment political 
efforts to end the war are in the hands of something called the Intergovernmental 
Authority on Development, which is made up of a half-dozen African 
countries. One senior European diplomat lamented that the group was 
``an excuse to do nothing,'' while acknowledging that the European 
Union did not have a strong, unified policy for ending the war. A 
senior U.S. diplomat said that Washington had ``no great interest'' 
in trying to end the fighting. He added that the United States could 
hardly play the role of a neutral mediator. The United States has 
long accused the Sudanese of harboring terrorists, and it recently 
launched a missile attack on a factory in the capital; at the same 
time, senior State Department officials have openly expressed sympathy 
for the rebels. The United States could, however, use its considerable 
influence with the rebels, European officials say, to help bring about 
a comprehensive cease-fire and an embargo on arms deliveries to both 
sides. If there is not ``some political movement'' toward ending the 
war, said a European relief official, the relief bill is going to 
soar. ``You ain't seen nothin' yet.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>