<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0018 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Suddenly, what is supposed to be the greatest season in American League 
history is drifting on a raft, like the one Orlando Hernandez rode 
out of Cuba. Suddenly, it is the Cleveland Indians, not the Yankees, 
who look like the team that won 114 regular-season games and was believed 
to have a dugout reserved for it in the World Series. Suddenly, Joe 
Torre's patience doesn't seem to be that much of a virtue, and the 
Yankees, for the first time since they gathered in Tampa, Fla., almost 
eight months ago, have to prove they can defeat a most unfamiliar 
opponent called adversity. The Indians, with Ya-Gotta-Believe now 
written all over them, didn't need 12 innings here Friday night, and 
didn't need help from the umpires, or more brain lock from Chuck Knoblauch. 
The Yankees didn't have anyone to blame but themselves, as George 
Steinbrenner _ stone-faced in his box, furious at the thought of losing 
to the city of his birth _ will certainly remind Torre before the 
Yankees get back on the field for Game 4 on Saturday night. The Indians 
manhandled the Yankees, 6-1, at Jacobs Field, treating Andy Pettitte 
like the batting practice pitcher, while the Yankees made Bartolo 
Colon _ a guy with a reliable fastball and not much more _ look like 
Bob Gibson. They kept hitting the ball to Omar Vizquel, who is about 
as good as it gets at shortstop. They produced the grand total of 
four hits and, trailing by two games to one in the four-of-seven-game 
American League Championship Series, now give the ball to a rookie 
who a year ago was watching his playoff baseball at a Cuban CNN bureau. 
Now the real drama begins, and we will find out how much greatness 
these Yankees really have in them. A year ago, the Yankees coasted 
to the playoffs as the wild card, and wilted in the face of playoff 
pressure. There was nothing close to a crucial game for them this 
season either, which certainly wasn't their fault. But here they are, 
down a game in the series, facing two more on the road, not hitting 
a lick, in the bowels of a pitching rotation that is up against a 
long ball lineup that awoke Friday night from a two-game slumber and 
used the bleachers for target practice against Pettitte, who had nothing. 
The pressure the Yankees are under now will surely not be reflected 
in Torre's words or his body language. Bill Parcells, a man Torre 
admires and vice versa, would be burying bodies in the back of the 
clubhouse by now, but that is not Torre's way. Like Bobby Cox with 
his Braves, Torre can only trust that all those regular-season victories 
_ an American League-record 114 in the Yankees' case _ will ultimately 
mean more for them than the 111 the Indians won in 1954, before losing 
the World Series in a four-game sweep. Torre tried a rare team meeting 
Friday afternoon, ``just to make sure, with everything that's been 
going on for the last day and half.'' ``I wanted to make sure that 
all the signs were right, and stuff,'' he said. It wasn't long before 
he discovered that Pettitte had, shockingly, almost no stuff at all. 
The Yankees manufactured a run off Colon in the first inning, but 
Jim Thome hit the first of his two home runs to right field in the 
second. Then Mark Whiten, who would later hit one of three fifth-inning 
home runs off Pettitte, doubled and soon scored on a single by Enrique 
Wilson. Getting beat by Thome and Manny Ramirez is one thing. Having 
to endure Whiten, a Yankee castoff last season after an off-field 
episode that would make Ken Starr blush, was like adding a can of 
kerosene to the fire. The truth is, Torre should have pulled Pettitte 
before the Indians' fifth-inning eruption blew the game open, and 
lightened whatever load there was on Colon. For two days, every time 
Torre was asked about Pettitte and his very shaky second half of the 
season, he referred his audience back to Game 5 of the 1996 World 
Series, a 1-0 shutout. ``I've always appreciated people who had faith 
in me and trust in me playing this game,'' he said. ``This is Game 
3 of a similar situation, on the road, and to do what he did in Game 
5, that will stay in my memory bank.'' This team has a track record 
with Torre, a championship and a season that at times seemed too good 
to be true. Maybe it was. Or maybe the Yankees have just been set 
up to prove the kind of greatness that comes from the heart, from 
the gut, from a man who earlier this summer faced life and death on 
a raft. The Yankees are in Orlando Hernandez's hands now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>