<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0116 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Firefighters in Tioga County were claiming victory Friday in a battle 
to recover burial costs and death benefits for a volunteer who died 
of a heart attack two years ago after a minor house fire. Many of 
the 1,200 volunteer firefighters in this upstate county along the 
Pennsylvania border had been planning to hold a demonstration about 
the case at the Oct. 31 meeting of the county Legislature, said Kevin 
Ford, the fire chief in Campville, a hamlet east of the village of 
Owego. But after the state Workers Compensation Board refused to review 
the county's appeal of the case Oct. 1, Ford said, the county's lawyers 
decided to drop a parallel lawsuit in state court. The volunteer who 
died, Guy Pollard, a former Newark Valley fire chief, suffered a heart 
attack in January 1996 while standing beside a fire truck requested 
of his department by neighboring Owego firefighters who were battling 
a minor house fire. While volunteer firefighters are unpaid, they 
are eligible for death benefits and lost wages under workers' compensation 
law if they die on the job. But Tioga County officials denied the 
claim filed by Pollard's wife, Sharon, and twice appealed compensation 
board decisions in her favor. The county's final administrative appeal 
was refused Oct. 1, without comment by the board. Joseph Sluzar, a 
lawyer who represented Mrs. Pollard in the case, said his client expected 
to receive $6,980 for funeral expenses and $400 a week in income retroactive 
to the date of the original workers' compensation decision a year 
ago. The $400 a week amounts to $20,000 a year, to which Mrs. Pollard 
would be entitled as long as she lives. The county, which is self-insured 
for workers' compensation claims, must also pay 9 percent interest 
on the awards for unpaid benefits, Sluzar said. The total award had 
not been calculated, he said. County Legislature Chairwoman Frances 
Leavenworth said the legal challenge was dropped after three consecutive 
administrative defeats, on the advice of the county's lawyers. Mrs. 
Leavenworth, R-Apalachin, added that the threatened protest by the 
volunteers did not affect the board's decision. She said it was responsible 
of county lawmakers to fight paying a claim that could potentially 
cost taxpayers as much as $500,000. ``What the Legislature did was 
the proper process in dealing with this claim,'' Mrs. Leavenworth 
said. Tioga County is not the only self-insured municipality fighting 
workers' compensation claims filed by the families of firefighters, 
said Tom LaBelle, the chief lobbyist for the State Association of 
Fire Chiefs. LaBelle said there had been a major jump in the number 
of cases over the last three years. The trend especially frustrates 
the organization, he said, because state law specifically presumes 
that a firefighter's fatal heart attack is a line-of-duty death, unless 
proved otherwise. ``There are more and more counties _ in particular 
for claims regarding malfunctions of the heart _ that fight tooth 
and nail,'' LaBelle said. ``I can guarantee, sitting in a house watching 
a football game, that same firefighter would not have suffered a heart 
attack.'' LaBelle, whose organization represents 15,000 career and 
volunteer fire officials in and outside New York state, says the appeals 
are penny wise and pound foolish. Firefighters who might otherwise 
take risky assignments now must weigh the consequences of their actions 
on their families, he said. About 83 percent of the roughly 132,500 
firefighters in 1,787 municipal fire departments are volunteers, according 
to state figures. ``You have that heart attack serving your community, 
and in repayment your community takes your widow to court over $50,000,'' 
LaBelle said in reference to the initial award of benefits. ``It's 
short-sighted.'' The cost of the county's legal battle was only $800, 
Mrs. Leavenworth said, since the Binghamton legal firm used in the 
case was on retainer. An October 1997 decision by Compensation Board 
Law Judge Geoffrey Wilk, however, ordered the county's self-insured 
fire district to withhold $8,000 as a lien on potential lawyer fees. 
The cost of such claims will soon increase. Gov. George Pataki signed 
a bill into law this summer increasing the lump sum benefits for a 
surviving spouse of a volunteer firefighter, and doubling the weekly 
payments and funeral benefits. It does not affect claims filed before 
Jan. 1, 1999. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>