<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981010.0075 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After surveying the Asian financial crisis, the World Bank has decided 
that a strong and independent news media could be an important protection 
against economic mismanagement and government malfeasance in developing 
nations. But as the economies of Asian countries and Russia go into 
free fall, the independent newspapers, magazines, television and radio 
stations these countries do have are being dragged down, and many 
are failing or being forced to scale back their activities by lack 
of money. In his address to the opening session of the annual meeting 
of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, World Bank 
president James Wolfensohn pointedly included ''the free flow of information'' 
as one of the ``essentials of good governance'' on which, he argued, 
sustainable economic progress depends. And earlier last week the World 
Bank was the host of a seminar on the role of the news media in holding 
governments accountable for their economic policies and fighting corruption 
and cronyism. World Bank officials, in mulling over the Asian debacle, 
say they have concluded that a freer, more aggressive and more critical 
news media in the region would have put a brake on the governmental 
corruption and theso-called crony capitalism that are widely seen 
as at the heart of today's economic mess. The World Bank is already 
financing training for journalists from the developing world. And 
while it has no plans to start financing news organizations there, 
officials say it will encourage charities, foundations and other aid-giving 
bodies to do more to strengthen fledgling news media throughout the 
developing world. ``A freer mass media would have challenged the quality 
of economic policy and encouraged a more vigorous public response 
to abuses'' says Mark Malloch-Brown, the World Bank's vice president 
for communications. The immediate challenge is not so much to create 
new newspapers or television stations as to save those that already 
exist from the deepening recession, which is gripping more than a 
quarter of the global economy. Some help is already on the way. Last 
week, international financier George Soros gave $10 million toward 
an $80 million fund he plans to create to help struggling, independent 
news organizations in Russia ride out the severe economic downturn 
in that country. ``With the Russian economy in its present state, 
many fledgling and established news organizations are threatened and 
some may already have failed'' Sasa Vucinic, director of the Media 
Development Loan Fund in Prague, told the World Bank seminar when 
he announced Soros' initiative. ``The media has no political independence 
without economic independence,'' he said. Many at the seminar agreed 
with the World Bank that a more crusading news media could have softened 
Asia's economic crisis, however complex the causes of the downturn 
may be. ``In my experience a genuine free flow of information can 
solve almost any problem,'' said Frances D'Souza of Article 19, a 
London-based anti-censorship organization. ``Corruption was not the 
only reason for the Asian crisis, but more objective reporting would 
have shown that these countries were building a mirage,'' noted Peter 
Eigen of Transparency International, which seeks to combat bribery 
and corruption around the world. Eigen said Denmark, Sweden and Finland, 
which Transparency International recently named as the three least 
corrupt countries in the world, also have the strongest freedom-of-information 
laws in Europe as well as the highest rates of newspaper readership. 
But some speakers cautioned that seemingly free news media can sometimes 
be caught by invisible shackles. Timothy Balding of the World Association 
of Newspapers, a Paris-based press organization, said Yugoslav President 
Slobodan Milosevic could tolerate an apparently free opposition press 
because the government's stranglehold on distribution virtually confined 
it to Belgrade, preventing it from circulating throughout the rest 
of the country. Balding said his organization is now financing an 
independent newspaper distribution system in Yugoslavia that allows 
opposition papers and magazines to reach six other Serbian towns in 
addition to Belgrade. Similarly, he pointed out that Nigeria's previous 
military ruler, Gen. Sani Abacha, allowed the local press considerable 
freedom to say what it liked about him and his regime because he was 
a tough-minded dictator who took no notice of what it wrote. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>