<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981016.0215 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A weakened typhoon Zeb approached islands in southern Japan on Friday 
after killing at least 74 people in the Philippines and six in Taiwan 
in a trail of destruction. With maximum sustained winds of 108 kph 
(67 mph), Zeb was located about 190 kilometers (118 miles) west of 
the island of Ishigaki in Okinawa prefecture, as of 4:00 p.m. (0800 
GMT), Japan's Meteorological Agency said. The typhoon was moving north-northeast 
at about 20 kph (12 mph) in the East China Sea, the agency said. Weather 
reports forecast rain for most of western and central Japan over the 
weekend. At least 35 domestic flights to southern Japanese destinations 
were canceled Friday, airline officials said. Disaster officials in 
the Philippines said the typhoon left at least 74 people dead, mostly 
due to drownings and landslides. At least one person died of electrocution, 
while another was bitten by a snake. Ten people were missing. The 
casualty figure is expected to rise because several mountain villages 
in the northern Philippines remain isolated. President Joseph Estrada 
flew Friday to the Cagayan Valley region, one of the hardest-hit areas, 
to inspect the damage. At least 103,000 people were forced to flee 
their homes in the Philippines because of flooding. Most have since 
returned home, but more than 10,000 people remained in 28 government 
shelters. Among the dead were two young brothers _ ages 2 and 4 _ 
killed when a hill unleashed tons of mud and debris on the town of 
Antipolo, just outside Manila. Their 6-year-old sister survived. In 
Benguet province, at least 10 people were killed and an undetermined 
number were missing after boulders, mud and debris crashed down a 
mountain and buried workers' quarters of the Luzon Hydroelectric Cooperative. 
In nearby Baguio City, five people died in separate landslides, and 
a 30-year-old South Korean student was killed when a section of road 
collapsed, plunging his car into a ravine, said Chief Inspector Ricardo 
Villena. ``There are so many reports of landslides that will keep 
us busy for a while,'' Villena said. At least five provinces have 
been declared in a state of calamity, to allow emergency funds to 
be released to these areas. Price control also has been established 
to prevent profiteers from taking advantage of the situation. In Taiwan, 
six people were dead and four missing after Zeb roared across the 
island Friday. Rivers in the Taipei area swelled their banks, and 
low lying urban areas in Taipei county were flooded by torrential 
rains. Residents were evacuated to safety by rescue workers patrolling 
through the night in inflatable boats. One woman was reportedly drowned 
in Taipei, and two persons were killed in eastern Hualien county when 
their car plunged into a flooded drainage ditch, the Interior Ministry's 
disaster rescue center reported. A man was killed in central Changhua 
county when a falling tree threw him from his motor scooter. In southern 
Tainan, a man riding a motor bike was killed by a shop sign loosened 
by raging winds. A man fishing off a breakwater in southeastern Taitung 
county was drowned and four more people were reported missing throughout 
Taiwan. One person was reported badly injured and nine treated for 
light injuries, the center said. Schools and offices were closed in 
most parts of the island Friday, and the stock exchange also suspended 
trading in the capital of Taipei. Among the four other people killed, 
one was smashed by a fallen billboard and one by a fallen tree. One 
person was swept out to sea by two-story high waves while fishing, 
while another died after being trapped overnight in heavy rain. Many 
international flights were canceled, and others arriving in Taipei 
were rerouted to Hong Kong, airport officials said. At its peak, Zeb 
reached ``super typhoon'' status, with sustained winds of 240 kilometers 
(150 miles) per hour and gusts measuring (295 kilometers) 184 miles 
per hour. Last month, Tropical Storm Vicki struck the northern Philippines, 
causing at least 52 deaths on land. A ferry also sank during the storm 
south of Manila, leaving 70 passengers drowned and 80 missing and 
presumed dead. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>