<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981016.0251 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The unexpected reduction in U.S. interest rates, and the surge that 
followed on Wall Street, sent Asian stock markets into a buying frenzy 
Friday that saw Singapore's bourse skyrocket by 9.2 percent and Hong 
Kong's by nearly 9 percent. But the dollar took another slide against 
the yen, which hurts Asian exporters, and some analysts said it won't 
take long for local concerns to override the benefits of America's 
moves. ``External problems may be eased by the U.S. rate cut, but 
the problems remain with Japan's domestic economy,'' said Kenji Karikomi, 
a general manager at Daiwa Securities in Tokyo. Across the board Thursday, 
the United States provided Asia's rattled and depressed markets with 
one good sign after another. For the second time in about two weeks, 
the U.S. Federal Reserve cut interest rates by a quarter-point. The 
surprise reductions ignited an explosive rally on Wall Street. The 
Dow Jones industrial average ended the day up 330.58 points, or 4.2 
percent, its third-biggest point gain in history. American economists 
also speculated that more rate cuts are imminent as the central bank 
tries to keep global economic turmoil from dragging the United States 
into a recession. In Singapore, the Straits Times Index hit the roof, 
rising 94.85 points, or 9.2 percent, to close at 1,119.6. Analysts 
credited the reduction in U.S. interest rates for lifting the index 
to its largest percentage gain, and its highest closing level, since 
February. In Hong Kong, the blue-chip Hang Seng Index rose 806.59 
points, or 8.9 percent, to close at 9,777.01 points, its highest level 
since May 11. Investors hoped that the territory's banks would once 
again follow the U.S. lead and reduce interest rates, too. And it 
turned out they were correct. Moments after the market closed, banks 
cut the deposit rate, a key lending rate in Hong Kong. The optimism 
on the index was clearest in property stocks, a sector that led all 
others with a 13.5 percent increase. The surge in volume indicated 
that cash-rich institutional investors are returning to the market, 
said Howard Gorges, director of South China Securities Ltd. in Hong 
Kong. In Tokyo, following three days of declines, the benchmark Nikkei 
Stock Average of 225 issues gained 285.17 points, or 2.2 percent, 
to close at 13,280.54. However, the U.S. currency bought 116.44 yen 
in late afternoon trading, down 2.29 yen from late Thursday in Tokyo 
and also below its late New York level of 116.75 yen overnight. Traders 
said the currency market in Japan is concerned that more rate cuts 
are likely as the Fed attempts to prevent the U.S. economy from slipping 
into a recession. The dollar has fallen sharply against the yen for 
two weeks, and that hurts exporters by making their products more 
expensive overseas, and reduces the value of their repatriated earnings. 
The success of key exporters such as Sony, Honda and Fujitsu has provided 
Japan one of the few brights spots in its economy, which is suffering 
its worst recession since World War II. Despite the stock surge, traders 
said the outlook of Tokyo's bourse remains weak. They said expected 
declines in corporate earnings and skepticism about new efforts by 
the government to bail out troubled banks have left investors pessimistic. 
``If anything, we expect the market to move downward in the short 
term,'' said Jason James, a strategist at HSBC James Capel Securities, 
in Tokyo. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>