<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981016.0924 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Angry Jewish settlers blocked the West Bank's north-south highway 
Friday and others burned tires after complaining that Palestinian 
police had detained, beaten and fired on two of their security officers. 
Palestinian security officials confirmed the two settler guards were 
briefly held, but denied they were roughed up. In Friday's protest, 
about 100 settlers, including children, laid an electricity pole across 
the highway to block traffic. Settlers sat on the pole and on boulders 
on the side of the road, reading from the Torah. Israeli troops directed 
motorists to an alternate route to avoid a traffic jam. After about 
an hour, the protesters dispersed. Later Friday some 50 settlers staged 
a protest on the road outside of the West Bank settlement of Ofra 
near Ramallah, burning tires and briefly blocking traffic, police 
spokesman Ofer Sivan said. The confrontation began Thursday evening 
when the security chief for nearby Jewish settlements and his deputy 
were patrolling the West Bank's north-south highway after repeated 
incidents of rock-throwing by Palestinians, according to a settler 
statement. The security officers' car was hit by rocks from a Palestinian 
car, the statement said. The two Israelis chased the car into the 
Palestinian-run town of Ramallah, where, they said, the attackers 
escaped into the residence of Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas. The 
settlers said Abbas' guards stopped the Israeli car, pulled out the 
two security guards, confiscated their weapons and equipment, beat 
them and fired on them. Later they were taken to the joint Israeli-Palestinian 
regional office and released. The Palestinian security officer, speaking 
on condition of anonymity, said the Israeli vehicle was stopped near 
Abbas' house because it appeared suspicious. The officer said the 
joint command was called, and its officers escorted the Israelis out. 
In the West Bank's Gush Etzion settlement bloc south of Jerusalem, 
shots were fired from a Palestinian village at a guard post near an 
Israeli settlement on Thursday night, Israel radio reported. No one 
was injured. Settler leaders are in Washington to accompany the summit 
meeting between Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat. They briefed one of Netanyahu's aides about 
the incident, and advised against handing more territory over to Arafat 
under the circumstances. Late Thursday night, Netanyahu aides at the 
summit telephoned high ranking army officers in the West Bank and 
told them that action should be taken against the Palestinian policemen 
involved in the incident and that the security guards' equipment should 
be returned to them, Army Radio reported. About 160,000 settlers live 
in the West Bank, among more than 1.5 million Palestinians. The settlers 
charge that any agreement to transfer territory to the Palestinians 
would endanger their security. Palestinians charge that armed settlers 
harass and threaten them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>