<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981016.0421 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Latin American leaders began arriving here Friday for a weekend summit 
to examine what they can do to shield their developing economies from 
volatile swings in world financial markets. At the annual Ibero-American 
Summit, the heads of state and government from Latin America, Spain 
and Portugal will discuss how to steer clear of financial turmoil 
that began in Asia, spread to Russia and now menaces Latin America. 
A joint declaration will be signed Sunday in this ancient port city 
on the Douro River in northern Portugal. Diplomats said there was 
consensus on the form of the final declaration which will center on 
the global financial crisis. The declaration ``calls on the international 
community, and Group of Seven countries in particular, to take the 
necessary measures to promote stability in international financial 
markets, which is a necessary condition for sustained economic growth,'' 
said Luis Augusto Castro Neves, of the Brazilian Foreign Ministry. 
Jittery investors have abruptly pulled cash out of Latin America with 
devastating effects on stock markets and currency reserves. Stock 
markets also fell in Portugal and Spain, heavy investors in Latin 
America. Latin America's leaders favor creating some kind regulatory 
system for global financial transactions that would place controls 
on speculators. They also want reforms that allow international financial 
institutions to head off crises rather than react to them with rescue 
packages. ``International institutions must be active in tackling 
crises like the recent one ... and contribute to stability,'' Portuguese 
Foreign Minister Jaime Gama said. ``Countries that have progressive 
policies should not be penalized, they should be given incentives,'' 
Gama added in reference to Latin American nations' efforts to modernize 
their economies. Cuban Foreign Minister Robert Robaina said his country 
had been experiencing an economic crisis for a long time. ``And the 
only thing we've learned is that if the little you have is shared 
better, that is the way to go,'' Robaina said. Cuba's Fidel Castro 
and Uruguayan President Julio Maria Sanguinetti were the first two 
leaders to arrive Friday morning. Castro, dressed in olive-drab military 
fatigues, joked with reporters about their working hours and congratulated 
Portugal for the Nobel Prize for literature going this year to Jose 
Saramago, a Portuguese writer. But the Cuban leader, who will host 
next year's summit, left politics aside in his airport remarks. Brazil, 
the continent's largest economy, is waiting for news of a dlrs 30 
billion bailout package from the International Monetary Fund. The 
presidents of the World Bank and InterAmerican Development Bank also 
were expected at the talks. The move by the U.S. Federal Reserve to 
cut interest rates Thursday boosted Latin America's financial markets, 
but analysts expected the reprieve to be short-lived because of deep 
concerns about the continent's economic health. The recent economic 
troubles stemmed in part from the structural weaknesses of Latin American 
economies. That has forced some leaders into gauging the need for 
unpopular reforms of their public finances, risking social unrest 
and political upheaval. A strike being waged by state employees in 
Colombia against a government austerity package offers a glimpse of 
the trouble that could arise. Meanwhile, Brazil is drafting an austerity 
package that will hit public spending, especially social security. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>