<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981016.0699 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As rain poured down on this tiny monarchy, Swazis trickled into the 
polls Friday to practice their peculiar form of democracy: voting 
in a country where parties are banned and the king rules absolutely. 
Police used tear gas to break up a demonstrations by about 100 protesters 
calling for greater democracy, the opposition said, but no arrests 
were reported. The heavy rain, fog and flooding probably kept many 
people at home as much as calls for a boycott by pro-democracy groups. 
U.S. observers reported no immediate irregularities in the voting. 
Police manned roadblocks on highways into the capital and patrolled 
downtown. Voters in this kingdom of 1 million people bordered by South 
Africa and Mozambique chose 55 representatives in the House of Assembly. 
The legislature acts mainly as a rubber stamp for the Cabinet appointed 
by King Mswati III, who was out of the country on a visit to the Far 
East to scout out foreign investment. The vote in one of the world's 
last absolute monarchies was closely watched in a part of Africa where 
democracy received a major boost with South Africa's first free elections 
in 1994. At the same time leaders of nearby countries like Namibia 
and Zimbabwe are showing increasing autocratic tendencies. Swaziland, 
once a sex-and-gambling playground for South Africans during the conservative 
years of apartheid, depends on tourism, timber and crops like sugar 
and tobacco. At a polling station in Lobamba, about 15 kilometers 
(9 miles) outside of Mbabane and past a small herd of cattle wandering 
across the highway, more than 300 people had voted by 11 a.m., election 
officials said. They lined up outside, wrapped in plastic or blankets, 
some of the men in traditional skirts and with a red feather in their 
hair -- sign of royal blood. The voters marked an X beneath the picture 
of their choice of candidates, who each represented a chiefdom in 
a district. ``I am voting here for my nation,'' said Siguphlu Semhlahla, 
a herbalist. ``I don't like any party. We follow our king.'' In the 
capital, it appeared most people had ignored calls by trade unions 
and opposition leaders to go to work instead of voting. No one who 
observed the boycott was willing to speak openly. Nationwide calls 
for a boycott were a success, claimed Mario Masuku, leader of the 
banned pro-democracy party PUDEMO, the People's United Democratic 
Organization. Masuku claimed that turnout was only 13 percent. Election 
officials declined to give figures on turnout, but have said about 
200,000 people were registered to vote, a bit less than half of those 
eligible. Turnout in the country's first vote, in 1993, was 17 percent. 
One group certainly did not vote. Widows during their two-year mourning 
period were banned from polling places set up on royal grounds because 
they are considered bad luck for the king, who has banned them from 
Parliament. Masuku called the government ``illegitimate,'' and said 
the king is ``not sincere about democratization.'' ``We are calling 
for a constitutional monarchy. We believe the monarchy is part of 
our culture, but the culture should be dynamic. It is a very expensive 
institution,'' said Masuku, who was one of three opposition figures 
whose house was searched this week. Mswati maintains a fleet of cars 
and four palaces. The state maintains his six wives and the hundreds 
of princes from the previous king, Subuzhu II, who had scores of wives. 
The king appoints 10 more members to the assembly, and 20 of the 30 
members of the Senate, who then choose 10 more senators on their own. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>