<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981016.0130.1487 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here's a book with something extra -- an extra one of everything. 
Jeanne Moos has the tribute to twins. Ever wondered what it's like 
to come face-to-face with your own face? Ever felt a twinge of twin 
envy? To have somebody that looks like you -- And sounds like you 
-- And breathes like you -- And talks like you -- And annoys you. 
On second thought, maybe we'd rather just read about it. Stand up 
Baldwin Norman. Stand up Baldwin Norman. From 83-year-old twins to 
infant twins, you'll find them in "the book of twins." After 80 years 
of being twins -- yes -- Would you recommend it? yes. Why not? "the 
book of twins" adds a new wrinkle to our concept of them. There are 
blind twins, twins who posed in "Playboy," twins who marry twins. 
You'll find everything from belly dancers with boa constrictors to 
undertakers? I mean, twin undertakers, it is kind of bizarre. Actually, 
Joe and vinnie Costa say they tend to lighten the mood of the bereaved. 
How do they react? They smile, or? -- Yeah, oh yeah. We don't dress 
alike. We don't, we never dress alike. Not on the job. The authors 
of "the book of twins," Debra and Lisa ganz, used to have a restaurant 
staffed by twins. Now they have a twins casting agency, and they dream 
of someday hosting a talk show. They sure do talk. We share everything 
in our lives, but we -- Do not share men. The book launch was teeming 
with twins from all over. Where you from? We're from Kazakhstan. And 
I'm from Tanzania. We chose to dedicate this book to twinless twins 
-- to people that have lost their twin. The book turns bittersweet 
with its portrait of richie boudreau, who lost his twin brother to 
cancer. We learned that twins sometimes develop their own language. 
We thought these guys were putting us on till we tested them. So tell 
me something. Your twin's not a bad looking guy. Scott and Wade Taylor 
say they put an "O-P" in front of every vowel sound. Gee thanks, I'm 
not a bad-looking guy. There are even three generations of twins. 
I didn't realize, twins tend to have twins. Well, I'm here to prove 
that it does happen. Here's more proof. That's your daddy. Right here, 
see? Daddy happens to be a twin cop. Twin trivia includes the top 
ten most annoying twin questions. Number one on the list -- Are you 
twins? At one point a bunch of triplets crashed the twin party. Good 
thing there weren't any mirrors. One time when I was 5, I ran into 
the mirror, and I thought it was George. But the most bizarre thing 
-- Bizarre? -- is how twins sound like stereo speakers. Thank you 
very much. Jeanne Moos, CNN, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>