<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981016.1600.0246 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton took time away from the mideast negotiations to 
congratulate this year's nobel peace prize winners. They come from 
opposite sides of the conflict in northern Ireland. Tom Mintier has 
more. It was the voices of moderation that may have convinced the 
nobel committee to award the peace prize to John Hume and David trimble 
-- two men who were once bitter enemies, but have now, apparently, 
put the past behind them to build a future for northern Ireland. Hume, 
the head of the predominately Roman Catholic social democratic and 
labor party, credited by many for steering the peace process when 
it seemed impossible. And trimble, the leader of the Ulster unionist 
party who turned away from being a hard-liner to a moderate. Both 
will split a cash prize of nearly 1 million U.S. dollars. I think 
it's a clear, strong endorsement of the decision by the paramilitary 
organizations to end their campaign. I hope very much that this award 
doesn't turn out to be premature, because there's much work to be 
done to secure peace in northern Ireland. And I hope they're able 
to achieve that. Supporters of Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams had hoped 
he would be on the list as well. But Adams says the prize is peace. 
The big prize is the peace settlement, and that's the prize for us 
all to keep our eye on, and that's the prize which is worth achieving. 
And the nobel peace prize is only important insofar as it AIDS the 
road and the quest for that bigger prize. While the odds were high 
that northern Ireland's peace process would win the prize, the determination 
of just who would get it may have been problematic. The fact that 
some of the extremists were not included is a recognition that memories 
in northern Ireland are still very fresh. And the idea of rewarding 
Gerry Adams for delivering IRA cease-fire may have been tempting, 
but I think the political reaction in northern Ireland would have 
been quite severe. British prime minister Tony Blair called the selection 
another step toward real peace. Let's use it in a way, not just to 
Mark the progress we have made, but as a spur to get the rest of it 
done, and to get in place a really lasting settlement for the future. 
The nobel committee director says his group cannot determine war and 
peace in the world and that the prize is not a magic wand in world 
conflicts. But this year's prize may be a reward, not so much for 
past deeds, but for a work still in progress. Tom Mintier, CNN, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>