<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981016.2100.2974 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With us tonight with his views on this Pope, one of only 12 to serve 
for 20 years, Carl bernstein, longtime "Washington Post" journalist 
and co-author of among other books, "his Holiness -- John Paul II 
and the history of our time." Carl is with us tonight from New York, 
having I assume attended a formal affair tonight, Carl. yes. Not in 
honor of the Pope. By how much has he redefined the job? He's redefined 
the job by becoming a world figure of such great importance that no 
modern Pope has achieved anything close to his role in the world as 
both a political player and as a powerful spiritual Shepherd. He's 
often called of course the most traveled Pope. That is a combination 
of the jet age and his extraordinary personal energy. Do you think 
that part of what he's done to the papacy will live on? He's really 
made it mobile. Well, this Pope has been seen and heard by more individuals 
than any -- by more people than any person in the history of the earth. 
That is quite a remarkable achievement. I think what we need to understand 
about this Pope that makes him unique is that he combines incredible 
geopolitical ingenuity with incredible spiritual power. He has used 
that power to be one of the most forceful figures of the 20th century. 
Your book takes on this man who is of course at his very root such 
an extraordinarily religious man, always his contemplative nature, 
every spare second is spent praying when he's not looking after the 
business of this sweeping and vast church. How has he changed with 
the 1990's? He's under a lot of fire in his last statement which he 
signed just days ago addresses that and says let's stick to our core 
values. He beliefs in the perennial theology of the Catholic church, 
and there are many people in his church, in the west particularly, 
who disagree with aspects of that theology, especially in regard to 
matters of sex and women. At the same time, he is a spokesman for 
universal human values, for human rights on a scale that no other 
person has been, certainly in the last part of this century, perhaps 
Nelson Mandela. This is somebody who takes to every country in the 
world and talks about the other, meaning those who are excluded by 
race, those who are excluded by poverty, those who are excluded by 
physical deformity, and embraces them and has committed his church 
to their well-being. He is a truly remarkable man. And he jumps into 
politics with both feet and with no apparent fear. With no apirnte 
fear, partly because he believes that his politics are guided by the 
holy spirit. He is Polish, and that has informed him more than any 
other factor in his life. He is the first Pope since Peter to grow 
up in a Jewish milieu. He grew up in the heart of European jewery 
in prewar Poland in a town that was 25% Jewish. He has established 
the best relations the Catholic church has ever had with Jews, has 
recognized the state of Israel. Almost everything about this Pope 
is unique in our lifetime. Wlile you were talking we were watching 
him in Poland where of course he is beyond revered. Carl, what is 
the latest best-known information on the state of his health? The 
tremor in his arm is now so noticeable is as his lunched-over appearance. 
He has Parkinson's. It seems to be a slow-developing form of Parkinson's. 
It seems not to have affected his mind. He has occasionally experienced 
temporary blackouts when he fell and broke his hip that was one of 
those occasions. The Vatican doesn't quite like to acknowledge that's 
what happened. But this is is a very determined man who wants to preside 
over the millennium, who still believes that he has in him to, as 
he puts it, to retrace the steps of Abraham through the Arab lands, 
through Israel, through the holy land. He's got an agenda, and I think 
that those who know him and those who have studied him have a feeling 
that he's got a good bit left to do, that the Parkinson's is moving 
slowly and it moves slowly in older people. So a few more years left 
on both body and mind? Look, nobody knows that, not in the medical 
profession, not in the journalistic profession. I think the Pope is 
in contact with people who know more about that than we do. Scarl 
bernstein. Good note to end on. A well-dressed Carl bernstein tonight. 
Thank you very much for coming in. The book is "his Holiness -- John 
Paul II and the history of our time." It is out in trade paperback 
now. Thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>