<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981016.1830.0923 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Wyoming -- where Matthew shepard was born now it is trying to understand 
how this could have happened there. NBC's Pete Williams, a native 
son, has gone back to Wyoming to take the measure of his home state 
during this difficult time. At the fall livestock exchange in glenrock, 
30 miles away from the funeral service, ranchers gathering to sell 
their cattle wondered how something so brutal could happen in such 
a peaceful place. I'm sad that we're like this. I'm sad that we're 
human, that we cannot tolerate each other and learn to get along and 
just love each other no matter what we're like. Many of the 480,000 
people in this state, that prides itself on fair play, say they're 
stunned at the savagery of the killing at the hands, apparently, of 
two bullies who chose a victim barely five feet tall. The people, 
shocked, too, at the apparent anti-gay motive in a state that doesn't 
have a single gay hangout. We're not a gay neighborhood of San Francisco, 
but it's part of society. It's not anything that's an issue to us. 
Many here worry shepard's death will only reinforce a stereotype that 
this is a part of the sparsely populated west where people resent 
anyone who's not of their own kind. You know, you hear this is a redneck, 
cowboy state. And it's just not right. As a matter of fact, Cowboys, 
they probably have the biggest heart of people that you could meet. 
The unofficial motto of Wyoming might be -- "live and let live." A 
state where people keep to themselves. This has never been a battleground 
for civil rights. So it's surprising how Matthew shepard's death has 
touched so many. Some people who never knew him brought Flowers to 
his church, like this casper woman who says his death hit her hard, 
as a mother. It doesn't matter whether he's gay or not. It was somebody's 
child who was brutally murdered. At the junior high school that Matthew 
shepard attended, students posted messages and wrote poems calling 
for an end to hate. It took a good man's heart put to rest to show 
that if you are different, that doesn't make you less. At Wyoming's 
largest newspaper, one reporter decided to write a column this week, 
revealing that he's gay, to show that he's not afraid to live in his 
home state. We will not be the hate state for the rest of the union. 
We will not be the candlelight vigil state. We will not be tarred 
by faraway cities and media organizations as being a hateful place. 
We will not tolerate it. In a state where harsh weather is the biggest 
threat to survival, people struggle to understand how one of their 
own could have died of a different kind of exposure to cruelty. Pete 
Williams, NBC news, casper, Wyoming. This footnote -- Matthew shepard's 
will be laid to rest tomorrow in casper, Wyoming. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>