<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0166 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chrysler threw a party here recently to mark the 15th anniversary 
of the minivan _ a vehicle it invented. The entertainment included 
film footage of the first advertisement for a minivan, which featured 
the magician Doug Henning. He demonstrated the innovative features 
like the front-facing third-row seat, the sliding door for back-seat 
passengers, the cargo bay and the low step into what he called the 
``magic box.'' Indeed, the minivan has enchanted the American public. 
Every year, about 1.2 million minivans are sold, and Chrysler, despite 
the increasing number of new entries over the years from nearly every 
major auto maker, still captures about 45 percent of the market. Now 
Honda has arrived at the minivan party with a new model, the 1999 
Odyssey, which is just arriving at showrooms and is even more magical 
than Chrysler's offerings. It's Chrysler's toughest competition yet. 
Honda stuck with the Odyssey name, the same name as its first minivan 
introduced in December 1994 as a 1995 model, which never achieved 
much sales success. Despite the name, the new model bears little resemblance 
to the quirky original. Much larger than its predecessor, the new 
Odyssey matches Chrysler's long-wheelbase minvans, sold as the Dodge 
Grand Caravan and Plymouth Grand Voyager, and Ford's Windstar in dimensions. 
Its styling is in keeping with the most popular minivans, the Chryslers, 
the Windstar and the General Motors family of vans. Though larger 
than its predecessor, the new, Canadian-built Odyssey carries a smaller 
price tag than the previous Odyssey, which was too small and underpowered 
to warrant its expensive cost. The Odyssey starts at $23,615 with 
destination fees. With few options because so many features are standard, 
it tops out at around $26,000. That puts the Odyssey in the realm 
of most mainstream minivans as they are popularly equipped. Indeed, 
Chrysler offers minivans that start under $20,000, but that is for 
short-wheelbase models equipped with small engines. Add the long wheelbase, 
one of the larger V6 engines, a four-speed automatic transmission 
and other options and the price pushes up to the mid-$20,000s. Likewise, 
the base price for the Ford Windstar, which can be equipped with a 
small V6 engine instead of the 3.8-liter V6 that 90 percent of its 
buyers order, is less. Adventurous minivan designs _ typified by GM's 
previous generation of vans, which resembled those popular minivacuum 
cleaners _ have fallen flat as most buyers apparently prefer conservative 
styling. The Odyssey does feature interesting creases in its sheet 
metal, as with the lines that form a ``V'' on its hood. The lines 
give its form distinctive definition compared with the smooth, jelly 
bean surfaces of the Chrysler models. The new Odyssey features four 
doors, including two rear sliding doors instead of the hinged doors 
of its predecessor. Both sliding doors operate electronically on the 
top-of-the-line EX; they are manual on the LX version. (I tested both.) 
The power doors can be opened and closed by pushing toggle switches 
to the left of the steering wheel on the dashboard as well as using 
buttons on the key fob. Or, pull the handles and the doors electronically 
open, a plus with independent children like mine who insist on opening 
their own doors. Inside the Odyssey, the magic show begins. The second-row 
seats move sideways on tracks that allow you to create a bench seat 
or separate them into two captain's seats. (The new Ford Windstar 
offers a similar feature.) The seats are also completely removable. 
The Odyssey seats seven passengers, and all have headrests and three-point 
seat belts. Patterned after an airliner, the Odyssey is equipped with 
individual lighting and air vents. A central control in front allows 
the driver to turn off lights or adjust the air-conditioning throughout 
the cabin. Power-operated rear quarter-windows open to provide a breath 
of fresh air to back-seat passengers. Outfitted in high-quality, two-tone 
materials, the Odyssey, available initially only with cloth upholstery, 
contains numerous features to make family travel comfortable and convenient. 
A table, designed after one in Honda's CR-V sport utility vehicle, 
stretches between the front seats. Two cup holders big enough for 
water bottles and coffee mugs are at the front of the table (another 
pair pulls out from the center dash); two more extend rearward for 
convenient access by passengers in the back seat. When not in use, 
the table folds flat against the passenger seat for clear passage 
to the rear of the van. Throughout the cabin, the Odyssey contains 
more cup holders as well as loads of bins, pockets and cargo nets 
for storage. Power outlets are situated in the center console and 
in the rear cargo compartment. My favorite feature of the Odyssey 
_ the feature that sets the Odyssey above all others, in my view _ 
is the third-row seat. Removing the third-row seat of most minivans 
is a nearly impossible task for one person. As a single mother, I 
don't even bother. In the Odyssey, however, simply fold the seat's 
back forward, yank the strap and the third seat does a disappearing 
act into a well in the floor. The only danger is catching your fingers 
as the seat folds into the floor. After a thorough cleaning of my 
garage and attic, I loaded the back end of the platinum EX test model 
with old toys and clothing. After delivering my haul to the Salvation 
Army, I returned the third seat to its seating position and proceeded 
directly to the soccer field for car-pool duty. Any other minivan 
would have required a return home to reinstall the third seat. When 
the seat is upright, the well in the floor of the cargo bay provides 
a large, secure area for cargo. After a shopping trip, I loaded a 
large box in the well and placed grocery bags on top of it. On trips, 
the well serves as a perfect location for an ice chest and suitcases, 
leaving plenty of room for other items to be stowed on top. With the 
third seat folded into the floor and the second-row seats removed, 
one can haul a 4-by-8 sheet of plywood on the flat floor or on top 
of the folded seats. Chrysler argues that the design, which it has 
considered, prevents installation of all-wheel drive. I contend, however, 
that for most drivers, the Odyssey's front-wheel drive offers plenty 
of traction for winter conditions. Plus, traction control is standard 
on EX models. Indeed, Chrysler still offers the widest choice in minivans, 
ranging from basic to luxurious, cheap to expensive. They come in 
short or long wheelbases, with different engines and transmissions 
and with front-wheel or all-wheel drive. The Odyssey, except for the 
two trim levels, comes with relatively few choices, but it is loaded 
with standard features. It's only engine is a smooth, quiet 3.5-liter 
V6 rated at 210 horsepower, more than any minivan on the market, for 
confident cruising at highway speeds. Its 229 foot pounds of torque, 
exceeded only by the new Ford Windstar, comes in handy for quick getaways 
at traffic lights. The engine is paired with a four-speed electronic 
transmission that shifts almost imperceptibly. The Odyssey's four-wheel 
independent suspension provides a smooth, quiet ride. As do most recent 
vintage minivans, the Odyssey handles as a much smaller vehicle would. 
While handling is by no means like that of a sports car, the Odyssey 
provides plenty of grip around curves. It is nimble and maneuverable 
in squeezing into parking spots. The Odyssey is equipped with large 
brakes, which provide confidence in stopping; and anti-lock brakes 
are standard. The list of standard features is long: air- conditioning, 
theft deterrent, cruise control, audio system with cassette. The EX 
adds, among other items, a power driver's seat, an audio system with 
CD player, automatic climate control and Homelink to open garage doors 
and security gates by remote control. Only side air bags are noticeably 
absent. With only one plant to Chrysler's two, Honda doesn't have 
the volume to ruin Chrysler's minivan party, but it likely will steal 
some of Chrysler's cake. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>