<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0219 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Massimo D'Alema, a former Communist and leader of the largest leftist 
party in Italy, was selected Friday to try to form a new government. 
D'Alema, 49, was chosen after Acting Prime Minister Romano Prodi, 
who resigned after losing a confidence vote last week, failed to gather 
enough support in Parliament to form a new government. If D'Alema 
succeeds in cobbling together a majority among Italy's many splintered 
political factions, Italy will fit even more closely with the European 
wave of social democratic governments or at least some of them. Prodi, 
a pragmatic economist with centrist views, was closer in outlook to 
Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain. In background and political 
approach, D'Alema resembles the Socialist prime minister of France, 
Lionel Jospin, and Gerhard Schroeder, the German chancellor-elect. 
Like them, he will face the challenge of marrying social democratic 
aspirations with the austerity measures already written into a unified 
European economic system. ``I feel the weight of conflicts and expectations,'' 
D'Alema said after accepting the mandate. ``And I will try to do what 
I can do to lessen the conflicts and to not betray the expectations.'' 
D'Alema was also referring to the narrow political shoals he has been 
maneuvering in his search for a majority. The leader of Democrats 
of the Left, a party he helped form out of the embers of the Italian 
Communist party after the fall of the Soviet Union, he said he thought 
he could count on the support of some Communists and also on a small 
center-right party led by Francesco Cossiga. If D'Alema and Cossiga 
reach agreement, it would put D'Alema in the position of leading a 
center-left coalition with more centrist votes in it than his more 
moderate predecessor had. D'Alema explained his entente cordiale with 
Cossiga, a former Christian Democrat and president of Italy, this 
way: ``President Cossiga is telling our country that the Cold War 
is over and that the men and ideas that openly fought for many years 
can also collaborate.'' Opposition leaders, including Silvio Berlusconi, 
the media tycoon and former conservative prime minister, were outraged 
by Cossiga's defection, calling it a fraud. D'Alema is counting on 
another fallout from the end of the Cold War: the split among the 
Communists that occurred after hard-liners withdrew their support 
from Prodi. Prodi's coalition relied on Communist Refounding, the 
party that remained after leaders like D'Alema became ex-Communists 
and formed new, non-Marxist factions. The general secretary of Communist 
Refounding, Fausto Bertinotti, refused to accept the 1999 budget. 
That drove Armando Cossutta, president of Communist Refounding, to 
quit and form his own party, unwilling to be associated with the Communists 
who caused the leftist government to collapse. D'Alema made it clear 
he was not planning to horse-trade to win Bertinotti back into the 
fold. ``I turn to him and say that his request that we redraft the 
budget is mistaken. It is a good budget. And if his `no' does not 
change, it means the government will have to be formed from the political 
parties that accept the budget.'' Italy badly needs to pass a budget 
that cuts $9 billion from the deficit to meet the requirements to 
enter the single European monetary unit, the euro, on Jan. 1, 1999. 
And Italy also badly needs to regain an image of stability, which 
was shaken by the defeat of Prodi, who managed to get Italy into the 
euro with stringent fiscal austerity measures in his two and a half 
years in office _ the second-longest period in postwar history. Loyal 
to Prodi even when Communist hard-liners rebelled against Prodi's 
centrist policies, D'Alema never successfully hid his ambition to 
succeed Prodi. Their styles are very different: Prodi, a low-key, 
self-deprecating former economics professor, was an approachable technocrat. 
D'Alema, a former head of the Communist youth league and editor of 
the Communist newspaper Unita, is a lifelong politician who is described 
even by his friends as reserved and humorless. But both men share 
a desire to reform Italy's fractured and chronically unstable political 
system by introducing a two-party system. D'Alema led a drive in Parliament 
to amend the constitution accordingly, but suffered a humiliating 
defeat when Berlusconi pulled the plug. Friday night, he vowed to 
resume the effort, saying, ``This crisis highlights the defect in 
our system and requires a new government and a rekindling of a dialogue 
so that in the remainder of the term, we can tackle electoral reform 
and constitutional change.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>