<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0211 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At lunchtime Friday, as Shkurte Ismajli was kneading dough in a tin 
pan on the floor of her makeshift kitchen in this village, she heard 
the thud of a mortar. Then sniper fire. Then the sound of a truck, 
loaded with Serbian policemen as it rumbled by and headed for the 
nearby school house where the Serbs had staked out a position for 
firing against the rebel Kosovo Liberation Army across the valley. 
This was not a major battle of the conflict in Kosovo, but the exchange 
of fire and the movement of Serbian security policemen on the third 
day of a NATO deadline suggested that sporadic fighting was continuing 
in the province. The incident, high on a lush green mountain ridge, 
indicated how difficult it will be for the 2,000 unarmed monitors 
who are expected to arrive here in the coming weeks to insure that 
the Serbian military has withdrawn soldiers and policemen as called 
for in an agreement brokered by U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke. Some 
of the 50 diplomatic monitors who have been working in Kosovo for 
the last four months and who will form the leadership of the 2,000 
international monitors are asking questions: What happens during fighting 
like Friday's if one side decides to take a monitor as a hostage? 
Who are the monitors going to report their daily findings to? And 
what are the levels that the Serbian troops are allowed to keep? How 
many troops are supposed to leave? So far, said a monitor from the 
European Union, a few matters like these have not been decided. ``There 
will be 50 of us to begin with,'' he said. ``We are being asked to 
do intrusive observations _ and what is our security?'' The monitor 
said he was not convinced that a NATO rapid reaction force based in 
the Adriatic was adequate protection for unarmed civilians who would 
be asked to check on whether troops were in barracks and whether the 
security police had pulled out. NATO on Friday extended by 10 days 
the deadline for Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to comply with 
the demands of the agreement he made with Holbrooke. Initially, the 
deadline expired early Saturday morning. Then, an ``activation order,'' 
permitting NATO air strikes, was scheduled to come into effect if 
Milosevic had not made sufficient progress in pulling out troops. 
The grace period, granted at a NATO meeting in Brussels on Tuesday, 
appeared to give ``fudging time'' that was needed for a variety of 
reasons. It allowed Milosevic to proceed with his withdrawal and yet 
not force NATO to attack. And it gave the underfinanced and understaffed 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the 54-nation 
Vienna-based group, which has been asked to organize the 2,000 monitors, 
more time to gather the group. Diplomats said there was concern about 
a vacuum if the deadline for Milosevic expired and there were only 
a handful of monitors on the ground in Kosovo. The chairman of the 
Vienna organization, Bronislaw Geremek, signed an agreement in Belgrade 
on Friday authorizing the 2,000 monitors to come to Kosovo with Yugoslav 
Foreign Minister Zivadin Jovanic. Geremek said he had received offers 
of 800 volunteers from member countries, which include the United 
States and Russia. But he was not specific about how long it would 
take to train, equip and station the monitors in the countryside, 
where more than 250,000 ethnic Albanian refugees who have been uprooted 
by the fighting are waiting to return to their villages. One of the 
roles envisioned for the monitors is to provide a security blanket 
to the refugees as they struggle back to ruined homes, where Serbian 
forces have burned roofs, interiors, and food supplies, cut electricity, 
stolen household goods and killed livestock. In Kraljane, a fairly 
well-to-do village in an area of strength for the separatist guerrillas, 
it was clear that the presence of outside monitors could be of significant 
psychological and practical help in persuading residents to come back 
and restore their shattered lives. The village was shelled and many 
houses burned by the Serbs in late August and has remained largely 
uninhabited ever since. In many ways, because it was virtually empty, 
the village presented an ideal base for the Serbian forces who wanted 
to fire out of the village toward suspected guerrillas bases around 
Jablanica, a stronghold of the Kosovo Liberation Army. Mrs. Ismajli, 
47, said she and her family of 10 children had come back here 10 days 
after fleeing in August. They have tried to rebuild part of their 
burned home, which is a series of buildings grouped around a courtyard 
with fruit trees and roaming chickens. Serbian forces in two armored 
personnel carriers and several trucks began rolling by her home _ 
which like many in this region is surrounded by a high wall _ on Thursday 
afternoon, she said. Her eldest children, young men in their 20s, 
immediately fled into the hills because they were frightened of being 
captured as suspected guerrillas. The younger children aged 9 and 
up were terrified Friday, and remained huddled behind the garden door. 
One of the concerns in such a situation, Mrs. Ismajli said, was that 
if the Serbian forces suffered casualties from the guerrillas, her 
family could become targets of revenge. ``They are still not leaving 
us alone, even though we've chosen to come back to our burned-out 
house,'' said Mrs. Ismajli, her hands covered with flour and her voice 
trembling with emotion. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>