<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0108 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Raised working-class, I've often experienced pangs of hot guilt over 
my desires _ not the sexual ones, but the retail ones. Whenever I 
buy something expensive and wholly unnecessary, I make a vow to do 
more for the struggling classes, to donate the clothes in the back 
of my closet to the Salvation Army and to clean my apartment thoroughly. 
Put it this way: a while ago, I bought a Rolex. Today, I'm a Catholic 
Big Brother. I accepted the penance (and my impish Little Brother, 
Angel) because I have felt my Rolex Datejust and I were bound by fate. 
There are books you must read in your life, and cities you must travel 
to and a few things you must own. A Rolex was on top of my list for 
three decades. For years, I waited. I had student loans to pay and, 
besides, I was a struggling freelance writer who did legal proofreading 
at night. A bright, shiny Rolex would have mocked me every day of 
my penurious existence. So I postponed my dream of owning one. But 
I did become a student of the watch and its role in the world. Probably 
too serious a student, looking back. Rolex's significance to people 
everywhere is obvious. Nice houses, German sedans and Paris vacations 
are all well and good, but the Swiss watch remains the premier mainstream 
symbol of Really Making It in America. Rappers rap about their diamond-encrusted 
ones; football players buy one the first day after they're picked 
high in the draft. And Wall Street is still loyal to the five-pointed 
crown. Rolex is the main noun in the international language of success. 
Several years ago, my father came to New York for a visit. We never 
saw the Statue of Liberty, but I did buy him a fake Rolex from the 
African vendors who hawk them near the Liberty Island ferry slip in 
lower Manhattan. Even though it cost only $25, my father wears his 
Rolex only on special occasions, like weddings. Even if it's fake, 
it was made in the image of something not fake _ something that has 
deep secular significance to him. A Rolex meant more to me than middle-class 
aspiration: it is a man's watch first. Growing up, its mythology was 
all around me. James Bond wore one, which doomed a fan like me to 
imagine that the watch was a necessary accessory for any he-man exploits. 
Foreign correspondents propped before exotic desert locations tend 
to wear the fat Submariner model. People who set world records, or 
die trying, favor the Explorer II. Plus, a Rolex is international 
currency: You can sell one for emergency cash in Morocco or Zanzibar 
(or in Las Vegas for a gambling stake, as Tom Cruise does in ``Rainman''). 
If you need a gallon of gasoline to get across the last stretch of 
desert, how are you going to haggle with some fussy little timepiece 
in your hand? Most Tuaregs I know don't mess with Patek. The drawback, 
of course, is the watch's history as the official watch of the ruling 
class, the bauble of the robber barons and the rich boys at college 
who drove from Chemistry to Romantic Lit in their Jags. I just had 
to believe my personality would overcome the watch's dark side. Maybe 
it was me, but Rolex popped up everywhere in my life. In my favorite 
television show of all time, ``Tales of the City,'' a nurse shows 
off the watch her beau just gave her. ``Tag or a Rolex?'' shouts another 
nurse excitedly. I understood the question: my watch at that time 
was a Tag Heuer, a fine sports timepiece, but I knew it was just a 
substitute, a look-alike, warming up my wrist for the daddy of all 
watches. That nurse was right: a Tag meant one thing (``Thanks for 
last night, hot stuff''), a Rolex another (``Marry me?''). The Rolex's 
power is such that it even attracts people who have no real clue about 
why they want to own one. I was watching a ``20/20'' episode inspired 
by ``The Millionaire Next Door,'' the best-selling book about extremely 
thrifty rich people. Tom Stanley, its author, told the ``20/20'' correspondent, 
``The typical millionaire in the United States never spent more than 
$235 for the most expensive watch.'' But the newswoman spotted something 
on the wrist of one thrifty millionaire named John Shmilenko. She 
zeroed in: ``Well, that's got to cost a lot of money!'' she said triumphantly. 
But Shmilenko was ready. ``Well, actually, it cost $25,'' he answered. 
``I bought it in Mexico. It's a fake Rolex.'' Only in America would 
a millionaire wear a fake Rolex instead of a Casio. One cultural phenomenon 
struck me through my years of preparation: Rolex's resistance to mass-marketization. 
Once the masses discover an ornament of the wealthy, rich people practically 
throw it off their bodies as if it were made of garlic _ or polyester. 
But the Rolex has been the exception to the rule. Collectors and watch-heads 
prefer Patek Philippe (30,000 hand-finished watches a year, versus 
Rolex's mass-produced 800,000 units). Still, there has been no shunning 
of the watch in high places. It's still a high-roller's choice and 
part of the stockbroker's uniform. Even as the market falls, it is 
a reminder of the opulent '90s _ and a pagan amulet against the bear. 
Finally, three years ago, I received a substantial check from a magazine. 
My student loan was paid off. I owned an inexpensive co-op. I had 
no relatives who needed to be bailed out. At long last, I was ready. 
Now, I entered the shops I had only ferociously window-shopped before. 
I rolled the nautical Rolex vocabulary across my tongue with salesmen: 
Oyster and Sea-Dweller and Submariner. At a posh Upper East Side shop, 
I chose the classic stainless-steel Datejust. When the salesman told 
me it was ``a good beginner Rolex,'' I stared him down, then took 
my business elsewhere. The idea of a beginner Rolex was too obscene 
even for me. I bought my Datejust elsewhere (for a rock-bottom $2,100), 
and it was the cleanest looking thing I had ever seen. The watch seems 
to defy the dust and grime and the dark end of the light spectrum. 
Its fanatically polished steel blasts away the city's grime; it catches 
the sun's rays and refracts them into bursts and shooting lances of 
light, like Bilbao. Yeah, I said it: My Rolex is like Bilbao. It is 
beautiful in itself, beyond the world's evaluation. When I returned 
home and showed my dad my Datejust, he looked at me feelingly. ``I 
always knew one day one of my sons would own a Rolex,'' he said. I'm 
planning on buying Dad the real thing if I ever hit the really big 
time. As for me, I'll probably die with this one on. Unashamed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>