<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0262 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a case of the oldest profession meeting the newest technology, 
a federal indictment handed down Oct. 9 suggests that the mob is muscling 
its way into cyberspace. Federal agents arrested six men here Oct. 
9 after surveillance indicated that the men intended to harm several 
operators of adult entertainment businesses that openly front for 
prostitution. Agents stumbled on the plot, the indictment says, because 
the intended victims were themselves targets of a federal investigation. 
According to the indictment, the men are members of the Gambino crime 
family who were pressuring a computer expert to systematically divert 
telephone calls from one or more adult entertainment enterprises to 
competing companies affiliated with the mob. Since the mid-1990s operators 
of adult entertainment companies known as out-call services have attributed 
a mysterious decline in the number of calls from customers to computer 
criminals who gain access to the local phone company's switches and 
illegally reroute calls to competitors. Although prostitution is illegal 
in Las Vegas and surrounding Clark County, nude dancing services in 
which a male or female entertainer is sent to a hotel room are legal. 
Prostitution is legal in some counties in Nevada. Although there are 
no reliable estimates of the size of the sex industry in Las Vegas, 
the Yellow Pages carry 134 pages of advertising in the category of 
``adult entertainers,'' one of the directory's largest categories. 
Federal officials said that among the six men who were arrested were 
two mob enforcers who had flown to Las Vegas from Tampa, Fla.. They 
said that the arrests were made after agents became convinced that 
the lives of several people were at risk. The two alleged enforcers, 
Vincent Congiusti and Anton Nelsen, came to Las Vegas to threaten 
three operators of out-call nude dancing services, according to the 
indictment. The men were arrested when they began looking for Charles 
Coveney, who is described in the indictment as a computer expert who 
worked for one of the adult entertainment services. Coveney did not 
return repeated calls requesting comment. In addition to Congiusti, 
48, and Nelsen, whose age was not given, agents arrested Christiano 
DeCarlo, the 27-year-old owner of the DeCarlo Group, an adult entertainment 
business in Las Vegas; Kenneth Byrnes, 38, described as an enforcer 
from New Jersey, and Joshua Snellings, 20, of Las Vegas, a driver 
for DeCarlo. A sixth man, Mario Stefano, believed to be a Gambino 
operative, was arrested in New York City on Oct. 12. The indictment 
quotes Stefano as telling an undercover agent that he was irritated 
by several of the out-call services that compete with DeCarlo, and 
that ``a couple of aspirins will be sent to Las Vegas to deal with 
those headaches.'' Congiusti's mob name is ``Vinnie Aspirins.'' The 
indictment also quotes Stefano as stating that on one occasion Congiusti 
used a cordless drill to bore holes in the head of a man who had crossed 
the mob. According to the indictment, the FBI agents who arrested 
Congiusti found a power drill in the Ford Expedition he was traveling 
in at the time of the arrest. The other alleged enforcer, Nelsen, 
is known as ``Angel of Mercy.'' He is described in the indictment 
as a former mercenary soldier who is an expert in explosives. FBI 
agents said that they had observed Nelson purchasing carburetor cleaner 
in an automobile parts store and that they believed he intended to 
use it to build a fire bomb. Last year, Hilda Brauer, an owner of 
the Perfect Body's and the Young and Sexy Bodies nude-dancing services, 
sued Sprint Corp. and R.H. Donnelley, publisher of the Las Vegas Yellow 
Pages, charging that they had conspired to systematically divert phone 
calls from her business. Although the suit was dismissed, the accusations 
appear to have drawn the attention of federal agencies. Several adult 
services operators, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said 
that in the last year federal agents had created an interagency computer 
crimes task force based in Reno to investigate the accusations of 
call diversion. One of the service operators said he believed that 
call diversions had spread beyond the adult entertainment business 
and were becoming a growing problem for other Las Vegas businesses. 
Federal officials in Las Vegas said they were familiar with the reports 
of electronic telephone call diversion but for the time being were 
focusing on other charges, including suspected payoffs to local law 
enforcement officials. ``This is a super big business here,'' Assistant 
U.S. Attorney Eric Johnson said of sex services. ``These operators 
generate a lot of money and a lot of cash.'' The indictment charges 
that a significant portion of the Las Vegas out-call industry is a 
front for money laundering, robbery, narcotics distribution and other 
criminal activities, in addition to prostitution. Federal agents believe 
that La Cosa Nostra crime syndicate is trying to grab control of the 
sex industry through threats, extortion and other illegal means, including 
sophisticated rerouting of calls from competitors' businesses. ``We 
have repeatedly heard these rumors, but the telephone company denies 
that it is possible,'' Johnson said. Nevertheless, he added, agents 
would continue to investigate the allegations. The indictment states 
that FBI agents in Las Vegas were contacted in November by a man who 
had previously worked as a cooperating witness in New York and said 
he now operated out-call services in New York and Las Vegas. The man 
agreed to assist the FBI by allowing an undercover agent to be placed 
in his business. During an Oct. 5 meeting in New York City, the indictment 
states, Stefano advised the undercover agent and the informer that 
he was sending two men from Tampa to assist Byrnes in threatening 
several operators of sex businesses. The defendants face charges of 
conspiracy, extortion and interstate travel in aid of racketeering. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>