<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0285 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The possibility that impeachment proceedings against President Clinton 
could weaken the Democrats this year, and again in the presidential 
election in 2000, has helped bring together the two leading potential 
candidates for that race, Vice President Al Gore and the House minority 
leader, Rep. Dick Gephardt, D-Mo. During private meals and joint public 
appearances in recent months, the two have struck a partnership, perhaps 
one of political necessity. The warmer Gore-Gephardt relationship 
is striking for several reasons, not the least of which is the acrimony 
arising from the presidential campaign of 1988, when both men lost 
the nomination to Michael Dukakis of Massachusetts. The Gore-Gephardt 
relationship was nasty in those days, punctuated by coarse rhetoric 
from them and their staffs. In one 1988 debate, Gephardt snapped at 
Gore, ``Lately, you have been sounding more like Al Haig than Al Gore.'' 
Gore responded: ``That line sounds more like Richard Nixon than Richard 
Gephardt.'' In the early years of the Clinton administration, Gephardt 
aides said they believed Gore blocked Democrats with strong ties to 
Gephardt from working at the highest levels of government. And in 
1996, most House Democrats thought the Clinton-Gore ticket was concerned 
only with its re-election, not with congressional candidates. Gephardt 
never said as much openly, but his allies in the House did. That helped 
fuel the longstanding animosity between the Gore and Gephardt staffs, 
which became an open secret throughout official Washington, and which 
remains, though to a lesser degree. Policy differences have also remained, 
even through the Clinton presidency, on issues like trade policy and 
welfare. Yet aides to both men now acknowledge a thaw, borne in large 
measure of the party's need to project unity and thus hold down potential 
losses in congressional and state elections in a year the president 
has been wounded by the Monica Lewinsky scandal. Terry McAuliffe, 
who was Clinton's chief fund-raiser in 1996 and who maintains close 
ties to both Gore and Gephardt, said the relationship between the 
two men has improved dramatically. ``They have tremendous respect 
for each other,'' McAuliffe said. ``They are at the point now that 
they enjoy working together to solve issues and to work on projects.'' 
And, in a thought likely to appeal more to the vice president than 
to the minority leader, McAuliffe suggested that a Gore-Gephardt ticket 
in 2000 would be ``the strongest Democratic ticket out there.'' For 
now, such formulations remain premature, especially with Gephardt 
indicating that he would be Gore's strongest rival for the Democratic 
presidential nomination in 2000. Gephardt has maintained a vigorous 
travel schedule, which includes frequent visits to New Hampshire, 
site of the nation's first presidential primary, and to Iowa, which 
holds the first caucus. Laura Nichols, a spokeswoman for Gephardt, 
said that he does not intend to decide about a presidential run until 
the end of the year. Nonetheless, the impression that he and Gore 
have smoothed out some of their differences gives each of them a chance 
to look statesmanlike at a time when Democrats fear that the scandal 
could cost them votes or hold down the Democratic turnout. Because 
of their respective positions, Gore and Gephardt have more recently 
maintained a cordial working relationship. Aides to both men say they 
began drawing closer after a long-scheduled dinner on Jan. 24 _ three 
days after the scandal broke _ at the vice president's home in northwest 
Washington, where he and his wife, Tipper, showed Gephardt and his 
wife, Jane, pictures from their wedding album. Since then, the men 
have met for lunch about every six weeks, aides say. And in recent 
weeks, they have appeared together at Democratic party events, like 
the Unity '98 dinner Friday night in Gephardt's hometown of St. Louis, 
as they concluded a long day of campaigning together in the area. 
In St. Louis Friday, Gore said of his relationship with Gephardt: 
``We have been friends for 22 years. We fight for the same things. 
And what we are fighting for right now is Democratic control of the 
U.S. Congress so that we can move forward into the 21st century with 
an agenda that makes sense for the American people.'' Gephardt said: 
``I think the party is unified, and we are as unified as we have ever 
been. We see these issues eye to eye.'' For Gore, who is widely perceived 
as the front-runner for the 2000 nomination, the advantages of an 
improved relationship with Gephardt beyond the November elections 
are obvious. ``Activists in Iowa and New Hampshire have long memories,'' 
said Martin Hamburger, a Democratic media consultant who is not working 
for either man. ``If it looks like the rivalry is out of hand, that 
hurts Gore. This gives him room to look magnanimous.'' Aides to both 
men said Gore has campaigned with several congressional candidates 
at the request of Gephardt, including two representatives from Minnesota, 
David Minge and Bruce Vento, who generally face strong opposition 
from Republicans. At Gephardt's request, Gore also joined him Friday 
for a private meeting with executives from high-tech companies in 
the St. Louis area. For his part, Gephardt has reciprocated with at 
least one major effort. Democratic House members say he played a leading 
role in holding down the number of Democrats, to 31, who voted last 
week for the Republicans' proposal for impeachment hearings after 
a Democratic-sponsored plan was defeated. That not only aided Clinton, 
but also Gore as a Clinton loyalist. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>