<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0221 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Stock market euphoria swept from the United States and Europe to Asia 
on Friday, as share prices across the region surged in response to 
Thursday's cut in interest rates in the United States. Hong Kong's 
gains were among the biggest, with the benchmark Hang Seng index jumping 
almost 9 percent, to 9,777.01, the highest level since early May. 
Shares in Singapore, Bangkok, Jakarta and Manila all rose more than 
5 percent; in Tokyo, the Nikkei index of 225 issues gained 2.19 percent. 
While analysts were impressed by the strong performance, which extends 
a rally that began last week, most were loath to declare it a turning 
point in the Asian financial crisis. Indeed, some said they were worried 
that the stock markets had become too rosy a barometer. ``There has 
been so much bad news built up in the region that any glimmer of good 
news causes the market to overshoot,'' said Brian Lippey, managing 
director of Tokai Asia Ltd. in Hong Kong. Lippey said a fundamental 
recovery in Asia still hinged on whether Japan could clean up its 
debt-burdened banking system. Although the Japanese Parliament completed 
passage of legislation Friday intended to do that, Lippey and other 
experts said it fell short of the radical overhaul needed. ``The Gordian 
knot for Asia is Japan, and the center of that knot is the Japanese 
banking system,'' Lippey said. ``Until they get that sorted out, the 
rest of Asia is going to be in for more disappointments.'' Still, 
from Seoul to Singapore, it was hard to find disappointment Friday. 
Here, the Hang Seng index posted one of its largest gains of the year, 
on hopes that local banks would follow the lead of the Federal Reserve 
in cutting rates. Late Friday, they reduced the deposit rate by one-quarter 
of a point, to 5 percent. ``The Fed's action suggests that they've 
diagnosed the problem, and the response is going to be serious and 
prompt,'' said Miron Mushkat, director of strategy at Indocam Asia 
Asset Management here. Beyond the lower rates, Hong Kong has been 
buoyed by the stronger Japanese yen, which has eased pressure on the 
Hong Kong dollar. A weaker yen had hurt Hong Kong because its dollar's 
exchange rate is linked to the U.S. dollar. That meant that the Hong 
Kong dollar was overvalued relative to other Asian currencies, and 
it made this former British colony a relatively costly place to do 
business. Among the biggest winners in this market rally is the Hong 
Kong government, which spent enormous amounts to prop up the stock 
market in August. The intervention, which officials said was intended 
to thwart foreign-currency traders, exposed Hong Kong to widespread 
criticism abroad and at home. For now, though, Hong Kong's government 
is sitting on hefty gains. While the government has not disclosed 
the market value of its holdings, analysts estimate that officials 
started buying $10 billion to $15 billion of stock when the Hang Seng 
index was at 6,600. The market has since gone up nearly 50 percent. 
``My opinion is that they got lucky, but it's better to be lucky than 
smart,'' said Mac Overton, a portfolio manager at MBF Unit Trust here, 
who had harshly criticized the intervention. Shares of the giant banking 
company HSBC Holdings, which was the government's largest investment, 
shot up $12.50 (Hong Kong), or $1.61 (U.S.) Friday, to $173. Analysts 
said the demand for shares of HSBC, parent company of Hongkong and 
Shanghai Bank, was fueled by rumors that an American hedge fund was 
trying to buy the government's 8.9 percent stake. The catch is that 
officials here said they intend to retain the shares for the long 
term. That means their huge potential profits are on paper only. Whether 
the government will be able sell its shares at a profit depends on 
whether this rally is merely a respite from the crisis _ or the start 
of a genuine recovery. Analysts said lower interest rates could revive 
business activity in Asia. But they said it was worth remembering 
why the Federal Reserve reduced rates: to forestall an expected slowdown 
in the U.S. economy. Such a slowdown bodes ill for Asian countries, 
which depend on American consumers to buy their goods. ``Ultimately, 
your view of this depends on whether you think consumer demand in 
Europe and the U.S. is going to hold up,'' said Richard Margolis, 
a regional strategist at Merrill Lynch in Hong Kong. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>