<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0336 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Men, naked but for a diaper, writhing sensually like Nijinsky on a 
bed of pink rose petals, are not what a fashion-show audience comes 
to see. But few would be telling the truth if they claimed that they 
minded this backdrop to the bounty of airy, magical dresses and redoubtable 
slithery suits that were the John Galliano collection. In several 
ways, Galliano and Karl Lagerfeld, whose spring 1999 collection for 
Chanel was shown Friday , have been successful taking the best of 
history and reinterpreting it for modern utility _ a skill matched 
perhaps only by Tom Ford at Gucci. Everyone in fashion these days 
borrows. But what's remarkable about these three designers is the 
way in which, like fashion antiquarians, their vintage design references 
have been subsumed into their own collections. Decades from now, when 
their work is viewed with the benefit of hindsight, each will rightly 
be given credit for his own considerable influence and recognizable 
imprint. For Galliano, fashion is a passport to dreams, to a time 
when women put glamour and appearance above all and were adored for 
it. Since everyone on occasion appreciates such escapism, Galliano's 
viewpoint, however bacchanalian, is magnetic. Every model must live 
to be booked for one of Galliano's shows. Working for him, they get 
a chance to perform instead of simply being employed as a wooden clothes 
hangar. In Galliano's vision last night of an operatic corps de ballet, 
circa 1920, the model Shalom seemed to be playing her namesake, Salome. 
And who knew that the model Crystelle could almost perform a full 
leg extension? But a ballet corp never got to dress like this _ in 
spectacular dresses of flowing peach chiffon, with diamond-shaped 
insets and cascades of accordion pleats. Some dresses were topped 
with dangling bras trimmed with gold. Delicate black chiffon cascaded 
over pale beige pleats that brushed the models' ankles. A beautiful 
evening dress of Chantilly lace hugged the waist and then spread in 
a soft profusion to the floor. These were dresses so pretty and feminine 
that even a bald, muscle-bound male model (presumably the principal 
dancer in Galliano's fantasy) did justice to a beautiful peach satin 
gown that he was wearing. Galliano's cast of styles included an orchestra 
member's fitted jumper over a sweet sheer floral blouse; a doddering 
dowager's sumptuous gold-threaded kimono opera coat and brocade suit, 
and an actress in a gauzy Grecian-inspired long plum skirt and top 
wrapped with deep pink velvet ribbon. Galliano is obviously an avid 
student of the designers Madeleine Vionnet, Paul Poiret and Alix Gres, 
who each has left an indelible imprimatur on style. Ms. Vionnet invented 
the bias cut, which Galliano has reinstated. Poiret helped introduce 
women to freeing clothes and was a master of the grand fashion gesture 
in, for instance, the kimono coat. And Mme. Gres perfected the drapes 
and cascades of Greek-like gowns. Lagerfeld, for his part, is an unapologetic 
champion of Coco Chanel, who ushered in to dressing an ease and sport 
influence. But Lagerfeld is much more of a forward thinker than Galliano. 
It was Chanel's sports legacy on which he chose to build the collection 
this time, but in a totally surprising way. He brought a streetwise 
sophistication to the line that might appeal equally to traditional 
Chanel clients and to Monica, the 18-year-old singer from Atlanta, 
whose two recent singles (one a duet with Brandy) have catapulted 
to the top of the charts). This was not in the obvious spirit of the 
hip-hop or scuba inspirations that Lagerfeld has done in the past 
to keep Chanel current, but a more subtle take on the streety, sporty 
influence, with tiny double C's almost indiscernible on the hems of 
tops and shirts. Sports-influenced materials were evident in a youthful, 
Lycra suit comprising briefs, a crop top and a cardigan jacket with 
ridged seams. The same fabrics showed up in a black and ecru jacket 
over a white paneled skirt, an orange leather jacket that fit snug 
and sexy over relaxed silver trousers, and a luxurious but athletic 
jacket in pale gray silk and cotton satin. Several of the fresh, sportier 
looks were from Chanel's new Beige label, which fulfills Lagerfeld's 
wish to work with more modern and sports-inspired materials. It should 
also broaden Chanel's market. Much of the season for designers here 
has been about legacies, their own or someone else's. Having broken 
fashion molds left and right, Ann Demeulemeester is having trouble 
picking up the pieces. Some fashion wags attributed Ms. Demeulemeester's 
inspiration for her latest collection to Mother Teresa _ which may 
or may not be the case. The designer's white cotton dresses and tops 
were melodious examples of imagination and workmanship that are sure 
to be commercialized and copied. Crushed white jackets paired with 
loose pants and messenger bags with trouser loops looked smart and 
funny. But too much in this collection, like her developing, twisted 
T-shirts and drowning necklines, looked difficult and tortured. At 
her best, Ms. Demeulemeester makes her most challenging design ideas 
seem as easy as asking, ``Why didn't I think of that?'' Which is exactly 
what comes to mind when viewing Martin Margiela's avant-garde designs. 
The show was an encore of Margiela's previous designs of photo-prints 
on dresses and T-shirts that made it seem as if the wearer had put 
on, for instance, a sequin slip dress over a white T-shirt. Margiela 
reprised from seasons past his stockman's jacket and his apron skirts 
made from a man's trousers, and he mixed in more commercial looks 
from his secondary lines called 6 and 10. Few designers could be as 
nostalgic and yet so interesting. Issey Miyake, ever the experimenter, 
presented the most intriguing idea of the French ready-to-wear shows 
with what he called A-POC. The letters stand for A Piece of Cloth, 
which consists of a tube of fabric with perforations that outline 
garments that customers can cut out at home. On the runway, he showed 
the method and the result: hats, bra tops, skirts, socks, little pouch 
bags from this strange but feasible concept. Both Miyake and Margiela 
are regarded as messianic by the avant-garde crowd, holding the cause 
aloft despite the considerable downward tug exerted by lesser designers 
like Kostas Murkudis, A.F. Vandevorst, Atsuro Tayama. Not that Murkudis 
did not show great style in his funky skirts decorated with hidden 
zippers that can be worn open _ to reveal whatever you like _ and 
delightful tulle dresses covered with bands of ribbon and zips, and 
sheer parachute suits. But they were quite conservative for a man 
who just a year ago was showing a bib as a piece of clothing. Murkudis 
clearly decided he wanted to sell some clothes. On the other hand, 
Tayama and Ms. Vandevorst seem to be pushing themselves a bit hard, 
taking the recent medical-inspired trend in fashion too literally, 
with clothes reminiscent of straitjackets and nurses' uniforms. Ms. 
Vandervorst, as her name suggests, is from Belgium, not France. Neither 
are Tayama, Murkudis, Lagerfeld and Galliano Frenchmen. They are all 
part of the quiet revolution transforming the Paris ready-to-wear 
shows. With only one to four French designers among the 10 to 14 designers 
who show on a typical day here, the Chambre Syndicale du Pret-a-) 
Porter des Couturiers et des Createurs de Mode, the French fashion 
trade group, finds itself in the strange position of promoting a great 
deal of foreign talent. To counteract this slide in probably the only 
country where the plebiscite takes the art of fashion as seriously 
as the elite do, the Chambre this season underwrote 17 designer shows, 
many of them French, instead of the usual two. There are also plans 
to create a Cite de la Mode in Paris in 2000 to bring together the 
various fashion schools in one location and to strengthen French fashion 
business development and research, said Didier Grumbach, the president 
of the federation of French ready-to-wear and couture designers. At 
this point, foreigners seem to understand better the imperative to 
release French clothes from their stuffiness. A Spaniard, Cristina 
Ortiz, has brought a modern spirit to the French house of Lanvin, 
and Alber Elbaz, an American, has done the same with Guy Laroche. 
Ms. Ortiz invoked a cold, austere beauty with frosty blues and whites 
in sculptured, space-age jackets and furled skirts brushing the ground. 
Even trousers had puffed hems. It was distinctive but stopped short 
of being thoroughly appealing. Elbaz, in his last collection for Guy 
Laroche, designed pretty dresses with etched florals, a wool flower 
nestled in a drape at the back of a skirt, and long gray wool skirts 
gently slung over rippling blouses. For all his references to flowers, 
Elbaz managed to make his collection somehow somber. Missing were 
the inspired hues and combinations of colors and the French flavor 
of reveling in dressing up. It will surely all burst forth again next 
season when Elbaz leaves the house of Laroche for the even more essentially 
French house of Yves Saint Laurent. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>