<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981016.0290 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Everywhere in this village in the verdant canyons of Chiapas State 
there are subtle signs of the presence of the Zapatista rebel army. 
Many of the men wear untattered olive green pants and strong-soled 
combat boots, a kind of informal uniform that the Zapatista organization 
has encouraged its followers to adopt. Government signs on the one-room 
schoolhouse have been covered over with fresh paint. When strangers 
approach seeking information, villagers turn away and put their fingers 
to their lips to warn each other to keep quiet. Until recently the 
Zapatistas moved openly here. Almost four years ago, when they were 
riding a surge of popularity after staging a brief armed uprising, 
they set up their own administration in a town a few miles away down 
a rocky dirt road. This village and a dozen others in the surrounding 
rain forest chose to join the new alternative township. The town had 
gone by the name of Amparo Agua Tinta, but the Zapatistas rebaptized 
it Land and Liberty, taking the battle cry of Emiliano Zapata, the 
Mexican revolutionary of the early 20th century from whom the guerrillas 
draw their name. The cowed authorities from the government's political 
party, the Institutional Revolutionary Party or PRI, quietly stepped 
aside to make way for the new Zapatista mayor. The Zapatista authorities 
resolved disputes and issued birth, death and marriage certificates. 
They even set up a three-cell county jail. But on May 1, the police 
and the army occupied the town, drove out the Zapatista officials 
and burned down the jail. More than 40 Zapatistas were arrested, of 
whom 8 remain in prison. It was one of four government operations 
in recent months to destroy Zapatista town governments, a campaign 
that rebel leaders labeled ``one of the most ferocious offensives 
we have ever faced.'' Now the Zapatistas in Rizo de Oro, and in scores 
of other villages across the Indian regions of Chiapas, have gone 
quiet. Once they held noisy rallies and blocked the highways with 
marches. They went about in bandanas or black ski masks that hid their 
faces but publicized their identities as Zapatistas. But since June 
the Zapatistas have suspended their demonstrations, taken down their 
banners and put away their masks. And from disciplined militants to 
casual followers, every Indian villager who has anything to do with 
the Zapatista National Liberation Army is under instructions from 
the movement's leaders to avoid outsiders, especially reporters. ``We 
are thinking of setting up our township again somewhere else,'' said 
Rafael Aguilar Santiz, 22, a Tojolabal Indian corn farmer in Rizo 
de Oro. After looking over two strangers at great length, he added 
warily: ``If we do, we might tell people about it. But probably we 
won't.'' The retreat from public view is a sharp turnabout for the 
Zapatistas, a guerrilla group that has always emphasized political 
over military combat. After only a week of amateurish fighting in 
January 1994, the rebels' chief strategist, who goes by the nom de 
guerre Subcommander Marcos, acknowledged that the show of armed force 
had been largely symbolic, intended to dramatize the Zapatistas' demands 
for better justice for Indians. A cease-fire soon went into effect, 
and the Zapatistas have observed it ever since. Instead of shooting, 
the Zapatistas set about creating civilian political organizations 
in Chiapas. These have included not just alternative townships, but 
also rural labor unions and associations of their Roman Catholic supporters 
in the local diocese _ which has backed the Zapatista cause, although 
not its armed tactics. Peace talks with the government collapsed in 
late 1996, with the Zapatistas accusing the government of reneging 
on signed commitments. But the Zapatistas' grass-roots groups continued 
to spread. The government tolerated those groups until this year, 
when President Ernesto Zedillo decided that the alternative townships 
were a threat to the legal order in the state and began a political 
and military offensive against them. The government has also tried 
to show the Indians of Chiapas that it has more to offer them than 
the Zapatistas. While Rizo de Oro remained relatively quiet, nearby 
Amparo Agua Tinta, the seat of the former Zapatista township, bustled 
with government-financed activity after the May 1 takeover. The streets 
were crowded with dump trucks and bulldozers sent in by the state 
government to pave soggy streets. A mobile health clinic stood in 
the central square. Public buildings shone with fresh coats of paint. 
Many villagers displayed their gratitude at being rescued from years 
of government neglect by painting the PRI insignia prominently on 
their houses. But some remained skeptical of the government's largesse. 
``We never had any difficulty with the Zapatista authorities,'' said 
Elias Mendez Agueda, 30, even though he admitted to being a PRI loyalist. 
``The government wanted them out. We didn't have anything to do with 
it.'' President Zedillo argues that his policies have laid the groundwork 
for the peace talks to resume. ``The government wants a dialogue, 
right now,'' Zedillo said emphatically during a trip to Chiapas in 
late July. ``Those who believe that the government wants war are completely 
mistaken. They who propagate that idea,'' he said of the Zapatistas, 
``are lost in the emptiness of their own fantasies.'' But in practice 
the government's actions have driven the Zapatistas farther from the 
negotiating table and deep into a secrecy that seems intended primarily 
to make it more difficult for government troops and intelligence operatives 
to monitor their activities. (The administration of Land and Liberty 
gave one recent signal that it is still operating in exile by putting 
out a message on the Internet calling for emergency aid for villagers 
in the region whose homes were destroyed in floods in September.) 
Although this small village is buried in backlands many miles from 
the nearest telephone, people here are keenly aware that they are 
locked in a sophisticated conflict. Recently PRI leaders in the region 
leaked a false report to the press that Rizo de Oro had been host 
to a formal ceremony to re-establish the shattered Zapatista township. 
The PRI followers apparently hoped the ruse would draw army troops 
into this Zapatista town. Aguilar, the farmer, contemplated taking 
advantage of the strangers' visit to set the record straight that 
no such ceremony had taken place. With a gesture signaling the visitors 
to wait, he disappeared for consultations with other, unseen villagers, 
presumably local Zapatista leaders. Not long ago the Zapatistas might 
have been eager to air their grievances and propagate their political 
views. But this time Aguilar returned to say that local rebels had 
chosen silence. His goodbye was curt: ``We have nothing more to say.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>