<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981016.2000.0840 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The final results aren't quite in, but the outcome of this month's 
elections in Australia is certain. Prime Minister John Howard's conservative 
coalition has won a comfortable 12-seat majority. Today was the deadline 
for the Australian Electoral Commission to receive the mailed in ballots 
from the October 3rd voting. Next year, Australians will go to the 
polls again to determine a more fundamental issue: their status as 
a nation. Aussies will soon decide whether to become a totally independent 
republic or remain loyal to the queen of England. As "The World's" 
Margaret Sternstein reports from Sydney, as the referendum approaches, 
Australians are examining the changing nature of their nation. Like 
the United States, Australia is a nation of immigrants. Aborigines 
have lived here for an estimated 40- 60,000 years before British settlement 
in 1788. Today almost a quarter of Australia's 18 million people was 
born overseas, about half coming from non-English speaking backgrounds. 
Certainly the Australian identity has changed dramatically in the 
last 40 or 50 years. Steffan Kirkisharian heads the Ethnic Affairs 
Commission in a Australia's most populated state. The future of Australian 
identity, he says, will be eclectic. It will not be Chinese or Vietnamese 
or - - or Greek or Italian; it will be uniquely Australian. And it 
will be there. It will emerge quite clearly, I would say, in 50 years' 
time. It is unstoppable. But while the population mix is changing, 
people of Anglo-Celtic heritage remain the vast majority and they're 
having an identity crisis. It's -- a terrible problem that when you 
have a majority group that it actually has no sense of its own boundaries 
or its own specialties. Eva Cox is a senior electorate in humanities 
at the University of Technology, Sydney. There were some people here 
that felt Anglo-Australian identity was going to be overcome. And 
it's not. It's still the dominant group. It's still the dominant language. 
It's still the dominant culture in all sorts of ways. But it has been 
stretched, enhanced, changed. One element stretching Australians' 
sense of security is the Asian financial crisis. It's likely to lead 
to an economic slowdown here next year, according to a recent report 
from the International Monetary Fund. Mickey Hartley, senior economist 
with Rothchild's Australia says that's making people nervous. MICKEY 
HARTLEY, SENIOR ECONOMIST ROTHCHILD's AUSTRALIA. What's happening 
to the dollar is a consequence of that loss of confidence. But I think 
it's probably gone too far. -- so very, very small, when you consider 
the power and strength of the U.S. or Europe or even Japan. Australia's 
a tiny little drop in the ocean. A drop in the ocean, perhaps. But 
one percent ripples throughout the region, with arguments over race 
and Asian immigration, spurred by the rise of Pauline Hanson -- and 
her protectionist party, One Nation. But the race debate, says sociologist 
Eva Cox, is more a product of a precarious economy than a part of 
Australian identity. I think a lot of people are frightened by the 
fact that -- that we do actually have quite a large number of people 
who are poor and we've got a large number of people that are -- a 
far richer than they've ever been. So, in a sense, there's a gap. 
Among Australia's poorest people are descendants of its original inhabitants. 
While aborigines today comprise less than two percent of Australia's 
population, their unemployment level runs 30 percent higher than the 
national average. Despite this, some people say there's a cohesiveness 
among aborigines that didn't exist even a few years ago. Linda Bernie 
chairs the State Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation. One of the 
terrific things that's happened is that now indigenous people are 
saying we are Australians; we are citizens in this country, and we 
want an equal share in what's going. And we have a stake in the national 
identity of this country. When Sydney hosts the Summer Olympics in 
the year 2000, organizers plan to showcase Australia's cultural diversity. 
But the question remains as to who will open the games. The last time 
Australia held the Olympics in 1956, that task was performed by Queen 
Elizabeth II. In 2000, however, the Olympics could be launched by 
an Australian head of state, that is if a referendum to make the country 
a republic passes here next year. Jerod Henderson who runs the Sydney 
Institute says that change is inevitable. What we will then have is 
an Australian republic and we will have an Australian head of state 
who lives in Australia. And this will, I think, increase the mood 
towards national identity, but it's a gradual process that's taking 
place. And I think if you came back in 10 years, you would see significant 
changes, just as there have been significant changes over the past 
10 years. In the meantime, these schoolchildren are singing to a different 
tune than did their parents. God may save the queen, but officially, 
Aussies don't serenade the British monarch any longer. The debate 
over a future that's totally independent of Mother England, is part 
of the country's evolving identity, as more Australians are singing 
their own praises. For "The World," this is Margaret Sternstein in 
Sydney. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>