<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981016.2000.2180 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On Monday, Public Television begins airing "Africans in America: America's 
Journey Through Slavery." The series examines a central contradiction 
of American history, how the ideals of life and liberty coexisted 
with the realities of shackles and chains. All next week, "The World" 
will examine slavery's legacy in Brazil, Jamaica, Cuba and Martinique. 
Today, we begin our series in an English city who's fine facades mask 
far from gentile history. "The World's" Steven Beard sent us this 
report. Ladies, will you stand, please? At Colston's Girls' School 
in Bristol, members of the choir are rehearsing for the biggest day 
of their year: Colston Day. On November 13th, star students and local 
dignitaries will gather to celebrate the 362nd anniversary of the 
birth of the schools' founder. Bristol's favorite son who endowed 
many of the city's schools, hospitals and charities, Edward Colston, 
merchant, philanthropist, and slave trader. What I have done is compared 
Edward Colston's involvement in the slave trade with Hitler's involvement 
in the holocaust against the Jews. Ray Sophia, a leading member of 
Bristol's black community. The fact of the matter is that Edward Colston 
invested considerably in the slave trade. And I think that when you 
look at the figures and you look at the legacy today, you can safely 
say that the African slave trade is the greatest holocaust known to 
mankind. From the 1500s to the middle of the 19th century, it's estimated 
that as many as 15 million Africans were brought to the Americas as 
slaves. Several million died in the process. It was called the triangular 
trade. European ships sailed down to the West Coast of Africa. The 
crews bought or kidnapped their human cargo and then sailed for the 
Caribbean or the Carolina coast. They sold or exchanged their slaves 
and then sailed back, laden with commodities. Bristol merchants, like 
Edward Colston, dominated this trafficking for the first half of the 
18th century. But the most -- legacy of the city's involvement in 
this grizzly trade, as local historian, Madge Dresser points out, 
is some of England's most glorious Georgian architecture. These fine 
three-story houses with their colonnades and their beautiful shell 
doors were -- on this exclusively in the early 18th century by those 
who had grown rich on the proceeds of either the African trade, in 
other words, the trade basically in slaves, or on the West India and 
Carolina trades, the trade in slave-produced commodities, such as 
tobacco, rice, indigo and sugar.. And the slave trade, says Madge 
Dresser had an even more profound impact on Bristol, leaving a major 
economic legacy. Now, Bristol remained an important commercial center 
in canal building and railways and other manufacturing industries. 
But she got her headstart from the slave and colonial trades. The 
story of Bristol's rise as a center for sugar refining, tobacco processing 
and chocolate manufacturing is told in the city's industrial museum. 
It's packed with gleaming, well- oiled machinery. But only one small 
exhibit illustrates the original source of the city's wealth. These 
are a set of neck and arm monicores, which are proported to have been 
used in the slave trade from Bristol. The curator admits that Bristol 
has been reluctant to dwell on its slave-trading past. Now under pressure 
from the black community, the city is trying to make amends. The main 
museum is putting together a big exhibition on the subject, due to 
open next year. And the city council, in cooperation with various 
groups, has drawn up a slavery trail -- a tour of the city which takes 
in places connected with the trade. But Christine Jackson of the City 
Museum admits there is some local resistance to the new spirit of 
openness. On the slavery trail, there is a house on Guinea Street. 
Guinea Street is named after the currency that was traded for -- for 
slaves from West Africa, and the house belonged to a sea captain who 
was a slave trader himself. And I was walking past the house with 
some colleagues and just pointing it out to them, and a then a lady 
threw up the window and said, "there never was a slave trade in Bristol. 
Bristol made its money from wool." And there she is living in a slave 
trader's house on Guinea Street. There's no such denial at Colston's 
Girls' School. The controversy has prompted many classroom discussions 
and the pupils are now fully aware of the city's unsavory past. They 
all know that 2 1/2 centuries ago, their illustrious founder built 
his fortune on death and misery. But members of the choir, at least, 
are still happy to celebrate Colston, the benefactor. Edward Colston, 
he did a good thing, in a way, because we wouldn't have our school 
if he didn't put the money in. He did make his money in a particularly 
evil trade. He did do an evil thing, but I do agree with that. But 
there again, lots of good has come out of what he has done. Just let 
it move on a little bit more, particularly at the beginning.. OK? 
Once more, through. Colston Day, says the head mistress, celebrates 
Colston's legacy, not just the immense fortune he left for good causes, 
but the spirit of philanthropy which still thrives in the city. Members 
of the black community in Bristol and throughout Britain say they've 
been left with an altogether different legacy from Colston and the 
other slave traders. Racism stemmed from the slave trade. Ray Sophia 
says the slave traders portrayed their victims as sub-human, in order 
to justify their barbaric activity. He claimed that racist ideology 
then took root and is still flourishing today. We still find people 
are pretty warped in bigoted ideas. So that is still a legacy. Unemployment 
is still 2 1/2 times the rest of the population amongst people of 
color. And there is discrimination in housing and discrimination right 
across the board. Here in the center of Bristol on Colston Avenue, 
not far from Colston Hall, there's a bronze statue of Edward Colston. 
The plaque plays tribute to his munificence. Earlier this year, someone 
splashed the words "slave trader" in red paint across the --. Now 
the council is struggling to find ways of accommodating both pride 
and shame about the city's past. It's considering a plan for a rival 
statute with an African in chains, representing the millions of victims 
of the trade that helped make this city rich. For "The World," this 
is Steven Beard in Bristol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>