<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981016.2000.1947 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For weeks, NATO has been threatening airstrikes against Slobodan Milosevic, 
if he does not withdraw his forces from Kosovo. NATO kept the pressure 
up this week, even after the Serbian leader agreed to pull his troops 
out of the province by tomorrow morning. Today NATO blinked; it announced 
an extension of the deadline until October 27th, acknowledging that 
Milosevic is, in the words of his spokesman, at some distance from 
full compliance. The World's Ninad Shebek has been covering the crackdown 
on the Ethnic Albanian separatists since it began almost eight months 
ago. Ninad is in Belgrade. Ninad, was the Saturday deadline realistic, 
in the first place? No. It wasn't realistic enough because something 
-- some things simply take time. It's a question of logistics. There 
was no way that -- that troops and the policemen could be pulled out 
at such short notice. The reason why I believe NATO gave such a tight 
deadline was, in order to check whether President Milosevic is actually 
willing to show true compliance. I believe that NATO now is assured 
that he has shown that kind of a willingness and that's why they've 
extended the deadline. Ninad, how is this situation being explained 
to the people in Belgrade and how is the mood there, now that the 
threat of immediate airstrikes is receded? Well, there's been a huge 
sigh of relief everywhere in Belgrade. People are now much more cheerful. 
They're now pretty much sure that it won't come to airstrikes. And 
the way it's being portrayed is the classic Milosevic way. It's been 
portrayed as a huge victory for President Milosevic. He shown now 
as the saviorr of the nation. Having brought the nation to the brink 
of war and foreign military intervention, he's now portraying the 
whole thing as a huge victory of his statesmanship and political wisdom. 
The Polish foreign minister was in Belgrade today, to sign the agreement 
to take the next step, which is deploying those civilian monitors 
in Kosovo on behalf of the Organization for Security and Cooperation 
in Europe. Now, what will it take to get those monitors into Kosovo? 
Are they going to have enough power to do the job and what will they 
actually be doing? They will actually be monitoring the situation 
on the ground. They will be able to tell the international community 
is Milosevic complying with the agreement, what is the police doing, 
is it overstepping its authority and, indeed, to check what the Ethnic 
Albanian separatists are doing. Let's not forget that we have the 
Kosovo Liberation Army, an armed separatist movement, which is, indeed, 
separate. It doesn't agree with the deal that has been struck between 
Holbrooke and Milosevic and that it will continue to pursue its own 
goal, which is independence for Kosovo. They will be unarmed. They 
will have a lot of work. But they will be fully protected by NATO. 
NATO will keep its troop in a state of readiness with more ships in 
the Adriatic and in the neighboring countries like Albania and Macedonia. 
So those monitors will actually have a lot of muscle. Now, what about 
the agreement itself, in general? Is Mr. Milosevic ultimately going 
to pull out all of his forces or not? We -- we have been hearing reports 
that fresh troops are entering Kosovo, just as some of the older units 
are being pulled out. Most of us here in Belgrade believe that Milosevic 
has actually capitulated to the international community and that, 
this time around, he will comply fully with what he has agreed to 
do, not because he's a man of -- who honors his word or because he 
wants to, but because he has no other choice. And serious discussion 
about the political future of Kosovo will then be able to take place? 
Well, that's going to be the real tricky one because that is where 
the two sides disagree completely and that's the one point where the 
international community is actually standing by the Serbians' side. 
It does not want to see an independent Kosovo fearing the creation 
of a greater Albania in the region, which could destabilize the whole 
Southeast Europe. So therefore, that is one thing which nobody can 
foresee at this stage. I think Albanians will get a large degree of 
self-rule and autonomy in Kosov, indeed. Whether their appetites can 
be satisfied with that or whether they will pursue independence, that 
remains to be seen. That was Ninad Shebek reporting from Belgrade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>