<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981016.2000.2840 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is "The World." I'm Tony Cahn. We return now to today's geography 
quiz. Remember, we were looking for a country made up of about 320 
islands in the Southwest Pacific Ocean, a land of warm temperatures 
and spicy food. Here to help us answer today's quiz is Chef Graham 
Kur whose newest cookbook is called "The Gathering Place." Graham 
is taking us to Fiji today to check out some of the local fare. But 
Graham says it's not really called Fiji. It's really Viti. Viti? My 
Fiji is actually your Viti? Yes, exactly. I had no idea and how do 
you spell Viti, the same way as Fiji? No, Viti. Well, I'll be. OK. 
Well, let's prefer to it as Fiji, just for those who may be tuning 
in late, so they'll know that Fiji is still there. It is, in fact, 
the answer to our geo quiz. What -- what took you to Viti/Fiji? Well, 
a trip around the world looking for great flavors that could be brought 
home to somehow contest this issue of big lumps of meats and salt, 
fat and sugar, which have largely sort of depressed our health in 
these days. And so, I just want to go and see how the rest of the 
world did it and did it right and then bring it home. And you're bringing 
it home in a new book, I gather. yes. yes. "The Gathering Place," 
right? I gather. And what would you call this -- this mix of pickled 
fish and coconut cream? Well, there it's called cocoda. It's seviche, 
you may know it as. And -- and... In Mexico, that's... ... and, yes. 
Well, a number of poachers in warmer environments have always done 
this. Before refrigeration, you would take a perfectly good fish out 
of the sea, you -- and it would spoil in the obviously warm and humid 
climate, quite quickly. So pickling is, of course, one of the primary 
issues. And since you've got marvelous limes that you can pull straight 
off the tree, squish the limes, pour it over the top of this freshly 
filleted fish, which whitens it. um-hm. It's almost white straight 
through and it's ready to use, chopped up and put into a coconut cream. 
I used orange roughy and -- which I think is very good fish for this. 
And I put some jalapeno, you'll be pleased to hear, a little tomato 
and some red peppers and cucumbers and a little dill and ginger and 
shrimp, just at the last moment, stirred into the whole thing. Crisp 
salad -- delicious thing, and about 160 calories and just three grams 
of fat in the whole thing. That -- that bears repeating. That number 
is so small, I can barely believe it. 160 calories? 160 calories and 
three grams of fat. That's incredible. yes. And cocoda is the name 
of this -- this blessing from Fiji? it is. If you'd want the recipe 
for cocoda, you certainly don't need it, Graham Kur, but those of 
you who are listening, check out "The World" on-line at www.theworld.org. 
Again, to find out how to make cocoda. -- you know how to do that 
already, visit us at www.theworld.org. And Graham Kur, thank you so 
much for speaking to us and happy trails on all your many journeys 
for the next book. Tony, I'm delighted and it was wonderful to speak 
to you. I enjoy my travel around the world every day. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>