<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981016.0600.1998 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Israeli commentators say that the countries Foreign Minister, Ariel 
Sharon could play a decisive role at these talks. Ross Donn has a 
report from Jerusalem. Israeli political analyst say they believe 
the appointment of Mr. Sharon shows that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
is ready to reach a new peace agreement with the Palestinians. They 
say that Mr. Netanyahu needs Mr. Sharon to win the backing of right 
wingers in his cabinet to allow the transfer of more territory in 
the west bank to Palestinian self-rule. Mr. Sharon is seen as a watch 
dog to make sure that Israel security interests are protected in any 
such agreement. Analyst Leslie Selser who writes for the Jerusalem 
Report says the Primes Minister selected Mr. Sharon to help in the 
negotiations. He'd probably uh try to be um perhaps uh the bad cop 
to Netanyahu's good cop and other people playing good cop uh in the 
negotiations. And, uh, this will be Netanyahu and will be designed 
to get Israel a better deal. Mr. Selser rejects suggestions that Mr. 
Netanyahu appointed Mr. Sharon to destroy the peace process. He says 
the Prime Minister's career is at stake and that Mr. Netanyahu will 
do everything possible to appease the U.S. Government. He could have 
uh destroyed the process himself without bringing Sharon in. And leaving 
um Sharon and the right wing very happy by the fact that the process 
had been stopped. The reason they need Sharon is because he feels 
he might have to go ahead with the process, uh satisfy the Americans 
and because if - if, uh, there is no deal and Israel is blindfold, 
then the international repercussions of that uh could be extremely 
dangerous for Israel and for the Netanyahu's own political future. 
The director of the Center for Palestine Research and Studies, Ayield 
Shikaki also believes that Mr. Netanyahu wants to reach a new interim 
agreement on the future of the West Bank. He says Mr. Netanyahu fears 
that without an accord, Palestinian Leader Yasser Arafat will carry 
out his threat to declare a Palestinian state in May of next year. 
I think that this point Netanyahu's interest in -- in reaching an 
agreement. I don't think that he wants to risk a major failure that 
will only make the Palestinians either or move and may inevitable 
in the whole condition of the whole world that might follow. So, yeah, 
I think his interested in reaching an agreement uh and I also think 
that Mr. Sharon might also be interested in reaching an with the Palestinian. 
But while there is strong pressure on the sides to succeed, the analyst 
say Mr. Sharon's expected to lower any Palestinian expectations about 
further territorial gains. In the past, he has insisted that Israel 
hand over no more than an additional 9 percent of the west bank before 
the two sides enter the negotiations on a final settlement of the 
Israeli/Palestinian conflict. Ross Donn for VOA News, Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>