<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981016.0600.0868 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The death of a young man in the U.S. State of Wyoming has touched 
a raw nerve here in Washington. Matthew Shephard, an acknowledged 
homosexual, was brutally beaten and left tied to a fence near the 
town of Laramie. His attackers are in jail. Some members of Congress 
want new Legislation to be his legacy. We get details from Congressional 
Correspondent, Paula Wilson. It was a crime that sparked cries of 
outrage across the nation and debate on Capital Hill. Matthew Shephard's 
attackers say they just wanted to rob him. But police sense a darker 
motive. They indicate the University of Wyoming student was brutally 
beaten because he was gay. His death has prompted new calls for Congressional 
action. At a rally Wednesday night on the steps of the U.S. Capital, 
thousands gather to urge the passage of a law that would make it easier 
for the Federal Government to step in and prosecute violence against 
homosexuals as hate crimes. Maryland Republican, Connie Morella took 
part in the vigil. Rep. CONNIE MORELLA,, MD: We do have to recognize 
that many citizens of our country cannot take for granted the right 
to live life without fear of violence simply based on their race, 
their ethnicity, religion, disability or sexual orientation. But news 
Morella faces strong opposition within her own party. Conservative 
Christian groups oppose efforts to broaden the existing hate crimes 
law saying it would sanction sexual conduct they consider unacceptable. 
And so republican leaders of the House of Representatives brought 
a resolution to the floor condemning the murder of Matthew Shephard 
but making no mention of the proposed hate crime legislation. Wyoming's 
lone member of the House, Republican Barbara Cubin knew Matthew Shephard 
and said the language reflects the wishes of his family. Rep. BARBARA 
CUBIN, WY: We should not turn Matthew into a martyr and his family 
asks has asked that we do not turn Matthew into a martyr. He would 
not want that and his family does not want that. Out of respect for 
Matthew, this resolution is not about advancing legislation, it is 
about advancing our in -- our tolerance in others regardless of their 
gender, race, or sexual orientation. But Democrat Nancy Pelosi said 
words of condemnation and condolence were not enough. Her Northern 
California district is home to one of the largest and most politically 
active homosexual communities in the nation. Rep. NANCY PELOSI,, CA: 
What more needs to happen? How many more deaths, how many assaults 
on the personal integrity of people physically and otherwise uh, need 
to happen before this Congress will see the need for the hate crimes 
legislation. Prosecution of violent crimes in the United States is 
almost always conducted at the local and state level. But if an act 
is found to be a possible violation of federal hate crimes law, the 
defendant can face a trial in U.S. Court and tougher penalties. The 
current hate crimes law covers offenses motivated by race, religion 
or ethnic origin. An expanded law would include gender, disabilities 
and sexual orientation. Paula Wilson, VOA News, Capital Hill. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>