<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981016.1700.3176 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Much attention is given these days to the latest in high technology. 
Yet, engineers still need to build some basic devices that help people 
perform very simple tasks. From Philadelphia, Susan Morris tells us 
about one such device. Designed by a group of engineering students, 
that has dramatically improved the life of a young man with Cerebral 
Palsy. Taking tickets? Yes, sir. Thank you. David Sorken works at 
a Philadelphia movie theater collecting and tearing patrons' tickets 
as they enter the lobby. It's the young man's first job, and he loves 
it. Now that I have a job, I don't have to sit around the house a 
lot. David wanted to work more hours at the movie theater. But the 
21 year old was severely disabled with Cerebral Palsy. Because his 
muscles are weak, David can only tear one ticket at a time. That meant 
he could only work weekday afternoons. When business at the theater 
is slow. Pat Rey is David's counselor at SPIN, a support group for 
the disabled. A year ago, she contacted the engineering department 
at West Point Military Academy about designing and building a device 
that would help David tear the tickets. I made the decision to go 
to a school because it was something that had to be developed. We 
needed some creative minds that really didn't know the boundaries. 
So, I thought school and students were probably the right place to 
go. Four West Point students signed up to design a ticket-tearer for 
David. Cadet Scott Lord said he thought the project would be easy. 
SCOTT LORD, CADET, WEST POINT: For four years, we've been trained 
to use the Scientific Method. And to work everything out in a rational 
manner. And, everything happens and works just kind of nice and pretty. 
But Scott Lord and his fellow cadets soon learned that designing a 
mechanical device, even one as simple as a ticket-tearer, is not as 
easy as it looks. Jason Whipple was part of the team. A pair of scissors, 
you can say is simple. But to be able to take a pair of scissors and 
make them so David could use them isn't that simple. Colby Shaw says 
the engineering students also ran into trouble, because they underestimated 
what it's like to have David's disability. Well, we had a foundation 
and we ran with it. But of course, we started down the wrong path 
because we hadn't talked to David enough. We brought him back up when 
we had a prototype. And the prototype just didn't even work. Because 
we hadn't taken into account a couple things different things about 
David and the way he moves his arms. So, the cadets went back to the 
drawing board. Five months later, as their teacher, George Catalino 
explains, they had a ticket-tearer device that David could use. The 
cadets took things that they found, essentially lying around an old 
abandoned machine shop. Cobbled it together, and came up with this 
thing that looks like very powerful shears. It's a set of shears and 
a box, and then there's a collecting box underneath it. The engineering 
students came to the movie theater in Philadelphia to give David the 
ticket-tearer. David was thrilled when he saw how the device worked. 
I put it in the slot, then pull the handle. And it cuts it. Before, 
I had to use my hands. I love it! David's counselor, Pat Rey, says 
he's a different person since working with the cadets. David has changed 
amazingly since we started this project. He has so much more self-esteem. 
He feels a real brotherhood with the cadets from West Point. He considers 
himself one of them. He's just much more confident. Even in his work. 
Because, I think he knows he will be independent, I guess, and a lot 
more confidence. Cadets Scott Lord and Nick Parmigiano say they found 
building the device for David a very satisfying experience. I just 
love the look on his face when he uses the ticket-tearer, and it works. 
And he just, he lights up, because in the future it is going to be 
so much better for him. It's just an awesome feeling to start out 
with an idea. And then build it. And have a product which actually 
helps someone. That's really what engineering's all about. Thanks 
to the ticket-tearer, David Sorken is now working two more days a 
week at the movie theater. And West Point has signed on with SPIN 
to build more devices for the disabled. For VOA NEWS NOW, I'm Susan 
Morris. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>