<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981016.0600.2936 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Time for business news. Faced with a world financial crisis and determine 
to stimulate the U.S. economy, the U.S. Central Bank has made further 
cuts in interest rates setting off a rally on world stock markets. 
The policy making Federal Open Market Committee, meeting in Washington 
yesterday, reduced two key short-term lending rates by one quarter 
of one percent each. The U.S. stock market reacted to the change with 
a immediate surge. The Dow Jones Industrial Average ended the day 
up 331 points., or more than 4 percent after the Central Bank's announcement. 
The rally continued with Asian markets today. News Now's Charlene 
Porter talked with reporter Amy Beckers in our Asia Newscenter in 
Hong Kong. We've seen a very big rally across Asia. All the markets 
have lifted substantially, very big gains today. Uh, some uh, marked 
gains in Hong Kong we've seen a 9 percent rally, the markets closed 
9 percent higher... Nine percent, wow, that's pretty incredible, isn't 
it? It certainly is. It's pretty incredible and it brings Hong Kong's 
market to a five month closing high of 9777. Tokyo also had a nice 
gain of 2.2 percent today. Now, is this uh directly linked to the 
interest rate trends in the United States and what we saw on Wall 
Street? Charlene, it is. It certainly is. Investors here have really 
taken heart from the rally in the U.S. stock market and also that 
cut in interest rates. However, analysts out here and economists, 
they're all saying that perhaps it's a little early to get so excited 
as investors have gotten today. They're concerned that a lot of the 
fundamentals in Asia still remain poor and they're saying that they 
don't expect these gains to hold. They see these gains short-lived. 
Is there a -- a substitutive connection between a cut in interest 
rates here in the United States and economic conditions in Asia or 
is it the psychological boost that's driving the markets there today. 
I think it's primarily the psychological boost. That's certainly seems 
to be the opinion of market watchers in Asia. However, there is a 
connection. The fact that interest rates are cut in the United States 
means that the U.S. economy has a buffer so the, it's less likely 
that the U.S. will fall into recession as many countries in Asia has. 
Now that means that exports in Asia will have a place to go. They'll 
still have a destination in the U.S. markets where capital now is 
a little bit cheaper. And, so that does reassure Asian companies. 
But, I saw one, uh, one economic commentator uh remark the other day 
that, uh, Asia cannot continue to export itself out of these problems. 
Specifically, Japan. That fundamentally, it uh they have to uh pursue 
their own reforms with their own economy if they're going to get out 
of the mess it's been uh troubling the whole entire region for the 
last fifteen months. Charlene, that's definitely what economists out 
here say, too. I think that investors take some heart from the fact 
that the U.S. had cut rates because they know they still will be a 
place to export goods to. The U.S. is a major market uh or certainly 
a major market for many, many companies across Asia. But I -- I do 
agree. Uh, economist here are cautious because they point to problems 
internal problems within these economies. Uh, most notably that most 
of them have too much debt. Now uh, Japan is a case in point here 
because it's got a banking crisis, it has a lot of economic problems 
of its own, record high unemployment right now, uh, many problems 
to deal with internally. So, certainly, uh getting out of this crisis 
would be a balance between solving those internal problems. But, I 
think the fact that the U.S. remains strong is still something investors 
here are pinning their hopes to right now. Japan's upper house in 
parliament has given approval to this, uh, package to clean up the 
banking sector. Could that be a factor in these star markets today, 
too? Particularly in Japan, yes, it could be. However, that was expected 
to come. It wasn't a surprise to investors. It's certainly good news 
as far as investors go, because Japan's banking sector now uh will 
be cleaned up. The process now can begin in earnest. So, it's good 
news but still a lot remains to be seen on how and when Japan is able 
to kick the recession. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>