<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981016.1700.0912 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And now to politics here in the U.S. There are less than three weeks 
to go until the November 3 Midterm Congressional elections. Both Republicans 
and Democrats are getting some encouraging signals from new public 
opinion polls. VOA's Jim Malone has a preview of the 1998 campaign 
for control of the U.S. House and Senate. Democrats are encouraged. 
Because they believe the Republican push for impeachment against President 
Clinton is sparking an angry backlash among Democratic voters. The 
Democratic party's general chairman, Colorado governor Roy Romer speaking 
on ABC's Good Morning America. Points to recent public opinion polls 
indicating that most Americans are taking a negative view of the way 
in which Congressional Republicans have opened up an impeachment inquiry 
of the President. You know, sure there was a backlash. The Republicans 
have been hurt badly by overreaching, and they should be hurt. American 
people have got this straight. They're trying to make politics out 
of something they shouldn't. The latest New York Times CBS news poll 
also shows a drop in public approval of Congress because of the impeachment 
investigation. While the President's approval rating remains relatively 
high at 63 percent. But, Republicans are taking heart from some of 
the recent poll results as well. Several surveys indicate Republican 
voters are more likely than Democrats to vote on November 3. And that 
usually translates into gains in the House and Senate. Republican 
National Committee Chairman, Jim Nicholson, also on ABC's Good Morning 
America. Says Republican incumbents in Congress will have plenty to 
boast about as they return home for the final two weeks of the campaign. 
If you look at the polls that talk about who's most likely to vote. 
They will tell you that Republicans are far more likely to vote. But, 
we're not running on polls. We're running on our accomplishments. 
We have cut taxes for working Americans. We've balanced the budget. 
We've reformed welfare. At least one prominent pollster, John Zogby 
sees little evidence of a Democratic resurgence. He predicts Republican 
gains of about ten seats in the House and five seats in the Senate. 
Democrats want very much to limit the Republican gains. But, they 
readily acknowledge that they have more of a challenge in encouraging 
their supporters to get out and vote. The polls also contain good 
news for Congressional incumbents for both parties. Most Americans 
seem inclined to re-elect their representatives in Congress. Largely 
because the U.S. economy remains strong. All 435 house seats and 34 
of the 100 U.S. Senate seats will be decided on November 3. In addition, 
36 of the 50 states will hold guganetorial elections. Republicans 
currently hold a 22 seat margin in the House, a 10 seat advantage 
in the Senate, and 32 of the 50 state governor shifts. Jim Malone, 
VOA NEWS, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>