<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981016.0600.2473 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Caribbean Regional Drug Control Conference dedicated to anti-drug 
enforcement is underway in Miami. Michael Bowman reports that the 
United States has come under criticism for not setting a good example 
for it's neighbors to follow. The conference is a follow-up to last 
year's summit of Caribbean community leaders in Barbados. There, President 
Clinton and other participants recognized the universal threat posed 
by illegal narcotics. Drug policy director McCaffrey is calling for 
counter narcotics cooperation on a variety of fronts. Three key assets 
are -- extradition of criminals so they can't hide in another nation 
and asset forfeiture. We have to track down money whether it's in 
the Cayman Islands or Miami and ensure that hundreds of millions of 
dollars of illegal profits are seized. The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration 
estimates roughly 30 percent of U.S. bound drugs pass through the 
Caribbean. Puerto Rico base Special Agent Mike Vajil says international 
cooperation on intelligence matters is a key to effective drug intradiction. 
We have a lot of drug trafficking organizations that operate in various 
island nations. It's not that they are strictly focused on one area. 
And, therefore, some of these countries have information that when 
shared with one another it can put into better prospective the extent 
of the drug traffic and also allow them to be a little bit more proactive 
in solving those problems. Sonita Abrahams, head of a drug awareness 
and treatment center in Jamaica, says the war on drugs is a campaign 
of education. We need to begin at the very beginning. From the home 
um when the children are really young, then into the schools and into 
the community at all different levels. Ms. Abraham says socio-economic 
issues are also a factor. If there is a lot of poverty, if young people 
cannot look forward to getting jobs once they left school, then they 
are very open to becoming not only drug users but drug traffickers. 
Many Caribbean and Central American officials say they are grateful 
to the United States for providing technical assistance in the war 
on drugs. But one conference participant says U.S. leadership is lacking 
in a critical area. Grenada's Minister of State, Patrick Bub says 
the root cause of the drug problem is the widespread decay of moral 
principles and the disintegration of family structures. Mr. Bub says 
one look at American television including news coverage of President 
Clinton and Monica Lewinsky shows the United States has strayed from 
what he calls the righteous path. We look to America for good example. 
We look to America for many things. But what we find coming from that 
source where we look for good is not good. We would want to see America 
returning in a real intangible way to support a family life. The Caribbean 
Regional Drug Control Conference concludes Friday. Michael Bowman, 
VOA News, Miami. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>