<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981016.1700.2155 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In today's global economy, it often seems the only way to compete 
is to be bigger. Whether in communications, airlines, or farms. The 
trend is toward giant mergers, conglomerates, or combining the resources 
of several companies. But is bigger better for business in the economy? 
That's the question examined on today's edition of Dateline. Here's 
Pamela Taylor. Two of the biggest mergers in history were recorded 
this year. The U.S. telecommunications giant, WorldCom bought MCI 
for 37 billion dollars. And the German auto maker Dengler-Benz bought 
the U.S. firm Chrysler for 34 billion. Two U.S. financial giants also 
merged this year. New York's Citibank, and Traveler's Group, for a 
whopping 70 billion. There have also been a series of agreements among 
various airlines around the world. To share routes, planes, and personnel. 
All of these arrangement were seen as necessary to improve profit 
margins. Ben Slade, Senior economist with the Washington-based group, 
Plan Econ, says there's definitely a trend toward bigness in the global 
economy. But, he says that does not mean that there is no place for 
small. There are advantages to small size. Just as there are advantages 
to large size. If large size firms can capture economies of scale, 
and lower their cost of production by producing large amounts. Small 
firms can often times be more concerned about quality more directly 
in touch with the consumers. Be more agile and nimble. I guess it's 
that the bigger is more visible. We see these giant corporations merging 
across borders, across oceans. And we see the long reach of successful 
American companies, such as, I don't know, K-Mart, or Wal-Mart and 
McDonald's. And it looks like that's a trend. But you're saying it's 
not necessarily. No, I don't think it is. Well, it is a trend in one 
sense. But one can find counter examples. There are many cases of 
companies that are spinning off assets. Because they have concluded 
that they have unrelated divisions that don't have synergies between 
them. And therefore, don't create efficiencies, and don't add to profit. 
One can also point to the problems that we see in Asia right now. 
In Japan and in Korea, and places like that. As problems caused by 
corporate structures that are too big and then will be. And have very 
clumsy relationships with banks that preclude market type interactions. 
Rather than going out there and being, in some sense, smaller and 
more nimble. But those things you just listed seem to be issues of 
more concern to the developed nations. Whereas, the need to be bigger 
in order to compete in the global economy would be what would be facing 
most developing and emerging democracies. Would it not? Well, that's 
true. But if you want to be international, you have to either be big, 
or be part of an organization that is big. But, there are many firms 
that don't sell internationally. Clearly, globalization is something 
that makes firms bigger. That's right. But, there are other factors 
at work. Its not the only, and perhaps not the dominant factor that's 
influencing the size of firms these days. For example, if you are 
an automobile company, you really want to be global. You want to be 
able to produce components for cars. And put them together in places 
that are closest to the markets that you want to sell to. But also, 
take advantage of low cost of labor or materials, or whatever. By 
contrast, if you are a computer software firm, being big and the risks 
of being slow and clumsy in the market, can be the kiss of death. 
And then you want to be small, so that you can quickly take advantage 
of market opportunities. Now, there are two trends that work. One 
is the globalization trend. One is the spread of information technology. 
One argues for big size. The other argues for small size. Some companies 
will be in the situation where the lure of globalization will be more 
attractive. Others will be in the situation where the lure of being 
small and nimble, and taking advantage of information technology, 
or what have you, will be more attractive for them. So, the answer 
I guess, to the question: Is bigger better? The answer is sometimes, 
but not necessarily always. That's right. Ask an economist a question, 
you'll get an answer: it depends. Ben Slade, Senior economist with 
Plan Econ. Speaking to us in Washington d.c. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>