<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981016.1700.0572 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Today is World Food Day, an annual observance to focus on the long-standing 
problem of feeding the world's people. The international aid organization, 
World Relief, is calling on churches and individuals around the world 
who observe the day as a day of fasting and prayer for people in one 
particular part of the world: the African nation of Sudan. U.S. Congressman 
Tony Hall is joining World Relief, and calling attention to the plight 
of the starving in Sudan. He talked earlier, with VOA's Frank Whitis. 
One of the things that many people in this country are doing is that 
on World Food Day, they're fasting for one day. Or they're fasting 
for one meal, or two meals for Sudan. And fasting is kind of a long-standing 
tradition among people who are concerned about the hungry. And the 
idea is to go without food for a day or a meal, or even longer than 
a day. So, to get an idea of what hungry people have to go through. 
And it's only a symbolic kind of thing. But it helps to contribute 
the cost of what we would pay for our meals. To pay for a few more 
of people that are suffering. Now did you not recently visit Sudan? 
Yes, I was in Sudan in May. And I visited, I spent most of my time 
in the southern part. In the southern province of Baralcazal. And 
that's a province that's been especially hit very hard. And it was 
very grim. Two million people have already died in the country's latest 
cycle of fighting and famine. And almost one hundred thousand people, 
just in this province, since I was there in May. Now, as I recall, 
this goes back quite a ways, involving Sudan. The terrible tragedy 
there. No food, the fighting. But, these efforts are made, but it 
seems the world can't really get down to solving this problem. Well, 
a lot of these famines across the world are really man-made. And, 
you can't solve the problems just by giving food. But what you can 
do, is save lives in the process. In hopes that we can get a longer 
term cease fire and hopefully, we can have some kind of political 
solution in the very near future. Having said that, Sudan has been 
fighting for a lot of years, many decades now. And a lot of the donors, 
a lot of people all over the world are frustrated with the whole situation. 
With the political leaders. Both in the north and in the south. And 
we want them to solve the problems. We want them to have a political 
settlement. And until they do, their people are just suffering left 
and right. But what are we to do are we to sit on the sidelines and 
watch innocent people die well there's nothing we can do about it. 
There is something we can do about it. We can help with humanitarian 
aid. And as far as the political solution, I've been calling for a 
long time for a special envoy. Somebody with international stature. 
Maybe somebody from the United States. It doesn't have to be. That 
could go and work with before with the leadership of Sudan. Somebody 
similar to George Mitchell, or former James Baker, former Secretary 
of State James Baker. To go over there and work with them to try to 
solve this problem. Democratic Congressman Tony Hall speaking with 
VOA's Frank Whitis about World Food Day. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>