<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981016.0600.3214 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pianist and composer Scott Kasu was at the peak of his recording career 
in 1989 when he nearly lost his life. He was struck by an automobile 
while crossing a busy street in Los Angeles. His recovery took more 
than three years and involved intensive physical therapy and rehabilitation. 
Now at 47, Scott is in fine form. During his current US tour, he stopped 
by at our studios to talk to VOA's Doug Lavine about his amazing comeback. 
"Coming Home" from the brand new CD by Scott Kasu called "When Spirits 
Fly." Scott, it's, uh, your first in about six years, not doubt your 
spirit was flying to make such an incredible recovery and here you 
are picking up right where you left off and it's good to have you 
back. Thank you very much, Doug. How did the accident change your 
life, musically and personally? How did it effect you? That's a great 
question, because it really effected me in mostly, in my, uh, re-evaluating 
what the meaning of life is. When you almost lose your life, you really 
have a chance to look at what life is to you. Um, for me, I was at 
a peak of my career. I was touring internationally as well as nationally. 
My recordings were doing well. And then, bang, it's gone. Was there 
any point that you felt like, "I just want to give up. I can't go 
any further. I'm -- I'm -- I've had it. I've gone as far as I can 
with therapy, that's it. I think I did several times because I had 
to cancel a whole year of being on tour. And, you know, it's difficult 
enough when you can't speak the language anyway, but when you're trying 
to re-learn English. I was having a hard time trying to get uh reawakened 
to -- to those realities. But, I was very fortunate. I had lost of 
support around me, lots of great musicians and -- and my family. So, 
uh, I want... You've done it all. Instrumental music. Crossing multiple 
boundaries, Latin blues and jazz to classical and folk, not to mention 
the, uh, background music for a lot of television commercials and 
documentaries. Uh, with your career now entering it's 20th year, how 
would you define the music that you make? I think that, uh, it's difficult 
to -- to call it a style. But, it's probably a combination of world 
beat, jazz, folk, rhythm and blues,. Uh, I jokingly call it heavy 
mental. But, I think that... A term I think Michael Hygis used one 
time. That's right. So, uh. Because so -- we -- we didn't really know 
what to call the music because it involved so much of our -- our styles. 
But, I think that the adult contemporary jazz is probably as close 
as I'm going to get. Scott will be appearing live in the Washington 
DC area this week for a uh solo concert. He's on tour. Thanks for 
coming in again today, Scott. My pleasure. "When spirits. This is 
called "Sakura". I'm Doug Lavine. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>