<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981016.1700.2428 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Down on the farm, the trend toward bigness has, of course, been going 
on for a long time. Today, there are just under two million farms 
in the United States. Half the number fifty years ago. Although 60 
percent of them are small, family run farms, they produce only five 
percent of the nation's farm output. The rest is produced by just 
two percent of America's farms. Large scale operations with gross 
earnings above half a million dollars a year. VOA's agriculture correspondent 
Rob Siveck has more on that part of our story. Paul Lasley, a professor 
of rural sociology at Iowa State University, says the trend toward 
bigger, corporate style farms in America has been driven by simple 
economics. When you're big, he explains, it's easier to cut costs 
and earn a profit. Most of the research now shows that large farms 
do achieve some economies of scale. Particularly in their ability 
to negotiate better prices when purchasing inputs. And negotiating 
better prices on selling. Prof. Lasley adds, that many moderate sized 
farms can also be very efficient producers. But he says big farms 
have an even more significant advantage. The currently very low prices 
being paid farmers for bulk grains and livestock are fueling a financial 
crisis that is bankrupting many moderate-sized producers. Most big 
farms, says Prof. Lasley, will whether the storm. Farms, independent 
of size right now, are losing money. They're selling commodities at 
below the cost of production. Which if this were to continue for a 
longer period of time. What it says is that those who survive are 
those who have got lots of equity. In short, who has the deepest pockets. 
But, there are other important issues to consider when gauging the 
impact of fewer and bigger farms. Paul Lasley says, a steady decline 
in the number of farm families has stretched the fabric of rural communities 
and threatened rural culture. Many rural businesses not directly tied 
to farming are losing sales and folding. And there are serious concerns, 
too, that bigger farms pose a proportionately larger risk to the environment. 
When heavier demands on the soil and water, greater use of farm chemicals, 
and bigger livestock waste problems. That's what farmer Curt Ahrens 
is worried about. Mr. Ahrens raises maize, soybeans, hogs, and cattle 
on about 250 hectares of land in Nebraska. He says he can sum up the 
real value of his medium-sized, family run farm, and others like it, 
in one word. And that is stewardship. Generally, the smaller units, 
like you say, the small to medium size family farms. They live right 
on the land that they farm. And so, you definitely have a reason to 
take better care of that ground. I'm the fourth generation on our 
farm. In my family. And so, I've got a really vested interest in taking 
care of that land for another generation. Iowa State University's 
Paul Lasley believes the trend toward larger farms in America will 
continue. But he says that does not mean small farms will disappear. 
He envisions an agricultural future, in which bulk commodities like 
grain or livestock, are produced almost exclusively by giant farms. 
Using environmentally-friendly and sustainable farming practices. 
At the same time, he predicts smaller farms, specializing in vegetables, 
fruits, and other high value foods will also thrive. And so help preserve 
the fabric of America's rural communities. VOA agriculture correspondent, 
Rob Siveck. So the answer to the question Is bigger better? indeed 
seems to be, as economist Ben Slade put it: it depends. For Dateline, 
I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>