<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981016.0600.1355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
That's the Japanese Tachen Daiko, the spirit of ironworkers taiko 
drum troop. Performing recently in Austin, Texas. It's an exchange 
that's part of Austin's sister city relationship with the Japanese 
city of Owita. But also came about in part because of the music of 
the log dead country western singer Hank Williams. Carolyn Weaver 
explains. Hank Williams and Japanese drumming are an unlikely combination. 
But that's the stuff of cultural exchange. Interminglings that no 
one could predict just because of the corky taste of individual people. 
In this case, it had to do with a woman in Austin and a man in Owita. 
The most amazing thing to me about our relationship with Owita, is 
their incredible generosity to Austin. They gave us this drum troop. 
The drum troop raised money. This is the biggest project we have ever 
undertaken to get into booking venues and promoting concerts and selling 
tickets. WEAVERL Farrah Wimer is a member of the Austin Sister City 
Committee that arranges exchanges with Owita, a city in Southern Japan. 
Ms. Wimer was present at the first exchange in 1991 when a 75 member 
delegation visited from Owita. That's actually when I met Hank. He 
turned to me at the final dinner party and said, "Hi, my name is Hank." 
And, I'm like, "excuse me, are you with the delegation?" And, he whipped 
out his picture of Hank Williams Jr. and I immediately knew that there 
was somebody I wanted to meet, because I also I worshipped Hank Williams. 
Ms. Wimer is referring to Todanobu Udiyama, the tour manager for Tuch 
Ching Daiko's visit. When I was a high school boy, junior high, uh, 
I heard a different music from radio. I never heard that, um, kind 
of music. At that time, I didn't speak and understand English. Your 
cheatin' heart... Mr. Udiyama says he didn't need English to understand 
the music of Hank Williams. But, I was so moved -- moved with tear. 
I know after that that's the music of Hank Williams song - "Your Cheating 
Heart." So, I became a contributing fan. So, when Hank Udiyama learned 
that the Owita Drum Troop wanted to make an international debut, he 
called the Austin's Sister City Committee and got the trip going. 
The troop played in sold out Austin's concert halls and in schools 
during the week in September. The groups leader, Hadeo Yamanouchi 
explains that Taiko Drumming is part of all Shinto ceremonies and 
festivals. It's a way of expressing joy and enthusiasm toward the 
gods. They're about 5,000 different Taiko groups in Japan. The Tut-Chien 
Daiko is part of the steelworkers union in Owita. The name of the 
troop means Spirit of the Ironworkers. And several of their drum pieces 
celebrate the process of making steel. And they actually say they 
gather inspiration from blacksmith's pounding the shape of metal. 
And, they also say that they feel identification with the whole infrastructure 
of Owita because they are making the core. They are making the rebars, 
I think they're called, that goes inside the concrete that's inside 
the building. But back to the Hank Williams connection. I asked Mr. 
Umiyama why he taken the name of his hero who died 45 years ago. He 
said it began with his dream of Hank Williams Jr. also a country singer 
performing in Japan. And, so, I wrote a letter to Junior again and 
again and again. In 1991, I got a letter from Hank Jr. and, I went 
to meet him in Nashville, Tennessee. I asked him coming to Japan and 
he said, "No problem. OK". And he came to Japan in 1994 and we had 
specials. So, Hank Jr. called me Hank. The Tachin Daiko drum troop's 
visit to Austin was just one of the number of exchanges between the 
two cities. Next month, Owita will give Austin a granite gate for 
the cities Japanese garden. Austin athletes travel to Owita each year 
for the world's largest wheel chair marathon race. An Owita athlete 
won Austin's 10k race a few years ago. I'm Carolyn Weaver. The day 
I passed you on the street And my heart fell at your feet I can't 
help it if I'm still in love with you... 
</TEXT>
</DOC>