<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981016.1700.1356 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yesterday, Ben Bova, a noted American science writer, the author of 
How Science is Extending your Life Span and The Changing of the World. 
Cited a number of scientific breakthroughs, including cell regeneration, 
which may soon make it possible for humans to live for indefinite 
periods. Dr. Bova discusses some of the social and economic challenges 
of living longer in a conversation with VOA's Dan Noble. Well, exactly, 
what are some of these challenges? Well, when people no longer fear 
dying. When the death rate has gone down almost to zero. For one thing, 
we're going to have to learn how to bring the birth rate down almost 
to zero. Or, we're going to overpopulate the world and cause tremendous 
problems that way. I see a new sense of human responsibility. When 
people live for centuries, they'll no longer be able to say: I don't 
have to worry about population growth. I don't have to worry about 
global warming. I don't have to worry about any of these long range 
problems. Because I'll be dead before they come about. My grandchildren 
will have to worry about it. No, you'll have to worry about it. You're 
going to still be here. So, I think it will generate a sense of responsibility 
in people. But you also write that, of all the barriers to life extension 
and immortality, religious injunction will undoubtedly be the most 
severe. Why is that? Well, they're the hardest to overcome. Because 
when people have a religious belief, the feel that they are getting 
the word from God. And to change that, or to go against it, is to 
go against God's wishes. But we've come to this situation before. 
In Immortality, I write about the situation in the 19th Century. When 
anesthesia was first used in surgical theaters. In Britain, moralists 
said: it's obvious you must never give anesthesia to a woman in childbirth. 
Because the Bible commands that women bring forth their children in 
pain and suffering. Well, Queen Victoria, who eventually had nine 
children, decided for her next birth, she was going to use anesthetics. 
And the argument dissolved. The moralists were silenced. And it turned 
out the church didn't crumble. The human race didn't come a bunch 
of depraved savages. What was seen as a moral issue the surgeons are 
playing God. Now we take it for granted. The first time we see people 
getting injections of enzymes that will extend their lifespans for 
centuries, people will say we're trying to evade God's justice. You're 
trying to evade going to hell. Or, postpone going to heaven. A hundred 
years from now, this will be seen as a quaint little argument. And 
people living for centuries will be taken for granted. Well, even 
if people live a decade or so more. Won't this have further implications 
of, for instance, work? Work and retirement age? Certainly will. If 
you're going to live to three or four hundred years, retiring at 65 
is nonsense. If you're going to be young for many centuries. You won't 
need to retire. You'll still be productive. What you will be able 
to do is change careers. Spend some time learning things that you've 
always wanted to learn but never felt you had the time for. Education 
is no longer going to mean sitting in a classroom and listening to 
a lectur Its going to mean a virtual reality experience.If you want 
to learn Chemistry Well, how do we plan economically to live, well 
if not forever, for a very, very long time? You know, this thing is 
sort of like the year 2000 problem for computers. People have known 
about the problem for a while, but they haven't done anything about 
it until the problem is almost upon us. Immortality is a book that 
talks about something that's going to happen. And begin to happen 
within 10 years. Nobody is even aware of it. That's why I wrote the 
book. So that people will be aware and begin to plan. Begin to think: 
how do I want to spend the centuries? How do I prepare for this financially? 
Thank you very much, Dr. Bova. We've been speaking with Ben Bova, 
author of How Science is Extending your Life Span and Changing the 
World. I'm Dan Noble. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>