<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981110.0273 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cyprus urged the European Union Tuesday to push Turkey into helping 
end the division of the Mediterranean island and not obstruct the 
EU membership drive of the Greek Cypriots. Opening formal membership 
talks with the EU, Cypriot Foreign Minister Ioannis Kasoulides stressed 
his government's commitment to the ``search of a viable and just solution.'' 
Reunification of the island communities would also lead to a ``substantial 
improvement'' in Greek-Turkish relations, he said. On Monday, the 
Dutch, German and French governments issued a declaration questioning 
the wisdom of admitting Cyprus unless the Mediterranean island is 
first reunified. Kasoulides said the three should have addressed themselves 
to Turkey which has been criticized for hampering United Nations efforts 
to reunify Greek and Turkish Cypriots. The three EU members said the 
division of Cyprus weighed on the island's membership chances. Turkey 
invaded the northern one-third of Cyprus in 1974 and installed a government, 
backed by 30,000 troops.The government is only recognized by Turkey. 
``I wish to reiterate once again that the government of Cyprus, despite 
the absence of positive developments and the hardening of the Turkish 
position, ... devotes all its powers and exerts all its efforts in 
search of a viable and just solution,'' Kasoulides told the EU foreign 
ministers. Sources said there was a fear in the EU of importing Greek-Turkish 
rivalry by admitting Cyprus and that once inside the EU Greek Cypriots 
_ the only government the international community recognizes on the 
island _ may hamper reunification and keep Turkish Cypriots out of 
the union. Austrian Foreign Minister Wolfgang Schuessel downplayed 
the statement of the Dutch, German and French governments saying it 
remained the formal EU view that Cyprus remained a valid candidate 
and that membership talks can encourage U.N. reconciliation efforts 
on the island. On Tuesday, the EU also began membership talks with 
five East European nations amid anxiety about the speed of its expansion 
drive. After meeting with Kasoulides, the EU foreign ministers met 
in one-on-one sessions with their colleagues from Poland, Hungary, 
the Czech Republic, Slovenia and Estonia. These countries are in the 
lead after preliminary expansion talks that began in March. The EU 
is not yet beginning formal membership talks with five other candidates: 
Lithuania, Latvia, Slovakia, Romania and Bulgaria. On Monday, the 
leaders of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia, at a meeting in Oslo, complained 
the EU moved so slowly it could destabilize the Baltic region. The 
EU has set no date for its eastward expansion. But the most successful 
candidates may well join as early as 2004. Lithuanian Prime Minister 
Gediminas Vagnorious warned of ``unnecessary tensions'' that could 
complicate relations with Russia and other neighbors unless the EU 
accelerated its screening of candidates. Formal membership negotiations 
with Cyprus and five East European nations open several days after 
the European Commission, in a fist-thick assessment report declared 
the expansion drive ``broadly on track.'' Although there was room 
for improvement, it said all 11 candidates were pursuing economic 
and political reforms to get in shape for EU membership. The Commission 
said Latvia, Lithuania and Slovakia do so well they may be advanced 
to the group of fast-track candidates as of 1999. At a regular foreign 
ministers meeting Monday, the EU broadly endorsed the commission's 
findings. Yet French Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine cautioned against 
advancing countries from the slower group saying that could widen 
the gap for Romania and Bulgaria which face the toughest task in meeting 
membership criteria. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>