<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981110.1188 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Victims of Kosovo's latest violence were buried Tuesday _ an ethnic 
Albanian separatist guerrilla whose family expressed pride for his 
cause and a Serb policeman who died in an apparent revenge killing. 
The funerals came amid new violence in the Albanian-majority Serbian 
province. A Kosovo Liberation Army guerrilla was killed and a policeman 
wounded in a clash in the central village of Negrovac, according to 
the Serb Media Center, the mouthpiece for Serb authorities. The report, 
which said the rebels attacked a police patrol, could not be independently 
confirmed. In Strovce, uniformed KLA guerrillas fired rifles in the 
air as Hamdi Hajrizi, 25, was buried in the small village 25 kilometers 
(15 miles) northwest of Pristina. Dozens of his fellow guerrillas 
attended. All wore camouflage uniforms displaying the red and yellow 
badges of the KLA. Hajrizi was one of five KLA members, including 
a commander of two brigades, killed last week when police opened fire 
on their two cars near the central village of Opterusa. Police said 
the rebels shot first. Despite their tears, Hajrizi's relatives said 
they were proud he joined the KLA. ``He was the first to take up weapons. 
It's in our blood _ we're a patriotic family,'' said his sister, Igballe 
Godeni, 28. ``We support the KLA with all our strength. I had five 
brothers, and I am prepared to lose them all to gain our freedom. 
In Kosovo Polje, just outside Pristina, the funeral of policeman Dejan 
Djatlov, 23, took place with little publicity. Foreign journalists 
were asked to stay away. Djatlov and a colleague were found shot to 
death on Monday in Malisevo. Police called the slayings retribution 
for the killings last week of Hajrizi and the other four KLA members. 
Kosovo is a province of Serbia, Yugoslavia's dominant republic. After 
a lull resulting from NATO threats to strike unless authorities pull 
back police and army units that spearheaded a nearly eight-month crackdown 
on Kosovo's separatist Albanians, violence by both sides has increased 
in the past week. Police have reported killing KLA fighters they said 
shot at them first in at least four separate clashes. In a separate 
report Tuesday, the Serb Media Center said two Serb civilians disappeared 
in Srbica village _ apparent victims of KLA abductions. Adem Demaci, 
a political spokesman for the KLA, on Tuesday accused Serb police 
of provoking the latest clashes and said any violence committed by 
his side was self-defense. But he did not comment on Serb accusations 
that Djatlov and the other policeman were kidnapped and summarily 
shot by the rebels. Serb police spokesman Bozidar Filic warned Monday 
that police may increase patrols on main roads in Malisevo if foreign 
observers fail to secure the thoroughfares. The Kosovo Information 
Service _ which reflects Albanian views _ suggested authorities were 
beefing up forces in violation of their Oct 12 draw-down agreement, 
saying 13 busloads of Serb police had arrived in Kosovo on Tuesday. 
The center also reported that three mutilated bodies of Kosovo Albanians 
who had gone missing in early June had been found near Klina, 45 kilometers 
(28 miles) west of Pristina. In Moscow, a foreign ministry spokesman 
said the main threat to peace in Kosovo comes from ethnic Albanian 
separatists, not the government of Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic. 
Russia has long been sympathetic to Serbia, made up of fellow Slavs 
and Orthodox Christians. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>