<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981110.1142 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In this ethnically divided town stained by the recent killing of an 
immigrant soldier, the Moroccan-born mayor cut a deal with the Russian 
party to survive Tuesday's local elections. In Jerusalem, an Arab 
running for city council received death threats, and a rabbi enticed 
the faithful to vote for his religious party by promising an eternity 
in heaven. In the northern community of Beit Shean, a centenarian 
sage prayed above the town from a helicopter to win last-minute support 
for his candidate. Israel's nationwide elections Tuesday for mayor 
and city councils were marred by violence and full of campaign stunts. 
With dozens of tiny special interest parties running, the elections 
reflected the increasing fragmentation of Israel's society along ethnic 
and religious lines and were a sign of the decaying power once held 
by the country's two main national parties. In the ancient Mediterranean 
city of Ashkelon, settled by the Romans more than 20 centuries ago, 
the ethnic tensions surrounding election day were highlighted by the 
fatal stabbing Friday of a soldier from the former Soviet Union, allegedly 
for speaking in his mother tongue. Four Israelis of Morrocan descent 
were under arrest for the murder. The 30,000 Russian-speaking immigrants 
living in this sleepy seaside port were expected to overwhelmingly 
support the immigrant rights party, Israel B'Aliya, which is running 
mostly Russian-speaking candidates in local elections for the first 
time. Hoping to restore the uneasy peace between the sides and remain 
in power, Mayor Benny Vaknin promised to appoint a Russian speaker 
as his deputy if the party dropped plans to run a candidate against 
him. With 30 percent of the population behind them, the immigrants' 
party agreed. In Jerusalem, an Arab insurance broker defied an election 
boycott, which was called by Yasser Arafat's Palestinian Authority 
to protest Israeli rule in the contested city. Moussa Aliyan, the 
first Arab candidate for city council, said he wanted to show the 
city's 180,000 Palestinian residents that the only way to get more 
classrooms, new roads and a sewage system was to participate in local 
politics. ``They are not getting what they are entitled to because 
of the boycott,'' Aliyan said. A newcomer to politics, Aliyan said 
he has received death threats in recent weeks, but was not deterred. 
Israeli police arrested two Authority activists for threatening Palestinian 
voters. Six others were detained for trying to shut down shops not 
participating in a partial commercial strike called to protest the 
election. For the city's Jewish voters, a growing culture clash between 
religious and secular Jews over the role of religion in daily life 
pitted the two groups against one another at the polls. The Shas party, 
which draws much of its support from Moroccan Jews, appealed to a 
wider audience with promises of blessings from aged rabbis. Weeks 
before the vote, they handed out amulets, lucky charms and posters 
of their party's spiritual leader. But aside from the last-minute 
campaign tactics, low turnout and violence at polling stations grabbed 
headlines in Israel. Police spokeswoman Linda Menuhin said officers 
responded to 278 violent incidents throughout the country. In Tel 
Aviv, a switchboard serving the offices of front-running mayoral candidate 
Ron Huldai was set on fire, a firebomb was thrown at the house of 
another candidate, and the car of a volunteer was torched. There were 
several incidents of election fraud. In Jerusalem, police arrested 
two minors who tried to cast ballots using false registration papers. 
As the campaign drew to a close, there were incidents of arson and 
fistfights among rival party workers. In all, 682 candidates competed 
for 58 mayor spots, and more than 20,000 hopefuls ran for 2,800 seats 
on local councils. Polls were to close at 10:00pm (20:00gmt), and 
preliminary results were expected after midnight. Official results 
were to be posted sometime Wednesday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>