<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981110.0222 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite a massive security clampdown across the capital, protests 
and street clashes among rock-throwing mobs Tuesday marred the opening 
of a government assembly convened to carve out a new political future 
for crisis-ridden Indonesia. The People's Consultative Assembly met 
at the national Parliament, protected from the violence by razor wire 
barricades and thousands of armed troops. In several areas, pro- and 
anti-government activists threw rocks and brawled before being broken 
up by soldiers. Much of Tuesday's trouble involved teen-age boys, 
armed with knives and bamboo spears. As many as 120,000 have been 
recruited by pro-government activists as private security guards to 
protect the assembly from student protests. Hundreds of them confronted 
5,000 anti-government students protesters on a busy road near the 
University of Indonesia. Outside the legislature, rival groups also 
clashed briefly. Troops blocked off a toll road and dispersed the 
crowd with sticks but made no arrests. In East Jakarta, hundreds of 
the pro-government guards threw rocks and fought with local residents. 
Witnesses said several people were injured. About 30,000 troops and 
police have been deployed across Jakarta to safeguard the assembly 
meeting. Critics doubt that the 1,000-member assembly, Indonesia's 
highest legislative body, will deliver on promises to dismantle the 
32-year-old authoritarian legacy of former President Suharto, who 
quit in May after a wave of deadly riots and protests. However, Parliament 
Speaker Harmoko, once a dogmatic and loyal Suharto supporter, warned 
that anarchy could engulf the world's fourth most populous nation 
unless fundamental political changes were made to meet the reform 
demands of 202 million Indonesians. The assembly is meeting for four 
days as Indonesia grapples with its worst economic crisis in decades. 
Inflation and unemployment are soaring, and millions of people are 
sinking into poverty. Rioting and looting have occurred sporadically 
for months in many areas. The assembly's main job is to set a date 
sometime in late May for parliamentary elections and to help frame 
new laws to legalize free political parties. ``We regard the general 
election as the best way for the people to determine their own future 
in a democratic manner,'' Harmoko said. Harmoko said the assembly, 
made up of 475 legislators and 625 government appointees, would revoke 
old decrees that preserved special presidential powers during the 
Suharto era. It would also promote human rights and clean government. 
In a sign of compromise, military chief Gen. Wiranto has said that 
the armed forces are willing to discuss demands to limit their prominent 
role in politics, which now gives them a guaranteed 75 seats in the 
500-member Parliament. One proposal is to cut its representation down 
to 55 seats. Despite promises of change, opponents claim most of the 
assembly's members are holdovers from the Suharto era. With Indonesia's 
main opposition figures not part of the assembly, critics fear it 
will try to bolster the position of current President B.J. Habibie. 
Habibie, a longtime friend and former loyal aide of Suharto, plans 
to stand as a presidential candidate next year. Habibie was applauded 
warmly when he attended Tuesday's opening session. But he did not 
speak so as to avoid giving the impression that he was trying to sway 
the delegates. In a show of discontent, Indonesia's three main opposition 
figures held a closed-door meeting in south Jakarta. At a rally earlier 
Tuesday, hundreds of students called on the assembly to disband. They 
also demanded that Habibie quit and that the military get out of politics 
altogether. They also called for Suharto to be tried for corruption. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>