<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981110.0219 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Accompanied by ethnic tensions and violence, Israelis voted for mayors 
and local councils Tuesday in an election that mirrored the growing 
fragmentation of Israel's society. Ethnic and sectarian factions seemed 
certain to bite deep into the support of the two main national parties, 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's Likud and the Labor opposition, 
headed by ex-Israeli army chief of staff Ehud Barak. For the first 
time, a party representing immigrants from the former Soviet Union 
ran candidates for local councils. With 900,000 immigrants, Israelis 
from the old Soviet Union have become Israel's largest ethnic bloc, 
overtaking Israelis of Moroccan descent. In the coastal town of Ashkelon, 
where the two ethnic groups live side-by-side amid growing tensions, 
the main campaign issue was the killing of a Russian immigrant last 
week. The victim supposedly was targeted because his attackers felt 
he was taunting them in Russian. Most Orthodox Jews are expected to 
vote for parties representing their interests. In Jerusalem, a growing 
ultra-Orthodox Jewish population exercises increasing power at the 
ballot box. In all, 682 candidates competed for 58 mayor spots, and 
more than 20,000 hopefuls ran for 2,800 seats on local councils. Israeli 
police were deployed to counter election fraud and control violence. 
As the campaign drew to a close, there were incidents of arson and 
fistfights among rival party workers. In Tel Aviv, a switchboard serving 
the offices of front-running mayor candidate Ron Huldai was set on 
fire, cutting off telephones at his headquarters. In one district, 
a firebomb was thrown at the house of a candidate, and in another 
the car of a volunteer was torched. Many Russian immigrants are expected 
to vote for Israel B'Aliya, the immigrants' party represented by former 
Soviet dissident Natan Sharansky in Netanyahu's Cabinet, said Lev 
Melamed, editor of ``Viesty,'' the largest-circulation Russian-language 
daily newspaper in Israel. It's straight local politics, and Israel's 
sputtering negotiations with the Palestinians are not an issue, Melamed 
told The Associated Press Tuesday. ``If there is a strong representative 
n the city council, he can look out for the interests of his constituents,'' 
he said. Experts believe turnout among secular Israelis will drop 
below 50 percent, but immigrants and ultra-Orthodox Jews will vote 
in larger numbers, giving them proportionally more power. The ultra-orthodox 
Agudat Israel party in Jerusalem took no chances. Rabbis instructed 
their followers to vote for the party, said activist Baruch Cohen, 
22, as he organized transportation for voters in a religious neighborhood. 
``Some people need more encouragement,'' he said, gesturing toward 
a bank of telephones where volunteers were calling voters. The spiritual 
leader of the ultra-Orthodox group Shas, Rabbi Ovadia Yosef, reportedly 
told followers in a Sabbath lecture that those voting for the party's 
candidates will go to heaven. Shas activists have also distributed 
bottles of oil blessed by a revered rabbi, Yitzhak Kadourie, a centenarian 
who during the campaign was helicoptered from town to town. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>