<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981110.0130.1470 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Monica Lewinsky matter gave a whole new connotation to the word 
"Intern" and to politics in general. Garrick Utley talks with a few 
young staffers inside the Beltway who are trying to look past all 
the negatives. Under the majestic dome of the capitol, in the endless 
labyrinth of legislative offices, you find them -- the young and the 
ambitious, the dedicated, the 20-something staffers who help make 
government run. Okay, well, thank you very much for calling, I will 
make sure that I pass this message on to the congressman. They come 
straight out of college, the young staffers. They are not turned off 
by politics and Washington, but rather drawn here, because they want 
to work in government. But what does that mean for ideals and dedication 
when you're suddenly caught up in the political theater of impeachment 
hearings, and when low voter turnout sends a message that most people 
are not very concerned about what's happening here? -- Within the 
republican party, you're gonna have -- That is what we wanted to learn 
from four young staff workers -- two democrats on the right, two republicans 
on the left. You read about the Negative things that are happening 
here in Congress, but in reality, I mean, there's so much good that 
is happening as well. I think people are -- they're getting bombarded 
with Negative images and they can't help but think, "hey, why should 
I turn out?" In Washington, most young staffers and interns remain 
hugely anonymous. Although, occasionally, one does manage to attract 
some attention. How does a young person face the harsh, often cynical 
reality of politics? I did not come here for the sole purpose of working 
on the hill during an impeachment. I mean, when you go home at the 
end of the day and all you've done is deal with this Negative, Negative, 
Negative, it's very draining. I've just had a discussion with a few 
of my friends about this very issue, you think that it keeps pounding 
away at you and all the Negative feedback that we're getting from 
all over the country, but in a way, it energizes me. And it's a call 
to action to do something out there. And is this the place to do something? 
Moment of truth, hands up, who would like to become a member of Congress? 
It's democrat. That's, that's, that's too hard a question. It's a 
democrat. Now when I look and I see what's involved with running and 
with all the negatives that are out there, in a way, it might make 
me want to stay away at least for now because you better not have 
any skeletons in your closet or anywhere near your closet. Despite 
all the frustrations, what keeps the staffers going? When you talk 
to a woman on the phone who has to choose between her prescription 
drugs and her food, you want to do something to change that and that 
really drives me. What keeps me going is just the opportunity to do 
something that most people can never say they've done, the opportunity 
to see history as it's being made, and to in some small part help 
make that history happen. If there is a shortage of voters today, 
there is no shortage of tims, mikes, ericas and dans, eager to come 
to Washington to try at least, as they say, to make a difference. 
Garrick Utley, CNN, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>