<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981110.2100.0440 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From Jim Miklaszewski we go to Linda Vester on the ground in Baghdad 
for a Look at how Iraqis are being prepared for the possibility, the 
very real possibility at this hour, of air strikes just about any 
time. Linda? Brian, basically all the Iraqis have to do is read the 
signs. They are both obvious and ominous, approximate and they hint 
that air strikes indeed are imminent, as mik was saying. We're starting 
to see there's a little bit of tape going up on windows to prevent 
them from shattering. People are expecting air strikes are coming. 
We journalists are doing the same thing. We're based here at the ministry 
of information, where all the journalists are camped. And tonight, 
we started taping up the windows, because we expect an air strike 
is imminent. All you have to do is read the signals. They all show 
that time for diplomacy is running out. The first sign came when about 
400 U.N. weapons inspectors and aid workers packed up and rolled out 
of Baghdad in convoys today, most heading to jordan. The measure is 
precautionary in nature and is being instituted solely for the safety 
of U.N. staff in mind. And on the Iraqi evening news tonight, the 
lead story, another troubling sign. Saddam Hussein met with his cabinet 
and military leaders. They reviewed emergency response plans and talked 
about "standing up to american aggression." But perhaps surprisingly, 
in the streets of Baghdad, there is no sense of panic yet, no visibility 
shortages, the markets are brimming with fresh produce. And at nouri's 
Barber shop, there is a steady stream of customers. Down the street 
at khalil Mohammed's cafe, the games proceed unaffected, a Surreal 
sight in a city that's in cross hairs. There is even a sense of defiance. 
no. Not worried. And so the games continue. In the cafe and with the 
U.N. Saddam Hussein is gambling that the U.S. and the U.N. are bluffing. 
He may be on the verge of finding out. To be perfectly honest, many 
of the average Iraqis that I spoken to today and tonight basically 
feel a sense of resignation. They think that air strikes are a foregone 
conclusion, so they just basically want to get them over with. They 
expect them to happen any time. Brian? Two items of note, Linda. The 
videotape you showed of Saddam Hussein meeting with members of his 
cabinet, both locations evidently were undisclosed. It has been very 
hard for the U.S. to really find him, to know where he is at any given 
moment. American intelligence officials have said they lack that ability. 
Number two, more U.N. inspectors, I guess the remaining inspectors, 
leave at daybreak tomorrow your time. How notable is that? That is 
very significant, Brian, because basically once they're all gone, 
then anything can happen in terms of air strikes. It's common sense 
that if they were in transit trying to leave here for jordan or for 
bahrin, the U.S. would do nothing. They have to wait until they cross 
the border in terms of pure safety. Watch that closely. When they're 
out of Iraq, anything could happen. Linda Vester, who has just arrived 
for us in Iraq, will remain there and will be reporting for us over 
the next several days. Thank you, Linda. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>