<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981110.2100.1799 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tomorrow morning's edition of the "financial times" rolling off presses 
around the world right now has an exclusive story that is sure to 
raise questions about Iraq he's compliance with U.N. weapons inspectors 
at the crux of what's going to be another air strike. Tariq Aziz, 
eye deputy prime minimum has been a member of a secret committee in 
charge of hiding Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. With us this 
evening to talk about this story is Robert Thomson, U.S. managing 
editor of "financial times." He is with us in New York. Robert, first, 
are you confident in your sourcing and your central allegation, and 
what, according to the story, has Tariq Aziz been up to? Well, I guess 
we're as confident as we can ever with with any source that is an 
intelligence one, but I obviously -- they're not going to release 
that sort of information if it's untrue. In the end, it would rebound 
on their own credibility as much as that of mr. Aziz. What is the 
central allegation? Essentially that Mr. Aziz, a very telegenic type 
who is often seen as most personable in the human face of the Iraqi 
regime has, in fact, been sitting on a secret committee which is charged 
with the responsibility for hiding materials related to Massachusetts 
destruction. Someone obviously has compiled this information so far 
in the allegation stage on Mr. Aziz. What's their motive for releasing 
it to you now? Well, obviously we're in the middle of a crisis. You 
know, I guess it's a genuine on the verge of a military attack or 
a Great deal of military theater, depending on how you look at it. 
But the timing is no accident. The attempt to undermine the credibility 
of Mr. Aziz, who will no doubt play a prime role over the next couple 
of days is no ax. What the intelligence sources are looking to do 
is accuse him really of both complicity and duplicity. To put a finer 
point on both of those, when we say he's accused of hiding weapons 
of mass destruction, how do we mean? Well, according to a recent defector 
from Iraq, a senior defector, Mr. Aziz sits on a committee, which 
also, obviously, involves Saddam Hussein, other senior cabinet members, 
and members of the Iraqi military, and they've been charged with the 
responsibility of looking after materials and making sure that weapons 
inspectors don't find those materials related to chemical weapons, 
biological weapons, and missiles, which are obviously the means for 
delivering those weapons. How do you think the story will play in 
Europe? And generally, how is Europe viewing this latest effort by 
Mr. Clinton and the military buildup and the drum beat? Well, it's 
pretty fair to say that Europe is not as gung ho as the United States 
in its attitude to dealing with Iraq. But obviously the more that's 
done to undermine the Iraqi regime and the more human side of the 
rejoom, which to a certain extent Mr. Aziz represents, the greater 
the likelihood of bringing France and Russia, the two key countries, 
on line for a military assault. Robert Thomson is the U.S. managing 
editor of the "financial times," joining us tonight from our studios 
in New York about the exclusive story rolling off presses right now. 
Robert, thank you very much. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>