<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0277 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After their election debacle and growing public fatigue over the inquiry 
against President Clinton, House Republicans are still feuding about 
the impeachment end game. Republicans know that the public does not 
want President Clinton impeached, but they are divided over everything 
from which witnesses to call, and how many, to how long to conduct 
the inquiry and whether it should even be brought to a vote on the 
House floor. The House Judiciary Committee seems likely to vote on 
articles of impeachment in the coming weeks, but the panel is divided 
over tactics. One faction, sensitive to criticisms of a proceeding 
with only one witness testifying, is pressing for testimony from other 
central players, including one of Clinton's closest White House confidants, 
Bruce Lindsey. But the committee chairman, Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois, 
eager to keep the inquiry from dragging into next year when the Republican 
majority will shrink by five seats, wants to wait until after Kenneth 
Starr, the independent counsel, testifies on Nov. 19 before deciding 
who else, if anyone, to call. Outside the committee, a small but growing 
number of Republicans say the chances of impeaching the president 
are diminishing, and that the committee should chart a graceful exit 
strategy. ``Clearly, there are not enough votes to move this through 
the House,'' said Rep. Mark Souder, R-Ind. Souder said that barring 
new information, he would vote against impeachment. Rep. Ron Packard, 
a California Republican and chief vote-collector for Rep. Robert Livingston, 
the likely successor to Newt Gingrich as speaker of the House, also 
voiced doubts. The Judiciary Committee is clearly going forward, Packard 
said in an interview, but in the full House, ``we may not have the 
votes. And in the Senate it is even less likely.'' If the full House 
does not vote for impeachment, Packard said he would like to see the 
whole subject dropped and does not want to move to another alternative 
like censure. ``We either have the votes or we don't,'' Packard said, 
adding that he spoke only for himself and not for Livingston. ``I 
prefer it just die than just create another option.'' On Sunday, Livingston 
said he would wait for the recommendations of Hyde and the committee. 
But he also said, ``The American public have certainly indicated in 
the polls that they don't see it as an impeachable or dismissible 
offense, and that would have to be considered in the political arena.'' 
The internal debate comes a day after Republicans and Democrats drew 
ammunition for their respective positions from 19 constitutional scholars 
at a 10-hour subcommittee hearing. House Democrats and the White House 
were quick to condemn the Republican-led hearing as a rush to judgment. 
``It seemed, from the very start, we heard strong statements judging 
the evidence already and people, before they had even had a chance 
to listen to the scholars, deciding and announcing what they were 
planning to do,'' said White House spokesman Joe Lockhart. In recent 
days, and again at a private meeting this morning, several committee 
Republicans pressed Hyde to consider calling more witnesses. This 
strategy aims in part to deflect criticisms that the White House is 
not being permitted to question its accusers. ``There's always been 
the potential for more witnesses because the president has to be given 
some opportunity to rebut the evidence,'' said Rep. Charles Canady, 
R-Fla. Republicans say more witnesses might also be needed to clarify 
conflicting statements if Clinton denies or refuses to answer some 
of the 81 questions the committee asked last week about lying under 
oath, witness tampering and obstruction of justice. Rep. Ed Bryant, 
R-Tenn., said the committee needed to find a middle course between 
calling only Starr and conducting a fullblown investigation into Clinton's 
sexual relationship with Monica Lewinsky. At the top of the Republicans' 
list is Lindsey. Calling the White House aide as a witness became 
a more distinct possibility after the Supreme Court on Monday refused 
to shield Lindsey from questioning by prosecutors on what conversations 
he had with Clinton about Lewinsky. ``We're talking about it, yes,'' 
Hyde said on Monday. A top aide to Hyde said Tuesday that no decisions 
on future witnesses have been made. Lockhart said the White House 
would ``take a view'' on Lindsey's testifying if the committee asks, 
but the White House has tried at every step to keep Lindsey from testifying. 
That leaves Starr. Republicans voice concern that Democrats will try 
to turn the inquiry into a trial of the independent counsel. Gearing 
up for that, Republicans on the committee have received a staff memorandum 
that outlines ``positive points'' about Starr as well as responses 
to Democratic attacks on the independent counsel. Many Democrats initially 
wanted to call Starr to put him on the defensive. Now, however, some 
Democrats say Starr might be a credible witness, and others are complaining 
the hearing only gives him a chance to recoup public credibility. 
``How preposterous is it to invite the independent counsel who is 
not a witness to anything, and who has already given us nearly 500 
pages of what he thinks?'' said Rep. Zoe Lofgren, a California Democrat 
on the committee. Democrats are struggling with the end game, too. 
Many, like Rep. Bill Delahunt of Massachusetts, are pressing for an 
alternative to impeachment, like censure, despite Republicans' rejecting 
that idea as a bad precedent. Some Democrats want to call more witnesses; 
some don't. ``How do you determine what the president did if you don't 
cross-examine a lot of witnesses?'' asked Rep. Jerrold Nadler, D-N.Y. 
``If you don't, then you're having the House act as a rubber stamp 
for Ken Starr.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>