<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0310 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As more and more Americans turn to herbal remedies, chiropractors 
and massage therapists, spending at least $27 billion a year on those 
and other forms of alternative health care, the medical profession 
is scrambling to catch up to the trend. Tuesday, for the first time, 
an entire issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association 
was devoted to alternative medicine, and this week the AMA itself 
is publishing 60 more articles on related topics in nine of its other 
journals. Dr. George Lundberg, the journal's editor, decided a year 
ago to take on the subject, in response to demand from doctors who 
wanted scientifically sound data on treatments and products that so 
many patients were asking about. Of the seven research studies being 
published in The Journal of the American Medical Association, three 
showed alternative treatments to be useless, but four identified treatments 
that seemed to work. ``In God we trust,'' Lundberg said at a news 
conference the organization held here to present the findings. ``All 
others must have data.'' In an interview, he said the combination 
of positive and negative studies in the journal came about naturally, 
and not by the editors' design. ``That's just how it shook out,'' 
Lundberg said, adding that the editors had no stake in proving or 
disproving particular treatments. ``We just wanted good science,'' 
he said. The journal's approach stands in contrast with that of the 
other leading journal in the United States, The New England Journal 
of Medicine, which during the past year has published a series of 
negative reports and editorials about various alternative treatments. 
The Journal of the American Medical Association includes a study by 
Dr. David Eisenberg, an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard 
and director of the Center for Alternative Medicine Research and Education 
at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, in Boston. Eisenberg 
conducted a survey showing a sharp increase in the use of alternative 
medicine by Americans from 1990 to 1997. Eisenberg's first survey 
on this subject was published in The New England Journal of Medicine 
in 1993. He declined to explain why the new one is appearing in The 
Journal of the American Medical Association instead. In their survey, 
Eisenberg and his colleagues define alternative medicine to include 
chiropractic, acupuncture, massage therapy, biofeedback, megavitamins, 
homeopathy, relaxation techniques, guided imagery, spiritual healing 
by others, self-help, commercial diets, folk remedies, hypnosis, diets 
like those based on vegetarianism or macrobiotics, herbal remedies 
and forms of ``energy'' healing that involve touch, magnets or other 
devices. In the studies published Tuesday, researchers found good 
results using Chinese herbs for irritable bowel syndrome; saw palmetto, 
an herbal product, for bladder symptoms caused by prostate enlargement; 
yoga for the wrist problems caused by carpal tunnel syndrome; and 
an acupuncture-like treatment for encouraging fetuses in the breech 
position to turn in the womb. The studies found no benefit in using 
chiropractic manipulation for tension headaches; herbal supplements 
containing the herb Garcinia cambogia for weight loss; and acupuncture 
to control pain from nerve damage caused by HIV, the virus that causes 
AIDS. In 1990, 61 million Americans were estimated to have used some 
form of alternative medicine. By 1997, the figure had risen to 83 
million. Visits to practitioners of alternative medicine also rose 
sharply, to 629 million in 1997 from 427 million in 1990. Those figures 
stand in marked contrast with visits to establishment doctors, which 
dropped to 386 million in 1997 from 388 million in 1990. Chiropractors 
and massage therapists accounted for half of all the visits to alternative 
practitioners. And the most frequent users were people age 35 to 49, 
with college educations and annual incomes of more than $50,000. Noting 
that the group includes baby boomers, Eisenberg predicted that their 
demand for alternative treatments would only increase over the next 
20 to 30 years. ``These numbers are the strongest message that the 
market can deliver to the medical establishment,'' he said. Yet the 
figures do not mean that people are abandoning traditional medicine, 
Eisenberg said. ``On the contrary,'' he said, ``the overwhelming majority 
who are using alternative therapies are also seeing their medical 
doctors.'' According to the survey, more than half the alternative 
remedies were used not to cure illness but to prevent it. One figure 
that worries him, Eisenberg said, is that few people tell their doctors 
what alternative therapies they are using, and that such reticence 
may lead to harmful interactions with prescription drugs. Eisenberg 
said the current climate of ``don't ask, don't tell'' could harm patients, 
and he urged doctors to ask patients in a nonjudgmental way about 
all remedies and treatments that they might be trying. Another concern, 
he said, is that people with serious illnesses like cancer will try 
to take care of their own symptoms with drugstore or herbal potions, 
losing precious time and letting the disease advance. In a decidedly 
unorthodox report, at least by Western standards, the journal reported 
a study of a treatment involving the burning of a cigar-shaped roll 
of herbs near an acupuncture point on the outside of either little 
toe of a pregnant woman whose fetus was in the breech position. The 
purpose was to stimulate the fetus to turn around for a normal, head-first 
delivery. The smoldering plant, Artemisia vulgaris, also called mugwort, 
or, in Japan, moxa, is held as close to the toe as a woman can tolerate 
without her feeling pain. The technique, moxibustion, has been used 
in China to turn breech fetuses ``since ancient times,'' said the 
authors of the report, Dr. Francesco Cardini, a physician in private 
practice in Verona, Italy, and Dr. Huang Weixin, of the Jiangxi Women's 
Hospital in Nanchang, China. The treatment is thought to make the 
fetus more active somehow, and more likely to somersault into the 
right position for birth. To test the theory, Cardini and Huang studied 
260 women at two hospitals in China in the 33rd week of their first 
pregnancy, after ultrasound scans showed their fetuses to be in the 
breech position. In a woman pregnant for the first time, if a baby 
is breech by the 33rd week, the odds are high that it will stay that 
way. Breech fetuses can be injured during birth, and in the United 
States they are often delivered by caesarean to avoid the risk. In 
China, moxibustion is often used to try to get the fetuses to turn. 
In Cardini's study, women were picked at random to receive either 
moxibustion or no treatment. The treated women would sit or recline, 
and their husbands would burn the moxa sticks near their little toes 
at a location called acupoint BL67, or Zhiyin, for 30 minutes at a 
time once or twice a day for one or two weeks. BL67 is one of 364 
most commonly used acupuncture points on the human body, and it is 
also stimulated to treat kidney and bladder problems and pain caused 
by the sciatic nerve. After two weeks, 75.4 percent of the babies 
in the moxibustion group had turned, as compared with 47.7 percent 
in the untreated group. Later, 75.4 percent in the moxibustion group 
were born head-first, and the figure in the other group rose to 62.3 
percent, but only because doctors turned some of the breech fetuses 
manually just before birth. Cardini said it was impossible to tell 
whether the effects had come from the sensation of heat to the toes, 
or the fumes from the mugwort. But since moxibustion is cheap, easy 
and harmless, it is worth trying, he said. If it fails, Cardini said, 
doctors can always try to turn the baby before delivery. But, he added, 
Western women may be put off by the strong, resinous odor of burning 
mugwort. ``It is a very Eastern smell,'' he said. Dr. David Nagey, 
an associate professor in gynecology and obstetrics at the the Johns 
Hopkins Medical School, in Baltimore, said that although moxibustion 
had been a source of levity among some American doctors, ``I don't 
want to put it down,'' adding, ``There may be something here.'' But 
it will take further research to sell him on moxibustion, Nagey said, 
because of some questions about the study. He said the effects of 
the treatment might have been due to the relaxing effects on the women 
of resting and having their toes ministered to by their mates. The 
experiment would have been better, Nagey said, if the untreated women 
had also been assigned daily rest periods with their partners. In 
addition, he said, he wondered whether the women in the study were 
truly a typical sample of pregnant women, because the researchers 
had a long list of conditions they could invoke to exclude a woman 
from the study. Following are other alternative remedies reported 
to work in The Journal of the American Medical Association: _ A mixture 
of 20 or more Chinese herbs used for inflammatory bowel syndrome, 
a hard-to-treat condition affecting millions of people, which can 
cause severe abdominal pain and constipation or diarrhea. _ Yoga, 
for the wrist pain and other problems caused by carpal tunnel syndrome, 
a disorder brought on by typing and other repetitive motions. _ The 
herbal remedy saw palmetto (Seronoa repens) for bladder problems caused 
by enlargement of the prostate gland. The treatments found not to 
work included chiropractic manipulation for tension headaches, the 
popular herb Garcinia cambogia for weight loss and the use of acupuncture 
to control pain from nerve damage caused by HIV. But researchers cautioned 
that these studies were the beginning of scientific investigations 
into alternative treatments, and not the final word. Dr. John McConnell, 
chairman of the urology department at the University of Texas Southwestern 
medical school, in Dallas, said, ``We have an obligation medically 
to determine whether these things are effective.'' McConnell questioned 
some of the positive studies on saw palmetto, because it was found 
to work as well as a drug that itself does not work in many patients. 
In addition, he said, there are so many different saw palmetto formulations 
on the market that it is hard to know which one might work, or why. 
``When patients ask me about it I tell them I think from the data 
that the agent is quite safe, and if they want to take it as an alternative 
approach that might provide some partial improvement, I don't object,'' 
McConnell said. What worries him, though, is that some men will unknowingly 
take saw palmetto for symptoms that are really caused by prostate 
or bladder tumors. ``We have a great fear of men going to the supermarket 
for two years straight and getting their saw palmetto and not realizing 
they have a growing cancer,'' McConnell said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>