<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0344 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mark Whitaker, who began his career at Newsweek as a college intern 
in 1977 and went on to expand the magazine's technology and business 
coverage and then oversee the pyrotechnics of the Monica Lewinsky 
story as managing editor this year, was named editor of the magazine 
Tuesday. Whitaker, 41, had been supervising the magazine's day-to-day 
editorial operations since the previous editor, Maynard Parker, fell 
ill with leukemia a year ago; Parker, who had been editor for 16 years, 
died last month at the age of 58. The appointment came as little surprise 
to Newsweek staff members, who have expected Whitaker to become editor. 
His new job is significant: It not only makes him the first black 
editor of a major news weekly, but comes at a time when the three 
major news weekly magazines _ Time and U.S. News &AMP; World Report 
along with Newsweek _ are undergoing a period of self-scrutiny, competing 
for an audience that increasingly is turning to television, the Internet 
and other news outlets. The changing of the guard represents a generational 
as well as a managerial shift. Replacing Whitaker as managing editor 
will be Ann McDaniel, 42, Newsweek's Washington bureau chief, and 
Jon Meacham, who has been national affairs editor since 1995. Meacham 
is 29, or in the words of one staff member ``about 5 years old during 
Nixon's impeachment proceedings.'' The new guard take over a magazine 
that trails Time magazine in circulation, 4.1 million to 3.2 million, 
even though it attracted enormous attention this year with its initially 
cautious then blanketlike coverage of the Monica Lewinsky affair. 
U.S. News &AMP; World Report trails the group with a circulation of 
2.2 million and has gone through five editors in 14 years, but its 
owner, Mortimer Zuckerman, hired Stephen Smith as editor from National 
Journal in late July, and Smith is considered by editors at Time and 
Newsweek as a foe who is perhaps more formidable than his predecessors. 
In a brief acceptance speech at the magazine's regularly scheduled 
Tuesday morning story meeting, Whitaker said he was very concerned 
about his competition and asked the assembled group: ``What can we 
do to make Newsweek a must-read?'' Whitaker answered the question 
Tuesday afternoon in his 16th-floor office in midtown Manhattan, as 
staff members began to pour celebratory Champagne and eat chocolate-chip 
cookies outside his door. ``Newsweek starts by having the strongest 
reporting and writing in the news magazine field,'' Whitaker said. 
``The first priority is to be out front on every major news story. 
That's our stock and trade and that's what our readers look for us 
to be. We will be as aggressive as we've ever been in covering the 
big stories, political and otherwise.'' At a news weekly magazine 
_ where the job of editor includes signing off on every story, cover 
headline, chart, photograph and ``pull quote'' _ the influence of 
the editor is felt to the core of the publication. A self-described 
technophile, Whitaker said he wanted to devote more space to technology 
and science, the global economy, domestic markets, personal investing 
and family issues, and added that he was especially interested in 
making the magazine relevant to younger readers. ``I think we do an 
extremely good job covering the baby boom generation, and we will 
continue to do so as we get older,'' he said. ``But I want this to 
be a must-read for younger readers as well.'' Newsweek has just emerged 
from its most profitable year in 1997, said Richard M. Smith, who 
has held the title of editor-in-chief since 1984, president since 
1991 and chairman since early this year. According to the Publishers 
Information Bureau, ad pages declined in the last year, to 1,959 from 
January to October 1998, from 2,043 for the same period in 1997. But 
Smith added that, for a news organization hinged on a single publication, 
Newsweek, which is owned by The Washington Post Co., fares ``extremely 
well.'' ``The thing that always amazes me about Newsweek is that despite 
Time Inc.'s multiple magazine advertising packages, despite Time-Warner's 
clout on the newsstand, despite the cross-promotion from CNN and other 
sectors of engulf and devour, we're in a good dogfight with Time and 
we win more than we lose,'' Smith said. ``Everybody has always said 
that Newsweek's great handicap is that it's a single-magazine company 
in this universe of hydras, but we do very well.'' Whitaker said that 
while he admired Time magazine and its marketing strategies, he said 
he was dismayed at recent decisions that he said blur the line between 
editorial and advertising priorities. ``I think it's pretty well-known 
that they're doing things now that seem tailored for specific advertisers,'' 
Whitaker said. He was referring to Time magazine's recent agreement 
with the Ford Motor Co., in which Ford will be the sole sponsor of 
new editorial sections that focus on the environment. Time's Managing 
Editor, Walter Isaacson, defended Time's separation of powers. ``We 
have a great system of church and state, and we do editorially what 
we feel passionate about editorially,'' he said. Whitaker is regarded 
by his staff as a strong, even-keeled intellectual presence, less 
seismic in his deadline fervor than Parker. Raised in Norton, Mass., 
Whitaker began his career at Newsweek as an intern in the San Francisco 
bureau in 1977; he graduated summa cum laude from Harvard in 1979. 
As assistant managing editor from 1991 to 1996, he expanded the magazine's 
technology coverage, and has written on the issue of race for the 
magazine _ including an essay titled ``Whites vs. Blacks'' which Newsweek 
published after the O.J. Simpson trial. Nonetheless, he says his race 
is irrelevant. ``I'm proud and I'm honored to be in this position,'' 
Whitaker said, ``but my goal is to the very best editor of Newsweek 
that I can be, not just the best black editor.'' Whitaker is married 
to Alexis Gelber, an assistant managing editor at Newsweek; she reports 
to Michael Elliott, editor of Newsweek's international editions. Elliott 
had been one of the several names mentioned as a potential successor 
to Parker, aside from Whitaker. Ms. McDaniel, the Washington bureau 
chief, was another; Evan Thomas, an assistant managing editor, an 
author and familiar face on the talk-show circuit, had also been mentioned. 
All say that there was no jockeying for the title of editor. ``We 
have an extremely healthy franchise, and we have to make sure we're 
better at it than everybody else,'' Whitaker said. ``The key to that 
is getting really smart, energetic and aggressive young reporters 
and writers, and give them a voice at the table. I've tried to be 
a real advocate in getting their views and interests into the magazine.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>