<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0393 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For Floyd Schultz, Tuesday's news that Cargill Inc. had agreed to 
buy the grain operations of its chief rival, Continental Grain Co., 
was about as welcome as another drop in his already low corn and soybean 
prices. Right now, when he transports his grain by truck just four 
miles to Lockport, Ill., he can choose between Cargill and Continental 
grain terminals, sitting side by side along a canal leading to the 
Illinois River. Once they combine, he said, the nearest competitor 
will be an Archer Daniels Midland terminal 30 miles and another 10 
cents a bushel in shipping costs away. While Cargill could lower its 
prices and improve its margins, he said, ``We as farmers would be 
the ones who pay.'' Cargill and Continental Grain executives answer 
that, for farmers, the advantages of their combination in storage, 
processing, distribution and export far outweigh the minimal risks. 
``What's important for farmers is to have the most efficiency,'' said 
Paul Fribourg, chief executive of Continental Grains, who added that 
consumers could see some lower costs, too. Cargill, the nation's largest 
private company, and Continental Grain, one of the largest, did not 
disclose their terms, though analysts estimated the price exceeded 
$300 million. Cargill, based in Minneapolis, handles about 20 percent 
of the nation's grain exports, and Continental Grain handles about 
15 percent. But Cargill's crucial advantage is having mills and plants 
to process grains into meals, flours and oils, expanding its sales 
opportunities and improving its overall profit margins. Continental 
Grain has been left as a middleman, buying, storing and selling grain 
on increasingly narrow spreads. Besides the payment from the sale, 
Continental Grain would also be able to free the huge amounts of capital 
tied up in its grain inventories. The company could then better support 
its other businesses, among them financial services and livestock, 
where it is the nation's leading cattle feeder, bringing 1.1 million 
head to market this year. The company's Contifinancial arm, publicly 
traded but about 75 percent owned by the parent company, has been 
besieged by its own falling profits in businesses like providing commercial 
and residential mortgages and home equity loans. Shares of Contifinancial 
rose $1.50 Tuesday, to $8.6875, as analysts anticipated that the sale 
of the grain operations would improve Contifinancial's finances. Fribourg 
described the decision to sell the grain operations, the foundation 
of a family business founded in Arlon, Belgium, in 1813, as wrenching. 
Having moved to Paris and then, during World War II, to New York, 
where it is based, Continental Grains in recent decades opened huge 
markets for American grain in the former Soviet Union and in China. 
But two years of searching for a partner in the more profitable ends 
of the grain business, genetic crop engineering or processing, resulted 
in frustration. The talks with Cargill instead got down to an outright 
purchase. Combining Continental Grains' six export terminals, 27 river 
terminals and 32 buying stations with its own terminals and mills 
will improve Cargill's flexibility and productivity, executives said. 
``It will allow us to better serve producers in terms of how we buy 
grain, how we load and transport grain and how we sell grain,'' Frank 
Sims, president of Cargill's North American Grain Division, said in 
an interview. Farmers will still have their cooperatives and many 
other corporate grain buyers, he added. Analysts agreed about the 
deal's advantages, strengthening Continental Grain's remaining businesses 
and enhancing Cargill's leadership in the grain industry. ``They were 
always a large trader,'' said Jeffrey Kanter of Prudential Securities. 
``Now they're a monster trader.'' While a Federal Trade Commission 
spokesman did not have any comment Tuesday, some farmers like Schultz, 
who is also chairman of business development for the National Corn 
Growers Association, did. Large crops and falling Asian demand have 
pushed corn prices down from about $5 a bushel two years ago to less 
than half that now. Mike Yost, a Minnesota corn and soybean farmer 
and president of the American Soybean Association, predicted the deal 
would cost farmers another penny or two a bushel, or perhaps a dollar 
or two an acre. Or at least $2,700 a year for him. ``We see constant 
consolidation of both our input suppliers _ seed, fertilizer, pesticides 
_ and the people who purchase our production,'' he said. ``Obviously, 
the trend's not healthy for the American farmer.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>