<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0378 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The leading cause of preventable blindness worldwide can be effectively 
treated by a single dose of an antibiotic once a year, health workers 
said Tuesday, and they announced a major push to distribute the drug 
in five countries. The disease, trachoma, is caused by strains of 
the chlamydia bacterium. An estimated 6 million people worldwide have 
been blinded by trachoma, which is outranked only by cataracts as 
a cause of blindness. The World Health Organization set up a new strategy 
earlier this year in an effort to eliminate trachoma as a major cause 
of blindness by the year 2020. Tuesday, officials of Pfizer Inc., 
which sells a long-acting antibiotic against the disease, and the 
Edna McConnell Clark Foundation, a leading charity organization in 
New York, announced that they were starting a $66 million program 
to help carry out WHO's strategy in Ghana, Mali, Morocco, Tanzania 
and Vietnam. Women are two to three times more likely to be blinded 
by the disease than men, presumably because women have more contact 
with children. As with many other diseases, children are the prime 
source of spreading the trachoma bacterium, Chlamydia trachomatis. 
The infection produces a sticky discharge from the eyes and a runny 
nose. One attack provides little protection against another one. Repeated 
infections over a number of years can scar the inner eyelids, which 
turn inward, causing eyelashes to rub against the cornea. The damage 
leads to blindness. The discharge provides an easy route of bacterial 
spread from person to person, particularly in families with young 
children. In areas of poverty and poor sanitation, flies are attracted 
to the sticky discharge, and epidemiologic studies strongly suggest 
that flies can also spread the bacteria. Trachoma is caused by different 
strains of the same bacteria that causes infections of the genital 
tract. For unknown reasons, the bacteria strains affect different 
parts of the body in different ways. Earlier this year, the World 
Health Organization developed a broad new strategy to eliminate blinding 
trachoma. The strategy calls for developing clean water supplies to 
encourage improved personal hygiene. It also calls for minor eye surgery 
which, when needed, can be carried out in villages with rudimentary 
health facilities. Another feature is once-a-year administration of 
the long-acting antibiotic, azithromycin. In 1993, Dr. Robin L. Bailey 
and colleagues at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine 
noticed a report in the journal Lancet of a study indicating that 
a single dose of azithromycin cured 78 percent of trachoma infections. 
Since then, the findings have been verified elsewhere. Azithromycin 
administered in communities under supervision proved as effective 
as application of an eye ointment containing another antibiotic, tetracycline. 
There is poor compliance with the recommended course because the ointment 
is uncomfortable, particularly for children, and must be applied twice 
a day for six weeks. Pfizer officials said that azithromycin, called 
Zithromax, is its leading antibiotic, accounting for $1 billion in 
sales a year. Pfizer said it would would donate enough Zithromax to 
treat 3 million people over the next two years at a cost of about 
$60 million. The Clark foundation will pay an additional $6.4 million. 
Dr. Joseph Cook, an official of the Clark Foundation and an expert 
in tropical diseases, said one measure of success would be if the 
program reduced the prevalence of trachoma infections by 50 percent 
to 75 percent in children 5 years and younger within two years. Worldwide, 
trachoma infects more than 150 million people. The disease is most 
common in Africa, the Middle East and parts of Asia. In some areas, 
more than 50 percent of children are infected. An additional 540 million, 
or 10 percent of the world's population, live in areas where they 
are at risk for the disease. Trachoma was once a scourge in the United 
States and Europe. A century ago, immigrants arriving at Ellis Island 
were examined by doctors who would routinely snap back the eyelids 
over a button hook to screen for trachoma. Detection of the disease 
meant certain deportation. Over the years, trachoma has been eliminated 
as a major public health problem in most Western countries through 
good sanitation, largely without antibiotics. However, antibiotics 
have been useful in speeding elimination of blinding trachoma in areas 
where it is highly prevalent. Cases still occur sporadically on some 
Indian reservations. The World Health Organization, a U.N. subagency, 
has said that ``recent community trials using azithromycin as a single 
dose against trachoma have demonstrated a very good therapeutic effect 
for 6 to 12 months in reducing inflammatory disease.'' The Geneva-based 
health organization recommended community-based distribution of the 
antibiotic in villages where more than 20 percent of children aged 
1 to 10 years are infected. For communities with less than a 20 percent 
childhood infection rates, WHO called for treatment on a house-by-house 
basis. WHO said that further research is needed to determine if azithromycin 
needs to be repeated after one year and how often. Eradication of 
trachoma infection is not thought possible because the bacterium is 
ubiquitous, Cook said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>