<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0139 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was late afternoon, the sun sat high over the Sacramento Valley, 
and Chuck Mathews Jr. was in a groove _ literally. With his right 
hand on the steering wheel, and his left eye trained on a helpful 
furrow, he kept the wheels of his bright-green harvester rolling in 
a perfect line, reducing acre after acre of rice plants to sawed-off 
stubble. Back and forth. Back and forth. Like a barber, the harvester 
combed and fluffed up the two-foot stalks, then applied the shears, 
trimming off the golden rice heads to create a perfect 100-acre crew 
cut. Mathews glanced up at an electronic box overhead and read some 
digital numbers. ``Two hundred and six hours in this machine, and 
I still haven't lost my mind yet,'' he said. Two hundred and six hours. 
Four point six million pounds of rice, and still counting. In a six-week 
blitzkrieg each fall, California farmers harvest about half a million 
acres of rice, almost all of it sticky short-grain and medium-grain 
varieties related to the rice grown in Japan. This yearly assault 
comes hard on the heels of the harvest in Arkansas, Louisiana, Texas 
and Mississippi, where long-grain rice is grown. Just about the time 
that Crowley, La., cranks up for its post-harvest festival in mid-October, 
the farmers of the Sacramento Valley are in the thick of it, and the 
roads around towns like Marysville, Yuba City and Richvale swarm with 
trucks headed for the drying stations and the rice mills. It might 
as well be a secret military operation. Most Americans, and many Californians, 
do not realize that California grows rice at all, although it accounts 
for a quarter of the national crop, and diners eat it every time they 
set foot in a sushi restaurant or bite into a rice cake. Rice may 
be America's most paradoxical crop, a rising culinary star in a country 
that has almost no indigenous rice culture. The United States harvests 
prodigious amounts, about 9 million tons last year, making it one 
of the world's top 10 producers. Yet, by and large, rice has been 
a minor player on the culinary scene. Southwestern Louisiana developed 
an authentic rice-based cuisine, with dishes like jambalaya and crawfish 
etoufee, but in the rest of the United States, the grain appears most 
prominently in poor-man's dishes like red beans and rice, or in industrial 
products like Rice Krispies. That picture is changing. In the last 
decade, rice consumption has risen from about 16 pounds a person to 
more than 25 pounds. Some of the increase can be attributed to Hispanic 
and Asian immigration, and some to a growing emphasis on grains as 
an essential part of a healthy diet. A third reason can be found in 
the more adventurous national palate. A fascination with the cuisines 
of Asia and the Middle East has put the spotlight on exotic rices 
like Indian Basmati, Thai jasmine, Italian Arborio and Japanese koshihikari, 
and California's rice breeders and farmers have jumped into this new 
territory. ``We like all those,'' said Milton LaMalfa, who grows 28 
different rices on 1,800 acres just east of Richvale. ``A lot of guys 
don't like to fool around with these specialty markets because it 
takes a lot of trouble, but if we can grow 40 or 50 acres of something 
that will fetch a premium, then we want to be in on the ground floor.'' 
Lundberg Brothers Farms, in Richvale, has built a thriving business 
with organic rices that include some downright weird hybrids, including 
a black Japanese-style rice and a long red Basmati-related rice called 
Wehani, an acronym forged from the first names of the four Lundberg 
brothers, Wendell, Eldon, Harlan and Homer, and their late father, 
Albert. The ``ni'' is extra. ``Homer just decided the ni sounded Indian-ish,'' 
said Grant Lundberg, Eldon's son and the company's chief executive. 
For chefs, the new activity on the rice front adds a little glamour 
to a grain that needed some badly. ``For years, I didn't want to see 
a grain of rice on the menu,'' said Bradley Ogden, the chef and owner 
of the Lark Creek Inn in Larkspur, Calif. ``Now, they've come out 
with varieties that are exciting to see. You can play with the wording 
on the menu and cook in different styles.'' Ogden has used some of 
the newer rices to make a black-rice jambalaya and a risotto with 
scallops. With a little luck, rice may recapture some of the star 
power it had three centuries ago, when Carolina Gold set the world 
standard for quality. Where the rice came from no one knows, although 
Madagascar seems most likely, but this medium-long-grain rice, with 
a deep-orange hull, took to the tidelands of South Carolina, and later 
found its way to Georgia and Florida. It emerged as an enormously 
profitable crop, second only to tobacco in value. In 1775, the colonies 
exported 66 million pounds of the golden grain. The reign of Carolina 
Gold lasted for 150 years, until cotton sent it into decline. In the 
end, the small, hand-farmed plantations of the Southeast, with their 
squishy soil, could not compete with the huge, mechanized rice fields 
that were established on the flat prairies of Louisiana, Arkansas 
and Texas in the 1880s. In California, state officials and farmers 
had been thinking hard about rice ever since the 1850s, when thousands 
of Chinese began streaming into the state in search of gold. Attempts 
to grow rice in overflow lands along the San Joaquin River in the 
Central Valley came to nothing. The soil was too rich and porous, 
the nights too cold, and farmers were trying the wrong varieties. 
Eventually, eyes turned to the Sacramento Valley, a swath of table-flat 
land that runs 150 miles from Sacramento north to Redding, bounded 
on the west by the Coast Range and on the east by the Sierra Nevadas. 
In 1912, farmers near Biggs, taking advantage of the area's water-retaining 
clay soil, harvested their first commercial rice crop. Before long, 
farmers like LaMalfa's grandfather were taking the train from Nebraska 
to Oroville, setting up as rice farmers and, thanks to the long growing 
season, bringing in enormous harvests, so large that one Texas newspaper 
called the Californians ``either the greatest rice farmers or the 
greatest prevaricators on earth.'' The yields were genuine, and they 
still are, 8,400 pounds an acre in a good year, compared with an average 
of 5,500 pounds an acre in the Southern rice states. That kind of 
productivity has earned the rice industry two cheers in California. 
For years, it has been a target of environmentalists, who point out 
that it is the state's fourth-leading user of water among crops. The 
rice farmers also lost points for burning the rice straw after the 
harvest, a technique that laid a layer of smoke over the valley. Strained 
relations have improved lately. Realists point out that the choice 
is not between rice farms and pristine oak savannas, but between rice 
farms and housing tracts. In addition, a 1991 state law has reduced 
the practice of burning to 40 percent of the rice fields. On most 
fields, the rice straw is plowed back into the ground after harvest 
and the fields are flooded, allowing the straw to decompose and creating 
a winter resort for the birds and waterfowl that cruise the Pacific 
Flyway. As planting time approaches in late April, the farmers soak 
their seeds for about 24 hours, and dry them for another 24. When 
a root hair emerges, the seed is boarded onto a biplane that buzzes 
the flooded rice fields, distributing its load over land that has 
been leveled using a laser guidance system. The laser method is so 
accurate that the water depth varies by as little as half an inch 
at either end of a field. As winds blow across the paddies, the seeds, 
pushed by wave action, find their way through four to five inches 
of water into V-shaped furrows. The seed takes hold and shoots up 
four inches in 10 days. For the next 130 to 150 days, the rice simply 
grows, developing a two-foot green stalk, and a golden head so heavy 
with kernels that by harvest time it bows, as it were, chin to chest. 
When the kernels reach a moisture level of 24 percent, the harvest 
begins. Still wrapped in its brown hull, the rice goes from the field 
to the drying shed, a giant column that circulates hot air through 
the rice until the moisture level comes down to about 14 percent. 
Then the rice goes to the mill, where the husks are rubbed off, and 
the kernels lose their coating of bran, unless the mill is turning 
out brown rice. Milling time has become tense because of the new emphasis 
on premium rices intended for the Japanese, who are notoriously finicky 
about quality, especially when it comes to premium varieties like 
akirakomachi and koshihikari, prized for their tiny pearl-like kernels 
and meltingly smooth texture. In 1995, because of an unusually bad 
harvest, Japan bought foreign rice for the first time. Under the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, it must agree to keep the rice door, 
if not open, at least ajar. California now accounts for nearly half 
the 500,000 tons of foreign rice sold to Japan (virtually no Japanese 
rice is sold in the United States). And growers can barely contain 
their excitement at the thought of getting to compete head-on with 
the heavily subsidized, high-priced Japanese rice. Pleasing the Japanese, 
however, has not been easy. Japanese buyers are acutely sensitive 
to fissures, the hairline cracks in the kernel that can cause it to 
break during cooking. They require each grain to glow with a translucent 
white sheen. They require a nice ``bounce'' to the cooked grain, but 
at the same time a soft, melting quality. The rice must stay soft 
after cooking and reheat readily. ``In Japan, the grading and tasting 
of rice is an art,'' said Jim Higa, the director of international 
sales for California Pacific Rice Milling in Arbuckle. It is also 
a science. To come up with a taste score, the Japanese subject rice 
to near-infrared tests that measure protein and starch levels, and 
they have developed machines to measure moisture, potassium-magnesium 
ratios, and free fatty acids, all of which affect the flavor of rice. 
The Japanese have even developed a texture meter that cooks a grain 
of rice, ``eats'' it and then rates it according to how springy and 
sticky it is. No one matches the Japanese for being demanding, but 
every culture has its own preferences. At the Rice Experiment Station 
in Biggs, researchers have been relying on a tasting panel of Sikhs 
to judge their latest Basmati-type rice, 96-Y-90, one of four new 
rice models that should roll off the Biggs assembly line next year. 
``The Indians like the grain to break across, to crumble,'' said Kent 
McKenzie, a plant breeder at the station. ``It's called beading.'' 
Sure enough, if you stare closely at a cooked grain of 96-Y-90, it 
looks a little like pop beads that have been linked into a chain and 
then smoothed over. Where other cultures want a rice grain to plump 
out, Indians look for a proper basmati to double its length while 
retaining its slim profile. The Biggs station has released 31 new 
varieties since 1969. Many of these have been improved medium-grains 
_ descendants of the Wataribune rice first grown in the valley _ that 
are blended and sold as Calrose, which accounts for 80 percent of 
the California crop. Table-rice brands like Tamaki are a premium version 
of Calrose; Kokuho Rose, a widely sold premium rice, is a close cousin 
to Calrose that was developed by Nomura Co. The Biggs station has 
also developed long-grain rices intended to compete with their Southern 
cousins, a California Arborio and Calmochi. Calmochi is a California 
version of mochigome rice, the supersticky rice that the Japanese 
make into New Year's treats and American companies use to bind gravy 
and fillings. Outside the station, farmers like the Lundbergs take 
their own walk on the wild side. Donna Wallace of Bayliss Farms has 
developed Calriso, an Arborio-type rice that crosses carnaroli, the 
best Italian rice for risotto, with Calrose. And then there are the 
Lundbergs, who will do just about anything. Short-grain, long-grain, 
red, mahogany, black or brown _ if it's rice, the Lundbergs will breed 
it and grow it. When a planting mistake gave them a field of speckled 
red rice, they simply harvested it and sold the motley package as 
Christmas Rice, touting its ``mysteriously musky flavor.'' Rice with 
sex appeal? It took California to find it. PAN-SEARED SCALLOPS WITH 
CABERNET RISOTTO AND LEMON BROTH Adapted from Bradley Ogden, Lark 
Creek Inn, Larkspur, Calif. Time:1 hour 1/2 cup lemon juice, plus 
extra for sprinkling 2 teaspoons grated lemon zest 4 tablespoons unsalted 
butter Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper 3 tablespoons chopped 
chives 1/4 cup olive oil 1/4 cup diced leeks, white part only 1 small 
yellow Spanish onion, peeled and diced 2 cloves garlic, minced 1 cup 
Calriso or other Arborio rice 3 cups (or more if desired) cabernet 
sauvignon 3 tablespoons grated Parmesan cheese 1 pound diver scallops, 
or sea scallops, tough muscles removed 2 teaspoons toasted cracked 
mustard seeds, for garnish (optional). 1. In a small nonreactive saucepan, 
combine 1/2 cup lemon juice and the lemon zest. Place over high heat, 
and bring to a boil. Immediately remove from the heat. Strain into 
a clean pan, discarding the zest. Add 3 tablespoons butter to the 
pan, and place over low heat just until the butter is melted. Remove 
from heat, and season to taste with salt and pepper. Stir in the chives; 
keep warm. 2. In a heavy-bottomed 4-quart saucepan over medium heat, 
warm 1 tablespoon olive oil. Add the leeks, onion and garlic. Cover 
the pan and allow the mixture to soften without browning, stirring 
occasionally, for about 4 minutes. Add the remaining tablespoon butter, 
and the rice. Saute until the rice is translucent, 2 to 3 minutes. 
3. Reduce the heat to medium-low. Add about 1/2 cup wine, stirring 
continuously until the wine is completely absorbed. Add another 1/2 
cup wine, and again stir until it is absorbed. Repeat this process 
until all the wine is used, a total of 25 to 30 minutes. (The rice 
will be al dente. For a creamier consistency, add more wine and cook 
longer.) Add the Parmesan cheese, and salt and pepper to taste. Cover, 
and keep warm. 4. In a large nonreactive saute pan over high heat, 
heat the remaining olive oil until sizzling. Season the scallops with 
salt and pepper to taste, and add to pan. Sear until golden brown 
on both sides, about 5 minutes. Remove from pan, and sprinkle with 
a little lemon juice. 5. To serve, spoon or mold risotto in the center 
of 4 serving plates or soup bowls. Arrange scallops in the center 
of the risotto. Spoon 2 to 3 tablespoons of the lemon broth around 
the risotto. If desired, sprinkle each plate with 1/2 teaspoon toasted 
cracked mustard seeds. Yield: 4 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>