<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0261 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The District of Columbia is recycling trash again. Squadrons of work 
crews are busy fixing streets. New parking meters have replaced their 
vandalized ancestors. For the first time in years, residential real 
estate prices are going up. In small ways and large, the nation's 
capital is on the mend. A near decade of financial chaos, rising crime 
rates and spiritual malaise has given way to balanced budgets, business 
expansion, safer streets and the possibility of true reform in the 
city government. Many problems persist, of course. The District Police 
Department is still a work in progress, with a new chief working out 
inefficiencies of the past. Many of the city's public schools need 
better teachers and smaller classes. Budget projects reflect a need 
for $500 million a year in additional help from the federal government 
to cover annual expenses. And racism in a city where blacks constitute 
a 57 percent majority remains near the surface. When two white candidates 
won seats on the City Council last week to give whites a majority 
for the first time, many blacks around the city, including outgoing 
Mayor Marion Barry, raised concerns about a white majority not being 
sensitive to black concerns, like maintaining a summer jobs program 
and preserving the city-owned hospital that serves a large portion 
of the poor community. But even with those challenges, many local 
officials, including Barry's successor, Anthony A. Williams, 47, are 
predicting that the city is well beyond the worst of times and that 
the sunset of Barry's career is ushering in a new era for the city, 
its politics and its residents. ``On a scale of zero to 10, with 10 
the best, I'd say we're at five and climbing,'' said Williams, a Democrat, 
whose victory last Tuesday has given rise to much of the optimism 
now pervading the city. Even Congress is impressed. ``The city is 
moving in the right direction,'' said Rep. Thomas M. Davis III, R-Va., 
who has been involved in district matters in the House for the past 
four years. Of Williams, he added: ``Our job now is to give him the 
tools he needs to succeed.'' Just as the new mayor promises to be 
different in style and effectiveness from Barry, who is retiring after 
16 years in office over the last two decades, the city, itself, has 
changed, as well. Four years ago, on that same scale of municipal 
viability, the district would barely have nudged a one. The city was 
mired in debt and deficit spending. Service agencies were broken. 
Violent crime was rampant. Barry blamed his predecessor, Sharon Pratt 
Kelly, for all the problems, and she blamed him. Congress stepped 
in to change much of that. With Republicans in control for the first 
time in 40 years, lawmakers created a financial control board in 1995 
and stripped Barry of virtually any meaningful role in running the 
city. He and his supporters complained, but the positive results proved 
to be unambiguous. The control board is now ready to shift authority 
for running the city back to the new mayor upon his inauguration on 
Jan. 2, and if the city can balance its budget for two more years, 
the control board, by law, will shut down. It was Williams' role in 
the revival that brought him to the attention of voters. Hired as 
the city's chief financial officer in October 1995, he effectively 
served as intermediary between the control board and city leaders, 
vowing to resign within a year if he could not straighten out the 
mess. In general, he recommended tough decisions to set the city's 
finances straight, and for the most part, the control board agreed 
with him despite Barry's frequent objections. But as a lifelong numbers-crunching 
bureaucrat, Williams had never contemplated running for office and 
certainly not in a city where Barry held almost Svengali-like sway 
over much of the electorate since his first run for mayor in 1978. 
A series of events changed all that. The district's problems through 
the early years of the decade had quietly led to a shift in the electorate. 
An increasing number of middle-class families, most of them black 
and many of them Barry supporters, left for the better schools and 
safer streets of the suburbs. While that continued, an overall population 
decline that began in the 1950s and included many white families also 
narrowed the gap with whites, who have been a minority group in the 
district since the late 1950s. The exodus enabled whites _ and to 
a lesser extent, the growing populations of Hispanics and Asians _ 
to gain growing influence in citywide elections. Whites now account 
for about 32 percent of the city population, an increase from 29 percent 
in 1990. Blacks make up about 57 percent, a decrease from 60 percent 
in 1990. The white influence never seemed more pronounced once Barry 
announced in May that he would not seek re-election. Soon, three leading 
members of the City Council _ Harold Brazil, Kevin P. Chavous and 
Jack Evans _ declared themselves candidates to succeed him. But none 
had a distinctively sharp political persona, and many voters regarded 
them as part of the problems, not solutions. In district political 
circles, Williams, who is black, was widely viewed as the outsider 
because he is a native of Los Angeles who only moved to the district 
five years ago. But he was also seen as someone who had answers, a 
perception that was especially widespread among middle-class and affluent 
whites _ voters who abandoned their earlier allegiance to Barry after 
his 1990 conviction on a drug possession charge. As a group, they 
were also more likely to vote than any other in the city. As a result, 
Williams built a strong coalition of enough blacks and whites to win 
50 percent of the vote in a seven-way race in the Democratic primary. 
In the general election, he won every precinct of the city to gain 
66 percent of the vote, to 30 percent for his Republican challenger, 
Carol Schwartz, another member of the city council. The turnout in 
Ward 3, the area of the city with the highest concentration of whites 
and affluent voters, was 49.4 percent, highest in the city. The turnout 
in Ward 8, the poorest in the city with the highest concentration 
of former Barry supporters, was 25.2 percent, lowest in the city. 
To Williams, the election was a mandate to continue the tough choices 
and build on what he perceives as the district's assets _ strengths 
that were largely obscured by the financial crisis. ``We have a chance 
to be a great success story,'' Williams said in an interview this 
week, giving shape to his short-term priorities. ``Every city wants 
to be all things to all people, but every city has to find its niche 
markets. We are still the federal center. We have a stable employment 
base. Last year we attracted 24 million tourists. Every diplomat in 
the world has been here _ hello _ that has got to be good for international 
trade. We have a lot of competitive assets.'' While Barry was always 
eager to sell the city's assets _ even now he is in Cameroon on what 
he said is a trade mission _ his efforts in this final term have been 
marginal, largely because of his diminished powers. Other local leaders, 
meanwhile, have embarked on a full-scale economic development program 
that they believe is vital to the city's future in the wake of the 
60,000 jobs that were lost in the city through the reorganization 
of the federal and municipal governments in recent years. The planning 
group, which includes federal agencies, local agencies and private 
organizations like Fannie Mae, as well as the control board, has targeted 
six major industries _ some of the niche markets Williams mentioned 
_ to exploit for job expansion and economic growth to enable the district 
to compete with faster-growing suburbs in Maryland and Virginia. The 
mayor-elect said he has already discussed other initiatives with Hillary 
Rodham Clinton. ``We have gone further and faster than any other city 
in the same situation,'' Williams said. But mindful of daunting challenges 
ahead, he conceded that he would have to convince both Congress and 
district residents that he was the right choice for the job. ``It 
still shocks me to think that I'll be mayor of this city,'' Williams 
said of his rise and the moment at hand. ``One minute, it's electrifying; 
the next, it's terrifying. There are a lot of expectations. But ultimately, 
they are all motivating. I know what I can do, but the whole thing 
is amazing.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>