<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0300 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The frenzy of hand-wringing and upheaval in the Republican Party has 
obscured an important and unmistakable reality: While the party suffered 
a defeat in last Tuesday's election, it was not as devastating as 
Republicans make it seem. Their reaction, more than the results, has 
made the election seem like a rout. Republicans forced out Speaker 
Newt Gingrich, and many of his lieutenants may soon find themselves 
relegated to the back benches. They are plotting to oust the party 
chairman, Jim Nicholson, as well as the heads of the Senate and House 
campaign committees. And Republicans of all ideological stripes are 
describing the outcome as ``a wake-up call'' that should send the 
party in a new direction. The most obvious reason for the intense 
reaction is that Republicans are deeply disappointed. President Clinton's 
scandal _ and the history of a president's party almost always forfeiting 
seats in a midterm election _ led Republicans to propel themselves 
into expectational overdrive. They had publicly declared their hope 
that the party would pick up enough Senate seats for the 60 votes 
needed to block a Democratic filibuster. And party leaders had forecast 
pick-ups of as many as 30 House seats. The recriminations are also 
being fueled by the factions and interest groups of the Republican 
Party, who seized on the results to press their own agendas. Randy 
Tate, executive director of the Christian Coalition, Tuesday attributed 
the outcome to the failure of Republicans to reach out to religious 
conservatives on matters like abortion. On the other hand, Mark Miller, 
executive director of the Republican Leadership Conference, a moderate 
group, said Republicans appeared to be too harsh and too preoccupied 
with a social agenda like curbing late-term abortions. Jack Kemp, 
the Republican vice presidential nominee in 1996, faulted the party 
for neglecting minority voters throughout the midterm campaign, saying 
that Republicans should ``help all people get a shot at the American 
dream.'' Many Republicans said their big failure was concentrating 
too much on impeachment. ``If you make it a referendum on a president 
with a 67 percent approval rating, as they tried to do, you shouldn't 
be surprised if the election goes against you,'' said Pennsylvania 
Gov. Tom Ridge, a moderate. Steve Forbes, the billionaire publisher 
who is courting religious conservatives in his quest for the presidential 
nomination in 2000, said Republicans should have been more aggressive, 
not less, in capitalizing on the White House scandal. Party leaders, 
he said, ``should have declared without hesitation that the president 
lied under oath.'' One after another, Republican governors accused 
Republicans in Congress of not sufficiently following their leadership 
on matters like education and taxes. Environmental groups proclaimed 
that the results showed that Republicans should not be contemptuous 
of environmental issues. ``Any good interest group representative 
will make a compelling case that the election results demonstrate 
the wisdom of their own agenda,'' said Q. Whitfield Ayres, a Republican 
pollster in Atlanta. ``They are claiming verification for their preconceived 
positions.'' But the cries of alarm do not match reality. ``The good 
news for Democrats is this is an election where we should have put 
them away,'' said John Morgan, a Republican consultant and demographer. 
``The bad news for the Democrats is they're still the minority party.'' 
While Republicans lost the California governorship, they defeated 
Democrats in gubernatorial contests in the seven other most-populous 
states, most of them in landslides. While Republicans lost a net of 
five seats in the House, they still control the chamber for the third 
consecutive election, a feat they have not performed since 1930. While 
Republicans did not build on their margin in the Senate, they still 
dominate the Senate with 55 seats, and they still claim the highest 
number of Republicans elected to the Senate since 1928. Judging by 
the popular vote, Republicans are still the majority party, an analysis 
by Morgan shows: Roughly half a million more people voted for Republicans 
for House seats than for Democrats. In races for governor, 4.5 million 
more people voted for Republicans than for Democrats. ``It solidified 
the status quo,'' said Wisconsin Gov. Tommy Thompson, a Republican 
who was re-elected in a landslide. ``If there was a really big backlash, 
Republicans would have lost control of the House.'' Some races were 
so close that one overlooked fact is that Gingrich's chief tormentor 
in Congress, Rep. David E. Bonior of Michigan, the second-ranking 
Democrat, was re-elected by a disquieting margin of less than 15,000 
votes. Sen. Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, chairman of the National 
Republican Senatorial Committee, tried to defend the failure of his 
committee to capture seats by reciting statistics about how few Senate 
Democrats had been defeated since 1980. ``We've clearly had a tough 
time knocking their incumbents out for quite a while,'' he said in 
a speech here on Monday. But many Republicans are not interested in 
excuses or rationales. They wanted big wins. And now they want heads 
to roll. Most of all, McConnell said he had finally learned an old 
rule of politics: Never, ever, raise expectations before an election. 
His prediction for the Senate outcome in 2000? ``The name of the game 
will be to hold the Senate,'' McConnell said as he cautiously tried 
his spin for the next campaign. ``Let's keep our ambitions here in 
touch with reality.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>