<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0388 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With hog prices now so low that farmers are being paid less than it 
costs to raise the livestock, Illinois agriculture groups on Tuesday 
raised questions about why pork prices in stores are not also plummeting. 
While hog prices fell 39 percent for the 12 months ending in September, 
according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, retail pork prices 
declined only 1.5 percent. Since then, prices for hogs have dropped 
even more, down 49 percent for the first 10 months of 1998, with farm 
groups estimating that producers are losing $20 to $50 on every pig 
they raise. ``This is an issue on which farm and city people come 
together,'' said Ron Warfield, the president of the Illinois Farm 
Bureau, contending that the gap between hog prices at the farm and 
pork prices at supermarkets is wider than ever before. In announcing 
its intention to monitor and publicize the gap each week, farm groups 
clearly hope to pressure retailers into promoting pork and cutting 
prices, moves that could help hog prices rebound by stoking consumer 
demand. But the farm advocates were careful to use wording that would 
avoid antagonizing retailers or encourage scapegoating, the old prairie-style 
penchant for distrusting markets and powerful institutions. ''We are 
not accusing supermarkets of gouging consumers,'' said Warfield. ``We 
are not calling retailers greedy middlemen. The days of farmers bashing 
`the middleman' are long gone.'' Groups that represent the interests 
of supermarkets, meanwhile, say the USDA measurement overstates the 
gap between farm and retail prices. Tim Hammonds, the president of 
the Food Marketing Institute, a Washington trade group for supermarkets 
and wholesalers, said the USDA bases its retail pries on average weekly 
prices in stores, which does not accurately measure purchases, since 
consumers buy a disporportionate share of pork, or anything else, 
during special sales. He also said that live hogs are only one part 
of the pork price equation, noting that costs related to slaughtering, 
processing and distribution have not gone down. ``With unemployment 
levels as low as they are,'' he said, ``I think it's safe to say that 
a lot of labor costs have gone up.'' Finally, Hammonds said that retail 
prices rarely see the valleys, or the peaks, that farmers experience. 
He said that when hog prices for farmers jumped 26 percent in 1996, 
retail prices climbed only about 10 percent. But Hammonds said supermarkets 
would gladly join producers in a campaign to ``highlight the value'' 
of what the pork industry dubs, ``the other white meat.'' The main 
cause of the falling hog prices, all sides agree, is an overproduction 
of swine. Hog production proved extremely profitable in 1996 and 1997, 
and the big gains prompted many swine operations to expand. Moreover, 
the growing political resistance to large-scale, confinement hog operations 
in the Midwest and the South _ the plants tend to emit strong odors 
that offend people living in nearby small towns _ has led some big 
hog operations to expand before states declare moratorium on hog facilities, 
as some have done. On the federal level, the Environmental Protection 
Agency is preparing to work with the states to impose strict pollution-discharge 
permits on all large farms by 2005. So far this year, 84.6 million 
hogs had been slaughtered, an increase of about 11 percent compared 
to a year earlier. Consumption grew about 7 percent in the United 
States, and exports have continued to rise, although the Asian economic 
crisis has taken its toll. The typical American eats about 52.3 pounds 
of pork a year, according to the National Pork Producers. The farm 
bureau here estimates that hog farmers are losing $20 to $50 a head 
at current prices, a calamitous situation that will surely drive many 
farmers out of business if the prices remain low. ''We don't go to 
a farmer meeting,'' Warfield said, ``but that we don't talk to somebody 
that's going out of production.'' The $6 billion in emergency farm 
aid passed recently by Congress does not directly affect livestock 
producers. Instead, it is aimed at grain farmers. Iowa is the leading 
hog producing state, followed by North Carolina, Minnesota and Illinois. 
Steve Meyer, an economist for the pork producers group, said a reduction 
in slaughterhouse capacity in recent years has posed a problem for 
hog producers. There was a time when slaughterhouses were centered 
in big cities, like Chicago, which the poet Carl Sandburg described 
as ``Hog Butcher for the world.'' But the slaughterhouse industry 
has long ago moved to rural regions, and in recent years, the capacity 
has been shrinking. ''We've lost 35,000 per head per day of capacity 
in the last two years,'' said Meyer, who noted that some big hog and 
packing companies, such as Smithfield, have bought slaughterhouses 
and closed them. The growing dominance of factory-like hog companies 
makes it increasingly difficult for smaller, independent operations 
to compete. Dan Steimel, 34, who farms with his father, Roger, 61, 
near DeKalb, Ill., was preparing to ship a load of hogs to market 
for a sale that will bring about half what it cost them to raise the 
livestock. ''We had some good years, and we paid down some debt,'' 
said Steimel, an economics graduate from the University of Illinois. 
``We knew the prices would go down again. But no one could ever have 
predicted they would have gone this low.'' He added, ``There are going 
to be some farmers asking themselves a lot of hard questions this 
winter.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>