<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0333 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a new sign of fracturing within the nation's largest Protestant 
denomination, Southern Baptists in Texas split on Tuesday when a group 
of strict theological conservatives voted to break away from the state's 
established Southern Baptist organization. The vote by the conservative 
group, to separate from the Baptist General Convention of Texas, marked 
the second time in two years that a state organization within the 
16-million-member Southern Baptist Convention had ruptured, a result 
of a two-decade-old struggle between conservative and moderate Baptists 
over differences in how to interpret the Bible and what stands to 
take on certain social issues. The new organization, the Southern 
Baptists of Texas Convention, was created by several hundred conservative 
Baptists who met at a Houston church on Tuesday and voted for a constitution 
and officers, said the Rev. Gerald Smith, the organization's treasurer. 
In September 1996, a conservative group pulled out of the Baptist 
General Association of Virginia, creating two bodies in that state 
that are both affiliated with the Southern Baptist Convention. But 
the break in Texas is considerably more significant. The state's established 
Baptist organization, the 2.7-million-member Baptist General Convention 
of Texas, is the largest state organization within the Southern Baptist 
Convention. In fact, it has more members than several major Protestant 
denominations, including the Episcopalian. Bill Leonard, a church 
historian who is dean of Wake Forest Divinity School, said the conservatives' 
decision would register as ``an 8.5 on the ecclesiastical Richter 
scale'' among Baptists. The vote, he said, was ``another piece in 
the redefining and realigning of the Southern Baptist system.'' The 
conservatives' decision does little for now, however, to weaken the 
older Texas Baptist organization. Those who voted to create the new 
organization represented about 150 congregations, said people who 
were present, and adopted a $903,000 budget for 1999. In contrast, 
the General Convention claims 5,700 affiliated congregations and, 
at its own annual meeting in Houston on Tuesday, adopted a $50-million 
budget. In 1979, conservatives undertook a successful effort to gain 
control of the Southern Baptist Convention, which is based in Nashville, 
Tenn. But some of the autonomous Baptist state organizations, that 
of Texas in particular, have remained in moderate hands. Although 
many other Protestants might regard the two factions as broadly similar 
in theological and social outlook, Baptists have been acutely aware 
of what separates conservatives from moderates. In recent years, moderates 
have begun founding their own seminaries, accusing conservatives of 
purging moderate professors from the denomination's six established 
seminaries. A central disagreement between the two factions turns 
on whether Scripture ought to be considered ``inerrant,'' literally 
true on a religious, historical and scientific basis, as conservatives 
insist, or whether its interpretation is ultimately up to the believer, 
as moderates hold. Leaders of the two groups have also clashed over 
church-state issues like prayer in schools. In an interview before 
the conservatives' vote on Tuesday, the Rev. Ronnie H. Yarber, administrative 
director of the group, said they were concerned that some state Baptist 
organizations were ``distancing themselves from the national Baptist 
convention.'' Yarber also said the conservatives' decision to create 
their own organization had been prompted by differences over the Bible 
and a desire among conservatives to make clear a strong stand against 
homosexuality, legalized abortion and the ordination of women as pastors. 
He said conservatives believed that the General Convention of Texas 
had taken a ``very weak'' stand against an Austin congregation that 
ordained a homosexual man as a deacon this year. The General Convention 
formally disassociated itself from that congregation by refusing to 
receive its financial contributions and ordering it not to use the 
convention's logo on the congregation's literature. As for abortion, 
the General Convention adopted a resolution last year condemning so-called 
partial-birth abortion. But the conservatives insist on a position 
opposing all abortion except to save the life of a pregnant woman. 
Before the conservatives' move on Tuesday, the General Convention 
issued a statement saying it remained loyal to the Southern Baptist 
Convention, welcomed leaders of differing views and contributed more 
money than any other state organization to the denomination. ``History 
indicates that a separate convention results in confusion and conflict,'' 
the General Convention's statement said. ``Attention and energy would 
be diverted from evangelism, missions and ministry.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>