<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0397 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Employees at Amazon.com, the popular on-line bookseller, recently 
received a directive from senior management that struck some as out 
of character in a company that had sprouted from the Internet's free-for-all 
culture. As part of an event that the Seattle-based company designated 
``Sweep and Keep,'' employees were instructed to purge, among other 
things, e-mail messages that were no longer required for business 
or not subject to legal records requirements. Free lattes would be 
dispensed in the cafeteria to those who complied immediately, the 
directive said. This Amazon ``document retention'' policy, which requires 
employees to expunge electronic files regularly, was followed a few 
weeks later with guidelines for ``document creation.'' ``Quite simply 
put, there are some communications that should not be expressed in 
written form,'' the Oct. 20 memo stated. ``Sorry, no lattes this time!'' 
Never mind monopoly power in the marketplace; the real lesson corporate 
America is taking away from the Microsoft antitrust trial is that 
old e-mail can be a mine field of legal liability, not to mention 
a source of public embarrassment. In the high-profile court battle 
between the Justice Department and the Microsoft Corp., e-mail has 
emerged as the star witness _ a fact that appears to be giving pause 
to corporate executives accustomed to clicking ``send'' without a 
second thought. ``I love e-mail,'' said Jeff Bezos, Amazon's founder 
and chief executive. ``I think it is changing the world. The problem 
is somebody can take it out of context and use it against you, and 
we have to guard against that.'' Amazon, like many companies, had 
embraced e-mail as the preferred way to communicate about business 
matters. Instant, convenient and at least putatively private, it allows 
the lowliest employee to discourse with the most exalted. And it provokes 
spontaneous, if not always eloquent, brainstorming among colleagues 
who might otherwise keep their thoughts to themselves. Now, Amazon, 
which to many people symbolizes a progressive Internet culture, is 
among the growing ranks of companies that are imposing new restrictions 
on e-mail. Unlike earlier policies prohibiting abusive or harassing 
electronic messages, the new rules tend to curb types of expression 
that have long been deemed acceptable business discourse. And when 
such exchanges must take place in writing, the prevailing philosophy 
would have them expunged as quickly and ruthlessly as possible. This 
backlash underscores a paradox of the information age: while instantaneous 
electronic communication often helps increase productivity and innovation, 
the privacy of workplace correspondence and accountability for what 
is written are growing concerns for many employers. Often, e-mail 
is more a conversation that happens to be written down than an actual 
letter, and it is often more revealing than either. It has thrived 
largely because of the assumption _ some would call it the illusion 
_ that the rapid-fire confessional exchanges that e-mail seems to 
encourage will never be divorced from their context. But that is often 
not the case in legal disputes, where e-mail is increasingly being 
treated as the ultimate window into the true thoughts of executives 
and the inner workings of an enterprise. Among the Microsoft trial's 
electronic highlights: the company chairman, Bill Gates, in a sworn 
deposition, flatly contradicts his e-mail statements, and an e-mail 
from James Barksdale, chief executive of Netscape Communications Corp., 
to America Online's chairman, Steve Case, in which he refers to Case 
as ``Franklin D.'' and himself as ``Joseph Stalin.'' The reference 
implies a comparison between the two executives in their war against 
Microsoft and the leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union 
fighting Nazi Germany in World War II. Likewise, in the Sun Microsystem 
lawsuit against Microsoft over the Java programming language, a federal 
court in San Jose, Calif., has seen a great deal of embarrassing e-mail 
from both companies. As a result, the very attributes that have made 
e-mail so popular _ chief among them its tendency to induce off-the-cuff 
candor _ are driving managers to conclude that its use must be reined 
in, its tracks dusted over. ``In the past, message-retention policies 
have been primarily designed for disk space management,'' said Jim 
Browning, a senior research analyst at the Gartner Group, a consulting 
firm. ``The new question is how quickly should e-mail be deleted to 
prevent it from becoming a danger to the organization?'' Browning 
said that anxious calls from clients had been rising in tandem with 
headlines about the Microsoft trial. Earlier this month, a client 
called looking for what he characterized as an ``e-mail shredder.'' 
Another wanted a ``Mission Impossible'' e-mail product that would 
self-destruct the message after it was read. ``That option doesn't 
exist today,'' Browning said. But such anxiety is not unreasonable. 
E-mail that someone thinks has been erased often still exists somewhere, 
perhaps on the hard drive of one or more recipients or of someone 
to whom it was forwarded. People often do not realize they have set 
their software to leave e-mail on the server, the computer that acts 
as an electronic post office. And erased files can sometimes be reconstructed 
with special software that reassembles discarded data from the digital 
ghosts left behind on hard drives. The Gartner Group recommends policies 
that help employees understand what a company considers appropriate 
business language. For example, said Joyce Graff, Gartner's research 
director for the electronic workplace: ``You talk about `fair competition'; 
you don't talk about `slaughtering' them. No warfare language. That 
way you have fewer messages you have to worry about in the files.'' 
As the 83 million Americans who now use e-mail in the workplace know, 
it is easily and often forwarded, copied and stored in perpetuity 
on everything from company backup tapes to personal Palm Pilots. The 
fact that people are disinclined to erase old e-mail has not been 
lost on lawyers, who routinely request e-mail as part of the discovery 
process in civil and criminal cases. Robert Lipstein, a Washington-based 
antitrust lawyer, said a company's e-mail was a treasure trove of 
evidence ``because that's when you catch people in their unguarded 
moments.'' Lipstein, who specializes in subpoenaing computer records 
from multinational corporations, added, ``I've seen e-mail that makes 
me cringe.'' Even so, several executives said they regretted the new 
atmosphere of deliberation and delicacy. ``It slows down communication 
if everybody is stopping and thinking about what they write,'' said 
Tom Jermoluk, chief executive of At Home, a company that provides 
Internet access over cable television lines. ``It's chilling. I don't 
like it.'' Nonetheless, Jermoluk, whose company was dragged into the 
Microsoft antitrust dispute because of an e-mail message a senior 
manager had written titled ``Gates on the Warpath,'' said he had instructed 
the company's lawyer to write a more restrictive policy to regulate 
e-mail and record-keeping. The conflicting desires to engage in frank, 
private communication and to escape public accountability for it are 
by no means new. Corporations have for decades trashed acres of files 
_ albeit with the added incentive that paper takes up a lot of space. 
And well before the first subpoena for a document, Socrates warned 
that writing ideas down was a bad idea because, among other things, 
one could never know who might read them. Plato countered that a culture 
that had to commit everything to memory was limited in its intellectual 
possibilities. The quandary of archived records, said Neil Postman, 
a professor of media studies at New York University, has been around 
``ever since phonetic writing became a critical part of Western culture.'' 
``Every important new technology is a Faustian bargain,'' he added. 
Increasingly, employers are choosing censorship. More than 20 percent 
of the respondents in the American Management Association's annual 
survey this year said that they monitored employee e-mail, compared 
with 15 percent who said they did so in 1997. Classes with titles 
like ``E-Mail 101'' are getting healthy enrollments. Bloomberg, the 
financial news service, installed a system last month that searches 
e-mail for offending words. If it finds one, a warning pops up before 
the e-mail is sent: ``This is inappropriate language to use in correspondence 
with any customer, and a copy of this message will be immediately 
sent to your superior.'' Managers at Polk Co., a data resource firm 
in Southfield, Mich., recently discovered that 10 percent of employees 
had from 5,000 to 10,000 e-mail messages saved on hard drives. A delete-fest 
is being planned. ``What the Microsoft trial has done is to say that 
if people are using this as an electronic filing system, it could 
be a dangerous medium,'' said David Zaccagnini, Polk's vice president 
for information technology. ``That's what the Microsoft trial really 
means to corporate America.'' Even without formal policies, executives 
said they were sanitizing their own e-mail. ``I self-consciously tone 
my language down,'' said John Gage, chief scientist at Sun. But Larry 
Prusak, executive director of IBM's Institute for Knowledge Management, 
is wary of inhibiting the use of e-mail. ``With e-mail, you get an 
optimization of a firm's knowledge,'' Prusak said. ``You know Queen 
Elizabeth I said, `I don't wish to build windows into men's souls.' 
That's in a sense what we're beginning to do, and I find it very threatening.'' 
In the wake of the Iran-Contra investigations in which Col. Oliver 
North's e-mail detailed illegal aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, courts 
ruled that most government e-mail must be saved as a public record. 
That has changed attitudes toward e-mail among federal employees. 
``There has been an enormous increase in information requests from 
Congress, which has a very legitimate oversight function,'' said Sally 
Katzen, who formerly headed the Clinton administration's Office of 
Information and Regulatory Affairs. ``But the call for e-mails _ which 
in many instances are very susceptible to being incomplete, cryptic 
and misunderstood _ has led a lot of people to shun the use of e-mail, 
and I think that's most unfortunate.'' Indeed, some critics say that 
unless e-mail comes to be viewed through a more appropriate legal 
lens, companies, governments and individuals will lose the full benefits 
of the technology. ``E-mail is perhaps the most contextually sensitive 
piece of writing that we have, and culturally we're going through 
this stage where we don't understand how to read it,'' said Lawrence 
Lessig, a Harvard University law professor. ``The clumsiness that 
the legal system has in dealing with this will lead to losing some 
of its value unless we learn how to put it into context and properly 
weigh it.'' Lessig's own personal e-mail became a source of controversy 
last year when he was named special master by the judge hearing the 
Microsoft antitrust case. Microsoft contended that he was biased, 
citing an e-mail message he had sent to a Netscape executive. ``There 
are people now who will not send me things in e-mail,'' Lessig said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>