<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0430 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
John Huang, a Democratic fund-raiser at the center of the 1996 campaign 
finance controversy, was granted immunity earlier this year in exchange 
for his cooperation in another criminal case, Kenneth Starr's investigation 
of President Clinton's longtime Arkansas friend, Webster Hubbell, 
law-enforcement officials said Tuesday. Starr has long investigated 
Hubbell, formerly the No. 3 official in the Justice Department, for 
accepting fees of more than $700,000 in 1994 from friends and supporters 
of Clinton. At issue was whether Hubbell was paid for his silence 
about Clinton's actions in the Arkansas land deal that touched off 
Starr's inquiry. As time passed, Starr shifted his attention to what 
some saw as parallel circumstances. In January, he began investigating 
Clinton's relationship with the White House intern Monica Lewinsky 
and accusations that he and associates helped find Ms. Lewinsky a 
job in New York in order to insure that she would deny their affair 
in the Paula Jones sexual misconduct case. It was revealed Tuesday 
that Huang, who funneled a $100,000 payment to Hubbell from an Indonesian 
banking family, received immunity from Starr this spring. The prosecutor 
agreed not to charge Huang with wrongdoing in exchange for information 
about Hubbell. A spokesman for Starr would not comment on the matter 
Tuesday. Justice Department officials said the deal Starr struck with 
Huang would not protect him from prosecution in the government's unrelated 
investigation of Huang's role in raising contributions for the Democrats 
during the 1996 election campaign. Huang raised more than $1 million, 
much of which was returned by the Democrats because the money originated 
from possibly suspect sources. One official said that because the 
department's campaign finance investigators were kept separate from 
investigators with the independent counsel's office, there was little 
danger that Huang's immunized testimony would seep into the campaign 
finance inquiry and undercut a Justice Department case against him. 
Huang was among the Clinton allies who hired Hubbell after he left 
the Justice Department in 1994, when Hubbell was being investigated 
for cheating his former law firm of hundreds of thousands of dollars. 
Huang paid $100,000 to Hubbell in June 1994 from the Riady family 
of Indonesia, which had employed Huang through its international business 
and banking operation, the Lippo group. The Riadys are longtime supporters 
of Clinton. Hubbell has acknowledged that he received the money, but 
he refused to tell the Senate Whitewater Committee what he did in 
return for the payment. ``There wasn't anything improper about and 
nobody promised me a damned thing,'' he said in 1996. Starr's office 
questioned Huang extensively shortly before Hubbell was indicted April 
30 on charges of evading taxes on hundreds of thousands of dollars 
in income. The indictment accused Hubbell of failing to pay taxes 
on money he received from Clinton's associates. But a Federal judge, 
James Robertson, dismissed the tax charges against Hubbell. Starr 
is appealing the ruling. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>