<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0345 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There was the doctor from West Virginia who received an official-looking 
letter from the Nigerian government, offering a business opportunity 
to export agricultural equipment. After some hesitation, he wrote 
several checks over a couple of years totaling $225,000. Then there 
were the three Amish farmers in Pennsylvania who heard about an offer 
for a lucrative oil pipeline contract. They, too, wrote several checks 
over time, parting eventually with $400,000. They were among the millions 
of Americans who have, over the years, received envelopes with colorful 
stamps and handwritten return addresses from Nigeria containing letters 
claiming to be from governmental or quasi-governmental bodies offering 
plans to strike it rich. The letters are part of what federal investigators 
say may be the oldest mail fraud scheme in the United States. They 
say it has existed for four or five decades in various forms, and 
now cheats people out of $100 million a year. To say that the scheme 
has been extensive would be an understatement: it accounts for four 
out of five letters sent from Nigeria to the United States, said Lee 
Heath, inspector in charge of the New York City division of the U.S. 
Postal Service. The fraud operation appears to be a thriving but mobile 
business based in Lagos, the commercial center of Nigeria. Now, U.S. 
officials, in conjunction Nigerian authorities, say they have devised 
a strategy that has significantly cut back on the fraud. Instead of 
waiting for victims to come forward, the Postal Service is training 
inspectors to spot the letters before they are delivered, and to discard 
them immediately. As a result, since March, postal inspectors at John 
F. Kennedy International Airport, where all mail from Africa is sorted, 
have intercepted 2.3 million of the letters. Before the practice was 
adopted, the Postal Service was receiving up to 25,000 complaints 
a month from people who had either been defrauded or were suspicious 
of the letters, and now it receives only 1,000. ``We hope that we 
will have a dramatic impact on shutting down these schemes and preventing 
American citizens from being victimized,'' Heath said at a news conference 
Tuesday in Manhattan. Although federal investigators were willing 
to estimate the amount of money lost through the scheme, they had 
no figures for how many people had been defrauded in the United States, 
or some of the other countries that have been targeted _ Britain or 
Belgium or Canada, Heath said. Thousands, officials thought. Nor was 
it clear how many people in Nigeria, or other countries in West Africa, 
may be responsible for the scheme; again, presumably thousands, officials 
said. Typically, the scheme relies on phone directories and other 
lists to inundate the United States with the letters. The letter, 
usually printed on official-looking stationery, may seek bank account 
numbers or advance fees. It characteristically makes a ``strictly 
confidential'' request that the recipient transfer millions of dollars 
siphoned from Nigeria's vast oil revenues or public construction budgets 
and offers the prospect of huge secret profits. Or it may simply describe 
an opportunity to do business with Nigerians who have connections 
to the government. Those who respond may later hear that legal fees, 
personal expenses and bribes may be involved, which would not be unusual 
in a country often described as one of the more corrupt in the world. 
Until recently, however, U.S. officials could not do much to prevent 
the fraud and were restricted to responding after receiving a complaint 
of fraud, or occasionally of physical threats. U.S. and Nigerian officials 
have made a few arrests over the years, but waiting for complaints 
is often frustrating, because the embarrassment keeps so many victims 
from reporting the swindle. In April, though, an agreement with Nigerian 
officials authorized United States postal inspectors to sift through 
mail from Nigeria and look for the characteristic signs of the fraud 
letters, including fake stamps, fake postage meter marks and bundles 
arranged in alphabetical order. One of the victims was Dr. Ian Leggat, 
an obstetrician in Fairmont, W. Va. Leggat received a letter in late 
1995. He was intrigued, asked to see documents testifying to the legitimacy 
of the agricultural equipment business and felt satisfied with what 
was offered as proof. Eventually, he was asked for fees to cover an 
assortment of matters, and was pinched out of $225,000. ``There's 
a sense that I was a complete idiot for having been played like a 
sucker,'' said Leggat, whose family is still reeling financially from 
the lost money. The swindlers ``are very smart, very sophisticated, 
and I'm doing this to help stop other people from getting sucked into 
this.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>