<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0160 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Zagat Survey turned 20 this week, grown from a two-page typed 
list of New York restaurants into a series of 35 gastronomic guidebooks, 
each devoted to a city or region, shaped like an upended legal-size 
envelope, written in a telegraphic style and wrapped in a claret-colored 
cover. Despite some criticisms, the guides have become America's closest 
analogue to France's Michelin series, the successors to Duncan Hines' 
``Adventures in Good Eating,'' which was the nation's culinary vade 
mecum in the 1940s and 50s. The New York guide sold 500,000 copies 
last year, and Zagat has launched successful entries recently in London 
and Paris, the latter in both French and English. Today, the guides 
are almost as vital to the American traveler as clean socks. Some 
have even learned to pronounce their name correctly, zuh-GAT rather 
than ZAY-gat or ZAG-it, the favored mispronunciations. In a few cities, 
like Boston and San Francisco, good local guidebooks provide competition. 
But among dedicated diners, Zagat has no national rival for answers 
to the insistent question, ``Where shall we eat?'' Marcellino's, a 
knockoff produced by a German entrepreneur, has limited coverage. 
A.A.A. and Mobil may be fine for hotels, but their restaurant ratings 
remain mired in the Pleistocene era, still celebrating veal Oscar. 
``Well-informed professional critics are important to the elite restaurant-goer 
and to the industry,'' said George Lang, the New York restaurateur, 
consultant and food writer. ``But the vox populi that Zagat reflects 
matters just as much to the great mass of American restaurant clients.'' 
And yet many in the trade have their doubts about the guides, precisely 
because they are based not on the judgment of professional critics 
but on the assessments of thousands of diners-out _ 18,320 of them 
in the case of this year's New York survey _ who fill out questionnaires 
and mail them in. Some say amateurs lack the knowledge to rate restaurants 
soundly. Some insist that the ballot box can be stuffed. Some argue 
that respondents rate restaurants where they have not eaten for five 
or 10 years. ``Who are these people who vote in the surveys?'' asks 
Piero Selvaggio, whose flagship restaurant, Valentino, has consistently 
been named one of the top spots in the Los Angeles area. ``I find 
it hard to believe that most people know enough to make these kinds 
of judgments, and harder still to believe that the editors rigorously 
follow the results of the balloting.'' Tim and Nina Zagat, the guides' 
owners and editors-in-chief, have heard all of that before, a hundred 
times. But they remain passionate believers in ``consumer democracy,'' 
as Zagat described it in an interview the other day, and they defend 
the integrity of their technique, which includes the use of a Salt 
Lake City firm to handle all the numerical tabulations. ``We don't 
want to be doing data processing,'' he said in his New York office, 
off Columbus Circle, with an eye-level view of the explorer atop his 
column. ``We want somebody above suspicion, like Price Waterhouse 
for the Academy Awards or corporate proxy fights.'' Zagat described 
himself as ``unimpressed by restaurant critics'' and asked, ``Who 
gave them a PhD in taste buds?'' Mrs. Zagat, interviewed separately, 
put a subtler spin on the matter, crediting critics with ``doing a 
better job of describing nuance and mood.'' The Zagat books, she said, 
cover more restaurants more often, and from varying perspectives. 
In fact, the top restaurants chosen by Zagat's amateurs do not vary 
markedly from those chosen by the pros, whether critics, food writers 
or restaurateurs. That is not surprising, since the pros influence 
the amateurs to start with, and the Zagats compare the judgments of 
control groups, composed of professionals and other people whom they 
know personally, to those of the amateurs. If the amateurs deviate 
too widely from the control group, a bell rings in Columbus Circle, 
and the Zagats scurry to discover why. That is one defense against 
ballot-box stuffing. Another is the prohibition of Xeroxed ballots; 
only originals, requested by mail from the Zagat headquarters or distributed 
through food societies and food and wine shops, are counted. Some 
completed ballots are discarded, such as those to which no name is 
signed and those that contain votes for only one or two places. There 
are other bulwarks as well, which the Zagats try to keep confidential, 
lest would-be cheaters find ways of breaching them. A Manhattan restaurant 
was eliminated from the guide this year because respondents rated 
it much higher than last year and higher than the control group, and 
because questionnaires mentioning it ``looked suspicious.'' In New 
York, the Zagats are themselves a safeguard. They eat out five or 
six times a week, often twice a day. Jean Georges, just up the street 
from their office, is a lunchtime favorite, where they often order 
the $28 fixed-price menu; the restaurant is rated 27 on a scale of 
30 for food this year. A favorite for dinner, where the Zagats are 
among the select few who can usually get a reservation, is Rao's, 
the century-old East Harlem Neapolitan classic; it is rated 25 for 
food, with the comment that tables are ``booked through the year 3,000.'' 
Both Zagats are adamant in rejecting accusations that they juggle 
the figures. They help choose pithy phrases from the reams of computer 
printouts that record every comment that comes on the evaluation sheets. 
They and their staff of about 15 try to insure that comments reflect 
the ratings, and that the 50- to 70-word write-ups of each restaurant 
have a similarity of tone coast to coast _ ``a kind of New York edge,'' 
Mrs. Zagat calls it. One obvious problem with the Zagat methodology 
is inconsistency from city to city. The New York ratings are clearly 
more reliable than those in Chicago, where only 1,873 diners' views 
are represented, or Las Vegas, where the number is 630. In addition, 
the meaning of the point scores varies from place to place, although 
they are arithmetically identical, which could be confusing to the 
unknowing. The 28 awarded to L'Antibes in Columbus, Ohio, for example, 
is obviously not equal to the 28 garnered by the French Laundry in 
the Napa Valley, which critics have called the nation's best restaurant. 
The problem exists even within the metropolitan area. Sirio Maccioni 
of Le Cirque 2000 ``went berserk last year,'' Zagat acknowledged, 
when his reborn restaurant was given a 25 for food, one point less 
than Soup Kitchen International, which was made famous by the ``Seinfeld'' 
television show. (Le Cirque caught up this year.) Likewise, there 
is something deeply incongruous about a 26 for Frank Pepe's Pizzeria 
in New Haven, unmatched though its clam pies may be, when that is 
exactly the same rating given to Lutece and La Caravelle. There are 
also scores here and there that seem inexplicable. Take San Domenico, 
Tony May's elegant, widely admired Italian restaurant on Central Park 
South. Praised in the text for ``swanky'' decor, ``impeccable'' service 
and a risotto that leaves clients ``speechless,'' it gets 23's for 
food and decor, 22 for service. It is also a no-show on a list of 
the 13 best Italian places in the city, which makes the list hard 
to take very seriously. Equally perplexing is the exclusion of Stephan 
Pyles' wonderful Star Canyon from Dallas' top five, and the exciting 
Tribute from Detroit's. ``We know that people tend to give the top 
grade to the best restaurant in town, no matter how good it is in 
absolute terms,'' Mrs. Zagat said. ``We know that haute cuisine takes 
a lot more skill than soup. People suggest that we massage the grades 
to iron out these kinds of problems _ but how? That would mean we 
were substituting our judgment for our surveyors' and we aren't prepared 
to play God.'' Zagat _ at 58, tall, burly, blunt of speech and boundlessly 
energetic _ handles the editorial and marketing chores. He works at 
a blond wood desk that could easily seat eight for dinner, seldom 
venturing from his office without a pocketful of guides to distribute 
to people he meets. Mrs. Zagat, 56, quieter, disciplined and more 
emollient, handles financial and legal matters, and is adapting the 
guides to the Internet. They met in contracts class at the Yale Law 
School, from which they graduated in 1966 (after Gary Hart, before 
Bill Clinton and Hillary Rodham). Their surveys began as an exchange 
of information with legal colleagues about Paris restaurants when 
they were living there in the 1970s; they gave their top marks in 
1974 to Taillevent, just after it won its third Michelin star, and 
Grand Vefour, before it lost its third when Raymond Oliver sold out. 
The New York guide started as a hobby. It stayed that for three years, 
until Mrs. Zagat told her husband that it was costing them at least 
$10,000 every six months, not including the expense of eating out. 
They quickly set up a company, mainly to get tax deductions for meals. 
At first, they distributed the guide themselves, touring Manhattan 
in their little station wagon, dropping off copies at any bookstore 
that would stock them. The Zagats' big break came when the guide was 
favorably mentioned in New York magazine in 1985; sales jumped from 
40,000 copies a year to 75,000 a month, almost overnight. They had 
been rebuffed in the early days by every publisher they approached, 
so when success arrived, they found themselves still sole proprietors. 
Each surveyor is asked to rate each restaurant in which he has eaten 
in the last year for food, decor and service on a scale of 1 to 3. 
(Service is and always has been the chief cause for complaint.) To 
derive a food rating for any given restaurant, the ratings are totaled, 
divided by the number of respondents and multiplied by 10. This year's 
leader in New York, Le Bernardin, scored 28.04; the runner-up, Daniel, 
scored 27.99. Even though the jury is composed differently each year, 
scores remain remarkably steady. Last year, Daniel finished first 
at 27.77, only 0.22 points lower than this year. But over the 20 years 
of its publication, the guide has reflected enormous changes in the 
views of New York foodies. Only one of the 10 restaurants that it 
rated best for food in 1979, La Grenouille, made the top 10 list for 
1999, although three of New Yorkers' 10 favorite restaurants this 
year, a completely separate category, have been among the city's best-loved 
haunts for decades: the Four Seasons, which was founded in 1959; Peter 
Luger, which dates from 1887, and Cafe des Artistes, established in 
1917. The escalation in cost, which Zagat also tracks, has been more 
modest than many might expect. In 1981, for example, a meal at Le 
Cirque cost $42, compared with $72 today, an increase of $30, or about 
$1.65 a year; a meal at the Four Seasons has risen from $43 to $65, 
or about $1.22 a year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>