<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0318 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Not in my memory has Broadway witnessed a resurrection comparable 
to the one on view at the 1,700-seat Minskoff Theater where, one year 
ago, the critical consensus was that the musical adaptation of ``The 
Scarlet Pimpernel'' was DOA. You might have expected that the show, 
with book and lyrics by Nan Knighton and music by Frank Wildhorn, 
would have been interred with dignity, then forgotten. But no. The 
popularity of Wildhorn's ``Jekyll and Hyde'' helped to sell tickets. 
So did the big, boldly engaging performance by Douglas Sills, who 
made his Broadway debut in the title role. As inert as the show was, 
it hung on, just barely, at last to be saved and maybe even turned 
into a hit. An association of big-spending, deep-pocket types provided 
the means by which ``The Scarlet Pimpernel'' was able to have its 
somewhat belated out-of-town tryout tour without ever leaving the 
Minskoff. The revisions went into rehearsal in September, while the 
cast continued to play the original production at night. After an 
eight-day shutdown beginning Oct. 1, the show began what were, in 
effect, several weeks of previews prior to the return of the critics 
earlier this month. The result is a virtually different show, still 
headed by Sills, but with two new co-stars, Rex Smith and Rachel York. 
It has been assembled mostly out of material that was already there, 
a lot of it rewritten, pared down and rearranged by Ms. Knighton and 
reimagined by Robert Longbottom, the new director and choreographer. 
You should remember Longbottom as a member of the team responsible 
for last season's haunting succes d'estime, ``Side Show.'' He has 
also been directing and choreographing the annual ``Radio City Music 
Hall Christmas Spectacular'' since 1994, which may have given him 
a special insight into the kind of show ``The Scarlet Pimpernel'' 
was meant to be. Market researchers, who are now required in our big-buck 
theater, told the new producers that people who had seen the show 
didn't know what it was about. That may have been true of some angry 
4-year-olds. The other respondents, I suspect, really meant that the 
show was so languidly paced, so awkwardly staged and so uninflected 
that they couldn't have cared less about what was happening on the 
stage. Their minds had wandered. In adapting Baroness Orczy's 1905 
romantic novel as a musical, Ms. Knighton was forced to do a certain 
amount of truncating, but she hardly made it difficult to follow. 
Her book was and is an adequate re-creation of the tale about Percy 
Blakeney, the dashing English knight who masquerades as a fop to disguise 
his activities saving aristocrats from the Terror of the French Revolution. 
What the show lacked was the comic point of view and the energy to 
prevent it from looking as glum as a failed, socially irresponsible 
``Les Miz'' spinoff. ``The Scarlet Pimpernel'' is now what it should 
always have been: a light-hearted, prettily appointed entertainment, 
still sung in the manner of old-time operetta, but a show that moves 
with speed, sometimes wit and is never solemn for very long. There 
is even a touch of Grand Guignol theatrics. One of the principal characters 
is guillotined, not offstage but before the eyes of the happily disbelieving 
audience. Even the score sounds better, not necessarily the ballads, 
in which singers seem always to be searching for some marshmallow 
truth within, but the mock anthems, such as ``Madame Guillotine'' 
and ``Into the Fire,'' and the comic numbers. The big, strapping Sills 
has great fun with these, especially ``The Creation of Man,'' in which 
Percy, in his foppish guise, leads the members of his league in a 
celebration of outrageous male plumage. Sills is a true singer, but 
he also enunciates the lyrics in a manner that recalls the crisp relish 
of Rex Harrison in ``My Fair Lady'' when he wondered why a woman couldn't 
be more like a man. Sills continues to dominate the show, though now 
the show is working with him, instead of ignoring him. A continuing 
problem: The Minskoff sound amplification system has a way of rendering 
many of the love songs unintelligible, the words emerging as meaningless 
syllables no matter who is singing. Is it because the love songs tend 
to be thunderously overorchestrated while the anthems and the comedy 
numbers are presented less ornately? Rachel York, last seen on Broadway 
as the brassy Chicago moll in ``Victor/Victoria,'' is the new Marguerite 
(originally played by Christine Andreas), Percy's baffled French wife. 
You wouldn't know that bubble gum had ever passed her lips. She looks 
and even sounds a bit like Isabelle Adjani at her most queenly. Also 
singing well is Rex Smith, who is in for Terrence Mann, the original 
Chauvelin, Marguerite's former lover and evil revolutionary zealot. 
Though ``The Scarlet Pimpernel'' is not exactly a dancing show, Longbottom 
appears to have altered and made coherent what choreography there 
was before. Andrew Jackness has augmented his lovely, Gainsborough-esque 
scenic design with one new set. Jane Greenwood's costumes remain a 
dazzling tribute to conspicuous consumption whenever the occasion 
allows. As welcome and as astonishing as this salvage operation is, 
it is also another reminder of the way in which other entertainment 
interests are now shaping the Broadway landscape. One of the principal 
new producers is Radio City Entertainment, a division of Cablevision 
Systems Corp., which is also the parent of Madison Square Garden. 
``The Scarlet Pimpernel'' is seen not only as a Broadway investment, 
but as something that will eventually be filling large arenas all 
around the country. The success of a Broadway show's possible second, 
third and fourth companies has always played a part in the fortunes 
of producers. Now it seems possible that the demands of this national 
market will more directly affect what appears on Broadway. Carried 
to its logical extreme, Broadway could become just another regional 
outlet for products expected to sell equally well in the Deep South, 
Salem, Ore., or Yuma, Ariz. It's Broadway as a franchise business. 
But is it a franchise business that would devote the same interest 
to saving something far more idiosyncratic? For example, ``The Capeman,'' 
last season's Paul Simon show, which was ineptly written and staged, 
though it had one of the best scores Broadway has heard in years? 
Good news: Richard Benjamin and Paula Prentiss have taken over the 
roles originated so memorably by Alan Arkin and Elaine May in ``Power 
Plays,'' the Off Broadway hit that opened six months ago at the Promenade 
Theater. Benjamin and Ms. Prentiss, who are man and wife, turn up 
in the theater far too infrequently. They are assets of singular comic 
dimension: he of the uncanny timing, furrowed brow and the crazily 
earnest persona, which was defined when he played the Philip Roth 
surrogate in ``Goodbye, Columbus''; she of the style and chic of a 
fashion model, but a fashion model with the mysterious, dizzy intensity 
of, say, a theoretical mathematician. Anyone who has admired their 
film work now has the opportunity to see them in something that seems 
as made for their talents as it was for those of their predecessors. 
Remaining in the four-actor cast, and better than ever, are Jeannie 
Berlin (Ms. May's daughter) and Anthony Arkin, the son of Alan, who 
directed the original production as well as the new cast members. 
The program of three short comedies (two by Ms. May and one by Alan 
Arkin) continues to be a delirious entertainment. If the tone and 
the balance of the performances have shifted a bit, that's a reflection 
of the public personalities of the new stars. This is particularly 
apparent in Ms. May's play, which opens the program. ``The Way of 
All Fish'' is about the hilarious, possibly life-and-death struggle 
of wills that erupts between two highly motivated women. Ms. Asquith 
(Ms. Prentiss) is a self-absorbed, high-powered Manhattan career woman, 
maybe a literary agent who deals only in six-figure properties. In 
the other corner is her drudge of a secretary, Miss Riverton (Ms. 
Berlin), who aspires beyond her capabilities. She expects to be elevated 
to the post of Ms. Asquith's assistant. As the two share Japanese 
takeout (and a lot of wine) in the office at the end of a long week, 
Ms. Asquith is suddenly forced to notice her secretary for the first 
time. Miss Riverton, her tongue loosened by alcohol, talks dreamily 
about attaining fame by assassinating someone famous. ``I'm a special 
person with no special abilities,'' she says. She is convinced that 
assassination is her only route to immortality. The challenge is to 
choose a victim whose fame won't overshadow the new-found celebrity 
of the assassin. Ms. Prentiss' wheeler-dealer has the spacey manner 
of a woman who has used her arrogant, eccentric manners to demolish 
all opposition. Suddenly, unlike Ms. May's resourceful Ms. Asquith, 
the character appears to be without defenses. When Ms. May played 
the role, Ms. Asquith looked and sounded so much like Miss Riverton 
that, in spite of their unequal positions in life, they could have 
been the mother and daughter they actually are. They were more evenly 
matched. The battle then was equally funny, but the stakes were of 
a different nature. In the present staging, there is some doubt whether 
Ms. Asquith will be able to check Miss Riverton's hilariously raging 
ambitions. The power has clearly gone to the younger woman, who is 
almost as dangerous as she dreams of being. A somewhat similar shift 
in emphasis occurs in the program's second play, Arkin's ``Virtual 
Reality,'' a small, comic chef-d'oeuvre that, when first seen, I mistakenly 
described as having the manner of an actor's exercise. It is now clear 
that the work is far more subtle, more deft than that. It is a seriously 
comic, shaggy-dog sketch that simultaneously makes use of two different 
realities. The first is that of the garage where, late one night, 
two hoods who don't know each other meet by prearrangement to prepare 
for an operation, the nature of which is never revealed. De Recha 
(Benjamin), prides himself on going by the book. He plans ahead. Lefty 
(Anthony Arkin), his younger associate, is more laid back, pragmatic. 
De Recha somehow persuades Lefty that they must inventory their gear, 
though it hasn't yet been delivered and though they have no way of 
knowing what it will include. To the younger man's astonishment, he 
finds himself not only swallowed up in De Recha's fantasy as they 
inventory the nonexistent gear, but also enthusiastically helping 
to create another world that replaces the reality of the barren garage. 
It's madness of a marvelous theatricality. Toward the end, the two 
men are huddling in a make-believe tent they have just unpacked and 
erected, in a feeble attempt to escape the sub-zero cold of a mountain 
top they have created. In the original production, Alan Arkin's De 
Recha appeared to be touched by a streak of brilliant lunacy; Benjamin's 
De Recha destabilizes Lefty by firm persistence, only to be engulfed 
by the younger man's even more dangerous fantasies. Both interpretations 
are valid, both hugely funny. All four members of the cast unite in 
``In and Out of the Light,'' which concludes the program. This is 
Ms. May's blissful, burlesque-like mini-farce set in a dentist's office. 
A proper, long-married Jewish dentist (Benjamin) is planning his first 
extramarital fling with his sexy nurse (Ms. Prentiss), a former exotic 
dancer. The obligatory interruptions are effected by his son (Anthony 
Arkin), who wants to confess that he is 1) gay and 2) planning to 
drop out of dental school, and a hysterically neurotic woman (Ms. 
Berlin), who is every dentist's worst nightmare of a needy patient. 
There is still joy in chaos at the Promenade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>