<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0266 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The separatist Kosovo guerrillas, who sprang out of nowhere this spring 
and were then pummeled by a Serbian offensive in the summer, are bouncing 
back more resilient and better organized than expected, Western officials 
said, much to their surprise. The Kosovo Liberation Army is conducting 
a major reassessment, reorganization and rearmament, raising concerns 
in Washington just as an unarmed, 2,000-member multinational force 
is readied to verify the cease-fire in the Serbian province. The guerrillas 
have killed at least six Serbian policemen in the two weeks since 
some Serbian forces withdrew from Kosovo under an agreement reached 
between Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic and U.S. envoy Richard 
Holbrooke. Western officials here said Tuesday they were concerned 
about threats from Serbian leaders Monday to take matters into their 
own hands unless the Organization for Security and Cooperation in 
Europe did so. The 54-nation, Vienna-based organization, which is 
charged with creating the 2,000-person team, has not formally begun 
its main work. The head of the OSCE effort, U.S. Ambassador William 
Walker, is expected in Kosovo on Wednesday for the first time. A top 
strategist of the guerrilla forces, Naim Maloku, who was a captain 
in the Yugoslav army and the first senior professional soldier to 
join the guerrilla forces, said the West should not be surprised by 
what they see. ``We made tactical, organizational and propaganda mistakes,'' 
he said of the Kosovo Liberation Army's operations. ``But now we are 
trying to institutionalize and give the forces a reasonable political 
leadership.'' Maloku, 40, who is considered a moderate and a pragmatist 
in a force that has its share of hotheads, said in an interview Tuesday 
that U.S. officials were ``making a mistake'' by expressing concern 
about guerrillas taking up positions occupied by the vacating Serbs. 
In essence, he said, when the Serbian onslaught became too intense 
many of the fighters fled to the hills with the civilians and have 
now returned with their uniforms back on. ``The fighters are from 
among the people,'' he said. ``It's only natural they should come 
back with them.'' Tall and well-built, Maloku wore a uniform that 
came from various sources _ German made camouflage pants and jacket, 
a khaki German army sweater with the German colors still attached 
at the sleeve, a Yugoslav army pistol at his waist and the red and 
black emblem of the Albanian double-headed eagle on his cap. ``Leaner 
and meaner'' is how a NATO diplomat summed up the Kosovo Liberation 
Army ``They are far from defeated, their morale is high.'' A NATO 
officer who last month described the guerrillas as ``not destroyed 
but dismantled'' acknowledged this week that he had been mistaken. 
``Where they're coming back, they're coming back pretty good,'' he 
said. ``There appears to be more structure, there seems to be some 
definitive organization. The wild card in all this is what the Kosovo 
Liberation Army is up to.'' The guerrillas are now parading around 
villages that were deserted only 10 days ago, in full gear, rifles 
over their shoulders and pistols at their hips. Many seem to be concerned 
with family matters and can be seen carrying their children. But others 
are manning checkpoints and at night clearly aiming to unsettle the 
Serbian forces. Last week, the guerrillas allegedly shot at civilian 
Serb workers as they left a mining facility. So far, the cease-fire 
verification work is being done by diplomatic observers, including 
a group from the United States who were shown bodies believed to be 
of two Serbian policemen on the street in the town of Malisevo on 
Monday. The men appeared to have been killed by the guerrillas in 
retaliation for the killing of five guerrillas last week. Such retaliatory 
actions were to be expected, Western officials said. One of the biggest 
concerns is the more sophisticated weaponry acquired by the guerrillas. 
Like most guerrilla groups, the Kosovo fighters are reluctant to show 
outsiders their gear. But two weeks ago a former Western military 
officer and member of the diplomatic observer mission was shown a 
new range of weaponry. The officer in the observer mission was taken 
aback when a powerful U.S.-made Barret sniper rifle was brought out 
for display. He was told the guerrillas had more of them and additional 
ones would be coming in. The Barret rifle is capable of ``blowing 
a head off from a mile away,'' the NATO officer said. The NATO official 
said the guerrillas could not defeat the Yugoslav army and Serbian 
police in straightforward battle. But with their new weapons, healthy 
flow of cash from the Albanian diaspora in Europe, Britain and the 
United States, and better organization, they could keep up a ``low-intensity 
conflict,'' the NATO officer said. Maloku, the guerrilla strategist, 
said he is one of ``more than 10'' former Yugoslav army officers who 
have been leading the liberation forces. He is a celebrated figure 
here because the Serbs announced he was dead only to have him return 
to Kosovo last spring to do battle. Maloku, a Kosovo Albanian, had 
been an officer in the Yugoslav army in Slovenia, a former republic 
of Yugoslavia, after his military school graduation in 1981. In 1986, 
he was thrown into a military prison for his political activities. 
After his release in 1988 he left the army and headed a chemical engineering 
institute in Slovenia, all the while playing an active role in the 
Albanian diaspora. After the well publicized massacres of ethnic Albanian 
civilians in Kosovo by Serbian forces last March, he started to head 
back home via Tirana, the capital of Albania. In northern Albania, 
just as he was about to cross the border into Kosovo, he sensed the 
Serbs had set a trap for him and at the last minute, he changed his 
plans. The Serbs ambushed some returning men, he said. Even though 
the guerrillas had these former Yugoslav army officers on hand, including 
some many who had fought the Serbs in Bosnia and Croatia, plenty of 
errors were made in Kosovo, he said. Too many volunteers joined the 
fighting force without any vetting or control. Village defense units 
tried to defend themselves by building trenches which became easy 
targets. The Serbs came along with artillery and tanks and many of 
the fighters had to flee, he said. Now, he said, plans were being 
made to make the Kosovo Liberation Army more flexible. Maloku said 
he hoped a political settlement with the Serbs, being worked on the 
by the United States would soon be reached. If it was not in place 
by before spring, the fighting would restart when the snow melted, 
he said. And the pent up fury that Serbs had created among the ethnic 
Albanians would express itself again but in more effective ways, he 
said. Explaining why there was little hope of restraining the Kosovo 
Liberation Army, Maloku put it in simple, stark, village terms: ``If 
the Serbs spend 30 minutes burning the house of an old man who has 
spent 40 years building it, isn't it natural that he would give his 
sons to the cause?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>