<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0272 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Ben Boucher looked in the mirror several months ago and decided he 
did not want to be bald like his father. So, like millions of other 
balding men, Boucher, a 25-year-old animator in Montreal who is a 
long way from losing his hair, picked up a prescription for Propecia, 
Merck &AMP; Co.'s hair growth pill, and patiently awaited the results. 
``I can't say that I've actually grown more hair,'' Boucher said. 
``But Propecia has stopped my hair from falling out. And I'm happy 
for that.'' Boucher does have his reservations. He does not like having 
to take Propecia once a day, at some $50 for a month's supply. At 
first, he had been worried about a possible loss of sexual desire, 
one of the drug's side effects. The experiences of Boucher and others 
illustrate why so-called lifestyle drugs like Propecia have had a 
mixed sales record so far. Unlike traditional medications that relieve 
pain or cure an illness, these drugs typically help people feel good 
about themselves, including their hair lines and sex lives. For many 
potential customers of lifestyle drugs, the price of a dose of self-esteem 
may be a little too high. Lifestyle drugs were once considered potentially 
bigger blockbusters than those that treated diseases. Indeed, some 
pharmaceutical executives believed that to be big sellers, lifestyle 
drugs merely had to prevent a condition from growing worse instead 
of curing it. But that has proved overly optimistic. While some lifestyle 
drugs _ most notably Viagra, Pfizer Inc.'s impotency pill _have generated 
huge worldwide sales, many others have yet to live up to expectations. 
Propecia, for example, had only $45 million in U.S. sales through 
the third quarter, roughly a third of what analysts had originally 
projected. Sales of Nicotrol, Johnson &AMP; Johnson's smoking cessation 
products, are off 47.9 percent this last year, while sales of Nicoderm, 
SmithKline Beecham PLC's patch, have fallen 12.8 percent. Such disappointments 
illustrate how lifestyle drugs can be much more difficult to sell 
than traditional medications. For one, insurance companies seldom 
pay for them, severely limiting the likelihood of repeat uses. And 
consumers have come to expect more from lifestyle drugs than they 
do from treatments for other ailments. Lifestyle drugs must not only 
work quickly to justify their upfront costs, they must be generally 
free of side effects to avoid turning off potential customers. If 
the drug does not meet these expectations, patients can immediately 
stop using them with little downside, since the ailments that lifestyle 
drugs treat are far from life threatening. ``Most of these products 
are viewed, fairly or unfairly, as being on the fringes of medicine,'' 
said Neil Sweig, a pharmaceuticals analyst with Southeast Research 
Partners. ``There's some controversy surrounding them if they have 
not been released to cure arthritis or some other disease. They are 
just not considered part of the mainstream.'' Part of the problem 
is that many consumers associate lifestyle drugs with over-the-counter 
wrinkle creams, hair-growth potions and the like. Earlier experiences 
with goops, tonics and gimmicks have made these consumers skeptical 
about lifestyle drugs unless they provide measurable improvements. 
``That is not always easy to find,'' said David Saks, a managing director 
of Gruntal &AMP; Co. who tracks the pharmaceutical industry. ``You 
can tell when Viagra is working, but most take some time. It would 
be great that you could take a pill to grow hair in the morning and 
by the afternoon you'd look like a model for GQ.'' Huge advertising 
campaigns have not been enough to stir up enthusiasm. To advertise 
Propecia, the tracking service Competitive Media Reporting says, Merck 
spent $39 million through July _ more than 80 percent of the drug's 
sales in the same period. Yet, despite the difficulties in marketing 
lifestyle drugs, pharmaceutical companies can't seem to roll them 
out fast enough. Schering-Plough Corp., pending regulatory approval, 
will market Vasomax, another pill for impotence, with the help of 
Zonagen, a tiny Texas biotechnology company. TAP, a unit of Takeda 
Chemical Industries, hopes to introduce a fast-acting tablet for impotence 
that is placed under the tongue, while Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. is 
working on a compound to remove sun spots. The prospect of finding 
another blockbuster like Viagra or Zyban, Glaxo Wellcome PLC's smoking 
cessation pill, is generating the sudden glut. Drug makers can pocket 
more revenue from feel-good treatments than they can from some treatments 
for cancer and heart disease. Although Viagra's sales have recently 
begun to slow, its $1 billion take this year should be one-third more 
than that of Gemzar, Eli Lilly &AMP; Co.'s popular anticancer drug. 
Drug companies can also usher in more innovations with lifestyle drugs 
than with their traditional disease-fighting staples. Before Glaxo 
Wellcome introduced Zyban, last June, the entire smoking cessation 
market consisted of inhalers, gum or patches. By introducing a twice-a-day 
pill, smokers had a convenient choice they apparently liked. Sales 
of Zyban reached $83.6 million in the United States through June, 
some 50 percent more than many analysts had projected. That is an 
especially nice bounty, given that lifestyle drugs typically have 
higher profit margins than traditional medications. Propecia was originally 
introduced as Proscar, Merck's prostate reduction drug, while Zyban 
was first rolled out by Glaxo Wellcome as Wellbutrin, an antidepressant. 
By releasing two drugs off what was essentially one research and development 
budget, Merck and Glaxo Wellcome can notch profits from a lower sales 
base, analysts said. A Merck spokeswoman denied that the company spent 
less on Propecia's research and development. Glaxo Wellcome did save 
money on its research and development for Zyban, though the company 
noted that separate clinical trials were conducted to test the anti-smoking 
use of the drug. So far, convenience and product efficacy have been 
the litmus tests for lifestyle drugs. Nowhere have those issues been 
as hotly contested as in the hair-growth market. The two leading products 
_ Merck's Propecia and Rogaine, a topical liquid made by Pharmacia 
&AMP; Upjohn Inc. _ can improve hair growth in some men but are far 
from the wonder remedies many men seek. Rogaine, which is applied 
twice daily, primarily works on the crown of the head instead of the 
full scalp, little help for someone with a receding hairline. And 
Propecia's results do not appear to be much better. Merck conducted 
three clinical trials of Propecia with 1,879 men, 1,215 of whom were 
followed for as long as two years. None of the men in the studies 
grew back a full head of hair, though scientists found that 83 percent 
of them had kept their hair or had grown more. The trouble is that 
of the men who took Propecia in the studies, the hair growth on only 
5 percent of them was rated greatly improved, compared with 30 percent 
who were rated slightly improved and 31 percent moderately improved. 
``Propecia works on about half of my patients,'' said Dr. Marc Avram, 
director of the cosmetic surgical unit at New York Hospital. ``But 
you have to pick your patients. I wouldn't give it to a man whose 
head is shiny bald, and it won't bring a receding hairline forward. 
It's most effective, I think, in holding on to the hair that you have.'' 
Sales of Propecia and Rogaine have been far from stellar. Analysts 
had predicted Propecia would reach $300 million in sales this year; 
it is now clear that it will not reach half that. Even through Rogaine's 
sales are up 8.3 percent, to $70.7 million in the United States through 
September, the jump appears to be more from gains related to retailers 
increasing their inventory in anticipation of a special sales promotion. 
Propecia and Rogaine have other troubles. The ideal lifestyle drugs 
are not only effective, they work almost instantaneously. The grand 
champion of effectiveness and fast onset of action is Viagra, which 
works within an hour or so of ingestion. And while men may stare at 
their mirrors for several months wondering if Propecia is working, 
there can be little doubt about Viagra's effectiveness. Immediacy 
is also crucial for smoking cessation drugs. Since smokers are increasingly 
using them to satisfy a nicotine urge in situations in which they 
cannot light up, a quick onset of action is crucial. That has helped 
the category leader, SmithKline Beecham's Nicorette gum, whose sales 
have risen 18.7 percent in the last year even as the entire nonprescription 
U.S. smoking cessation market has declined 1.8 percent, to $568.3 
million, according to Information Resources. ``Smokers get a more 
immediate feedback with Nicorette than the patch,'' said Dr. Peter 
Proctor, a Houston cosmetic dermatologist who used Nicorette 14 years 
ago to quit smoking. ``You get oral gratification with Nicorette, 
something you want after giving up cigarettes, and you don't really 
have that with the patch.'' Even when smokers want smoking-cessation 
drugs, dealing with their insurance companies can be discouraging. 
Determined to give up smoking two packs of cigarettes a day, Bob Gelman, 
a 53-year-old lawyer near San Francisco, bought a three-month supply 
of Nicorette gum and had his doctor write a prescription for Zyban, 
the popular smoking cessation pill. Gelman did not expect his insurer, 
Blue Cross of California, to pay for Nicorette but was incensed when 
it declined coverage for Zyban. ``I went back and forth with the insurance 
company for a month arguing over Zyban,'' Gelman recalled. ``Then 
I learned that Zyban is really Wellbutrin, an antidepressant. So I 
get a prescription for that, and they covered it. But I was really 
irritated. Was I going to take Zyban for recreation?'' There are other 
hurdles facing the widespread acceptance of lifestyle drugs. Consumers 
will tolerate moderate side effects from pills that control serious 
illnesses _ say, diabetes or epilepsy _ but not from miracle hair 
growers or smoking cessation pills. Propecia's popularity has been 
hurt by the possibility that it can decrease libido or damage an unborn 
fetus if it is accidentally handled by a pregnant woman. And while 
lifestyle drugs are aimed at a broad market, they do not appeal to 
everyone. Women tend to like them far more than men. With the exception 
of Viagra, men have had little patience for lifestyle drugs, usually 
discarding them when they are not immediately effective. For example, 
women buy 60 percent of the three top smoking cessation drugs. ``Part 
of the reason so many women take these types of drugs is that men 
tend to have trouble admitting they have a problem,'' said Dr. David 
Krueger, a psychiatrist in Houston. Even if a pharmaceutical company 
introduces the ultimate novelty drug, booming sales cannot last forever. 
After hitting 50,000 new prescriptions a day in May, Viagra is now 
notching about 15,000, according to IMS Health, a health care consulting 
firm. Analysts say that Viagra has simply lost some of its initial 
curiosity. ``No one can knock the success of Viagra,'' Sweig said. 
``Maybe people could say that baldness wasn't a serious enough condition, 
and that's why some of those products didn't sell so well. But I don't 
think anyone would say that about impotence.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>