<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0274 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As Sotheby's and Christie's prepare for their big fall sales, which 
begin Thursday night with Christie's sale of contemporary art, auction 
house experts are as concerned about the world financial markets as 
they are about the number of collectors prepared to buy art. More 
than any other segment of the art market, auctions rely on buyers' 
confidence. When the mood in a salesroom is buoyant, so are the prices. 
But nervousness can be equally contagious, making even those who came 
to bid get cold feet. That's not to say that the art market always 
mirrors the stock market. In 1987, just three weeks after the market 
plunge labeled Black Monday, Sotheby's Impressionist and modern art 
auction topped $100 million in sales for the first time in its history, 
a 45 percent increase from six months before. This season, while pessimists 
are saying that the problems in the economy are deeper and more widespread 
than in the last 11 years, auction house officials are trying to paint 
a rosy picture. ``The state of the financial markets has given people 
pause, but the sky has not fallen in,'' said Charles Moffett, co-chairman 
of Sotheby's department of Impressionist and modern art worldwide. 
With the Dow Jones industrial average at around 8,900 points, he continued, 
``a huge amount of wealth has been created.'' Is there enough wealth 
to support the staggering number of works on offer during the next 
two weeks, when an estimated $400 million worth of paintings, drawing 
and sculptures by artists like van Gogh, Picasso, Cezanne and Modigliani 
go up for sale? ``The real test of this market will be in the grade-B 
works,'' said Christopher Burge, chairman of Christie's in America. 
``But the indications from collectors worldwide suggest that the art 
market is still healthy. In the area of top-quality works there will 
always be buyers, and prices will always be strong.'' What distinguishes 
this season from last is the large number of special collections coming 
to auction. In fact, Sotheby's has so much to sell in just two evenings 
that the auction house is beginning its Impressionist and modern art 
auction and its sale of contemporary art at 6:30 p.m. rather than 
at the usual 7 p.m. By far the biggest collection of the season is 
the group of 39 Impressionist, Post-Impressionist and modern artworks 
being sold by the financially troubled Reader's Digest Association. 
The collection was formed by Lila Acheson Wallace and her husband, 
DeWitt Wallace, who founded Reader's Digest in 1922. They began buying 
art in the 1940s and continued through the 1960s. The collection, 
valued at $100 million, is uneven. There are some extraordinary works, 
but also some that are considered mediocre. The best painting and 
sculptures are world-class. The cream of the collection includes a 
Giacometti sculpture, ``The Forest: Seven Figures and a Head'' (1950), 
depicting a group of tall, slender figures with the bust of a man 
thought to represent the artist's brother, Diego. Sotheby's has estimated 
that the sculpture could sell for $4 million to $6 million. Mrs. Wallace 
loved nature, which explains why there are many landscapes, garden 
scenes and flower paintings. Few works in the collection can top Monet's 
``Lily Pond'' (1917-1919), a more colorful rendering of the artist's 
famous waterlilies than most. Monet was working on this painting while 
he was creating ``Large Mural Decoration,'' the two rooms of large-scale 
paintings of his waterlily pond that are in L'Orangerie in Paris. 
Sotheby's officials predict the work will bring $9 million to $12 
million. Portraits were also an interest of the Wallaces. For sale 
are two by Modigliani. Both are of Jeanne Hebuterne, the artist's 
wife. One, painted in 1918, shows her sitting in a pale-blue upholstered 
chair posed like an 18th-century Madonna. The other, painted a year 
later, depicts Hebuterne perched on a more fragile chair with one 
hand touching her shoulder. Both are estimated to sell for $9 million 
to $12 million. In the category of portraits, however, it is Christie's 
that has the blockbuster, a self-portrait by van Gogh that the artist 
painted in 1889 as a present for his mother, Anna Cornelia Carbent 
van Gogh. Experts believe it is the last self-portrait he painted 
before his death in 1890. ``The self-portrait has been in the same 
collection for over 30 years, and the fact that van Gogh self-portraits 
rarely come to auction makes the sale of this painting an event,'' 
said Franck Giraud, head of Christie's 19th- and 20th-century art. 
``As soon as word got out that it was available, we had major collectors 
expressing serious interest.'' The van Gogh is one of 10 works being 
sold by the heirs of Jacques Koerfer, a German-born collector and 
former chairman of BMW AG who died in 1991. This is the fourth block 
of Koerfer property that Christie's has sold in the past six years. 
Another important painting from the collection is Cezanne's ``Chateau 
Noir'' (1904), which was once in the collection of Lord Kenneth Clark, 
former director of the National Gallery in London. Christie's estimates 
it will sell for $5 million to $7 million. Also for sale at Christie's 
on Nov. 19 is a group of paintings from the collection of Harry Torczyner, 
a Belgian-born writer, scholar and collector who was also Magritte's 
lawyer. Fourteen Magrittes form the core of the collection, and some 
are among the artist's best-known images. One of the most widely recognized, 
``Son of Man'' (1964), depicts a man in a bowler hat with a green 
apple obscuring his face. It, too, carries a $2 million to $3 million 
price tag. These works have not been on the market because Torczyner 
bought them directly from Magritte. ``Boatmen in Argenteuil,'' a Monet 
in Christie's Impressionist and 19th-century sale next Wednesday, 
has not been on the market for 103 years. It is a sun-dappled scene 
of sailors and rowers painted in 1874. ``It is the quintessential 
Impressionist picture, especially the way the artist captured the 
early morning light on the water,'' said Giraud. The work comes from 
heirs of the Parisian dealer Paul Durand-Ruel and is estimated to 
sell for $6 million to $8 million. Thursday night, Christie's starts 
things off with its sale of contemporary art, which the auction house 
now defines as art from 1970 to the present. It is a small but interesting 
sale of 50 works, and it features paintings and sculpture by such 
artists as Robert Gober, Jean-Michel Basquiat and Cindy Sherman. ``The 
sale reflects the new spirit of the department,'' said Philippe Segalot, 
Christie's new head of contemporary art worldwide. ``We're selling 
cutting-edge contemporary art that's more challenging and sexy. The 
sale starts with several works from the 90s by artists like Gober, 
Matthew Barney and Felix Gonzalez-Torres, who have been popular at 
auction before.'' Sotheby's sale of contemporary art has a far different 
complexion, in part because the auction house defines contemporary 
art as works from 1945 to the present. Its sale, scheduled for Tuesday 
evening, casts an even broader net than that. Because of the number 
of pictures in its sale on Monday night, Sotheby's will begin Tuesday's 
sale with a collection that includes modern and contemporary works 
belonging to the Boston collectors Herbert and Mildred Lee. In the 
1960s, Mrs. Lee began buying what were then considered adventurous 
works. Now, they are viewed as downright desirable. Besides its contemporary 
offerings, the collection includes some older works, like a 1929 Calder 
and a 1952 Picasso. But all eyes will be on Jasper Johns' ``White 
Numbers'' (1958), an encaustic-onlinen painting of numbers in a progression 
from zero to nine repeated horizontally and vertically in thick, gestural 
strokes. It is expected to bring $7 million to $9 million. ``It's 
an extraordinarily important work,'' said Tobias Meyer, who runs Sotheby's' 
contemporary art worldwide. ``In light of the recent purchase of Johns' 
`White Flag' by the Metropolitan Museum, this is now one of the last 
white paintings by the artist available.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>