<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0374 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During the Middle East peace talks last month in Maryland, the director 
of the CIA told President Clinton he would resign if Clinton agreed 
to release the spy Jonathan Jay Pollard, according to several Administration 
officials. The agency director, George Tenet, who was directly involved 
in the peace negotiations, gave his warning to President Clinton after 
learning that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel had made 
Pollard's case a key bargaining point, officials said. In the end 
Clinton turned down Netanyahu's request, and the negotiations ended 
with a peace accord. Tenet refused to comment on the matter Tuesday, 
as did a CIA spokesman. Tenet's threat to resign was a direct reflection 
of the depth of anger against Pollard that lingers among U.S. intelligence 
and law enforcement officials 13 years after the former naval intelligence 
analyst was arrested for passing top-secret documents to Israel. He 
is now serving a life term. U.S. intelligence and law enforcement 
circles insist that the American spy should never be freed and dismiss 
the fact that he acted on behalf of a friendly nation. But the far 
right in Israel has made Pollard's release a celebrated cause _ and 
Netanyahu has raised it with the president virtually every time they 
have met. During the recent talks, Netanyahu told Clinton that he 
needed Pollard's release in order to win over the right wing of his 
coalition to the peace agreement, according to senior American officials. 
Clinton was open to what Netanyahu and the Palestinian leader, Yasir 
Arafat, said they needed to help sell the peace agreement to their 
constituencies, these officials said. The president was seriously 
considering Pollard's release, they officials said, when Tenet spoke 
up. ``It was clearly on the table,'' said one U.S. official. While 
a White House spokesman refused to comment on whether Tenet threatened 
to resign over Pollard, he did say that during the conference, at 
Wye Mills, Md., Clinton had been ``impressed by the force of Netanyahu's 
arguments'' on the Pollard matter. The President then went back to 
consult with his advisers, including Tenet and national security adviser 
Sandy Berger, and eventually decided that he could not agree to Netanyahu's 
demand, the spokesman added. Ultimately, the opposition to releasing 
Pollard was persuasive, Administration officials said. Clinton, who 
twice before denied Netanyahu's calls for releasing the spy, agreed 
only to review the case again, for the third time in five years. Officials 
say that Tenet believed that he would lose his credibility with his 
rank-and-file in the intelligence services if he were to agree to 
Pollard's release. ``He knew that he was closely associated with these 
peace talks -- it wasn't like he was back at headquarters _ and he 
couldn't distance himself from this decision,'' one U.S. official 
said of Tenet. Tenet's resignation would have forced Clinton to find 
his fourth CIA director in less than six years _ making the post one 
of the most difficult and intractable personnel problems to plague 
his administration. Twice Clinton has had to stand by and watch as 
his nominees have been forced to withdraw before being confirmed by 
the Senate, and twice the President has had to find backup candidates. 
Tenet, 45, who was named director of Central Intelligence in 1997, 
pledged to remain in the job for at least four years in an effort 
to provide the agency with some stability. Since arriving at the CIA's 
Langley, Va., headquarters in 1995, first as the CIA's deputy director, 
Tenet has worked to revive the morale of agency employees and to provide 
a new focus after the cold war while winning increased funding from 
Congress. The Pollard case was one issue on which it was impossible 
for Tenet to straddle both his political and intelligence constituencies. 
As soon as word leaked out that Pollard's freedom had become a bargaining 
chip in the Middle East talks, U.S. law enforcement and intelligence 
officials went into nearly open rebellion, complaining that the President 
should not release someone who had so flagrantly betrayed national 
security. Accepting a Pollard deal with Netanyahu would have forced 
Tenet to side with the White House against his own lieutenants. ``If 
Pollard had been released, George would have had no choice but to 
resign,'' said one senior congressional official involved in intelligence 
matters. The anger within the intelligence agencies was fueled by 
the fact that, during the 18 months he spied for Israel in 1984 and 
1985, Pollard stole more top-secret documents than almost any other 
spy in American history. ``He stole huge amounts of intelligence, 
measured in cubic yards,'' said R. James Woolsey, former director 
of Central Intelligence, who recommended that Pollard be denied clemency 
when his case was first reviewed by President Clinton in 1993. He 
took thousands of pages of the government's most sensitive intelligence, 
including many concerning Soviet weapons system designs that came 
from Russian spies recruited by the CIA, as well as codes and large 
caches of information from American spy satellites and listening posts. 
The information of great interest to Israel because its Arab opponents 
used Russian weapons. He betrayed some of America's most sophisticated 
espionage technology, and handed over so many documents that his Israeli 
handlers had to equip a secure Washington apartment with a high-speed 
photocopier and photographic equipment to absorb it all. Israel has 
refused to return those documents ever since, and U.S. intelligence 
officials say that the lack of Israeli cooperation has made it impossible 
for U.S. investigators to resolve one of the most sensitive questions 
raised by the Pollard case _ whether any of the thousands of pages 
of top secret documents he passed on might somehow have ended up in 
the hands of America's enemies, including the Soviet Union. Such an 
outcome would have given the enemies knowledge of what American intelligence 
had learned, and perhaps how. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>