<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0309 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Eager to show voters that Washington is not completely mired in partisanship, 
leaders of both parties have been proclaiming their enthusiasm in 
the aftermath of the elections to tackle the big issues, Social Security 
foremost among them. ``Above all, now we must address the challenge 
to save Social Security for the 21st century,'' President Clinton 
said. Rep. Bob Livingston of Louisiana, who will succeed Newt Gingrich 
as speaker, said much the same thing in setting out his priorities. 
Oh, that it were so easy. After nearly a year of debate over the best 
way to insure that Social Security can handle the impending retirement 
of the vast baby boom generation, there are no signs of emerging consensus. 
The situation is further complicated by political factors, from the 
turmoil within the Republican leadership to the presidential aspirations 
of some of the main players. And hanging over the process is the stomach-churning 
volatility in the stock market, which complicates efforts to push 
for a Wall Street solution to Social Security's problems. Still, both 
parties are pressing ahead. Clinton is planning a White House conference 
on the subject next month. Rep. Bill Archer, R-Texas, chairman of 
the Ways and Means Committee, has scheduled a hearing for Nov. 19. 
Livingston has promised that pragmatism will prevail over ideology 
in the House, suggesting a willingness to bridge the gulf between 
the conservative vision of Social Security as an individualized system 
for saving and investment and the insistence by liberals that it remain 
a guaranteed, collective shield against poverty among the elderly. 
Clinton has stressed that any solution will have to be bipartisan. 
Beyond that, there is little to pull them together. Republican leaders, 
convinced that the Democrats will otherwise find a way to burn them 
on the issue, insist that Clinton, who has remained resolutely vague 
about his thinking, go first by presenting a detailed proposal. ``He 
can't holler down to the Congress and say, `Hey, we need to do something 
about Social Security, good luck,''' said Sen. Trent Lott of Mississippi, 
the Republican leader. But the White House has resisted setting out 
a position, saying that to do so would polarize the debate from the 
beginning. Republicans generally want to allow individuals to invest 
a portion of their Social Security payroll taxes in stocks and bonds, 
an approach also favored by a few leading Democrats, including Sens. 
Bob Kerrey of Nebraska and Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York. Most 
Democrats oppose any shift from a guaranteed retirement benefit, but 
are willing to consider having the government itself seek a higher 
return for Social Security by investing its trust funds in the financial 
markets. Should he move toward private investment accounts, Clinton 
would run into opposition from many of the same liberal constituencies, 
especially organized labor, that helped revive his party's fortunes 
in last week's election. Democrats may be less likely to compromise 
if they believe they have a shot at regaining control of the House 
in 2000. Vice President Al Gore will no doubt be wary of any plan 
that would alienate core Democratic groups and give his most likely 
rival for his party's 2000 presidential nomination, Rep. Dick Gephardt 
of Missouri, an opportunity to lock in support from the party's left. 
On the other hand, Gore also has to be concerned about a challenge 
in 2000 from Kerrey. For Republicans, the main question is how hard 
to push for a big tax cut to reassert their conservative agenda _ 
and whether Democrats would respond by accusing them of squandering 
the surplus and endangering the financial security of coming generations 
of retirees. Yet there are still optimists in both parties, including 
Rep. Earl Pomeroy of North Dakota, the point man on the issue for 
House Democrats. In blocking Republican efforts to cut taxes this 
year and demanding that the surplus be set aside until Social Security 
is fixed, Pomeroy said Clinton ``reminded Republicans that this is 
a powerful issue, that it works to the Democrats' advantage, and the 
way to get it off the table is to come up with a bipartisan fix.'' 
``Their right-wing base is clamoring for a tax cut,'' Pomeroy said 
of the Republicans, ``but doing it in the absence of Social Security 
reform is a high-risk business, so before they get to the tax cut 
they have to take care of Social Security. ``For Democrats, we have 
a Democrat in the White House and we have a budget surplus, so the 
time to do this is now. So this is a fortuitous point in which both 
parties have it in their self-interest to get it done, and a budget 
surplus to help us do it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>