<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0218 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yvette Weilacker sits in the kitchen of a small house in Buffalo, 
N.Y., waiting for the contractions to begin. Her baby, already named 
Nicholas Lee by his anxious parents, was due days ago, and he shows 
scant signs of being ready to be born. The waiting is all the more 
tense because the kitchen she waits in is not hers, and the baby she 
waits for is in another woman's body. Kim Elniskey and her fiance, 
Jorge Rosario, have chosen Mrs. Weilacker and husband, Paul, to adopt 
their son and the two families have gotten to know each other well 
these past few months, by telephone, letter and now in person as the 
birth nears. Since she flew in from her home in Riverside, Calif., 
four weeks earlier, Mrs. Weilacker has been staying with Ms. Elniskey 
and Rosario and helping care for their three other children. ``I want 
you to feel that this is your baby, your family,'' Ms. Elniskey told 
Mrs. Weilacker. Ms. Elniskey has kept the Weilackers involved throughout 
her pregnancy, sharing ultrasound pictures and updates about the baby's 
intra-uterine acrobatics. ``Your son kicked me a lot today,'' Ms. 
Elniskey reported in one of many telephone conversations. The Weilackers 
have promised that they will be just as open as Nicholas grows: what 
he wears on his first Halloween, when he loses his first tooth and 
learns to read. When the boy is ready, Ms. Elniskey and Rosario plan 
to visit him. The intimacy between these two families would have been 
rare just a few years ago and unthinkable a generation ago. But such 
open contact between adoptive parents and biological parents is one 
of the many ways that adoption has evolved from a secretive, closed 
process weighed down by dark stigmas and painful misconceptions into 
an infinitely more transparent experience. How many children are adopted 
each year is an elusive number, since no one keeps complete statistics. 
The most recent data, from 1992, show 127,441 children adopted that 
year, a slight increase from 118,000 five years earlier. About 42 
percent of those adoptions were by stepparents and other relatives. 
The most sought-after children for adoption are, as they have been 
for generations, domestic white infants _ known among parents and 
professionals in the adoption loop as DWI's _ but those babies are 
scarcer because of the easier availability of birth control, the legalization 
of abortion and the growing acceptance of single mothers raising children 
alone. Experts estimate that there are fewer than 20,000 a year. As 
a result, the biggest increase in adoptions has been children adopted 
from other countries. Because they require visas, there are up-to-date 
statistics for these adoptions and since 1990, their numbers have 
nearly doubled, to 13,620 in 1997 from 7,093. So while the overall 
increase in the number of children adopted has been subtle, the increase 
in visibility has been dramatic, enhanced by those children adopted 
from other countries whose physical differences from their parents 
make their adoption an obvious fact. In the last decade, adoption 
has gone public in much the same manner that divorce did in the 1970s. 
Increasingly children are told, even before they can fully understand, 
how they came to their families and that story is shared with relatives, 
friends, teachers, sometimes even strangers. ``My birth mother gave 
me this doll,'' Sasha Saidman, a 6-year-old who was adopted, told 
a clerk at the video store near her home in Wheaton, Md., as her family 
prepared for a visit from the woman who had borne her. Like most adopted 
children, Sasha used the term that has replaced such loaded phrases 
as ``real mother'' and ``natural mother.'' Where once children hid 
their adoption from friends, if they even knew of it, adopted children 
today can belong to play groups made up entirely of adopted children. 
They can buy storybooks about being adopted, go to summer camps for 
children adopted from particular foreign countries, and if they face 
emotional difficulties, get treated by a therapist who specializes 
in adoption. In some cities, like New York, San Francisco and Boston, 
playgrounds are peppered with parents of various races and nationalities 
chasing children of other races. Many of those families are headed 
by single people, people in their '40s or older and gay people, men 
and women who, in years past, would have been rejected as unsuitable 
adoptive parents. Once the ``other'' option for becoming parents, 
adoption is now one of many ways that men and women create families. 
The panorama of the American family now includes children born through 
advanced reproductive technology, some conceived with donated sperm 
and eggs; families broken apart by divorce then blended through remarriage; 
families created by single parents and by gay men who have hired a 
surrogate to bear a child. ``We are seeing an explosion of different 
family forms which make adoption seem downright mainstream and conservative,'' 
said Madelyn Freundlich, executive director of the Evan B. Donaldson 
Adoption Institute, a research group in New York. In the last few 
years, the media have focused on global dramas highlighting the plight 
of children needing homes: Chinese girls abandoned in markets by parents 
encumbered by the country's one-child policy and its preference for 
boys; Romanian children orphaned by revolution or left in understaffed 
institutions by their impoverished parents; Russian children stranded 
in dismal state orphanages, in a society that widely stigmatizes adoption. 
In the 1990s, it became a kind of social phenomenon to adopt a child 
from abroad. Last summer, Vanity Fair magazine quipped that a Chinese 
baby was the season's hot accessory in the Hamptons. The experience, 
however, is not limited to wealthy neighborhoods. Suburban American 
and rural towns are also home to children adopted from Shanghai, Murmansk, 
Guatemala City, Bucharest. Many people turning to international adoption, 
and indeed adoption in general, are baby boomers who put off starting 
families, then confronted infertility problems and finally opted out 
of the world of assisted reproductive technology that many call the 
``Ovarian Olympics.'' Further raising the profile are the celebrities 
who have spoken happily about being adoptive parents, including: Nicole 
Kidman and her husband, Tom Cruise; Rosie O'Donnell, and Jamie Lee 
Curtis, who wrote a popular children's book on the subject, ``Tell 
Me Again About the Night I Was Born.'' In bookstores, that book shares 
shelf space with an expanding selection of adoption-related titles 
from large publishers and from niche publishers like R-Squared Press 
in Ann Arbor, Mich., a small family-run business that focuses on adoption. 
In Tacoma, Wash., Gloria Finkbeiner, an adoptive sister, aunt and 
grandmother, started a mail-order card and gift business called Adoption 
Option with her daughter, Susan Pierce, who adopted three children 
out of foster care. ``Where we are, adoption isn't unique,'' said 
Mrs. Finkbeiner. ``It's just a way to be a family.'' The Evolution: 
Rules on Privacy Led to Secrecy Perhaps the most profound change in 
the process of adoption is the growth of the kind of open adoption 
that brought Nicholas to his parents, the Weilackers. Before World 
War I, it was common for friends and relatives to raise the child 
of someone they knew and for the biological parents to be in touch 
with their children. But as the century progressed, adoptive parents 
were paired with babies, mainly by doctors, lawyers and social workers, 
most of whom sought a match of physical traits that would allow parents 
and children to pass as a ``real family.'' The institutionalization, 
and the secrecy and the stigma, of adoption were deepened after World 
War II by state laws requiring that records to the event be sealed 
and new birth certificates issued, listing the adoptive parents in 
place of the biological ones. E. Wayne Carp, a professor at Pacific 
Lutheran University, writes in his book ``Family Matters: Secrecy 
and Disclosure in the History of Adoption,'' that initially, such 
confidentiality was intended to protect those involved in an adoption 
from outside scrutiny, but it later evolved into a way to keep all 
parties to an adoption from one another. That change dovetailed with 
a postwar emphasis on the nuclear family. In the 1950s, motherhood 
was glorified. For those unable to conceive on their own, adoption 
was a blessing, one often kept secret to mimic the wished-for idyll. 
In addition, social workers seized on a postwar embrace of psychoanalytic 
theories _ which tended to view unmarried mothers as disturbed, adoptees 
seeking information about their roots as neurotic, and infertile people 
as unstable _ as a rationale for keeping adoptive families and biological 
families apart. In that atmosphere, nobody imagined that adopting 
parents would ever live with the expectant family in the final days 
of the pregnancy, waiting for the contractions that would signal the 
beginning of their new families. ``What we are going through together 
blows me away,'' Mrs. Weilacker said, soon after she arrived in Buffalo. 
But as the wait dragged on, drawn out by a doctor's inaccurate calculating 
of Ms. Elniskey's due date, both women grew tense. Mrs. Weilacker, 
a court stenographer, was also anxious about transcripts she needed 
to finish. Reluctantly, she returned to California until the birth 
seemed more imminent. ``I just feel a little lonely,'' Ms. Elniskey 
said. ``I thought we'd stick this out together and now Yvette gets 
to get away for a while and I don't.'' Back in California, there seemed 
no relief. ``It's all I think about,'' Mrs. Weilacker said. ``I love 
Kim and Jorge and their kids. It was just all getting to me.'' A New 
Approach: Easing the Curiosity And Guilt in Adoption There are no 
statistics on how many people build families through open adoption, 
no way to know how many birth parents select the people they want 
to rear their child, get to know them and then stay in some sort of 
contact _ from regular visits to occasional phone calls or letters 
_ after the baby is legally and emotionally the other family's child. 
But people in the field say the trend of open adoption is growing 
rapidly. Catholic Human Services in Traverse City, Mich., a rural 
area in the northern part of the state, was one of the first agencies 
to arrange open adoptions. Since 1980, the agency has handled close 
to 500 of them. ``The stereotype from 20 years ago was that birth 
parents were wild and reckless people from the other side of the tracks,'' 
said Jim Gritter, a child welfare supervisor at the agency. ``But 
what we found was that that viewpoint was 180 degrees from reality. 
So many birth mothers talked about feeling that they were abandoning 
their babies because the closed system basically asked of them to 
abandon them.'' Social workers at the agency decided that the only 
way to soothe birth parents' guilt was to let them choose families 
for their children. The social workers were motivated in part by stories 
they had heard of adoptees searching for their birth parents. If children 
yearned to know about their roots, and birth parents longed to know 
who became the parents of their children, the agency social workers 
figured that it made sense to make adoption a collaborative experience. 
It was a logical time to try to coax adoption out of the shadows. 
By the late 1970s, with the rise of the sexual revolution and the 
women's rights movement, many in society were rejecting a range of 
paternalistic institutions. Although in many places a child born to 
unwed parents would still face scorn, in many places he would not. 
The Traverse City social workers devised a plan in which they asked 
prospective adoptive parents to put together a letter about themselves 
with a picture and other information to be shown to pregnant women, 
who would choose among them. Gritter and his colleagues have since 
taken the concept one step further. In nearly all cases, the children 
handled by their agency are born of parents in the region and adopted 
by parents in the region. ``It's not the same to be pen pals as it 
is to be part of a clan,'' Gritter said. Not everyone agrees that 
open adoption is always a good option, particularly workers at agencies 
whose birth mothers come from cultures that still regard out-of-wedlock 
births with shame. In addition, many parents who have adopted internationally 
say that one reason they chose that route was to avoid being involved 
with a birth family. Because the practice is still so new, researchers 
are only now studying how these open relationships are working: Will 
a child be hurt if a birth parent starts out involved but then withdraws? 
How will a child feel if the woman who bore him has another child 
but decides she can raise this one? And what if there is a falling 
out between the birth parents and the adoptive parents? ``I think 
there are a lot of people pressured into openness that might not be 
in their best interest,'' said Beth Parsons, executive director of 
El Paso Adoption Services. The agency places about 25 children a year, 
roughly 70 percent of them children of Hispanic mothers, many of whom 
conceal their pregnancies from relatives. ``We talk to birth mothers 
about what their options are, but many do not feel emotionally ready 
for an open adoption,'' Ms. Parsons said. Although many of the pregnant 
women choose parents themselves from among the agency's files, most 
people who adopt through the El Paso agency do not learn that they 
have a child until relinquishment papers are signed, which cannot 
be done in Texas until at least 48 hours after the birth. ``I want 
the mothers to make their decisions without the pressure of an adoptive 
family waiting outside the delivery room door,'' Ms. Parsons said. 
She said she also wanted to protect adopting parents from becoming 
attached to a woman and her unborn baby in case the mother changes 
her mind. Still, Ms. Parsons said, the move toward openness is positive 
and she urges all birth mothers to give photographs, letters or some 
memento to their child, a change from when the agency first opened 
in 1990. Most experts agree that the open adoption process has helped 
to transform the experience of adoption even for those with more traditional 
arrangements. Today, the majority of people who adopt know something 
about their children's backgrounds. Even if they do not stay in regular 
contact, they frequently have detailed medical histories, photographs 
of biological relatives, and letters and gifts for the children from 
the women who bore them. This information, experts say, can help children 
to understand better the decisions leading to their adoption. ``One 
of the most frustrating things for me growing up was not knowing my 
background,'' said David Wilson, a 31-year-old telecommunications 
consultant who several years ago found and met his birth parents. 
``I'm cautious about saying that having an open, ongoing relationship 
with them when I was growing up would have been good. That could create 
conflict or blur lines. But just knowing who they were and why they 
made their choices would have taken away an unnecessary mystery.'' 
One of the greatest shifts in adoption in recent years is this emergence 
of birth mothers from the shroud of shame and dependence that kept 
them from having any role in shaping their children's futures. In 
fact, most parents who adopt domestically today _ whether in totally 
open adoptions or more closed ones _ engage in a kind of courtship 
of birth mothers, preparing often elaborate albums and letters aimed 
at persuading pregnant women to entrust their unborn children to them. 
``We want to see things through the eyes of this child,'' the Weilackers 
wrote in their ``Dear Birth Mother'' letter. The Weilackers, who are 
both 39 and had endured several years of unsuccessful infertility 
treatments, placed their letter in the files of the Independent Adoption 
Center in Pleasant Hill, Calif. It was forwarded, among dozens of 
others, to Ms. Elniskey, prompting her to call the Weilackers on a 
toll-free line they had set up in the hopes of receiving just such 
a call. Before she called the center, Ms. Elniskey said that she did 
not even know such an arrangement was possible. The world of adoption, 
she said, was vastly different than it was eight years ago, when she 
was 18, in high school and pregnant. ``I knew I wasn't ready to be 
a mother; I couldn't do it,'' Ms. Elniskey, a 26-year-old homemaker, 
said of her first pregnancy. ``After I gave birth, my sister Judy 
took the baby home and cared for her. I named her Alyssa. My obstetrician 
found the couple. She was a patient of his. I wanted to know about 
them, who they were and all. But I didn't know I could ask.'' The 
experience, she said, left her heartbroken. Even now she will scan 
a crowd, looking at girls around Alyssa's age, wondering, ``Is that 
my hair? My nose? Could this be her?'' When she found herself last 
winter with three small children and pregnant again, despite having 
had an injection of Depo-Provera that was supposed to prevent pregnancy 
for several months, Ms. Elniskey said she panicked. She and Rosario, 
who is 30 years old and works in a factory making roll-up doors for 
trucks, agreed that they could not cope with another child. Ms. Elniskey 
said she knew she could never go blindly into another adoption. But 
she never imagined the power she had to influence her baby's future 
and to remain a part of it. ``I want him to have his own life with 
them,'' Ms. Elniskey said. ``I don't want to be in their way. But 
I want to know what's going on. When he's old enough, he can come 
to me and ask what he wants. But I want him to never have to wonder 
why I made this plan for him.'' ``He never will,'' Mrs. Weilacker 
assured. Battling Ignorance: Hurtful Words, Even By the Well-Meaning 
Despite these radically changed attitudes toward adoption, parents 
and adoption professionals said that Nicholas can expect to be asked 
by his friends and others why his ``real'' mother ``gave him away.'' 
Even in the most cosmopolitan and adoption-saturated cities, like 
New York, people still say callous things to adoptive families. The 
mother of a girl adopted from Korea said that the first week she strolled 
with her daughter in Central Park, strangers approached her and said: 
``Oh, she'll be great at math!'' ``Couldn't you have one of your own?'' 
``Does she speak Chinese?'' Ronny Diamond, director of post-adoption 
services at the Spence-Chapin adoption agency in Manhattan, said that 
attitudes toward adoption were similar in some ways to racial prejudice. 
``If you ask people if they are prejudiced, they would say, `No,''' 
Ms. Diamond said. ``But if you put forth a scenario, the bias emerges. 
For example, a teacher gets a class list and sees that three boys 
are adopted. Often, they'll say, `This is trouble. This will be a 
tough year.''' Spence-Chapin offers advice to help teachers and administrators 
focus on how they talk about adoption, the language they use and the 
assignments they make. At a recent workshop, teachers were surprised 
at how clumsy they had been in dealing with the issue and how easy 
it was to readjust. Administrators at the school agreed to have a 
reporter present on condition that the school not be identified. Ms. 
Diamond began by handing out a glossary showing the common ways people 
talk about adoption and the more positive alternatives. For example, 
instead of saying that a birth parent ``gave a child away,'' it is 
better to say she ``made an adoption plan,'' reflecting the thought 
that goes into such a decision. Among the most important shifts in 
language is to say that a child ``was'' adopted, rather than ``is'' 
adopted. ``Being adopted is an action that happens once and then you 
are someone's child,'' Ms. Diamond said. She also cautioned teachers 
against trying to comfort adopted children by telling them that they 
were ``chosen.'' ``Think about it,'' Ms. Diamond suggested. ``What 
is the opposite of chosen? Rejected. To be chosen, a child might think 
he had to have been rejected.'' Also, she went on, most adopted children 
are not chosen. Implying that they are makes it seem like their parents 
walked down a row of children in a pediatric supermarket and selected 
the choicest offering. ``Adoption is not better,'' Ms. Diamond told 
the teachers. ``It's just not worse.'' The Changing Family: Breaking 
the Mold Of a Traditional Home Diana Galligan, nearly 7, knows what 
adoption means. ``It's when people who love you take care of you and 
become your parents,'' she says, quietly poised. And she will tell 
you that in her case, those people who love her and take care of her 
are her ``guys,'' her dad, John Galligan, and her pop, Richard Koonce. 
At Tuckahoe Elementary School in Arlington, Va., Diana is one of many 
adopted children, although her fathers think she is the only one there 
who is being raised by openly gay parents. And even though Galligan 
and Koonce are far more concerned with helping their daughter learn 
to read and to express herself freely, they are acutely aware that 
families like theirs are a symbol of ``the new American family.'' 
``In previous generations, one of the most difficult notions for many 
gay men coming out was putting aside the idea of having a family,'' 
said Galligan, 39, who works for the U.S. Treasury Department. Galligan 
said that he knew he wanted to be a father ever since he worked as 
a college volunteer in a Big Brother program. Several years ago, Galligan, 
said, although he had no partner at the time, he decided that ``the 
time was right; I wanted to be a father.'' He was trying to figure 
out how to go about adopting, when a woman he knew with two older 
children told him that she was pregnant and was willing to have him 
adopt the baby. Their arrangement is open, and Diana visits her birth 
mother every summer and calls her when she feels like it. Although 
they have sensed disapproval and worse from strangers, Galligan and 
Koonce said they have never faced prejudice from neighbors or teachers. 
But both men lamented that many religious and political institutions 
were still hostile. Although Galligan adopted Diana, Koonce is legally 
only Diana's guardian in case something happens to Galligan. He has 
yet to formally adopt her, they said, because Virginia courts would 
not allow it. Many states let single people adopt without their sexual 
orientation being an issue. Some states allow one gay person to adopt, 
then later and separately the other partner. But about half the states 
do not allow a second parent of the same sex to adopt a child, even 
at a later time. And in Florida and New Hampshire, it is nearly impossible 
for homosexuals to adopt at all. Koonce and Galligan said that they 
thought such resistance to adoptions by gay people would eventually 
wither. ``Society is on the edge of creating a lot of new models for 
work, family and community,'' said Koonce, 44, who owns his own career 
counseling business. ``I look at myself. I have a nontraditional model 
of work that's a far cry from what my father did, working for the 
big company. I have what many people would consider a nontraditional 
family, although we see ourselves as very conservative and mainstream. 
I walk Diana to school; John picks her up. On Teacher Appreciation 
Day, there I was with all the moms, bringing a tossed salad.'' Sometimes, 
when Kathryn Creedy is stitching badges on a Brownie sash or searching 
under a couch for a magic marker cap, she pauses and reminds herself 
that, as real as being a mother feels to her, a generation ago, she 
and her daughters _ Alexis, who is 8, and Brooks, 5 _ would also likely 
not have become a family. Ms. Creedy is a single woman. As the American 
family has assumed new forms, adoption agencies have begun to look 
beyond stereotypes to find parents. Some countries, it turned out, 
actually favored older parents and single parents, reasoning that 
children would have such parents' full focus. Single parents were 
also more willing to adopt older children or children with disabilities. 
In 1991, Ms. Creedy, a media specialist for the Federal Aviation Administration 
in Washington, decided that, then 39 and unmarried, the biggest regret 
in her life was that she was not a mother. Initially, she tried to 
adopt a child out of foster care, but she was turned down because 
she was single. She signed up with a private adoption agency near 
her home in Alexandria, Va. While preparing to adopt a child from 
Guatemala, news reports coming out of Eastern Europe pushed her to 
fly to Rumania. After seven grueling weeks of scouring the bureaucracies 
there, she returned home at last with a feisty 14-month-old girl with 
laughing eyes. The girl's birth mother was desperate for her child 
to climb out of the poverty engulfing the family. ``She would take 
Alexis and point to me and say, `Mama, America,''' Ms. Creedy recalled. 
``It was so profound. We didn't speak the same language, but it was 
clear she was saying to me, `You are the one I trust to be my child's 
mother.''' Two years later, Ms. Creedy flew to Bolivia to adopt a 
5-month-old girl, whose onyx hair and tawny skin set her apart from 
her golden-haired, fair-skinned sister, and from her mother, who describes 
herself as having ``turkey white skin.'' And yet, together they are 
a family in every way: loving, argumentative, affectionate. The girls' 
roots are a vibrant part of their identities. Each year, each girl 
celebrates her ``Gotcha Day,'' the day she became a part of the family. 
The day begins with the reading of ``life books'' that Ms. Creedy 
prepared for each, with pictures, maps and the tale of how their family 
came to be. Alexis' book, which she now proudly reads herself, begins, 
``Once upon a time there was a woman, who dreamed of having a baby 
girl of her own to give her all the love she had stored up over her 
lifetime. Her name was Mommy.'' The Mothers' View: Finding That People 
Seldom Understand Even as adoptive parents and their children feel 
less isolated and stigmatized, birth parents say they continue to 
endure society's disapproving glare. ``When I was pregnant, people 
were shocked and disgusted by my plans, not that I was pregnant and 
unmarried but that I was making an adoption plan,'' said Lisa Nicholson, 
a 28-year-old woman from Richmond, Va., who four years ago chose a 
family to adopt her daughter. ``My family and friends understood, 
but strangers who knew nothing about me or my circumstances would 
say, `How could you?''' Sometimes, she said, when she hears people 
talking about how irresponsible birth parents are, she cannot help 
revealing herself. ``Usually, I really surprise them, because, to 
meet me, I'm the girl next door,'' said Ms. Nicholson, who married 
last year and hopes to start a family. ``I explain to them why it's 
a responsible decision. It's not easier, it's harder.'' While Ms. 
Nicholson corresponds with and occasionally speaks to the couple who 
adopted her daughter, she has often feared that disapproval and ignorance 
among the couple's friends and relatives would drive them away from 
her. Susan Saidman, who has a warm and open relationship with Linda 
Dooley, the birth mother of her daughter, Sasha, said that prejudices 
in society lingered. ``There's been this image in the popular consciousness 
that birth parents are these selfish, uncaring people who don't even 
think twice about giving up their kids and yet, paradoxically, that 
they are these evil people lurking in the shadows who are going to 
come and snatch these children back,'' said Mrs. Saidman, 49, a writer 
and management consultant. ``But it's just fear and ignorance speaking. 
Linda is part of our lives, part of our family. But I am Sasha's mother.'' 
To celebrate Sasha's 6th birthday this August, Mrs. Saidman and her 
husband, Perry, a 52-year-old design patent lawyer, invited Ms. Dooley 
and her 22-year-old daughter, Keira, to drive up from their home in 
Florida and stay with the family in their house in Wheaton, Md. This 
was the third time the extended clan had gotten together since Sasha's 
birth. In between, there were e-mail exchanges, letters, phone calls 
and a vacation in the Bahamas that Keira, a college student, took 
with the Saidmans. ``The most important thing for me is that Sasha 
is a great kid, she has wonderful parents and she will never have 
to have any self-doubts because any questions she has, she can ask 
me or she can ask Susan,'' said Ms. Dooley, 42. ``The hardest part 
has been when people who barely know me belittle me and my decision.'' 
Saying Goodbye: Decision May Be Best, But Deed Is Not Easy The day 
Nicholas was born, on a warm, late September Sunday, Kim Elniskey 
wrote him a letter as he rested beside her in a bassinet in the hospital. 
Mrs. Weilacker was scrambling to get on a plane to Buffalo. Rosario 
was at home with the children. ``I needed to make sure that you would 
always be healthy, safe, happy and most of all LOVED more than could 
humanly have been possible,'' Ms. Elniskey wrote. ``And in order for 
all those things to go together as one, Jorge and I had to make THE 
HARDEST DECISION OF OUR LIVES, and that was to find you a mommy and 
daddy that would do all those things for you.'' After Mrs. Weilacker 
arrived, the two women stayed together in the hospital room and tended 
to Nicholas, confusing nurses about who his mother was. One even tried 
to take Mrs. Weilacker's temperature. Ms. Elniskey showed Mrs. Weilacker 
how to change his diaper, how to tap his back gently to bring up air 
after a feeding. The day after Nicholas' birth, Mrs. Weilacker spent 
time alone with him in the hospital, when Ms. Elniskey had tubal ligation 
surgery. After checking out, Mrs. Weilacker settled into a hotel with 
Nicholas, while Ms. Elniskey returned home to her family. For the 
rest of the week, they shuttled between the apartment and the hotel. 
Jake, Miranda and Serena cooed over Nicholas. Rosario kept his distance. 
Ms. Elniskey seemed always on the verge of tears. And yet, when her 
children clambered about her and Nicholas would begin to cry, she 
said that she was relieved and sure of her decision. Finally, Mrs. 
Weilacker, Ms. Elniskey and Rosario boarded a plane to Los Angeles, 
where Nicholas met his father and the adoption papers were signed. 
``Nicholas has to get on with his life and we have to move on with 
ours,'' Ms. Elniskey said. ``At least our lives won't be entirely 
separate, but I really can't imagine how it will all be in a month 
or a year from now.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>