<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0377 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As negotiators from around the world worked on details of an international 
agreement to fight global warming, the Clinton administration faced 
an intense debate among lawmakers Tuesday over whether to sign the 
pact during talks this week in Argentina. There is no doubt that the 
administration will sign the agreement eventually, even though it 
faces an uphill struggle for approval by the Senate. But congressional 
adversaries argued Tuesday whether signing it now, a step the White 
House favors as a sign of its commitment to the controversial accord, 
would strengthen or weaken the bargaining hand of the United States. 
Some administration officials said Tuesday that no decision had been 
reached on signing the agreement, but others said that the administration's 
envoy to the talks, Stuart E. Eizenstat, would announce in Buenos 
Aires that it would be signed. The agreement would commit the United 
States to reducing its emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping 
greenhouse gases, which scientists say threaten to warm the planet 
and disrupt its climate, by 7 percent below the 1990 levels over the 
next 10 to 15 years. Opponents have said that this would require cuts 
in the use of fossil fuel that would devastate the economy. The administration 
insists that new technologies would insure a painless transition to 
a cleaner economy. For weeks, administration officials have declined 
to say when the United States would sign the protocol, which was agreed 
to by more than 150 nations last year in Kyoto, Japan. The current 
round of talks is aimed at establishing a system of international 
emissions trading and at defining what role developing countries should 
play in cutting emissions of the pollution that scientists say may 
cause major changes in the planet's climate. As reports spread that 
the administration would sign the agreement this week, congressional 
opponents warned that this would be a political mistake, while those 
who favor the treaty said signing it now would increase the administration's 
influence in the negotiations. Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., where cuts 
on emissions of carbon dioxide from burning coal would damage the 
state's mining industry, warned President Clinton to ``resist making 
empty gestures that will only make the potential future approval of 
the protocol by the Senate more difficult.'' Byrd is a leader of congressional 
opponents of the treaty who contend that it must not be approved until 
developing nations, whose emissions of greenhouse gases are projected 
to surpass those of the United States in the next few decades, agree 
to join industrial nations in cutting emissions. But Sen. Joseph Lieberman, 
D-Conn., urged the White House to sign the agreement. ``If we are 
not at the table, we cannot cajole or convince the developing nations 
to become part of the solution,'' he said. Rep. F. James Sensenbrenner 
Jr., a treaty opponent in the House and a leader of the congressional 
observers' delegation to the talks in Buenos Aires, called on the 
administration not to sign the treaty. ``Any global warming treaty 
devoid of developing country participation and credible evidence that 
America will maintain its economic health and vitality will be dead 
on arrival,'' said Sensenbrenner, a Wisconsin Republican. But Lieberman, 
as he left Washington to join the observers from Capitol Hill, called 
Sensenbrenner's plea ``a mistake, and a serious abdication of American 
responsibility to lead in this effort, and also an obstacle to our 
being able to shape the global response to the problem.'' Fred Krupp, 
the head of the Environmental Defense Fund, an advocacy organization 
that favors the treaty, said that ``the people who oppose signing 
are the same people who have opposed the treaty from the beginning, 
and in fact they are really opposing protecting the planet. We feel 
very strongly that the time to sign has come.'' But other environmentalists 
were not so enthusiastic. ``In my mind, this administration has made 
expectations so low, that when they finally sign this weak agreement 
that they negotiated, people will mistake it for leadership,'' said 
John Passacantando, executive director of Ozone Action, an environmental 
group that follows climate issues. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>