<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0276 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Clinton administration threatened Tuesday to place 100 percent 
tariffs on wine, cheese and other imports from Europe if the European 
Union did not lift its trade restrictions on bananas sold by American 
companies. In Brussels, Sir Leon Brittan, the European trade commissioner, 
said at a news conference that the European nations would challenge 
such duties in the World Trade Organization. ``In resorting to unilateral 
action, the United States is setting itself above the law and resorting 
to the principle of might is right,'' he declared. Jay Ziegler, a 
spokesman for the office of the U.S. trade representative, Charlene 
Barshefsky, disagreed, accusing the European Union of having failed 
to change its trade policies after being ordered to do so by the World 
Trade Organization. ``What we are doing is consistent with our rights,'' 
Ziegler said, ``and represents a measure of frustration that the European 
Union continues to disavow its obligations.'' This is the latest round 
in a long struggle between the United States and Europe over trade 
in bananas. Authorities here said it was highly unlikely that the 
stiff tariffs threatened Tuesday would ever be imposed. They said 
the administration had made a bold move to get the European Union 
to pay attention. In the past, the Clinton administration made similar 
threats to place high tariffs on Japanese luxury cars and on Chinese 
textile products, but withdrew the threats after those countries made 
concessions. For years, the United States has complained that the 
big American fruit distributors, Chiquita Brands International and 
the Dole Food Co., were restrained from selling Latin American-grown 
bananas in Europe. The European Union has conceded that its regulations 
have favored bananas from African, Caribbean and Pacific countries 
that were once colonies of European nations. European officials contend 
that the economies of these former colonies would be devastated if 
they had to compete with lower-cost Latin American producers whose 
bananas are sold by the American companies. Last year, the World Trade 
Organization, which administers trade agreements and monitors national 
trade policies, ruled in favor of the United States and ordered the 
European Union to modify its regulations. The Europeans did so, but 
the Clinton administration maintains that the modifications were, 
in Ziegler's words, ``nothing but window dressing.'' One of the main 
beneficiaries of increased banana sales in Europe would be Carl H. 
Lindner, a Cincinnati investor who controls Chiquita Brands and is 
one of the largest donors to political campaigns in the United States. 
During the 1996 presidential race, Lindner was an overnight guest 
of President Clinton in the Lincoln Bedroom, and he allowed Bob Dole, 
the Republican candidate, to use his family's aircraft. Leading up 
to this year's congressional elections, Lindner, his family and his 
company, the American Financial Corp., donated more than $850,000 
to candidates and parties, according to the Center for Responsive 
Politics, a nonpartisan watchdog organization that monitors campaign 
finance practices. More than three-quarters of the total went to Republicans. 
In a notice published Tuesday in the Federal Register, the office 
of the U.S. trade representative said it would announce on Dec. 15 
exactly which products would be subject to the 100 percent tariffs. 
They would go into effect Feb. 1. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>