<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0324 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rep. Dick Armey of Texas appeared to be ahead on Tuesday in his struggle 
to keep his job as House majority leader, the No. 2 leadership position, 
but a lingering dissatisfaction with him and his two current opponents 
prompted rumors of a fourth candidate's entering the race. Already, 
Reps. Steve Largent of Oklahoma and Jennifer Dunn of Washington have 
entered the race for the leader's job, which involves scheduling and 
managing floor votes. Some lawmakers on Tuesday raised the possibility 
that Rep. William Thomas of California, who sometimes supports abortion 
rights, might be drawn in, but his aides said that he would have no 
immediate announcement. Another possible candidate, Rep. Howard McKeon 
of California, decided not to enter the race and threw his support 
to Armey. The result of this uncertain battle, along with a contest 
over the fourth-ranking position of chairman of the party caucus, 
a job that includes spreading the party message, will determine the 
public image the party presents in the House. While most of the campaigning 
seems based more on personal ambition than on any carefully plotted 
ticket-balancing, a victory for Armey would reflect a sense that the 
departure of Speaker Newt Gingrich was enough of a change in top positions. 
An upset victory by Largent would give the party a strikingly conservative 
cast while te selection of Ms. Dunn would make her the highest-ranking 
woman in congressional history and instantly send a new message about 
the party that for nearly two decades has worried about its relative 
lack of support from women. A victory in the race for the caucus leadership 
by Rep. J.C. Watts of Oklahoma, the only black Republican member of 
Congress, would send a comparable message for a party that got only 
11 percent of black votes in last week's House elections. He is challenging 
Rep. John Boehner of Ohio. Rep. Tom DeLay of Texas, who currently 
holds the position of majority whip, is unchallenged in his bid for 
re-election. Rep. Robert Livingston of Louisiana, now the presumptive 
speaker pending two formal votes, met for more than an hour on Tuesday 
afternoon with Gingrich, whom he forced from office with his announcement 
Friday that he was challenging him. The two discussed the transition 
of power to Livingston and covered such topics as making sure that 
the 17 incoming freshmen Republicans were on board with the leadership. 
Livingston called Gingrich ``a brilliant man'' and said he had been 
``gracious'' in defeat. Aside from the races for two of the leadership 
positions, another big question mark in the House is who will replace 
Livingston as chairman of the Appropriations Committee, one of the 
two most important committees in the House. Republicans said that 
Rep. C.W. Young of Florida, who is next in line because of seniority 
and who is in the same conservative-pragmatist mold as Livingston, 
would probably get the nod from the new Speaker. Armey's supporters 
say he has more than 100 of the 112 votes needed to secure re-election 
to his post but that they have had difficulty in reaching embers who 
are on vacation and difficulty in securing commitments over the telephone 
for what will be a secret-ballot election on Nov. 18. ``We're almost 
at a majority, but you don't stop at 112, you build in a cushion,'' 
said Michele Davis, Armey's spokeswoman. Armey's opponents said his 
support was thin and could vanish in the secret balloting. ``The trick 
here is trying to hold your votes til the end,'' Ms. Dunn observed 
on CNN. Her aides said on Tuesday she had reached nearly 100 members 
and was ``encouraged'' by what appeared to be soft support for Armey. 
``I know a head fake when I see one,'' Largent said in a statement. 
The Hall of Fame football player asserted that Armey had less than 
40 votes. ``There is a huge block of undecided members.'' What is 
keeping this race alive is the apparent dissatisfaction with all three 
options. Armey is known for verbal gaffes that many say have caused 
too much embarrassment to the party. Largent is perceived as too hard-core 
conservative. Ms. Dunn is perceived as having too mixed a record on 
abortion rights. Both sides in the abortion debate were unhappy with 
her, reflecting the difficulty for any politician in trying to take 
a middle position on this most inflammatory of issues. An aide said 
that in discussions on Tuesday, Ms. Dunn was discovering that her 
abortion votes would be used as a ``litmus test'' in her race for 
majority leader. The National Right to Life Committee gave her a positive 
rating of 80 out of 100 this year. The National Abortion and Reproductive 
Rights Action League gave her a positive rating of 17. Still, that 
was higher than the zero it gave to all the other candidates for all 
the other leadership posts. Her 17 stemmed largely from her support 
for family planning. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>