<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0321 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton said for the first time Tuesday that the United 
States would not tolerate the ``flooding of our markets'' with low-cost 
goods from Asia and Russia, particularly steel, that are threatening 
the jobs of American workers. The president's statement came days 
after a White House meeting of top executives of steel companies and 
the United Steelworkers of America, which helped get out the vote 
for Democrats last week, playing a pivotal role with other unions 
in the party's success in midterm elections. After the meeting in 
the Cabinet room, which included Clinton, Vice President Al Gore and 
top Cabinet officials, Clinton's aides said the White House would 
not grant the unions' demand to cut off imports of steel that are 
apparently being dumped in the American markets. But on Tuesday, the 
president warned that foreign nations must ``play by the rules,'' 
appearing to signal that the United States would press other nations 
to restrict their exports to the United States. The remarks, which 
came in an address to the President's Export Council, an advisory 
group, creates an apparent conflict in U.S. policy, which until now 
has indirectly encouraged economically troubled countries to export 
their goods. But with the United States as the strongest and most 
open economy, Japan in deep recession and Europe still closed to many 
goods, most of those imports have come here, creating a political 
problem the White House must now deal with. How to deal with the flood 
of imports, and the soaring trade deficit they are creating, has touched 
off a significant debate within the administration. Secretary of the 
Treasury Robert Rubin, who has led the effort to design rescue packages 
for Asian nations, Russia and Latin America, has urged Clinton to 
be cautious in limiting the ability of those nations to export goods 
to the United States, their main source of hard currency now. Any 
effort to cut off the American market, Rubin noted Tuesday in a sharp 
exchange with George Becker, president of the steelworkers' union, 
could ``have consequences that are adverse to workers in other industries 
and consumers'' who have benefited from low-priced imports. Rubin 
has also cautioned that any move by the United States to shut off 
its markets could be taken as a signal by other nations that they 
are free to do the same. ``We don't want to encourage greater protectionism 
abroad,'' he told Becker during the meeting of the Export Council. 
But Secretary of Commerce William Daley; the U.S. trade representative, 
Charlene Barshefsky, and the president's political advisers have all 
urged more aggressive action, noting that layoffs have already begun 
in the steel industry and warning that they could spread elsewhere. 
On Friday, Gore, who is increasingly attentive to the demands of both 
business and labor unions, warned a group of top European executives 
that ``the United States cannot be the importer of only resort'' for 
the world's ailing nations. The phrase has since been repeated by 
others in the administration. Daley has, characteristically, been 
blunter. Noting that imports of Japanese-made hot-rolled steel, used 
for construction products, had increased fivefold this year, he said 
on Friday that ``we cannot sustain these rates.'' ``We alone cannot 
absorb all of Asia's imports,'' Daley added. ``We will not be the 
dumping ground for troubled economies.'' ``Just look at Japan's trade 
surplus with nations outside Asia,'' he said. ``It is almost three 
and a half times as large as it was a year ago. This is a major source 
of instability. And such instability _ caused by boatloads of cheap 
imports _ can lead to political unrest, as people fear for their jobs.'' 
On Tuesday, Daley inched toward action: The Commerce Department issued 
a ruling that allows the complaints of the steel industry and unions 
to be heard on an expedited basis. Clinton noted that decision in 
his speech Tuesday. The Commerce Department and the International 
Trade Commission share authority for ruling on whether dumping is 
taking place and for imposing compensatory tariffs. Setting limits 
on imports would almost certainly violate international trade agreements. 
Until Tuesday, the president had not publicly discussed the problem 
of rising imports from Asian or other troubled nations. In fact, the 
administration had indirectly encouraged those imports: Agreements 
between the International Monetary Fund and Indonesia, Thailand and 
South Korea all assume significantly increased exports by those countries, 
because their devalued currencies make their goods less expensive 
abroad. The Treasury Department signed off on all those accords after 
detailed study of their economic assumptions. But now, the political 
costs of those accords are becoming clear. The steel industry has 
been the first to scream, and the loudest, but makers of auto parts, 
machine tools and semiconductors are also complaining that foreign 
goods are being sold here at prices below their production costs. 
``There is certainly an effort now to try to take pressure off the 
U.S. market as the main buyers of Asian goods,'' C. Fred Bergsten, 
director of the Institute for International Economics in Washington, 
said on Monday. Bergsten noted that the ``flood'' the administration 
is now complaining about is only at its beginning stages: Only in 
recent months have the Asian countries hit hardest in the economic 
downturn begun to gear up their exports. Becker, the steelworkers' 
union leader, has been complaining that the administration's response 
is too slow and cautious. ``The crisis is here and now,'' he said 
late last week. ``The industry is on the verge of a catastrophe that 
will almost certainly dwarf the steel disasters of the '80s.'' Clinton 
spent much of his speech Tuesday insisting that the burden of reviving 
Asia falls on Japan, where he is scheduled to visit next week after 
attending a meeting of Asian leaders in Malaysia. The White House 
hinted Tuesday, however, that Clinton might have to curtail or even 
cancel the trip, depending on the showdown with Iraq over U.N. inspections. 
In a separate appearance in front of the export council, Ms. Barshefsky 
expressed mounting frustration with China, which so far has made no 
new proposals for market liberalizations that would pave the way for 
its entry into the World Trade Organization. During the summer, and 
particularly during his trip to China, Clinton and his aides have 
been upbeat about China. But Ms. Barshefsky said China had been retreating 
on reforms and that its bureaucrats had ``become somewhat more entrenched.'' 
To save their own jobs at a time of government downsizing in Beijing, 
Ms. Barshefsky said, ``they think it is wiser to take a hard line, 
to say `no' to the United States.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>