<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0326 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two large drug companies say they have developed a new class of drugs 
that can relieve pain and inflammation without the gastrointestinal 
side effects of current drugs. The companies, G.D. Searle and Co., 
a division of Monsanto Co., and Merck and Co. reported results of 
tests of the new drugs Tuesday in San Diego at the annual meeting 
of the American College of Rheumatology. It remains to be seen if 
the results will hold up in further tests, or if the Food and Drug 
Administration will accept the companies' claims for the drugs. But 
the companies said low doses of the new drugs appeared to be as effective 
in relieving pain and inflammation as the highest doses of nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs, like ibuprofen and dicolfenac. They reported 
that the new drugs, called cox-2 inhibitors, do so without causing 
stomach pain, bleeding or ulcers _ the major side effects that thwart 
the use of the other painkillers. Drug companies have long sought 
to discover such drugs, which would be an enormous boon to people 
who, like those with arthritis, need to take painkillers daily. The 
drugs have generated enormous publicity as the companies and some 
eager doctors have hailed them as the start of a new era both for 
patients and for the drug's makers, who stand to profit greatly if 
the companies' claims are proven. But the meeting provided the first 
display of the companies' results from large and long-term studies 
of cox-2 inhibitors. The results have not yet been scrutinized independently 
by other scientists. Yet the promise is tantalizing, the company officials 
say, since ulcers and bleeding can be serious, even deadly, side effects 
of current drugs. About 13 million Americans take nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs, according to data supplied by Merck. Of them, 76,000 are hospitalized 
each year for ulcers caused by the drugs, and about 7,600 die from 
those ulcers. About one in three people who take the drugs for long 
periods end up with gastrointestinal bleeding. The large studies have 
found no such complications with the new drugs. Searle, which is based 
in Skokie, Ill., presented data Tuesday from a 12-week study of 1,004 
patients with osteoarthritis who were randomly assigned to take one 
of three doses of its drug, celecoxib, or the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drug naproxen or a placebo. The two highest doses of celecoxib were 
as effective as naproxen in relieving pain and inflammation, the company 
reported, but those taking the new drug had no more gastrointestinal 
side effects than those taking the placebo. On Dec. 1, an advisory 
committee to the FDA will decide whether to recommend that Searle's 
drug be approved for treating arthritis patients. Merck, of Whitehouse 
Station, N.J., said it would send its marketing application to the 
FDA by the end of the year. For now, scientists are finding themselves 
in a sort of equipoise. Some are daring to hope that a new age is 
dawning while others are cautious. ``This might be hyperbolic,'' said 
Dr. Lawrence J. Marnett, associate director of the cancer center at 
Vanderbilt University and a consultant to Monsanto, which is based 
in St. Louis, ``but I think it's going to be revolutionary.'' But 
Dr. Michael Lockshin, an arthritis expert who is director of the Barbara 
Volcker Center at Cornell University's medical school in New York 
City, is less comfortable making predictions. ``I'm looking at this 
with a stand-back-and-see-where-it-goes attitude,'' he said. ``I'm 
just not standing here with my tongue hanging out waiting for these 
drugs.'' And Dr. James R. O'Dell, chairman of the rheumatology department 
at the University of Nebraska Medical Center in Omaha, warned that 
cox-2 inhibitors were not miracle drugs as safe as placebos. Aspirin 
and similar drugs, for example, can decrease blood flow to the kidney. 
``That problem may be lessened but may not be eliminated with cox-2 
inhibitors,'' he said. To the scientists, cyclooxygenase was not new. 
It was made all the time, in virtually every cell, and it was blocked 
by aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. But here 
was something they did not know: A different cyclooxygenase, abbreviated 
cox, that was only made when cells were growing, which occurs during 
inflammation. Because aspirin blocks inflammation and also causes 
bleeding _ an effect that has nothing to do with cell growth _ all 
three scientists had the same reaction. ``I immediately thought that 
this is telling us something very exciting about aspirin and aspirin-like 
drugs,'' said Dr. Daniel L. Simmons, director of the Cancer Research 
Center at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah. It meant, Simmons 
and the other discoverers of the enzyme realized, that aspirin and 
similar drugs might be blocking both cyclooxygenases. And if there 
were a drug that blocked just one of the enzymes, the one that is 
made in growing cells, if might soothe pain and inflammation, caused 
by the proliferation of white blood cells of the immune system, without 
causing bleeding problems and ulcers. But Dr. Simmons and the directors 
of the other two research groups, Dr. Harvey R. Herschman, the director 
for basic research at the cancer center at the University of California 
in Los Angeles, and Dr. Donald A. Young, a biochemist at the University 
of Rochester, were basic scientists, not drug developers. Drug companies, 
however, rushed to the scene as soon as they learned what had been 
found. Monsanto learned about Dr. Simmons' work by sheer coincidence, 
at a seminar. Simmons was then invited to the company on April 15, 
and two weeks later, Simmons gave Monsanto his cox-2 materials. In 
return, Simmons said, he sought and received a two-year, $100,000 
research grant from Monsanto. Merck's scientists got started almost 
a year later, also learning about cox-2 by happenstance. Dr. Bennett 
Shapiro, director of the company's basic research, met the discoverers 
of cox-2 at a small scientific meeting that he had considered skipping. 
Once he heard their discovery, Shapiro was stunned. He went back to 
Merck where, he recalled, ``I said, `I really think we ought to hit 
this hard.''' By summer, 150 scientists, virtually the entire laboratory 
at a Merck research center in Montreal, were doing nothing else but 
looking for drugs that most efficiently blocked cox-2. In record time, 
Searle and Merck began testing their drugs in patients with arthritis. 
Shapiro said the speedy time from laboratory to the FDA, six and a 
half years, was all but unprecedented. By contrast, Shapiro said, 
the Merck laboratory that took on the cox-2 project had spent 20 years 
on its previous project, which culminated in the development and marketing 
of an asthma drug. While the cox-2 studies were under way, the companies 
realized that they might have more than just an arthritis drug on 
their hands. ``Several bombshells hit the scientific world,'' Young 
said. First was the observation that people who take nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs have about half the incidence of colon cancer 
as those who do not take the drugs. The cox-2 inhibitors may be just 
as effective as aspirin or similar drugs, said Dr. Raymond N. DuBois 
of Vanderbilt. In 1993, he found that 85 percent of colon cancer tumors 
had ramped up their production of cox-2. Merck and Monsanto are now 
starting studies to see if cox-2 inhibitors can prevent colon cancer. 
Other studies found that there was less Alzheimer's disease in people 
who took nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Merck and Monsanto 
said they were also starting studies to determine if the drugs could 
prevent that disease. In addition, Young said, there is hope that 
cox-2 can prevent the breakdown of bone that occurs in osteoporosis. 
``These would be some of the most exciting drugs of the century if 
it all works out,'' Young said. For now, O'Dell cautioned, all that 
can be said is that the new drugs are as effective in alleviating 
pain and inflammation in arthritis patients as the existing nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs, but safer. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>