<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0258 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A specter is haunting the music business: the prospect of listeners 
getting the music they want directly from the Internet, free of charge. 
Right now, all it takes to make a recording executive nervous is the 
mention of MP3, a powerful piece of software that allows users to 
zap music all over the Internet, unchecked and untithed. For utopians, 
MP3 is a way to liberate music from the clutches of gatekeepers and 
profiteers, and perhaps to return music to its intangible essence. 
But the recording business sees MP3 as a Pandora's box of copyright 
destruction, unleashing anarchy and piracy while robbing musicians 
of royalties and record labels of capital. In effect, both sides are 
correct. There's bound to be serious legal scuffling between people 
who own copyrights and people who believe in the hacker credo that 
information wants to be free. Yet recorded music is considerably more 
than a corporate revenue source, and the implications of digital distribution 
go far beyond the particulars of software and gadgets and royalty 
collection. For listeners, music has never been about its physical 
form, but about what's in the grooves or magnetic particles or digital 
pits; it's the information, not the plastic. Digital distribution 
can turn that sentiment into a reality. And that shift could alter 
the way music is made, released, sold, stored and valued. It will 
affect everyone from listeners to musicians to record-store clerks 
to manufacturers of CD shelves, and it will certainly disrupt the 
routines that have grown over a century of recorded music. It means 
listeners can have more choices while musicians may get away with 
making fewer of them. It means recorded music will be more accessible 
but also, perhaps, less respected and inviolable. Music that isn't 
in solid form may just not seem as significant as those antique CDs. 
It could move closer to the spontaneity of live performance, but it 
will also demand less of a commitment. Instead of a lifelong companion, 
music could be a one-click stand. Music has been inextricable from 
technology from the moment someone tapped together two particularly 
resonant sticks. And in the last century, the technology of recorded 
music _ microphones, cylinders, 78-rpm disks, LPs, cassettes, CDs 
_ has affected everything from the length of songs to the lineup of 
ensembles to the environments that music is made for. Where would 
psychedelia be without headphones or hip-hop without booming car stereos? 
The way music reaches the public also affects its development, because 
listeners as well as musicians are shaped by what they get a chance 
to hear; in the past, that often meant songs geared above all to the 
perceived needs of radio programmers. The Internet has already changed 
the prospects for listeners who might once have been condemned to 
the offerings of a local Top 40 radio station, MTV and a few stores 
at the mall; now, Internet radio stations offer a world of options. 
In the past, purchasing music has been a more serious undertaking 
than simply tracking it down. High CD prices discourage people from 
owning music they might have liked, even if they can find the recording. 
But digital distribution almost certainly will change the way people 
buy music. The new model could be like a jukebox, with listeners paying 
for each song or group of songs they download. Better yet, it could 
resemble cable television, with subscribers paying a monthly fee for 
all the music they want to download, and revenues distributed on the 
basis of popularity. (Of course, with MP3 around, other listeners 
may just head for free sites and nab what they can.) If monthly subscribers 
could download a song or an album on a whim _ not just to hear it 
once but to replay it often enough to understand it _ general listeners' 
tastes could broaden and budding musicians could learn new vocabularies. 
The process wouldn't necessarily build new Top 10 hits, which would 
still need mass broadcast exposure. But it could make all sorts of 
niche-music purveyors happy. And it would be likely to prove that 
people's tastes aren't as constricted as radio formats pretend they 
are. For people with the right kind of equipment, free Internet music 
is already here. MP3 is just one form of digital distribution of music; 
the other two widely used methods, called Liquid Audio and a2b, offer 
more control to the people making the music files available, notably 
by eliminating unauthorized copies. What makes MP3 appealing, however, 
is its absence of constraints; it puts users in charge. MP3 (short 
for MPEG-1, Layer 3) is what computer types call a compression algorithm. 
It shrinks packages of information, making it practical to send them 
across the Internet. Computer programs, video clips or songs _ any 
digital information _ can then be decompressed upon arrival for playback. 
MP3 is part of Windows 98, and it's widely available from sites on 
the Internet; it's on its way to ubiquity. While a standard music 
CD holds 650 megabytes of information, or about 77 minutes of music, 
using MP3 the entire Beatles catalog can be packed onto one CD-ROM. 
The watchdogs at the Recording Industry Association of America have 
found such a disk offered for sale, a blatantly illegal bootleg. Still, 
MP3 music isn't by definition illegal. One enterprising company, MusicMatch 
Inc., has packed 152 songs from independent (read: mostly unsigned 
and eager for attention) bands onto a CD-ROM that's perfectly legit. 
But the wider significance of digital distribution is that the actual 
CD-ROM will be unnecessary. (Think of the ecological benefits of having 
fewer plastic CD's or cassettes in the world.) Try an Internet search 
for ``MP3'' and your favorite band, and you're likely to turn up MP3 
songs just waiting to be downloaded directly to your hard drive. Listen 
to them, save them or erase them; it's no big deal. Some may be concert 
recordings or other rarities, while others come directly from commercial 
CDs, processed through MP3 programs that are delicately named ``rippers.'' 
At the moment, most home computer users still find MP3 unwieldy; even 
compressed songs take considerable time to download through ordinary 
telephone lines and modems. But on college campuses and other places 
where computers hook up to the Internet through fast T-1 connections, 
music via MP3 is a fact of life. The rest of us will have to wait 
until we get cable modems, which speed up Internet connections. For 
the recording business, true panic set in when a company named Diamond 
Multimedia announced it was bringing out a portable MP3 player this 
month for about $200, the same price as the first Walkmans. Instead 
of carrying around a computer for playback, MP3 users will have a 
pocket-size gadget; input the MP3 files and hit the highway or the 
beach. The recording-industry association obtained a temporary restraining 
order on the MP3 player, charging that it was a bootlegging machine, 
but the manufacturers prevailed in a higher court by arguing that 
it's only a playback device, not a recorder. Sooner or later, the 
hardware won't matter. Digital players _ whether they use MP3 or some 
other format _ will be in people's pockets, and songs will be instantly 
available. Digital distribution is likely to revolutionize the economics 
of the music business. Some advantages of large recording companies, 
like their centralized manufacturing and distribution and their domination 
of retail display space, vanish if the Internet becomes the main outlet 
for music. With current mail-order Internet stores like CDnow, an 
album on Kill Rock Stars Records can already have the same visibility 
as one on Columbia or Atlantic. Of course, without the cost of manufacturing 
a recording and getting it to a store, music could also be made available 
at lower prices. But that would cut profits. Record companies fear 
that with boundless free music around, people are going to be less 
willing to pay $17 for 10 songs on a CD. Their worries may be slightly 
exaggerated. Up to a point, people don't shop for music like buying 
groceries; people are looking for a specific performer and a specific 
song; they won't change brands for a better price. But if superstar 
albums can be duplicated and sent over the Internet via MP3, with 
no way of collecting royalties or profits, who's going to finance 
the next million-dollar recording projects and video clips? Expect 
recording companies to push their music even harder for soundtracks, 
commercials and other uses that will generate licensing fees upfront. 
And expect the more greedy musicians to start thinking ``hit jingle'' 
as well as ``hit single.'' As the recording companies have contended 
since the introduction of the analog cassette, unauthorized copying 
could leach away the investments that record companies have typically 
made in musicians and marketing. The companies' edge, in the past, 
was that their product offered higher recording quality, better packaging 
and more convenience. But digital copies are indistinguishable from 
originals. If one is available from Capitol Records for full price 
and another is available free from, say, www.piratetunes.com, even 
a band's most dedicated fans may be torn. With free copies available, 
legally or illegally, there's increased pressure to make music more 
affordable; a fan might be willing to support a performer for 75 cents 
a song, but not for $1.50. At least one company, GoodNoise, has decided 
to sell music as MP3 files for a low price, figuring that it will 
be paid for the first copy, if not the rest. It's following the model 
of computer software makers, who have grown resigned to having their 
programs passed around. Record labels could continue to offer music 
from their roster before anyone else had it, and they could present 
themselves as reliable sources, free of viruses and true to the performers' 
wishes. (There's plenty of computer software around for making music, 
which could lead to all sorts of edited, bowdlerized and brutalized 
versions of songs. Why don't we remove that Mariah Carey vocal and 
substitute my cousin? Or her cat?) Many albums now reach their highest 
position on the charts the week they are released, and companies could 
hold on to that part of the market. They could also remind fans that 
legitimate releases support the musicians who made them, appealing 
to conscience or loyalty. Another primary function of record companies 
is promotion: advertising, publicizing, getting music played on radio 
and television and subsidizing bands on the road. That kind of clout 
will remain important, especially as choices proliferate. Popular 
music needs stars, who shape and share a culture's fantasies while 
they contribute to the bottom line. One of the genuine pleasures of 
popular music is knowing that you're not the only one listening to 
a hit but part of a figurative community of fans who all have something 
in common, even if it's just liking the way Scary Spice dances. Digital 
distribution, by providing many more choices, could well affect the 
magnitude of pop stardom the way competition from cable television 
has affected the audience for network television. But the craving 
to be part of a phenomenon won't go away. While many listeners will 
be able to delve into niches, the mass market that creates hits (which 
in turn subsidize projects like recording the classical repertory) 
is used to having music sorted by MTV and radio programmers. Amid 
a bewildering number of options, the record companies that can draw 
attention to their releases will still have an edge. With digital 
distribution, musicians at two extremes of the business _ steady-gigging 
live bands and established superstars _ could choose to bypass recording 
companies entirely. Those whose music is based on live performance 
rather than studio assemblage can record cheaply and quickly; those 
who have already bought mansions and soccer teams could finance their 
own studio time instead of getting advances from recording companies. 
Either way, they could simply place their music directly on the Internet, 
as many grass-roots musicians have already done. (Not using other 
people's money for recording could have another side effect: cutting 
down on studio time and budgets.) Some musicians might put the music 
out free to make themselves known to fans, to entice people to buy 
concert tickets and T-shirts or just for the fun of being heard. Recording 
music, already a do-it-yourself operation for many musicians, could 
become synonymous with releasing music to the world. That, in turn, 
could create a flood of 10th-rate material, doing for music what Internet 
bulletin boards and chat rooms have done for literature. When musicians 
had to depend on record companies to get their efforts to the public, 
they had to convince other people that their tunes were worth preserving 
and marketing. Recording companies are notorious for missing innovations 
and pressuring musicians toward last week's commercial directions. 
But they're not all bad. Despite the amount of junk they release, 
they also perform useful reality checks, winnowing the vast numbers 
of hopefuls and helping musicians make the transition from basements 
or clubs to recordings that bear up to repeated listening. Recorded 
music and live music work differently; the whiz-bang thrills of a 
live punk band, for instance, may seem unsubtle and even monotonous 
the fifth time through. For every musician like the Artist (formerly 
known as Prince), who comes up with more good music than a traditional 
record company can handle, there are dozens who should discard more 
than they do. About 30,000 albums are already released every year 
by record companies large and small. Imagine how much music would 
emerge if no one was writing rejection letters. As releasing music 
becomes a casual decision, the length of those releases will turn 
unpredictable. We're used to thinking that music comes in two sizes 
_ songs and albums _ but digital distribution brings more flexibility. 
The limitations of Edison disks shaped the three-minute pop song; 
the necessity of flipping over an LP built the habit of programming 
an album in two parts. In the long run, the album is also a technological 
artifact, an artistic unit engendered by physical limitations. When 
music is downloaded, packages no longer have to be uniform. Musicians 
might release a song, or three, or 53, on any schedule; they could 
put out a song the day it was recorded. They could release collections 
like commercial versions of albums and, simultaneously, as the musical 
equivalent of director's-cut films. Musicians could also stop making 
a lot of tough decisions. They could offer alternate versions of songs; 
they could record every show of a tour, digitize it and encourage 
fans to assemble their own sets. (Somewhere on the Internet, Phish 
fans are probably doing that right now.) But with digital distribution, 
musicians could no longer govern the package that listeners receive. 
Some fans would want everything, including what used to be obscure 
B-sides from singles and alternate versions; others would just click 
on to the hits, ignoring a band's less commercial efforts. Downloaded 
music would encourage listeners to build their own programs _ album-length 
or not, one performer or many. Listeners might riffle through a performer's 
whole career or pick through a favorite genre or put together an assortment 
of old and new hits. Current record companies that have been heavily 
pushing soundtrack albums are already training listeners to concentrate 
on the immediate pleasure of a hit song rather than taking the time 
to get to know a musician's full scope. Listeners could also reshuffle 
their music at whim, since no collection would have to be permanent. 
If a song is always available electronically, there's no need to hold 
on to a CD. With full-scale digital distribution, the Internet itself 
becomes a music library, and home shelves can be emptied. Listeners 
could download what they want, listen to it as long as they're interested, 
and move on. Music would stop being something to collect, and revert 
to its age-old transience: something that transforms a moment and 
then disappears like a troubadour leaving town. But there's a tradeoff 
for the convenience; the music might seem disposable. Musicians could 
soon come to miss the kind of sustained attention that fans used to 
give to a brand-new album, playing it repeatedly from start to finish. 
Downloaders have short attention spans, and like other Internet phenomena, 
digital distribution is a temptation to surf. The notion of some centralized 
music archive, out of listeners' hands, is not entirely reassuring. 
There are dire possibilities of surveillance; I could always pay cash 
at a record store for a Barenaked Ladies album, but I certainly wouldn't 
want some Internet monitor to know that I was downloading it. Meanwhile, 
what happens when a control-freak musician decides to erase his inspired 
but erratic early recordings, or some bureaucrat gets a court order 
to delete all the gangsta rap? At that point, the anarchic copying 
and free circulation allowed by MP3 become a blessing. Somebody is 
bound to have the missing songs tucked away on their computer, ready 
to be resuscitated and out of any company's control. Other entertainment 
moguls may be quietly gloating over the music business' digital quandaries. 
They shouldn't get too comfortable. After all, movies are next. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>