<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0188 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This isn't quite what dressing up in Mommy's clothes used to be like. 
Teresa, Mary and Catherine, three English sisters of no particular 
closeness, have gathered before a mirror in garish dresses from their 
mother's closet. There's not a flicker of remembered little-girl fantasies 
of grown-up glamour in the eyes of these adults. They're appalled 
and amused by what they see, and when one of them says to another, 
``You look dead like Mum,'' they're taken hostage by laughter. After 
all, Mum, at the moment, is lying in state in the local funeral parlor. 
As enacted by Suzanne Bertish, J. Smith-Cameron and Seana Kofoed, 
this collapse into gallows merriment is a sad and invigorating spectacle. 
It occurs just before the end of the first act of ``The Memory of 
Water,'' the new play by Shelagh Stephenson at the Manhattan Theater 
Club, and it has a raw spontaneity that captures perfectly the idea 
of ``what normal people do in abnormal times,'' as one character has 
said earlier. It is what often happens in the face of a death in the 
family: words fail, emotions short-circuit and the only proper response 
seems to be laughter. The scene is also remarkable as an indication 
of a play and of performances that might have been instead of what 
is seen during most of this reflective comedy, which opened Tuesday 
night under John Tillinger's direction. The moment is one of the few 
in which three fine actresses are able to sink comfortably into their 
parts, and the effect is of a revivifying breeze sweeping through 
a small, stuffy room. ``The Memory of Water,'' previously produced 
in London and Chicago and the first stage play by Ms. Stephenson, 
who brings to mind an English Beth Henley, is dotted with stimulating 
observations that point to depths the work itself never plumbs. This 
story of sibling resentment and filial ambivalence, set in a seaside 
town in North Yorkshire, considers the notion that what we remember 
from our pasts is as much invention as fact. ``Can you feel nostalgia 
for something that never existed?'' asks Mary (Ms. Smith-Cameron), 
the middle sister and the official success of the family. Like other, 
similar lines in ``Memory,'' the question hovers in the air, but it 
never really lands on the stage to become a part of the action. The 
comedy features enjoyably detailed arguments among the sisters in 
which no one can agree, for instance, on which of them was once abandoned 
at the beach and which threw up on the television when ``The High 
Chaparral'' was on. It extends the theme by having Mary, a doctor, 
describe a patient who has come to obsess her, a young man with ``post-traumatic 
amnesia.'' Yet these elements often feel like sparkling accessories 
pinned onto a comedy cut from a conventional pattern and synthetic 
cloth. Ms. Stephenson, who is currently under commission to the Royal 
National Theater, is a writer of promising curiosity. Here, unfortunately, 
she trucks out her arresting themes without letting them take on organic 
life. ``Memory'' can be broken down too easily into alternating scenes 
of bantering insults and heartfelt confrontation. They are attached 
to a central plot line, built on the mysterious papers that lie in 
a missing green biscuit tin, that could have figured in a 19th-century 
melodrama. The sisters themselves fall neatly into pre-formed categories. 
Teresa (Ms. Bertish), the eldest, is the practical, bossy one, who 
stayed home to take care of Mother and married a nice but boring man, 
Frank (Peter McRobbie). Mary, the doctor, has a worldly arrogance 
and a married lover, Mike (David Hunt). Catherine (Ms. Kofoed), the 
baby, is a professional, promiscuous drifter. The sisters carp at 
and blame each other in dialogue that exists somewhere between situation 
and drawing-room comedies. It's intermittently funny, but the actresses 
delivering it only rarely transcend a sense of deft mechanical banter 
to suggest the biological bonds of sisterhood. You keep wanting them 
to react to, rather than just perform for, each other. Ms. Smith-Cameron, 
the blissful star of ``As Bees in Honey Drown,'' has retained some 
of that earlier performance's artificiality, her eyebrows arching 
to accent a quip as if they just couldn't help themselves. The excellent 
Ms. Bertish often seems to be struggling against stereotype and giving 
up the battle, especially when the prim Teresa gets drunk. Ms. Kofoed, 
in the flashiest and most exaggerated part, does convey the ravenous 
neediness at her character's center. As the bewildered men in the 
sisters' lives, Hunt and McRobbie are very good indeed, giving the 
evening its most persuasive flow of natural life. But the standout 
in the cast is Robin Moseley as Vi, the girls' mother, who reappears 
as a ghost to bedevil Mary. Wearing a 1950s-ish green taffeta dress 
and a smile that is both droll and reproachful, Vi exudes the adult 
sophistication that her daughters must have projected onto her as 
children and would now deny her in recollection. Even as she nags 
and criticizes, in the tradition of ghost mothers in comedies, she 
also has a fundamental reserve, a sense that she knows something that 
no one else onstage does. Unlike ``The Memory of Water'' itself, Vi 
understands the importance of not spelling out one's secrets. PRODUCTION 
NOTES: `THE MEMORY OF WATER' By Shelagh Stephenson; directed by John 
Tillinger; sets by James Noone; costumes by Jess Goldstein; lighting 
by Donald Holder; sound by Aural Fixation; dialect coach, Elizabeth 
Smith; production stage manager, Leila Knox; production manager, Michael 
R. Moody; associate artistic director, Michael Bush; general manager, 
Victoria Bailey. Presented by the Manhattan Theater Club, Lynne Meadow, 
artistic director; Barry Grove, executive producer. At City Center 
Stage 2, 131 West 55th St., Manhattan. WITH: J. Smith-Cameron (Mary), 
Robin Moseley (Vi), Suzanne Bertish (Teresa), Seana Kofoed (Catherine), 
David Hunt (Mike) and Peter McRobbie (Frank). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>