<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0339 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Graduate students working on Ph.D.s know that getting a job after 
graduation will be difficult. Faculty who teach the graduate students 
say the Ph.D.s often wind up underemployed. Now the Association of 
American Universities, a group that represents 62 leading universities, 
is acknowledging the problem and calling on its members to look at 
their graduates' job prospects more carefully and change their programs 
if necessary. In a new report, a committee of the Association of American 
Universities defends the number of Ph.D.s as useful to society, but 
calls on its member institutions to better track employment of graduates 
and better prepare students for a range of careers. The study represents 
an acknowledgment by elite institutions that they should take more 
responsibility for all of their graduates, not just the relative few 
who find jobs at research universities like their own. The 62 elite 
research universities that belong to the association produce more 
than half of the approximately 40,000 Ph.D.s awarded in the United 
States each year. The 15-member committee included presidents or chancellors 
from Yale, Duke, Washington University, Rutgers and the University 
of California at Santa Barbara. Peter D. Syverson, vice president 
for research and information services at the Council of Graduate Schools, 
applauded the call for universities to collect better data. ``The 
problem comes down to a disconnect between expectations and reality,'' 
he said. ``Gathering more information is useful so your current graduates 
aren't taken by surprise.'' But Mark R. Kelley, president-elect of 
the graduate student caucus of the Modern Language Association, called 
the recommendations ``ludicrous.'' He said the problem is university 
reliance on part-time adjuncts, which if reduced would create more 
full-time teaching jobs for Ph.D.s. ``I assume they're saying that 
after eight or nine years of running people's lives, we'd better look 
at what happens to them,'' Kelley said. ``This is a grand gesture. 
I wonder why it's taken them so long to recognize this. They're always 
putting Band-Aids on problems.'' Bryan Hannegan, a graduate student 
at the University of California at Irvine and president of the National 
Association of Graduate-Professional Students, said: ``There is a 
relative lack of jobs in some fields. The traditional mind-set is 
that people who go into Ph.D. programs are preparing for jobs in academe, 
but that is no longer the case.'' Hannegan hopes to receive his own 
Ph.D. in earth system science this year but does not yet know what 
kind of job he will get. ``We need to make sure that universities 
are devising programs that recognize that a lot of graduates won't 
go into academe.'' Although graduates with Ph.D.s earn more than those 
with bachelor's or master's degrees, financial support for graduate 
students has eroded and for many students, the time it takes to earn 
a Ph.D. has grown to eight to 10 years or more. Universities have 
never hired all of the Ph.D.s they produced themselves, but for many 
years, supply and demand were more closely matched. Production of 
Ph.D.s mushroomed in the late 1950s and the 1960s as the United States 
raced to catch up with Russia's space program and the Cold War intensified. 
The number of Ph.D.s awarded annually jumped to 41,610 in 1995 from 
only 8,773 in 1958, spurred in part by increased federal financing, 
which paid for an expansion in the number of universities offering 
doctorates and in the number of doctoral programs. As that expansion 
ended, however, there were fewer new teaching jobs to be had. Between 
1975 and 1994, the report said, the number of recent Ph.D.s hired 
by academe from the universities that are association members grew 
by only about 1,000. Between 1975 and 1978, 31,056 were hired into 
academe; between 1991 and 1994, 32,317 were hired. The number actually 
dipped below 30,000 in the 1980s. But these figures do not even tell 
the whole story, since graduates in individual fields sometimes have 
particular problems, and some of the academic jobs are in part-time, 
nonpermanent positions. ``Our view is that there is a continuing crisis 
of underemployment in the humanities and the humanities-oriented social 
sciences,'' said Robert Weisbuch, president of the Woodrow Wilson 
National Fellowship Foundation in Princeton, which last month held 
a conference on how to link the humanities closer to the world outside 
of academia, including finding more job opportunities for Ph.D.s. 
``There has been a tremendous waste of talent,'' he added, ``and this 
has gone on for more than 25 years.'' The new report by the American 
Association of Universities' Committee on Graduate Education acknowledges 
that many new Ph.D.s do not have full-time jobs by the time they graduate, 
but argues that the Ph.D. is valuable preparation for a variety of 
jobs, not just college teaching positions. Furthermore, it says, people 
with doctorates have very low unemployment rates throughout their 
careers. But the report does express concern over the increasing proportion 
of Ph.D.s who spend one or more years in post-graduate study after 
they earn their degrees. This means that students who have already 
postponed taking full-time jobs, are postponing such employment still 
longer, and often not entering the job market until their mid to late 
30s. Some universities have begun to track their own graduates in 
the job market. One recent study by the English department at the 
Graduate Center of the City University of New York, for example, found 
that of 89 students who earned Ph.D.s in English between 1992 and 
1996, 60 were in academic jobs (39 in tenure track positions, nine 
in nontenured but full-time positions and 12 in adjunct positions.) 
Except for three graduates not found by the researchers, the remaining 
26 held a variety of jobs, including writing, editing and administration. 
``That there is a real problem in the academy in the placement of 
Ph.D.s is beyond question,'' said William Kelly, provost at the CUNY 
graduate center. ``But the magnitude is not as severe as it is made 
out to be.'' Although he, for one, says that some of the non-academic 
jobs are valuable and exciting, there is a growing recognition in 
academic circles that those who do not find full-time tenured jobs 
are often left feeling that they have fallen short of some mark. Maresi 
Nerad, director of graduate research at the University of California 
at Berkeley, who is conducting a national study of Ph.D.s 10 years 
after graduation, said Berkeley is trying to address this with programs 
like a career-management workshop for English Ph.D. students this 
fall. ``We wanted to make our doctoral students aware that there is 
an array of possibilities,'' she said, ``and not be caught up in the 
feeling that either you're a professor or you're nothing.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>