<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981110.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There was a moment after the salmon with Brittany sea salt at the 
pillowy corner banquette at the Carlyle, after the triumphant stroll 
up Madison Avenue, where East Side matrons swooned like teen-agers 
spying Leonardo DeCaprio, after the brief tour of the 12-room symphony 
of mahogany and double-beveled glass where he lives, when, out of 
the blue, Tom Wolfe sounded like a man ready to let his red dog slip 
its leash. The untethered red dog in Wolfe's new novel, ``A Man in 
Full'' (Farrar, Straus &AMP; Giroux), is a metaphor for breaking out 
of type, taking a mad dash on the wild side, as the novel's cautious 
banker Raymond Peepgass does in cooking up a felonious get-rich scheme. 
So it seemed so un-Wolfean as to be almost Wolfean when he began preaching 
the virtues of teaching his son to hunt, sounding like some old boy 
in muddy fatigues contemplating the apocalypse in Valdosta or Spartanburg. 
``The day will come, inevitably, maybe it's the Y2K, when only the 
grandmothers will have the skills to deal with life on another basis: 
no computers, hunting for food,'' said Wolfe, the towers of Manhattan 
glistening in the late afternoon light outside his 14th-floor window. 
``It's not going to happen anytime soon, but it could happen. ``What 
if two weeks from now the food supplies were all cut off? People are 
throwing their hands in the air, saying: `This can't happen! Where's 
my congressman?' And it turns out he's out in the woods somewhere.'' 
The vision emerges like a scene from a bad Tom Wolfe parody: the author 
in his trademark cream-colored double-breasted serge suit and matching 
vest, his two-tone shoes and white cotton handkerchief with brown 
selvage design, his silver hair shockingly tousled and his blue eyes 
bloodshot, lurching up Fifth Avenue past the Pierre with a shotgun 
in search of who knows what for dinner. Wild turkey! Brown bear! Sinewy 
cougar! South Texas javelina! And then, of course, the vision fades 
away. ``Talk about degenerate,'' he had sniffed, in a bit-too-transparent 
piece of stagecraft as he passed a Madison Avenue boutique with its 
plastic mannequin positioned in droll repose above five gleaming toilet 
seats, each roughly the color of Wolfe's famous garb. Aside from his 
one red-dog digression, he played relentlessly to type, modest, soft-voiced 
and unfailingly polite (``Shall we take the air?'' he inquired as 
he finished his coffee), like the refined Richmond boy he still is 
at heart. But if his red dog tends to run loose in his writing and 
not, not publicly anyway, in his life, ``A Man in Full'' presents 
an intriguing window for looking beneath Wolfe's familiar urban-dandy 
exterior. In the book, his second novel, Wolfe goes south to the plantations, 
bank towers and strip malls of Georgia and particularly the wealthy 
Atlanta of the leafy, sumptuous Buckhead neighborhood, where ``the 
lawns rose up from the street like big green breasts.'' It is also, 
in many ways, a trip home for Wolfe, who grew up the grandson of a 
Confederate soldier in Richmond, went to school at the Southern gentleman's 
redoubt at Washington and Lee University, and whose dress, manners, 
work and worldview bear the unmistakable mark of the South's most 
aristocratic state. Indeed, if his ambitions inevitably drew him to 
New York and then kept him there, he remains so indelibly Southern 
that his new book, right down to its unlikely homage to the Stoic 
philosopher Epictetus, reveals as much about him as about the South. 
Thomas Kennerly Wolfe Jr. was born in 1930 into an old Virginia family 
at a time when the Civil War was still as much a part of Richmond 
as the Confederate statues on Monument Avenue. His father, whose Virginia 
roots go back to 1710, was an odd Southern hybrid of agronomist, teacher 
and businessman who taught at Virginia Polytechnic Institute, edited 
a publication called The Southern Planter and ran a company, Southern 
States Cooperative, that became a Fortune 500 company. His mother, 
Helen Perkins Hughes Wolfe, came from an old Virginia family as well. 
And Wolfe grew up with a sense of entitlement so profound that each 
night when he got down on his knees to pray, he began by thanking 
God for the miraculous gift of his place of birth. ``I used to think 
of it every night,'' he said, as he sipped his tomato (``ta-MAH-to'') 
juice with a dash of salt and pepper. ``First, I thanked God for having 
been born in America, which was obviously the greatest country on 
earth. I was pretty dead right on that. And in what was obviously 
the greatest state, because more presidents came from Virginia than 
anywhere else. And from the greatest city in the greatest state in 
the greatest country, because it was the capital of Virginia. Just 
think of all the people not fortunate enough to be born in Richmond, 
Va.'' He paused a moment to contemplate that injustice for a moment 
and realized he had not fully conveyed his enthusiasm. ``Oh,'' he 
added, ``and I also thought I lived in the best location in the greatest 
city because from my window, when the state fair was in town, I could 
see all the fireworks. How many children could say that? I can see 
now that I had _ what's the word? _ literally an egocentric view of 
the world. But it wasn't all that far from the truth.'' Wolfe strayed 
from the steamy Eden of his youth, but his friends say that to understand 
his work _ the (dare one say?) cavalier detachment from the passing 
parade; the acerbic skewering of most elements of modernism from art 
to architecture; the conservatism about politics, art and race; the 
withering disdain for what he calls the think-alike ``intellectual 
etiquette'' of liberal Manhattan _ one need only think of Wolfe not 
as dandy or New Journalist or satirist, but as Virginian. ``It's what 
he's all about,'' said Ed Hayes, a Manhattan lawyer who says he is 
the model for Killian, the defense lawyer in Wolfe's first novel, 
``The Bonfire of the Vanities.'' ``Tom doesn't talk about this stuff 
publicly, but he has this Scotch-Irish sense of honor, of duty, of 
family, about masculinity. ``He's the grandson of a Confederate rifleman 
and grew up with the sense of the Lost Cause, of glorious doomed charges 
at Gettysburg, of a sense of personal honor and what constitutes masculinity 
that has largely been rejected by the urban intellectual elite of 
the Northeast.'' Of course, one person's noble lost cause is another's 
slaughterhouse over slavery. And Wolfe clearly sees the South more 
as something that shaped him than as something he is unduly taken 
with today. He may rhapsodize about his mother's iced tea with mint 
or the ``genteel Richmond accent'' he says is ``about as terrific 
as accents become.'' He may give concise voice to the Southern fixation 
on manners. (``I don't mind hypocrisy as long as courtesy comes with 
it.'') But despite his claim to being taken with Atlanta's ``hypomanic'' 
business culture and incessant chatter about being world-class, what 
he seems to like best about the South is what used to be there, like 
the view from his Richmond window or the seemingly genetic grace and 
courage of his mostly Southern flyboys in ``The Right Stuff.'' In 
the new book, he gives his one unrelievedly virtuous character, a 
young man named Conrad Hensley, a name he picked from his Shenandoah 
Valley past, and he dotes on the fading Old South grit of his embattled 
developer hero, Charlie Croker. But the go-go New South, where Southern 
Planters Bank and Trust Co. is now PlannersBanc, seems more grist 
for his mill than balm for his soul, which perhaps explains Wolfe's 
own red dog running headlong and armed toward the past, however uncharacteristic 
it might seem. ``The motor is more important than where the car left,'' 
he said of his own journey. ``One of my problems is that everything 
I know about Atlanta is in the book. There's nothing left. If I'm 
pontificating about the South and Atlanta, it's not from a very high 
pulpit.'' And while others have portrayed the book as a devastating 
evisceration of Atlanta's New South pretensions, he insists his only 
agenda is getting it right, from real-estate machismo to stud-farm 
machismo, from the delicate negotiations of race to the latest trophy-wife 
fashions in the golden era of ``perfect boys with breasts'' as the 
ideal body type for the '90s. ``The book isn't anti-Atlanta, and it's 
not pro-Atlanta, just as `Bonfire of the Vanities' wasn't anti-New 
York or pro-New York,'' he said. ``It's just Atlanta as near as I 
could get it. What I've always been swept up in is the great journey 
of journalism, of discovery, what I call the objectivity of egotism. 
It's always been more important to me to discover something new in 
what I'm writing about and put it into brilliant prose than to make 
any political point on earth.'' It was probably inevitable that Wolfe, 
after 11 years of work sandwiched around a 1996 heart attack that 
almost killed him, preferred to see the book as a triumph of craft 
rather than a grand vessel of significance. After all, he has been 
preaching the gospel of artful, imaginative reporting as high art, 
whether in fiction or nonfiction, since the 1960s. Critics can argue 
over whether he is a modern Dickens, Balzac or Zola or merely the 
possessor of perhaps the wittiest, most merciless, reportorial eyes 
of his time. But his second novel at least validates him as a player 
in both the New Journalism and the old fiction. ``It's probably foolish 
to say this, but I feel more fireproof now than I ever did,'' he said. 
``What's the old song? `They Can't Take That Away From Me'? It's how 
I feel.'' He is almost 70 now, a decade older than his book's Old 
South hero, who goes from a raging bull to a broken man as he turns 
60. And surely, a man with as acute an eye as Wolfe knows what a big 
target he has become with his grand pronouncements about the proper 
role of the novel, his Southern planter meets Savile Row attire, his 
artful dismantling of cultural icons and, perhaps most of all, his 
pitiless eye for the failures of the flesh, for broad-shouldered cast-off 
first wives, for wide-bottomed, fleshy-armed men. Indeed, ``A Man 
in Full'' at times reads like an ectomorph's manifesto in which only 
the slim survive. ``Of all the things written about me and this book, 
it's the adjective `spry' that really gets me,'' he said dolefully. 
``Not flexible, or supple, or strong. Spry. Someone really knows how 
to hurt a guy.'' These are ambiguous days for great Virginians, after 
all, as evidenced by the doings at Monticello. But for now, the food 
supply has not run out, Wolfe is contemplating a new novel having 
something to do with education, and all seems well as his publisher 
offloads Titanic-like mounds of ``A Man in Full,'' which has a 1.2 
million first printing, into bookstores this week. ``Oh, Wolfe,'' 
gushed one of the women of Madison Avenue as the white suit breezed 
by. ``I have to tell you, you look even better than your picture.'' 
``You're too kind,'' Tom Wolfe replied, smiling like a man in full, 
as he strolled jauntily down the avenue toward home. Finding Wolfe 
on the Web Tom Wolfe will read from ``A Man in Full'' Wednesday night 
at 6:30 at Town Hall, 123 West 43rd St., Manhattan. Audio of the reading 
will be available at 9:30 p.m. on The New York Times on the Web: www.nytimes.com/books. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>