<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981110.2000.0365 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Tony Kahn. Time is running out for Iraq. That 
was the message from Defense Secretary William Cohen today, and it 
was the least subtle suggestion during the current crisis that the 
United States is considering a military strike. Cohen emphasized that 
no decision has yet been made on launching an attack, but he added 
pointedly this can't go on forever. Texas Republican Kay Bailey Hutchison 
is one of 27 senators who have urged President Clinton to take necessary 
actions, including possible air and missile strikes to end Iraq's 
defiance of U.N. weapons inspections. Senator, is that still your 
advice? Do you believe that the time has run out on a diplomatic resolution? 
Yes, I do. I think that we have delayed and delayed and delayed, and 
I think it's important when America makes a threat that they follow 
through. That way, Saddam Hussein will know that we mean business 
and he must comply with the agreement he made. Are you, in suggesting 
that, representing your constituents on this matter as well? I think 
that a number of senators in a very bipartisan letter to the president 
has said it's really important that America be a staunch ally and 
a formidable enemy. And we cannot continue to threaten Saddam Hussein, 
who continues to defy the inspectors that have every access to his 
places where he's keeping weapons. He's defying the agreement that 
he made, and I think he's sticking his thumb in our eye, and I don't 
think we ought to sit back and take it. I guess what I'm asking is 
not whether the two parties in Congress agree that this is a good 
approach but whether the people that they're representing across the 
country also agree that now is the time for military action. There 
hasn't been any strong indication that the nation's insisting on that, 
is there? I think the nation is insisting that we keep our word. I 
think that we have been dilly-dallying with Saddam Hussein for a long 
time, and people's patience has worn thin, and particularly when all 
of us are at risk of chemical and biological weapons that there is 
a very good indication he is making. Well, other than simply proving 
to Saddam Hussein that the United States means business and can be 
pushed only so far, from a military point of view, what do you expect 
a strike of whatever kind would accomplish? Well, I would hope that 
the strike would go for the places where the inspectors have said 
he is making chemical and biological weapons. What if some of those 
bombs, as has been suggested, should land on some of those sites? 
Isn't it possible that could open a Pandora's box of its own kind 
and maybe create as much of a danger as not bombing them? Well, I 
would hope Saddam Hussein would consider that. What about the program 
itself of inspecting what Saddam Hussein has or does not have? That's 
been in effect for seven years. Do you think that that program was 
of any value whatsoever, given that an attack might wipe out all of 
its gains? Yes, I do think it was worthwhile, and I think the inspectors 
have given us much information. We cannot allow someone to make chemical 
and biological weapons when we know he has used those weapons on his 
own people and will clearly use them on other people to continue to 
do it. You say that there is a growing feeling of bipartisan support 
for some kind of military action. Would you be able to specify what 
kind of action that should be? There have been several options that 
have been floated in the press at least, one, a quick and as it were, 
dirty operation to get to eliminate some major strategic sites; another 
one, a much longer investment of time and material. I do think we 
need to try to take out the places where we believe he is making these 
weapons. But I also think a longer term investment in helping people 
who are willing to stand up to this dictator. I think we do need to 
support them, and I think we need to give them the help they need 
to take him down. The people of Iraq should not be suffering in this 
way, but I think we must make it very clear that it is Saddam Hussein 
who is hurting his own people; it is not outsiders. Senator, thank 
you very much for speaking with us. Thank you, Tony. Texas Republican 
Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison on the line from Texas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>