<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981110.2000.2019 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the first time ever, a foreigner has won the Irish Person of the 
Year Award. George Mitchell was honored yesterday for his role as 
peace broker in Northern Ireland. In accepting the award from Ireland's 
prime minister, the former U.S. senator said that every day, he prays 
that peace in Ireland will be maintained and that it's people will 
prosper. For Mitchell's prayers to be answered, Catholics and Protestants 
in the province will have to bridge the divide that caused the so-called 
troubles and 3600 deaths in the past 30 years. There may be no more 
effective place to build that bridge than in Northern Ireland's largely 
segregated workplaces. And the effort already has begun. The Fair 
Employment Act passed nine years ago requires companies to integrate 
their work force or face fines of more than $50,000. In the first 
part of her series from Northern Ireland, WORLD anchor Lisa Mullins 
visits a place where Protestants and Catholics are learning to work 
together whether they like it or not. To illustrate just how difficult 
it is to integrate the work force here in Northern Ireland, we came 
to this spot, Garvahee Road, in Portadown. Portadown is the birthplace 
of the Orange Wooder. That's the Protestant group that wants to keep 
Northern Ireland under British rule. Garvahee Road is where every 
year the Orange order holds its traditional unanous marches which 
have often provoked violence. The Orange order marchers are Protestant. 
This street is primarily Catholic. In fact, the flag of the Irish 
Republic in the south is waving right above me here on several street 
lights. Allster Carpet Mills is on Garvahee Road. The company has 
a predominantly Protestant work force, 87 percent, but now it's trying 
to recruit more Catholics. Here at Allster Carpet Mills, huge looms 
with spools the size of small beer barrels spin gold, red, and black 
carpets for casinos and hotels. Allster Carpet is considered a success 
story, although folks here admit they've got a ways to go. They want 
the work force on the factory floor to reflect the population in Portadown. 
In fact, it has to to comply with the Fair Employment Act. This means 
increasing the number of Catholic workers by 27 percent, and that 
will be a challenge, because even though the mills sit on a Catholic 
street, the company has a reputation of being a Protestant workplace. 
And Catholics and Protestants have a history of acrimony in Portadown. 
This is a very divided community. Carolyn Whiteside is the personnel 
manager at Allster Carpet Mills. We're asking people who have grown 
up and been educated within one community to come and work alongside 
people from another community, so it's not easy. You hear the same 
story from employers all over Northern Ireland. Many of them have 
had a nearly 100 percent Protestant or Catholic work force depending 
on where they're located and what work they do. For example, high 
tech companies are generally based in Protestant neighborhoods and 
as a result, attract a steady stream of Protestants, while most textile 
companies based in Catholic neighborhoods rely on Catholic labor. 
Bob Cooper is chairman of the Northern Ireland Fair Employment Commission. 
He said employers in the province have just naturally hired their 
own. We have tended to operate on a nepotistic basis. We have tended 
to give employment to our friends and relations. We have tended to 
look after the interest of our own community. Northern Ireland's work 
force is not separate but equal. Catholics have suffered more than 
Protestants under segregation. For every Protestant without a job, 
there are two unemployed Catholics. With those odds, you think it 
would be easy for employers, including Allster Carpet Mills, to bring 
more Catholics on board. But as personnel manager Carolyn Whiteside 
explains, the workplace is not immune to the ill will between Northern 
Ireland's Protestants and Catholics. If we go back ten years, we would 
have had flags flying on work stations. That has all stopped. What 
kind of flags? Union Jacks flying. And now we have just one flag flying 
from the main flagpole and there are new other emblems. Is that Union 
Jack the British flag that's flying outside now, is that considered 
an offensive symbol by some of your Catholic employees? It may be, 
yes. Flags cut to the heart of the divide here in Northern Ireland. 
The flag of the Irish Republic, the green, white, and orange stripes, 
is simply a proud emblem down in Dublin and Kilarney and the rest 
of the Republic of Ireland, but show that same flag up north, and 
it can become the emblematic equivalent of fighting words. It's all 
part of the complicated fabric of life in Northern Ireland. You see, 
a Catholic factory worker who pastes the green, white, and orange 
colors of the south on his locker isn't making a decorative statement. 
He's making a political one, showing Catholics support for a united 
Ireland. That kind of statement is now banned in workplaces like Allster 
Carpet Mills. By the same token, a Protestant worker who wouldn't 
have thought twice about wearing the British Union Jack across his 
tee-shirt now has to change his attire, for that Union Jack is also 
a political statement of Protestant loyalty to British rule. The idea 
of such that you leave all this at the gate and do your work. Allster 
Carpet Mills' deputy managing director James Crockett says most of 
the time, people do check their politics at the door. But during the 
marching season, every July when traditional Protestant paraders march 
down Garvahee Road right in front of Allster Carpet Mills, and police 
try to keep the peace, it's hard to keep the workplace neutral ground. 
People don't like going through police lines. It's intimidating. Both 
Protestants and Catholics don't like that because it is a situation 
where things can go wrong and we don't like having to ask people to 
come to work through that sort of situation. I grew up in the docks 
at Belfast. I grew up in a very Catholic background. I didn't meet 
a Protestant until I was ten years old. Billy Robinson's experience 
isn't unusual. In Belfast, you can grow up 100 yards from Protestant 
and never meet one. You go to school, the bank, the pub in your own 
neighborhood with your own kind. Now Billy Robinson is teaching people 
who grew up as insulated as he did how to change. He heads a program 
called Counteract which shows employers and employees how to work 
against sectarianism so they can comply with the Fair Employment law. 
But as employers and even shops stewards crack down on sectarianism, 
they're finding that doing the right thing can be lethal. A friend 
of mine shot threw the back going to work one night because he took 
a very strong position against within the workplace. And we have a 
number of people who were beaten up, threatened, and had to leave 
their jobs because they took a position against sectarianism. And 
this is basically a position that they're being asked to take. That's 
right. It will be a tall order to get these workers to embrace diversity 
in the workplace, a mantra of many American companies, but Billy Robinson 
will be happy if he can get people just to tolerate it. I hope I they 
will never change. But I understand where they come from. I understand 
the influences upon me. And it's the best we can actually hope to 
achieve. We will not change people. But as the man says, it's the 
first step in march of a thousand years, and we have to make that 
step. Some people say the first step should be made in Northern Ireland's 
schools which are segregated until college. Until 1989, the curriculums 
were different with the Catholic schools stressing the humanities 
and Protestant schools, math and science. The result some say is a 
segregated work force. Just, tell me what a heart does. Keeps you 
alive. All right. Runs your body. Can you tell me what lungs do? Today, 
Northern Ireland has a standardized curriculum for all schools. Couple 
that with the new moves toward peace and you get a newly found optimism. 
Take for instance these eight-year-olds at the Holy Child Catholic 
School in mostly Catholic West Belfast. Unlike their parents, these 
people see all fields open to them, including the sciences. And I 
want to be an astronaut. So are you studying hard to become an astronaut? 
Mm-hmm. What are you doing for it? I'm going to write a letter to 
NASA on the computer. What are you going to ask them? I'm going to 
ask if can I have some information about space and what at the moment. 
Connor and many of his classmates have better job prospects than their 
parents did. Joanne McPaulen, a Catholic mother, went to this school 
during what she calls the height of the troubles. Now her daughter 
is a second grader here. When I was at school, we were segregated. 
I mean, this is a Catholic area. But we didn't go beyond that boundary, 
you know. You were frightened. I think the children - I don't even 
think about that anymore. It's always in the back of our minds because 
we grew up with it. But the children don't have that fear and have 
the troubles have stopped, and they're all looking forward to what 
they can get and a better education. And now all the jobs are open 
to them. It's true that Catholics who once felt the brunt of discrimination 
now have more choices than ever, but there's still a problem. Northern 
Ireland's economy is ailing. Many companies have laid off workers. 
When they begin recruiting again, mostly Catholic companies are being 
told to hire Protestants, and mostly Protestant companies must hire 
Catholics. There is no quota system, people here say, and there is 
no reverse discrimination. They see that as a failure of affirmative 
action in the United States. But the law is clear in Northern Ireland: 
Make the workplace reflect the region. Esmond Burney is one of the 
newly elected members of the Northern Ireland Assembly. He says his 
mostly Protestant constituents are resistant. It would certainly make 
my job much easier if I could show to my supporters that they were 
getting something out of the process as well, that they weren't always 
giving grind, because as you see across the world and to some degree 
in American politics at the moment, when you introduce legislation 
to deal with anti-discrimination situations, eventually a majority 
group may begin to feel that itself is hard done by and then you get 
a backlash, and you may get it here as well. Companies under orders 
to integrate can't do much to prevent such resentment, but there is 
something they can do as the first place Catholics and Protestants 
may even encounter one another. Businesses can set up shop on neutral 
ground. Here at the Short Brothers training shop, young employees 
learn the craft of building airplanes. Short Brothers is Northern 
Ireland's biggest private employer that's been building planes since 
the beginning of the century. In fact, its first contract was with 
the Wright brothers. Globally, the company is considered a pioneer 
in aviation. Locally, it's considered a pioneer in fair employment. 
Short Brothers has traditionally been Protestant. It's main operations 
are in East Belfast where many Catholics are afraid to go. So with 
an eye recruiting more Catholics, Short Brothers has built this training 
center in the heart of Belfast which is more neutral territory. Here, 
Catholic and Protestant teenagers wearing goggles and blue work jackets 
are taught their craft together. Can we look at the angle bracket? 
We want to put one of our components up against it. See if she's going 
to set vertically. Short Brothers is considered a success story, but 
like Allster Carpet Mills in Portadown, it's had its problems. Catholics 
who work in Short Brothers factory in Protestant East Belfast have 
been threatened. Some have even been killed. Isolated incidents but 
ones nobody forgets. And even with Short Brothers' investment in fair 
employment, the company is still only 15 percent Catholic. At Allster 
Carpet Mills, Carolyn Whiteside says the firm wants to get beyond 
Catholics versus Protestants, beyond the symbolism of Catholic Garvahee 
Road and Protestant East Belfast. People come from different backgrounds. 
They've got different beliefs. But at the end of the day, we want 
people to come in and work alongside each other. It's a constant refrain. 
Most people want to work together and they want to be integrated without 
quotas. But they also want to live in the neighborhoods they grew 
up in, go to school in those neighborhoods, and work in them. Most 
important, they want to be safe. You could say the Catholics and Protestants 
of Northern Ireland want to move forward into an era of peace while 
keeping the values they forged during harder times. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>