<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981110.2000.1248 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Tony Kahn. The United States will provide another 
$10 million in aid for the victims of Hurricane Mitch. That money 
is in addition to the $70 million Washington had already pledged. 
Perhaps even more vital to Honduras, Nicaragua, Guatemala, and El 
Salvador, the massive assistance is debt reduction. The four Central 
American nations carry a collective debt of more than $16 billion. 
France and other European governments today announced plans to ease 
Central America's debt burdens, but Lester Thurow, a professor of 
management and economics at MIT thinks debt relief is a bad idea. 
Well, if you take a country that's borrowed a lot of money now, of 
course, some of this money is borrowed by the country and some is 
borrowed by individuals, and some is borrowed by corporations, but, 
you know, the country in some sense has a collective obligation to 
pay it back. You can get countries in debt to the point where realistically, 
they're never going to get out and they're going to spend all their 
time trying to pay off debts. And in that sense, it's exactly like 
a family who's gotten themselves into too much credit card debt and 
can't dig their way out. The problem, of course, is if you're going 
to give debt release, somebody loses the money, they don't pay. And 
then the question is, Who is that somebody? And, of course, if you're 
a banker, you don't want it to be you, and so anytime you do debt 
relief, somebody ends up taking a loss. And the question is: Who's 
going to take the loss? Because if it was your money that had been 
lent to Latin America or anybody else, you wouldn't want somebody 
doing debt relief because it would mean you wouldn't get your money 
back. But I guess the question is: Would you get your money back anyway 
if you basically put your money on an economy that isn't really producing 
very much... You may have a chance to get some of it back as long 
as you keep the debts there, right? You have no chance once it's given 
- essentially wiped out in debt relief. So is it your suggestion, 
if I get you right, that it's important for debt relief to be considered 
very carefully because otherwise you take away an incentive for the 
nation's economy? I don't think it's so much an incentive, but it's 
the politics of it. Why would anybody give debt relief? The people 
who put their money in the country don't want debt relief. And where 
does the political, in some sense, muscle come from for debt relief? 
It isn't going to come just because we feel good and want to help 
people in Latin America or wherever else, because that's kind of a 
generalized, vague kind of thing, and the guys who have their money 
at risk in Latin America, they want those debts there forever. Maybe 
you can't collect them but it's better to have them and try to collect 
them than to admit that they don't exist. Because why should you give 
your money to Latin America? Well, now that you've handled the financial 
arguments, what about the moral arguments? Don't you think that maybe 
you should take a little pressure off of this economy that can't produce 
anything now anyway? I don't think the moral arguments really fly 
either because, hey, these are big people, smart people. And it's 
like the family that gets into trouble on credit card debt. Who's 
to blame? The family or the credit card companies that advertise and 
make it easy to get credit card debt, right? Well, in some fundamental 
sense, it's the family and not the credit card companies. Now the 
only argument for doing it - and I think it's a very powerful argument 
- is very different, and that is we need success in economic Latin 
America. It's important to the American economy, and it's important 
to the world we live in. And therefore, it's worth paying the price 
of getting rid of the debt to generate an environment where they have 
some chance of being economically successful. Now presumably, while 
you're saying all of this, you're still having images in your mind 
of the devastation that has been leaked on Central America where perhaps 
75 percent of the infrastructure of the country is gone. Doesn't that 
sort of practically speaking make what you're talking about impossible? 
The problem with that, and it's a crude way to do it, is what - You 
know, if you're asking the United States taxpayer to pay the bill, 
what you're doing is you're taking money away from middle class people 
in America and giving it to rich people in Latin America because debt 
relief goes to the rich. The poor guy who has his home in the village 
flooded by mud out of some volcano, he doesn't have any debts. Debt 
relief goes to the wrong people. It goes to basically wealthy people 
in Latin America as opposed to poor people in Latin America. So if 
you want to help the poor, let's do, you know, flood relief, volcano 
relief, all of those kind of things. But debt relief doesn't get to 
the people you want to get to. And I think, you know, the real issue 
here in Latin America in the long run is can these societies get themselves 
organized to get a period of sustained economic growth. And, you know, 
hurricanes are bad things but they're random things. The big issue 
in Latin America is not Mother Nature. The big issue in Latin America 
is human beings. So if the investment that was made in Central America 
basically did very little for the average Central American citizen 
to begin with, then will not relieving the pressure of having to pay 
back that debt make it even worse for the people of Central America? 
Well, the answer is: For somebody. You know, the biggest part of the 
debt relief goes to the wealthy people who borrowed the money. It 
doesn't go to this poor village peasant that you feel sorry for when 
you see them on the TV set. It doesn't go to the right people. So 
in a sense, it's going to make very little difference one way or the 
other... Think of that kid in the village and there was a dramatic 
picture in the "New York Times" of some kid in the village walking 
around in the mud looking for his parents. It isn't going to help 
that kid. Lester Thurow is a professor of management and economics 
at MIT. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>