<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981110.2000.0659 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Germany's chancellor announced today or acknowledged that there is 
unease about his government's plan to relocate back in Berlin next 
year. To some, Gerhard Schroeder said Berlin still sounds too Prussian, 
too authoritarian, too centralized. But he added, "Our vision of a 
new center republic stands as the exact opposite of this." One example 
of Schroeder's new center republic is its approach to immigrants. 
Schroeder has promised to make it easier for the seven million foreigners 
living in Germany to become citizens by reducing the weight from 15 
years to eight. From Berlin, THE WORLD's Margaret Evans reports on 
the evolving definition of what it means to be German. The Ubon or 
overhead train that runs every few minutes above the Berlin City district 
of Kroitzberg. Sturdy and efficient, it's undeniably German. But the 
people who ride the route daily call it the Orient Express, and the 
city block spreading out below it are known as Little Istanbul crowded 
with kabob shops, spice markets, and street vendors playing Turkish 
music. There are two millions Turks in Germany, 300,000 of them in 
Berlin. They're the country's largest ethnic minority. Many arrived 
in the 1960s as gastobiter or guest workers who stayed on. Today, 
their children and their children consider Germany home. Grabbing 
a bite to eat at his favorite kabob stand, 18-year-old Ufek Tacaro, 
who was born in Berlin, says he's proud of his heritage, but he says 
its his parents who dream of Turkey, not him. When I go to Turkey, 
I want to go back to Berlin, I miss Berlin. I have no connection to 
Turkey. But Germany's ethnicity based citizenship laws have kept many 
so-called foreigners from feeling a part of German society. They grow 
up here, are educated here, pay taxes here, but they still can't vote, 
and it's often hard for them to get jobs. Red Cookman is a political 
scientist who studies race relations at the Berlin Science Center. 
Almost all of the migrants in Germany are not citizens, so as an effect, 
they're not active in political parties or they're not in the police 
force. They're not in the military. They're not teachers in the school 
systems. Gerhard Schroeder's Social Democrat government is on the 
verge of changing those laws, making it far easier for foreigners 
to become full citizens. But it won't just apply to Turks. There are 
sizable Bosnian, Greek, and Italian minorities here as well. Jim Ostmeer 
is one of just two German parliamentarians of Turkish descent. Sitting 
in his office under a picture of his hero, Martin Luther King, he 
says he was inspired to join political life by the American civil 
rights movement. Ostmeer says he still remembers the first time he 
felt himself estranged from the country he was born in. On a school 
trip to England, he was turned back because he had a Turkish passport, 
not a German one like his classmates. For the first time in my life, 
I understood I'm foreign, I don't belong to this country, I don't 
belong even when I'm born here, even when I talk the same dialect 
that people in that region are talking. I'm different. Ostmeer says 
the new laws will change the face of Germany forever. From this point 
on, we belong to this country, we're citizens of this country, and 
I'm very sure the new generation of Germans will grow up together 
with non-Germans, and both of them will feel as sharing the same citizenship. 
Germany's ideas of what it means to be German are tied inexorably 
to its past. A 1913 law established the blood or ethnic based view 
of citizenship. During World War II, the Nazis developed their own 
extreme interpretation of that law. And after the war, Germany kept 
it in place to keep faith with German minorities in Eastern Europe 
cut off by the iron curtain, offering the right to immediate citizenship 
to any German descendants regardless of when or where they were born. 
The end of the Cold War and the rise of a new political class have 
made way for the profound shift that's taking place in German society. 
Still, there's no doubt it will take time for Germans to adjust. Even 
back in Kroitzberg where Germans live side by side with Turks, many 
Germans are wary about the new citizenship laws. Waiting for a kabob, 
Melanie is a 26-year-old student who thinks foreigners are being given 
an advantage by being allowed to keep their dual citizenship. I think 
a foreigner should decide whether he wants to stay in Germany or in 
Turkey and then take the nationality of that nation. So I'm against 
the change because you don't know which country they're a member of. 
East Germans are also expected to have greater problems dealing with 
the changes. There was little immigration to the east during the Cold 
War years, and they're still unused to the sight of foreigners. Parliamentarian 
Jim Ostmeer says he's under no illusions. He admits it will take time. 
It is still very unusual that a person who is called Jim Ostmeer is 
not only a German but is a member of the German parliament. So it 
will take a long time till Germany accepts a person like me not only 
cleaning the streets. But he also says that this is just the beginning 
and that once Germany finally accepts that it is a country of immigration, 
it can move on to insuring that minorities in the country have the 
same kinds of rights to education, religion, and political life that 
regular Germans do. Reporting for THE WORLD, I'm Margaret Evans in 
Berlin. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>