<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981110.2000.2989 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Tony Kahn. The latest crime figures for South 
Africa showed the country is living a nightmare: murders, attempted 
murders, and violent robberies have all risen. For anyone who lives 
in Johannesburg, that means daily existence characterized by fear. 
But as reporter Jeremy Vine tells us, at least one South African entrepreneur 
is making out like a bandit. Meet Robert Noones. The man with the 
drill is one of the few people who have been doing well out of South 
Africa's appalling crime wave. Today, he's putting up an electric 
fence at the home of Lindsey Folds, who was burgled while sleeping. 
This is lounge. They broke in through the right-hand window, took 
the stereo, amplifier. The bull terrier was asleep through all this. 
yes. why? They're actually gassing the animals. On the right-hand 
side here is the spare room where my 6-1/2 daughter sleeps. They actually 
came into this room and took out a television while she was fast asleep. 
The gassing of guard dogs is now common practice, Robert Noones says. 
And had Lindsey woken up... She would have definitely been shot. Nowadays 
if you're asleep and you do wake up, they'll just shoot you. There 
were 11-1/2 thousand murders in South Africa in the first half of 
this year. The murder rate is now six times America's and rising. 
Many whites believe the crime is partly revenge for years of hard 
line white governments, and partly a sign of frustration among black 
South Africans who feel Nelson Mandella has not given them what they 
want, and so they will take it with a gun. Robert Noones sells a variety 
of devices to respond with. This is your shocking one. How many people 
have these? The majority of people carry them around. The majority? 
Yeah. What's this piece of equipment here in this box? What it does 
is you put a cartridge on the front and it's got two mini harpoons. 
Two harpoons? Yes. Barb press on the butts and they shoot out 15 feet. 
What is the name of this? That's a spitting cloth. And this stuff 
is all legal, is it? Everything is. You only have to harpoon people 
in Johannesburg. Well, you don't get much more exotic than electrified 
harpoons but the fact is if you take this house in Windsor in Johannesburg, 
for example, there is razor wire all down the left hand side. The 
windows have burglar bars behind them, and then above my head, there 
is a light that reacts to movement. But still, the owner here is living 
in fear, and she sent for Robert Noones. I'm just wiring the passive 
infrared over here. Improving the picture is not as simple as some 
whites make out. The woman who lives here is black. Her name is Pinky 
and she's part of a new black middle class which is equally terrified 
of violent crime. The thing is they could squeeze in a very small 
space and between the burglars. Between the burglar bars. yes. They'd 
have to be very thin to do that. Yeah. They could be. Yeah, I think 
so. Do you think there's a level of paranoia in this city? Oh, if 
they can break in, and they'll find you, and they'll look for something 
you don't have it, they'll kill you. Meanwhile, Robert Noones is climbing 
a ladder to install movement detectors claiming as he works near the 
ceiling that he wouldn't live in Johannesburg. I've actually moved 
the reason being I'm sick and tired of people breaking into my car. 
It is excruciating stuff for those who hoped for something much better 
for South Africa. By now, Robert Noones has turned Lindsey's home 
into Ft. Knox. Rob, while you're hammering here, just tell me what 
you're fitting in this house. I'm putting an exterior electric fence, 
perimeter exterior beams, your exterior microwave passives, passive 
infrareds in every single room. You have glass on response. On response? 
yes. You're obviously getting rich doing all this but does it make 
you sad as well? Very, very sad, honestly. It's a pity that the country 
is turning out this way. For THE WORLD, this is Jeremy Vine in Johannesburg, 
South Africa. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>