<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981110.0500.1693 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Turning now to Malaysia and the trial of Malaysia's former Deputy 
Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim, a police witness told the court today 
that his colleagues pressured two people into retracting their allegations 
of sexual misconduct against Mr. Anwar. We have details from Maggie 
Lee in Kuala Lumpur. Assistant superintendent Abdul Aziz of the Police 
Special Branch told the court that police carried out a so-called 
turning over operation to get two witnesses to change their original 
stories concerning Mr. Anwar. Umi Hafida, the sister of Mr. Anwar's 
private secretary, and Aziza Anbubaka, his former driver, had accused 
Mr. Anwar of sodomy and also of having an affair with his private 
secretary's wife. Mr. Anwar is on trial on four counts of corruption. 
He's accused of having used his position to stop a police investigation 
into allegations of his sexual misconduct. Mr. Anwar also faces further 
trials on one other count of corruption and five charges of sodomy. 
He says he is innocent and that he is a victim of a high level political 
conspiracy. Mr. Abdul Aziz said the special branch used several approaches, 
including scaring and threatening the two simple target. He also said 
that witnesses were interrogated continuously and other techniques 
were used to confuse them. At one point, the police official demonstrated 
the procedure in court, suddenly shouting in a threatening manner 
at the defense counsel. Mr. Abdul Aziz said he was ordered to get 
a retraction from Umi Hafida but he had difficulty in doing so because 
she was very firm in her original stand. He called her information 
concerning Mr. Anwar rational and consistent, adding he felt that 
the allegations against Mr. Anwar should have been further investigated. 
Police documents introduced early in the trial cast doubts on claims 
of sexual misconduct by Mr. Anwar. During a recess in the court proceedings, 
Mr. Anwar told reporters that Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad had 
lost the support of the Malaysian people as well as international 
leaders. Mr. Anwar's trial comes as Malaysia is preparing to host 
the Asia Pacific Economic Coordination Summit next week. This case 
has sparked international concern about human rights in Malaysia. 
And several leaders, including President Clinton, has said as a result, 
they will not hold the meetings with Dr. Mahathir. This is Maggie 
Lee for VOA News in Kuala Lumpur. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>