<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981110.1600.2689 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is VOA News Now. The American landscape is changing as cities 
sprawl into the countryside gobbling up farmland and open space and 
filling them with highways, traffic congestion, housing developments, 
and office parks. In our series on the sprawling of America, VOA's 
Roseanne Skirbel turns her attention to a bedroom community not far 
from the nation's capital. This is the center of sprawl. There are 
no sidewalks, no way to get around except by car. Both sides of this 
six-lane highway are filled with strip mall after strip mall, fast 
food restaurants, retail clothing stores, supermarkets, and gasoline 
stations. Welcome to Waldorf, Maryland, a noncommunity 40 kilometers 
east of the nation's capital with no identity, aside from uncontrolled 
development, traffic congestion, and a paved landscape. This is the 
downtown of this urban area of almost 60,000 people, and there's nowhere 
you could take your kid for a stroll and buy an ice cream cone. You 
can't walk down the street and buy a quart of milk. You take your 
life in your hands to walk down this area because it's built for cars. 
That's Joy Oates, regional director of the Sierra Club, the nation's 
largest environmental organization which recently named Washington 
one of the most sprawl threatened cities in the United States. In 
a subdivision a few kilometers from Waldorf, Amy Frizee is feeling 
the consequences of controlled sprawl. She says sprawl has become 
an unpleasant fact of daily life. A typical shopping trip will involve 
six to seven times getting yourself and your children in and out of 
the car, buckled in and out of the car seats, in and out of the stroller 
in order to simply run errands. Amy Frizee says a public hearing on 
a proposed new highway around Waldorf motivated her to get politically 
involved against sprawl. Our local elected officials stood up in front 
of 400 people from the community and said, "This is our solution for 
your problem which is getting to work." But Amy Frizee, who leads 
the protest against what's called the Walford bypass, say the proposed 
bypass is not a solution. She says the highway is a symbol of bad 
planning and would subject 150,000 more heptires of now open land 
around Waldorf to unwanted development. What the community wants, 
she says, is not another super highway but repair and upgrading of 
the existing highway. You can maintain access to business while you 
have through lanes for high speed traffic. You can separate the local 
traffic and the through traffic. And what that allows is for people 
who live here to perform our daily lives easier, faster, and much 
more safely. Kenneth White is a proponent of the Waldorf bypass. As 
chairman of the Transportation Committee for the local Chamber of 
Commerce, he says the proposed super highway would satisfy both the 
need for safety and for business development. It will only be about 
three places, perhaps four if you count each end of that bypass where 
traffic can either enter or exit. Right now, we've got a tremendous 
amount of traffic, big 18 wheelers and so on that come barreling through 
the Waldorf area, and it's a very dangerous situation. Amy Frizee 
says she is not anti-car but uncontrolled sprawl has brought Waldorf 
congested roads, overcrowded schools, to declining scholastic test 
scores, tight resources, and higher taxes. Because of the efforts 
of Amy Frizee and her supporters, no decision on building the bypass 
will be made for at least 18 months, as the county rates for the recommendations 
of yet another citizens' advisory group charged with studying the 
matter. I'm Roseanne Skirbel. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>