<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981110.1600.0647 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The government of Iran recently announced drastic measures to cover 
the government's budget deficit. The deficit has been rising in recent 
years because of a drop in earnings from oil, Iran's major export. 
Iran's economic problems have led to pressure for economic reform, 
especially since the election of President Mohammad Khatami 18 months 
ago. However, change is slow. VOA Middle East correspondent Scott 
Bob visited Iran recently and has this report on the economic situation. 
While Iranians debate sometimes heatedly the merits of political and 
social reform, they seem virtually unanimous on one topic: the economy 
is not good and life is getting harder. One of the reasons for the 
loss of buying power for the average Iranian is inflation, which is 
due primarily to the government's budget deficit. The deficit is expected 
to reach ten percent of the total budget this year. It is blamed on 
the low price for oil, which provides Iran's government with 85 percent 
of its foreign exchange earnings. Professor Aliyad Rashidi is an economics 
professor who recently wrote a book on the Iranian economy. He says 
the Iranian government in the short-term is facing considerable difficulties. 
There is no solution for them in the forefront, so the government 
is trying to borrow some money from the Central Bank and also sell 
some oil in future markets, and also reduce some of the current expenses 
hopefully to raise enough money to repay the salaries of the government 
employees and also implement some of the projects which are underway. 
Professor Rashidi says the economic problems have been aggravated 
by inefficiency in the public sector. The Iranian economy is dominated 
by the government. Economic reform and the privatization of some government 
controlled companies is a hotly debated topic. The government still 
believes it should control strategic sectors like the petroleum and 
communications industries. However, since the election of reform-minded 
president Mohammad Khatami, it has taken some small steps in the economic 
area. Ahmed Nasidi is vice president of the first publicly owned company 
in the petroleum sector called the Oil Industry Investment Company. 
His company is formed in nearly one dozen subsidiaries to produce 
products needed in the oil industry. Many of the companies are joint 
ventures with foreign and multinational corporations primary from 
Europe. Some of the ventures benefit from tax holidays and other incentives. 
Others are under what are called buy back arrangements where the foreign 
partner is allowed to sell the product of the venture until its original 
investment is recovered. But Mr. Nasidi says the Iranian government 
is moving with caution because of political sensitivities concerning 
the oil industry. The new government which President Khatami, they 
think that they have to privatize as much as they can, OK? And to 
have a government to just guide the industry not oppress the industry, 
that's how they think. So I think that if they want to do it step 
by step but all industry, of course. It's a political issue. So you 
have to go step by step very quiet and to see clearly what you are 
doing. Mr. Nasidi says his company would like to enter into partnership 
with U.S. companies, but these have been reluctant to do so because 
of the poor relations between the governments of Iran and the United 
States. With prospects not excellent for oil prices and a new foreign 
investment in the short term, Professor Rashidi says the Iranian government 
needs to take several major steps to bolster the economy. The first 
step he says is to open the door to private investors. The second, 
he says, is to get rid of the numerous government sanctioned monopolies. 
Many of these, he says, are religious foundations that control entire 
industries and make huge profits but pay no taxes. He says that as 
a result, the government loses as much as 40 percent of its potential 
tax revenue. Finally, Professor Rashidi says the government could 
improve the economy by attacking waste and by appointing officials 
who have economic experience rather than merely good political credentials. 
He says this will bring new blood into government. I think these three 
steps will, if taken together, I think will give us a chance to start 
the process of economic, social, and political reform. Of course, 
it will take a lot of time, but I think if there is a political will, 
I think we are not going to have much problem. Economic observers 
note many Iranians still are nationalistic about economic policy, 
and they are sensitive to perceived foreign domination. They note 
that the political reform movement is much stronger than the economic 
reform movement, and some of the strongest reformists still favor 
a highly centralized economy. As a result, many predict economic stagnation 
is likely to continue in Iran until a stronger consensus emerges for 
economic change. They worry that if this course is not corrected in 
time, it could pose a threat to some of the leading advocates of political 
reform. Scott Bob, VOA News, Teheran. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>