<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981110.0500.2917 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Growing up on a farm in the Midwestern state of Iowa, folk singer 
and songwriter Susan Warner learned to play guitar. Leaving Iowa's 
wide open spaces behind, she moved East and earned a degree in classical 
music at the respected Temple University in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
Oh, but it was back to folk music when Warner was recruited to play 
on national concert tours with people like Joan Armtrading and Richard 
Thompson. She's recently released her fourth solo album, and VOA's 
Doug Levine caught up with Susan Warner on her current tour to tell 
us more. It's been a busy year for Susan Warner. Since her appearance 
at the Newport Folk Festival in Rhode Island last summer, she's traveled 
to more than 25 cities coast to coast in support of her new album, 
"Time Between Trains." The tour will continue until after the new 
year. So just who is coming out to see her concerts? Usually I get 
taxpayers, you know, the responsible people, you know. I've been thinking 
of doing something drastic, some kind of bodily disfigurement to broaden 
my demo but mostly, you know, taxpaying people who read the newspaper, 
most of the sections of the newspaper, in fact. They don't just stop 
at the sports page but they read, you know, they read the business 
section. That's kind of - Yeah, they read the business section, too. 
Some of those people come. When she wasn't on stage, Susan found time 
to put together her new CD at Love Shack studio in Nashville. She 
says it was a great experience with some of Nashville's finest back 
up musicians. The players were national cats and they're really - 
They don't come in and play a separate track, separate from other 
people. It's much more interactive, much more like sitting around 
on the front porch. That's the national component that I really like. 
These musicians are spontaneous. They make stuff up on the spot. I 
think we really got good pictures of live performances instead of 
things that you feel is scripted. On songs like "Petaluma Afternoons," 
Susan Warner displays her passion for pop and jazz, as well as folk. 
Warner sees folk music as a reflection of people's lives and the world 
around them. Hopefully folk music can stay in the center that people 
are thinking about and continue to be some kind of agitating force. 
I think that's what folk music should be, some kind of agitating force. 
You know, there should be some element or some ability to shock you 
or upset you, Susan Warner's latest album, "Time Between Trains," 
marks her debut on New York based Bottom Line Records. Future tour 
dates include concerts in Kansas, Arkansas, Oklahoma, Kentucky, Michigan, 
and Illinois. I'm Doug Levin. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>