<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981110.0500.1077 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Are you enjoying school? Yeah. why? Because I like learning. Good 
for you. That's VOA's Andy Barreck talking to children on the playground 
at a school in Northern Virginia in the eastern United States. Do 
you speak Spanish? Yeah. Do you know there are a lot of people who 
do not speak English in the school? How does everybody communicate? 
That's a hard question. I think you have to tell - If they don't speak 
English, one that speak your language and then that person, if he 
speaks English, he tells somebody else. That's Barcroft Elementary 
School in Arlington, Virginia where 75 percent of the students are 
children of immigrants. Their parents came from Asia, Africa, and 
Latin America, and there are immigrant families like them in regions 
all over across the United States. Andy Barreck visited Barcroft and 
another Virginia school to find out how the children are learning. 
Educators have a category for these children. They're on the Students 
With Limited English Proficiency or LEP. About 50 percent of the nation's 
schools, kindergarten through 12th grade, have LEP students. States 
with large immigrant populations obviously have high LEP enrollments 
like California, where 90 percent of the schools have LEP students. 
American schools essentially offer two methods of teaching these students: 
academic instruction in their native language for at least two years 
before they're required to learn in English. That's known as bilingual 
education. The other and more commonly used teaching method is called 
immersion. At Barcroft Elementary in Arlington, Virginia, the kindergarten 
teacher, known to the children as Miss Childress, explains how she 
uses immersion. The kids learn by example. They learn by watching 
the other children. When they see other children all going to do something, 
they know that's what they're supposed to be doing. And a lot of them, 
you know, throw out one word answers to questions here and there, 
and they start just picking up commonly used words. So that's really 
the beginning of how it happens. So you don't need to know another 
language? They didn't hire Miss Childress because she spoke three 
different languages? No, not at all, not at all. And really, that's, 
you know - Our goal is to integrate them into English and into, you 
know, the classroom with all the English speakers. And if we were, 
you know, speaking a different language with them all the time or 
translating things constantly, it would take a lot longer. And when 
they're just immersed into it, they seem to pick it up pretty quickly. 
Dozens of languages are heard on the playground, but that doesn't 
intimidate Barcroft principal Marion Hewey Guy. The third, fourth, 
and sixth graders are excellent translators for me. There are so many 
languages in the school, and so I know all of the children, I know 
who speaks the language. And so when I need a child to speak a different 
language for me, I will just get them because I'm not bilingual. On 
the playground, a third grader named Brittany offers to translate 
for a Salvadoran girl named Madelaine. Britney, do you help this young 
lady here? Yeah. Hi. What's your name. Madelaine. Madelaine. A little. 
A little, boco. Britney, how do you help Madelaine? When we're doing 
our work, she doesn't like understand English words on the piece of 
paper, so she says, "Can you help me with these?" And I go, "OK." 
Very good, very good. Yeah, she's the student in my classroom that 
doesn't speak any English. So team work. But give her six months and 
you'd be surprised how well she'll be able to speak and understand 
the language. Takes about that long. That's Shirley Stoval, a third 
grade teacher at Barcroft Elementary in Arlington, Virginia. In nearby 
Alexandria, Virginia at Polk Elementary School, 40 different languages 
are spoken, and LEP students make up 25 percent of the school population. 
Polk principal Mildred Kruse Fridman says her goal for these students 
is proficiency, not just conversational English in the school yard. 
We have people saying, "Well, they can play together. They know what 
words to use." Sure they do, but the type of language that's used 
in the playground is very different than the type of language that 
you use in textbooks, that the teacher uses in preparation for class. 
And this takes time. This takes at least six to seven years. But LEP 
students in Virginia won't have six or seven years. State education 
officials have already scheduled standardized tests in English for 
these students in the year 2001. Schools have been warned they may 
lose state accreditation if 30 percent or more of the LEPs fail the 
tests. Loss of accreditation could lead to a state take over of a 
school. But educators at Polk and Barcroft Elementary Schools are 
confident most LEP students won't fail. And they see the state's new 
get tough policy as part of a welcomed trend in the United States 
to make schools accountable for all students. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>