<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981110.0500.1843 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Indonesia's top lawmaking body began its special session today considering 
political reforms meeting amid tight security in Jakarta. Lawmakers 
hope to pass electoral reforms in time for balloting next year. But 
at the opening of the four-day session, the assembly speaker called 
for democratic reforms. We have more from Jenny Grant in the Indonesian 
capital. In his opening address to the People's Consultative Assembly, 
House Speaker Halmoko said constitutional change is the only way to 
obtain a new democracy. Speaker Halmoko told the assembly the Indonesian 
people are demanding reform. The House Speaker, who was appointed 
by former President Joharto Lapir called for an end to Suharto era 
laws that gave the president sweeping powers. He also urged a term 
limit on the presidency. Former President Joharto served for more 
than three decades. Mr. Halmoko also declared that Indonesians will 
not accept a government that rises from anarchy. Mr. Halmoko warned 
the 1,000 assembly members against the dangers of what he called the 
euphoria of freedom. Former authoritarian President Suharto stepped 
down from power in May following match riots. His successor, President 
B.J. Habibie, has implemented some promised reforms such as loosening 
tight control over the media and the economic infrastructure. Outside 
the meeting, hundreds of protesters blocked a tow road in front of 
the parliament building demanding the assembly bring Mr. Suharto to 
justice. Tohapa Dringso from West Java says the assembly should investigate 
Mr. Suharto's wealth and put him on trial for corruption. Twenty thousand 
soldiers and police were deployed near the parliament and throughout 
the city Tuesday to stop demonstrators from getting close to the meeting 
and to prevent violence. Helicopters circled ahead and a water cannon 
was on standby on the grounds of the assembly building. Students stayed 
away from the sensitive parliament area all morning. Only a few hundred 
gathered at the University of Indonesia. The China town area of North 
Jakarta was quiet as most ethnic Chinese businessmen elected to close 
their shops for the three-day assembly. The Japanese International 
School was closed. School officials said they feared demonstrations. 
Students at other international schools have been told to bring overnight 
bags in case tensions on the street escalated into unrest. This is 
Jenny Grant reporting for VOA News, Jakarta. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>