<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981110.0500.0339 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Japan's Prime Minister, Keizo Obuchi, is set to begin a three-day 
visit to Russia tomorrow including, he hopes, a meeting with President 
Boris Yeltsin. Among the topics for discussion will be the long sought 
conclusion of a World War II peace treaty between the two countries 
and their long-standing dispute over islands in the northern Pacific 
Ocean. Details from Chris Simkins in Hong Kong. Japanese Prime Minister 
Keizo Obuchi makes a visit to Russia this week but with Russian President 
Boris Yeltsin weakened by illness and so little time set aside for 
direct talks between the two leaders, some analysts wonder the visit 
even if Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov, who has taken over some day-to-day 
operations, has to stand in for Mr. Yeltsin. Political analyst Thomas 
Landoff says whether or not any major breakthroughs are made, Prime 
Minister Obuchi's visit to Moscow is worthwhile. I think there's a 
very vibrant exchange of news and ideas on the whole spectrum of a 
relationship between Russia and Japan. And I think this has been, 
yes, a step forward. A key issue to be discussed during Mr. Obuchi's 
visit is the dispute over four islands in rich fishing grounds in 
the Pacific Ocean. The islands are known by the Japanese as the northern 
territories and the southern curaos by the Russians. The islands which 
lie just north of Japan's northern most island of Hokkaido were occupied 
by Russian soldiers after World War II. Japan and Russia, then the 
Soviet Union, never signed a formal peace treaty to end the war. The 
islands are a stumbling block in the way of finally reaching a pact. 
Some analysts doubt whether Mr. Obuchi will return to Japan with anything 
new on the islands issue, but analyst Thomas Landoff says progress 
could be made nevertheless. There is a certain flexibility on the 
part of both sides on this issue that he would not directly link the 
issue of the northern territories to the peace treaty should that 
be signed in the future. So I think, yes, there is movement on the 
positions of both parties, both countries. Other analysts disagree, 
saying it will be hard not to link the two issues. They say if the 
islands dispute cannot be resolved soon, Russia and Japan are unlikely 
to make any progress on a peace treaty. Both sides have said they 
want to formally sign a World War II peace agreement by the year 2000. 
Chris Simkins from the VOA Asian News Center. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>