<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981110.1600.3175 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It's time for our weekly look at the most popular films at North American 
theaters. Allen Silverman has the top five films starting with an 
animated hit at number five. There's just got to be a better place. 
"Antz," spelled A-n-t-z, features the voice of Woody Allen as Z, a 
neurotic ant unhappy with his place in the underground domain. My 
mother never had time for me. You know, when you're the middle child 
in a family of five million, you don't get any attention. I mean, 
how is it possible? The computer animated fable also features the 
voices of Sharon Stone, Sylvester Stallone, and Jennifer Lopez. And 
"Antz" ends up in fifth place. New at number four, an oldie but goodie... 
Toto, I have a feeling we're not in Kansas anymore. It's "The Wizard 
of Oz," newly restored for its 60th anniversary and the adventure 
of Dorothy and her friends, the scarecrow, the tin man, and the cowardly 
lion is a hit all over again. Even though it's been seen on television 
and widely available on video, "The Wizard of Oz" re-released drew 
big family audiences to theaters and it enters the chart in fourth 
place. Slipping a notch to number three, a social fable dressed up 
as a comedy. In "Pleasantville," two teenagers from the 1990s are 
zapped back into the black and white world of a 1950s television show. 
We're in Pleasantville? We're supposed to be in school. We're supposed 
to be in color. Their influence brings change, both good and bad to 
the seemingly well ordered time and place. Joan Allen co-stars as 
the TV show mom and says the story is meant to be provocative. It's 
embracing three dimensionality, really, in life and not denying a 
wide variety of emotional experiences and being able to somehow embrace 
that and tolerate that in other people, which is, you know, I think 
is good to raise a few eyebrows. "Pleasantville" hangs on in third 
place. The Army's a broad sword, not a scalpel. Trust me, Senator, 
you do not want the Army in an American city. "The Siege" opens up 
at number two and opens up a debate over whether constitutional liberties 
can withstand the deadly threat of terrorism. Denzel Washington stars 
as the embattled head of the FBI counterterrorism squad in New York. 
Having seen what I've seen, and the work that I do with the FBI, we 
should all be writing' them letters and saying thank you. I'm telling 
you 'cause you have no idea what they're out there doing, not just 
the FBI, but their cooperation with CIA and with INS, and with airport 
security. You should all be very nice to them, because they're making 
it easy for us to walk around and not have to think about things that 
this film makes you think about. There's a whole lot more going around 
that never gets to you and I because of the job they do. London, Belfast, 
Beirut, we're not the first city to have to deal with terrorism. This 
is New York City. We can take it. "The Siege" co-stars Annette Bening, 
Bruce Willis, and Tony Shaloub. The political thriller opens strong 
in second place but the new number one films is a youthful comedy. 
"The Waterboy" is written by and stars Adam Sandler as a slow-witted 
but good hearted waterboy for a college football team who discovers 
his special talent on the field. It's an underdog who becomes a hero. 
The players mock him and their cheerleaders mock them, and the people 
of the town, the townspeople don't like him very much. I thought it 
would be fun to have a guy who gets picked on a lot, you know, has 
a lot of pent up rage, get to release it and tackle somebody. Stop 
making fun of me. "The Waterboy" was panned by most critics but that 
didn't stop Sandler's fans from making it the most successful November 
movie opening in history, some $40 million in opening weekend ticket 
sales. "The Waterboy" makes a big splash in first place, the new most 
popular movie at North American theaters. Allen Silverman for the 
Voice of America in Hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>