<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981110.1600.2155 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
the American legal system and the rules evolving in the European Union 
are based on radically different views of the nature of privacy and 
the roles of government and business. Those differences have implications 
for the future of the worldwide boom in electronic commerce. How much 
privacy is enough? That's the question posed on today's Dateline. 
Here's Pamela Taylor. Late last month, the European Union issued a 
set of privacy standards designed to protect the transfer of data 
on an individual citizen's personal life. The new rules oblige governments 
to block data transfers to countries that fail to uphold similar adequate 
privacy provisions, and that, in the European commission's view, includes 
the United States. We have more on the European directive from VOA 
correspondent Ron Pempstein in Brussels. What the European Union wants 
to do is to prevent companies from selling data about European consumers 
without their consent. That's why the rule contains a provision barring 
transmissions to a country outside the European Union if that country 
does not provide similar protections of privacy. Any member state 
in theory can block individual data transfers to the United States. 
A European can protest the release of information about themselves 
if it is done without their consent. The European Union allows controls 
of data concerning an individual's health, their ethnic origin, their 
religious or political beliefs, or their sex life. European commission 
officials say the rules are designed to prevent a recent case in the 
United States where medical information about the is provided by pharmacies 
to medicine suppliers. They ridicule suggestions that normal data 
transmissions from the European Union to a third country will be disrupted. 
As one official puts it, a decision to block a data transfer would 
only apply to a single type of transfer, not to all transmissions 
to a country. If an individual consents to a transfer of information 
to obtain a job, for instance, the new rule will not stop the data. 
The intent of the European Union legislation to harmonize the 15 countries' 
approach to data so there are not barriers put up by different countries. 
The European Union sees privacy as a human right. So the rule is designed 
to take a single market approach to the transmission of data about 
individuals. The European commission has been talking to American 
officials trying to reach a common understanding on the data issue. 
Banks, airlines, and insurance companies are always transmitting data 
about potential clients back and forth across the Atlantic Ocean. 
There is still no understanding on how the European rules are going 
to be enforced. The United States has little interest in putting controls 
on the Worldwide Web. The European Union hopes an agreement can be 
reached where data transmissions can continue to the United States 
with companies that sign up to privacy principles issued by the U.S. 
Department of Commerce. VOA correspondent Ron Pempstein reporting 
from our European bureau in Brussels. One basic disagreement between 
Brussels and Washington is the whole issue of legislating compliance. 
Washington prefers a voluntary system, one that would call on U.S. 
companies wishing to process European's personal information to adhere 
to a set of privacy standards. Just how such standards would be enforced 
or how European citizens could seek redress for any grievances has 
not been resolved. Peter Swire, a law professor at Ohio State University 
in Columbus, Ohio, says the E.U. privacy directive has major implications 
for global business transactions if such issues are not resolved. 
The big question is going to be we have half a trillion dollars a 
year of trade between Europe and the United States in goods and services 
just with the European Union. And if we follow the European rules, 
a lot of the transfers of data might not be legal. But if we stop 
all those data transfers, then we're disrupting half a trillion dollars 
of trade. And how can that be the right answer? So we're really in 
a pickle right now between the European desire to follow their laws 
and the reality that that would disrupt trade an awful lot. Well, 
surely the Europeans foresaw some of these problems when they were 
discussing it implementing this directive. They did foresee it but 
they frankly thought the United States would go and pass privacy laws 
like theirs. They think they're on the side of progress and human 
rights for individuals. And it's still hard for them to understand 
how different the United States is and how personal information is 
handled. Well, now, explain that difference. Part of the difference 
probably stems back to World War II in the Nazi era when a lot of 
Europeans found out the dangers that happen if all sorts of information 
about people are being tracked and dossiers or secret police or Nazis 
or whatever. And Germany was the first place where these data protection 
laws were passed. It spread from there throughout Europe, and now 
the European Union in this directive is saying that they're going 
to have the same rules for all 15 countries and 370 million people 
in Europe. And in the United States, you say we have a different view, 
but it would seem to me that there is a trend toward demanding more 
privacy. Right. But the United States also has a laissez faire tradition 
of not regulating companies. And the American view has usually been 
that the companies have data about their own transactions, about their 
own customers, and companies are allowed to use that the way they 
see fit with very few limits. In the United States, if you subscribe 
to a magazine, it's been normal practice for years that your name 
gets sent to other magazines for possible use of solicitation. That's 
something Americans are used to. It's much less common to see that 
in Europe. And the two cultures are really pretty different on that. 
I guess this is a specter of big brother watching as far as many Europeans 
are concerned where big brother in Europe is a government; in the 
United States, perhaps big brother, is a company. Right. The American 
rules are stricter on the government and less strict on business. 
And it's the other way around in Europe. They're stricter really on 
companies. And the government as part of the social welfare scheme 
get to know a lot more about their citizens. But what about a case 
such as, I don't know, a tourist from a European country injuring 
him or herself in the United States and the insurance company? We'd 
need access to his medical records. There are a number of exceptions 
to the directive. One of them is the one you say, when it's for the 
vital interest the data subject to provide health data. If an individual 
gives clear consent, then data can leave Europe. If it's necessary 
to perform the contract such as to get shipping information of where 
the delivery should go, then that can leave Europe. The problem comes 
if American companies keep trying to use American style practices 
with their data. But the Europeans are saying they're using it in 
Europe or with European data. That's where the conflict happens. And 
the conflict I guess is presumably also that Europeans see the U.S. 
laissez faire capitalist idea as simply trying to allow American companies 
access to all this information about their people which will help 
give American companies perhaps an edge. Right. You see the worst 
of all worlds from Europe's point of view is if the United States 
companies get to use the data, so you get violations of privacy and 
the jobs go to the U.S. That would really be bad from Europe's point 
of view. How do you see all this shaking out? I think for the Worldwide 
Web in general, we're in a period of adjustment. I don't think that 
the most restrictive rules are going to work ala through the Web. 
Europe has all sorts of anti-advertising rules, privacy protection 
rules, and I don't think they're going to be able to stop all the 
Web sites in the world from doing what they do. On the other hand, 
big American companies probably are going to have to follow European 
practices for European customers. If you're doing business in Europe, 
you have to follow the minimum wage laws there, you have to follow 
the environmental laws there. And I think going forward, American 
companies acting in Europe are probably going to have to follow the 
data protection laws, too. But ultimately, is that going to hurt Europe 
more or American business more? There's a real trade off here. When 
you go - When you have a lot of information about you, you can get 
a credit report in the United States, you can get your cable hooked 
up when you move into a new apartment. You get opportunities to participate 
in all sorts of credit cards and businesses that you might want to 
do. On the other hand, all those businesses knows things about you, 
and Europe so far has made a decision to have less marketing, less 
targeting of individuals but also less information known about the 
people. And I think Americans probably are going to have to adjust 
over time either to having lots more known about them or to having 
more laws than we've had previously. Peter Swire, a law professor 
at Ohio State University and co-author of "None of Your Business, 
World Data Flows, Electronic Commerce, and the European Privacy Directive." 
Thank you so much for talking to us. How much privacy is enough was 
the subject of today's Dateline. I'm Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>