<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981110.1600.1352 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Americans love trains, even though passenger train travel thrives 
these days only in the northeast corridor. Old steam trains operate 
as tourist attractions in many parts of the country and model trains 
are a popular hobby. Americans grow nostalgic even about their streetcars 
and subway trains, as VOA's Ted Lanfair found out at the New York 
Transit Museum. Several American cities have subway systems, the first 
having been opened before the turn of the century in Boston. But when 
you think subways in the United States, you think first and foremost 
of the old and vast New York City system. New Yorkers take one billion 
subway trips a year, almost half of America's mass transit rides. 
Because Manhattan in particular is so congested, automobiles barely 
crawl along much of the day. You'll find executives construction workers, 
musicians, tourists, and shall we say, street characters rubbing shoulders 
on the subway. Trains run in four of New York's five sections or boroughs: 
Manhattan, Brooklyn, the Bronx, and Queens, but not in distant Staten 
Island, which you can reach only by bridge or ferry. The subway was 
built early this century at the same time that the first of New York's 
great skyscrapers and bridges were constructed. More than 30,000 workers 
from the city's teeming immigrant community built the lines up Manhattan 
Island and into the other boroughs. In the process, more than 50 workers 
died in cave-ins, dynamite blasts, collapses of underwater tunnels. 
As the subway lines were completed, the population moved with them, 
creating new residential neighborhoods. Much ugly graffiti has been 
removed from the squeaky old cars but they're still basically plain 
looking and utilitarian, not sleek and modern like Montreal's or Washington's 
subway cars. Yet New York is proud of its efficient people movers, 
and in 1976, it opened a fascinating transit museum to show them off. 
The museum is located in Brooklyn in what was once a working subway 
station. The transit museum has a huge exhibit of photographs and 
other artifacts on the construction on the subway that's called Steel, 
Stone, and Backbone. Gabriel Schubert is executive director. Buildings 
had to be shored up with timbers to make sure that there was no collapse. 
Different kinds of utilities that were already underneath the street 
had to be delicately removed away so that gas, electricity, phone 
lines, water lines were still functional while the subway system was 
being built. This is what the dynamite blasting sounded like in those 
days when you were blasting to build a subway tunnel. There are wonderful 
old subway cars in the New York Transit Museum, as well as exhibits 
about subway tokens and turnstiles. Subway riders used to buy tickets 
like movie tickets. They'd hand them to a clerk and then the tickets 
would be chopped in half by a guillotine-like ticket chopper to be 
sure they could not be used again. Down in the museum is a sample 
control tower that keeps track of trains and beautifully designed 
ceramic mosaics for which New York City's subway stations are famous. 
In fact, many stations are considered works of art. The subway cars 
are powered by a third rail and the side of the tracks away from the 
passenger platforms. Listen as a tour guide describes their power. 
Sometimes a person standing on the platform, they'll look down there, 
and they'll see a token, OK? And they might want to jump down on the 
track to get that token. You might actually touch the third rail. 
If you touch that third rail, you'd be well done, not medium, not 
rare, but you'd be well done, OK, 600 volts to move a train. The direct 
current in that electrified rail gives more than five times the jolt 
of a regular household socket on alternating current. Every once in 
a while, a movie is filmed inside the New York Transit Museum. What 
they did was use one of our cars and have a bunch of grips on the 
outside of the car rocking the car so that you simulate the motion 
to look like the car was really moving. What movie was that? That 
was "Enemies, A Love Story." We should add that this is a total transit 
museum, not just one for subways. There are workshops for kids about 
New York City's transportation network. Visitors can look at models 
of old horse cars, trolleys, and elevated trains, and even get behind 
the wheel of a city bus. The museum raises its operating money from 
admission fees and special lectures and tours. The transit authority 
has even auctioned off old subway cars to raise funds. Imagine owning 
your own subway car but having nowhere to run it. Waxing nostalgic, 
I'm Ted Lanfair. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>