<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981110.1600.0355 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Eleven British aid agencies have launched a massive joint fund-raising 
drive to help pay for much needed medical and food supplies for Central 
American victims of Hurricane Mitch. More than 11,000 have died and 
millions remain homeless. VOA correspondent Laurie Kassman in London 
spoke with one of the fund directors about the new appeal. The death 
toll rises in Nicaragua and Honduras. So, too, does the cost estimate 
of what it will take to rebuild countries devastated by Hurricane 
Mitch. But for now, the priority is emergency relief for the millions 
left homeless by the storm. Luisa Phillips is fund-raising director 
for the Christian Children's Fund. She is one of 11 British aide executives 
helping to launch an emergency appeal for Central America. Our priorities 
at the moment are to get medical assistance out there, because as 
we know, the flooding has caused incredible damage, but it has also 
cut off safe water supplies and has caused the possibility of disease 
being rampant throughout the countries where this disaster has occurred. 
So we need to get medical supplies out there quickly. We also need 
to provide clean water as soon as possible. Ms. Phillips says the 
problem now is getting any aid to outlying areas cut off from the 
capitals because flood waters and mudslides have washed away key roads 
and bridges. As we know, many bridges and many roads have been utterly 
destroyed, and that's something that's going to be very difficult 
for us. But we do have a lot of help with that from various Army and 
Navy sources. So that is something that is going to be made easier 
for us over the next few days. Ms. Phillips says the most serious 
challenge for aid workers and the international community will be 
to help rebuild Nicaragua and Honduras. Officials already estimate 
one-third of the Honduran infrastructure is destroyed and most of 
the banana plantations destroyed. Ms. Phillips says the hurricane 
has wiped out decades of development efforts. And we need to realize 
that this disaster is unlike most disasters that we see on the news. 
This disaster has not only destroyed the current activities but it 
has also destroyed about 30 years of development work in this country. 
So we need to start again, an that's going to be a very long and difficult 
process. While emergency aid pours into Central America, the debate 
is starting to focus on long-term relief. Many international aid agencies 
now are urging creditor nations to forgive or postpone debt payments 
from Central America to ease the burden of reconstruction. Laurie 
Kassman, VOA News, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>