<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981017.0153 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just hours after NATO gave Yugoslavia more time to fulfill a peace 
pledge and avoid airstrikes, a convoy of tanks and trucks appeared 
to be heading out of war-wracked Kosovo province. The convoy Friday 
night and the expected arrival Saturday of a 15-member advance team 
to prepare for the mission of 2,000 unarmed observers signified more 
Yugoslav compliance with Western demands to end the conflict in Kosovo. 
NATO on Friday decided to extend the deadline to reduce Yugoslav forces 
in Kosovo by 10 days, until Oct. 27. About 400 NATO warplanes will 
be kept ready for possible airstrikes if Yugoslavia fails to meet 
its promises. Late Friday night, 144 army tanks, artillery trucks 
and other vehicles were seen driving in the direction of the provincial 
border with Serbia. While journalists were unable to follow the convoy 
due to unsafe conditions at night, it was considered virtually certain 
the vehicles continued on to bases in Serbia. A Yugoslav official 
said Saturday that President Slobodan Milosevic will withdraw forces 
in time to meet the new, pushed-back deadline. ``I am convinced that 
our leader has been pulling his troops out of Kosovo,'' Milos Radulovic, 
Yugoslavia's ambassador to London, told British Broadcasting Corp. 
radio. Scaling back Yugoslav and Serb troops and equipment in Kosovo 
is an important demand of the agreement reached Monday by Milosevic 
and U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke. The agreement intended to avert 
NATO airstrikes against Yugoslav military targets called for its army 
forces in Kosovo to be reduced to the levels they were at before the 
crackdown began Feb. 28 against ethnic Albanian separatists. Hundreds 
of people have been killed by Serb forces, while Kosovo Liberation 
Army rebels also have killed more than 200 Serb policemen, civilians 
and ethnic Albanians loyal to Milosevic's government. In Washington, 
the Clinton administration said Friday that Yugoslav compliance with 
the U.S.-brokered agreement on Kosovo was substantial but not yet 
enough to head off the possibility of airstrikes. ``We believe NATO's 
guns should remain cocked and NATO's military commander should remain 
in a position to act,'' State Department spokesman James P. Rubin 
said. The advance team from the OSCE, Europe's main problem-solving 
alliance, headed from Austria to Kosovo on Saturday to begin planning 
for the arrival of the 2,000 observers who will monitor compliance, 
OSCE spokeswoman Melissa Fleming said in Vienna. The government on 
Friday signed a deal with the 54-nation Organization for Security 
and Cooperation in Europe to let the OSCE ``verifiers'' monitor Milosevic's 
pledge to withdraw his troops and allow the return of up to 300,000 
refugees. NATO U-2 surveillance planes were expected to begin flying 
over Kosovo on Saturday under an agreement signed with Yugoslavia, 
a U.S. official said Friday in Washington on condition of anonymity. 
There was no immediate confirmation Saturday that the reconnaissance 
flights had begun. Jet fighters could patrol the skies nearby in case 
the spy planes are threatened, NATO sources said on condition of anonymity. 
OSCE chairman Bronislaw Geremek, Poland's foreign minister, said Friday 
that the Yugoslav government had guaranteed the safety of the unarmed 
ground force and that he would ask NATO to do the same. Teams of diplomatic 
observers who pulled out of Kosovo last week under the threat of possible 
NATO airstrikes were operating Saturday, said a U.S. official in Pristina, 
on condition of anonymity. The official said four teams of two Americans 
each were in the field, and more members would arrive in nearby Skopje, 
Macedonia, over the weekend for training before coming to Kosovo next 
week. After meeting with the main ethnic Albanian leader, Ibrahim 
Rugova, Geremek said in Pristina: ``I have received assurances from 
Mr. Rugova about his participation in the peace process.'' But the 
rebel KLA issued a statement later saying it rejects the U.S.-brokered 
deal for the strife-torn province. The KLA has been fighting for independence 
for Kosovo, where the vast majority of the population is ethnic Albanian. 
Serbia and the much-smaller Montenegro make up Yugoslavia. Meanwhile, 
at the United Nations, Security Council members held preliminary talks 
on a resolution to endorse this week's accord and lend U.N. backing 
for organizations that will verify its compliance, diplomats in New 
York said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>