<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981017.0524 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
PRISTINA, Yugoslavia (AP) _ NATO spy planes flew over Kosovo and the 
advance team for a 2,000-strong monitoring force arrived in the country 
Saturday, as efforts to ensure Yugoslavia pulls its forces back advanced 
in the air and on the ground. A day after NATO gave President Slobodan 
Milosevic 10 more days to fulfill a peace pledge, the Serbs and ethnic 
Albanian rebels accused each other of new shooting attacks. But there 
were signs the government was gradually complying with international 
demands aimed at ending the turmoil. A Yugoslav official assured that 
security forces in the secessionist province will withdraw in time 
to avoid threatened airstrikes. ``I am convinced that our leader has 
been pulling his troops out of Kosovo,'' Milos Radulovic, Yugoslavia's 
ambassador to London, told British Broadcasting Corp. radio. Empowered 
to verify such claims, NATO began an aerial surveillance mission by 
sending U-2 planes high over Kosovo on a clear, sunny day in the southern 
Balkans. Yugoslavia formally consented to the flights on Thursday 
as part of the package of agreements worked out to end the turmoil 
in the secessionist province of Serbia. ``U-2s are indeed flying,'' 
a U.S. official told The Associated Press on condition of anonymity. 
``They're definitely up in the air and we're looking at the ground'' 
as part of the air surveillance accord. NATO and U.S. officials have 
declined to say where the flights originate. Hours before its four-day 
grace period for Milosevic to fully comply was to expire Saturday 
morning, NATO extended it until Oct. 27. One reason was that the status 
of troop withdrawals and refugee returns in Kosovo can't be fully 
attested to until the mostly European force of 2,000 observers is 
in place. An advance team of specialists for that mission arrived 
in Belgrade on Saturday to begin planning for the monitors' arrival. 
The 13 staffers were to be joined by about seven others by the time 
they arrive in Pristina on Sunday. ``We are here to do some of the 
preparatory work that will hopefully facilitate the activation of 
the verification mission, which we hope to have here as soon as possible,'' 
said delegation member John Sandrock. American diplomat William Graham 
Walker was appointed Saturday to head the new mission by the Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Melissa Fleming, spokeswoman 
for the 54-nation OSCE, said in Vienna, Austria, that the group hopes 
to have a sizable number of monitors in place in Kosovo in two weeks. 
U.S. and NATO officials have reported significant pullbacks by Yugoslav 
forces in recent days, but say the number remaining exceeds the level 
required by the agreement reached by Milosevic and U.S. envoy Richard 
Holbrooke. Hundreds of people on both sides have been killed during 
seven months of clashes between Serb forces and the rebel Kosovo Liberation 
Army, and more than 300,000, mostly ethnic Albanians, have been displaced 
from their homes. The Serb Media Center in Pristina claimed that KLA 
``extremists'' had staged more than a dozen attacks on Serb forces 
since late Friday, ranging from the southwest to the northeast of 
the province. Machine-gun fire, mortars and grenades allegedly were 
used to target Serb police, and at least two Serbs were reported wounded. 
The ethnic Albanians blamed the Serbs for at least two of the incidents, 
saying police in Vranjevac had opened fire, hitting several Albanian 
houses and a car. Reporters were unable to verify the conflicting 
claims. Many refugees have been afraid to return to their homes because 
of the continuing presence of Serb police forces. But aid workers 
and U.S. officials have reported a steady return in the last few days. 
Humanitarian organizations have stepped up efforts to get aid to the 
refugees before winter sets in. In the town of Pagarusa, southwest 
of Pristina, the United Nations delivered 160 tons of flour, oil and 
other food to refugees from the area Saturday. Ethnic Albanian leaders 
in Kosovo, where Serbs comprise only about 10 percent of the population, 
remain skeptical of Milosevic's compliance. They also are reluctant 
to accept anything short of independence for the province, while international 
officials urge a lesser form of self-rule. Kosovo Albanian leaders 
reportedly were meeting Saturday in Istanbul, Turkey, to smooth differences 
between different factions and unite in their political demands. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>