<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981017.0154 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two people were missing after a deadly typhoon hit Japan's southernmost 
main island of Kyushu Saturday, drenching the area with heavy rains 
and interrupting travel in much of the country. Typhoon Zeb, which 
killed at least 74 people in the Philippines and 18 in Taiwan, made 
landfall near the city of Makurazaki in Kagoshima Prefecture, 985 
kilometers (616 miles) southwest of Tokyo, at around 4:30 p.m. (0730 
GMT), Japan's Meteorological Agency said. With maximum sustained winds 
of 90 kilometers (56 miles) per hour, the typhoon was moving northeast 
at a speed of 35 kilometers per hour. Zeb was expected to cross western 
Japan and enter the Sea of Japan early Sunday, before heading toward 
northern Japan, the agency said. Two men, aged 19 and 22, were missing 
on the southern island of Okinawa after they went to the beach to 
watch the roaring waves brought on by the typhoon, said an Okinawa 
prefecture (state) police spokesman. The men were believed drowned 
after being swept away by waves, said the spokesman who declined to 
be named. One man was injured in Okinawa when he lost control of his 
motorbike in strong winds and a woman in Kagoshima suffered a head 
injury after being blown over while trying to shutter the windows 
of her home. More than 140 domestic flights to and from southern Japan 
were canceled and inter-island ferry service was suspended, national 
broadcaster NHK said. Local train service on the main southern island 
of Kyushu was also interrupted, it said. Parts of southern Japan will 
be soaked by up to 400 millimeters (16 inches) of rain through Sunday 
morning, with some areas getting as much as 80 millimeters (3.2 inches) 
of rainfall in a one-hour period, the meteorological agency said. 
In the Philippines and Taiwan, disaster officials were searching for 
those still missing and cleaning up from the damage wrought by Zeb 
on Thursday and Friday. Most of the 74 people dead in the Philippines 
drowned or were buried in landslides. Ten people were still missing 
and the casualty figure was expected to rise as reports come in from 
isolated villages. At least 103,000 people were forced to flee their 
homes in the Philippines because of flooding. Most have since returned 
home, but more than 10,000 people remained in 28 government shelters. 
In Taiwan, 18 people were dead and up to 19 missing after Zeb roared 
across the island Friday. Torrential rains prompted mudslides that 
covered two houses in the Taipei suburb of Neihu. The bodies of two 
elderly men were recovered from the debris Saturday, and rescuers 
were still searching for three others believed trapped. At its peak, 
Zeb reached ``super typhoon'' status, with sustained winds of 240 
kph (150 mph) and gusts measuring (295 kphs) 184 mph. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>