<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981017.1300.1495 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Baseball is a game of memories, and Seth swirsky has a lot of them. 
The californian has collected more than $600,000 worth of baseball 
memorabilia. There's nothing like the game of baseball I get so deep 
into this stuff that the rest of the world doesn't exist. September 
of '94, my son, Julian, was born and at the same time the baseball 
players went on strike. And I missed the sound of the game. And I 
started collecting in September of 1994. I'm not a fanatic. I don't 
go to every single game. I don't read every last line of a box score. 
I'm not in a rotisserie league or anything. I like the feel of baseball. 
One of the things I really enjoyed doing was collecting team signed 
balls. These baseballs represent many themes and events that I put 
together, like this Mickey Mantle baseball. I got Mickey Mantle to 
sign the sweet spot of this baseball, but there are 16 other guys 
named Mickey who played baseball on that ball as well. I like the 
idea of that within this box right here there are hundreds of players 
that now, in a way, live together through -- just on this little sphere. 
These are different baseballs that started just completely blank. 
But I had players write different things that they had accomplished. 
Here's one written by the guy who pitched in the midget, Eddie gaydell. 
And he went from the top of the baseball all the way down to the bottom, 
and he told the exact story of what happened that day. It's very interesting 
to really hear it from the horse's mouth, you know? But I wanted to 
commemorate it on a baseball. This was the first mitt that George 
Brett used in his career. You know, when my son wants to have a catch, 
I take that mitt out. This is a yearbook signed four times in 1939 
by a guy named Jackie robinson. He had signed his name over his football 
picture on that one -- Jack robinson. This is Ted Turner. Now back 
in '77 he, he bought the Atlanta Braves. He managed one game. And 
that was the cap he was wearing. I collect these things because I 
love them. I don't think I've sold one thing. Maybe one thing in my 
collection I've sold just to raise money for something else type of 
thing. I truly love it. I see it almost like Warren Buffett sees it. 
You know, if you really like it and you think it's a good value, then 
sit with it forever. Because it's, you know -- I think he collects 
stocks like I collect baseballs in a way. If you had to take one item 
with you, what would it be and why? Well, I think that the baseball 
signed by all four Beatles the night they played Shea stadium would 
probably be the first thing that comes to mind, because it seems to 
encapsulate everything that I've done in my life and everything I'm 
interested in. There's nothing like a great old American game baseball 
</TEXT>
</DOC>