<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981017.1600.0141 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NATO is moving its eyes and ears into place over Yugoslavia. U-2 spy 
planes began flying over the province of Kosovo today and an advance 
team of international observers has arrived in Belgrade. They'll travel 
to Kosovo tomorrow. The attention appears to be having some effect. 
Last night, an armored column inside Kosovo began rolling toward the 
border. NAto gave Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic 10 days to 
withdraw his forces from Kosovo or face air strikes. Ethnic Albanians 
who were the target of the Serbian offensive fear the government troops 
are digging in, not pulling out. Lindsay hilsum reports. The Kosovo 
liberation army on lookout. They say that, far from withdrawing, they 
are seeing more Serb troops arrive and large units dividing into smaller 
ones. Intelligence sources say to reduce the force to premarch levels, 
the Serbs must pull out 10,000 men. The KLA spot a Serb military position 
near the village licovatz. The approach of an earth mover suggests 
digging in. They sight what appear to be mortars. 500 meters to the 
west, a military convoy is heading towards the same position. A tank 
pulls past the houses on the hill. As the NAto council met, the U.S. 
envoy to Kosovo went to see president milosevic, who now has another 
ten days to withdraw his forces and stop the atrocities. We will now 
have a verification system in place which will be able to verify where 
we are on compliance. And we've had considerable discussions with 
the Serbs, and they know what they need to do to comply. The chairman 
of the organization for security and cooperation in europe was in 
Belgrade to sign the agreement for 2,000 OSCE verifiers to check up 
on Serb activity in Kosovo. It's an honorable mission. There will 
be people without guns, with the goodwill, and they have to observe, 
to verify and to inform. The question now is will the Serbs allow 
the verifiers to go wherever they want in Kosovo and really see what 
the troops are doing? And will the verifiers be able to gain the trust 
of the Albanians and persuade them to come down from the hills and 
go back to their villages for the winter. Those are the two tests 
of this agreement. For the moment, the Albanians remain wary. People 
in camp say when they tried to go back to their village they were 
attacked by Serbs. Diplomats say the continued threat of air strikes 
should force president milosevic to stop oppressing these people. 
But they have no trust. Lindsay hilsum, channel 4 news, Belgrade. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>