<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981017.1830.0765 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With just over two weeks to go before the November 3rd elections, 
members of Congress have fled Capitol Hill for some last chance campaigning. 
And as NBC's Gwen Ifill reports, they're arriving home to some surprises. 
Consider this the starting gun. As members of Congress -- technically 
still in session until Tuesday -- race home to begin a compressed 
two-week re-election campaign. Democrats once feared these midterm 
elections would be a referendum on the presidential scandal. But now, 
they believe the president can help voter turnout. Staying home is 
not a very good option when so much is riding on a trip to the ballot 
box. This White House pep rally yesterday was a democratic campaign 
kickoff. We're talking about the issues that matter to people, education, 
and we're not talking about the president's problems. Better news 
than congressional democrats had, even two weeks ago. It's starting 
to look very much like an incumbent, pro-incumbent election. It's 
hard to see any great partisan wave. Senate races to watch -- I love 
ya, good to be home. In New York, veteran republican senator Al D'Amato, 
running neck and neck with Brooklyn congressman Charles Schumer. The 
voters of New York want to send Al D'Amato home. In Illinois, incumbent 
democrat Carol Moseley-Braun, struggling against millionaire conservative 
republican, Peter Fitzgerald. President Clinton campaigned for Moseley-Braun 
in Chicago yesterday, and the White House even rolled out its not-so-secret 
campaign weapon. Illinois native Hillary Rodham Clinton. I wish everyone 
could see the Carol Moseley-Braun I've seen in the Senate. But Moseley-Braun 
is running against her own spotty record. I know I've made some mistakes 
and disappointed some people. In Washington state, democrat Patty 
Murray is in a tight contest with republican congresswoman Linda Smith. 
And in California, polls show democratic senator Barbara boxer is 
slipping against republican state treasurer Matt fong. And the Senate 
is only half the battle. In the house, dozens of competitive races 
will be decided by voters who are apparently paying less attention 
to party affiliation than they are to local issues. But there has 
been some fallout from Washington's sex scandal. In Cincinnati, democrat 
roxanne qualls, first avoided, then embraced, the White House. Trying 
to unseat vulnerable republican Steve chabot. And in Texas, congressman 
Charles Stenholm, who voted the republicans for an open-ended impeachment 
inquiry, has distanced himself from president clinton. Charlie immediately 
went to work taking on the president. But taking on the president 
is now less attractive, even for lawmakers who, when they return to 
Washington, will still have his future in their hands. Gwen Ifill, 
NBC news, the capitol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>