<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0195 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Elizabeth Chapman Gilkeson, an educator associated with the Bank Street 
College of Education for more than four decades and the founding director 
of its School for Children, died on Oct. 7 at her home in lower Manhattan. 
She was 95. As a senior faculty member of Bank Street College, Mrs. 
Gilkeson helped develop many of the programs that define the institution, 
now on West 112th Street in Morningside Heights. She joined the staff 
in 1955 as head of the children's program division; though she officially 
retired in the 1970s, she remained active in the college's affairs, 
including its seminars on professional development. The predecessor 
to the School for Children had its modest start in 1919, three years 
after Bank Street College opened as the Bureau of Educational Experiments. 
Under Mrs. Gilkeson's guidance, what began as an interdisciplinary 
program with nine toddlers took shape as an innovative learning environment 
in which young children were encouraged to interact with teachers, 
parents, their urban surroundings and one another. Mrs. Gilkeson, 
whose father served as schools superintendent in Glen Cove and Corning, 
N.Y., was born in Bethel, Maine. She graduated from Vassar College 
in 1924 and, 10 years later, became a founder of the progressive Poughkeepsie 
Day School on the Vassar campus. She also was a member of the Vassar 
child study faculty through 1949. She earned a master's degree at 
Columbia Teachers College in 1942, studied child and adult development 
at the Carolyn Zachary Institute in the late 1940s and pursued doctoral 
studies at Columbia in the early 1950s. At that time she was director 
of guidance at the New Lincoln School in New York City and an adviser 
and instructor at Bank Street. After joining the full-time staff, 
she expanded the School for Children beyond the nursery years to include 
pupils through the eighth grade, developed programs for children and 
parents and founded the Polly Miller Child Center in Marble Hill. 
She supervised psychiatric residents from Albert Einstein Medical 
School at the School for Children, developed the multidisciplinary 
42nd Street Early Childhood Center for children and their parents, 
and directed a national Head Start project as well as Bank Street's 
participation in the Federal Office of Education's National Follow 
Through Programs. Mrs. Gilkeson, whose husband and son pre-deceased 
her, is survived by five grandchildren and six great-grandchildren. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>