<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0095 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
``I have here in my hand a list of 205 _ a list of names that were 
made known to the secretary of state as being members of the Communist 
Party and who nevertheless are still working and shaping policy in 
the State Department.'' _ Sen. Joseph McCarthy, Feb. 9, 1950, Wheeling, 
W.Va. By ETHAN BRONNER c.1998 N.Y. Times News Service It is one of 
the most infamous speeches in U.S. politics. Delivered just months 
after the Soviet Union detonated its first atomic device _ a replica 
of the U.S. bomb right down to the bolts _ and months before the communist 
North invaded South Korea and Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were charged 
with selling nuclear secrets to Moscow, McCarthy's words set off a 
period of political hysteria. It would be some time before the nation 
grasped that he not only had no scruples but that he also had no list. 
By then, many honorable Americans whose sentiments leaned to the left 
_ among them, teachers and actors, journalists and government functionaries 
_ had lost their jobs in a witch hunt. But half a century later, with 
Soviet-era archives open, it turns out there was a list. Not the fake 
one brandished by McCarthy before a group of Republican women, but 
a real one, with code names and salary receipts and carbons of sensitive 
messages on the Manhattan Project and U.S. diplomatic strategy that 
were passed to the Soviets. The appearance of the Soviet evidence 
starting in the early 1990s, after the breakup of the Soviet Union, 
and the 1995-1996 declassification of U.S. intelligence files on the 
interception of Soviet spy cables _ now widely known as the Venona 
decryptions _ has unleashed a flood of scholarship. In a replay of 
old battles, it is a debate over U.S. communism and McCarthyism with 
two challenges. One side is asking: If the left was so wrong so recently, 
why should it be listened to at all? The other side counters that 
when the right is given a chance, as it was in the early 1950's, it 
becomes vicious. And with the Cold War won, it argues, there is a 
whiff of right-wing triumphalism in the air that must not go unaddressed. 
The new documents certainly sully many icons of the old left. Julius 
Rosenberg, it is now clear, was guilty (though there is still debate 
about his wife's complicity). Alger Hiss, according to respected new 
scholarship, was probably a Soviet agent and the U.S. government in 
the 1930s and '40s harbored hundreds of communist spies and even more 
fellow travelers. And there is more to come. Next year, Ronald Radosh, 
a senior research associate at George Washington University, will 
publish what he says is a devastating picture of the Spanish Civil 
War _ as a gruesome example of Soviet imperialism dressed up as anti-fascism, 
rather than as the epic, noble battle the left has always said it 
was. It is no surprise that, given the ferocity of the political struggle 
at the time, the scholarly struggle over the new data is raw and impassioned. 
``On the one hand you have scholars showing that many members of the 
Communist Party were motivated by a legitimate desire to fight social 
injustice,'' said Jonathan Brent, editorial director of Yale University 
Press, which is publishing 25 volumes on the new material titled ``Annals 
of Communism.'' ``But at the top of the party they were controlled 
by Moscow. How do you reconcile the two?'' The new evidence has appeared 
so quickly and so forcefully, and at a time when communism is so bereft 
of defenders and intellectual capital, that some have flirted with 
the rehabilitation of McCarthy himself. In 1996, The Observer of London 
stated: ``McCarthy has gone down as one of the most reviled men in 
U.S. history, but historians are now facing the unpleasant truth that 
he was right.'' In The Washington Post, Nicholas von Hoffman wrote, 
``Point by point, Joe McCarthy got it all wrong and yet was still 
closer to the truth than those who ridiculed him.'' Such assertions 
send chills down the spine of Ellen Schrecker, a historian at Yeshiva 
University, whose new book, ``Many Are the Crimes: McCarthyism in 
America'' (Little, Brown), argues that whatever harm may have come 
to the country from Soviet-sponsored spies is dwarfed by McCarthy's 
wave of terror, which crushed livelihoods as well as any alternative 
political discourse. She said social developments like government-provided 
health care and strong labor unions _ things commonplace elsewhere 
in the West _ were stymied in America. And, she added, the China hands 
in the State Department who could have fended off the disaster of 
the Vietnam War had been purged for suspected communist sympathies. 
In fact, the gush of new scholarship from the archives is less rigorous 
than it appears, say Professor Schrecker and others, including Victor 
Navasky, publisher of The Nation, who wrote ``Naming Names'' (Viking, 
1980), a book about Hollywood blacklisting. The scholarship relies 
heavily on the boasts of Soviet-paid agents in America eager to impress 
their Moscow masters. And, they say, it is scholarship with an agenda. 
``What is happening today is an effort to deny the legitimacy not 
just of those who favored the Communist Party but the entire left-wing 
political movement in the post-Berlin Wall moment,'' said Nelson Lichtenstein, 
a history professor at the University of Virginia. ``The whole anti-racist, 
anti-capitalist impulse in American life, which reached its apogee 
in the 1930s and '40s, is on the line. If it turns out these movements 
were the results of communists advancing their goals, are they still 
legitimate? People like Ron Radosh want to discredit not only that 
historical episode but the moral legitimacy of the left in the United 
States today.'' Radosh says he has little patience for these arguments. 
``I deal with issues of historical truth,'' he said. ``The left's 
inability to accept this truth is what discredits the left.'' Perhaps, 
too, something more personal is at stake. Many of the most passionate 
advocates on both sides of this struggle, including Radosh and Professor 
Schrecker, were ``red diaper'' babies, weaned on the left. The debate 
pits those upholding the honor of their idealistic parents against 
those who believe their own honor requires them to expose the deceptions 
on which they were raised. William F. Buckley Jr., whose new novel 
on McCarthy is due out next summer, said many Americans looking back 
on the espionage dismiss its significance because there is so little 
threat from Moscow today that to them it is hard to remember how serious 
the peril was. ``The notion of stealing secrets is seen today as a 
kind of misjudgment, a form of eccentric behavior,'' said Buckley, 
who was an early friend and defender of McCarthy. Exactly how much 
damage was done is a matter of some contention. No one suggests that 
a communist coup was afoot or that the nation was in existential danger. 
But the Soviets did build the bomb a year or two earlier than they 
would have _ no small feat _ and it is not hard to imagine other damage 
that might have resulted from unchecked spying. Harvey Klehr, a historian 
at Emory University and co-author of the new book ``The Soviet World 
of American Communism'' (Yale University Press), has mused that if 
Franklin D. Roosevelt had died earlier, his vice president during 
the third term, Henry Wallace, would have become president. Wallace 
had once said that as president he would make Laurence Duggan his 
secretary of state and Harry Dexter White his Treasury secretary. 
Evidence in the Venona messages suggests that both were Soviet agents, 
Professor Klehr said. That is why people like Buckley argue that McCarthy 
has been maligned by history. ``McCarthy's excesses have to be taken 
in the context of other work he did,'' Buckley said. ``For example, 
his concentration on security loyalty practices was absolutely correct.'' 
Timothy Naftali, a senior fellow at the Miller Center of the University 
of Virginia, said McCarthy gave anti-communism a bad name, but that 
a fair examination of communist activity during and after World War 
II would show that anti-communist paranoia was understandable and 
reasonable. ``The FBI and military officials had lists of hundreds 
of unidentified code names that appeared in Soviet intelligence traffic 
and had every reason to believe that many of those names belonged 
to agents still operating,'' he said. Many of the code names have 
yet to be identified. The Soviets became aware of U.S. interceptions 
by the end of the 1940s _ thanks to Kim Philby, then a Washington-based 
double agent of British intelligence _ and shut down their operation 
just as McCarthy was coming on the scene and U.S. counter-intelligence 
was swinging into action. So by the time McCarthy was hunting communists, 
most of the agents were gone. It is a quirk of history, but one apparent 
only through the perspective of the archives. As the century draws 
to a close, communism and Nazism are being increasingly grouped as 
20th-century paradigms of totalitarian horror. But once the Soviets 
were seen for what they were, were those who insisted on waiting for 
``true'' communism fools? Or knaves? It was Hitler who said people 
prefer a big lie to a small truth, and the proponents of Soviet communism 
certainly understood that. It was the very depth of their betrayal 
that made it so hard for American communists to grasp the deception. 
``When we realized that what we thought was heaven really was hell, 
we fell into silence,'' said Robert Schrank, a former communist and 
union leader who has just published a memoir titled, ``Wasn't That 
a Time? Growing Up Radical and Red in America'' (MIT Press). ``We 
were overwhelmed with shame.'' That explains, in part, the uncivil 
nature of today's dialogue and why it will likely be some time before 
a full accounting can be offered. ``As these first documents come 
out, we are having a debate,'' said Brent of Yale University Press. 
``But it is a slow historical process, something involving our national 
consciousness, and I think it will be at least five to 10 years before 
a historian arises who can really put this all in perspective.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>