<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0032 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
He was a man with advanced AIDS. His pain was unbearable and constant, 
lucidity a luxury that floated into each day with less and less frequency. 
His life finally ended at home when he succumbed to large doses of 
painkillers and tranquilizers prescribed by his doctor, who knew what 
their effect would be. She was a woman with terminal breast cancer. 
She had stopped eating and going to the bathroom, and lived in total 
misery. Her life ended, police say, when a close friend, a veterinarian, 
injected her with drugs at her request while she lay listless in a 
hospital bed. The two cases _ the first a few years ago, the second 
at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in summer 1997 _ appear 
similar. Both could be counted among the usually secretive cases of 
physician-assisted suicide. The case of Cara Beigel, the woman with 
breast cancer, came to public attention this week when the authorities 
charged the friend who assisted her, Marco Zancope, with second-degree 
manslaughter. But most cases of friend- and physician-assisted suicide 
go undetected _ wrenching, private pacts between two people, infrequently 
revealed to others and hardly ever prosecuted. Such acts still remain 
fairly unusual, and there is heated legal and ethical debate about 
what role, if any, doctors should play in the ending of life, and 
what constitutes ``physician-assisted suicide'' in the first place. 
Does it occur only when a doctor provides a requested prescription 
for lethal drugs? Or when a doctor significantly increases a terminally 
ill patient's dose of morphine in the name of killing pain, knowing 
it could bring on a longed-for death? ``Physicians tend not to talk 
about this among even themselves,'' said Dr. Nicholas Christakis, 
an assistant professor of medicine and sociology at the University 
of Chicago and an expert in end-of-life care. Although the case history 
of assisted suicide is mostly undocumented, experts say the death 
of the man with AIDS is the more usual: a dying patient, at home, 
receives a lethal dose of painkillers, including morphine, prescribed 
by a doctor, who also ends any life-sustaining treatments, and the 
death is attributed to the disease. Neither the medical community 
nor the legal authorities become involved, even though technically 
a crime may well have been committed: a doctor aided a patient in 
ending his life. The case of Ms. Beigel, experts said, is unusual, 
both in the way it was carried out and in the arrest of the man who 
confessed to giving her a lethal dose of barbiturates. Sloan-Kettering 
officials say Ms. Beigel's death was not imminent, and was hastened 
with injected drugs, which tend to be used only in the last days or 
hours of life. Experts said that a person in her situation would be 
more likely to use orally administered drugs, at home, away from hospital 
doctors, nurses and rules. Even more unusual, they said, was that 
in Ms. Beigel's case the drugs were administered not by an attending 
physician, but by a friend. ``The thing that is so unique is that 
the friend has access to drugs, which is very rare,'' said Dr. Diane 
Meier, the director of the palliative care program at the Mount Sinai 
School of Medicine and an expert in end-of-life care. Finally, it 
was unusual in that the case attracted the attention of the Manhattan 
district attorney's office, only the second time in memory the authorities 
said such a case was pursued by the law. Dr. Meier reasoned that it 
was Sloan-Kettering's investigation that brought the case to light. 
``Whereas if this had been done at home, it would not have come to 
anyone's attention,'' she said. ``And I think it raises the issue 
of what we can do as a profession and society to keep people from 
getting to the point of believing that the only way to end suffering 
is to die.'' Ms. Beigel, 33, whom investigators say sought out her 
friend Zancope for help in ending her life, was found dead in her 
hospital bed shortly after a visit from friends in August 1997. Suspicious 
because she died sooner than expected and so shortly after a visit 
from her family, hospital officials got in touch with the Medical 
Examiner's office, which summoned police. Tuesday, police said, Zancope, 
who ran the Animal Clinic of New York on Manhattan's Upper East Side, 
confessed to assisting Ms. Beigel in her death. He awaits a grand 
jury hearing. But law enforcement officials said juries are loath 
to indict people accused of assisting in the suicide of a terminally 
ill person, often because they are sympathetic with the person who 
did so and believe that the act was merciful. Further complicating 
a prosecutor's ability to gather evidence is that family members, 
who are often complicit in the act, rarely press charges. A New York 
state court decision briefly granted the right to physician-assisted 
suicide, but it was overturned last year by the U.S. Supreme Court, 
which ruled that there was no constitutional right to assisted suicide. 
At present, Oregon is the only state with legal doctor-assisted suicide, 
and its law is highly restrictive. But advocates for assisted suicide 
laws contend that, though mostly hidden, the practice already occurs 
regularly in various forms, and will become more frequent as the population 
ages. The need is growing, these advocates say, because doctors do 
not focus enough on palliative care, treatment that eases pain and 
suffering at the end of life. ``It happens all the time undercover,'' 
said Don Blake, a spokesman for the Hemlock Society, the right-to-die 
group. ``More and more people are saying this is an option that we 
should be open to, even though we know only a small percentage will 
avail themselves of this.'' The most comprehensive study of physician-assisted 
suicide, whose lead author was Dr. Meier, found that fewer than 3 
percent of doctors who were asked for medicine to end a patient's 
life agreed to do so, and only 5 percent said they had administered 
lethal injections to patients on their deathbeds. But many doctors 
and patient advocates say there are other methods that are not usually 
regarded as assisted suicide, but that doctors may use to hasten the 
end of life: for example, an increase in morphine, routinely used 
to kill pain, to an amount that causes breathing to stop. ``Active 
euthanasia is relatively uncommon,'' Christakis said. ``But the average 
internist has withdrawn or withheld life support 17 times in the last 
year. Or in many instances, you stop the pain or induce sleep and 
then the patient dies, but since that was not the intention, it is 
deemed more permissible. I think that there are lots of shades of 
gray here.'' But there are doctors willing to do more, and the stories 
of their patients tend to have similar themes: the patients have less 
than six months to live, they have decided they would have less pain 
or more dignity if they controlled their own deaths, and they have 
persuaded a doctor to help after long and difficult discussions that 
usually involve other family members. The doctor has usually treated 
the patient for some time, and the deaths, unlike those paraded by 
Dr. Jack Kevorkian, the Michigan doctor who has made a career of assisted 
suicide, tend to pass without note. In a small town in Oregon, a man 
with brain cancer has a small vial of barbiturates. He got them recently 
from his doctor, said George Eighmey, the executive director for Compassion 
in Dying of Oregon, the state chapter of a national organization committed 
to helping mentally competent terminally ill patients who want to 
end their lives. The man, 47, an accomplished violinist, artisan and 
father of two, is deteriorating rapidly. His doctor, who refused to 
be identified, agreed to provide him with the lethal dose. ``He is 
making his decision when to take them,'' Eighmey said. ``He said he 
is so relieved to know the pills are there and he can take them when 
he can. He doesn't want to subject his family or himself to the last 
indignities of incontinence, inability to move, think or speak.'' 
But even in a state where such assistance is legal, doctors are rarely 
willing to let anyone know they have helped to end a life. ``Anybody 
who has done it knows it is a tremendous decision that you carry with 
you forever,'' said Dr. Howard Grossman, a Manhattan internist who 
was a plaintiff in the unsuccessful New York lawsuit challenging the 
laws against assisted suicide. ``And under the current circumstances, 
there is no one to talk to about it, there is no support. You can't 
tell anyone, because it is illegal.'' Grossman, who said he assisted 
the man dying of AIDS, said his actions in that case were legal because 
he simply stopped giving the patient his regular medication and increased 
his morphine and other painkillers. But whether an assisted death 
falls within legal parameters or not presents ``no ethical difference 
for me,'' he said. ``Because I have to sit there,'' he said, ``and 
think, `Is this the end or is it not the end?' It is a very grave 
decision. I feel very responsible.'' Even strong opponents of assisted 
suicide say its practice sheds light, and may provoke action, on the 
problems of pain management. Studies show that many patients seek 
a hastened death because they are in terrible pain or discomfort. 
``What seems to have been helpful in this debate is the active public 
discussion about how people die,'' said Dr. Ira Byock, the author 
of ``Dying Well'' (Putnam Riverhead, 1997) and a past president of 
the American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine. ``Both sides 
agree that many people die badly,'' he said. ``While care has improved, 
it is hardly adequate still. I mean, it is harder to get into a hospice 
program in Oregon if you have emphysema than it is to qualify for 
assisted suicide. So it is not a mystery as to why people feel miserable 
and want to kill themselves.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>