<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0171 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Five tons of bull elephant stood its ground, immovable as bedrock, 
eyeballing us and our 20-foot boat, which seemed to be shrinking by 
the second as we drifted closer to shore. Jonathan Pyper, our guide, 
kept one hand on the throttle, alternating worried glances at both 
the idling outboard and the huge beast now less than 100 feet away. 
``Go ahead,'' he said quietly to Scott Swanson, who stood ready on 
the bow clutching a heavy baitcasting rod. Swanson nodded and pitched 
a gold spoon toward the grassy shoreline. Too late. The bull instantly 
threw up its trunk and snorted loudly, a clear warning that we were 
dangerously close to invading that most sacred domain: an elephant's 
personal space. Pyper punched the throttle forward and off we went, 
gladly conceding that section of the lower Zambezi River to those 
who call it home. Swanson and I had come to the Kayila Lodge in Zambia 
seeking tigerfish, a fearsome predator with the streamlined body of 
a bonefish and the teeth of a piranha. Up to that point, I had never 
seen one, except for an illustration of a particularly deranged-looking 
specimen in ``McClane's Fishing Encyclopedia.'' For me, casting among 
hippos and crocodiles along this famous African river felt like the 
adventure of a lifetime. Swanson, on the other hand, who works for 
Quest Global Angling Adventures, a travel agency for anglers, considered 
it all in a day's work. After we spent the afternoon fruitlessly casting 
for tigerfish, he left the next morning to sample Mozambique's near-virgin 
sportfishing. ``It's a tough job,'' he said smiling, before being 
whisked off in one of the lodge's boats for the airport. Which left 
Pyper and me with the task of boating a tigerfish, no small order 
since the season was still weeks away from its October peak. We decided 
to stay in camp, fishing from the lodge's dock in a large eddy where 
several 10-pounders were hooked a few days earlier. With two hippos 
rumbling away on the far shore, I worked a heavy spinner, letting 
it sink deep in the slow current. Pyper stuck to a local favorite 
_ a bait rig sweetened with a piece of cut tigerfish. Right away Pyper 
felt a pickup. He tensed, studying the rod, but soon realized by the 
repeated light taps that a small tiger had his bait. ``A boy on a 
man's errand,'' he said in his British colonial accent, lifting the 
rig away from the juvenile. We fished into the afternoon with no action. 
Pyper kept me entertained with tales of ``tigahs'' splintering plugs 
in a single chomp and his recent near misses with lions and poisonous 
snakes. From the beginning, he struck me as the classic African bush 
guide, looking the part in his full safari garb, as if he had just 
swaggered off the set of a John Huston movie. Between stories, he 
would point out soaring African fish eagles or herds of grazing impala 
or troops of baboons lounging along the bank. My spinner stopped dead. 
I set the hook and immediately saw a bright silver fish of about four 
pounds clear the water 30 feet away and throw my lure. I had just 
hooked my first tigerfish, if only for a second. Pyper seemed unfazed 
and suggested that I use something with a single hook instead of a 
treble, which he assured me a tiger could easily crush in its jaws. 
I opted instead for my flyrod, thinking that a big streamer might 
get past a tiger's teeth. But this was Africa, where huge beasts can 
take center stage in a heartbeat. Just as I readied to cast, an immense 
bull elephant lumbered out of the brush behind us and strolled into 
camp, followed by another, then a third and finally a fourth. Right 
away Pyper recognized the big bull as Two-V, a camp regular named 
for the V-shaped notches on each ear. We watched motionless as the 
group passed 50 feet from where we stood, thankfully ignoring us. 
The large marula tree ripe with berries standing in the camp's center 
was not so lucky. The elephants surrounded the big tree. Then Two-V 
took charge. He wrapped his trunk around one of the larger limbs and 
shook _ hard _ sending thousands of berries cascading down like hail, 
along with various leaves and not-so-small branches. All four elephants 
then went about picking up the berries with their trunks and passing 
them to their mouths, looking as casual as old men eating pretzels 
in a bar. Pyper sighed. ``Old Two-V is really getting to be a bore,'' 
he said, fighting back a smile. (He would later confess how much he 
admired the camp's visiting ``ellies.'') The scene bordered on the 
ridiculous: 4 elephants _ 20 tons worth _ lounging, periodically shaking 
the tree to send down a salvo of berries, my long-forgotten flyrod 
abandoned on the dock, with Pyper and me utterly fascinated. I would 
not catch a tigerfish on this trip. But at that point, as Africa roared 
around me, I could not have cared less. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>