<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0144 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If every rumor swirling around this seaport capital is true, someone 
tries to assassinate the Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi _ oh, about 
every couple of months. Most of the rumors, diplomats guess, must 
be fanciful, spun either from the wishful thinking of those who would 
dearly love to see an end to Gadhafi's 29-year reign or from the equally 
dark designs of security forces adept in the art of disinformation. 
Real information in Libya is so scarce a commodity that the only generally 
accepted truth about most internal security matters is that no one 
really knows. Still, a recent barrage of claims and counterclaims 
about who might have done what, and when, to a leader who is now hobbling 
on crutches has included so fulsome a dose of the unusual that _ even 
in a country with a reputation for the bizarre _ people are trying 
hard to piece together just what might be going on. A tangle of clues 
includes a postponed trip, a broken leg, reports of a roadside ambush, 
and the untimely death of a provincial governor. But, as with videotape 
broadcast here last month that purportedly shows a 1996 assassination 
attempt by a British agent, no one is quite sure what, if anything, 
it adds up to. ``Something seems to have happened this summer, but 
a lot of fantasy has been mixed up with fact,'' a senior Western diplomat 
here said with about as much authority as it is possible for any foreign 
observer here to muster. The latest speculation about Gadhafi, ignited 
by travelers' assertions in early June, was further fueled in late 
August when the Libyan leader looked weak and wan and sat in a wheelchair 
in a satellite television interview with CNN. Gadhafi explained in 
the interview that he had broken his thigh in a sporting accident. 
But among Libya watchers, particularly those abroad, his unhealthy 
appearance has revived unanswered questions about what might have 
happened earlier in the summer, when a planned overland trip to Egypt 
was abruptly canceled on the day he was to have arrived, and when 
news agencies quoted travelers from Libya as saying that his convoy 
had come under attack near the eastern Libyan town of Benghazi. Officially, 
Gadhafi, who led a military coup in 1969, is not even Libya's head 
of state; he is known simply as the leader of the revolution. But 
in practice, the 56-year-old colonel and a tight circle of advisers 
continue to rule Libya with a heavy hand. And because he has never 
designated a successor, and is regarded as a pariah by the United 
States and Britain, real and reported accounts of attempts to overthrow 
him have been watched in the West for years with particular acuity. 
In interviews here, nearly a dozen Arab and Western diplomats who 
have paid close attention to the case scoffed at the idea that there 
was any connection between any injury to Gadhafi and whatever might 
have happened this June. For a start, they said, Gadhafi appeared 
in public in Tripoli several days after the reported assassination 
attempt, in what seemed a deliberate attempt to discount the rumors 
that he had been attacked. In one television appearance, he wore a 
short-sleeve shirt and even pointed defiantly to his left arm, openly 
mocking those who had been saying that it had been badly wounded in 
the supposed attack on his motorcade. But on other questions, the 
diplomats, who under rules imposed by their governments would speak 
only on condition of anonymity, expressed sharply differing views. 
Some said they were all but certain that some kind of attack had taken 
place; others said they were all but certain that it had not. All 
said there was little doubt that Gadhafi had not incurred any injury 
to his leg until about a month later, in early July, when he unexpectedly 
was carried out on a stretcher to meet with a visiting delegation. 
But most also discounted the story that he had been injured while 
exercising; some suggested that there might have been another assassination 
attempt, while most said they believed that the truth had been far 
more mundane: that he had broken his thigh during a slip in the bathroom. 
And, in a country in which the only official source of information 
is the state-controlled news outlets, all acknowledged that much remained 
unanswered about reported events this summer, including the death 
of the governor of Benghazi, who by some accounts was among those 
who tried to assassinate Gadhafi in June and by others was one of 
those wounded in that reported attempt. Several weeks after the reported 
assassination, the governor was reported in official Libyan newspapers 
to have been killed after being struck in the forehead by a horse. 
Among other unresolved mysteries has been why Gadhafi abruptly canceled 
his trip to Egypt scheduled for June 4. Explained by Libyan officials 
as deference to President Hosni Mubarak's busy schedule, the decision 
was greeted in Egypt with enough surprise that Mubarak was reported 
on the same day to have telephoned Gadhafi to inquire about his health. 
The idea that Gadhafi faces internal challenges is not new. One biographer, 
George Tremlett, has written that there have been dozens of coup attempts, 
and some of them, including a 1993 attempt by soldiers from the Warfalla 
tribe, have resulted in publicly announced executions. Among other 
clear indications of opposition to his rule, Western diplomats and 
reports by the U.S. government have noted intensive clashes in 1995 
between Libyan security forces and members of Islamic groups in eastern 
Libya, a 1996 prison riot that left hundreds of people dead and a 
1996 clash at a soccer stadium in which a dispute over a referee's 
call against a team owned by one of Gadafi's sons set off a riot in 
which people chanted anti-Gadhafi slogans. In that latter incident, 
even official Libyan news outlets reported that nine people had been 
killed and 30 injured. Other accounts, given credence in a recent 
State Department report, have put the number of deaths as high as 
50. As for reports of actual assaults against Gadhafi, Arab and Western 
diplomats in Tripoli say that many have been concocted by the Libyan 
security services and then spread as a way of testing public loyalty. 
But some who said they had begun to wonder whether everything had 
been fabricated said they had been given pause by a wrinkle that emerged 
last month, when a Libyan television broadcast appeared to substantiate 
rumors that an assassination attempt against Gadhafi had been made 
in 1996. The images, broadcast by the London-based Arab satellite 
television channel ANN during a live interview with Gadhafi from Tripoli, 
showed the Libyan leader being greeted by crowds at a people's rally 
in Wadi Achatt, in the southern province of Fezzan, when a man threw 
what Gadhafi said was a hand grenade at him from less than three yards 
away. The report said the grenade did not explode, but the images 
did not show the grenade, nor did they show any indication of panic 
by either Gadhafi or his bodyguards. But the broadcast quoted Gadhafi 
as saying that the pictures substantiated recent assertions by a former 
British intelligence officer, David Shayler, that the British government 
had been aware of and had supported an attempt to kill the Libyan 
leader that year. The British government has denied Shayler's accusations, 
and he has been detained by the French police since early August at 
the request of the British authorities. He is awaiting a ruling by 
a Paris court, scheduled for Oct. 21, as to whether he should be extradited 
to Britain to face charges under the Official Secrets Act. As is often 
the case in Libya, though, the accounts conflict, adding to the element 
of mystery. Shayler told the BBC that the attempt involved the planting 
of a bomb under Gadhafi's motorcade in February 1996. He said the 
attempt was carried out by Muslim extremists who put the bomb under 
the wrong car, killing several bystanders. But not only is that scenario 
different from the one shown on Libyan television, so is the apparent 
timing of the incidents, Tripoli-based diplomats say. They say that 
the incident shown on Libyan television appeared to have taken place 
during an appearance by Gadhafi before a people's rally in Wadi Achatt 
during the summer of 1996, several months after the incident described 
by Shayler. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>