<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0023 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
City and state officials told the New York Stock Exchange on Friday 
that they were on the verge of securing a site for a new headquarters 
and trading complex for the market directly across the street from 
its historic home on Wall Street, according to people involved in 
the discussions. But in what has become a high-stakes poker game, 
the Stock Exchange did not immediately embrace the proposal, saying 
it was exploring all of its options. In an effort to insure that the 
financial district in lower Manhattan remains the financial capital 
of the world, officials have been scrambling to come up with a real 
estate deal for the exchange, which has threatened to move to Battery 
Park City or New Jersey unless the city comes up with an alternative 
by Nov. 4. In a meeting at the New York Stock Exchange on Friday, 
Deputy Mayor Randy Levine and Charles Gargano, chairman of the Empire 
State Development Corp., told exchange chairman Richard Grasso that 
they were confident a deal could be struck for the site, according 
to people who were there. Four office buildings owned or controlled 
by J.P. Morgan &AMP; Co. now sit on the block, along with an apartment 
building. The site is bounded by Wall Street and Exchange Place, between 
Broad and William Streets. Under the terms of the proposal, the state 
would condemn the property and acquire the land, which would be ready 
for demolition and construction in 2001. Officials at the Stock Exchange 
expressed reservations about the proposal, yet another indication 
that they may favor moving to vacant land at Battery Park City. The 
exchange has no desire to directly antagonize city and state officials, 
however, because it wants hundreds of millions of dollars in public 
funds for a new headquarters. ``As currently presented, the economics 
have yet to justify building a new New York Stock Exchange trading 
facility on the old J.P. Morgan site,'' said stock exchange spokesman 
Richard Adamonis on Friday. ``We continue to keep all options open.'' 
The so-called J.P. Morgan site first surfaced as a possible home for 
the stock exchange in 1991, when Morgan and city and state officials 
proposed building a $1 billion super exchange for the New York Stock 
Exchange, the American Stock Exchange and the city's commodities exchanges. 
Negotiations dragged on for a year. But in the midst of a severe recession 
that left a quarter of the office space vacant in lower Manhattan, 
the New York Stock Exchange decided not to go forward. Six years later, 
historic preservationists blocked a plan by the New York Stock Exchange 
to build a new trading floor on the Morgan site and a glass atrium 
over Broad Street that would have connected the old and the new buildings. 
Desperate to get out of its cramped space on Wall Street, the Exchange 
told city officials in April that it wanted to move to Battery Park 
City, where it could build a modern complex on vacant, state-owned 
land. And when the stock exchange felt that City Hall was not paying 
sufficient attention to its problems, Grasso announced that New Jersey 
was offering all kinds of enticements to move to Jersey City. Ultimately, 
the exchange agreed to give New York officials six months to come 
up with an alternative that would keep the market in the financial 
district. Landlords and businesses were alarmed that the loss of the 
exchange would undercut the downtown renaissance and spark the exodus 
of many financial companies. For four months, city officials negotiated 
with property owners on a block bound by Broad and William Streets, 
between Beaver Street and Exchange Place. The most difficult problem 
was at 25 Broad St., where a developer, Crescent Heights Investments, 
had spent $100 million converting the vacant office building into 
345 apartments _ a move the city encouraged. Crescent Heights president 
Bruce Menin said Friday that he had been in negotiations with city 
officials but had not heard from them recently. In recent weeks, city 
officials suddenly resurrected the old J.P. Morgan proposal, hoping 
to strike a less complicated deal with J.P. Morgan, which has more 
than 2,500 employees in four buildings on the block, and the Elghanayan 
family, which owns the apartment house at 45 Wall Street. Real estate 
executives say that Morgan believes it is imperative that the stock 
exchange remain in the financial district. ``It's in the best interest 
of all of us to have a vibrant downtown,'' said Joseph Evangelisti, 
a spokesman for J.P. Morgan. ``So we have an obligation to listen 
to all reasonable proposals.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>