<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0198 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Bruce Marek grows more than 100 different kinds of organic vegetables 
on a patch of farmland along Old Hook Road in Emerson Township in 
Bergen County, which with 851,344 residents is the most populated 
of New Jersey's 21 counties. Marek, who is 46, lives in an 18th-century 
house on the 6.5-acre farm that his family purchased as a weekend 
retreat in 1925 and has farmed for nearly four decades. It is a tradition 
Marek said he would like to continue, though he says that it is becoming 
more difficult in so heavily developed a county as Bergen, where commercial 
and housing projects continue to gobble up the little remaining open 
space. Just west of Marek's Old Hook Farm, an assisted-living complex 
for the elderly is rising on 3.8 acres of former watershed land used 
to protect the nearby reservoir that holds the area's water supply. 
Other examples of development bumping up against open space can be 
found throughout the county, where just 4 percent of its 152,768 acres 
are undeveloped. That such examples as Marek's farm still exist ``underscores 
the need to keep what we have left in some kind of natural state,'' 
said Lori Charkey, co-director of Save the Watershed Action Network, 
or SWAN, a nonprofit conservation group. ``While some people may throw 
up their hands and say it's too late, many others are crying out they 
have had enough,'' she said. Now the county hopes to step up its efforts 
to save some of its remaining land, including farms like Marek's, 
partly by asking residents _ in a referendum next month _ to pay a 
little more in property taxes for preservation purposes. The move 
reflects a growing trend of counties and towns taxing themselves to 
acquire and conserve open space. In Bergen County, the move toward 
a preservation tax was started 18 months ago by the New Jersey Conservation 
Foundation, a nonprofit group in Far Hills that brought together environmentalists, 
civic leaders, citizens and county officials to discuss such a measure. 
This led to a vote last summer by Bergen's Board of Freeholders to 
hold a referendum in November on whether the county should establish 
a five-year dedicated open-space trust fund. The fund would provide 
$8 million a year, or a total of $40 million, and would be financed 
equally by bonds and a conservation tax on residents' homes _ one 
half of a cent on each $100 of assessed property value. Owners of 
homes with the county's median sales price of $237,308 would pay $11 
a year in conservation taxes. The money would go not only toward acquiring 
open space, either directly or through the purchase of development 
rights, but also toward maintaining and upgrading parks, ballfields 
and playgrounds in the county, which state figures estimate is 1,200 
acres short of meeting its recreation needs. At present, the county 
is negotiating for the purchase of 1,162 acres of open space. They 
would be added to the 2,316 acres the county has preserved over the 
last decade by acquiring large tracts most threatened by development. 
A task force created by County Executive William Schuber last year 
identified 44 sites, totaling an additional 1,000 acres, in need of 
preservation. ``We have taken care of a lot, but there are limits 
to the money so we could not purchase everything,'' Schuber said. 
The trust will ``give us another tool and a greater fund of money 
to buy what is still out there as well as afford us the opportunity, 
for the first time, to partner with municipalities'' to further stretch 
funds, he said. ``The goal is to retain the county's suburban character 
and not to become the sixth borough of Manhattan.'' he said. ``It's 
a quality of life issue.'' In 1989, the state Legislature gave municipalities 
and counties the legal authority to raise taxes for open space and 
many have done so in recent years as development pressures have increased. 
During the 1990s, Bergen County's population, following two decades 
of decline, increased by 25,954, according to the Department of Planning, 
to its current size as elderly homeowners who moved out were replaced 
by young families. If residents of Bergen County approve the open-space 
tax on Nov. 3 it would join 13 other counties in the state, as well 
as 53 municipalities, where residents have accepted open-space taxes. 
The trend toward open-space taxes shows no sign of abating. Next month 
in addition to Bergen County two other counties _ Essex, as well as 
Camden in a second attempt _ will also ask residents to take on such 
a tax, as will 29 other municipalities including four in Bergen County. 
Some municipalities and counties with taxes already in place _ ranging 
from 1 to 5 cents on each $100 of assessed property values _ are also 
going back to voters to increase the amount of their tax. The state 
itself in November will also ask residents to support New Jersey's 
largest conservation effort _ spending $1 billion over the next decade 
to preserve 1 million acres of undeveloped land. The state is seeking 
voter approval to amend the state Constitution so that it can dedicate 
up to $98 million a year in state sales-tax revenues over the next 
30 years to buy the million acres and retire bonds. If approved the 
referendum would also give the state the authority to issue an additional 
$1 billion in bonds for preservation purposes. There are no statewide 
statistics available on the total amount of money raised or the amount 
of land preserved through the tax. But a partial report done in 1997 
by the state's Department of Environmental Protection showed that 
the nine counties and 29 municipalities surveyed had collected $105.7 
million and preserved 16,800 acres. Still, there are challenges to 
overcome. ``People by their very nature are anti-tax, so it takes 
an education process to show them that with their own buying authority 
they can be masters of their own destiny,'' said John Klevins, senior 
project manager at the Morristown office of the Trust for Public Land, 
a nonprofit land conservation organization. He noted that preservation 
has proved to be a prudent fiscal alternative to the higher tax increases 
usually required for additional services like roads and schools that 
development brings. Advocates also say having a conservation tax is 
an added benefit when competing for state funds under the state's 
37-year-old Green Acres program, which has been the main source of 
funds to state, county and local government agencies for preserving 
open space. Since its creation, the program has raised $1.39 billion 
in nine voter-approved bond issues to preserve 922,000 acres of open 
space, including farmland. Two years ago it began offering 2 percent 
loans and matching grants _ representing 75 percent and 25 percent, 
respectively, of the state award _ to counties and towns that have 
an open space master plan and conservation tax in place. In Bergen 
County, the New Jersey Conservation Foundation worked with open-space 
advocates ``to bring the issue of preservation to the forefront, and 
to show that a stable source of funding would provide an efficient 
process'' for preserving land, said Dennis Miranda, the foundation's 
urban parks project manager. To that end 34 of the 70 towns in the 
county passed resolutions in support of a trust fund, he said. Still 
some county officials needed to be convinced that taxing current residents 
and embracing a pay-as-you-go approach was more beneficial than issuing 
bonds and spreading payments over future generations, which had been 
the county's traditional method of raising funds. The other issue 
was how to structure the trust to be equitable to all residents in 
the county, where most of the undeveloped land exists in its northern 
half and little open space remains in its southern half, said Richard 
H. Kelly, a county freeholder and chairman of its open space committee. 
The compromise, he said is that of the $40 million provided under 
the trust half the money will be raised from the issuing bonds, the 
other half from a conservation tax, which was cut to one-half of one 
cent from 1 cent per $100 of assessed property value. In addition, 
the county will retain 75 percent of the funds raised to acquire land 
and preserve farmland and historic sites as well as to improve recreation 
facilities. The remaining 25 percent of the funds will go to municipalities 
to improve recreational facilities. There is also a provision calling 
for the trust fund and tax to sunset in five years. As for Marek, 
he said he had no interest ``right now'' in selling his Emerson farm. 
But if the referendum passes, he said, he would consider selling the 
development rights. ``It would be one way to protect the equity in 
the farm and guarantee that the land would be farmed forever,'' Marek 
said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>