<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0143 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the arrival of significant numbers of international monitors appeared 
weeks away, and the withdrawal of Serbian forces remained very unclear, 
the tensions of embattled Kosovo province seemed to be heading on 
Saturday for the deep freeze of winter _ ready to reopen in spring. 
Western diplomatic monitors here said they were unable to confirm 
whether Serbian forces had actually left Kosovo on Friday. There was 
still considerable skepticism about the potential effectiveness of 
2,000 unarmed monitors who are supposed to go to the southern Serbian 
province under an agreement between the Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic 
and the U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke to help with arms inspection 
and _ perhaps, eventually _ elections. Thousands of ethnic Albanian 
refugees, who were uprooted from their homes by Serbian tank and artillery 
offensives that ended two weeks ago, remained outdoors. About 150,000 
others were doubled up in homes, schools and other makeshift shelters, 
according to officials from the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. 
Fro the top of a dew-covered hill just steps from his plastic tent, 
Florim Kadriaj peered down Saturday into Krusica, a village that has 
been home to his ethnic-Albanian family for generations. Some of his 
neighbors among the birch trees in the hills here, worried by the 
cold and damp, have pulled up their shelters and gone back to homes 
badly damaged during an assault by Serbian forces three weeks ago. 
But Kadriaj, 21, whose 30-member extended family includes a sister-in-law, 
Shukrije, who is eight months pregnant, says he cannot take the risk. 
Their two-story home is on what he calls the front line: within shooting 
range of a posse of Serbian police. ``The Serbs have to move from 
Movljane for us to go back,'' Kadriaj said Saturday morning as women 
in the family washed their hair in water from the creek and others 
prepared a fire for cooking. ``If I'm alone I can run, but if it's 
30 of us being captured in the same house, it's different.'' The Kadriajs 
are among refugees who remain trapped in the woods of Kosovo by Serbian 
forces and, in some instances, by the Kosovo Liberation Army, the 
rebels who are fighting for independence for the province's ethnic 
Albanian majority. Officials from the U.N. agency say the overall 
number of refugees in the hills of Kosovo is steadily dwindling as 
autumn nights get colder and the ground remains consistently damp. 
At Kisna Reka, northwest of here, a much larger group of 2,000 refugees 
remains outdoors, caught between a company of Yugoslav Army soldiers 
on one ridge and armed men of the separatist guerrillas who frequent 
the camp, an official of the U.N. refugee agency, Margaret O'Keefe, 
said Saturday. Under the original deadline set in the agreement between 
Milosevic and Holbrooke, Yugoslav Army soldiers and the Serbian police 
who were sent to Kosovo last March to fight the guerrillas were to 
have already withdrawn. A new deadline, set Friday by NATO, gives 
Milosevic until Oct. 27. On Friday there were signs that some forces 
had withdrawn, U.S. officials said. But they said they could not be 
specific about numbers, or kinds of troops. A media center run by 
the Serbian government in Pristina, the capital of Kosovo, alerted 
television crews late Friday afternoon that a convoy of Serbian troops 
was pulling out from Stimlje, about 15 miles south of the capital. 
A television crew followed the convoy of about 145 vehicles _ trucks, 
tanks and armored personnel carriers _ but did so only until Pristina, 
leaving it unclear whether the equipment had actually left the province. 
According to one estimate, each of the 2,000 monitors supposed to 
come to Kosovo would cost about $100,000, making a total bill of $200 
million for the salaries, housing and logistics of the team. Some 
of the skepticism about the new monitoring force is based on the fact 
that 120 former military officers and diplomats were supposed to join 
a team of diplomatic monitors in Kosovo in July. The team never got 
beyond 50 members. At best, a Western diplomat in Belgrade says, about 
500 or 600 monitors, who are being recruited by the 54-nation Organization 
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, would appear in Kosovo in 
the next two or three weeks. By then, colder weather will have begun 
to settle in and both sides in the conflict will have hunkered down 
to await the spring, when hostilities are expected to resume, diplomats 
said. And by November, it will be too late for any large-scale reconstruction 
of destroyed homes. Ms. O'Keefe, of the U.N. refugee agency, said 
that, according to a very rough estimate, 150,000 ethnic-Albanian 
refugees remain camped out in temporary shelter, 50,000 have returned 
to their homes in recent weeks and another 50,000, who had fled across 
the borders to Montenegro and Albania, are staying there. There is 
no large-scale return of people displaced by fighting and no visible 
rebuilding of homes and farmhouses. Hundreds of villages remain destroyed 
and abandoned, the only sign of life being livestock searching for 
feed. A partial survey, recently completed by diplomatic monitors 
driving along main roads, included estimates that 16,000 houses had 
been heavily damaged during the recent Serbian offensive. A proposal 
by the Serbian government to provide building materials for reconstruction 
_ and at one point encouraged by the Clinton administration _ never 
came to fruition. Even if it had, Western diplomats said, refugee 
families whose homes had just been blown away by Serbian forces were 
highly unlikely to accept construction materials from the Serbs. A 
well-to-do ethnic Albanian entrepreneur, Salih Bega, 35, who owns 
a sawmill in Petrova that was totally burned by Serbian forces, said 
he would not consider rebuilding his home or business even though 
he had the financial wherewithal to do so. ``I'm afraid to rebuild,'' 
said Bega, as he showed a visitor burned transformers, buildings and 
the black ashes of valuable wood logs that he had imported from the 
neighboring republic of Montenegro, Serbia's lone remaining partner 
in Yugoslavia. His business, known as Graniti, was burned by Serbian 
forces in August and again in September. ``If I order five trucks 
to come from Montenegro to deliver wood, the Serbs could come and 
burn it all over again.'' Theoretically, Bega's business should be 
flourishing _ if refugees were returning to their homes to rebuild. 
But, he said, ``People don't have bread to eat and I have to sell, 
not give, them wood.'' Up in the hills above Petrova, Kadriaj expressed 
similar bewilderment about the situation even as the international 
community has announced air surveillance of Serbian forces, increased 
material help and the dispatch of monitors. ``These observers can 
come around only during the day. The Serbs shoot at night too,'' he 
said. ``The police can come and kill me. How can the monitors help 
with that?'' The outsiders might help reduce immediate tensions. ``But 
nothing will change in relations between Serbs and Albanians,'' he 
said, suggesting that the battle between the two groups will rage 
on beyond this winter. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>