<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0137 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With Washington sapped by scandal and the U.N. arms inspectors weakened 
by infighting, Iraqi officials are expressing confidence that they 
are closer than ever to having some sanctions against their country 
eased and that they can avert a military strike even if they stonewall 
against inspections. ``Until February, the United States felt free 
to threaten or actually use power anytime we objected to intrusive 
inspections _ it was simple,'' a senior Iraqi official said, speaking 
on condition he not be identified. ``Now it is clear they are restricted 
to only two circumstances: if we threaten a neighbor or if we resume 
the manufacture of weapons. There is no more carte blanche.'' Most 
diplomats from other countries agree, at least, that Iraqi President 
Saddam Hussein has come a long way in shifting the burden of making 
the case for sanctions toward the United States and the U.N. Special 
Commission, known as UNSCOM, which is charged with dismantling Iraq's 
weapons of mass destruction and long-range missile systems. Until 
that is done, the Security Council has said, the sanctions will remain. 
Thursday, for example, a group of scientists and experts are to meet 
at the United Nations in New York examine whether Iraq loaded some 
of its missiles with deadly nerve gas. The United States made the 
charge. But Switzerland, which conducted independent tests of the 
equipment, says it found no proof. France, whose scientists did tests 
of their own, may, though tepidly, back the United States' contention. 
The week before last, one of the most senior U.N. officials, Assistant 
Secretary General Denis Halliday, a 34-year veteran of the United 
Nations who had administered the ``oil-for-food'' program meant to 
blunt some impact of the sanctions, resigned his post in anger. ``Sanctions 
are starving to death 6,000 Iraqi infants every month, ignoring the 
human rights of ordinary Iraqis, and turning a whole generation against 
the West,'' he said in an interview here. ``I no longer want to be 
part of that.'' Even Britain, while continuing to side with the United 
States, has considerably toned down its criticism of Iraq. The week 
before last, its chief delegate, Sir Jeremy Greenstock, said Iraq 
may have made enough progress in eliminating some weapons to deserve 
a hearing on whether some sanctions should be lifted. ``I think we 
have succeeded in splitting the unanimity of the Security Council, 
questioning the motives of UNSCOM, and above all bringing in the secretary 
general of the United Nations into the decision-making process as 
a neutral party,'' a high-ranking Iraqi official said, speaking on 
condition of anonymity. In the latest confrontation with the United 
Nations, Iraq has banned all inspections since Aug. 5, and Secretary 
General Kofi Annan has suggested a ``comprehensive review'' of Iraq's 
effort to eliminate its banned arms. Such a review would take place 
after inspections are resumed, a decision Iraq has yet to make. But 
the acting U.S. representative at the United Nations, A. Peter Burleigh, 
insisted that not much has changed. ``There is no Security Council 
member, friend or foe of Iraq, expressing any sympathy toward Baghdad 
as it continues to openly defy the will of the international community 
and its obligations under council resolutions,'' he said. The inspections 
commission itself, however, has been put on the defensive as one of 
its inspectors, Scott Ritter, a former U.S. marine, quit in August, 
charging that both the United States and Annan caved in to Iraq. Since 
then, he has drawn more fire on the inspection regime by acknowledging 
in several interviews that while working for the United Nations he 
received intelligence about Iraq from Israeli government agencies. 
One senior Western diplomat at the United Nations, speaking on condition 
of anonymity, said that UNSCOM chairman Richard Butler ``has lost 
of a lot of trust.'' And the damage done to the commission from such 
revelations was underscored by Butler himself, who reprimanded Ritter 
for divulging secrets of his work. And there was another blow to the 
sanctions regime the week before last. The International Atomic Energy 
Agency, itself a U.N. agency based in Vienna, reported to the Security 
Council that it had no evidence that Iraq has ``nuclear weapons, or 
nuclear weapons usable materials or the capability to produce such 
items.'' The finding prompted Russia to renew its call for the Security 
Council to close the ``nuclear file'' on Iraq and reward it by lifting 
some of the sanctions. For now, the United States would surely use 
its veto on the Security Council to prevent such an outcome. But Iraq 
officials here made clear that they see a definite limit to how long 
the United States can push the sanctions, and a nearly unlimited possibility 
for eroding the consensus on keeping them in place. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>