<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0016 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The largest death row in the United States is not in Florida or Texas, 
where executions have become almost routine rituals of last meals, 
unanswered prayers, lethal injections and hearses driving slowly through 
a prison gate. With 508 men and 9 women sentenced to die, the largest 
death row is in California, the land of sun, sand, surf and once upon 
a time the most liberal governor in the country, Jerry Brown, who 
opposed capital punishment at every turn. For years, California's 
death row was a place where the condemned were more likely to die 
from old age, sickness or suicide than from a lethal injection. In 
the two decades since the nation resumed executions, California has 
put five people to death. This year alone, Texas has executed 16 people. 
No one believes that the Golden State will ever catch up with Texas. 
Nor does anyone say that would even be desirable. But because of a 
confluence of events in California, from a congealing of political 
will to the fact that scores of cases making their way through the 
appeals process are about to be resolved, the pace of executions is 
likely to increase. ``There's a very real concern that we're going 
to have a mass assembly line of executions starting up in this state,'' 
said Mike Farrell, the actor and president of the board of Death Penalty 
Focus of California, a group that opposes capital punishment. And 
yet, argued Dane Gillette, the senior assistant state attorney general 
who oversees death penalty cases, the people of California have consistently 
expressed their support for the death penalty in opinion polls and 
jury verdicts. ``I don't think you can say there is any ambivalence,'' 
Gillette said. ``The fact that we have over 500 people on death row 
and juries are willing to give out so many death sentences doesn't 
show much ambivalence.'' To be sure, support for the death penalty 
has been a litmus test for California politicians for a long time, 
ever since a Republican replaced the last governor to oppose state-sanctioned 
executions, Brown. In 1986, voters sent California politicians a powerful 
message, ousting the chief justice of the state's Supreme Court, Rose 
Bird, who was widely seen as soft on the death penalty because the 
Bird court frequently reversed death sentences. After her ouster, 
the new court frequently affirmed death sentences. Brown, who had 
appointed Judge Bird, is no longer a player in the major leagues of 
state politics. He is mayor-elect of Oakland. Now more than ever, 
the political power in the state lies squarely in the hands of those 
who favor capital punishment and the voices of opposition among elected 
officials have been all but silenced. Both candidates for governor 
this year, Gray Davis, the Democrat, and Dan Lungren, the Republican, 
like the current governor, Pete Wilson, favor the death penalty, so 
much so that their campaign commercials quibble over which one supports 
it more. Having long ago parted company with their anti-capital-punishment 
tradition, even the state's two U.S. senators, Dianne Feinstein and 
Barbara Boxer, both Democrats, say they favor it. ``A large percentage 
of the traditionally liberal wing of the Democratic Party has caved 
in on this issue,'' said Lance Lindsey, executive director of Death 
Penalty Focus. A lonely voice of opposition among state officials 
is state Sen. John Burton, a Democrat and the president pro tem of 
the Senate. Burton said he did not know of a single elected Republican 
official in the state who shared his opposition. Indeed, he said, 
``I have trouble finding Democrats. We're a vanishing breed.'' Outside 
the government, some organized opposition remains, but it has failed 
to ignite California voters. Last weekend in San Francisco, Death 
Penalty Focus sponsored a conference of religious leaders opposed 
to capital punishment. The conference included Buddhists, Baptists, 
Roman Catholics, Jews and Muslims, who signed a ``Statement of Conscience,'' 
opposing the death penalty and announced a campaign to stop executions 
in California. ``We have seen this issue politicized in recent years 
and reason and spiritual concerns have been pushed aside,'' said Wilson 
Riles Jr., executive director of the American Friends Service Committee, 
Pacific Mountain Region. ``Our campaign will not be aimed at politicians, 
but at the people who elect them.'' So far, their efforts are having 
little effect. To the contrary, in fact. Both sides in the debate 
agree that a major reason the capital punishment process has been 
so slow in California is that there are not enough lawyers experienced 
in the often-complicated laws on the death penalty. Currently, about 
180 death-row inmates in California do not have lawyers for their 
appeals, and it can take more than four years before they are assigned 
one by the court. Only then can the lengthy state and federal appeals 
process begin. To speed the cases, the California Legislature has 
created a new state agency to recruit and train lawyers to represent 
death-row inmates. The agency, which is to open its doors within the 
next few months, is also intended to satisfy a new law that puts a 
one-year time limit on filing federal court appeals in death cases. 
Michael Laurence, a defense lawyer opposed to capital punishment, 
has been named to be the first executive director of the agency, the 
Habeas Corpus Resource Center. ``Lawyers who take on these cases,'' 
Laurence said, ``are basically signing on to a 10-year commitment. 
And they're very hard to find.'' The lawyers must be qualified, as 
well as compensated, to investigate cases that are often years old. 
``As I recall,'' said state Sen. Bill Lockyer, a Democrat who was 
the sponsor of the bill that financed the center, ``the median time 
between conviction by a jury, sentencing by a judge and execution 
is about 14 years in California. Virtually, no one thinks that is 
appropriate or good policy.'' The center will eventually employ 30 
lawyers and a staff of investigators. The initial budget of $5 million 
also includes money to hire 15 new lawyers for the state's public 
defender's office, for a total of 45 additional government lawyers 
representing inmates in death cases. The Legislature also increased 
the hourly pay to $125 from $98 for private lawyers who agree to take 
appeals of death penalties. ``It's going to take us three to five 
years to get through the backlog of cases,'' Lockyer said. He was 
speaking only of getting lawyers assigned to all the death-row inmates. 
Even that will be a daunting task. Every year, 20 to 40 new inmates 
are sent to the state's death row, according to the California Department 
of Corrections. Laurence's permanent appointment requires approval 
of the state Senate, which is pending, and not all interest groups 
are pleased with him in the job. Kent Scheidegger, the legal director 
for the Criminal Justice Legal Foundation, which supports the death 
penalty, put his reservations this way: ``I'm very concerned about 
Laurence. From what I know about him, he is the advocate of the obstructionist 
school, the idea that a defense lawyer makes every conceivable argument. 
They drag the process out. They deliberately throw sand in the gears 
of the system.'' For his part, Laurence, a former director of the 
Death Penalty Project for the American Civil Liberties Union of Northern 
California, said he had no intention of using his new position to 
do anything to slow justice. ``I don't believe the state should have 
the power to kill people,'' he said. ``But this is clearly not a position 
that allows for advocacy. If I wanted an advocacy position, I would 
not have left the ACLU. And I don't have any qualms about the agency 
being able to provide high-quality representation. That's what we're 
here for.'' In November, Laurence plans to take a couple of days off 
from setting up the center for a trip to Chicago. He is scheduled 
to gave a speech at the Northwestern University Legal Clinic's National 
Conference on Wrongful Convictions and the Death Penalty. Most of 
the 75 people released from death rows around the country in the last 
25 years after evidence of innocence was discovered are also expected 
to attend the conference. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>