<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0135 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They have been together for five bitter decades, and they will stay 
together, it seems, for the foreseeable future. As teen-agers in the 
1940s, they became Nationalist soldiers in China and followed Chiang 
Kai-shek to Taiwan. As middle-aged bachelors in the 1960s and '70s, 
they fled to the United States, angry that Taiwan did not have a pension 
system for veterans. As graying immigrants with no immediate relatives 
within a hemisphere, they toiled in menial jobs in Manhattan's Chinatown. 
And since 1989, William Wong, Chi-ching Tung, Tong-yu Yang and Hsi-shan 
Chang have occupied the same half-bedroom in a dilapidated apartment 
on the Lower East Side. It is a story that only Wong, now a rickety 
66, can tell. The ashes of the other three rest in a tea container 
and two cardboard boxes atop a shoddy bookcase, next to Wong's bed. 
``It's too expensive to put them in a crematorium, a minimum of $50 
each month,'' said Wong, who began storing the remains of his comrades 
after Yang died in 1989. Together, these four men have come to symbolize 
the penury and pathos saturating the lives of many of the 100 or so 
Nationalist veterans in Chinatown, and thousands of others scattered 
throughout the country. For years, the veterans in Chinatown stayed 
in Chinatown, unable to speak English, afraid to venture beyond its 
borders. Loneliness was pervasive, and the men often had only one 
another, and their memories, as company. But now, after decades of 
hiding in the shadows of society's margins, they are seeking recognition 
and help. In recent months, a growing number of veterans in New York 
have demanded more retirement benefits from Taiwan's government _ 
benefits that they say could mean the difference between life and 
death. And to press their case, they have staged demonstrations in 
Chinatown, appealed to politicians and courted the Chinese-language 
news media. ``Everyone has a sad story,'' said Charlin Chang, president 
of a veterans' group called the ROC Veterans' Self-Support Association 
of USA. ``Everyone. And we are all getting older.'' As with anything 
broaching Taiwan politics or history, the campaign has elicited polar 
reactions in New York and abroad. Nationalist loyalists are among 
the veterans' staunchest defenders. But some ethnic Taiwanese _ particularly 
those who view the Nationalists as invading outsiders _ have little 
sympathy, and wonder aloud at what point self-pity stops and self-reliance 
begins. For the veterans, though, the goal is not just money. Deep 
in the sunset of their lives, these men are also struggling to gain 
respect for what they have been through, and understanding for how 
they fell through life's cracks. ``They came for the American dream, 
but perhaps their luck was not right,'' said Wallace Chow, a senior 
assistant at the Taipei Economic and Cultural Office, Taiwan's de 
facto consulate in New York. ``It is sad, but maybe this is just a 
mistake in history.'' The story of Wong and his comrades is typical 
of those who drifted from China to Taiwan to New York's Chinatown. 
As young men without much formal education, they joined the army or 
navy, patriotic and adventurous. But after the Nationalist forces 
were defeated by the Communists and fled to Taiwan, the men never 
returned to China or their families. As the decades passed, they became 
increasingly disillusioned with the soldier's life. Soldiers earned 
only a pittance and were not supposed to marry; those who did forfeited 
their salary, food rations and housing. Those who quit the military 
found civilian life just as difficult. They did not have skills or 
family. So some veterans decided to join commercial fleets, jump ship 
to New York and enter the United States illegally, convinced, as Wong 
put it, that ``America was heaven.'' It was not. They had heard about 
great jobs and big houses, but instead they found only backbreaking 
work at restaurants, sweatshops or construction companies, in a neighborhood 
with a surplus of bachelors. Most remained unmarried and socialized 
mainly with one another, swapping stories about their misspent youth. 
A determined few worked with matchmaking services in China to find 
wives. But many of those matches ended in divorce, particularly after 
the wives discovered that their husbands were poor. Few veterans moved 
out of Chinatown. Few picked up much English. And over the years, 
they found themselves being passed by or overwhelmed by the changing 
landscape. More families moved in, modern buildings went up, and the 
flow of Chinese immigrants and the dialect they spoke changed. These 
days, some veterans collect cans and bottles to survive. Others, Chang 
of the veterans association says, take advantage of free bus rides 
from Chinatown to Atlantic City that are sponsored by the casinos. 
The casinos offer a free meal and $10 for the day, which the veterans 
pocket instead of using it to gamble. Then there is the story of Tzu-cheng 
Chang. Chang, a 76-year-old veteran and bachelor, had worked in a 
restaurant for more than 30 years before quitting four years ago because 
of asthma and arthritis. He survived on food stamps. In July, Chang's 
barber in Chinatown noticed that the man had not dropped by for a 
few weeks. Concerned, he phoned Chang. No one answered. So on July 
30, firefighters entered Chang's tiny apartment on East 17th Street 
in Manhattan. There was a foul smell. Chang had been dead for days. 
In September, more than 60 veterans, some in wheelchairs, demonstrated 
in Chinatown to call attention to the plight of Chang, Wong and others, 
and to clamor for changes to Taiwan's system. Before 1970, Taiwan 
offered its retiring soldiers only a lump-sum discharge of about $10 
for nonofficers, with shoes and a blanket tossed in. ``Our country 
was poor,'' said Ma Kai Nan, director of the overseas liaison department 
of Taiwan's Veterans Affairs Commission, in a telephone interview 
from Taipei. ``Life was difficult, and we couldn't offer the soldiers 
much.'' In 1970, Taiwan established a special fund for nonofficers, 
disbursing the equivalent of about $350 per month per veteran. But 
there was a catch: except for those who lived in mainland China, overseas 
veterans had to return to Taiwan twice a year to claim the money in 
person. As a result, many veterans in the United States have not received 
their money, because they are too infirm to travel and because the 
cost of the trip would exceed the stipend. In addition, some veterans 
are still in the United States illegally, and would be unable to return 
if they left. So instead, the veterans want, among other things, to 
be able to register at any unofficial consulate to claim their money. 
``We've been cheated and lied to from when we were 17 to now,'' said 
Wong. ``We have been patriotic, we have sweated, we have shed our 
blood, but the Taiwan government has not given us anything.'' To date, 
the campaign has largely swirled in the New York area, partly because 
Chinatown holds the largest concentration of veterans and partly because 
veterans elsewhere in the country live too far from one another to 
organize effectively. A small number of veterans, meanwhile, have 
managed to rebuild their lives, finding spouses and better jobs, and 
are uninterested in participating. But there are hints that the campaign 
may be working. While the U.S. government has no official position 
on the matter, several New York politicians, including Assembly Speaker 
Sheldon Silver, have vowed to help. And Taiwan's government plans 
to amend its policy, requiring that the veterans return only once 
a year, said Ma of the Veterans Affairs Commission. But whether this 
support is based on legitimate policy considerations or just pity 
for a dwindling group of desperate men remains a matter of opinion. 
Some people say that while the veterans' stories may be sad, their 
lives have not been discernibly worse than those of millions of Taiwanese 
who endured economic and political hardship. Moreover, some veterans 
already qualify for government assistance in the United States, so 
for them to receive more from Taiwan would look like double dipping. 
In addition, the veterans are viewed by some Taiwanese as relics of 
another era _ dinosaurs from the authoritarian regime of Chiang Kai-shek 
who are out of touch with modern Taiwan. ``People might think, `Why 
are we giving these old soldiers some money?' '' said Tzu-shong Yang, 
a former president of the East Coast chapter of the Democratic Progressive 
Party, Taiwan's main opposition party. ``They have no ties to Taiwan, 
and there are plenty of other people in Taiwan who are suffering even 
more.'' Interestingly enough, if the veterans moved to Taiwan today, 
they would be eligible for benefits that did not exist when they left, 
including free housing and medical care. But most do not want to return, 
afraid to go back to a country that was a backwater when they left, 
and is now the world's 17th-largest economy. So they remain in the 
United States, many living in squalor. Wong, for instance, has lived 
in the same grimy two-bedroom apartment on Essex Street for 30 years. 
Only the roommates have changed. Four people now live in a crammed 
two-bedroom apartment of about 400 square feet, paying $175 per person 
per month. The bathroom does not have a sink. The kitchen does, however, 
and that is where all the roommates leave their toothbrushes, along 
with the dirty dishes. A tattered white sheet dividing Wong's bedroom 
in half gives him the only privacy from that of his latest roommates, 
whom he does not count among his friends. Wong does not have a closet 
in his half, and hangs his clothes on a coat hanger nailed to the 
wall. There are no pictures on the cream-colored walls; the paint 
is peeling. A bookcase, unsteady, holds the remains of his three colleagues. 
The ashes of Yang, who died in 1989, are in a tea container, which 
is wrapped by a Nationalist flag. Those of Chang, who died in 1990, 
are in a cardboard box. And the ashes of Tung, who died in 1997, are 
in a similar box, with a framed photograph of him taped to the front. 
``I miss my friends,'' Wong said with a sigh, cradling the containers. 
``Some day, I'd like to be able to bury them with the proper respect.'' 
For years, Wong shared a bedroom with Tung, a navy veteran from Sichuan 
province. But after Tung died, Wong rented the other half out to a 
man who grew up in Communist China. The two men do not get along. 
Wong declined to identify the man. After all, the roommate does not 
even know that he lives among the ashes of three men, because Wong 
covers the containers whenever he is with strangers. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>