<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0141 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If the Republican National Committee's site selection team picks San 
Antonio for the party's presidential nominating convention in 2000, 
as the backers of the city's drive predict, the nation will be treated 
to a love fest of diversity aimed at drawing Hispanic-Americans into 
the Republican tent, backers say. ``What San Antonio offers, mainly, 
is the sole political reason for choosing any city to host the convention, 
a reason that no other city has, to extend the hand of the Republican 
Party to the Hispanic people of America,'' said Tom Loeffler, a lobbyist 
and former San Antonio area congressman who is co-chairman of the 
local host committee. The nine-member site selection committee finished 
its last visit to San Antonio Friday, indeed its last visit to any 
of the five cities that are finalists for the convention, after three 
days of private meetings with local officials, inspections of 150 
area hotels and a thorough scouring of the downtown Alamodome, which 
would be the convention site. The members will return to their homes 
to work for Republican candidates in the November elections, then 
reconvene later in the month or early in December to decide. Jan Larimer, 
the Wyoming Republican who is head of the committee, said the group 
would submit its decision to the Republican National Committee in 
January. Other cities in the running are Indianapolis, New Orleans, 
New York and Philadelphia. ``I am absolutely confident that the decision 
will be in favor of San Antonio,'' said Red McCombs, the wealthy San 
Antonio car dealer and owner of the Minnesota Vikings who is co-chairman 
of the local host committee. ``I just base it on common sense. This 
is a place known for freedom and free enterprise. That's what Texas 
is, that was the only reason for Texas to exist.'' San Antonio, with 
nearly one million people, is the largest city in the United States 
to have a majority Hispanic population. It was the runner-up for the 
Republican convention in 1996, but insufficient hotel space and other 
factors nudged the Republicans toward San Diego. ``We are in much 
better shape today to host the Republican National Convention than 
we were in 1996,'' said Nelson Wolff, a former San Antonio mayor and 
member of the host committee. ``Plus, we have the best political argument.'' 
Drawing Hispanic people into the party has been a dominant theme in 
Texas Republican politics recently, and is one of the central thrusts 
of Gov. George Bush's re-election campaign. Bush strategists say they 
are aiming for 40 percent of the state's Hispanic vote in November, 
which would be more than any other Republican candidate for statewide 
office has ever received in Texas. Bush received 25 percent of the 
Hispanic vote when first elected governor in 1994. San Antonio has 
also drawn the support of some leading Hispanic Republicans, including 
former Interior Secretary Manuel Lujan Jr. from neighboring New Mexico. 
The reasons for wanting Hispanic people in the party are clear, Loeffler 
said. By 2004, party strategists say Hispanic voters will be numerous 
enough to make the difference in presidential elections, and the Hispanic 
population is increasing fastest in Texas, California and Florida, 
among the nation's most populous and fastest-growing states. ``Neither 
party has extended the hand to Hispanics in the past with utmost sincerity 
and follow-up,'' Loeffler said. ``Now, it's time to reach out and 
perform. And merely having the convention in San Antonio is a strong 
symbol of our outstretched hand.'' Loeffler and many Republican strategists 
say there is a ripe opportunity for the party to attract Hispanic 
voters because, they say, the Democratic Party has not been attentive 
enough to the voting bloc, which has been growing more prosperous 
and more attuned to conservative political themes. Loeffler said: 
``Values of family, church, the work ethic, taking care of yourself 
instead of being taken care of, a very strong patriotic feeling, those 
are the values of most Hispanic-Americans, and the Republican Party 
is the party that reflects those values. I am totally convinced that 
we are a city which is in the correct place at the proper moment.'' 
Of course, the four other finalist cities have their own arguments 
to make. Having the convention in New York, with its Republican mayor 
and Republican governor, would highlight the party's inroads in Democratic 
strongholds. A Philadelphia setting would offer the obvious Liberty 
Bell and Independence Hall backdrops. New Orleans was already the 
site of a Republican convention, in 1988. And Indianapolis, which 
many say is San Antonio's strongest competitor, offers a solid, middle 
American backdrop to talk about family values and a successful history 
of privatization. Ms. Larimer said the selection would not follow 
politics alone. Convention sites, accommodations, transportation and 
the city's financial package would weigh just as heavily, she said. 
There has been some suspicion, particularly in the Texas press, that 
the move to have the convention in San Antonio is a means of providing 
a cozy launching for the potential presidential campaign of Bush, 
the current Republican front-runner in national polls. Not so, Ms. 
Larimer said. ``We have a lot of candidates for the year 2000, and 
we don't know who the candidate will be,'' she said. The site selection 
process began at the Republican National Committee's meeting in January, 
when the committee's members were chosen. Bids were solicited from 
25 cities that had been hosts of previous conventions or had expressed 
interest in the 2000 event, said Timothy Fitzpatrick, deputy press 
secretary for the party's national committee. Nine cities submitted 
bids in April. Los Angeles later withdrew its bid, and a first round 
of visits to the remaining eight cities was held in June and early 
July, after which Minneapolis, Charlotte, N.C., and Chicago were dropped. 
The committee has been making second, more nuts-and-bolts visits to 
the five finalists over the last two months. McCombs, who shares the 
view that a San Antonio convention would help attract Hispanic voters 
to the party, said he had worked hard and spent more than $100,000 
of his own money on the effort for another reason. ``In San Antonio, 
we still have an image problem,'' he said. Despite playing host to 
a world's fair in 1968, re-energizing its downtown with the hugely 
popular Riverwalk development and being the site of high-profile events 
like the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Final Four basketball 
championship, the ninth largest city in the United States is still 
strangely unknown around the country, he said. ``I don't think an 
event like this is as important to a Houston or a New York as it is 
to a city like San Antonio,'' McCombs said. ``It's about jobs. Jobs, 
jobs, jobs. We need to focus attention on the city around the whole 
world and convince companies to relocate here or to expand. That's 
what an event like this can do.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>