<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0166 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just as researchers are closing in on a method to detect abuse of 
the artificial hormone EPO among athletes, a dangerous new drug, which 
is also believed to substantially increase endurance, has aroused 
the active concern of the International Olympic Committee. According 
to Dr. Laurent Rivier, the head of the IOC-accredited laboratory in 
Lausanne, Switzerland, the lab is prepared to test blood samples for 
the presence of perfluorocarbon metabolites, or PFC. The substance 
is, in effect, a synthetic blood, with enormous oxygen-carrying capacity. 
But use of PFC can also be extremely dangerous, particularly without 
medical supervision. Although there is no reliable research on PFC 
abuse in humans, possible symptoms involve a perilous thickening of 
the blood. Rumors of PFC use among athletes first filtered back to 
Lausanne last February from the Winter Olympic Games in Nagano, Japan, 
where cross-country skiers and speed skaters were allegedly using 
the drug. In May, the International Cycling Union issued a warning 
to its national federations about riders' using PFC emulsions. ``We 
heard that some cyclists are now using it in Switzerland,'' said Dr. 
Martial Saugy, an associate director of the Lausanne laboratory. ``I 
think in the cyclists' world, they know it can be very dangerous. 
It's not the same story as EPO.'' Sandrine Martelli, a spokeswoman 
for the International Cycling Union, or UCI, said last week: ``It 
is a delicate subject and difficult to speak about. There have been 
many rumors, but little is known. Usually there is no smoke without 
fire.'' Cycling hardly needs another scandal after the debacle of 
this year's Tour de France, in which the world's top team, Festina, 
was disqualified for systematic doping. And last week, the Italian 
police raided that country's cycling federation headquarters as well 
as the Italian Olympic Committee's offices and its laboratory as part 
of its investigation into drugs in sport. Police confiscated pharmaceutical 
products and documents, including drug tests going back as far as 
1985. And cycling is not alone. Thursday, Carlo Tranquilli, one of 
the Italian soccer federation's official doctors, said he was resigning 
amid continuing doping allegations in that sport. Likewise, reports 
of PFC use have extended beyond cyclists to include even canoeists 
and thoroughbred race horses. Dr. Michel Audran, a professor of pharmacology 
and biophysics at Montpellier University in France, is conducting 
research into EPO and PFC detection. He has said he believes that 
some cyclists used the substance at the Tour de France along with 
the more widely known EPO and human growth hormone. Thirty cyclists, 
all members of the three teams from whom drugs were confiscated in 
the Tour, were ordered to give blood samples for testing. One of them 
showed small traces of PFCs, according to a laboratory employee who 
insisted on anonymity. Audran said the possible use of PFCs had come 
to his attention earlier, in May, during a stage of the Tour of Romandie 
in Switzerland, when the Swiss cyclist Mauro Gianetti, unconscious 
and in danger, was taken to a hospital in the little town of Montigny. 
Doctors there were unable to diagnose the stricken rider's condition, 
and within hours, Gianetti was transported by ambulance to the university 
hospital in Lausanne, almost 40 miles away. According to a doctor 
in the Lausanne hospital who spoke on condition of anonymity, the 
emergency room doctors suspected some kind of infection and ordered 
the appropriate tests. Gianetti was in intensive care for 10 days; 
all the tests came back negative. ``His symptoms were difficulty breathing, 
muscle pain, gastroenteritis and what we call intravascular coagulation,'' 
the doctor said. ``It was a very dangerous problem.'' Two doctors 
from the Lausanne hospital suspected that Gianetti had been given 
PFCs without his knowledge and reported their suspicions, said Nicolas 
Cruchet, a judge in Lausanne. Cruchet launched an official investigation. 
Reached at his home two weeks ago in Tessin, high in the Swiss Alps, 
Gianetti laughed off the situation. ``Yes, I was very ill with an 
infection, but I didn't inject myself with anything,'' he said. ``They 
thought that somebody had given me something that was bad for my health. 
The investigation is not against me. It is against somebody who could 
have given me something.'' Gianetti said he was in top condition, 
and he represented his country at last week's World Cycling championships 
in Maastricht, the Netherlands. He finished 35th, in a pack 14 minutes 
46 minutes behind the winner. Two years ago, he won a silver medal 
at the championships. Although PFCs are not officially on the market, 
there is active research into the products for legitimate medical 
use. Several companies in the United States are developing PFCs in 
answer to the chronic blood shortage. This problem, together with 
the inherent risk of infection through blood transfusions, has fueled 
research for an artificial blood. Oxycyte is one such PFC product 
that is expected to enter clinical trials next year. ``If the product 
is oxygenated with 100 percent oxygen, then you will have the effect 
of carrying oxygen to the muscle tissues at five times the rate of 
hemoglobin,'' said Bob Nicora, president of Synthetic Blood Institute 
based in Kettering, Ohio. ``Oxycyte is the kind of product that there 
probably could be some sort of underground sports use. There's no 
way to control that.'' As usual, the IOC has reacted cautiously to 
the rumors of PFC use. ``The International Olympic Committee is concerned 
by any kind of practice which may be harmful to the athletes' health 
and also which may be against the idea of fair competition,'' Patrick 
Schamasch, the IOC's medical director, said last week in a telephone 
interview. ``These drugs are not even licensed for use in medical 
practice. We must first try to investigate for the moment and try 
to collect some samples and gather information,'' he said. ``For sure 
at our next meeting of the IOC medical doping subcommission, we will 
speak of it. That meeting is in December.'' At the Institut National 
de la Recherche Scientifique, a lab in Pointe Claire, Quebec, Dr. 
Christiane Ayotte expects to receive samples of PFCs soon. She and 
her staff will run the samples through a gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer, 
the most advanced doping control technology available. Normally Ayotte 
or her staff ingest ``mystery drugs'' themselves _ always in small 
quantities _ to identify the various metabolites in the urine. This 
gives a basis for future detection. Not this time, however. ``We will 
not inject ourselves with this stuff,'' Ayotte said. ``No way. I am 
too frightened of this.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>