<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0179 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As prosecutors investigate allegations that millions of dollars were 
stolen from the city's largest union of municipal workers, months 
of disclosures paint a picture of rampant corruption, in which money 
flowed freely and there was a startling lack of financial controls. 
Top union officials, including Stanley Hill, the politically powerful 
director of District Council 37, the umbrella group representing 120,000 
city workers, acknowledge that they exerted little financial oversight 
of the council's 56 locals, even in the face of clear excesses. The 
district council and its parent union even point fingers at each other 
for failing to provide financial oversight of the wayward locals. 
One local paid $92,000 for a Christmas party and often paid a caterer 
more than $10,000 for food for union meetings that fewer than 100 
people attended. At the local representing City University's clerical 
workers, members have demanded an investigation into the disappearance 
of $192,000. And the president of the council's largest local received 
$685,000 for fraudulent overtime expenses, according to a union judicial 
panel, after he claimed to have worked 35 hours of overtime every 
week for four years. Hill approved those overtime payments even though 
that local was already more than $5 million in debt. ``I'm not going 
to be a Monday morning quarterback,'' Hill said in an interview. ``There 
were communications with my treasurer in terms of making sure the 
local's board had approved this.'' Manhattan District Attorney Robert 
Morgenthau has subpoenaed all 56 locals as he investigates unusual 
and inflated payments _ all part of an inquiry into accusations of 
embezzlement and kickbacks from caterers, lawyers, travel agents and 
others doing business with the union. The spiraling allegations are 
a bitter setback to District Council 37, once considered the nation's 
pre-eminent public sector union, and to Hill, one of the city's most 
visible labor leaders and a close ally of Mayor Rudolph Giuliani. 
The scandal not only hurts the union's reputation and bargaining clout, 
but also tarnishes Hill, whom many members have criticized as being 
too cozy with the mayor. Hill accepted a two-year pay freeze for union 
members and has done little to protest the expansion of workfare. 
Anticipating a wave of indictments this fall, many union members predict 
that the parent union, the American Federation of State, County and 
Municipal Employees, will soon put the whole district council into 
trusteeship and push out Hill in an effort to clean house. As a result 
of the spiraling scandal, many union members are asking pointed questions 
about Hill's effectiveness as council leader and about how he could 
have let corruption gain such a foothold in his once-revered union. 
``Too often people have looked at their leadership position not as 
an opportunity to serve, but as kind of a right to plunder,'' said 
Charles Ensley, president of the local representing 16,000 social 
service workers. ``I don't see how any of us can completely absolve 
the district council of all responsibility _ it happened during their 
watch.'' The council Hill heads is an awkward structure in which the 
presidents of the locals largely run their own affairs, although the 
district council handles collective bargaining for all the locals. 
Almost all of the locals' and council's money comes from union dues 
the city collects when it pays its employees. Hill, who took office 
12 years ago, angrily rebuffs criticism that he was delinquent in 
policing the locals' finances. The district council has no power to 
audit the locals, he asserted, saying that the locals should have 
done a better job running their affairs and that the parent union 
had the real responsibility for oversight. He said the locals' presidents, 
who jealously guard their power and prerogatives, usually kept the 
district council out of the loop about their financial affairs. ``A 
local president can go out there and authorize ABC and Stanley Hill 
may not be aware of it,'' Hill said. ``How can the local's auditor 
let it go? That's a good question.'' The district council's controller, 
Alvin Warshaviak, put the situation more starkly: ``We never, ever 
reviewed their books. We never had anything to do with any of their 
expenditures.'' The situation is not so simple, however, because many 
locals were in debt and often asked the district council for loans, 
with council officials often knowing how the loans would be spent. 
Officials from the parent union contend that Hill and his treasurer 
should have been the principal backstops to prevent financial wrongdoing 
in the locals. ``Constitutionally, the district council has relatively 
little authority in the auditing area, but we count on them to alert 
us to problems in local unions,'' said Larry Weinberg, general counsel 
for the parent union. ``They can learn not by auditing the books, 
but by what they observe in patterns of expenditures.'' He said the 
parent union did not have the time or manpower to audit its 3,600 
locals nationwide. Hill's predecessor, Victor Gotbaum, took a more 
hands-on approach in his 22 years running the council, saying that 
he often had his treasurer inspect the locals' books. Gotbaum said 
he occasionally pushed out officials after discovering that they had 
pocketed union money. ``It may be technically true that we didn't 
have the power to examine their books,'' Gotbaum said. ``But if we 
felt something was wrong, we'd just look at the books or we'd call 
in the international union. We had no trouble doing that.'' In other 
words, where there was a will, there was a way to provide oversight. 
But with Hill steadfastly deferring to the autonomy of locals, financial 
oversight fell through the cracks. Labor experts point to other reasons 
for the problems. Under federal law, the government monitors public-sector 
unions far less than private-sector ones. In addition, many union 
leaders know little about financial management and are tempted by 
the huge sums they handle. Embarrassed by the scandal, Hill and the 
parent union have raced to adopt stricter financial rules. They now 
acknowledge that there was not enough oversight and that many locals 
failed to provide basic financial information to their members to 
help them detect improprieties. Under the new rules, the parent union, 
which has 1.3 million members nationally, will be required to do annual 
audits of the 60 locals that have more than 2,000 members. In addition, 
all large locals will have to file quarterly financial reports. As 
for the district council, its new rules not only give its treasurer 
clear power to inspect the locals' finances, but also require the 
locals to adhere to a new ethical code and to file annual financial 
reports with the council. ``Under the new guidelines, we are 100 percent 
sure these things won't happen again,'' Hill said. The first hints 
of financial wrongdoing emerged last February when the parent union 
put Local 372 into trusteeship because that local, which represents 
25,000 cafeteria aides and crossing guards, was $10 million in debt 
and had not paid $500,000 in rent owed to the district council. Most 
locals have their offices in the council's headquarters, near City 
Hall. In June, an internal union panel expelled Charles Hughes, the 
local's president, finding that he had wrongly taken huge sums, including 
$329,000 for personal credit card bills and $685,000 for fraudulent 
overtime. Hughes says that he worked 35 hours of overtime a week from 
1994 to 1997. These revelations disgraced a popular leader and political 
heavyweight. Hughes was close to Giuliani and had appeared in a campaign 
commercial for him last year. The members of his local, most of them 
part-time, average about $10,000 yearly. With Hughes' local deeply 
in debt, he had an aide send a note to the district council's treasurer, 
Robert Myers, asking the council to pay him $685,000 in overtime claims. 
Myers wrote a series of checks totaling that amount, counting them 
as additional debt that Hughes' local owed the council. Myers paid 
the overtime not long after Hill and Myers had warned Hughes to get 
his local's finances in order. They even persuaded him to agree to 
monthly spending limits, but that agreement did not stop the locals' 
deficit from soaring to $10 million last year from $5.4 million in 
1996. This episode enraged many union members. Internal critics say 
Hill should have read Hughes the riot act years earlier about his 
mushrooming deficit. And they questioned how Hughes and Myers could 
have paid the $685,000 to Hughes when a union judicial panel later 
found that the overtime requests were transparently fraudulent. Hill 
defended the checks paid to Hughes, noting that the local's executive 
board had approved the payments. Many members say Hill is too nice 
and has a hard time cracking down on miscreants. To others, he is 
a chicken assigned to guard the foxes. His role is to oversee leaders 
who play an instrumental role in electing him, making it uncomfortable 
for him to ask tough questions about their finances. ``Stanley Hill 
I think has integrity, but he's in a situation where he doesn't have 
control,'' said James Miller, an expert on public employee unions 
at the Cornell University School of Industrial and Labor Relations. 
``He is dependent on these people for his position. There are really 
no checks and balances there.'' But Hill insists that he cracks down 
when necessary, noting that in January he asked the parent union to 
place Hughes' local in trusteeship. And he said he does not take electoral 
considerations into account in deciding whether to punish union officials. 
``When it comes to representing this council, I am not a nice guy,'' 
he said. ``Being a nice guy doesn't mean that you're not tough. When 
there's a violation, we respond to it.'' Gerald Shargel, Hughes' lawyer, 
said his client ``has been one of the city's most effective and competent 
labor leaders. Obviously, these allegations are disturbing. But it 
would be wrong for people to rush to judgment.'' Mark Rosenthal, the 
new president of the motor vehicle operators' local, asserted that 
Hill was less than aggressive in pursuing accusations of wrongdoing. 
In a meeting last year, Rosenthal and several dozen other union members 
complained to Hill about what they saw as evidence of kickbacks and 
overspending. They pointed out that before Rosenthal took office, 
$92,000 was spent on the 1995 Christmas party and $11,000 was spent 
on 250 turkeys for members at Christmas. They paid $44 each for turkeys 
that normally cost about half that. ``When we didn't feel Stanley 
was moving fast enough, the members brought this information to the 
district attorney,'' Rosenthal said. But Hill said he had ordered 
an investigation and an audit, adding that in his view it was unfortunate 
that the local's members had gone to the district attorney. Many critics 
say that if Hill had adopted a tough, anti-corruption approach early 
on, the district council would not be facing a crisis. ``At the top, 
there's an incredible attitude of looking the other way, of not questioning 
anything that anybody does,'' said Arthur Schwartz, the lawyer for 
the motor vehicle operators' local. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>