<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981017.0097 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The House of Unions, like so many buildings in Russia, has served 
many different masters. In the 18th century, a Crimean prince commissioned 
its construction in Moscow. Russian nobles later converted it to a 
private club. Lenin, Stalin and Brezhnev lay in state behind its bright 
green facade. And in June, as Russia lurched toward a financial crisis 
that set off global shock waves, the House of Unions was rented for 
a glittering celebration of capitalism, with one of the country's 
most ardent bankers, Goldman, Sachs &AMP; Co., as its host. Goldman 
flew in former President George Bush, paying him more than $100,000, 
and entertained Russia's former prime minister. But between toasts 
to U.S.-Russian ties, the talk was about what really mattered to Goldman 
and many Wall Street brethren: deals. True, Russia was a mess, the 
government's bank accounts were almost empty and even the postal system 
was near collapse. But Goldman wanted to become Russia's leading deal 
maker, paid handsomely to finance the government and newly private 
businesses. Now was the time to prove that Goldman could come through 
with money in a crisis. So in the days preceding its elegant soiree, 
Goldman helped the government raise money by selling $1.25 billion 
in bonds. A few weeks later, it arranged a complex deal in which short-term 
debt was exchanged for long-term debt to give Russia financial breathing 
room. It was not enough. By late August, the Russian government stopped 
paying what it owed on much of its debt. Buyers of the bonds that 
Goldman sold now hold nearly worthless paper. Goldman itself escaped 
the blood bath: in the course of those bond deals it earned tens of 
millions of dollars in fees and protected hundreds of millions of 
dollars it had at stake in Russia. When the government defaulted, 
Goldman said its losses were ``absolutely minimal.'' Senior Goldman 
executives expressed regret that Russia's economic program collapsed 
and that the deals that bear Goldman's imprimatur did not always work 
as intended. But they defended the firm's role there as ``very constructive'' 
and attributed the country's troubles to problems that had little 
to do with investment banking. Goldman maintains a small office in 
Russia. But the firm's troubled bond deal and the skillful protection 
of its own money are a window on the role that many investment banks 
played in the breathless rise and fall of the newly liberated Russian 
economy. To critics, including Russian officials, analysts and some 
investment bankers who worked in Russia, Wall Street helped hook Russia 
on easy money, rarely saying no or advising clients to take it slow. 
They fed the seemingly insatiable appetite for borrowed money. Bankers 
helped the Russian government borrow billions from foreign investors 
before it could reliably collect taxes to pay them back. Bankers flattered 
the country's oligarchs, an emerging class of elite businessmen, with 
generous loans that many commercial banks shunned as too risky. They 
helped regional governments raise money for farms through ``agro bonds,'' 
even though the system of money-draining Soviet-style collectives 
never ended. With the help of investment bankers, Russia built a roaring 
bond market, but never developed a bricks-and-mortar banking system 
that provided loans the conventional way. Nor did Russia attract much 
investment from multinational companies. Such companies have committed 
about $8.7 billion to the country, while Russia's governments and 
businesses have incurred more than four times that much in short-term 
debt that must be repaid within a year. ``What the Russian problem 
reflects is that today's bankers often don't have long-lasting concerns 
about customer-client relations,'' said Paul Volcker, the former chairman 
of the Federal Reserve and an occasional adviser to Russian government 
officials. ``You just do the deal and get out.'' Volcker noted that 
Russia was part of a broader problem in many emerging markets, where 
local companies and governments have tried to raise money quickly 
by issuing securities even before they are ready to handle the demands 
of shareholders and debt payments. ``Greed prevails over prudence,'' 
he said. Russia's experience stands in sharp contrast to the developing 
world's other heavyweight, China. In the last seven years, foreign 
companies have invested about $181 billion in China, much of it to 
finance long-term industrial joint ventures or wholly owned foreign 
factories. Though investment bankers eagerly knocked at the door, 
Beijing has restricted the freedom of its companies and local governments 
to borrow money abroad, fearing such money could leave as quickly 
as it came. Some Wall Street bankers acknowledge that in pursuit of 
profits they glossed over some warning signs about Russia _ corporate 
corruption, failure to pay loans on time, gross accounting irregularities 
and tax evasion _ because they were blinded by the country's enormous 
natural wealth. Others say they were lulled into complacence by a 
presumption of international backing for the Russian experiment with 
markets. Many bankers acknowledge privately that they courted Russia 
more eagerly, and sometimes with less discretion, than they did many 
other darlings of the developing world, including many countries where 
capitalism had much longer to gestate. ``In a short time, we went 
from having a sovereign government that was not considered credit 
worthy to a situation in which virtually every regional government 
and every top company was coming to the investment banking community 
or being approached by them to talk about stocks and bonds,'' said 
Jim Dannis, head of European emerging markets for Salomon Smith Barney. 
``We very rapidly had an oversupply of services, followed by a sudden 
collapse.'' The Rush: A Market Ripe For the Picking From November 
1996, when J.P Morgan and SBC-Warburg jointly marketed Russia's first 
international bond since the days of the czar, to August, when the 
country defaulted on its debt, there was a stampede of bond and stock 
deals. The rush was so great that bankers sometimes nearly tripped 
over themselves in pursuit of clients that some thought marginal even 
at the time. In the summer of 1997, for example, many leading investment 
bankers crowded first-class sections on Aeroflot flights from Moscow 
to the central Siberian city of Irkutsk, where the soil was underlain 
with permafrost and a local energy company, Irkutskenergo, was thinking 
of raising money abroad. Managers at the power plant had so many suitors 
that they made bankers prove their mettle: Those who wanted to underwrite 
Irkutskenergo's bond were required to provide up-front loans of $50 
million, then guarantee in writing that the company would pay interest 
rates only modestly higher than what the U.S. government pays, bankers 
who competed for the business said. Most scoffed, but several investment 
banks accepted Irkutskenergo's terms. SBC-Warburg, the Swiss-British 
investment bank, eventually won the company's nod to underwrite the 
bond. There were a wave of stock deals, too. Shares of 28 Russian 
companies, including a department store, several banks, half a dozen 
energy companies and a few industrial concerns, were offered to the 
public by big Wall Street names including Salomon, Morgan Stanley 
Dean Witter, and Donaldson Lufkin &AMP; Jenrette and trade on the 
New York Stock Exchange through direct or indirect listings. All those 
Russian stocks now trade at one-fifth, one-tenth, even one-twentieth 
of their offering prices, meaning that investors who bought in early 
and held have lost most of their money. For an immature market, Russia 
also took on some of the financial trappings of developed countries, 
with Wall Street help. For example, Credit Suisse First Boston, the 
Swiss-American investment bank, pioneered a way for foreign speculators 
to buy and sell high-interest Russian government debt. The bank was 
one of the most active traders in Russia, adding to an already overheated 
market. It was also one of the biggest sellers of Russian debt derivatives 
to foreign investors, earning big profits in 1996 and 1997 but losing 
what analysts expect will amount to $500 million to $2 billion this 
year because of its heavy exposure in Russia after the country defaulted. 
Indeed, nearly every big Wall Street firm had an active and growing 
operation in Russia before the collapse. From the start, however, 
Goldman, Sachs stood out. In 1992, under its chief executive, Robert 
Rubin, who is now the U.S. treasury secretary, Goldman was named banking 
adviser to Boris Yeltsin's new government, recruited to help attract 
foreign investment. Business was slow, however, and Goldman pulled 
out of Russia entirely in 1994, angering some senior Russian officials, 
bankers said. When Russian markets took off two years later, however, 
Goldman rushed back in _ and opened its checkbook to make temporary 
loans as a prelude to winning investment banking business. Goldman's 
willingness to shell out big, up-front loans bolstered Russia's confidence 
that Wall Street was unlikely to shut off the financing spigot, and 
that even companies with spotty track records could count on a flow 
of money from abroad. Investors _ including big mutual funds and hedge 
funds _ also complain that Goldman was so eager to prove its underwriting 
prowess to the Russian government that it flooded the international 
market for Russian bonds in the final weeks before the country defaulted. 
Moreover, Goldman used a bond deal to pay back one of its own temporary 
loans. It also used $550 million of its own capital to create momentum 
for its second big bond deal, but reduced that exposure to Russian 
bonds shortly after the deal was complete. Those moves raised some 
concerns among investors, especially because the bonds are now worth 
much less than they were when they were first sold. But Glenn Earle, 
a Goldman managing director who oversees the firm's Russian business 
as head of its new markets team, dismisses such criticism as ``largely 
carping from competitors and the misrepresentation of sound transactions 
with the advantage of 20/20 hindsight.'' ``We made a very significant 
impact in the Russian market,'' Earle said. ``We had the very high-profile 
assignments, the most difficult ones, which we were pitching for along 
with all the other major banks. It is obviously extremely unfortunate 
that the market turned out this way. But the speed and extent of the 
collapse was both unforeseen and unforeseeable by our competitors 
and ourselves.'' Still, the firm's tactics were among the most aggressive 
of Western banks scouting business in Russia's still-untapped market, 
other bankers said. Goldman, for example, made loans as sweeteners 
to Russian companies that were considered by most commercial banks 
to be risky borrowers. The idea was to lock up new investment banking 
in the future by advancing them money, a practice common to many, 
but not all, of its investment banking rivals. Goldman officials said 
that they were not eager to make such loans and that they fended off 
many Russian demands for cheap short-term financing. But they said 
that in some cases they considered it the price of making business 
contacts in Russia's fledgling banking market. Goldman made loans 
to at least four clients, the oil giant Yukos, the Russian banks Inkombank 
and Menatep and its largest client, the Russian government. The firm 
said those loans were often arranged in conjunction with other Western 
banks, and that its chief rivals recruited or tried to recruit the 
same clients. The Oligarchs: Goldman Courts A Young Tycoon The loans 
sped Goldman's rush into Russia's feverish market. An early target: 
companies controlled by the oligarchs, businessmen who control most 
of the country's big industries. A few such businessmen have acknowledged 
that they took control of Russian national companies in auctions that 
were deeply flawed, allowing them to buy once-prized national energy 
and mining companies at fire sale prices. Analysts suspect that many 
big Russian conglomerates have siphoned cash from the companies they 
took over, putting it in foreign accounts. Russian officials speak 
openly of their worries that the conglomerates, many of them publicly 
listed, often flouted the law. ``Most of the companies were ignoring 
most of the regulations and used to violate them all of the time,'' 
said Dmitri Vasiliev, who recently resigned as chairman of Russia's 
Federal Commission for the Securities Market. ``It's not easy to enforce 
securities laws here because we don't have the courts we need to prosecute 
violators.'' Eager to forge alliances with businessmen who could one 
day prove to be Rockefellers or Gettys, Goldman sought to develop 
close relations with Menatep. The bank was the financing arm in the 
empire of Mikhail Khodorkovsky, a 35-year-old, tough-talking businessman 
who controlled one of the country's biggest business networks, including 
Yukos and other big oil concerns. Goldman's calling card: a $200 million 
loan for Menatep. Bankers who have had direct dealings with Khodorkovsky 
said that he used Menatep and Yukos to wangle cash out of smaller 
companies in which Menatep had big equity stakes. Some of those subsidiary 
companies are publicly listed, and they have minority shareholders 
who do not benefit from profits at Yukos or Menatep. Yukos has also 
pledged much of its projected short-term earnings as collateral to 
go on a huge borrowing binge, analysts said, raising serious doubts 
about the company's ability to pay its debts. Khodorkovsky, as well 
as Menatep and Yukos officials in Moscow, declined repeated interview 
requests by telephone and fax. A lawyer for the company in Washington 
declined to comment, and was unable to obtain a response from company 
representatives. Yukos had approached several banks, including Morgan 
Stanley and Chase Manhattan, seeking a $500 million loan in the summer 
of 1997 _ some more than once _ but was repeatedly turned away. Then 
Goldman entered the picture. Late last year, Goldman arranged for 
a group of banks, including Credit Lyonnais and Merrill Lynch, to 
join in lending Yukos $500 million, with oil-export earnings used 
as collateral, in advance of a proposed bond offering. The banks had 
hoped to repackage the loan as a security and sell it to other investors. 
But as was often the case in Russia, their ardor was not matched by 
market demand: Much of the loan remains on their books, meaning that 
Yukos still owes them money. While Yukos missed a debt payment last 
spring, putting the loan into technical default, Goldman says the 
payments are now current, and does not consider it a loss. Goldman's 
help in raising money for Yukos had a direct impact on some American 
companies. The Dart Management Co., which oversees Russian investments 
of the Michigan industrialist Kenneth Dart, has stakes in several 
formerly independent oil companies that Yukos now controls. E. Michael 
Hunter, Dart's manager in Russia and a former banker, said Yukos routinely 
squeezed profits out of its new subsidiaries by forcing them to sell 
oil to the parent company at below-market prices. Yukos then resold 
the oil abroad at market prices and collected the profits at the expense 
of its subsidiaries. Hunter said he wrote letters to Goldman's chairman 
and chief executive, Jon Corzine, and the heads of other banks in 
the lending syndicate detailing Yukos' business practices. He urged 
the banks not to accept the disputed oil exports as collateral for 
the loan they made to Yukos. Hunter said his pleas were rejected by 
the banking syndicate's lawyer. ``I think they are horribly bad at 
doing due diligence,'' Hunter said of Goldman and Yukos' other bankers. 
``They were moved by greed, frankly. They preferred to hitch their 
horse to these guys rather than to face the truth.'' Goldman officials 
said that they believed that Yukos acted legally under Russian law, 
though the firm declined to discuss the details of its relationship 
with the client. The Investors: So Many New Bonds, So Little Confidence 
Since the default in August, investors in Russian bonds have criticized 
Goldman and another top adviser to Moscow, J.P. Morgan, for their 
work in issuing Russian bonds. Investors and some rival bankers argue 
that bond issues underwritten by those two firms swamped an already-soggy 
bond market, accelerating a loss of investor confidence. By the spring 
of this year, Russia found it nearly impossible to issue any more 
ruble-denominated bonds in its domestic market. After a flood of issues 
over three years that left Moscow struggling to pay interest on tens 
of billions of dollars in borrowings, investors lost faith and declined 
to buy more short-term Russian debt. The government was also having 
great difficulty collecting taxes. So, it sought bankers who would 
help find new sources of foreign money. Before the summer, Russia 
had issued a cumulative total of $4.3 billion in medium- and long-term 
dollar bonds overseas, and that market was viewed as potentially much 
larger. To the Russians, Goldman was the key. It underwrote a $1.25 
billion issue of dollar-denominated bonds known as Eurobonds in June 
_ the first new dollar bonds Russia managed to sell since the fall, 
before Asia's turmoil spread. Goldman also arranged a $6.4 billion 
bond swap in July, which allowed investors in Russia's short-term 
ruble debt to exchange their holdings for longer-term dollar bonds. 
This offered at least temporary breathing space for the government. 
Combined with a separate $2.5 billion Eurobond issue underwritten 
by J.P. Morgan and Deutsche Bank in late June, the investment banks 
tripled the total supply of Russia's dollar bonds in just six weeks 
_ from $4.3 billion to nearly $15 billion _ despite growing investor 
squeamishness about emerging markets. Many bankers judge the merits 
of a bond or stock deal by whether prices rise or at least hold firm 
after the issue is sold to investors. That's because clients do not 
want to see the market value of their securities plummet, which makes 
it harder to raise money later. Russia's summer bond deals did not 
pass that price test: while the new issues prompted a brief market 
rally, they soon tumbled. J.P. Morgan's Russia Eurobond index gives 
the tally: the Russian benchmark bond price hovered above $100 all 
year until the new issues began reaching the market in June. By late 
July, just before the giant Goldman swap of ruble bonds for dollar 
bonds, the benchmark price had fallen to just above $80. But it was 
soon after that Goldman bond swap, in late July, that the bottom fell 
out. The crash to about $50 directly preceded Russia's default. In 
fact, some investors in Russian dollar bonds complain that the deals 
contributed to the default: With the international bond market collapsing 
along with the domestic one, the Russian government saw another of 
its channels for raising money blocked, perhaps concluding that it 
had little left to lose by defaulting. Steve Merrell, a manager for 
the IDS Global Bond Fund and an active investor in Russian dollar 
bonds, said that underwriters torpedoed the market with the deluge 
of new issues, undercutting prices. ``In hindsight there was no plan,'' 
Merrell said. ``Just take as much money as the market will give and 
hope it holds together.'' A senior J.P. Morgan banker responsible 
for the firm's business in the Russian region said that his institution 
acted with good faith in Russia and that the firm considered the June 
bond deal it underwrote to be a success. Likewise, Michael Sherwood, 
head of Goldman's emerging-markets syndicate desk in London, argued 
that Goldman's June bond deal was well received by investors, selling 
out in less than an hour and raising much-needed money for Russia 
at a tough time. The July debt swap, he said, fell short of Goldman's 
goal of relieving Russia's domestic debt burden, though he said that 
it was the right thing to do. The reason the swap failed, he said, 
was because it was too small, not too large. If investors had opted 
to swap more of their short-term ruble debt for long-term dollar bonds, 
the deal might have allowed Russia to continue to pay interest on 
all its debt, avoiding default. He said he suspected that investors 
might have chosen not to participate in Goldman's swap because they 
had a false sense of confidence that Russia would continue to honor 
its high-interest ruble debt, a favorite source of income for speculative 
hedge funds. Many also may have hoped that the International Monetary 
Fund would pump enough money into Russia to insure that it did not 
fail. Whatever the merits for Russia, the deals were good for Goldman. 
The firm earned fees of about $56 million for arranging the July debt 
swap alone, rival bankers say, though they add that that fee is standard 
in the industry for the work performed. Part of the proceeds Russia 
raised from the June bond issue also went to pay off Goldman's half-share 
of $500 million in short-term financing known as a bridge loan to 
the Russian government late last year. That loan, Goldman officials 
acknowledge, was made to put its name at the front of the list of 
banks jostling to be named advisers and underwriters for the government. 
Goldman officials said they had an agreement with the government to 
have the loan repaid as soon as Russia raised money through a foreign 
bond offering. Goldman was the underwriter for the first such offering 
made after the loan was extended. Rival bankers and investors say 
the bridge loan raises the question of a conflict of interest because 
Goldman, with nearly 4 percent of its partners' capital tied up in 
that one loan, was highly motivated to market the June bond deal _ 
and make sure that it was big enough for Russia to pay Goldman back. 
Goldman itself at that time was preparing to issue shares to the public, 
a move that would require the private partnership to open its books 
to scrutiny for the first time in its 130-year history. A large bridge 
loan to the Russian government, unsecured by collateral and made at 
a time of considerable turmoil in emerging markets worldwide, would 
have raised a red flag for brokerage firm analysts and credit rating 
agencies, which view that kind of lending as high risk. Goldman also 
had a great deal of its own capital at stake in the second bond deal, 
but managed to take it off the table well before the August default. 
The firm said that it sought to generate momentum for the July debt 
swap by buying ruble-denominated securities in the days leading up 
to the swap for the purpose of including them in the swap transaction 
_ a standard, though somewhat risky, underwriting activity, not altogether 
unlike a publisher snapping up books from stores to try to get the 
title on the best-seller list. After the swap was completed, that 
left Goldman with a store of newly minted Russian dollar bonds valued 
at about $550 million. Goldman disclosed in financial documents that 
it had the right to participate in the swap offering in this way. 
But the story has another twist: Even as Goldman proclaimed publicly 
as recently as its elegant House of Unions party that it was in Russia 
for the long term, the firm appears to have had limited faith in the 
country's financial future. Goldman confirms that its trading position 
on Russian debt went from ``quite long'' in the days around the swap 
to ``flat'' or even ``short'' by August, meaning that it substantially 
trimmed its $550 million holdings of Russian bonds or even had trading 
positions that would have benefited from a fall in prices of those 
bonds. Goldman officials declined to talk in detail about the trading 
the firm does on its own account. But officials said the international 
dollar bond market was large, accommodating large buy and sell orders 
each day, and that Goldman was an active trader in that market. The 
firm, these officials said, frequently buys large blocks of bonds 
and sells them to investors when it thinks the price is right, a practice 
they describe as a routine part of Goldman's core business. Rival 
bankers agree that Goldman would not have been wise to invest lots 
of money in Russian dollar bonds at such a volatile time _ though 
other firms do often keep a store of bonds in which they are dealers 
to facilitate trading. But several bankers who followed the transaction 
noted that Goldman accumulated its holdings of Russian bonds specifically 
to create momentum for its swap deal, then quickly sold the bonds 
when the deal was done, a sequence that Goldman does not deny. Goldman 
officials said that market demand for Russian dollar bonds was still 
strong when it trimmed its position. But other bankers said Goldman's 
heavy selling almost certainly worsened the sharp drop in Russian 
dollar bond prices in the days following the debt swap. Moreover, 
by quickly selling off its own holdings just after it led investors 
to purchase the same securities suggests that it was worried more 
about the firm's own money than the long-term interests of its client, 
the Russian government, these bankers say. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>