<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981023.1830.0079 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. If you had been glued to the television in two, maybe 
three countries since early this morning, you'd have understood this 
was a crazy day. First there was a flurry of excitement about an agreement 
between Israel and the Palestinians after President Clinton had worked 
with them all night. And then there was a crisis between the U.S. 
and Israel, because suddenly, freedom for an American who had spied 
for Israel against the U.S. was part or not part of the deal. There 
were several hours of talk about blackmail and who'd promised what, 
and then it all seem to get smoothed over, at least for today. There 
was an agreement. We begin with ABC's Sam Donaldson at the White House. 
That's right, Peter. A U.S. official actually announced a deal had 
been reached, only to have to take it back. And for a few agonizing 
hours, there was the real possibility that everything would blow up. 
But my midafternoon, everyone was smiling. They came back here to 
participate in a signing ceremony. It was another of those historic 
occasions in the White House east room that presidents dream of. After 
nine days of bargaining, the interim agreement had achieved. We have 
seized this moment. We have overcome tremendous challenges and achieved 
success for both sides. . We will never go back to violence and confrontation, 
no return to confrontation and violence. For his part, the president 
warned of danger ahead as well as promise. The enemies of peace will 
seek to extract a price from both sides. They, themselves, may have 
put themselves at greater risk. They have given both Israelis and 
Palestinians a chance to have the future we all want for our children 
and our children's children. As the parties signed the agreement, 
king Hussein of Jordan witnessed their signatures. Everyone credited 
his mediation during the negotiations as indesuspensible in making 
this moment possible. In the agreement, Israel will turn over to the 
Palestinians an additional 13% of West Bank land. A detailed security 
plan will be put in place and monitored by the United States CIA. 
The Palestinians will remove from their charter all traces of language 
calling for the destruction of Israel. Israel will return many, but 
not all, of the Palestinian prisoners it is holding. And then, there's 
the matter of Jonathan pollard, the spy for Israel presently serving 
a life sentence in a U.S. prison. U.S. officials say that after the 
principals signed off on the deal just after dawn this morning, prime 
minister Netanyahu pulled President Clinton aside and said the Israelis 
wanted pollard released or there was no deal. Mr. Clinton was said 
to be taken aback. There had been discussion of pollard, but no commitment 
to release him. But now the president found himself over a barrel. 
The hard and, at times, acrimonious negotiation between the president 
and the prime minister went on for over six hours. At today's ceremony, 
the president said he agreed to review the polt lard matter seriously, 
but he insisted -- I have made no commitment as to the outcome of 
the review. Pollard aside, White House officials believe the president 
comes away from this a big winner. He can still accomplish big things 
in the world stage. And he's promised to go to the Middle East in 
a few weeks to address the palestinian assembly when it removes those 
objectionable clauses that israel wanted out from its charter. Finally, 
Peter, the final status talks for negotiations which are due to end 
next may, will begin in about ten days. And the difficulty in achieving 
final status, may make the difficulty in achieving the interim agreement 
look like child's play. Thanks very much, Sam. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>