<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981023.1830.0913 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Tonight we are going to dwell for a few minutes on the tremendous 
gap that often exists between investing in the stock market and the 
knowledge of what we are doing. We have said several times before 
now that more than 40% of American households are invested in the 
stock market. With the huge swings in the stock market that we have 
witnessed of late, with the complexity of the Asian financial crisis, 
and its impact on the United States, there's a lot to absorb. And 
so much we don't know. Here's ABC's Deborah Amos. Answer this -- what 
investment has earned the most over the last 20 years? Stocks. Stocks. 
Stocks. Bonds. Can you say the magellan fund? Let's try again. What 
is a treasury Bill? I haven't got a clue what a treasury Bill is. 
I don't know. I don't know. A treasury Bill, oh, God. In fact, most 
Americans flunk finance 101. Studies show a majority of Americans 
do not even know the basics, and that means they cannot evaluate the 
risks and rewards of investing. Do you know the difference between 
a stock and a bond? About 60% of the public would fail that test. 
Surprisingly, more than 50% of Americans failed to invest in the record-breaking 
stock market. why? Do you think you know enough? I think I need to 
know more. Only 4% of those who invest say they know everything they 
need to know to make good investments. We are in the midst of a financial 
literacy crisis, and many will face unnecessary hardships because 
they don't know the financial facts of life. This is especially important 
because more than half of Americans don't have a pension plan. Those 
who do often get it in a lump sum -- a big problem if they don't know 
how to invest the money and make it last. Younger Americans say they 
know how much money it will take to retire. About half a million. 
$4 million. They're living longer than their grandparents or their 
parents, they'll have a lot more years in retirement that they need 
to fund. But many don't know how to calculate how much to save. Individuals, 
if they don't save for themselves and don't prepare for retirement, 
they may get the privilege of working forever. a privilege most Americans 
could easily avoid with just a little financial planning. Debra Amos, 
ABC News, Washington. working forever? So what about the next generation? 
Maybe we can do a better job of teaching them. Here's ABC's Bill Blakemore. 
Imagine if you had to raise your kids to live in a wild jungle, but 
never taught them how to secure food or Shelter, or to protect themselves. 
That, say a growing number of critics, is what America does -- sends 
kids out from high school knowing nothing of economics or finance. 
There are two kinds of literacy that are absolutely essential if you're 
going to survive, let alone thrive, in the modern world -- reading 
literacy and economic literacy. One poll found two-thirds of high 
school seniors don't understand that having no marketable skills produces 
low income. Nearly half thought people's wages were fixed by the government. 
Most have no idea how credit cards work. This is one of those instances 
where knowledge literally is money. a few schools do teach financial 
savvy. What's the necessary benefit of capital gains? They teach long-term 
saving options, 401Ks, IRAs. The difference between bonds and stocks. 
Right now, Nike's at 39 5/16. Teachers report kids are more likely 
to pay attention to this subject, because it's about money. It's probably 
one of the only required classes that probably teaches us anything 
that we're going to use in our future lives. We're talking about growth. 
Teachers say, as with languages, economics is even easier if children 
start young. I could have $1,000 the next day, when all we have flowing 
is $100. Actually, a partnership would work better for me. In this 
Ohio school, 11-year-olds run their own school supply business. But 
in fact, only 14 of the 50 states require an economics course before 
high school graduation. The vast majority offer it, at best, only 
as an elective. It's not an elective in life. It's something you're 
going to have to deal with. Why would we make that an elective? Good 
question. Bill Blakemore, ABC News, Hartsdale, New York. so fascinating 
and frustrating. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>