<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981023.0873 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The U.N. Security Council on Friday discussed nine questions about 
a proposed review of Iraqi sanctions that Baghdad wants answered before 
it will consider ending a 2 1/2-month boycott of U.N. arms inspections. 
While the council met behind closed doors, chemical weapons experts 
were wrapping up a two day assessment of tests by U.S., French and 
Swiss laboratories to determine whether Iraq loaded the deadly nerve 
agent VX into missile warheads. The Security Council imposed economic 
sanctions after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990, and U.N. weapons experts 
must certify that Iraq has destroyed its chemical, biological and 
nuclear weapons _ and the missiles to deliver them _ before the council 
can lift them. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan has proposed a ``comprehensive 
review'' of Iraq's progress over the past seven years in eliminating 
its weapons of mass destruction. The council has agreed to conduct 
a review, but members say it won't begin until Iraq rescinds its Aug. 
5 decision to stop cooperation with the inspections. Annan's proposal 
would require inspectors to prove that Iraq is still hiding banned 
weapons and set a timetable to clear up outstanding disarmament issues 
so that sanctions could be eased. Iraq has accused the U.N. Special 
Commission, known as UNSCOM, which is charged with the disarmament 
task, of taking orders from the United States, which opposes any lifting 
of sanctions until Baghdad fully complies with the Security Council. 
In its request for ``clarifications,'' Baghdad told the council it 
wants inspectors to be forced to disclose the source of evidence to 
back their claims that Iraq isn't fully disarmed. That could be a 
problem considering some council members have already expressed discomfort 
with Annan's proposal to shift the onus of disclosing information 
about the hidden weapons from Iraq to the inspectors. Iraq also wants 
to know exactly how long after inspectors are allowed to return to 
work the council will begin the review, and whether Iraq would be 
allowed to participate. According to Iraq, the review should also 
recognize that 100 percent verification of all banned weapons is impossible 
and should quantify what margin of uncertainty the council would accept 
before lifting sanctions. The Iraqis also said the council should 
not enter a review assuming that it will find gaps and holes in the 
country's past declarations of its banned weapons. The results of 
the scientific assessment on the VX tests could be a key factor in 
the sanctions review. Iraqi claims it was never able to produce enough 
VX nerve agent, or stabilize it sufficiently, to load into missiles. 
But U.S. tests showed traces of VX on fragments of warheads that Iraq 
filled before the 1991 Gulf war. The Iraqis challenged the validity 
of the U.S. test results, prompting the United Nations to authorize 
a second series of tests by French and Swiss scientists, which were 
being assessed by 17 experts from seven countries. Chief U.N. weapons 
inspector Richard Butler said he expected to receive a report from 
the experts Friday evening and would forward it to the Security Council 
and the Iraqis early next week. Butler has said that even if the French 
and Swiss labs don't turn up traces of VX, Baghdad still has to account 
for the findings by the U.S. Army's Aberdeen Proving Ground laboratory. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>