<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981023.1150 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Italian Premier Massimo D'Alema on Friday won the required vote of 
confidence in the Chamber of Deputies for his new government, the 
first to include Communists in a half-century. The vote on the center-left 
coalition, Italy's 56th government since World War II, was 333 in 
favor and 281 against, with three abstaining. The premier was expected 
to easily win next week's confidence vote in the upper chamber, the 
Senate. D'Alema has promised to pursue the strict economic policies 
imposed by his predecessor Romano Prodi, which allowed Italy to qualify 
for Europe's single currency. Treasury and Budget Minister Carlo Azeglio 
Ciampi, who stayed over from the previous government led by Romano 
Prodi, indicated D'Alema continued to keep on healing Italy's economy. 
Ciampi said in an interview for RAI state TV that the government over 
the next years -- its full term runs out in 2001 -- could create 650,000 
new jobs. Italy's unemployment runs 12.5 percent nationally and nearly 
double that in the south. During debate before the vote, Italy's center-right 
opposition forces, led by former Premier Silvio Berlusconi, promised 
a fierce battle against D'Alema, a former Communist. Berlusconi's 
Freedom Alliance called supporters to march in protest in Rome on 
Saturday. The opposition contends that D'Alema's coalition, which 
ranges from a small centrist party of former Christian Democrats now 
loyal to ex-president Francesco Cossiga to Communists holding ministry 
posts for the first time in five decades, fails to respect the choices 
made by voters in the 1996 elections. Many of the centrist deputies 
were elected to Parliament in 1996 on the center-right Freedom Alliance 
ticket, not on the center-left Olive Tree group which proposed economist 
Prodi as premier. D'Alema would like to have as broad as support as 
possible to pass the 1999 budget as well as to revive efforts to constitutionally 
reform Italy's bureaucratic institutions and an electoral system that 
rewards small parties and feeds the country's chronic government instability. 
``This government was born for reforms, constitutional and electoral,'' 
D''Alema said, pitching for the confidence vote. Prodi's 2 1-2 year-old 
coalition, Italy's second longest-lasting since the end of the war, 
collapsed after some Communists, then outside the government but usually 
supportive of Prodi, refused to back the government in a confidence 
vote Oct. 9 over what they said was not enough action to create jobs. 
D'Alema won the vote on the eve of his first international appearance 
as premier. He was expected in Austria for a European Union summit 
Saturday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>