<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981023.0585 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The new left-wing lineup of European Union leaders gathers in this 
lakeside resort Saturday for a weekend's brainstorming to map out 
the EU's future, but here-and-now problems like Kosovo and the global 
economic crisis are sure to intrude. The opening day of the two-day 
summit marks the EU debut of Germany's Social Democratic Chancellor-elect 
Gerhard Schroeder, and Italy's new Prime Minister Massimo D'Alema, 
a former Communist who now heads the Democratic Left party. Their 
arrival means all but four of the 15 EU governments are headed by 
left-leaning prime ministers. Two others are coalitions with socialists 
in top positions, and only in Ireland and Spain are socialists in 
opposition. Although some of the faces have changed, the problems 
facing the EU leaders have a nagging familiarity: _ how to maintain 
Europe's economic recovery and tackle unemployment in the face of 
spreading international turmoil. _ how to reduce Europe's dependence 
on the United States when bloody conflicts flares up on the EU's doorstep. 
_ how to streamline the EU's ponderous decision-making process and 
make the EU more efficient ahead of next decade's planned expand of 
the membership from 15 to 21. Forecasts released by the EU this week 
show the crisis sweeping though Asia, Russia and Latin America dragging 
growth in the 15-nation bloc down to 2.4 percent next year, from the 
previously predicted 3 percent. Although EU officials insist the slowdown 
will be temporary, pressure is growing for a more hands-on approach 
from governments to encourage growth by increasing public investment 
or cutting interest rates to boost business. ``The competitiveness 
of our companies .... must be further bolstered. The government intends 
to see to that,'' French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin said this week 
in Paris. ``A decline in interest rates is essential to that end.'' 
Schroeder and other euro-Socialist leaders have also indicated rates 
should be lower, but central bank governors have resisted calls to 
cut, arguing rates in the EU's core economies, such as France and 
Germany, are already among the world's lowest. Jospin may have more 
success seeking support for a plan to raise state funding for job-creating 
public-works projects. The outgoing German administration of Chancellor 
Helmut Kohl quashed that idea last time it came up, Schroeder may 
be more sympathetic. Britain's Labor Prime Minister Tony Blair this 
week indicated he may be prepared to drop the long-standing opposition 
of his Conservative predecessors to giving the EU a military capability. 
``We need to allow fresh thinking in this, and it is important for 
Britain to be part of this thinking,'' Blair was quoted telling The 
Times of London. His spokesman Alistair Campbell explained Blair wanted 
European countries to be able to mount peacekeeping or combat operations 
to deal with crises like Bosnia or Kosovo. ``We could put together 
an operation with, say, France, Belgium, Italy and Spain, in a way 
that meant we did not have to rely the whole time on the Americans,'' 
Campbell said. The leaders will also debate plans to raise the Union's 
international political profile by naming a permanent envoy to coordinate 
EU foreign affairs, although nobody is likely to be appointed until 
the next euro-summit December in the Austrian capital, Vienna. This 
weekend's summit was originally called to allow the leaders to hold 
an informal chat in a relaxed Alpine atmosphere on ways to overhaul 
the EU, making it more efficient and more relevant to its 370 million 
citizens as it prepares to take on Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, 
Cyprus, Estonia and Slovenia as new members over the next few years. 
``Poertschach provides an excellent opportunity to relaunch the debate 
on the future of the Union,'' said EU Commission President Jacques 
Santer, in a letter to the leaders. ``Europe must rid itself of its 
cliched image of an economic giant but political dwarf.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>