<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981023.0130.1496 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, many people don't give traffic cones a second thought. If you're 
among them, you're not like Jeanne Moos, if there was ever any doubt. 
You may never hear a cone moan. But imagine being mowed down like 
bowling pins, choked by exhaust fumes, left for dead like road kill. 
There may be cones more famous. But even David cone wouldn't make 
this sacrifice. These poor things, these little orange, little cones 
give up their lives for us. On the bright side, cones do get to travel. 
Well they get stuck on the Greyhound buses. And they spend their lives 
getting laid over and over. What's the life span of a cone? You call 
this a life? Some of them, the first day you put 'em out there, could 
get hit by an 18 wheeler -- they're done for. Others last for ten 
years or more. We went to the birthplace of many a cone -- work area 
protection corporation in St. Charles, Illinois, says it's the largest 
cone manufacturer in the world. We are the king of cones, yes. Just 
call Tom bednar "king cone." On a good year, we'll make anywhere from 
1.3 million to 1.4 million traffic cones. First a white coat of pvc 
plastic is poured over a mold, like an upside down ice cream cone. 
But traffic cones get baked. A pink topcoat is applied that changes 
to orange in the oven. They pop the cone off the mold, give it a trim, 
then dress some of them up with reflective collars -- collars that 
can look pretty frayed by the end of a day on the road. Here at New 
York's Lincoln tunnel, they can't imagine a life B.C. -- before cones. 
Critical part of our operation. Without 'em, we'd be lost. a lot are 
lost to theft at a cost of 10 bucks a cone. Conenapping. Police at 
the Lincoln tunnel once captured a drunken cone napper. And they caught 
him in the tunnel, sitting there. He's was talking to the cone next 
to him in the car. Of course, cones have big relatives and little 
relatives that range from rubber band rests to door stops. In the 
newsroom, we use cones to steer traffic away from folks being interviewed. 
Why, even the president is protected by cones. Manufacturers test 
cones in cold Chambers and stretch machines. But our favorite test 
is when they make the cones do toe touches. We just go ahead and let 
the cone up -- To see if it regains its shape. Not quite the same 
as a hit-and-run. Oh, my goodness. Ouch. It's under us. So let's celebrate 
the cone before it ends up prone -- with a duet -- and next time you're 
in a cone zone, stay on your toes, and keep off theirs. Jeanne Moos, 
CNN, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>