<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981023.2100.2241 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The picture from Washington today was one the White House wanted, 
the president as statesman. It may not mean anything in Wisconsin, 
however. The election is now 11 days away. It's been called a referendum 
on the president, even though it isn't about the president. We're 
about to find out how well the party fares, however. With us tonight 
with the very latest, handicapping the election 1998, is ron faucheux, 
the editor-in-chief of "campaigns and elections" magazine. He joins 
us from our Washington bureau. Ron, we have selected with your help 
a few bellwether races, as they like to say, beginning with what many 
are calling the race by which to measure all others. That is the California 
governor's race. Starting with that, how can this fairly be argued 
as a referendum on Bill clinton? Well, I don't see that it really 
can be, and that's what I think about most of the elections. The California 
race is being decided on the strengths and weaknesses of the two candsdathes 
involved, their records, their performance. That's what campaigns 
have become. They're not so much a discussion or debate of issues, 
but it's basically a Strategic game between candidates who are attempting 
to stay on the offensive and put their to the pro opponents on the 
def executive of california -- defense may win football games, but 
offense wins political games. I think we're seeing that in California 
and other races around the country. Do you agree that California's 
race is going to be the most important? I think so, because either 
candidate who wins that race becomes a serious national prospect for 
office. It's also critical in terms of reapportionment because the 
new governor could have a direct impact on house seats that could 
swing one way or the other. So, it's a big one. If the democrats win 
it, it's significant. Now, let's go to the race you guys in Washington 
love to talk about. It's in your market. You see all the media. Two 
people have been at this before, former prince georges county executive, 
parris glendening, and Ellen sauerbrey. How big is this one, really? 
Well, it's an interesting race because you have two candidates who 
ran this race four years ago. There was a debate and controversy over 
whether the election returns were honest four years ago. Sauerbrey 
lost. She was able to stay in the Hunt. She's now in a very close 
election. Maryland is a state that leans democratic, so for an incumbent 
democratic governor to be in this much trouble is interesting. And 
it points out one of the ironies of the election. The two most democratic 
states in the country, Massachusetts, and Hawaii, have chances of 
electing governors -- in a state like Maryland, they have a Shot at 
electing a republican governor. Then in South Carolina, which is trended 
tremendously to the republicans, their incumbent is in trouble. So, 
how these races are being decided individually, based on the strengths 
and weaknesses of the candidates, not necessarily as a national partisan 
contest in terms of issues or philosophy or the president's problems. 
Let's talk about an interesting rates in the south. If Hollings wasn't 
in the Senate, he'd have to get appointed a senator. His opponent, 
Bob Inglis. And this is true old versus new. Is it not? It sure is. 
Fritz went into this election as a classic sitting duck. He's in his 
mid 70's. He's been in this office for over 30 years. He barely won 
re-election last time. His state is trended towards republicans. It 
was a good case are a republican alternative should have been able 
to put him away. It's interesting holings is hanging in there. He 
has a very small lead at this point, and it could still go down. A 
lot depends on whether the democrats in South Carolina can turn out 
a Large black vote, because that's their top, most solid important 
constituency. And if they can, they'll re-elect him and a democratic 
governor. If they can't, they may lose both the governorship. In North 
Carolina, another widely-watched race featuring Faircloth. He's the 
incumbent, once a guy seeming to be unbeatable, versus John edwards. 
Tell us about this one. In a whole election season that's supposed 
to be a good year for incumbents, we have a lot of incumbent members 
of the Senate and governors in trouble. In the case of North Carolina, 
you have an incumbent senator who has had lackluster poll numbers 
for several months now. He has a strong challenger a good candidate. 
He's made a number of attack points on health care and education and 
a few other issues like that that have seen to serve him well. And 
it's a clash of personal styles. That race is very much in play. It's 
an even shot right now. And when people ask a guy like you what is 
going to be the split, how many net gain/net loss, realizing I'm putting 
you on the spot and it's early yet, what do you tell them? Well, as 
it stands now, in both the house and the Senate, we have handicapped 
the republicans leading in about the same number of seats in both 
the house and the Senate that they now hold. So, any seats they pick 
up of the 13 seats in the house we have rated as even and the three 
seats in the Senate we have rated as even, that would be a gain. So, 
if they would split the difference on the even seats then pick up 
six or seven seats in the house and two or three seats in the Senate. 
Dr. Ron faucheux, always a treat to have you on. We'll be talking 
to you again. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>