<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981023.1830.0850 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" -- tonight, John Glenn about to make history again. 
36 years ago, he became the first American to orbit earth. Next week, 
he'll return to space on board the shuttle "discovery." I sat down 
with senator Glen to talk about that journey, and the one aspect that 
makes it so unusual, his age. Senator, how old are you on your drive's 
license. 77. How old are you in your mind and your heart? A good question. 
I questions I have never gone by the calendar, Tom. I think you are 
as old as you feel you are. Getting old without giving into it is 
what drived John Glenn. I have a neighborhood whose mother says I 
don't want to rust out, I want to burn out that. Is not a bad motto 
for people when they get old. Does he still measure up? Can he still 
reach the physical and mental demands? Are you finding, with all due 
respect tharx you are as quick in the mind as you were a few years 
ago? I think as quick in the mind, I think probably, yes. But I'm 
not as up to speed, for instance. I'm not as much into the computers. 
Training improves the technical gaps, but there is the question of 
"the right stuff." Glenn proved he had it in the early '60s, as one 
of NASA's original "Mercury 7" astronauts, brave enough to risk his 
life flying an experimental rocket that was unproven. While nothing 
is 100% safe, I think NASA has had an amazing safety record. By comparison, 
today's shuttles are reliable laboratories for science. But safe enough 
for annie Glenn, his wife of 55 years? Does she look at you this time 
and say, "John, come on, enough"? When I first started talking about 
this, she was rather cool, very cool to the whole idea. But the more 
she's learned about this, the more she has switched around and become 
a real enthusiast for this. For Glenn, there is the rich memory and 
anticipation of the thrill of liftoff. There's gonna be that same 
kind of rush. And I'll sneak a peak out the window, occasionally, 
you can bet on that. But on earth, Glenn is about to retire from his 
second calling, 24 years as U.S. senator from Ohio. After the shuttle, 
he will open a public policy center. He hopes to change the minds 
of cynical young people who want nothing to do with government or 
politics. We can't have dwindling numbers and more apathy and more 
cynicism, or our country will go downhill. John Glenn, at 77, still 
nonstop in the service of his country. Aren't you at an age where 
you're supposed to be bouncing your grandchildren on your knee instead 
of doing all that? Grandchildren are so big now, I can't bounce them 
anymore, Tom. So you might as well go fly in space. I might as well 
go fly in space and learn something new. And that's thrilling, to 
learn new things that may benefit other people. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>