<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
PARIS _ NATO ambassadors in Brussels on Friday ordered the alliance's 
two top generals to Belgrade on Saturday to warn Yugoslav President 
Slobodan Milosevic again that he would face air strikes unless he 
ordered troops and special police units to withdraw from Kosovo Province 
or return to barracks by Tuesday. Milosevic agreed to the withdrawals 
from the province in southern Serbia 10 days ago under the threat 
of air strikes, but the alliance later suspended action to give him 
time to comply. Serbian forces have still been firing on ethnic Albanian 
villages and preventing tens of thousands of refugees from returning 
home. Gen. Wesley Clark of the United States, the supreme commander 
of NATO, and Gen. Klaus Naumann of Germany, its highest European military 
chief, are to warn Milosevic this weekend that they have authority 
to order air strikes after 8 p.m. local time Tuesday (2 p.m. Eastern 
time), allied officials in Brussels said. But, the officials added, 
the allied governments could also instruct their ambassadors in Brussels 
to prolong the deadline again if Milosevic showed signs of finally 
complying. ``Milosevic may have decided that the threat of air strikes 
is not as great this week as it was last week,'' an allied official 
said, ``and that's why we're sending the two generals to Belgrade.'' 
Officials in Brussels said Milosevic had ordered one army brigade 
last week to move out of Kosovo, as he had agreed to do in the agreement 
he reached Oct. 13 with U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke. Since then, 
the officials said, a military police battalion failed to withdraw 
as agreed and two Yugoslav army units normally stationed in Kosovo 
were sent out of their barracks into the field, supposedly to counter 
attacks by the Kosovo Liberation Army, ethnic Albanians fighting for 
independence for the province. Kosovo is part of Serbia but had autonomy 
until Milosevic abolished it in 1989. ``The units in the field are 
not being used to fight the Kosovo Liberation Army, but to take villages 
hostage,'' an allied official said. ``We don't want to see the Yugoslav 
army deployed against civilians.'' This will be Clark's third mission 
to Belgrade since Oct. 12. He and Naumann are to report Sunday to 
allied ambassadors, who will decide by Tuesday what to do next, officials 
said. One diplomat said the allies were aware that extending the deadline 
yet again or watering it down could damage their credibility. NATO 
authorized its commanders to go ahead with air strikes, but later 
suspended the order after the United Nations Security Council adopted 
a resolution calling on Yugoslavia to withdraw the motorized special 
police forces, tanks and army units that it first sent into the province 
in February to quell the separatist revolt. The resolution called 
for a cease-fire and for guarantees that international organizations 
would be unhindered in attempts to provide aid to thousands of refugees 
who had taken to the hills to get away from the fighting. Some 10,000 
are still without shelter, according to reports from the province, 
which is home to 2 million people, 90 percent of them ethnic Albanians. 
Russia, which has worked with the allies to press Milosevic to stop 
the attacks, parted ways with them when the allies agreed with the 
United States that the resolution authorized the use of force. Russia 
opposes a proposed Security Council resolution, demanded by Canada 
and other countries, that would authorize NATO to protect up to 2,000 
observers from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe 
that Milosevic agreed to accept to monitor the situation in Kosovo 
after a cease-fire. Canada has said it would refuse to provide observers 
unless they had clear protection. Russia, as a permanent member of 
the Security Council, has the power to veto the resolution. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>