<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0462 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With fans chanting for him to remain with the Yankees, Bernie Williams 
stood on a podium at City Hall Friday and said, ``I think I've got 
a chance to stay.'' The crowd roared. Then Williams, who is expected 
to file for free agency shortly, motioned to George Steinbrenner, 
the Yankees' principal owner who was sitting nearby, and said, ``But 
you've got to talk to this guy here.'' Williams is right in trying 
to deflect some of the tension surrounding the Yankees' most notable 
decision of this off-season, for if the team is to re-sign its cleanup 
hitter, both Williams and the Yankees will have to bend substantially 
_ and that seems unlikely. The Yankees appear far more likely to re-sign 
third baseman Scott Brosius, another free agent who was the most valuable 
player of this year's World Series, and work out a deal with pitcher 
David Cone. But outfielder Tim Raines and catcher Joe Girardi may 
well be playing somewhere else next season. Like all other players 
eligible for free agency, Williams must file for that privilege by 
midnight Nov. 5. He is the American League batting champion, a switch-hitting 
center fielder, and he is expected to command numerous offers, from 
the Arizona Diamondbacks and perhaps the Boston Red Sox, Baltimore 
Orioles, Los Angeles Dodgers and Colorado Rockies. Williams made $8.25 
million in 1998, and the Yankees are expected to make him an offer 
somewhere in the range of five years for $10 million per season. But 
that probably will be far less, in total dollars, than what Williams 
can get elsewhere; Williams would have to be willing to take less 
to stay with the Yankees. Given that Williams still feels slighted 
by past negotiations with the Yankees and that his agent, Scott Boras, 
usually gets top dollar, the chances of Williams being willing to 
make financial concessions or the Yankees making an offer that is 
in line with other offers seems improbable. If Williams rejects the 
Yankees' first offer outright, look for the Yankees to acquire another 
center fielder very quickly. They could explore a trade for the likes 
of Anaheim's Jim Edmonds or Ray Lankford of the St. Louis Cardinals, 
or they could sign a free agent, such as Brian Jordan. They could 
also determine to give Ricky Ledee a shot at playing center field. 
After filing, Williams and the other free agents can talk to other 
teams about their interest, but not specifically about money, until 
Nov. 6. Then the bidding begins. Several matters are pending in the 
off-season. _ Brosius can file for free agency, but the Yankees are 
resolved to re-signing him and Brosius wants to come back. ``If they 
want me back, they've got a pretty good chance of getting me,'' Brosius 
said Friday in the Yankees' clubhouse before the parade. _ Because 
Cone pitched 200 innings, he has the option of accepting a one-year, 
$5.5 million contract from the Yankees by next Wednesday at midnight. 
Cone, who won 20 games, may want to parlay his success this summer 
into more dollars or some sort of an extension, but those talks must 
move fast. ``I'm hoping to get something done quickly,'' Cone said 
Friday. If Cone declines his option, he can become a free agent. _ 
Raines' tenure with the Yankees is probably over. The team already 
has outfielders Chad Curtis and Paul O'Neill under contract, and the 
late-season emergence of Shane Spencer and Ledee virtually insures 
that duo will be in the majors next season; in addition, the Yankees 
may retain Darryl Strawberry. Raines, who is 39, must file for free 
agency by Nov. 5 _ The Yankees have eight more days to announce whether 
they are declining a $3.4 million option for Girardi. But it is apparent, 
with Jorge Posada ready to catch full time, that the Yankees will 
choose to buy out the option for $400,000. The Yankees may try to 
work out another, more inexpensive contract to keep Girardi, a veteran 
who is well-liked and respected. Girardi, however, indicated that 
as hard as it would be to leave the Yankees, his preference still 
is to play every day for somebody. The Detroit Tigers and Orioles 
and Chicago Cubs may all put in bids for him. _ The Yankees have eight 
more days to determine whether they will exercise the $2.5 million 
option on the contract of Darryl Strawberry. This would be a cut-and-dried 
decision under normal circumstances: Strawberry is an older, incapacitated 
player because of his colon cancer and there are no guarantees he 
will ever play again. But Steinbrenner has a liking for Strawberry, 
a particular benevolence, and it figures that some arrangements will 
be made for Strawberry to stay with the organization, whether through 
renegotiation or other avenues. _ Chuck Knoblauch, the second-baseman 
acquired from the Minnesota Twins in February, technically has the 
right to demand a trade before Nov. 6, and if he were to do so, the 
Yankees would have to deal him by March 15 or allow him to depart 
as a free agent. But others in the organization say Knoblauch's agents 
long ago arranged the framework for a two-year, $18 million extension 
to the three remaining years on Knoblauch's current contract, a deal 
that presumably will be announced shortly. ``I'm coming back, if they 
want me,'' Knoblauch said. _ Joe Torre, the Yankees manager, is expected 
to sign a two-year extension shortly, a deal that would keep him tied 
to the team through the year 2001. Others in the organization say 
Torre, already signed for next year at about $1.3 million, will get 
a raise that will push his salary near $2 million per year. _ Brian 
Cashman, the first-year general manager who worked under a one-year 
contract (for about $250,000), likely will get an extension from Steinbrenner. 
Whether Williams departs or not, the Yankees will be the favorites 
to repeat as the champions of the American League East. The shortstop 
Derek Jeter is a rising star, and the core of the pitching staff will 
remain intact, with David Wells, Orlando Hernandez, Andy Pettitte, 
Mariano Rivera, Hideki Irabu, Ramiro Mendoza, Graeme Lloyd, Mike Stanton, 
Jeff Nelson and Darren Holmes all tied to the team through next year. 
With the ascension of Hernandez, Ledee and Spencer to the big leagues, 
the farm system is somewhat dry in Class AAA and AA, but very deep 
in Class A. The Yankees' immediate and long-term future appears secure. 
But none of the Yankees was interested in discussing the future Friday, 
as they milled around their clubhouse, shaking hands with and hugging 
Darryl Strawberry and signing a last round of autographs for one another 
before the parade. Shane Spencer picked up a bottle of champagne and 
found a spot to add his signature to a group of names that won't all 
be together next year. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>