<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0392 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even in the self-congratulatory sparkle of the East Room of the White 
House, the words of caution rang loud and clear. If it took 19 months 
of blood and insult and nine days of extraordinary round-the-clock 
wrangling just to do things that were supposed to have been done months 
ago, what superhuman intervention would be required to surmount the 
truly formidable issues of refugees, Jerusalem, water? Yet among the 
exhausted Israeli, Palestinian and U.S. participants, there was a 
distinct sense that, however technical or tentative the actual arrangements 
they had made, however certain the knowledge that they would be disputed 
and violated, both Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian 
leader Yasser Arafat had crossed a painful and fateful political threshhold. 
``This peace agreement represents not just the drawing of a new territorial 
map, but the reconfiguring of the political map for both sides,'' 
said David Makovsky, the veteran political reporter for Haaretz. ``It 
is almost certain to mark a confrontation between each leader and 
the hard-line elements in his camp.'' By far the most important shift 
was in the Israeli camp. Netanyahu arrived in Wye a man whose true 
colors had never been revealed. For all the endless recriminations, 
crises and debates that accompanied his first 29 months in office, 
no one in Israel was really sure whether he was at heart an ideologue 
intent on destroying the Oslo agreements, or a conservative pragmatist 
who would ultimately recognize that there was no alternative to trading 
land for peace, and would do so after ratcheting up the cost. When 
he left, the prime minister was firmly in the moderate camp. Even 
if the ``Wye Memorandum'' suffers in coming weeks, he had finally 
declared himself. And he was certain of a brutal war with right-wing 
extremists, for whom he was now a traitor as bitter as Yitzhak Rabin, 
the late prime minister who signed the Oslo agreements. Even through 
the enforced stillness of the Sabbath in Israel there came the hum 
of speculation about new elections, new political alignments, new 
dangers from the extreme. Though less dramatic, Arafat's shift was 
no less momentous. In the four years since he had returned triumphant 
to Gaza, the promise of the Oslo agreements had turned to sour disappointment 
among Palestinians under the weight of corruption, poverty, violence, 
and stagnation in the negotiating process. A chilling poll taken just 
before the Wye conference showed that for the first time since Oslo 
was signed in 1993, a majority of Palestinians again supported terror 
as a weapon. But already long before that, the adulation for Sheikh 
Ahmed Yassin, Islamic founder of the virulently anti-Oslo movement 
Hamas, demonstrated that the Palestinian Authority was on trial. Arafat 
repeatedly tried to waffle _ arresting a few leaders of Hamas now 
and then, then reaching out a hand of friendship. He spoke of peace 
in English, and of ``holy war'' in Arabic. He condemned suicide killings 
but spoke of fallen terrorists as martyrs. So when he finally agreed 
at Wye to a concrete war on terror, one to be monitored by the U.S. 
CIA, he effectively declared war on Hamas. Until now, the Islamic 
movement had tried not to publicly challenge Arafat and to mount terror 
operations from Israeli-held territory so the Palestinian Authority 
would not be blamed. Now there is every chance that Arafat will have 
to protect himself and his lieutenants from Hamas. The result, curiously, 
was a triumph for the very Oslo process that both men had accused 
the other of undermining. The underlying theory of the agreement, 
which devised a staged process of reconciliation leading slowly to 
a final settlement, was to allow Jews and Arabs time to change their 
mutual perceptions, to cease seeing the other as an existential threat. 
Perhaps the architects of the treaty were optimistic in their estimate 
of the time it would take, and the past 19 months will be viewed as 
the time it took for Israelis to step back and take a deeper breath 
and for Palestinians to adjust their expectations. History may also 
judge that the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin by an extreme nationalist 
exposed so yawning an ideological divide among the Jews that a whole 
new approach was required, with a conservative at the helm. In any 
case, the Wye conference represented a gamble by President Clinton 
and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright that both sides were ripe 
for a change. The fact that a difficult election loomed close obviously 
contributed to the calculation, though it also raised the stakes. 
After trying virtually every other negotiating approach, Clinton went 
for the pressure cooker, summoning the principals and all their top 
aides to an isolated farm, and devoting scores of his own hours and 
sleepless nights to cajoling, mediating, nudging and promising. Given 
the huge political risk to each leader, , both Netanyahu and Arafat 
struggled mightily for the concessions that would demonstrate to their 
people that their political shift carried tangible benefits. The Israelis 
demanded concrete, guaranteed steps against specific terrorists; they 
insisted on a public renunciation of the vows to eradicate Israel 
in the old Palestinian Charter. Arafat battled for a Palestinian airport, 
seaport, for safe passage between Gaza and the West Bank, for the 
release of Palestinian prisoners, for assurances that Israel would 
cede more land. Surprisingly, the last concession on which success 
hinged was asked not of Netanyahu, not of Arafat, but of Clinton. 
With the package almost tied up, Netanyahu required one more achievement 
he could bring home to his right wing, and late Thursday, Foreign 
Minister Ariel Sharon came up with the key _ the United States would 
release Jonathan Pollard, a convicted spy whose release has long been 
demanded by Israel and who had taken Israeli citizenship in prison. 
Arafat liked it, too: if Pollard were released, Arafat would not be 
compelled to jail or extradite a Palestinian wanted by Israel who 
now serves in the Palestinian police. But apparently the U.S. intelligence 
agencies balked, adding another several hours to the ninth day and 
leading Clinton to insist at the ceremony that he had agreed only 
to review Pollard's imprisonment. The need by both Netanyahu and Arafat 
to assuage their critics was clear in their comments. ``Today is a 
day when Israel and the entire region are more secure,'' declared 
Netanyahu, while Arafat went through the entire list of what he had 
gained, from the airport to the prisoners. But to many who watched 
the ceremony, the more telling message was not in the words, but in 
some of the images. Most striking was the picture of the two Arab 
veterans, King Hussein of Jordan and Arafat, both small, feeble and 
obviously ailing after lives spent in struggle. Hussein, undergoing 
chemotherapy for cancer, was thin and hairless, while Arafat's lower 
lip trembled uncontrollably. Alongside the tall and hale president 
and Israeli, they hardly looked like the existential threat to Israel 
they were supposed to be. Netanyahu, for his part, seemed to struggle 
to keep his eyes open after a sleepless night. After 29 months of 
bluster, maneuvering and political struggle, he seemed tired and subdued. 
In the end, it was not any concrete concession or agreement, but the 
cancer-ravaged king who was singled out by all sides as the force 
that broke the deadlock. Though his words on Thursday night were not 
made known, they seemed to render both Clinton and Netanyahu misty-eyed 
when they recalled it. A man who obviously had no agenda of his own 
left, and who had known this fray from the beginning, the king added 
just the right dash of human and historical perspective to an exercise 
that until then was purely political and technical. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>