<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0390 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Chilean leftist politicians who have applauded the arrest in London 
of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the former dictator, say they are receiving 
anonymous death threats. A rightist political party that supports 
the general canceled a news conference because of a bomb threat. And 
an unidentified protester threw a gasoline bomb at a police car. Such 
incidents over the last 48 hours have heightened tensions here, spurring 
more aggressive demonstrations and inflaming debates on talk radio 
about Pinochet's 17-year rule and the efforts of a Spanish judge to 
have him extradited to Spain to stand trial for human rights violations. 
In a television address on Thursday night, President Eduardo Frei 
warned that there were people trying ``to introduce the germ of violence.'' 
He added, ``I condemn them with all my energy and when we need to, 
we will apply the full force of the law.'' In the week that has followed 
Pinochet's arrest in a London clinic, where he has been recovering 
from back surgery, the daily demonstrations here supporting and opposing 
him have been marked by scattered rock and egg throwing, a few fights, 
and police use of water cannon to disperse crowds. About 100 people 
have been arrested, although only a few people have been held more 
than a few hours, and no one has been seriously hurt. Most of the 
protesting has been peaceful. Municipal officials have refused to 
pick up garbage at the British and Spanish embassies, but diplomats 
have been saved any inconvenience by Chilean critics of Pinochet who 
have volunteered to cart away the trash. Nevertheless, his arrest 
has highlighted divisions that have endured since he gave up the presidency 
in 1990. When police officers broke up a small, peaceful anti-Pinochet 
demonstration in front of the Moneda Presidential Palace on Thursday, 
they appeared to needlessly rough up several youths and journalists 
even while they dispersed. And several conservative politicians have 
begun to assert that Socialist members of the governing coalition 
are behind the Spanish extradition efforts, an accusation that Socialist 
Party officials and their Christian Democratic partners deny. A growing 
number of political leaders and analysts are expressing fears that 
a prolonged international legal struggle over Pinochet will expose 
the country to renewed splintering and violence. ``This is the most 
delicate moment we have experienced in the democratic transition,'' 
said Andres Zaldivar, president of the Senate and a Christian Democratic 
candidate for president. ``I'm not afraid of a coup or an interruption 
of democracy, but I see the possibility of the country entering into 
a period of serious tensions, polarization and constant demonstrations.'' 
The government is stepping up diplomatic efforts seeking Pinochet's 
release, saying that foreigners are interfering in Chile's domestic 
affairs and jeopardizing the emerging democracy here. Chilean officials 
say that as a ``Senator for Life,'' Pinochet carried a diplomatic 
passport and should have been immune from arrest. But British authorities 
have rejected the claim, saying he was in London for health reasons, 
not diplomacy. Chilean diplomats are now pressing another argument. 
They say that at age 82, Pinochet is in poor health and may not be 
able to survive the pressures of an extradition and trial. The Chilean 
press is reporting that Pinochet, who is a diabetic and has a history 
of circulatory problems, is recovering very slowly from an operation 
two weeks ago on a herniated disk due to multiple infections. Pinochet's 
arrest may influence next year's presidential election. The two right-wing 
parties, one of which had been distancing itself from the Pinochet 
legacy to broaden its appeal, have found new unity in support of the 
retired dictator. And tensions are emerging in the left-of-center 
governing coalition, with most Christian Democrats supporting the 
president's strong defense of Pinochet and most Socialists quietly 
applauding the arrest. Ricardo Israel, chairman of the political science 
department at the University of Chile, said the long-term impact of 
the Pinochet arrest is bound to be profound. ``If this is resolved 
rapidly, it could be a blessing as we finally learn that we need to 
face up to human rights abuses of the past,'' Israel said. ``But if 
Pinochet dies in custody, many Chileans will look for someone to blame 
and you could see uncontrolled waves of violence.'' The British interior 
minister, Jack Straw, is expected to decide within days how his government 
will rule on a Spanish extradition request. In a note to the House 
of Commons on Thursday, Straw suggested that as one of several options 
open to him, he could deny extradition on humanitarian grounds. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>