<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0358 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The fallout from the recent hedge-fund eruptions continues to waft 
into the nooks and crannies of the financial markets. One asset class 
caught in the downdraft is convertible bonds, which according to the 
First Boston Convertible Bond Index have fallen 21.5 percent since 
April 30. Converts, as they are known, initially fell for the same 
reasons that stocks did: the meltdown in emerging markets and fears 
of recession. But the slide in their prices _ and the corresponding 
increase in their yields, which move in the opposite direction _ was 
worsened by widespread selling among hedge funds. Margaret Patel, 
manager of the Third Avenue High-Yield fund, which holds some convertibles, 
says leveraged players, including a very large number of hedge funds, 
felt compelled to sell their positions in convertible bonds to raise 
needed cash. In fact, hedge funds control 40 percent to 50 percent 
of the $120 billion market in convertible bonds, according to Salomon 
Smith Barney. Converts are corporate bonds with a feature that allows 
the holder to convert the fixed-income securities into a set number 
of common shares of the issuing corporation. Converting such bonds 
can be a lucrative transaction in a rising market, making the securities 
popular among many investors because of the close relationship between 
the price of the bonds and the underlying stocks. For hedge funds, 
however, a common tactic is to short the common stock of a company, 
betting that it will fall, and to buy its convertible bonds as a hedge 
against the possibility that the stock will rise. To short a stock, 
an investor borrows shares and then sells them, expecting to replace 
them after the price declines and pocket the difference. If the stock 
rises, however, the hedge fund is somewhat protected because the price 
of the convertible, which is also paying interest, is likely to rise, 
too, helping to offset the loss from the short transaction. The unusually 
swift fall in converts in the third quarter caught many hedge funds 
off guard, forcing them to liquidate positions, which in turn put 
more pressure on the market. At the same time, hedge funds' bets in 
other markets were going awry, and many were forced to unwind convertible 
positions to raise cash, said John P. Calamos, president of Calamos 
Asset Management in Naperville, Ill., and manager of the Calamos Convertible 
Hedge fund. A result is a table-thumping buy opportunity, money managers 
say. ``This is the kind of opportunity we only see a couple of times 
each decade,'' said Charles Pohl, manager of the Putnam Convertible 
Income-Growth fund. In fact, investors can benefit from resulting 
anomalous situation. Many converts have higher yields than those of 
the comparable nonconvertible bonds issued by the same company. Columbia/HCA 
Healthcare, for example, has a nonconvertible bond, rated triple-B, 
with a 7 percent coupon due in 2007 that is trading at 92.25 percent 
of its face value, with a yield of 8.26 percent. The same company 
has a convertible bond that is rated slightly lower _ triple-B-minus 
_ and has a coupon of 6.75 percent due in 2006. It is trading at 80.25 
percent of par, with a yield of 10.47 percent. So buyers of the convertible 
now get a security with a higher yield and retain the possibility 
of converting their investment into common stock. The best course 
for individuals, however, may be investing in a convertible mutual 
fund. Buying individual bonds is costly _ one typically needs at least 
$10,000 to buy one bond _ and analyzing the securities can be complicated, 
because it requires an understanding of the underlying stock as well 
as the bond. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>