<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0233 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Are you on the list?'' The inquisitor, looking formidable with clipboard 
and pen, was standing sentinel outside Joe's Pub, the new cabaret 
and lounge flanking the lobby of the Public Theater. The couple in 
question, looking a tad J. Crew, had no names to drop and no hope, 
it seemed, of joining the writers, musicians and assorted club-enhancing 
faces who were reveling in the latest creation of Serge Becker, the 
club and restaurant designer who has given New York some of its most 
successful nightspots of recent years, including M.K., Bowery Bar, 
Fez and _ for those old enough to remember _ Area. ``It's a private 
party,'' the doorwoman said, as James Truman of Conde Nast breezed 
in with a few friends. The spurned couple, a copywriter and social 
worker in their 40s from the Upper West Side, were about to turn away 
when something unusual happened. The doorkeeper swung open the portal. 
Was the week-old club desperate for warm bodies last Tuesday night? 
Hardly. A birthday party for Ariel Kaminer, a New York magazine editor, 
and a sizzling salsa band, Mo-Guajero, had nearly filled the place 
to its 160-person capacity. Perhaps the ghost of Joseph Papp, the 
man who brought free theater to the masses, had something to do with 
the doorwoman's magnanimity. A portrait of the legendary producer 
watches over the plush banquettes, red votives and zinc ballustrades, 
so perhaps Papp's inclusionary spirit will also guide door policy 
at what is already one of the season's most buzz-heavy nightspots. 
Depending on the time and the scheduled act, Joe's Pub will be a swank 
cabaret, a pre-theater watering hole, a place to slam poetry or a 
late-night drop-in center for hip, downtown laze-abouts. If Becker 
has his way, Joe's Pub will become the kind of place Sandra Bernhard 
might stop into after her Broadway show for an impromptu encore. But 
night-life skeptics question whether the cabaret formula and the egalitarian 
ethos of the Public Theater will scare off the taste-making set that 
has previously flocked to Becker's ventures. The unusual split personality 
of Joe's Pub _ half cabaret with tickets sold through Telecharge; 
half exclusive nightspot with guest list _ could be a breakthrough 
for New York's beleaguered club scene, which has seen few new openings 
at a time of year normally hectic with them. Or it may end up being 
a well-pedigreed belly-flop. ``In small loungey spaces, the cool crowd 
will get bored easily,'' predicted Steve Lewis, the executive director 
of Life, the sprawling dance club on Bleecker Street. ``They get tired 
of looking at four walls and each other. Without dancing, it's a tough 
world out there.'' He pointed out how quickly Shine, a performance 
space on West Broadway, lost its sheen. ``I mean how long can you 
sit there and listen to some soliloquy about yams?'' But the Public 
Theater, not Becker, is setting the basic agenda for Joe's Pub, and 
its role as performance space has precedence. ``We see it as a place 
that will have three or four different lives over the course of an 
evening,'' said George C. Wolfe, the Public's producer, who got the 
idea for Joe's Pub after walking into what were dreary administrative 
offices two years ago and being struck by the room's lofty ceiling 
and ornate details. ``I thought, `This needs to be a public space.' 
But more importantly, I wanted to create a place that formalizes the 
improvisational mixing of artists and audience that goes on in our 
lobby.'' Joe's Pub promises to be more than yet another piano bar 
for aging torch singers. The Public's long tradition of encouraging 
brash, new talent will make sure of that. Among the acts booked for 
8:30 p.m. shows in the next two months are Roy Hargrove, the jazz 
trumpeter; Roger Guenveur Smith, the actor and playwright, and Comedy 
Rhumba, described by the Public as ``the premier comedy/variety show 
catering to English-speaking Latinos.'' But what will set Joe's Pub 
apart from other supper clubs and cabarets is the hand of Becker, 
whose 14-year career in clubland has earned him near-mythical status. 
Becker, who is the majority owner of the venture, will oversee food 
service as well as late-night entertainment after the publicly advertised 
shows. ``Serge can take a garage with no chairs and a dirt floor, 
make 11 calls, and the place will be packed with pretty women and 
fabulous musicians and actors,'' said Nadine Johnson, a publicity 
agent who represents Bowery Bar, which is owned by Becker and Eric 
Goode. Others say that by luring top-quality performances to a friendly, 
laid-back setting, Becker may forge a new brand of night life for 
a generation that has grown weary of loud dance halls, indifferent 
service and overhyped bars that put up a velvet rope, install a few 
sofas and proclaim themselves ``lounges.'' ``What you're going to 
see is an interesting fusion of cutting-edge culture and a sophisticated 
social scene,'' predicted Andre Balazs, an owner of the Mercer Hotel, 
who worked with Becker on the now-defunct M.K. ``For people of a certain 
age, myself included, this will be the perfect place to end an evening.'' 
Michael Musto, the Village Voice columnist, who turned out to hear 
Audra McDonald last Monday night, said he hoped Joe's Pub would bring 
back the cabarets of the 1970's, when they were venues for emerging 
talents, ``not the dreary places we have now, where your waiter is 
too busy singing to take your order.'' Beyond its ambitious content, 
Becker's ability to pull in the pretty and pretentious should help 
earn Joe's Pub frequent gossip-column mentions, an essential ingredient 
for stoking a club's heat. A dozen private parties have already been 
booked for coming weeks, including one on Tuesday for Jay Faires, 
the founder of Mammoth Records, and one on Nov. 11 given by Jennifer 
Lopez, the actress, and Details magazine. Last Wednesday afternoon, 
as the final traces of sunlight seeped through the room's soaring 
quatrefoil windows, workmen scurried around Joe's Pub making late 
adjustments to the lighting and the custom-made table tops that resemble 
oversize illuminated bar codes. Becker, dressed in a black turtleneck, 
black New Republic raincoat and his trademark New Balance sneakers, 
sat in one of his magenta banquettes with a cell phone affixed to 
his ear. He was not happy. ``I've been on hold with the carpet people 
forever,'' he groaned, as Ali, his Rhodesian Ridgeback nuzzled the 
Ultrasuede upholstery, leaving broad smudge marks with her nose. In 
creating the space, Becker took cues from Dadaism, German cabarets 
of Weimar Republic, the Vienna Secessionists and the Bauhaus designs 
of Oskar Schlemmer. He and his collaborator, Derek Sanders, have covered 
the walls with thick panels of ink-injected cork, thin batons of rosewood, 
and most strikingly, sheets of corrugated roofing material that have 
been sheathed in crushed velvet. Born in Paris, Becker was raised 
in Zurich by his Swiss mother, a television producer. His Vietnamese 
father, he said, left the family when he was still a boy. ``I grew 
up surrounded by theater people, and there was never any doubt that 
I would end up doing something theatrical,'' he said. For a man so 
identified with the whirl of New York social life, Becker is suprisingly 
shy, almost sheepish. A competitive chess player as a child, he is 
more passionate about music and art than bathing in the aura of models 
and movie moguls, friends say. Becker was 21 and fresh out of art 
school when he left Zurich and moved to New York in 1982. ``Serge 
was a little club kid when I met him, and I took him under my wing,'' 
said Goode, who was then a partner in Area, the TriBeCa hot spot recently 
described by Paper magazine as ``the ultraglamorous nightclub by which 
all clubs are now judged.'' Its hallmark was the ever-changing decor 
and a diverse, often freakishly attired clientele. Becker helped shape 
Area's monthly makeovers, and after it closed in 1987, he and Goode 
went on to do M.K., Bowery Bar and B.C., an ill-fated club in Los 
Angeles. ``Eric and Serge made for great partners and have an almost 
innate sense of what will and won't work,'' said Shawn Hausman, the 
principal designer at Area, who has worked with the pair on several 
other projects. Joe's Pub is Becker's first venture without his longtime 
partner, and although both men deny it, others say Becker's decision 
to go it alone has put a chill in their relationship. Becker, long 
accustomed to being the publicity-shy partner, recognizes that he 
can no longer stay in the shadows. ``I'm not thrilled with working 
the media, but it's all me now,'' he said. ``I'll do what I have to 
do.'' While acknowledging his creative prowess, some of those close 
to Becker worry that he lacks the managerial skills or the attention 
span that are critical for Joe's Pub's long-term success. Hausman 
agreed that Becker is more skilled with pens and a sketchbook than 
with an accounting ledger. ``Serge isn't much of a businessman,'' 
he said. ``Once he finishes the design work, he likes to hang out.'' 
Goode agrees with those who are skeptical about the dual personality 
of Joe's Pub, saying that the A-list crowd may feel a bit challenged 
by poetry slams and disk jockeys spinning bhangra, the fusion of hip-hop 
and traditional Hindi music. ``These kinds of people want to see and 
be seen,'' he said. ``They can't deal with anything too highbrow.'' 
But Becker doesn't seem to worry about that. If anything, his bigger 
challenge will be how to maintain the right mix of hipdom, given the 
mandate of the Public Theater, which has the final say on the club's 
operation. ``We simply can't get into picking people out of a line,'' 
said Bonnie Metzgar, a producer at the Public who will oversee the 
club's programming. Becker recognizes the contradiction of a nonprofit 
theater's sponsoring a nightclub, and he hopes that the mix of experimental 
music, poetry and performance will substitute for the velvet rope 
and scowling doorkeepers. ``My guess is that the bridge-and-tunnel 
crowd isn't going to be lining up to see Craig Harris or Ntozake Shange,'' 
he said, referring to the jazz trombonist and the playwright, who 
appeared together on Friday and Saturday. ``I think it will be self-editing.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>