<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0474 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Amid the gentle smiles and the strong colors of autumn, New York City 
Mayor Rudolph Giuliani seemed an odd addition this week to the scenic 
state of New Hampshire. Trying out a new audience for his old Marlon 
Brando imitation and his bragging stats on New York City, The Mayor 
Who Tamed the Capital of the World suddenly landed in civility central, 
a quilted haven where people tend to raise their voices only at football 
games. So why was he in New Hampshire, site of the first presidential 
primary, generating a New York buzz amid the soft cries of birds going 
south for the winter? Not because he's test-running for president, 
he protested with a sly grin. He was up there to see if Republican 
national committeewoman Ruth Griffin would vote for New York City 
as the site of the Republican Party Convention in the year 2000. He 
was up there to take pictures of the foliage. Sure he was, the New 
Hampshire natives nodded agreeably. For all their feigned quaintness, 
these veterans pride themselves on being able to spot a presidential 
yearning in the best pre-season camouflage. More important, with less 
than two years remaining until the next presidential season, they 
know exactly what to do with these nascent, barely contained desires 
_ fan them. ``I think with a primary as wide open as New Hampshire's, 
he could win,'' cooed Republican state chairman Stephen Duprey to 
reporters trailing New York's mayor.``We need quality candidates like 
this,'' said Augusta Petrone, whose husband is a big contributor in 
the state. This is fishing season in New Hampshire, where residents 
and political people alike are trying to add candidates the way the 
admissions director of a college tries to encourage applicants. More 
is better, more is exciting. More means that the whole whiz-bang New 
Hampshire madness is once again on track _ several thousand political 
reporters jammed into a miniature monolithic state where every voter 
picks candidates by the whites of their eyes. So Giuliani and New 
Hampshire flirted vigorously this week. To energetic applause, the 
mayor offered his strategy for a Republican candidate to take back 
the White House in two years. ``The way you win an election is by 
contesting the other person's vote,'' he explained. Democrats usually 
win the cities, and Giuliani is a Republican who has been elected 
twice as mayor of the biggest city in America. The logic is unsinkable, 
unless, of course, you ask how the mayor of New York City could win 
in the rest of America. The mayor had an answer to that one too, describing 
how New York had responded to Republican principles just like other 
areas of the country. New York is diverse, he said, like most of America, 
both urban and suburban. He wasn't sure New York could count as rural 
exactly, but, he offered, ``parts of Staten Island might qualify.'' 
Finally came the clincher. He was asked whether New Hampshire should 
be the first presidential primary, and he agreed it should. This is 
like asking somebody in the Bronx if the Yankees should stay there. 
``Sure,'' the mayor said, flashing the full-Buick grin, ``somebody 
has to be first.'' At the end of a long and otherwise rousing day, 
however, the mayor found himself at one of those dead evenings that 
are the lifeblood of politics. The Republican women's club of Nashua, 
all 50 of them, sat like stones while the mayor rambled through his 
pitch. Suddenly it became clear to the regulars in the room that this 
guy would need a little polish if he wanted to outshine Steve Forbes, 
Texas Gov. George W. Bush and even former Tennessee Gov. Lamar Alexander, 
who, as Duprey put it, never left New Hampshire after he ran third 
in 1996. Until then, it had seemed easy to imagine New York's mayor 
in the White House marathon. But the idea of polishing Rudy or making 
him say the right political thing instead of exactly what he's thinking 
at the time . . . nah, too difficult. So maybe the mayor really was 
up there to sell New York for the next GOP convention and to help 
raise money for candidates. Maybe he was in New Hampshire to see the 
leaves. Really. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>