<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0464 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Probably, very few federal judges telephone professional wrestling 
lines for updates on the likes of Rowdy Roddy and Macho Man. But federal 
judges in Pennsylvania have been poring over the observations of Mark 
Madden, an irrepressible pro-wrestling commentator here who acknowledges 
that the essays he writes for callers to his 900-number are often 
sarcastic or even fictitious. ``Outrageous trash talk,'' he calls 
his musings, for which callers pay $1.69 a minute. But is outrageous 
trash talk journalism in the eyes of the law? For two years, federal 
courts have been considering the question in a case that puts Madden 
at the center of a landmark argument over First Amendment rights. 
The issue arose when Madden, in a lawsuit involving the two biggest 
wrestling promotion companies in the United States, refused to name 
the people who had given him information for insults he delivered 
on his toll line. Saying he was a journalist entitled to keep his 
sources confidential, Madden thus probably became the first 900-number 
reporter to go to the mat for his sources. Some legal experts say 
the case raises an important issue as the line between traditional 
news and entertainment is blurring. ``Who decides whether somebody 
is an entertainer and not a reporter?'' said Martin Garbus, an expert 
on media law, who said that First Amendment lawyers had been watching 
the case. To those who may consider the case a goofy offshoot of entertainment 
in which it is sometimes hard to tell truth from fiction, Floyd Abrams, 
a First Amendment expert, points out, ``Many of the great cases involved 
under the Bill of Rights have been pressed where what is involved 
seemed silly.'' The federal courts have ruled over the years that 
journalists have a privilege to protect sources in some circumstances. 
But the courts have not defined what a journalist is. Last year, a 
federal district court here said that Madden was a journalist with 
a right to remain mum because he gathered information with the ``intent 
to disseminate'' it. In August, a three-judge federal appeals panel 
disagreed, saying he was an entertainer, ``disseminating hype, not 
news.'' Madden's lawyers asked the full 3rd Circuit U.S. Court of 
Appeals, in Philadelphia, to review the decision, saying the appeals 
panel had created a new constitutional rule that evaluated the content 
of speech to determine whether Madden was entitled to First Amendment 
protection. And that, they said, was a dangerous precedent. The court 
is expected to decide soon whether it will review the appeals panel's 
decision. Madden, 37 and a native of Pittsburgh, was for years a sports 
writer and editor at The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. He now writes a 
weekly column for the newspaper and is also host of a pregame radio 
program for the Pittsburgh Penguins hockey team and of a daily sports 
talk show on WTAE-AM radio. Wrestling is a sideline. He testified 
that he was paid $350 a week by World Championship Wrestling, which 
owns and operates the line. In his commentaries, he offers what he 
admits are ``gratuitous plugs'' for World Championship Wrestling, 
known as the WCW. Madden testified that he submitted his 900-number 
scripts for approval by WCW executives, and that they then got a performance 
for their money. He has also said that the WCW's archrival, the World 
Wrestling Federation, was failing financially. The two wrestling promoters 
compete fiercely for television ratings, and the WWF says the WCW 
will do anything to steal its fans. The WWF and the WCW, which is 
owned by Turner Broadcasting Systems, have sued each other, claiming 
unfair competition and seeking millions of dollars in damages. It 
was in that legal fight that Madden was subpoenaed and asked in a 
deposition to provide, for example, the names of sources for his insults 
to WWF owner Vincent McMahon. Jerry S. McDevitt, a WWF lawyer, said 
that if Madden did not name his sources, he would seek to have him 
cited for contempt of court. The suit against the WCW accuses its 
executives of using Madden's 900-number reports as ``one of the principal 
conduits'' to distribute disparaging information about the WWF. The 
WCW's lawyers have acknowledged that some of Madden's statements ``blend 
factual reporting with his own style of satirical editorial commentary.'' 
In his testimony, Madden was vague in drawing the line between journalism 
and entertainment. He was asked, for example, if he had ever met wrestling 
fans who had called the 900 number and, if so, what their view of 
his reliability had been. Yes, he testified, he had met people who 
listened to his 900-number reports. And what they told him, according 
to his testimony, showed that they viewed him just the way many people 
view journalists today. ``These people,'' he testified, ``never once 
treated the matters I spoke about as reality.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>