<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0323 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A military-procurement scandal ended the career Friday of one of Japan's 
eminent executives, Tadahiro Sekimoto, chairman of the NEC Corp., 
the world's second-largest maker of computer chips. Sekimoto resigned 
to take responsibility for a scandal that has received little attention 
outside Japan but has been avidly followed in business circles here 
because of the involvement of NEC, one of the bluest of Japan's blue-chip 
companies. He said at a news conference that he would also resign 
other positions, including an influential post at the Keidanren, the 
nation's largest business organization. Sekimoto, 71, has not been 
tied to the scandal, but Japanese corporate mores demand the resignation 
of senior executives as atonement for the sins of the companies they 
run. ``I would like to make clear my social responsibility for the 
scandal that has been bothering society,'' he said. Hisashi Kaneko 
will remain as president of NEC. It is unclear how soon the company 
will choose a new chairman. A total of 13 people from NEC and its 
two subsidiaries, the Nico Electronics Co. and Toyo Communication 
Equipment Co., have been arrested by the Defense Agency on suspicion 
of overcharging the Japanese military on procurement contracts. Three 
of those arrested are current NEC executives. Prosecutors say the 
NEC affiliates overcharged a total of nearly 1.7 billion yen, or $14.3 
million. Two Defense Agency officials also have been arrested, suspected 
of ignoring the inflated billings. When the agency demanded a refund, 
NEC and its subsidiaries were said to have conspired with at least 
one senior official in the procurement department to reduce the amount 
by more than 3 billion yen _ upward of $25 million _ in exchange for 
bribes and promises of comfortable jobs for retiring agency bureaucrats. 
Japanese news media have reported that some local governments and 
their contractors, which are estimated to account for 10 percent of 
NEC sales, have excluded the company from bidding on projects for 
a limited time because of the scandal. But analysts said it was likely 
to have little effect on NEC's business. Executives have been fascinated 
with the scandal _ yet another in a string of disclosures of a lack 
of integrity among government bureaucrats _ because many suspect that 
NEC insiders may have tipped the Defense Agency to the scheme in an 
effort to unseat Sekimoto. In Japanese companies, most decision-making 
power typically rests with the president, while the chairman's job 
is largely ceremonial, except in those companies where that post is 
filled by a founder. NEC was an exception. Although Sekimoto was elevated 
to chairman in 1994, both insiders and outsiders believed he retained 
much of the power he had enjoyed for 14 years as president. He remained 
as the public face of the company, and he became a favorite voice 
of the Japanese corporate world, speaking out on the domestic economic 
situation and advocating business interests. Those who know him say 
he skillfully used his strong, powerful personality to rise within 
NEC, strengthening its role in telecommunications equipment and insuring 
that it became a powerhouse in personal computers. Unlike such competitors 
as Toshiba and Hitachi, NEC has not dallied in money-losing business 
lines like household appliances, focusing instead on high-technology 
markets. Nonetheless, analysts at foreign investment banks hailed 
his departure as a much needed breath of fresh air for NEC, which 
has suffered less from the collapse of semiconductor prices and competition 
in the personal computer market than some of its competitors, but 
has resisted structural change. ``His departure will be viewed as 
a positive,'' said Steven W. Myers, senior analyst at Jardine Fleming 
Securities here. ``He is viewed as an old-style Japanese manager, 
more interested in market share and sales growth than in profitability, 
and showing little concern'' for shareholders' interests. NEC shares 
rose 41 yen on Friday to close at 944. After the market closed, the 
company announced sharply lower earnings for the six months that ended 
on Sept. 30. It cited the steep fall in semiconductor prices, the 
domestic recession and decreased spending by telecommunications companies 
for a net loss of 19.73 billion yen, or $166 million at current exchange 
rates, compared with a profit of 35.76 billion yen in the corresponding 
period a year earlier. Sales dropped almost 11 percent, to 2.1 trillion 
yen. Sekimoto is blamed for NEC's continuing investment in Packard 
Bell NEC, a struggling personal computer maker in Cupertino, Calif. 
Although NEC bought its initial stake in Packard Bell after Sekimoto's 
time as president ended, he is widely seen as the driving force behind 
the investment. Since 1995, when it paid $1.3 billion for a 20 percent 
stake in Packard Bell, then the No. 1 seller of personal computers, 
NEC has invested at least $525 million, and many analysts here say 
it is throwing good money after bad. NEC now owns 52.81 percent of 
Packard Bell, which recently announced plans to cut 20 percent of 
its work force in the face of increasing competition in low-priced 
personal computers. NEC has been overtaken by Compaq and Dell in the 
household market, and it has found breaking into business computing 
more difficult than it anticipated. ``I think people at the company 
are now going to look at the investment in Packard Bell more objectively,'' 
said Peter Wolff, a high-technology analyst with ING Barings here. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>