<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0032 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The game had five goals, all of them important, most of them with 
style. But it was the one important shot that did not cross the line 
that provided the best moment of a match that ended in a 3-2 New York 
Rangers victory over the New York Islanders last night at Madison 
Square Garden. It came on a penalty shot by the Islanders' Claude 
Lapointe, who had a chance to tie the score with 4 minutes 42 seconds 
remaining. Kevin Stevens had just given the Rangers the lead with 
his first goal in a season of personal rebuilding. After Lapointe 
was pulled down by Brian Leetch on a breakaway, Referee Dan Marouelli 
called for the shot. There was a brief delay, and Richter said it 
allowed Lapointe to prepare himself physically while allowing Richter 
to prepare himself mentally. ``I have pride in these situations,'' 
said Richter, who has stopped 7 of 8 penalty shots in his regular-season 
career. And he is 2 for 2 in the playoffs, including one against Vancouver's 
Pavel Bure in the Stanley Cup finals of 1994. Lapointe skated in quickly, 
faking several times, the puck ending up on his backhand. Richter, 
who had gone out to meet Lapointe, skated backward and matched him 
move for move. Lapointe took a low, backhanded shot that Richter stopped 
with his left leg pad to the cheers of the crowd as the goalie pumped 
his arm in celebration. ``It's my first time taking a penalty shot,'' 
said Lapointe, who had 10 goals last season and has 67 in his nine-year 
career. ``When you have a breakaway, the defense is chasing you and 
there is no time to think. I guess I was thinking too much. I'm not 
a goal scorer. I made a great move and he made a great save.'' The 
victory continued a revival for the Rangers, who have won two games 
in succession and are undefeated in three after starting their season 
with four consecutive defeats. The game-winner was significant for 
Stevens, who came to training camp with a sobering new job description. 
Once a 50-goal scorer, Stevens was told by Coach John Muckler that 
those days were over. Settle for a role as a checking left wing, Muckler 
said. Not satisfied with Stevens's play, Muckler benched him once 
in the first week. And the Rangers put him on waivers, although no 
team took Stevens because of his $3 million salary. On Thursday night 
Stevens gave a robust effort of skating, checking and shooting. The 
score sheet credited him with six body checks. He admitted that the 
change of role was difficult at the age of 33. ``It's a weird situation,'' 
Stevens said. ``I haven't played once on the power play. Anyone who 
thinks you'll score 50 goals at even strength, you're out of your 
mind. It's tough to score goals these days. Obviously, I'd like to 
play on the power play and I'd like to play more. Mentally, it's a 
difficult situation.'' John MacLean, another 33-year-old veteran, 
scored one of the Ranger goals and Mike Knuble got the other. Trevor 
Linden and Robert Reichel scored for the Islanders. Tommy Salo, the 
Islander goalie, stopped 27 shots and was one of the best participants 
in the game. Salo turned away a Leetch blast on the power play; he 
stopped Wayne Gretzky up close with a pad save after a three-pass 
combination had moved the puck low in the zone; he robbed Niklas Sundstrom 
by sliding across the crease and snatching the puck with his glove, 
and he beat Stevens on a break-in from the blue line. Gretzky took 
a hard hit from Kevin Miller, leaving him on the ice wincing. Gretzky 
played the rest of the game, but he left the building limping. ``Hip 
pointer,'' he said. But Gretzky rarely misses games and is expected 
to play on Friday afternoon in Philadelphia. The Islanders also survived 
an unusual penalty call: delay of game. ``It was ridiculous,'' Coach 
Mike Milbury said. ``I have to question his judgment. He said he gave 
us warnings. I've never seen anything like that in my 25 years in 
the game. It was an absurd judgment.'' In the final seconds, after 
pulling Salo for an extra attacker, the Islanders stormed Richter's 
crease. Lapointe got another close-in shot, but Richter stopped it, 
leaving Lapointe to smack the net with his stick in frustration. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>