<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0405 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At 7 a.m., after a long night of bargaining ended with handshakes 
and, it seemed, a peace agreement, the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin 
Netanyahu, met alone with President Clinton and made one last demand: 
As part of the deal, the United States had to free Jonathan Pollard, 
the American serving life in prison for spying for Israel in the 1980s. 
For the next several hours at the Wye River Conference Center, American 
officials scrambled to hold together an agreement that had taken nine 
days to negotiate. Netanyahu said he would refuse to sign the accord 
without Pollard's release, officials said, even as Israeli television 
and radio stations reported his freedom had already been won, infuriating 
the Americans. ``Everyone thought it was over,'' a senior administration 
official said, describing the frantic negotiations that followed the 
early-morning handshakes. The two sides sharply disputed the reasons 
for the snag, with the Americans accusing Netanyahu of throwing up 
last-minute demands, while the Israelis said he was simply trying 
to nail down something they believed Clinton had promised earlier 
in the talks: a pardon for Pollard. Administration officials, speaking 
on condition of anonymity, acknowledged that the fate of Pollard, 
a Navy intelligence analyst, had been discussed at Wye but not, they 
insisted, as part of the agreement announced Friday. But even the 
discussion of Pollard's release caught officials at the Pentagon and 
within the nation's intelligence community by surprise, reviving the 
deep anger still felt in those quarters about Pollard's espionage 
and raising concern that a process has now been set in motion that, 
for political reasons, will result in freedom for an admitted spy. 
The release of Pollard, whose cause has been championed by many Jews 
in Israel and the United States, could well help Netanyahu with his 
own right wing as he sells a new peace agreement negotiated with the 
Palestinians. And one administration official, speaking on the condition 
that he not be identified, suggested that Pollard could be released 
at a later date to promote the peace process. But the official suggested 
that any possible release of Pollard would be announced in a way that 
appeared separate from Friday's agreement, comparable to how the United 
States quietly withdrew its nuclear missiles from Turkey shortly after 
the Soviet Union withdrew its nuclear missiles from Cuba during the 
missile crisis. In the end, the president refused Netanyahu's demand 
to release Pollard. But before Netanyahu agreed Friday afternoon to 
proceed with the accord, he wrung a public statement from Clinton 
that he would reconsider Pollard's longstanding pleas for clemency. 
``With respect to Pollard, I have agreed to review this matter seriously, 
at the prime minister's request,'' Clinton said at the ceremony in 
the East Room of the White House, where the agreement was signed. 
``I have made no commitment as to the outcome of the review.'' Pollard, 
a 43-year-old graduate of Stanford University who attended the Fletcher 
School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University, is now serving his 
sentence at the federal prison in Butner, N.C. His case is considered 
one of the most damaging in American history, even though the recipient 
of the classified material he passed along was the strongest American 
ally in the Middle East and not, as in so many other cases, the Soviet 
Union. Pollard was a civilian analyst for the Navy's Anti-Terrorist 
Alert Center in Suitland, Md., when he and his wife at the time, Anne, 
were arrested by FBI agents on Nov. 21, 1985, after being turned away 
by guards at Israel's Embassy here. Pollard was charged with _ and 
later pleaded guilty to _ giving the Israelis thousands of pages of 
documents, photographs and other highly classified material over 18 
months starting in 1984, delivering them in a suitcase to an apartment 
house in Northwest Washington. In return, he and his wife received 
at least $45,000 in cash, gifts and travel. Although Israel only officially 
acknowledged Pollard as its spy last May, his fate has been a source 
of contention with the United States. Israel has repeatedly asked 
for his release in recent years, but first President Bush and then 
Clinton refused to grant a pardon or clemency. This is not the first 
time Clinton has promised Israeli officials to reconsider the case. 
He did so in November 1993 at the request of Prime Minister Yitzhak 
Rabin, but four months later he accepted a recommendation against 
clemency from his law enforcement and national security aides. Clinton 
rejected clemency a second time in 1996. The Pentagon and the nation's 
intelligence agencies have been the most adamant forces fighting Pollard's 
release, arguing that he gravely compromised American intelligence 
sources and methods by passing information to the Israelis. On the 
eve of Pollard's sentencing in 1987, Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger 
submitted a classified affidavit to the sentencing judge calling for 
a severe sentence, citing ``the magnitude of treasons committed.'' 
When Clinton first considered the case in 1993, the secretary of defense 
at the time, Les Aspin, released a report accusing Pollard of continuing 
to release classified information in letters he wrote from his prison 
cell. Current and former military and intelligence officials expressed 
shock and outrage that the White House would even consider Pollard's 
release in the context of Israeli and Palestinian peace talks. ``I 
can't imagine why anybody on our side would be throwing Pollard into 
this mix,'' said a Navy official who recalled firsthand the dismay 
the service felt when Pollard's case arose. ``It makes them look desperate 
for the deal. It's just dumb.'' Paul Redmond, a former chief of counter-intelligence 
at the CIA, said that if Pollard were released, the director of central 
intelligence, George Tenet, who played a critical role in the talks 
at Wye, would not be ``upholding his duty'' to protect ``sources and 
methods'' of gathering intelligence. David Boren, a former chairman 
of the Senate Intelligence Committee, said releasing Pollard should 
be weighed on its own merits, not as part of the larger Middle East 
agreement. ``It was such a breach of intelligence,'' Boren said. ``I 
don't think that should be bargained away as part of other issues.'' 
Sen. Richard Shelby, the Republican chairman of the intelligence committee, 
released a statement Friday strongly objecting to the possibility 
of Pollard's release, saying it would be ``an extremely unwise, inconsistent 
and very dangerous action.'' The Constitution gives Clinton the authority 
to pardon those convicted of federal crimes or to commute their sentences. 
The Navy is still worried enough about the knowledge Pollard possesses 
that it required an intelligence officer to be present when Pollard 
met with Israeli officials in prison last May _ and demanded that 
everyone speak English. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>