<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0067 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A little knowledge is a dangerous thing, particularly in the way that 
investment advisers have co-opted the term ``contrarian analysis'' 
without really understanding it. As originally used a half-century 
ago, the term referred to a discipline of independent thinking that 
resisted Wall Street's latest fads and fashions. It is just such independent 
thinking that has helped investors resist, say, becoming fully invested 
at market tops and going to cash at bottoms. But most advisers who 
say they are contrarians today bear little resemblance to the originals. 
Reflexively, they do the opposite of what they perceive to be the 
majority belief, thus overlooking the possibility that the majority 
might be right. Contrarian analysis has become what it was intended 
to overcome: a fad. Adviser after adviser claims that he is alone 
in his analysis, and is thus correct, according to today's peculiar 
contrarian logic. What doesn't occur to such knee-jerk contrarians 
is that they don't have even remotely similar forecasts. So they can't 
all be right. The father of contrarian analysis, as far as I can tell, 
is a Vermonter named Humphrey Neill, who, beginning in the late 1940s, 
published the Neill Letters of Contrary Opinion. Neill would strenuously 
disagree with today's contrarians when they assume that the majority 
is always wrong. As Neill argued, though the majority ``is wrong at 
the terminals of trends,'' it ``is right, on the average, during the 
trends.'' Furthermore, because the market spends more time during 
a trend than at turning points, it follows that the majority is correct 
more of the time than not. My research into the average recommended 
equity exposure among investment newsletter editors confirms that 
Neill was right. The peak of their bullishness came in early 1985, 
when the Dow Jones industrial average was around 1,250 and their recommended 
equity exposure was 83 percent. To be sure, many advisers were burned 
by the 1987 crash. But that was nearly three years and 1,500 points 
later. Knee-jerk contrarians, who were in cash in 1985, missed out 
on one of history's great bull-market runs. The majority of investment 
newsletters are more bearish today than they've been in years. I calculate 
that from a peak of around 70 percent in July, the average recommended 
equity exposure has dropped to as low as 14 percent. Knee-jerk contrarians 
insist that this is a positive sign. Maybe it is. But the bearishness 
may also be presaging a deeper decline. So what good is Neill's approach 
as a short-term market-timing tool? Not much. But Neill never claimed 
it was. And he went out of his way to tell readers as much. Investors 
may pay a high price for ignoring that. Consider Contrarian's View, 
a newsletter that in recent years has been bearish. I calculate that 
since the beginning of 1991, its model portfolios have produced an 
annualized return of just 3.4 percent, versus 17.2 percent for the 
Wilshire 5000, a broad market index. An even higher price has been 
paid by adherents to the Natural Contrarian, which has bet heavily 
on gold-mining companies. I calculate that since the beginning of 
last year, a portfolio of its most recommended stocks has lost more 
than 50 percent on an annualized basis. This doesn't mean you should 
always invest with the majority. That strategy won't always work either, 
since there are other periods _ particularly when the market changes 
course _ when contrarian approaches will succeed. Furthermore, some 
contrarian approaches actually beat the market over the long term. 
Consider Investors Intelligence, a newsletter that uses contrarian 
analysis to time the market. Though it has lagged behind the market 
since I began tracking it in 1985 _ returning 13.4 percent a year, 
on average, versus 16 percent for the Wilshire 5000 _ it did so with 
less than half the risk _ a winning combination. The lesson from all 
this? There is no substitute for independent thinking. Remember too, 
the modesty of Neill's claims for his approach: ``It is plainly nothing 
more than developing the habit of doing what every textbook on learning 
advises, namely, to look at both sides of all questions.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>