<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0427 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After putting their stamp of approval on the financial statements 
of Asian financial institutions that then collapsed, the world's five 
largest accounting firms are coming under increasing pressure to strengthen 
their auditing procedures in Asian and other emerging markets. The 
Big Five, which audit almost all major corporations in the United 
States, also audited most of the big Asian banks that failed last 
year, according to a new study by the U.N. Conference on Trade and 
Development. Investors and lenders had been given a false sense of 
assurance that the banks were strong, the study said, when they saw 
the accounting firms' names on the audited financial statements. The 
study, an early draft of which was obtained by The New York Times, 
concluded that the Asian crisis would have been detected sooner if 
the banks and companies had been forced to follow stronger accounting 
rules than those now in use in most Asian countries. The study urged 
the Big Five firms to do the same strong auditing tests on financial 
statements in Asia that they do in the United States and Europe. The 
World Bank is also pressing the accounting firms to do more to get 
Asian banks and companies to use better accounting. The lending agency 
wants the accountants to ask the companies they audit to follow international 
standards, which are stronger than the rules now followed in Thailand, 
Indonesia, China and other Asian countries. If the companies refuse, 
the World Bank wants the accounting firms to not sign the financial 
statements with their world-famous names _ PricewaterhouseCoopers, 
Ernst &AMP; Young, KPMG, Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu and Arthur AndersenAndersen 
Worldwide. In many Asian countries, the global accounting firms have 
gained a presence by taking over local firms. ``There is a major expectation 
gap when they put their global names on accounts that don't meet international 
standards,'' said Jules W. Muis, the World Bank's vice president and 
comptroller. Muis said the big accounting firms ``have been in the 
forefront'' of an international effort to get Asian governments to 
adopt stronger accounting rules. ``But at the moment,'' he said, ``it's 
not enough.'' The Big Five say they must follow the accounting and 
auditing rules that are now in place in every country. And, they say 
that they are doing what they can to move countries toward using a 
single set of global rules. ``Just like electrical outlets are different 
in every country, so are the accounting rules,'' said Robert A. Campbell, 
regional managing partner for the Asia-Pacific region at Deloitte 
Touche Tomatsu. ``The Big Five are eager to apply consistent standards 
around the world.'' The accounting firms and the World Bank are both 
helping a group known as the International Accounting Standards Committee 
complete its work on a set of global rules. The group hopes that most 
countries will adopt the international rules so that investors can 
easily compare companies around the world. But the international rules 
are weaker and less detailed than the accounting standards in place 
in the United States, so it is doubtful that Washington regulators 
would allow companies following the international rules to trade their 
shares on exchanges in the United States. Muis said it would be difficult 
to get other countries to adopt the more detailed American accounting 
rules. ``Throwing those at the world would probably be counterproductive,'' 
he said, ``because the world would not understand.'' The United Nations 
study, which will be released early in November, reviewed the financial 
statements of the largest companies and banks in South Korea, Thailand, 
Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines. In its preliminary conclusions, 
the study said that poor accounting did not directly cause the Asian 
financial crisis that began in the summer of 1997. But it said that 
the Asian companies' financial difficulties would have been detected 
sooner, and the crisis would have been less severe, if the accounting 
methods used by the companies and their auditors had been stronger. 
The study also laid part of the blame for the crisis on international 
money managers, financial analysts and credit-rating agencies. Savvy 
international investors continued to pour money into East Asia, the 
study said, even when they knew that the companies followed weak accounting 
rules and could easily hide their financial problems. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>