<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0187 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
So how's my favorite hair floozy?'' my friend Jonathan asked, tweaking 
a hank of the two-foot-long blond ponytail that lay across my shoulders 
like a particularly well-behaved ferret. The floozy shrugged, and 
$4,000 worth of the finest Nordic hair splayed across her back. I 
mean my back. But whose hair? Because what was now shedding lightly 
on Jonathan's velvet couch did not spring from my own head, and it 
was no Dynel pup. Still, it was real enough hair. It crackled when 
you brushed it and gave off that fine electric-y, static-y smell. 
It even had split ends. The ponytail, sewn into a webbed tube through 
which you could thread your own mingy ponytail, had been lent to me 
by a kind of hair couturier, an Argentinian-born hair stylist named 
Rodolfo Valentin, whose specialty is wigs and falls and hair extensions. 
I was interested in Valentin and others like him because it occurred 
to me that all of a sudden everyone was beginning to look like the 
female leads of Merchant-Ivory films, rank with hair. It seemed unlikely 
that fate had bestowed the gift of huge and terrific hair on so many. 
I mean, people like Kate Winslet, Mariah Carey, Elizabeth Hurley in 
those Dazzling perfume ads, beaming up from under a castle of hair. 
And Sandra Bullock and Nicole Kidman, looking like a pair of cocker 
spaniels in the movie ``Practical Magic.'' And most runway models 
and virtually all the musicians, male and female, on VH-1. There's 
so much hair out there, and so little of it belongs to me, or to anyone 
I know. My own hair started falling out in chunks two years ago; I 
cut the remaining three hairs as short as a boy's. And so I have serious, 
crippling hair envy. I yearned to be big with hair, heavy with hair. 
``Look, I had four hairs or something after I had my first child,'' 
said Linda Wells, the editor in chief of Allure magazine, trying to 
be consoling. ``So, I would wear this fall. I just stuck it in my 
drawer during the day and wore it at night if I had to do something 
big. It's not glamorous, but I think the reason fake hair is so popular 
is that nobody has any hair of their own anymore.'' Jonathan has been 
taking Propecia, the antibaldness pill. Rather wistfully, he said 
that he was hoping, ``you know, to soon have a few more hairs on my 
head.'' As movie hair and runway hair become more and more baroque, 
conjuring up a world of Liliths and Medusas, the rest of us huddle 
together, a bedraggled crew of limp, wan Samsons. And so I set out 
to see what, if anything, I could do to join the follicly gifted. 
``We can put anything on your head,'' claimed Lisa Mitchell, a talented 
young hair stylist who does a lot of runway work _ most famously for 
John Galliano, Chanel and Comme des Garcons _ and who is perhaps the 
most celebrated hair weaver on both coasts. She could sew kittens 
in your hair and make them look as if they belonged there. When Galliano 
had platinum blond dreadlocks, it was Ms. Mitchell who fashioned them. 
What Ms. Mitchell and Valentin, the maker of my ponytail, have in 
common is the way they augment real hair with real hair. They work 
like sculptors or weavers or florists, tucking and gluing and sewing 
hair onto hair _ planting lush crops in fallow fields. Valentin has 
a hair salon nestled deep in the Five Towns, that part of Long Island 
where big hair really counts and money and time are more plentiful 
than some other places. Valentin also makes pieces for other stylists 
to use on their clients. Stephen Knoll, for example, whose salon is 
on Madison Avenue, orders Rodolfo hair for Blaine Trump and Madonna. 
Dr. Audrey Sanders, a clinical psychologist with a great sweep of 
red hair tied loosely in a ponytail, travels two hours every week 
so that Valentin can set her hair and tweak her hairpieces, which 
include the ponytail and a few falls, about $5,000 worth of hair. 
``People always ask me, `Is that yours?''' she said, patting her hair 
while sitting in Valentin's salon, ``and I always say yes, because 
of course it's mine. I paid for it.'' Valentin, whose prices range 
from $350 for a banana clip with cascades of curls attached to $4,000 
for a long ponytail, buys hair from around the world from a network 
of distributors who collect it from women called donors _ that is, 
the women sell it. Seated in his salon chair, which is set on a platform 
high above the rest of his salon in Cedarhurst, N.Y., I felt like 
Cindy Sherman slamming through her characters. ``This is very Chanel, 
I think,'' said Valentin, courtly and deft, sliding on a black velvet 
headband hung with hair. Really, it was very Hillary. The changes 
were swift and dramatic. A half-moon piece was a fall of tousled hair 
that transformed me into an aging ingenue. The long blond ponytail 
was strangely appealing, even though it made me look like a refugee 
from a Carl Hiaasen novel, or, as Jonathan said later, as if my name 
should be Bambi or Trixie. The hair was smooth and coiled nicely around 
my hand, very friendly and cozy. I wondered who my ``donor'' was, 
and I imagined her, what? Tending sheep? Milking a cow? Enacting some 
late-20th-century version of ``The Gift of the Magi''? Valentin explained 
that hairpieces are created with many different strands of hair from 
many donors, and I began to think of an entire village commingling 
on my head. I worried about Middle European economies, and I worried 
about Kosovo, and I thought, lamely, that perhaps I was doing my part 
for global relief _ like buying renewable rain-forest products. ``Hair 
is a crop,'' said Gary Herbert, a manager at the Adorable Hair-Do 
Corporation, a company on West 24th Street that sells other people's 
hair. ``Whole families grow their hair and cultivate it. It's a way 
of life.'' In this hair world, if Rodolfo Valentin is couture, then 
Adorable is ready-to-wear. At Adorable, a half-pound of dark hair 
starts at $150; blond hair can cost as much as $1,000. Cardboard boxes 
with hair spilling out line the walls, the floors, the tables. Seamstresses 
sew rows and rows of hair into wefts _ hair that's been hemmed like 
a fringe. A promotions director for a television network recently 
bought a half-pound of wefted hair from Adorable, as she does every 
couple of months, and took it to Ms. Mitchell's salon on Rivington 
Street on the Lower East Side, where it lay curled up in the client's 
lap like a sleek black kitten. ``Most people think this is my real 
hair,'' the woman said, insisting on anonymity. ``So, let's not mention 
any names.'' Ms. Mitchell neatly cornrowed the woman's own hair, then 
picked up the edge of the weft and began to sew it directly onto the 
cornrows. I worried my own little homunculus of a ponytail between 
my fingers (it had seemed gauche to bring Rodolfo hair into Ms. Mitchell's 
salon), feeling inadequate and envious, as the weft began to coil 
and creep up the woman's scalp. Two hours later, she had morphed into 
Meredith Brooks, and Ms. Mitchell began styling and cutting her shoulder-length 
hair _ it was HER hair now _ into something a little more chic. My 
jaw had hit the floor an hour earlier, when the weft was halfway in 
place and the salon began to fill with beautiful young women, all 
with long woven-in hair. Gail Powell, the salon's manager, had hers 
all wavy and wild; Amoy Pitters, a stylist, had T-square bangs and 
straight, straight hair that fell below her shoulders. Another client 
had chunky, poufy high-style hair. It felt terrific. You could tug 
on it, drag your fingers through it, stroke it, pat it. A full weave 
is about $1,500 and takes about seven hours to create. It will last 
about two months, or until your own hair begins to grow out. ``If 
you can't achieve it, weave it!'' Ms. Mitchell said. Oh, I wanted 
to. Those women were so lovely, the Medusas of Rivington Street. But 
I don't think I could. Hair _ sheaves of human tissue, bundles of 
human cells _ is just too biological. Wearing another's (or many, 
many other's) is a bit like stepping into the proverbial dead man's 
clothes, with all the attendant heebie-jeebies. Regardless of the 
possible boost I might give to Third World economies, I don't really 
have the stomach for such intimacies. The Rodolfo ponytail spent only 
a week with me. I took it for walks, and out to dinner, and for extended 
shopping trips along Fifth Aveneue. It swung rather crazily down my 
back but garnered nary a wink nor smile from passers-by. In the end, 
I found I couldn't dress for it. It lay curled on my dresser at night, 
an elegant totem from a more elegant age. ``Fair tresses man's imperial 
race ensnare/And beauty draws us with a single hair,'' Alexander Pope 
wrote in ``The Rape of the Lock,'' a zingy 18th-century social satire 
that equates a snipped hair with loss of virtue. Virtue is gone forever. 
Hair, it seems, is not. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>