<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0394 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Champagne is to New Year's as cotton candy is to carnivals. So, with 
the millennium approaching, and with it the biggest New Year's Eve 
party in a while, sparkling wine makers throughout Europe are happy 
to talk about how well they are doing these days. In this quaint city 
at the heart of the Champagne district in northeastern France, as 
elsewhere in the country and in Spain and other countries, sparkling 
wine makers are busily taking orders for the celebration. Some wineries 
will release special millennium champagnes, others have increased 
the amounts they produce, and there will be emphasis on distinctive 
packaging, with bigger bottles and memorable labels. The makers of 
champagne _ who are expected to deliver 280 million bottles worldwide 
this year _ expect to top 300 million for the first time in 1999; 
The makers of cava, the sparkling wine from northeastern Spain, expect 
to sell 215 million bottles in 1998, 20 percent more than last year, 
and are forecasting similar growth in 1999. ``The world of bubbles 
is booming,'' said Daniel Lorson, a spokesman for the organization 
here that represents the champagne producers. But among those bubbles 
is at least one cloudy enough to cause analysts and wine makers to 
worry. As the economic malaise in Asia threatens to put a damper on 
sales in a region that no longer has much to celebrate and to infect 
the rising middle class in other emerging markets that have proven 
lucrative to European sparkling wine makers, the industry is banking 
increasingly on the turning of the millennium to maintain the momentum 
of its recovery from a severe battering in the early 1990s. Indeed, 
wine makers are so optimistic that some experts are increasingly apprehensive 
about a possible post-2000 hangover. ``The next two years will be 
very positive for champagne,'' said Jean-Marie L'Home, an analyst 
with Banque Nationale de Paris. ``After that, we'll see.'' For now 
at least, the industry's overall export business is coming up roses. 
This year, producers of cava will export 105 million bottles, double 
the amount five years ago; in France, exports of champagne will rise 
to 110 million bottles, up from 73 million in 1992. ``They have very, 
very good income,'' said Michel Bettane, editor of Revue du Vin de 
France, a French trade publication. Indeed, champagne sales qualify 
as one of the few bright spots for luxury goods conglomerates like 
LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton, the French group that makes not 
only Louis Vuitton bags and Hennessy brandy but also owns several 
of the most prestigious champagne brands, including Moet &AMP; Chandon. 
Flagging sales in Asia, where LVMH generates roughly half its revenue, 
have pushed its share price down to about 950 French francs, or $158, 
from 1,600 last year. But of all LVMH's businesses, champagne ``is 
getting more profitable, and is the only one improving,'' said Joseline 
Gaudino, who follows the group at Societe Generale in Paris. Production 
of French champagne, in the region that invented sparkling wine in 
the 17th century, represents just 4 percent of total French wine production. 
But in 1997, champagne generated roughly 33 percent of France's $4 
billion in earnings from wine exports. It was not always so for the 
industry. In the heady years of the 1980s, sales of sparkling wines 
like champagne and Spanish cava, borne aloft by the decade's conspicuous 
consumption, grew rapidly. By 1989 champagne makers delivered 249 
million bottles to consumers, compared with 35 million bottles in 
the 1950s. In Spain, cava's triumph was equally spectacular. In 1989, 
sales reached 142 million bottles, up from 81 million a decade earlier. 
But as corks popped around the globe, prices for sparkling wine soared, 
as did the cost of the grapes used to make it. In 1992, as recession 
engulfed Europe, the bubble burst. That year, champagne sales plummeted 
to 214 million bottles; by the following year, sales of cava had slumped 
to 128 million bottles. In the United States, one of the biggest markets, 
consumption of sparkling wines peaked in 1985 at 18 million 9-liter 
cases (216 million bottles) but then hit the skids and declined to 
about 12 million cases (144 million bottles) last year. ``Until two 
years ago, one of every two companies in the Champagne region was 
losing money,'' said Jean-Marie Laborde, chief executive of Moet &AMP; 
Chandon, which has made champagne since 1724. When the market collapsed, 
prices did too. In France, champagne prices dropped by as much as 
65 percent, and those who rarely drank champagne before could not 
resist picking at the bargains. That, paradoxically, started a market 
recovery. Faced with the dilution of champagne's image by excessive 
sales, big houses like Moet &AMP; Chandon introduced new and fancier 
products to revive champagne's cachet, and poured millions of dollars 
into promoting their qualities. Wine makers poured on the marketing, 
though, to counter the biggest obstacle to a comeback _ fresh competitors 
from abroad. In Australia, giants like Southcorp, one of the world's 
largest producers of premium wines, began delivering to Europe and 
Japan. In the United States, E.&AMP; J. Gallo Winery, with sparkling 
wines that were drinkable yet cost as little as $3.99 a bottle, did 
likewise. Pressed to the wall, European sparkling wine makers realized 
they had to respond or be marginalized in the marketplace. In Europe, 
where 80 percent of the world's sparkling wines are consumed, they 
spent lavishly to plant the idea that sparkling wine is essential 
to a comfortable style of life. Companies with grand old names like 
Veuve Clicquot and Piper-Heidsieck emphasized the inherent difficulty 
of producing champagne and the cachet that its relative scarcity affords. 
``There is a sex appeal to champagne, almost a physical attraction,'' 
said Michel Bourqui, of the Office International de la Vigne et du 
Vin, a Paris trade organization that helped devise the strategies. 
At the same time, Spanish cava makers used aggressive marketing, with 
film stars like Sharon Stone and Paul Newman, and more affordable 
prices to expand their market share. The efforts have clearly paid 
off as the wine companies _ each with markedly differing strategies 
_ appeal to different groups of customers. And all of them, keeping 
in mind that possible sales hangover, are getting ready to pull out 
the stops for the millennium. Moet &AMP; Chandon, which dominates 
the French business, will put a special double-sized magnum on sale 
in January for $60 to $70 a bottle with a silk ribbon, the date 2000 
and a red wax seal. As a promotion, it is donating Jeroboams (double 
magnums, and thus the equivalent of four bottles) of its premier Dom 
Perignon champagne to charities in the United States for fund raising. 
The first of the big bottles, which were auctioned last year, fetched 
$2,500 to $4,000 each. But the real growth at Moet has come from a 
proliferation of champagne varieties, many sold under its lower-priced 
Mercier label, the No. 1 brand in France. ``We decided to open to 
the consumer more choices,'' Laborde, the Moet &AMP; Chandon executive, 
said. ``We used to be like Ford: any color, as long as it's black.'' 
Yet Moet's growth next year will be ``lower than the champagne industry,'' 
he said, so that ``if there is a hangover afterward, it will be less 
so for us.'' Bollinger, which dates from 1829, is also preparing a 
millenium bottle, but Bizot called it ``nothing out of the ordinary, 
for Bollinger.'' With thinly veiled swipes at big corporate competitors 
like LVMH and Seagram, which owns Mumm and Perrier Jouet, Bizot said 
scarcity was a valuable marketing device to maintain champagne's exclusive 
image. ``You cannot take advantage of a situation to jeopardize our 
future,'' he said. ``I think a lot of companies are doing that.'' 
Among Spanish cava makers, estimates of next year's sales vary. At 
the Freixenet wineries in the village of San Sadurniu, south of Barcelona, 
the director of domestic sales, Jose Maria Ferrer, who until last 
year directed operations in the United States, ventured that ``sales 
in 1999 will be huge.'' Across town at Freixenet's rival, Codurniu, 
the forecast is more cautious. ``The trade is definitely going to 
load in next year,'' said Clay Philipp Daum, export director at Codurniu, 
a market leader. ``How much consumers will consume, no one will know 
till January of 2000.'' Indeed, although robust sales are certainly 
expected, no one knows exactly how much more champagne will be consumed 
in the holiday season next year than in ordinary years. Moreover, 
since champagne must be aged, the sparkling wines that will be used 
to toast in the new millennium have already been made. ``For me as 
a wine maker, the year 2000 is already in the cellar,'' said Richard 
Geoffroy, chief taster at Dom Perignon. Could supplies run out, and 
bottles of champagne be available only at outrageous prices, or through 
shady black market channels? Or might the whole thing fizzle? Perish 
the thought. If the industry succeeds in making steady customers of 
merely 5 percent to 10 percent of those consumers who on New Year's 
Eve 1999 will taste sparkling wine for the first time, Ferrer says, 
it can celebrate itself and weather any headache the morning after. 
In fact, Laborde of Moet &AMP; Chandon said he believed the best antidote 
to a slump may yet prove to be Asia. ``The next three years will not 
be what we expected two years ago,'' he acknowledged. But a recovery 
in Southeast Asia, led by a revival of the Japanese economy, might 
just coincide with the early years of the new millennium. ``We believe 
in those markets,'' he said. ``They have 30 million to 50 million 
people with occidental buying power.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>