<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0396 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Justice Department filed suit Friday to prevent Northwest Airlines 
from buying a controlling stake in Continental Airlines, saying the 
deal would stymie airline competition and lead to higher ticket prices 
for millions of Americans. The lawsuit is the first time that the 
government has tried to block a deal between two major airlines since 
the industry was deregulated 20 years ago. It appears to signal that 
the Clinton administration, which has stepped up antitrust enforcement, 
will not permit further consolidation of the airline industry, which 
has coalesced around a handful of large carriers in recent years. 
``Affordable, quality air transportation is critical to consumers 
both in their personal lives and in their businesses,'' said Joel 
Klein, assistant attorney general in charge of the Justice Department's 
antitrust division. ``This acquisition would lead to higher ticket 
prices and worse service for the over 4 million passengers traveling 
on the routes dominated by the two airlines.'' The heart of the government's 
case is that control of Continental by Northwest would diminish competition 
between the two airlines, especially on seven routes between their 
largest hub airports. Northwest, the country's fourth-largest carrier, 
dominates air traffic in Detroit, Minneapolis and Memphis. Continental, 
the nation's No 5 carrier, is now the single largest airline in the 
New York area operating from its hub in Newark, N.J. It also dominates 
the airports in Houston and Cleveland. But it was not immediately 
clear how effective Friday's action would be. The lawsuit, filed in 
U.S. District Court in Detroit, seeks to block the Northwest-Continental 
transaction, but the government did not ask the court to stop the 
two airlines from completing the deal while the case is pending. The 
complaint also did not address an alliance agreement between the two 
airlines that would enable them to sell seats on each others flights 
and engage in other joint marketing while maintaining separate managements, 
employees and fleets. Continental has described the arrangement as 
a ``virtual merger.'' Calling both the equity investment and the alliance 
pro-competitive and pro-consumer, Northwest said Friday that it will 
acquire the stake in Continental, ``within weeks, if not days,'' while 
it prepares to challenge the government in court. If it loses, it 
will be forced to divest itself of the Continental shares, but that 
might not be for awhile. ``This litigation could drag on for years 
to come,'' said Continental general counsel Jeffery Smisek. Antitrust 
experts were puzzled that the government did not seek a temporary 
order to stop the carriers. But government lawyers said it would be 
possible for the Justice Department to get a decision from the court 
relatively quickly, perhaps within a year, and that it could still 
block the alliance, which it is still investigating. ``There is no 
reason why it has to be a multiyear proceeding like the old IBM case,'' 
John Nannes, the deputy assistant attorney general in the antitrust 
division, said in an interview Friday. ``Merger cases can be brought 
to trial very promptly.'' He said that the government did not seek 
a temporary restraining order because Northwest and Continental were 
not proposing to make changes that could not easily be undone. The 
outcome of the case promises to have far-reaching implications for 
the airline industry. After Northwest and Continental announced their 
alliance in January, the country's other major airlines scrambled 
to match them, fearing that the larger network of a combined Northwest 
and Continental would lure away their customers. Within weeks, United 
Airlines, the country's largest, agreed to link its domestic network 
with Delta Air Lines, the third-largest carrier. American Airlines, 
the second-largest, struck a deal with US Airways, the sixth- largest. 
Though none of the agreements involved exchanges of stock, they alarmed 
lawmakers in Washington who have grown increasingly concerned about 
rising ticket prices and declining airline competition. Last month, 
United and Delta were forced to scrap plans to jointly market their 
domestic flights after Delta's pilots objected. But airline executives 
privately admit that if the Northwest-Continental alliance is permitted 
to go forward, the other alliances seek similar rights. ``The question 
is: If you permit this one, how do you stop United, Delta, and so 
on,'' said Alfred Kahn, who presided over airline deregulation as 
head of the Civil Aeronautics board during the Carter administration 
and is now an emeritus professor at Cornell University. ``Maybe you 
can, but it is going to be hard.'' Northwest and Continental said 
Friday that their alliance will result in an estimated $1.4 billion 
in consumer benefits, while maintaining the independence of both carriers. 
Together, the two carriers account for about 16 percent of domestic 
air traffic, enabling them, they argued, to become a viable fourth 
challenger to United, American and Delta, which each have between 
17 and 20 percent of the market. In January, Northwest agreed to buy 
14 percent of Continental's shares, which represent 51 percent of 
all voting rights, from Air Partners, a Texas investment group controlled 
by financier David Bonderman, for $311 million in cash and 4.1 million 
shares of Northwest stock. To insure Continental's independence, Northwest 
said that it would place the shares in a trust. A set of independent 
directors on Continental's board would control the votes, though Northwest 
would retain the right to vote the shares in the event of a takeover 
and a few other key circumstances determining Continental's future. 
After the Justice Department objected to the trust, which was to expire 
after six years, Northwest offered to extend its life to 10 years. 
It also offered to submit to further restrictions on when it would 
vote the shares and to remove a Northwest representative from Continental's 
board. But Northwest general counsel Douglas Steenland said that negotiations 
with the government broke down earlier this week when the Justice 
Department refused to back down from its demand that Northwest give 
up majority voting rights after the trust expired. He added that Northwest 
was planning to acquire the Continental shares on the more liberal 
terms it had offered the government, which meant that many of the 
issues outlined in Friday's lawsuit will be addressed. ``This complaint 
challenges a transaction that doesn't exist anymore,'' he said. But 
the government obviously disagrees. ``Anticompetitive acquisitions 
cannot be cured by long-term voting trusts or other artificial legal 
devices that leave one competitor in the hands of another,'' Klein, 
the antitrust chief, said Friday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>