<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0389 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Since June, gifts of cash to the United Jewish Appeal-Federation of 
Jewish Philanthropies of New York are running several million dollars 
below last year. The New York Community Trust received 13 gifts of 
stock in the last two weeks of August 1997. But when the stock market 
was falling in the equivalent period this year, not one gift of stock 
came in. And at the San Francisco Opera, two board members have asked 
to defer or delay their pledges, as have several donors to the Boston 
Lyric Opera. Across the country, many charities say that with the 
stock market's summer swoon, the wild swings in share prices that 
have followed and the recent drop in interest rates, they have observed 
a sudden drop in donations _ and, in what may be a more ominous sign, 
a decline in inquiries from donors about future gifts. To be sure, 
many charities say they have seen no signs that donations are slowing. 
Leaders of charities in Silicon Valley and Minneapolis said that giving 
was growing. But in New York and a half-dozen other cities, charity 
officials say market volatility has created apprehension about the 
future value of assets. If those worries translate into a slowdown 
in giving after two years of robust growth, it would take some of 
the polish off what has been widely hailed as a golden age of philanthropy. 
John H. Biggs, chief executive of the TIAA-CREF pension system and 
volunteer chairman of the United Way of New York City, said the drop 
in the value of his portfolio had affected his own thoughts about 
giving to a host of charities. ``Makes you think, `Maybe a little 
less,''' he said last week at the kickoff for the current United Way 
campaign. Such thinking is widespread. ``The volatility in the market 
is causing a general mood of conservatism among all donors,'' said 
Karen Brooks Hopkins, development director for the Brooklyn Academy 
of Music. Jonathan Rose, whose family members are prominent supporters 
of performing arts and low-income housing charities in New York, said 
the concern about gifts was highest among those with modest new wealth 
from stocks and mutual funds. ``People who were giving surpluses now 
are concerned about having any surplus,'' he said. Individual Americans 
gave $109.3 billion in 1997, the American Association of Fund-Raising 
Council Trust for Philanthropy estimated. Giving rose almost 7 percent 
in both 1997 and 1996, more than three times the rate of inflation. 
But as charities approach the closing weeks of the year, when many 
collect half of their annual donations, there is concern that instead 
of a torrent of gifts there may be only scattered showers. Many charities 
say that for the year, their donations are running ahead of 1997, 
but that the growth was all in the first six months of 1998, before 
the Dow Jones industrial average peaked at 9,337.97 on July 17. Stephen 
D. Solender, executive vice president of the United Jewish Appeal-Federation 
of Jewish Philanthropies of New York, which raised a quarter-billion 
dollars last year, said that gifts of appreciated property remained 
strong even as cash gifts dropped, but that the start of layoffs on 
Wall Street was worrisome. ``It never helps when the financial industry 
is going through this kind of turmoil, and we are alert to potential 
implications,'' he said. ``The last six weeks of the year will tell.'' 
The New York Community Trust also said overall giving was up from 
last year. Ms. Hopkins, the Brooklyn Academy of Music development 
director, said: ``Right now we are in the contemplative-hysterical 
stage. People are saying, `I lost 40 percent of my portfolio, I have 
to think this through,' when asked about another gift. No one has 
said out and out, `We are not giving.' And if the market drop just 
turns into a correction, all it will mean is that we will have to 
work a little harder. But there is a lot of concern about the value 
of the market.'' The prospect of job layoffs caused by turmoil in 
the financial markets and depressed oil prices is also raising concerns 
about how well annual fund-raising campaigns will fare in New York, 
Houston, New Orleans and some other cities. A recession could actually 
benefit many charities, said Robert F. Sharpe, a planned-giving consultant 
in Memphis who has written extensively about giving patterns in this 
century. Giving, he has found, typically rises during hard times. 
``Historically, the wealth effect takes about two years before it 
breaks the charitable giving cycle, so it will be 2001 before we really 
know what is going on,'' Sharpe said. ``People cancel vacations before 
they cancel their pledges to their church or synagogue or college.'' 
Recent wild swings in stock prices have prompted some donors to time 
their gifts, either in the hope of new market highs or to get the 
maximum tax benefit. ``There are clients who are waiting to fund charitable 
trusts as far into the year as they can,'' said W. Christopher Singleton, 
director of trust and nonprofit services for the Merrill Lynch Trust 
Co. ``They want the opportunity of a rebound in individual securities 
they plan to transfer into the trust.'' Eileen Heisman, president 
of the National Philanthropic Trust in Jenkintown, Pa., said she was 
running on a boardwalk in Cape May, N.J., the morning after the Dow 
plummeted 512 points on Aug. 31. ``I was thinking about a major donor 
who was waiting for the stock market to reach a certain threshold 
before making a gift, and when I saw the headlines on the newspaper 
racks, I shouted `Oh, no!' so loudly a guy running by stopped to see 
what was wrong.'' She said that the prospective donor ``has never 
called back.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>