<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0408 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
True or false: The Federal Reserve's recent interest-rate cuts, and 
those expected forthwith, will forestall an economic recession in 
the United States and lower the risk that credit will dry up across 
the economy. True, said the stock market as it meandered upward last 
week. In one of the calmest five-day trading stretches in months, 
the Dow Jones industrial average closed at 8,452.29, up 0.4 percent. 
The bond market, however, isn't sure that all is well yet. Smoke signals 
from much of the non-Treasury bond markets say a recession remains 
a possibility. Moreover, while it is unclear whether banks have stopped 
lending to good customers, the bond markets are still gripped by catalepsy. 
And so a credit crisis might start there. Because movements of various 
fixed-income instruments, like mortgage-backed securities and high-yield 
bonds, aren't as easily tracked as stocks, what the bond market is 
saying isn't immediately evident. But one sign of continued fear among 
these investors is the difference between the yields they demand on 
junk bonds and those paid by Treasury securities with like maturities. 
This difference is known as the spread. When investors embrace risk, 
as they did last spring, spreads between Treasury issues and more 
speculative debt are narrow. As investors rush into riskier bonds, 
their prices rise and yields decline. When investors shun risk, as 
they are now, spreads widen. Despite the Fed's latest reduction in 
interest rates, on Oct. 15, spreads remain wide by historical standards. 
The estimated yield on Salomon Smith Barney's index of high-yield 
bonds exceeds that on Treasuries by 6.82 percentage points, compared 
with a 5.3-point spread before the rate cut. ``This spread is reflecting 
a great concern that the economic environment is not very healthy 
and that, if anything, surprises will be on the downside,'' said Ned 
Riley, chief investment officer of the BankBoston Corp. Riley agrees 
with the market and expects corporate earnings to be chronically disappointing 
for six to nine months. The hefty spread on junk bonds is also a sign 
that the huge market for these corporate bonds is still frozen. As 
a result, the credit squeeze that the Fed fretted about when it lowered 
rates remains a possibility. According to Riley, credit contractions 
can happen for two reasons. One is a result of restrictive moves by 
bank regulators. The other is more emotional, with lenders pulling 
back from loans more out of fear of default than its reality. ``It's 
the emotional action we have to worry about now,'' Riley said. ``As 
lenders become gun-shy, they can create a credit squeeze even without 
monetary authorities being a catalyst.'' Hence the interest in credit 
spreads. If they narrow, it will mean that lenders are becoming more 
optimistic about their customers' prospects. If they stay wide, a 
credit contraction is likely. Both stock and bond investors think 
the Fed's recent rate cuts, though welcome, are not enough. Indeed, 
many are hoping for a one-half-point slash in the federal funds rate 
at the next Federal Open Market Committee meeting in November. These 
hopes could be dashed. Late last week, several Fed members started 
telegraphing that further rate cuts were not necessarily a given. 
In a speech on Thursday, J. Alfred Broaddus, president of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond, said said the risk that the economy's growth 
rate could accelerate _ aka inflation _ hadn't vanished. And, he said, 
the Fed cannot ``be held hostage'' to the markets on interest-rate 
policy. The stock market has shrugged this off. So far. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>