<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0500 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
From the observation deck of the Stratosphere Tower, 1,149 feet above 
the glitzy casinos on the Strip, dozens of green fingers can be seen 
on the outskirts of town, sticking out into the brown desert valley. 
These are new communities in the fastest-growing part of the fastest-growing 
state, and they are the battleground for one of the tightest Senate 
races in the country. Many of these communities did not exist in 1992 
when Sen. Harry Reid, D-Nev., who is running for a third term, was 
last elected. By some estimates, 40 percent of the potential voters 
in Nevada this year were not here six years ago. Reid's Republican 
challenger, Rep. John Ensign, is running in this area, historically 
a Democratic stronghold, for the third time in four years, having 
been sent to Congress to represent Las Vegas and most of its suburbs 
in the Republican sweep in 1994. ``Who these people are and how they 
will vote: That is the question everyone is trying to come to grips 
with,'' said Billy Vassiliadis, an advertising executive and lobbyist, 
who is said to have one of the savviest political minds in the state. 
So Reid, who has raised more than $4 million, began widespread television 
advertisements in April, early for a candidate here, to introduce 
himself to the newcomers. ``The real challenge for me in this race 
is the 400,000 new people,'' he said in an interview. And Ensign, 
who has nearly $3 million, has spent weekends knocking on doors in 
these outlying communities. The experience convinced him, he said, 
that the new voters, many of them retirees who left Southern California 
for a place with a similar climate, cheaper houses and lower taxes, 
were conservatives sympathetic to his politics. Both candidates and 
the handicappers say the race is too close to call. The opinion polls 
are inconclusive, in part because nobody knows who will vote. National 
Republican leaders say they must win this seat if they are to have 
any hope of gaining five seats for a 60-vote, filibuster-proof majority 
in the Senate. Reid calls Ensign a conservative extremist. Ensign 
calls Reid a tax-and-spend liberal. Neither characterization does 
justice to their differences. In style and philosophy, said Jon Ralston, 
publisher of a political newsletter here, they are ``polar opposites.'' 
Reid, 58, has a high-pitched voice and a pasty complexion. He has 
held office most of his adult life, beginning with a term in the Nevada 
Assembly. But he is an awkward campaigner, and in his one televised 
debate with Ensign often became tongue-tied. Ralston calls him ``charismatically 
challenged.'' But Reid is a skillful legislator who will probably 
become his party's whip, the No. 2 post in the Senate leadership, 
if he is re-elected. He takes credit for legislation important to 
Nevadans, including a bill that prevents states from taxing the pensions 
of retirees who move to other states. A senior member of the Appropriations 
Committee, Reid has arranged for Nevada to receive an ever larger 
share of federal highway money. And he has used his influence to block 
a plan favored by Republican leaders to create a nuclear waste depository 
at Yucca Mountain, about 100 miles northwest of Las Vegas. Reid's 
emphasis on the issue forced Ensign, to his considerable embarrassment, 
to cancel a campaign appearance by Sens. Trent Lott, R-Miss., and 
Larry Craig, R-Idaho, two of the party's sponsors of the Yucca Mountain 
measure. ``My seniority,'' Reid tells audiences, ``puts Nevada on 
par with the larger states.'' Reid's positions _ for gun control and 
more spending on social programs, and against big tax cuts _ are in 
line with most other Democrats. But he favors outlawing a late-term 
abortion procedure that opponents call partial-birth abortion and 
supports a proposed constitutional amendment guaranteeing equal rights 
for women. He endorsed a Republican proposal, never adopted, to use 
10 percent of the budget surplus for tax cuts. Ensign, 40, is tall, 
tanned and handsome, charming on the campaign stump and formidable 
in debate. ``Ensign definitely has the advantage when they are side 
by side,'' said Steven Parker, a political science professor at the 
University of Nevada, Las Vegas. Ensign used his alliance with Speaker 
Newt Gingrich to win a seat on the House Ways and Means Committee, 
a rare assignment for a freshman, and he quickly mastered the intricacies 
of tax and health legislation. But as a junior representative, he 
has not had the same opportunity as Reid to put his stamp on legislation. 
Ensign has generally voted with his party's conservative leadership, 
but he broke with them in 1996 to to support an increase in the minimum 
wage. In the Senate, Ensign tells his audiences, his ability to work 
with Republican leaders would be more valuable than Reid's seniority. 
No one knows how the scandal involving President Clinton will affect 
the race. A Democratic poll this month showed that Clinton is seen 
in a worse light by voters here than he is nationally. Only 38 percent 
of Nevadans said they had a favorable opinion of the president, while 
49 percent had an unfavorable view. Ensign has called for the president 
to resign. But he does not bring up the matter unless he is asked, 
and he is rarely asked. Reid has called the president's activities 
``immoral.'' But Reid says that voters know that he is married to 
his high school girlfriend, has five children and six grandchildren 
and does not share Clinton's ``predilections.'' If Reid wins, it will 
almost certainly be because of women's votes. Polls show that among 
women, he leads Ensign by 10 points or more. He is being helped by 
several women running on the Democratic ticket, particularly the candidate 
for governor, Mayor Jan Laverty Jones of Las Vegas. Polls show that 
Ms. Jones, who began far behind, is drawing close to her Republican 
opponent, Kenny Guinn, a retired business executive and school superintendent 
who has been campaigning for more than two years. This election could 
mark a turning point in Nevada politics. Twenty years ago, Democrats 
had a 7-1 advantage in voter registration. Now the Republicans have 
a slight edge. ``I see this as truly a generational contest,'' said 
Vassiliadis, the lobbyist. ``There's a sense here that Harry Reid 
is a real player who gets things done,'' Vassiliadis said. ``He's 
up against a congressman who's seen as a hot political prospect, a 
new breed. This is a test of the direction this state is going in.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>