<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0340 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With the flourish of a pen at Friday's signing ceremony, Benjamin 
Netanyahu, the right-wing prime minister of Israel, has positioned 
himself as a centrist and redefined the relationship between the two 
major political parties of his country. By agreeing to give back more 
land to the Palestinians, Netanyahu has shaken up the right-wing, 
religious and immigrant coalition that keeps him in power by a razor-thin 
margin. But he has swooped in on and, at least momentarily, seized 
the emerging center, coopting the issue _ peace _ that has defined 
the opposition Labor Party. There is likely to be much political turmoil 
on the prime minister's return. Smarting with betrayal, Jewish settlers 
plan demonstrations starting Saturday night and construction of new 
settlements, perhaps as soon as Sunday morning. And a hard-right, 
fringe party, Moledet, has called for a vote of no confidence in Netanyahu's 
government Monday, when Parliament formally reopens with a speech 
by the prime minister. A successful no-confidence vote would lead 
to new elections in 60 days. But, turmoil or not, Netanyahu returns 
strengthened by his moment on the world stage, by the concessions 
he has made _ and extracted _ to revive a peace effort supported by 
the majority of Israeli citizens. In the short run, then, he is likely 
to survive politically, at least partly because the Labor Party, unwilling 
to let any government be toppled on the issue of peace, has promised 
him a two-week ``safety net.'' ``We will not bring down the government 
in this no-confidence vote,'' Eli Goldschmidt, Labor's chief parliamentary 
whip, said Friday. The accord reached in the peace talks must be submitted 
to the Cabinet and then the Parliament for approval. Meir Shitrit, 
the chairman of Netanyahu's coalition, said Friday night that he has 
counted 90 votes in favor of the peace agreement out of 120 votes 
in Parliament. After that vote is taken, however, there may be an 
inexorable momentum toward the formation of a unity government or 
early elections. Labor Party leaders, whose support Netanyahu needs 
if he genuinely loses the right, say they will withdraw their safety 
net for his government at the end of two weeks. They have long been 
itching to bring him down, even if it means a brief, unholy alliance 
with the right. And they want a direct role in the peace effort, which 
they consider to be theirs. Labor Party leader Ehud Barak said Friday 
night that Netanyahu needs Labor's help to implement the agreement 
and to move on to final status talks, which are bound to be the thorniest 
of all. He said he favors the idea of a unity government with Labor 
leadership. Recently, however, he predicted a 50-50 chance of new 
elections. The real question is who would call them. Would Netanyahu, 
whose term expires in the year 2000, beat left and right to the punch, 
effectively toppling his own government in order to redefine it? The 
right, even the hard-right fringe, is backed into a corner. It has 
no visible candidate of its own; it does not want to see Netanyahu 
in a center-left coalition, and it has does not want to be left out 
in the cold. Many right-wing members of Parliament from small parties, 
including Moledet, have a vested interest in remaining in a government 
that subsidizes its activities. And Labor, which has been riven by 
in-fighting, could find itself undercut by a Likud prime minister 
who has been willing to return land to the Palestinians. Right wing 
and left wing, Likud and Labor, have traditionally been defined here 
by their opposition to or support for the peace effort. This move 
blurs that distinction, and could force them to develop distinct political 
personalities based on the issues that distinguish parties in more 
traditional Western democracies. On the other hand, this is not a 
traditional Western democracy. ``Perhaps we will see that if the peace 
issue moves further into the background, the religious-secular divide 
will be strengthened,'' said Gerald Steinberg, professor of political 
science at Bar-Ilan University outside Tel Aviv. Certainly, the language 
used Friday by religious activists has been fiercely pointed. ``Signing 
this will bring danger to the soul of Israelis,'' said Rabbi Mordechai 
Eliyahu, spiritual adviser to the National Religious Party, which 
has nine members of Parliament in Netanyahu's 61-member coalition. 
``Rabbis whose rulings are guided by religious law and virtue will 
not be able to cooperate with he who causes endangerments and risks 
to the people of the state.'' The settlers' leader, Aharon Domb, called 
Netanyau's decision to sign an agreement ``treasonous,'' but later 
apologized for using the politically charged term. After the 1993 
Israeli-Palestinian peace accord was signed, the right wing repeatedly 
called Yitzhak Rabin a ``traitor'' in the months before his assassination. 
Chabad, the Hasidic sect that supported Netanyahu financially, with 
a ``Bibi is good for the Jews'' campaign, Friday promised a counter-campaign 
in coming weeks. Chabad leaders said they would put up thousands of 
huge signs showing a letter they received from Netanyahu right before 
his election in 1996, promising that he would not relinquish any land. 
Within his own party, Likud, which is ideologically divided, he has 
weathered strident opposition as he moved closer to a deal. Former 
Likud Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said in a scathing interview published 
Friday in the Israeli newspaper Maariv that Netanyahu has done a complete 
about-face to save his political future. ``As far as he is concerned, 
the main thing is remaining in office, which comes even before the 
interests of the State of Israel,'' Shamir said. But Netanyahu has 
proved skillful at defanging his opposition on the right. And they 
were the intended audience for his bolts from the negotiating table 
during the peace talks, including his last-minute, unexpected move 
to raise the issue of the release from prison of a right-wing cause 
celebre _ convicted spy Jonathan Pollard. Political analysts say the 
greatest electoral challenge Netanyahu perceives comes from the broad 
center _ specifically Amnon Lipkin-Shahak, the retired army chief 
of staff, who has beaten Netanyahu in polls. Lipkin-Shahak has yet 
to throw his hat in the political ring, and the idea of a new centrist 
party, which was the talk of Israel during the summer, has not yet 
taken shape. The political calculus is complex and unpredictable. 
There could be acts of terrorism or breakdowns in relations with the 
Palestinians. What seems certain, though, is that Netanyahu's political 
fate will be played out as Israeli troops are withdrawn from the West 
Bank. ``You may end up having a raucous Israeli election campaign 
take place at the same time as this very complicated and sensitive 
agreement is being implemented,'' said Joseph Alpher, director of 
the American Jewish Committee in Israel. ``If so, you can be sure 
that there will be an interesting dynamic between them.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>