<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0388 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At 7 a.m., after a long night of bargaining ended with handshakes 
and, it seemed, a peace agreement, the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin 
Netanyahu, met alone with President Clinton and made one last demand: 
As part of the deal, the United States had to free Jonathan Pollard, 
the American serving life in prison for spying for Israel in the 1980s. 
For the next several hours at the Wye River Conference Center, American 
officials scrambled to hold together an agreement that had taken nine 
days to negotiate. Netanyahu said he would refuse to sign the accord 
without Pollard's release, officials said, even as Israeli television 
and radio stations reported his freedom had already been won, infuriating 
the Americans. ``Everyone thought it was over,'' a senior administration 
official said, describing the frantic negotiations that followed the 
early-morning handshakes. The two sides sharply disputed the reasons 
for the snag, with the Americans accusing Netanyahu of throwing up 
last-minute demands, while the Israelis said he was simply trying 
to nail down something they believed Clinton had promised earlier 
in the talks: a pardon for Pollard. Administration officials, speaking 
on condition of anonymity, acknowledged that the fate of Pollard, 
a Navy intelligence analyst, had been discussed at Wye but not, they 
insisted, as part of the agreement announced Friday. But even the 
discussion of Pollard's release caught officials at the Pentagon and 
within the nation's intelligence community by surprise, reviving the 
deep anger still felt in those quarters about Pollard's espionage 
and raising concern that a process has now been set in motion that, 
for political reasons, will result in freedom for an admitted spy. 
The release of Pollard, whose cause has been championed by many Jews 
in Israel and the United States, could well help Netanyahu with his 
own right wing as he sells a new peace agreement negotiated with the 
Palestinians. And one administration official, speaking on the condition 
that he not be identified, suggested that Pollard could be released 
at a later date to promote the peace process. But the official suggested 
that any possible release of Pollard would be announced in a way that 
appeared separate from Friday's agreement, comparable to how the United 
States quietly withdrew its nuclear missiles from Turkey shortly after 
the Soviet Union withdrew its nuclear missiles from Cuba during the 
missile crisis. In the end, the president refused Netanyahu's demand 
to release Pollard. But before Netanyahu agreed Friday afternoon to 
proceed with the accord, he wrung a public statement from Clinton 
that he would reconsider Pollard's longstanding pleas for clemency. 
``With respect to Pollard, I have agreed to review this matter seriously, 
at the prime minister's request,'' Clinton said at the ceremony in 
the East Room of the White House, where the agreement was signed. 
``I have made no commitment as to the outcome of the review.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>