<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981023.0494 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rep. Charles Schumer released a new television advertisement Friday 
night that seeks to use Sen. Alfonse D'Amato's own words against him: 
a 19-second clip of unedited news footage in which he repeatedly denies 
that he ever insulted Schumer with a Yiddish vulgarism. Hours after 
he issued his denial, and after D'Amato's own supporters said they 
had heard him make the remark, the senator acknowledged that he had 
said it. The Schumer advertisement shows D'Amato voicing his denial 
in halting and disjointed sentences as two messages flash at the bottom 
of the screen: ``New Yorkers can't trust Al D'Amato. Eighteen years 
is too long.'' The speed with which Schumer's advisers turned a piece 
of news footage into a commercial was evidence of the ferocity that 
Schumer has shown in trying to transform D'Amato's use of the vulgarity, 
and his initial denial of it, into a metaphor for the Republican senator's 
public behavior and credibility. The advertisement was released as 
D'Amato went to Bushwick, in Brooklyn, to accept the endorsement of 
neighborhood Hispanic leaders and tried to turn the campaign back 
to the subject that had apparently served him well until earlier this 
week: votes Schumer missed in Washington this year while he was campaigning 
for U.S. Senate. On this stop, D'Amato cited bills of interest to 
Hispanic voters. But for the third day in a row, D'Amato found himself 
responding to Schumer's criticism of the insult and of the senator's 
decision to enlist Holocaust survivors to assail the congressman's 
record on Jewish issues. (Schumer is Jewish.) D'Amato strongly defended 
his use of the vulgarism _ a crude way of saying ``fool'' _ as an 
apt description of his Democratic opponent. ``It fits the bill,'' 
said D'Amato as he abruptly cut short a news conference Friday morning, 
climbing into his car and pulling the door shut as reporters shouted 
questions at him through the windows. D'Amato's aides later said he 
had rushed off because he did not want to miss the parade for the 
Yankees in lower Manhattan. The advertisement released Friday night 
marked one notable moment in this campaign: notwithstanding all the 
money the campaigns have spent on television advertisements, this 
was the first one that featured D'Amato speaking. It is not unusual 
for someone who has been in office as long as D'Amato has, and who 
is viewed unfavorably by many voters, to stay out of his own commercials. 
The advertisement, produced by Schumer's media consultant, Hank Morris, 
is made up almost entirely of a clip from New York 1 News of a news 
conference D'Amato held Wednesday morning to answer questions about 
his remark. In it, D'Amato glances around uncomfortably _ at one point 
looking straight into the camera _ as he denies having made the remark. 
He also appears to renounce the use of that kind of language. ``I 
just have no knowledge of ever doing it,'' D'Amato says in the clip. 
``I just don't. All right? I think it's ridiculous. I think he's probably 
pretty desperate, and that's why when you ask me do you _ I have no 
knowledge of it. I would never, I have never engaged in that, I wouldn't 
engage in it. It's wrong. I haven't done it. What, I'm going to do 
it now? It is ridiculous.'' Later that day, D'Amato sent a letter 
to Schumer acknowledging that he had used the word during a private 
meeting with Jewish leaders, but saying he stood behind it. In Bushwick, 
D'Amato responded to questions about Schumer's advertisement by attacking 
the congressman's attendance record. ``It's a desperate attempt to 
divert attention from his record,'' D'Amato said. ``And it's not going 
to work. We're going to continue to contrast our work for the people 
of this state, our making a difference, with the congressman putting 
politics _ his political agenda _ ahead of doing the business of the 
people.'' The senator again said it was Schumer who was ``trying to 
inject religion'' into the debate. Once again, he offered no examples 
to support the charge. The issue first came up last weekend, when 
D'Amato brought Holocaust survivors to the Holocaust Memorial Wall 
across from the United Nations building to assail Schumer's record 
on issues of concern to Jews. D'Amato is Roman Catholic. Schumer's 
campaign aides, who earlier this week had appeared glum over the evident 
success D'Amato was having in turning the campaign into a referendum 
on Schumer's attendance record, could scarcely contain their delight 
at the turn of events. No public measurements of any shift in voter 
sentiment have been taken, but the incident has clearly shifted the 
focus of the debate away from Schumer's voting record and toward D'Amato's 
behavior. Schumer seized on D'Amato's denial that he had made the 
statement to dramatize a central theme of the congressman's campaign: 
that the senator is untrustworthy. Schumer's advisers said Friday 
that they believed that D'Amato's initial denial of a statement that 
was heard by 40 people was far more politically significant than his 
use of a vulgar Yiddishism. At the same time, D'Amato's use of the 
vulgarity and his reference to Rep. Jerrold Nadler of Manhattan as 
``Jerry Waddler'' _ Nadler is a large man _ inevitably encouraged 
a reprise, in newspapers and on television, of other colorful incidents 
in the junior senator's career. Schumer's supporters said such incidents 
_ like the time D'Amato used an exaggerated Japanese accent to mock 
Lance Ito, the judge in the O.J. Simpson criminal trial, during a 
radio interview _ could reinforce the belief among some voters that 
D'Amato's behavior did not befit a senator. Even as he defended his 
attacks on Schumer, D'Amato said Friday that he remained unsure whether 
he had in fact said what a number of people, including former Mayor 
Edward Koch, said he had. ``It was something that, truthfully, people 
say I said,'' D'Amato said. ``I believe I said it, if they tell me. 
I have no recall at the time. It's just that simple. It was not a 
big deal.'' In Albany, Schumer appeared with B. Thomas Golisano, the 
Independence Party candidate for governor, who endorsed Schumer by 
offering just the kind of assault Schumer's advisers had been looking 
for. ``Al D'Amato has spent the last 18 years embarrassing himself 
and our state,'' Golisano said. The candidate, who is a wealthy businessman, 
added: ``As a man with considerable experience in the world of business, 
I can tell this very clearly: if Al D'Amato was an officer of a major 
corporation, he would have been fired for his conduct this week. There 
is no place in the world of politics, or anywhere in American life, 
for the kind of crude comments and cheap deceptions that Al D'Amato 
demonstrated this week.'' State Republican chairman William Powers 
responded with a written statement referring to Schumer's missed votes. 
``Based on his sorry attendance record, it's fair to say Chuck Schumer 
would be fired if he worked for Tom Golisano's company,'' Powers said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>