<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981023.2000.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is THE WORLD. I'm Tony Kahn. The Middle East peace process is 
back on track. One solid week of negotiations between Israel's Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat has 
yielded a land-for-peace accord. In essence, the agreement commits 
the Palestinians to eliminate anti-Israel provisions in their founding 
charter and Israelis to see 13 percent more of the West Bank. Much 
to the dismay of Udit Tayar, an Israeli settler living on the West 
Bank, the Jewish state also dropped its insistence that suspected 
Palestinian terrorists be extradited to Israel. From what we understand, 
and you have to bear in mind, of course, that we have not yet seen 
the agreements, this is only what we've been hearing from our delegation 
there, it's a continuation basically of the fact that there will not 
be murderers brought to justice in Israel. This is especially unacceptable 
in light of the fact that the Americans have delegations of the CIA 
and the FBI here with the Palestinian authority making deals to extradite 
murderers of American citizens. And the double standard is especially 
reprehensible. Are you saying that basically you have no confidence 
whatsoever that the Palestinians in collaboration and cooperation 
with the CIA will do anything to bring to justice people who have 
killed Israelis or who are devoted to doing that? What I'm saying 
is even more than that. What I'm saying is that up until now, we've 
received empty promises. We're talking about human lives. We're talking 
about 300 people that have been murdered since Oslo, including 11 
American citizens. And even the United States has not been able to 
enforce this. If the prime minister of Israel has made an agreement 
now that Israel will first make concession and then the Palestinian 
authority will have to live up to its part of the agreement and comply 
with the agreement, then we have a repetition of what we've had for 
the past five years. It's a one-sided agreement and we're paying in 
blood. Would you accept any peace deal? We're definitely for peace 
but we're for peace that is able to be lived with. We're not for a 
piece of paper. We're not for an interim peace. We're for peace for 
the long run. What Mr. Netanyahu has done is this is exactly what 
we're hearing if this is the actuality of the circumstances is with 
President Clinton, they have sown together the fabric for a Palestinian 
state which will only be a means to undermine the security and safety 
of all of the residents and citizens of Israel, not only now but certainly 
in the future. Udit Tayar is spokesperson for Yashir Council, a settlers 
organization for the West Bank. Thank you, Udit. Thank you, Shabat 
Shalom. We now turn to former Palestinian negotiator Ahmed Halidi. 
We just heard a West Bank settler call the agreement more empty promises 
from the Palestinians. How much do you think this deal forces the 
Palestinians to put an end to the violence that the Israelis say is 
being directed by the Palestinians against them? The truth of the 
fact is, as far as one can see, Arafat has made a very major effort 
over the past few years to contain violence. Security also must be 
remembered is a mutual issue. It's not just one sided. More Palestinians 
have been killed at the hand of Israelis since Oslo than the other 
way around. So we do hope that this will be a step towards containing 
violence, but I think requiring Arafat to achieve goals that are eventually 
unachievable is not very helpful. Is this a kind of deal that strikes 
you as being in any way really a significant one or just something 
that's sort of enforced on both sides by a lot of pressure and a lot 
of press looking in on them? I'm afraid there's something to that. 
What I find most missing in this deal is a spirit of true reconciliation, 
of partnership. With this government, you get the impression that 
it's a forced milieu, that they are not truly interested in a kind 
of partnership for peace but rather in scoring political points. And 
I'm afraid this is well ill for the implementation of the process. 
Give us a picture if you can about this whole political prisoner issue. 
The Israelis say they're going to release 750 alleged political prisoners. 
The Palestinians wanted 3,000 of them released. Who are these people 
and how dangerous do both sides feel they are? This is an issue that 
should have been resolved five years ago when the PLO and Israel recognized 
each other. It is common practice at the end of a conflict when both 
sides sit down to negotiate to release prisoners on both sides. Now 
unfortunately or fortunately as the case may be, the Palestinians 
being the civil population but not hold any hostages whereas the Israelis 
did have large numbers of Palestinians in their jails. We are now 
in a position where five years after Oslo, we still have what we consider 
to be prisoners of war held and used as negotiating leverage against 
us by the Israelis. This sours the spirit of peace and is yet one 
more indication of how far we still have to go. Thanks for speaking 
with us, Mr. Halidi. Thanks for interviewing me. Ahmed Halidi is a 
former peace negotiator for the Palestinians. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>