<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981023.2000.2377 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
"Slavery," Abraham Lincoln said, "is founded on the selfishness of 
man's nature. Opposition to it or his love of justice, these principles 
are an eternal antagonism," he continued. "And when brought into collision 
so fiercely as slavery brings them, shocks and throws and convulsions 
must follow." Well, Mr. Lincoln was typically prescient as well as 
being very eloquent, and the Civil War soon ended slavery in the United 
States but not around the world. Steven Beard reports on slavery's 
contemporary echoes. On this nondescript street in South London, there's 
a bland modern office block that could easily house a firm of accountants 
or a software company. In fact, it's the headquarters of the world's 
oldest human rights organization. When slavery was abolished in the 
British empire in 1833, the various abolitionist groups disbanded. 
They then reformed into one group to campaign against slavery around 
the globe. One-hundred-and-fifty-nine years later, Anti-Slavery International 
is still going strong. The Romans had slaves, the Greeks had slaves, 
the Incas had slaves. So slavery has always been with us and it still 
is with us, I'm afraid. David Owd and his colleagues are fighting 
a far wider range of practices and their predecessors in the 19th 
century who won the battle to abolish the African slave trade. Today, 
the target is exploitation in many different forms, and that, says 
Margaret O'Grady, makes their task exceedingly difficult. Whereas 
one can say that there was a lot of success in abolishing slavery, 
it's very difficult to say. Well, I would say it might even be dishonest 
to say that we've been really successful in helping to abolish exploited 
forms of labor which are akin to slavery, because the reality is that 
poverty forces people into situations where they can be easily exploited. 
Camel racing is a prime example. Camel racing is a highly respectable 
entertainment in the oil rich state of Dubai, but the jockeys who 
participate in this dangerous sport are children, some as young as 
four years old, most of them from abroad. Anti-Slavery International 
has been campaigning against the practice of trafficking in children. 
The organization estimates that in recent years, almost 20,000 kids 
have been smuggled into Dubai from South Asia. This Pakistani woman 
sent her five-year-old son to brave the hazards of the camel races. 
He injured his head and hurt his eye quite badly. He ripped it open. 
They admitted him to the hospital. He was unconscious for a long time. 
He returned after eight to ten days. I didn't want to send him but 
we had a loan. We are also very poor so we had to send the boy. In 
the rain forests of Brazil and elsewhere, Anti-Slavery International 
has been trying to combat another form of oppression: debt, bondage. 
Workers are lured by the very prospect of very high wages to work 
in very isolated estates in the Amazon basin. Margaret O'Grady has 
been investigating the plight of Brazil's bonded laborers. They are 
taken on a long journey over three days, and by the time they arrive 
at their work site, they discover that they owe money for the transportation. 
They owe money for the accommodation and food that they've had over 
that three days journey. Now in the middle of dense jungle and watched 
over by armed guards, the laborers have little option but to work 
and they quickly get even deeper into debt. They are forced to buy 
from the cantina, which is owned by the estate, and the prices there 
are very high. There's alcohol available. And at the end of the month, 
it turns out they owe more money than their wages. And so they cannot 
leave because they're bonded. Anti-Slavery International does not 
confine its investigations to emerging markets like Brazil or developing 
countries in Asia and Africa. One of its latest campaigns has been 
conducted here in Britain. David Owd says the mistreatment of domestic 
servants brought into the U.K. by some foreign visitors has been causing 
concern. We know of forms of sexual abuse. We know of people who are 
beaten. We know of people who were literally on call 24 hours a day. 
We've heard of cases where they had to wear a bell around their neck 
so that at any time, even when they were sleeping, this bell could 
be rung and they had to immediately go and do whatever form of work. 
They weren't being paid. In many cases, they're not allowed out. Their 
plight, says David Owd, was worsened by Britain's strict immigration 
rules. The domestic servants could only seek the protection of British 
law if they stayed with the employer that was maltreating them. If 
they fled the household, they'd be deported. The laws trapped them. 
It's a wonderful piece of Catch 22. You may use the laws of this country 
to protect you when you're in employment, but as soon as you leave 
the household or the people who are exploiting you, you become illegal. 
Therefore, you may not use the laws of this country to stop your employers 
from exploiting you. Under pressure from Anti-Slavery International 
and others, the British government has just relaxed the rules. Domestic 
servants are no longer tied to the family that's abusing them. They 
can look for similar work elsewhere in Britain. Another recent success 
story involved the carpet trade in South Asia, where young children 
are forced to work up to 14 hours a day in cramped and dirty sheds 
with no pay and no education. Anti-Slavery International has persuaded 
major British retailers not to sell carpets made with child labor. 
But Margaret O'Grady admits that compared with the abolition of slavery 
in the 19th century, these more recent achievements are modest. I'd 
like to say that we have chalked up many successes, but I think to 
be honest, we would say we're still struggling. For the sake of the 
exploited, Anti-Slavery International says it's determined to continue 
the struggle, but 159 years after it was founded to stamp out slavery 
everywhere in the world, the group sees no prospect that its work 
will be finished anytime soon. For THE WORLD, this is Steven Beard 
in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>