<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981023.2000.3186 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This week's landmark public television series, "Africans in America," 
showed viewers the far-reaching effects slavery had on American history. 
Africans who came to the new world converged their religious traditions 
of animism with a Christian theology of their slave owners. In the 
United States, you find musical results of this merger in gospel, 
blues, and eventually soul. THE WORLD's Marco Worman introduces us 
to a new musical discovery from Brazil, whose roots are also in Africa 
and the new world. The moment Virginia Rodriguez opens her mouth to 
sing, you know you're going to hear something special. Part of the 
magic of Virginia Rodriguez is a rags to moderate riches story. She 
was born in a slum off of Vala outside of Salvador, the capital of 
the Brazilian state of Bailla. Music enthralled her as a girl. The 
choirs in the church in her neighborhood drew her into the congregation, 
but as Virginia Rodriguez explains, music also chased her away from 
the church. I was a member of the Protestant church until I was 19. 
That's when I got the chance to be on a talent contest on television. 
I won but the church didn't accept it. The TV show wanted me back. 
The church didn't want me to go. They didn't like these kinds of programs 
and they wouldn't allow me to be a professional artist. So I went 
my own way far away from the church. When Brazilian singing great, 
Gadana Faloso, heard Rodriguez sing this in a theater in Salvador 
de Bailla, he got her a deal to record her first album. A copy of 
the CD made its way to the desk of Ryco Records head, Joe Boyd. This 
got my attention from the very first opening bars and I just stopped 
what I was doing. I listened to the thing from beginning to end. I 
was absolutely struck by her voice and also by the sensibility of 
the record. It just seemed to me to represent a version of Brazilian 
music more folkloric, a simpler version than the slick modern Samba 
that most Brazilian artists now turn out. And I just felt that if 
I responded to it this way, that a lot of other people may. The music 
of Bailla has traditionally been associated with the heavy artillery 
of drums that Paul Simon employed on his recording, "The Rhythm of 
the Saints." The enormous popularity of Rodriguez in Brazil now seems 
to be redefining and softening Baillan music. That new definition 
can be heard on Virginia Rodriguez's debut album, "Soul Negro." For 
THE WORLD, this is Marco Worman. Music from Brazil's Virginia Rodriguez 
brings this edition of THE WORLD to a close. You can learn more about 
the singer online at www.theworld.org. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>