<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981023.0600.2006 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two major developments out of Japan, first Japan's bank bail-out package 
came into effect today, raising hopes Japan's economy will start to 
grow again. Amy Bickers reports from the VOA Asian News Center. The 
move paves the way for the government to take control of one of the 
nation's largest banks. The Japanese government announced Friday that 
it would nationalize the long-term credit bank of Japan, known as 
LTCB. The bank is Japan's 10th largest in terms of assets and has 
more than 8,000 corporate clients. The unprecedented move was applauded 
by analysts. The huge bank's troubles have undermined global confidence 
in Japan's banking system and are the source of a bitter four-month 
struggle between Japan's ruling political party and the opposition. 
Analyst Gary Evans of HSBC Securities in Tokyo welcomes the move. 
But warned that shareholders may suffer big losses. Well, it's been 
expected for some time. I think the only question now is what price 
the shareholders will get. It looks like it's probably only going 
to be one yen a share. The government has declared that the LTCB is 
basically insolvent. Fears that investors will have to sell their 
holdings to the government for next to nothing had hit the stock hard 
in recent days. It fell to an all-time low of two yen per share this 
week. Trading the stock was suspended Friday. The concern about LTCB 
has spread from the financial industry to the general public. Afternoon 
talk shows usually focused on show business gossip now include regular 
segments on LTCB and developments in Japan's debt-ridden banking industry. 
Analysts say there's no doubt that other banks will also subscribe 
to the bail-out program, which came into effect Friday. The $515 billion 
package approved by Parliament last week is aimed a revitalizing the 
financial system and lifting Japan out of recession. While some ailing 
banks will be shut down, Mr. Evans points out that healthier lenders 
troubled by bad loans will also gain access to public coffers. What 
I think you'll have is perhaps 10 or 12 of the big banks, and there 
18 big banks now left, applying for perhaps three or four hundred 
billion yen each. And the government's not really expecting much in 
return, so there won't be any restructuring of these banks. They'll 
just get a little bit of extra cash. It'll make them a little bit 
healthier but, unfortunately, it's not going to make them any more 
efficient. Investors in Tokyo are hopeful that most big banks are 
going to take part in the plan. The Nikkei stock average closed lower 
Friday on profit-taking after climbing eight percent in four trading 
sessions. Still, banking analysts warn it could take months of paperwork 
before most big banks actually receive any money. Amy Bickers for 
VOA News, Hong Kong. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>