<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981219.1830.0985 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
On this day, you heard much from the politicians. You heard a great 
deal from commentators. But how about the rest of the nation? Many 
Americans have not paid much attention to this impeachment story, 
so far. We asked three reporters in different regions to find out 
if that's changing. We begin with ABC's dean Reynolds in Chicago. 
Americans scrambling to finish their Christmas shopping weren't really 
focusing on the impeachment drama this morning, but once the house 
voted, many began to debate whether Mr. Clinton should fight on or 
resign in the interest of the nation. I think he should see the process 
through. why? Because I think the process is a sham. I think the process 
will be revealed as a sham once it gets to the Senate trial. I don't 
think that he should resign so that the American people can say "Whew." 
This whole thing is over. But others believe Mr. Clinton should go 
right now. It's time for him just to step down. He's made his amount 
of mistakes and we're tired of forgiving him. However, people view 
the issue, it can't be good news for Bill clinton to have the public 
now mentioning his name and the word resign in the same breath. Dean 
Reynolds, ABC News, Chicago. This is Judy Muller in Los Angeles. At 
the corner of Florence and Normandy, once the focus of riots, the 
main focus today was Christmas. They're just coming in now and trying 
to get their Christmas shopping done and getting their Christmas trees. 
This is not a political Arena right in here, this is a Christmas tree 
arena. And those who are talking about it are not happy. It's really 
sad because there's a lot of other things going on in the world that 
needs attention besides this. At a nearby plea market, Ophelia arreleno 
says it reminds her of a coup D'etat in her native Guatemala. We like 
the president. We like him. He is doing a good job. Why the congressmen 
don't listen to the people? And so a lot of people see no point in 
listening to Congress. I'm working on the church grounds today. And 
this is where my reliance is on, something higher than Sadness, anger, 
futility, and a grim determination to get on with the holidays. Judy 
Muller, ABC News, Los Angeles. This is Steve Osunsami in Atlanta. 
It's the morning workout at this Atlanta fitness center. And Bob Livingston 
has just announced he will leave Congress. I think that now that the 
speaker of the house has resigned, I don't think the president has 
much of a choice but to resign. But as divided as the House of Representatives, 
so are southerners. At this assisted living center, 101-year-old Louis 
Goodman says the house had no right to impeach. There's no saints 
among them, understand? Many people we talk99 talked with, old and 
young, point out, they elected the president with reservations. Today's 
impeachment, they say, is the realization of their worst fears. Steve 
Osunsami, ABC News, Atlanta. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>