<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981219.1830.0288 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton was with his pastor while the house was impeaching 
him. ABC's Sam Donaldson has the reaction from the White House. sam? 
When the first impeople money vote was taken, the president wasn't 
watching. He was informed he had been impeached. He was with one of 
the ministers with whom he's been working. The minister said later 
they prayed together. The president watched the next three impeachment 
votes. What had to be the most devastating moment of his life, the 
White House picked up the mode. They began a campaign to save the 
president from possible removal of office. Mrs. Clinton walked arm 
in arm with her husband as they, along with vice President Gore and 
house democratic leader Gephardt came to the lawn below the oval office, 
where surrounded by his backers, the president made his case to the 
American people for avoiding a long Senate trial. I have accepted 
responsibility for what I did wrong in my personal life. And I have 
invited members of Congress to work with us to find a Reasonable, 
bipartisan and proportionate response. That approach was rejected 
today by republicans in the house. But I hope it will be embraced 
by the Senate. I hope there will be a constitutional and fair means 
of resolving this matter in a prompt manner. Not once did Mr. Clinton 
mention that he had been impeached, nor did he mention any specifics 
of what he had done wrong. In fact, he suggested he was to some extent, 
a victim of the times. We must stop the politics of personal destruction. 
We must get rid of the poison us venom of excessive partisanship, 
obsessive animosity, and uncontrolled anger. That is not what America 
deserves. That is not what America is about. The president said he 
has tried to bring the nation together. It's what I've tried to do 
for six years. It's what I intend to do for two more until the last 
hour of the last day of my term. When it was over, the president withdrew 
to the oval office complex where he got a big hug from his assistant, 
Betty Currie. This all around show of support was noent underscore 
the president's determination to serve out his term. Dick Gephardt 
reported on the private meeting a few minutes earlier. He cannot and 
must not resign. The strategy now is to be very conciliatory toward 
the Senate, including republicans. Let house democrats continue to 
bash house republicans. The president now wants a censure deal in 
the Senate, if possible, in order to avoid a trial. So, Charlie, this 
long, sad historic day ends. And at its end, the Clintons are hosting 
a White House Christmas party for friends, supporters, and democratic 
party donors. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>