<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981219.1830.0081 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton has been impeached. The House of Representatives 
today approved two of the four articles of impeachment, accusing him 
of perjury and obstruction of justice. The issue now goes to the United 
States Senate for a possible trial. In the house today it was a partisan 
vote, and it will have repercussions, not only for this president, 
but for the presidency itself, and for the House of Representatives. 
It is almost impossible to describe this day. We'll try starting with 
ABC's Linda Douglass on Capitol Hill. At 3:00 this afternoon, the 
articles of impeachment were delivered to the secretary of the United 
States Senate by house Judiciary chairman Henry Hyde and the 13 republicans 
who will prosecute the case against the president. It was an emotional 
day. The yeas are 228. The nays are 206. The article one is adopted. 
Article one, charging President Clinton committed perjury before the 
grand jury passed 228 to 206, with five members of each party voting 
with the other party. Article two, perjury in the Paula Jones civil 
case was defeated 229 to 205. Article three, obstruction of justice, 
passed 221 to 212. And article four, abuse of power was defeated 285 
to 148. As if impeaching the president was not drama enough, earlier, 
house speaker designate Bob Livingston plunged the house into chaos 
with a stunning announcement. First an appeal to the president. You, 
sir, may resign your post. no! no! no, no! And then he dropped a bombshell. 
I can only challenge you in such fashion if I am willing to heed my 
own words. I will not stand for speaker of the house on January 6th. 
Livingston announced he will resign from Congress. He made the decision 
two days after confessing to several extramarital affairs. Democrats 
rose up to plead for an end to the poisonous political climate. We 
need to stop destroying imperfect people at the Altar of an unobtainable 
morality. Say no to resignation. No to impeachment. And no to vicious 
self-righteousness. But republicans argued the climate did not create 
president clinton's problems. He did. A nation of laws cannot be ruled 
by a person who breaks the law. At one point, democrats walked out,. 
They charged republicans are ignoring the will of the people. Let 
me tell you, people are angry. They are frustrated. They are bewildered. 
And now the Congress is preparing for something people thought they 
would never see, that is a trial in the Senate. The majority leader 
of the Senate, Trent Lott, issued a statement tonight suggesting that 
the beginning date of that trial may depend on how long it takes the 
president to prepare his defense. Meanwhile, of course, the White 
House is hoping somehow in the interim, they can make a deal for a 
censure resolution, but democratic senators are saying, Charlie, that 
they do expect a trial and expect it to last for months. Linda Douglass 
on Capitol Hill, who will be back with us in a few moments. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>