<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981219.0804 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Shouts of ``Death to America!'' rang out at angry pro-Iraq marches 
staged by Palestinians on Saturday in the West Bank. Violent clashes 
in their aftermath left more than 100 Palestinians hurt. Yasser Arafat's 
government, meanwhile, said it would send a special envoy to Baghdad 
to try to help end the crisis in Iraq, which has been pounded by U.S. 
and British air strikes to punish Saddam Hussein for obstructing U.N. 
weapons inspectors. The display of Palestinian frustration and fury 
_ exacerbated by Israel's refusal to carry out a troop withdrawal 
promised under the Wye River peace accords _ stood in stark contrast 
to the warm welcome U.S. President Bill Clinton had received earlier 
in the week in the West Bank and Gaza strip. The main fighting came 
in the West Bank town of Hebron, where more than 3,000 Palestinians, 
some masked, marched waving Iraqi flags and portraits of Saddam. Afterward, 
hundreds of Palestinians broke away from the main march and hurled 
stones and firebombs at Israeli soldiers guarding Jewish settlements 
in the center of Hebron. The soldiers fired rubber bullets at the 
marchers, injuring 104 of them, hospital officials said. Four were 
seriously hurt, according to doctors at Hebron's Aliya Hospital. The 
unrest was among the most intense in months in the Palestinian lands, 
even including demonstrations that rocked the West Bank last week 
over Palestinian demands for release of prisoners held in Israeli 
jails. The rally in Hebron and smaller ones in the West Bank town 
of Jenin and the Gaza Strip town of Rafah came in defiance of a Palestinian 
police ban on pro-Iraq demonstrations. In Rafah, about 400 Palestinian 
protesters burned U.S. and British flags. Police dispersed them, but 
without using force. In Jenin, about 2,500 Palestinians chanted ``Death 
to America'' but refrained from burning any U.S. flags. Afterward, 
the marchers approached the Jewish settlement of Ginat and threw stones 
at Israeli troops, who responded with rubber bullets and tear gas. 
Seven Palestinians were injured. The fighting in Hebron took place 
amid winding, cramped downtown streets, where soldiers and protesters 
ducked into shops and doorways for cover. At one point, with stones 
raining down on them, about 20 Israeli soldiers grouped and charged 
stone-throwers, firing rubber bullets as they ran forward. After two 
hours of intense fighting, Palestinian police moved in and kept the 
demonstrators away from Israeli positions, and the stone-throwers 
eventually dispersed. Thirty of those hurt were hospitalized and the 
rest treated at the scene. The Iraq crisis poses a dilemma for the 
Palestinian leadership. On the one hand, it is anxious to rein in 
the unmitigated backing Palestinians gave Saddam during the 1991 Gulf 
War _ a stance that set back the Palestinian cause in the West. At 
the same time, however, Arafat's government apparently wants to allow 
some outlet for Palestinian street sentiment in favor of Iraq. At 
its meeting Friday night, the Palestinian Cabinet called on the international 
community to use diplomatic means to address the Iraq dispute. It 
said the Palestinian Authority would send an envoy to aid in efforts 
to ``stop the destruction in which the Iraqi people are paying the 
price.'' The Cabinet also condemned Israel's demand that the Palestinians 
take more steps before the government of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
would keep its part of the Wye River pact. ``The Palestinian leadership...has 
implemented all of its obligations,'' it said in a statement, calling 
the Israeli stance a ``dangerous setback.'' On Friday, after a series 
of pro-Iraq rallies at which U.S. flags were burned, Palestinian authorities 
declared such demonstrations banned and briefly detained some journalists 
_ including some working for foreign media outlets _ who had covered 
the pro-Iraq unrest. The Gaza City bureaus of The Associated Press 
and the Israeli-based Orbit Satellite Service were closed down by 
the authorities on Friday but allowed to reopen on Saturday. Six Palestinian 
TV and radio stations in the West Bank that had also been closed a 
day earlier were reopened Saturday. The Palestinian journalists' syndicate 
called a strike starting Saturday to protest the curbs on their coverage, 
and said they would stage a sit-in at the Palestinian legislative 
council on Monday. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>