<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981219.0173 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thunderous blasts rocked Baghdad before dawn on Saturday, with U.S. 
and British forces pressing a punishing air offensive on Iraq for 
a third night. Reporters saw fiery streaks from what appeared to be 
Tomahawk cruise missiles arcing across the sky and landing in giant 
fireballs. Warheads exploded a few seconds later, lighting the pre-dawn 
horizon in a red glow that silhouetted palm trees against the dark 
sky. Iraqi anti-aircraft gunners on rooftops opened fire, filling 
the sky with booms and bright red flashes. Orange tracer bullets streaked 
high above. When the attack ended, ambulances or fire trucks with 
sirens blaring were heard speeding away. Officials, who must escort 
journalists wishing to tour the city, refused to take them to the 
targeted areas. Baghdad residents said damage from the Friday and 
Saturday attacks was heavy and that a number of buildings in the center 
of the capital _ including palaces, security headquarters and offices 
of the ruling Baath Party _ had been hit. Western reporters staying 
at Al-Rashid Hotel in central Baghdad saw explosions in nearby areas 
known to have palaces, a headquarters of the Special Security service 
and the command center for the Popular Army, which is a paramilitary 
force. The walls of the Military Industrialization Corporation, which 
oversees state-run factories, were still standing, but the building 
appeared to have been gutted by missiles. Saturday's attack appeared 
to be the toughest yet against Baghdad since the U.S. and British 
militaries began air strikes early Thursday to punish Iraq for its 
obstruction of U.N. inspectors searching for evidence of weapons of 
mass destruction. Before Saturday's attack, the United States fired 
nearly 300 Tomahawk cruise missiles from ships in the Gulf or from 
B-52 bomber aircraft. The missiles carry warheads weighing up to 1,350 
kilograms (3,000 pounds). Iraq says 25 people were killed and 75 injured 
in the first two nights of attacks. Saturday's explosions were not 
preceded by air raid sirens, implying that for the first time the 
strikes eluded Iraqi air defenses. When the reverberations from the 
explosions subsided at about 4:45 a.m. (0145 gmt), the winter air 
filled with the sounds of muezzins calling from mosque loudspeakers, 
informing Muslims to eat their last meal before beginning the first 
day of fasting for the holy month of Ramadan. On Friday, in an address 
to the nation broadcast on television, President Saddam Hussein vowed 
that Iraq ``will not compromise or kneel in the face of injustice. 
``We will not let evil triumph over virtue,'' he said. State-run newspapers 
on Saturday echoed Saddam's theme. A banner headline in the Al-Jumhuriya 
daily read: ``We shall resist and fight in the name of God.'' On Saturday, 
officials at the Oil Ministry said that crude exports under the U.N. 
approved oil-for-food program were continuing despite the military 
attacks. The officials said an average of 1.8 million barrels per 
day were going out through Mina al-Bakr port and terminals at the 
Turkish port of Ceyhan on the Mediterranean Sea. They spoke on customary 
condition of anonymity. During a Pentagon briefing on Friday, the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman Gen. Henry Shelton said that U.S. forces 
have hit more than 75 targets in the last two nights. But initial 
bomb-damage assessments indicate that only a small number of the targets 
were destroyed or severely damaged even though Iraq offered virtually 
no resistance. ``We ... have had some very good success with our strikes, 
but not all of them have gone exactly as planned,'' Shelton said. 
For example, of 27 Iraqi surface-to-air missile facilities attacked, 
only one was destroyed and eight suffered no damage. The Iraqi military 
claimed its anti-aircraft batteries had shot down 77 incoming missiles 
so far. The United States says the aim of Operation Desert Fox is 
to lessen Iraq's ability to make weapons of mass destruction, threaten 
its neighbors and attack U.S. interests in the region. But Iraq's 
Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz questioned that. ``The real objective 
of this aggression is to show that the United States is the sole superpower,'' 
he told reporters Friday. He said the strikes targeted the old defense 
ministry building, which houses only administrative department, a 
refinery in the southern city of Basra, a trade ministry warehouse 
and a radio-television transmission facility. The Pharmacy College 
of Baghdad and the Museum of Natural History were also hit. Aziz did 
not say which military sites had been hit. But in Washington, U.S. 
officials showed aircraft videotape of laser-guided bombs slamming 
into what they said were military targets, including radar stations, 
a missile storage facility, and a missile production plant. Aziz said 
almost all potential weapons sites that U.N. weapons inspectors had 
been monitoring have been hit. The inspectors, who had been working 
in the country since 1991, withdrew from the country on Wednesday, 
complaining of lack of cooperation from Iraq. The withdrawal became 
the trigger for the U.S.-British attack. Until the monitors certify 
that Iraq is free of biological and chemical weapons and long-range 
missiles, the U.N. Security Council cannot lift economic sanctions 
imposed on Iraq for its 1990 invasion of Kuwait. The United Nation's 
efforts to relieve the hardships caused by the sanctions received 
a severe blow with the evacuation Friday of 106 international staffers 
of a program to monitor food aid to the Iraqis. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>