<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981219.0361 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hundreds of protesters attacked the U.S. and British embassies in 
Damascus on Saturday as tens of thousands of Syrians took to the city's 
main downtown streets to denounce the American and British air strikes 
on Iraq. Witnesses said the U.S. Embassy's Marine guards fired tear 
gas to disperse the crowd, but three protesters managed to enter the 
grounds and climb the walls of the building to haul down and burn 
the American flag. Chanting ``Down with America!'' a crowd estimated 
at a thousand surrounded the embassy in the upscale al-Rawdha neighborhood. 
Many pelted the building with stones, shattering windows. ``It's very 
crowded. They are throwing stones,'' said a switchboard operator at 
the embassy who would not give his name. The mobs later attacked two 
other American installations and two British government buildings, 
but there were no reports of injuries to any Westerners. Witnesses 
said about a dozen protesters were taken away to a hospital after 
being overcome by tear gas outside the U.S. Embassy. The attacks came 
as tens of thousands of demonstrators marched peacefully, chanting 
anti-American slogans and demanding an end to attacks on Iraq, which 
have gone on for three nights. Large demonstrations are rare in the 
Syrian capital, which is under tight security control, and Saturday's 
marches throughout the downtown could not have occurred without government 
approval A crowd also marched on the nearby residence of U.S. Ambassador 
Ryan Crocker, throwing stones and breaking windows. The ambassador's 
wife, Christine, was in the building but was not hurt, said a Syrian 
guard outside who would not give his name. Witnesses, who spoke on 
condition of anonymity, said the protesters later broke into a nearby 
American school and the U.S. Cultural Center around a corner about 
a block away, despite efforts by Syrian police to block their path. 
The crowd broke up furniture in the two buildings, both closed for 
the day. Other demonstrators surrounded and threw stones at the nearby 
British Embassy and the British Council, a government institution 
that sponsors English language classes and cultural programs. The 
protesters also overturned a British diplomatic vehicle, witnesses 
said. After initially trying to manage the crowds outside the U.S. 
and British institutions, Syrian police later tried to break up the 
protests but were still having trouble controlling the situation after 
about an hour. ``The Americans are trying to make us kneel down and 
surrender. ... I will not leave before I burn the flag and make my 
voice heard,'' said Hafizah Abu Tarbous, a protester outside the U.S. 
Embassy. The embassy building was believed to be largely empty and 
closed for the day. Embassy officials could not immediately be reached; 
someone answering the phone there said no one was available for comment. 
Sirens could be heard wailing in the background as the person spoke. 
Most of the protesters outside the building apparently were university 
students or members of the youth organization of the ruling Baath 
Party. During the protest marches in downtown Damascas, patriotic 
Syrian songs blared from loudspeakers on some government buildings 
as marchers chanted slogans. ``No to killing and destruction,'' went 
one chant. ``The Iraqi people will never kneel down,'' was another. 
``The Syrian people are with you, our Iraqi brothers,'' read one banner 
carried by protesters. The protests in Damascus were part of a massive 
show of support for the Iraqis across the Arab world. Demonstrations 
also erupted Saturday in the West Bank and Egypt, and protests against 
the U.S. and British attacks were staged Friday in Jordan, Lebanon 
and Yemen. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>