<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981219.0825 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As revelations keep arising of corruption surrounding the bidding 
of the Olympics, the high-priced constituency that finances the games 
is getting anxious. Some corporate sponsors, who make millions of 
dollars on the Olympics' revered reputation of honor and integrity, 
have urged Olympic officials to hurry and fix any problems that threaten 
to tarnish the image of the event. ``We've expressed our concerns 
to the International Olympic Committee and they assured us they will 
take swift and decisive action and we will monitor them to ensure 
that,'' said Ben Deutch, spokesman for Coca-Cola, a long and influential 
sponsor of the Olympics. The IOC has responded with an investigation 
into allegations of its members selling their votes, with particular 
focus on Salt Lake City's bid for the 2002 Winter Games. On Friday, 
Salt Lake City Olympic organizers pledged that an independent probe 
into the scandal would be undertaken and the results made public no 
later than Feb. 11. Leaders of the Salt Lake Organizing Committee 
didn't say they had been pressured to resolve the controversy by the 
more than two dozen top-level sponsors, who will cover more than dlrs 
600 million of the event's estimated dlrs 1.4 billion budget. But 
the SLOC executive committee resolution calling for an ethics probe 
was a clear indication that the demands of many sponsors who want 
the issue dealt with quickly and in the open were taken into consideration. 
``I think the steps taken today by the executive committee to refer 
this matter to the ethics board will be a matter of reassurance to 
sponsors,'' Frank Joklik, SLOC president and CEO, said. The U.S. Olympic 
Committee has suggested the possibility of opening its own investigation 
into the Salt Lake bid. And the FBI in Salt Lake confirmed that it, 
too, was reviewing the allegations to determine whether to open a 
formal investigation. While allegations of influence peddling and 
corruption in the Olympic movement are not uncommon, this latest controversy 
is the biggest scandal ever. Charges of bribery and corruption by 
IOC members and so-called agents who claim to buy and sell IOC votes 
have steadily escalated since it was revealed three weeks ago that 
SLOC had paid the college tuition of at least six relatives of IOC 
members when bidding for the 2002 Winter Games. The son of Libyan 
IOC member Bashir Attarabulsi, who is attending Utah Valley State 
College, told a newspaper his father would never sell his vote. He 
said the checks for tuition and books stopped coming two weeks ago. 
``People think it is bribery. For us as Muslims, it is forbidden and 
we would not accept that,'' Suhuel Attarabulsi, 26, was quoted in 
a copyright story in Saturday's Deseret News. ``My dad, he knows God 
is watching him all the time.'' But a senior IOC member, Marc Hodler 
of Switzerland, last weekend claimed Salt Lake used the scholarships 
and other favors to bribe IOC members. Later, he said Salt Lake and 
other recent bid cities were the victims of extortion by greedy IOC 
members and their agents, although he did not name names. IOC officials 
have said Hodler has offered no evidence to prove his claims. This 
past week more revelations cropped up daily of Salt Lake bid officials 
currying favor with IOC members by offering expensive gifts, such 
as skis and shotguns made in Utah, and performing cosmetic surgery 
_ most of it at no cost to IOC members. IOC rules limit the value 
of gifts to its members from bidding cities to dlrs 150. The IOC has 
reassured Salt Lake organizers that the 2002 Winter Games will stay 
in Utah and sponsors are publicly holding back judgment. But sponsors 
agree the mounting allegations and admissions of corruption in the 
Olympic bidding process make them uneasy about their investment. The 
Olympics have had the reputation of the highest standards of true 
sportsmanship that companies bank on when they tout their ties with 
the games, hoping the association with the event's ideals will attract 
and keep customers. ``As an Olympic sponsor, we are very concerned 
that the Olympics keep the proper perspective and any allegation raises 
a concern,'' said Bill Berry, spokesman for Delta Air Lines, a sponsor 
of the 2002 Winter Games. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>