<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981219.0151 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hundreds of weeping relatives of victims of a SilkAir plane crash 
in Indonesia cast flowers Saturday onto a mass grave to commemorate 
the first anniversary of the tragedy. The anguish was heightened because 
investigators have yet to determine the cause of the Dec. 19, 1997 
crash into a murky, fast-flowing river. Divers recovered only body 
parts amid the plane wreckage and most victims were never identified. 
``There has been no clear explanation as to why it fell and totally 
disintegrated,'' said Atang Hidayat, father of victim Elly Sundari, 
an Indonesian journalist who perished. About 750 mourners as well 
as Singaporean and Indonesian government officials attended the ceremony 
in the Sumatra island city of Palembang, near the crash site. A largely 
symbolic burial with dozens of empty coffins was held at the same 
place on Jan. 19, one month after the Boeing 737 fell out of the sky 
on a routine flight from Jakarta to Singapore. All 104 passengers 
and crew members aboard died. As at that ceremony, prayers were recited 
this time by religious leaders from a number of different faiths, 
including Islam, Christianity, Buddhism and Taoism. Grieving relatives 
then hugged each other. Some lit candles, sang hymns, mouthed prayers 
in silence or shrieked in sadness. ``We feel sad but we have to accept 
that she was predestined with such a fate,'' Hidayat said of his daughter, 
who was then 40 and on her way to Japan to study fashion for three 
months. Hidayat and other relatives thanked SilkAir, a subsidiary 
of national carrier Singapore Airlines, and the local government for 
organizing the ceremony. But they expressed frustration at the failure 
to discover the cause of the crash as well as offers of compensation 
from the airline that they consider too little. So far, the airline 
has offered no more than the dlrs 75,000 called for in the Warsaw 
Convention for victims of air crashes, and as little as dlrs 20,000 
for some, depending on their age and income level, according to Singaporean 
news reports. At the ceremony, SilkAir unveiled a nine-meter-high 
monument consisting of four wing-shaped posts. The cost was four billion 
rupiahs (dlrs 510,000). In the weeks following the crash, helicopters, 
minesweeper boats with sonar and hundreds of Indonesian and Singaporean 
searchers found little more than half the plane wreckage. The remains 
of six victims who were identified were returned to their families. 
Two were from the United States. The others were from Germany, France, 
Malaysia and Singapore. Most on board were from Singapore and Indonesia. 
The plane's flight data and voice recorders were recovered, and the 
U.S. National Transportation Safety Board has studied their contents 
at its laboratory in Washington. A release from Indonesia's Transportation 
Ministry said Friday that the investigation has not yet discovered 
the cause of the crash. International media reports have raised the 
possibility that the cause was pilot suicide. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>