<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981219.0521 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Anti-aircraft guns shot bright flashes into the Baghdad sky on Saturday 
night, an indication that the fourth wave of punishing U.S. and British 
air strikes was underway. Gun batteries on rooftops sent tracer shells 
streaking across the sky shortly after dusk as Muslims were breaking 
their fast on the first day of the holy month of Ramadan. The guns 
began firing minutes after sirens wailed across the capital. In Washington, 
a White House official said a fourth wave of air strikes had begun. 
Iraq has been taking a beating since overnight Wednesday-Thursday, 
when U.S. and British forces launched an air offensive to punish Iraq 
for obstructing the work of U.N. weapons inspectors. Baghdad residents 
said damage from the previous three nights of airstrikes was heavy 
and that a number of buildings in the center of the capital _ including 
palaces, security headquarters and offices of the ruling Baath Party 
_ had been hit. Western reporters staying at Al-Rashid Hotel in central 
Baghdad saw explosions the previous night in nearby areas known to 
have palaces, a headquarters of the Special Security service and the 
command center for the Popular Army, which is a paramilitary force. 
The walls of the Military Industrialization Corporation, which oversees 
state-run factories, were still standing, but the building appeared 
to have been gutted by missiles. Iraq says 25 people were killed and 
75 injured in the first two nights of attacks, but it did not issue 
further official casualty figures. On Saturday, the state-run Iraqi 
News Agency said five additional people had been killed overnight 
and 21 wounded in a missile attack on the Al-Riyad neighborhood of 
the northern town of Kirkuk. The report said an agricultural training 
center and a number of houses were damaged. Meanwhile, a second U.S. 
aircraft carrier battle group _ led by the USS Carl Vinson _ moved 
into the Gulf to join the USS Enterprise group, U.S. Navy officials 
said. The thunderous attacks overnight Friday-Saturday were not preceded 
by air raid sirens, implying that for the first time the strikes eluded 
Iraqi air defenses. When the reverberations from the explosions subsided 
at about 4:45 a.m. (0145 GMT), the winter air filled with the sounds 
of muezzins calling from mosque loudspeakers, informing Muslims to 
eat their last meal before beginning the first day of fasting for 
Ramadan. U.S. and British officials reported that more than 100 targets 
had been hit. Iraq's Republican Guard was a major focus of the third 
night of bombing, British officials said. On Friday, in an address 
to the nation broadcast on television, President Saddam Hussein vowed 
that Iraq ``will not compromise or kneel in the face of injustice. 
``We will not let evil triumph over virtue,'' he said. State-run newspapers 
on Saturday echoed Saddam's theme. A banner headline in the Al-Jumhuriya 
daily read: ``We shall resist and fight in the name of God.'' On Saturday, 
officials at the Oil Ministry said that crude exports under the U.N. 
approved oil-for-food program were continuing despite the military 
attacks. The officials said an average of 1.8 million barrels per 
day were going out through Mina al-Bakr port and terminals at the 
Turkish port of Ceyhan on the Mediterranean Sea. They spoke on customary 
condition of anonymity. The United States says the aim of Operation 
Desert Fox is to lessen Iraq's ability to make weapons of mass destruction, 
threaten its neighbors and attack U.S. interests in the region. The 
trigger for the U.S.-British attack was a report by U.N. weapons inspectors 
that Iraq was not cooperating with U.N.-mandated checks in Iraq for 
signs of banned weapons programs. The inspectors, who had been working 
in the country since 1991, withdrew from the country on Wednesday. 
Until the monitors certify that Iraq is free of biological and chemical 
weapons and long-range missiles, the U.N. Security Council cannot 
lift economic sanctions imposed on Iraq for its 1990 invasion of Kuwait. 
Baghdad has complained that thousands of Iraqis have died because 
limited medicine has entered the country under the sanctions. The 
United Nation's efforts to relieve hardships caused by the sanctions 
received a severe blow with the evacuation Friday of 106 international 
staffers of a program to monitor food aid to the Iraqis. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>