<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981219.0509 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
British tycoon Richard Branson and his crew soared over Libya and 
out across the Mediterranean on Saturday, heading for Turkey _ and 
avoiding Iraq _ on day two of their quest to circle the globe in a 
balloon. Branson, Chicago millionaire Steve Fossett and teammate Per 
Lindstrand were ``laughing and joking'' and in ``great shape,'' on 
Saturday, said Jackie McQuillan, spokesman for ICO Global, a mobile 
telephone company supporting the trip. The balloon sailed into Libyan 
airspace from Algeria on Saturday morning and then out over the Mediterranean 
Sea at a speed of about 130 miles (210 kilometers) per hour late in 
the afternoon. A last-minute decision Friday evening by Libya to rescind 
permission to fly over its territory almost thwarted the trip, but 
intense diplomacy won a reprieve and finally Libya gave the green 
light for the balloon to enter its airspace Saturday. Branson, who 
had a sore throat Saturday morning, felt well by the afternoon, said 
McQuillan, who spoke to him on several occasions throughout the day 
via satellite telephone. All three adventurers were surviving on a 
diet of vitamin-packed food packages of the kind that astronauts eat 
in space. The crew does have a Christmas pudding, a traditional British 
Christmas dessert on board for the upcoming holiday. It was not clear 
whether they would be able to pour brandy over the pudding and light 
it as is the custom in Britain. After passing over the Mediterranean 
and eastern Cyprus on Saturday night, the 200-foot-high (61-meter) 
balloon was to cross into Turkish airspace at the border with Syria 
about 50 miles from Iraq. Most of Sunday will be spent flying over 
Turkey before the balloon heads up to the former Soviet republics 
of Azerbaijan and Kazakstan before skirting the Himalayas on its way 
to China. The balloon cruised at about 28,000 feet Saturday, McQuillan 
said in a telephone interview. Good weather, a good wind and a cloudless 
sky have helped the travelers in their attempt to become the first 
to circle the globe in a balloon. The balloon took off from a Moroccan 
airforce base outside Marrakech on Friday morning. After crossing 
the Atlas mountains, the balloon crossed into Algerian airspace where 
the balloon continued its course overnight before entering Libyan 
airspace. Branson and his colleagues, all wearing silver jumpsuits, 
expressed confidence in the trip, estimating it could last from eight 
days to nearly three weeks. The U.S. missile strike on Iraq has complicated 
the task. The missile strike means the team has to find the winds 
to take them north of Iraq through Turkey instead of cutting over 
Saudi Arabia. Branson and his crew hope to touch down somewhere in 
Europe at the end of a 24,000-mile flight which will take them over 
Saudi Arabia, India, the South China sea, the Pacific ocean and the 
United States. The team secured permission from 97 countries for overflights 
and had only four refusals - Iran, Iraq, Russia and North Korea. Fossett 
has made four tries to ring the globe. Branson has tried, and failed, 
four times to become the first person to trek the globe in a balloon. 
The crew is more confident this time because of improved technology 
used to make the balloon, including a Kevlar canopy over the crew's 
pressurized capsule. Kevlar is used for bulletproof vests. At least 
three other balloon crews have been waiting for favorable weather 
to launch their balloon - from Albuquerque, New Mexico, Loves Park, 
Illinois and the Swiss Alps. Yet another team is to take off next 
month from Alice Springs, Australia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>