<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981219.1130.1497 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
tom hanks and meg ryan are hollywood's reigning king and queen of 
romantic comedy. their latest project has them looking for love in 
a very modern place. paul vercammen reports. you know what that hanky 
reminds me of? hmm? first day i met you. first day you lied to me. 
i didn't lie to you. you did, too. tom hanks and meg ryan, fighting 
and flirting again in "you've got mail." they first explored the romantic 
comedy genre in "joe versus the volcano" -- there's no such thing 
as a perfect -- then in "sleepless in seattle," regarded in show business 
as a date movie that scored. how do you feel about being responsible 
for improving many moviegoers' sex lives? i've never been accused 
of that. it's exactly what i was going for. well, then, i say we accomplished 
what we set out to do. do you think we should meet? hanks' and ryan's 
characters make a cyberhookup in "you've got mail," an update of the 
classic, "the shop around the corner." so she wants us to take, like, 
a couple of steps. "mail" is directed by nora ephron, who also directed 
the duo in "sleepless in seattle." here's the theory on their chemistry 
-- we have this class, it's the only class that we have during the 
-- it's our only class together. like, fourth period. 55 minutes. 
we never see each other -- except for that class. in the course of 
the rest of the day, except for that day. and we sit in the back, 
and we get in trouble. yeah. but we're laughing about stuff that has 
nothing to do with -- american history. yeah. but we still get a "b" 
in the class. because we're smart, or because why? because nora's 
the teacher. he cheats. so much time together. i'm sorry, what? i 
don't know. i forgot to tell you. oh, it's my line, sorry. how does 
this settle with hanks' wife, rita wilson, or ryan's husband, dennis 
quaid? i like rita, tom likes dennis. dennis is a fine lad. and honestly, 
before i did this movie, i hadn't seen meg probably for like six months 
or so. yeah. and chatted a little bit, but that was it. so we're really 
not together all that much. no. also, we're professionals, and this 
is what we do. and we do like each other, that's genuine. we're lucky. 
but ryan isn't sold on the idea of someone meeting good fortune in 
love online. i just think the idea that you could be romanced by someone 
that you don't know, and you don't know what kind of persona they're 
creating, i'm very confused by it. i'd like to talk to somebody about 
what their real exchange was like. it's probably the same exact percentage 
as people who fell in love with somebody they were sitting next to 
on a plane. i would really appreciate it if you would just go away. 
kathleen? after teaming up once more, hanks and ryan should be qualified 
to philosophize on love connections. paul vercammen, "cnn entertainment 
news," hollywood. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>