<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981219.1600.0874 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Breaking in, "Headline News" covering live, President Clinton emerging 
from the White House to give his remarks to the nation. The House 
of Representatives earlier this afternoon voted two articles of impeachment. 
They have adopted two articles of impeachment against the president 
of the United States, only the second time in history this has happened. 
Let's listen to what the president has to say. On behalf of the president, 
the first lady, the vice president and Mr. gore, the White House and 
the entire administration, I want to thank the members who came here 
today and all the members who stood with you on the floor -- thank 
you for standing up for what you believe in. Thank you for standing 
up for fairness. Thank you for standing up for the American people. 
Thank you for standing up for the constitution. And thank you for 
doing so with dignity and determination, passion, and patriotism. 
I would like to introduce a man who has done so much for our country, 
a Great leader, a great friend of the American people, congressman 
Dick gephardt. Mr. president, Mr. vice president, first lady Hillary 
Clinton. We have just witnessed a partisan vote that was a disgrace 
to our country and our constitution. Chairman Henry Hyde once called 
impeachment, the ultimate weapon and said that for it to succeed, 
ultimately, it has to be bipartisan. The fact that a vote as important 
as this occurred in such a partisan way violated the spirit of our 
democracy. We must turn away now from the politics of personal destruction 
and return to a politics of values. The American people deserve better 
than what they have received over these long five months. They want 
their Congress to bring this issue to a speedy compromise. Closure. 
And they want their president, twice elected to his office, to continue 
his work fighting for their priorities. The democratic -- the democratic 
caucus in the house will continue to stand alongside our president 
and we will work to enact the agenda that we were sent here to pass. 
We look forward to supporting his agenda in the upcoming session of 
Congress. The president has demonstrated his effectiveness as a national 
and world leader in the face of intense and unprecedented Negative 
attacks by his opponents. I am confident that he will continue to 
do so for the rest of his elected term of office. Despite the worst 
efforts of the republican leadership in the house, the constitution 
will bear up under the strain. And our nation will survive. The constitutional 
process about to play out in the United States Senate will hopefully, 
finally be fair. And allow us to put on end to this sad chapter of 
our history. Ladies and gentlemen, it is now my honor to present our 
great vice president, of these United States, Al Gore. Thank you very 
much, Mr. leader. To you and to David Bonn -- bonoir, thank you for 
what you have done for our country. I would also like to single out 
for thanks and praise, congressman John conyers and all of the members 
of the Judiciary committee who are present here today. And to you, 
Dick Gephardt, I would like to repeat a judgment that I made to the 
smaller group earlier. You and I came here on the same day 22 years 
ago, and in all that time, I don't believe I have heard a finer speech 
on the floor of the House of Representatives than the one that you 
delivered this morning. But in all that time, I do believe this is 
the saddest day I have seen in our nation's capital. Because today's 
vote in the House of Representatives disregarded the plain wishes 
and good will of the American people and the plain meaning of our 
constitution. Let me say simply, the president has acknowledged that 
what he did was wrong. But we must all acknowledge that invoking the 
solemn power of impeachment in the cause of partisan politics is wrong. 
Wrong for our constitution, wrong for the United States of America. 
Republican leaders would not even allow the members of the House of 
Representatives to cast the vote they wanted to. They were not allowed 
to vote their conscience. What happened as a result, does a great 
disservice to a man I believe will be regarded in the history books 
as one of our greatest presidents. There is no doubt in my mind that 
this verdict of history will undo the unworthy judgment rendered a 
short while ago in the United States capitol. But we do not have to 
wait for history. Instead, let us live up to the ideals of this season. 
Let us reach out to one another and reach out for what is best in 
ourselves, our history, and our country. Let is heal this land. Not 
tear it apart. Let us move forward, not toward bitter and angry division. 
Our founders anticipated that there might be a day like this one, 
when excessive partisanship unlocked a form of vitriol and vehemence 
what hurts or nation. We know that a process that wounds good people 
in both parties does no service to this country. What America needs 
is no resignations, but the renewal of civilty, respect for one another 
decency toward each other, and the certain belief that together we 
can serve this land and make a better life for all of our people. 
That is what President Clinton has done. That is what he is doing, 
and that is what he will continue to do for the next two years. I 
feel extremely privileged to have been able to serve with him as his 
partner for the past six years. And I look forward to serving with 
him for the next two years. I have seen him close at hand, day after 
day, making the most important decisions about peace, prosperity, 
and our future. And making them always by asking what is right for 
the American people? What is right for all of the American people? 
I know him. I know his wonderful first lady. I know his -- I know 
his heart and his will. And I have seen his work. Six years ago, he 
was left with the highest budget deficit in history, and he ended 
it. Six years ago, he was handed a failing economy. Today, because 
of his leadership we are on the verge of the longest period of peacetime 
prosperity in all of American history. And I know nothing will stop 
him from doing the job that the American people sent him here to do. 
I say to you today, President William Jefferson Clinton will continue 
and will complete his mission on behalf of the American people. I'm 
proud to present to you, my friend, America's great president, Bill 
clinton. Thank you very much. Thank you. Good afternoon. Let me begin 
by expressing my profound and heartfelt thanks to congressman gephardt 
and the leadership and all the members of the democratic caucus for 
what they did today. I thank the few brave republicans who withstood 
pressure to stand with them, for the plain meaning of the constitution, 
and for the proposition that we need to pull together to move beyond 
partisanship to get on with the business of our country. I thank the 
millions upon millions of American citizens who have expressed their 
support and their friendship to Hillary, to me, to our family, and 
to our administration during these last several weeks. The words of 
the members here with me and others who were a part of their endeavor 
in defense of our constitution were powerful and moving, and I will 
never forget them. The question is, what are we going to do now? I 
have accepted responsibility for what I did wrong in my personal life, 
and I have invited members of Congress to work with us to find a Reasonable, 
bipartisan, and proportionate response. That approach was rejected 
today by republicans in the house. But I hope it will be embraced 
by the Senate. I hope there will be a constitutional and fair means 
of resolving this matter in a prompt manner. Meanwhile, I will continue 
to do the work of the American people. We still, after all, have to 
save social security and Medicare for the 21st century. We have to 
give all our children world-class schools. We have to pass a patients 
Bill of rights. We have to make sure the economic turbulence around 
the world does not curb our economic opportunity here at home. We 
have to keep America the world's strongest force for peace and freedom. 
In short, we have a lot to do before we enter the 21st century. And 
we have to keep working to build that elusive one America, I have 
talked to much about. For six years now, I have done everything I 
could to bring our country together across the lines that divide us, 
including bringing Washington together across party lines. Out in 
the country, people are pulling together. But just as America is coming 
together, it must look from the country's point of view, like Washington 
is coming apart. I want to echo something Mr. Gephardt said. It is 
something I have felt strongly all my life. We must stop the politics 
of personal destruction. We must get rid of the poisonous venom of 
excessive partisanship, obsessive animosity, and uncontrolled anger. 
That is not what America deserves. That is not what America is about. 
We are doing well now. We are a good and decent country but we have 
significant challenges we have to face. In order to do it right, we 
have to have some atmosphere of decency and civilty, good faith, por 
portionality and balance in bringing judgment against those who are 
in different parties. We have important work to do. We need a constructive 
debate that has all the different voices in this country heard in 
the halls of Congress. I want the American people to know today that 
I am still committed to working with people of good faith and goodwill 
of both parties to do what's best for our country. To bring our nation 
together, to lift our people up, to move us all forward together. 
It's what I tried to do for six years. It's what I intend to do for 
two more, until the last last hour of the last day of my term. So 
with profound gratitude for the defense of the constitution and the 
best in America that was raised today by the members here and those 
who joined them, I ask the American people to move with me to go on 
from here, to rise aabove the rancor. To overcome the pain and division, 
to be a repairer of the breach, all of us. To make this country as 
one America, what it can and must be for our children in the new century 
about to dawn. Thank you very much. Democratic leaders of the house 
gathering on the south lawn of the White House to express their continued 
support of President Clinton in the face of today's vote for impeachment 
in the house. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>