<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981219.1300.1471 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A moment of great history, a moment of great drama as the House of 
Representatives voted to impeach William Jefferson Clinton. Lying 
to a grand jury, the most serious charge of all. It came, if you're 
interested, at 1:19 eastern time today. And ten minutes prior to that, 
the democrats, led by the minority leader dick Gephardt, stood outside 
the capitol building and called the entire process unfair. His lieu 
nen tant, David Bonior says -- On this vote the yeas are 228 the nays 
are 226. The articles are adopted. Motion to reconsider is laid upon 
the table. The question is on the adoption of article two. House will 
be in order. The question is on adoption of article two. Those in 
favor will say I, those opposed will say no. The Is have it. On that 
I demand the yeas and nays. All in favor will rise. Sufficient number 
having risen, they will have it. This will be an electronic vote on 
article two. Congressman sensen brenner it may seem odd was the one 
that asked for the actual role call vote. This is a matter of great 
moment. He is the second ranking republican on the house Judiciary 
committee. A committed conservative, one who was an early Foe of President 
Clinton and an advocate of impeachment. So the second article of impeachment, 
which is lying in the Paula Jones deposition, is now being voted on. 
It's already being voted on. it's 63 to 65. This will change, of course, 
electronically. As I started to tell you earlier President Clinton 
is going to speak shortly after the fourth and final article is voted 
on. His wife had earlier gone to the house to thank the democrats 
for their steadfast support. "CNN Headline News" will care Trie president's 
remarks live when they're coming. They should come. This is a 15 minute 
vote. So presumably the entire matter could be resolved in the next 
hour or so. We might hear from the president around 3:00 eastern. 
This, again, as we have been indicating, this second article is not 
quite as powerful an argument according to analysts as the first. 
And even less so would be obstructing justice and abuse of power. 
They were all included in the referral by Ken Starr. But it was the 
actual remarks about whether you can ever remember being alone with 
Paula Jones and Clinton's response that hey had no specific recollection 
of that. That is the statement apparently in his January deposition 
that has been decided -- that has been ruled perjurious, that Ken 
Starr thinks is perjurious and that the house is considering right 
now. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>