<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981219.0130.0257 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
First lady Hillary Rodham Clinton is expected to go to Capitol Hill 
to give the house democratic caucus a last-minute pep talk before 
they cast their votes Saturday morning. And after they vote, sources 
tell CNN, President Clinton will meet with democratic house leaders 
before addressing the nation. John king reports, he will urge the 
Senate for a quick end to the impeachment process. The president, 
resigned to being impeached by the house, is waving off calls for 
his resignation and seeking help trying to strike a Quick Senate plea 
bargain. CNN has learned that former Senate majority leader George 
Mitchell is close to taking a lead role in the president's defense. 
And the White House is consulting former republican leader Bob Dole 
in a More informal way, hoping for his help in brokering a bipartisan 
compromise. We do feel, as many senators do, that the country's best 
interests are not served by going forward with a trial, then we ought 
to find a different way out of this. It takes a two-thirds vote of 
the Senate to convict the president and remove him from office. But 
it would take just a majority to end the trial if a deal is struck. 
Plea bargaining, motions to dismiss are part of the legal process. 
Democrats privately are telling the president just what republicans 
are saying in public. The longer goes, the more chance of another 
reckless act or some other information coming that could put the president 
in real jeopardy. So if I was the president, I'd want it over with 
as quickly as I could. Friday's house debate featured this republican 
chorus. If the president won't resign, we must go forward. The White 
House shot back that calls for the president's resignation are proof 
republicans are abusing the impeachment process. I think that that 
is a strategy that betrays partisanship and cynicism. But two house 
democrats who have been critical of Mr. Clinton in the past also say 
he should think of resigning, Louise slaughter of New York and William 
Lipinski of Illinois. For the good of the country, I think we'd be 
better off him resigning and al Gore becoming the president of the 
United States. The prospect of a Senate trial featuring Monica Lewinsky, 
Linda tripp and Ken Starr has some White House allies worried that 
resignation could become a more popular alternative. But most democrats 
say the president must fight on. To resign in the face of a partisan 
investigation, where an historic threshold of impeachment has not 
been met would permanently change the constitution. These Christian 
coalition petitions calling on the president to resign are proof the 
intense political debate will carry over from the house to the Senate. 
The only way for the country to move forward with important issues 
is for the president to resign, do the honorable thing. But administration 
sources tell CNN the president will come to the rose garden after 
Saturday's vote and make clear he has no intention of resigning. Our 
sources tell us the president will make an appeal to the Senate and 
directly to the American people that the best solution to this year-long 
drama is a punishment short of impeachment -- a punishment that allows 
him to stay on the job. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>