<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981219.1830.0123 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
we begin our look tonight at this extraordinary day with nbc's congressional 
correspondent gwen ifill here on the hill tonight. brian, history, 
unfolding at the nation's capitol today, as a somber house of representatives 
voted for only the second time in american history to impeach the 
president of the united states. i hereby deliver the articles of impeachment. 
two articles of impeachment charging the president with perjury and 
obstruction of justice, as the republican majority, joined by only 
a few democrats, voted on the house floor. engaged in a debate about 
sex, lies, and constitutional duty. how can we expect a boy scout 
to honor his path, if elected officials don't honor theirs? six days 
before christmas. our troops are in battle and a lame duck congress 
is rushing to overthrow the commander in chief! this is surreal! the 
first article, approved 228 to 206, that mr. clinton "willfully corrupted 
and manipulated the judicial process of the united states" by lying 
to the grand jury investigating his relationship with monica lewinsky. 
the second article, approved 221 to 212, says the president obstructed 
justice by orchestrating a "scheme designed to delay, impede, cover 
up and conceal" evidence in the paula jones sexual harassment lawsuit. 
a nation of laws cannot be ruled by a person who breaks the law. two 
other articles, charging civil perjury and abuse of power, were soundly 
rejected by the house. the house also rejected a democratic campaign 
to censure, instead of impeaching the president. the republican process 
is cynical and is dangerous. walking off the house floor in a symbolic 
show of protest, the democrats were greeted by cheering anti-impeachment 
protesters on the capitol grounds. but in the middle of an already 
riveting day, a surprise announcement by the man who was to succeed 
newt gingrich as speaker of the house. i must set the example that 
i hope president clinton will follow. i will not stand for speaker 
of the house. shocking colleagues only two days after admitting that 
he had been unfaithful to his wife of 33 years, leaving leaving congress 
altogether. the white house tonight is busy looking for a way out, 
brian? gwen ifill on the hill tonight, thanks. now to nbc's claire 
shipman at the white house, where today's vote was not unexpected. 
good evening, claire. brian, for most of this year, the president 
has avoided watching his fate on television, but we're told he watched 
today, counting the numbers, watching patterns, his mood solemn, and 
friends described him as ready for a fight, but also exhausted and 
saddened. after a lifetime of striving for a celebrated rank among 
american presidents, this diligent student of history was handed his 
place today, one he did not want but can never give back. he faced 
the news, flanked by his wife, the vice president and scores of house 
democrats and left no doubt that he does not intend to make more history 
by resigning. i want the american people to know today that i am still 
committed to working with people of good faith and good will of both 
parties to do what's best for our country. it's what i've tried to 
do for six years. it's what i intend to do for two more until the 
last hour of the last day of my term. and he was passionate in what 
seemed a comparison of his situation with bob livingston's. it is 
something i have felt strongly all my life. we must stop the politics 
of personal destruction. after the vote, the democratic rank and file 
left the capitol for the white house in busloads. a studied contrast 
to a trip republicans made here in 1974 to tell richard nixon to step 
down. we have just witnessed a partisan vote that was a disgrace to 
our country and our constitution. true to the president's promise 
to keep focused on his job, he immediately turned his attention to 
iraq. in fact, every bit of today that the white house could control 
from statements on iraq, to hillary clinton's trip to capitol hill 
this morning, where she thanked democrats and told them of her love 
for the president, to this democratic rally at the white house, crowned 
by warm images of the first couple, added up to an image that the 
president did not intend to quit. any calls for the president's resignation 
could turn into a wave. senate strategy is under way at the white 
house, and some aides are optimistic that former senator george mitchell 
will possibly be able to cut a deal for censure. others are already 
thinking about possible trial lawyers. claire, thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>