<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981219.1830.0765 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
the announcements came within minutes of each other tonight, the u.s. 
and britain announcing their joint air strike campaign over baghdad 
is over, at least for now. for the latest here's nbc pentagon correspondent 
jim miklaszewski. president clinton has announced that phase one of 
"operation desert fox" dfx was planned to last 72 hours and is over 
tonight. it's clear that the long-running standoff with saddam hussein 
is far from over. he's been impeached by the house, but he's still 
commander in chief. and after meeting with his top security advisers 
at the white house tonight, president clinton ordered an end to air 
strikes against iraq. i am confident we have achieved our mission. 
after four straight days of bombings, military leaders told the president 
the air strikes had done the job. we have had significant success 
in our air strikes. but what did the air strikes accomplish? from 
the beginning, the stated goal was to reduce saddam hussein's ability 
to threaten his neighbors with deadly weapons of mass destruction. 
secretary of defense william cohen claims, mission accomplished. we 
estimate that saddam's missile program has been set back by at least 
a year. but there's no guarantee many targets that were hit actually 
contain any weapons. so many other strikes were aimed at leadership 
targets. example, gun camera footage released today shows 1,000-pound 
bombs slamming into the republican guard. while the u.s. insists air 
strikes were not intended to take out saddam, tony blair said today 
he'd welcome that outcome. it would be wonderful if saddam hussein 
was removed from power. but any plan to turn the military against 
saddam may have come up short. four days of bombing failed to produce 
even a crack in the regime. the u.s. will maintain a strong military 
force in the gulf, ready to strike at saddam hussein again if he threatens 
his neighbors or tries to rebuild his weapons of mass destruction. 
it's an open-ended commitment that could keep u.s. military forces 
on a high state of alert around iraq indefinitely. the forces are 
still streaming in, right? that's right. even as president clinton 
has announced an end to this first phase one of air strikes, there 
are thousands of ground troops and fighters that could take part in 
any follow-on air strikes against iraq. thanks. now to nbc ease kevin 
tibbles in bagdad where there is no doubt a feeling of relief tonight. 
it's quiet over the skies of bagdad tonight, in contrast to what was 
going on here early tonight. evening prayers and anti-aircraft fire 
in this fourth night of air strikes. the heaviest damage this morning 
with attacks on saddam's control centers. evidence of a direct hit 
was here. but the iraqis remain defiant. the vice president announced 
iraq will bar united nations weapons inspectors from the country. 
the u.s. says it has not spoken with the iraqis since the attack began. 
we expect to have contacts in the next couple of days. iraq has offered 
various casualty tolls, but today held a procession for people killed 
in the bombing raids. they say hospitals are filled with the injured. 
this is a civilian hospital. from the south. and this hospital didn't 
receive military patients. and tonight, a government tour of a bomb 
site, not a strategic site, but a residential area hit by u.s. missiles, 
officials say. now that president clinton has called off the air strikes, 
it remains to be seen what has happened to saddam hussein's weapons-making 
cape abilities or his power base. what is clear is that the iraqi 
people will have some rest from nights of air strikes, air raid sirens 
and bombs. thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>