<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0143 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Since the Giants have played 999 regular-season games, maybe it is 
no surprise they have played so many games remembered by quirky and 
theatrical nicknames or for the weather conditions or their peculiar 
endings. History takes root in many forms across 74 seasons, and for 
the Giants it is a grand time line: from Jim Thorpe to Jim Fassel, 
from Red Grange to John Elway. So maybe it is no surprise that as 
the Giants approach regular-season game No. 1,000 Sunday against Kansas 
City at Giants Stadium, one of their more memorable games is recalled 
for a last-minute field goal of an utterly indeterminate length. To 
this day no one knows exactly how far Pat Summerall kicked the ball 
through the snow, putting the Giants in the 1958 playoffs and on their 
way to the championship remembered as the Greatest Game Ever Played. 
Wellington Mara, the Giants' co-owner, has two pictures of the Summerall 
kick on the wall of his office, but they are of no help. The snow 
covers the yard markers. To that end, maybe it is no surprise that 
the Giants once scored 41 points and still lost by 31. Maybe it is 
no surprise that they played a game known for the Fumble. No Giants 
fan is ever confused enough to ask which fumble. When quarterback 
Joe Pisarcik and fullback Larry Csonka misplayed the handoff in the 
final minute of a 1978 game to turn certain victory into defeat, there 
would forevermore be one fumble in Giants history that stood alone 
from all the rest. By the same standard, it may have snowed at countless 
Giants games since 1925, but mention the Snowball Game, and there 
will be instant understanding that it was the Giants Stadium game 
three years ago when fans pelted both the Giants and the San Diego 
Chargers with snowballs. Afterward, New Jersey officials started a 
manhunt to identify and arrest certain high-profile snowballers pictured 
in news photographs. Since the Giants have won far more of their regular-season 
games (529) than they have lost (437) _ there have been 33 ties _ 
there are many milestone victories that represent the rise of both 
the franchise and a particular generation of Giants. In many ways, 
the Giants' legacy chronicles a significant portion of National Football 
League history. As Mara, whose father, Tim, bought the New York franchise 
of the fledgling NFL for $500 in 1925, said this week: ``Longevity 
is its own reward.'' Seventy-three years of rewards were harder to 
discern in the fall of 1925, however, when the Giants were 0-3, their 
star player, the renowned Jim Thorpe, had been released, and they 
had drawn a meager crowd for their first home game _ a 14-0 loss to 
the Frankfort Yellow Jackets. The Giants did win their fourth game 
that season, the first of seven consecutive victories, and on Dec. 
6, 1925, more than 70,000 packed the Polo Grounds for what Mara still 
calls the Red Grange Game. Mara remembers being allowed to sit on 
the bench as a 9-year-old. He recalls a coach turning to a player 
and saying: ``Get in there and give 'em hell.'' Mara said, ``I thought, 
`Man, this is a tough game.' '' Mara, 82, has since seen about 900 
Giants games. The Giants lost to Grange's Bears, 19-7, but the huge 
crowd that day encouraged Tim Mara to give his Giants a little longer 
to catch on in a sports climate dominated by boxing, baseball, horse 
racing and college football. By 1927, the Giants had won their first 
NFL title and by 1929, they were averaging 25,000 fans a game. In 
1934, an 8-5 regular season led to another championship when the Giants 
changed into basketball shoes at halftime for better traction on an 
icy Wrigley Field in Chicago. A 13-3 deficit was turned into a 30-13 
victory: thus the Sneakers Game. Although the Giants continued to 
win regularly in the 1940s, it wasn't until the 1950s that they again 
had powerhouse teams. In 1956, they moved to Yankee Stadium, a suitable 
setting for their first NFL championship since 1938. In 1958, Summerall 
kicked his field goal _ officially estimated at 49 yards. Mara called 
the kick ``the biggest play in Giants history.'' It put the Giants 
in a playoff with the Jim Brown-led Cleveland Browns, which the Giants 
won. Then the Giants played the Colts at sold-out Yankee Stadium and 
Baltimore's Alan Ameche scored his sudden-death touchdown. ``We don't 
call it the Greatest Game Ever Played,'' Mara said with a smile. ``But 
I understand, from the point of view of one game's impact, with the 
television audience and it being in Yankee Stadium, then it is significant.'' 
There were other big games in Yankee Stadium during the next 15 years, 
most of them disappointing to the home crowd. And the suffering was 
not always experienced at home. In a game at Washington in 1966, Coach 
Otto Graham's Redskins called a timeout in the waning seconds to kick 
a field goal and extend their lead to 72-41. It was the most points 
scored by one, or two teams, in a regular-season game in league history, 
one of several indignities befalling the Giants in a 1-12-1 season. 
By 1981, the Giants had overcome the Fumble to upset the Dallas Cowboys 
on the final weekend of the regular season, Joe Danelo's field goal 
putting the Giants back in the playoffs for the first time in 18 years. 
By 1986, on their way to their first Super Bowl, the Giants won a 
memorable Monday night game at San Francisco, with tight end Mark 
Bavaro carrying five defenders on a 31-yard catch-and-run up the middle 
as the Giants rallied from 17 points down. The victory foreshadowed 
the Giants pre-eminence in the playoffs to follow. Four years later, 
after squandering some golden opportunities to advance to their second 
Super Bowl, the Giants were 7-1 at home during a 13-3 season that 
set the stage for another league championship. And last year, on Dec. 
13, the Giants won their first division title since 1990 with a stirring 
home victory over Washington. One year to the day later, in regular-season 
game No. 999, they upset the unbeaten Denver Broncos with a dramatic 
86-yard drive in the final minutes. Mara said a number of people approached 
him last week, asking for his perspective on the 1,000th game. ``I 
tell them it's a long time,'' he said, laughing. But Percy Ellsworth, 
a Giants safety for three seasons, said the occasion would motivate 
him. ``You don't want to have a ball from the 1,000th game up in the 
showcase,'' Ellsworth said, ``and it reads Chiefs 20, Giants 17. That's 
no good.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>