<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0055 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the last eight seasons, Jerry Seeman has been the National Football 
League's director of officiating. For 16 seasons before that, he was 
a league official. And long before that he was a quarterback, first 
with his high school in Fridley, Minn., and then at Winona (Minn.) 
State University. Being inside the game helped Seeman develop an appreciation 
for officiating. His final game was Super Bowl XXV, the Giants' victory 
over Buffalo in Tampa, Fla., in 1991. He was on the field officiating 
when instant replay was used in the NFL from 1986 through 1991. The 
NFL has dropped the idea of reinstituting replay for this season's 
playoffs, but the proposal will be back on the table for next season. 
With a clamor developing because of a spate of game-swinging or game-ending 
bad calls, Seeman has had to keep his group of officials united, focused 
and upbeat. He has at times bluntly criticized them and passionately 
defended them. He discussed the uproar in an interview last week. 
Q. What have the last few weeks been like? A. It seems historically 
that there has been a week or two in the course of the season where 
judgment calls by the officials have created a storm. That happened 
this year in Week 13 with the Buffalo-New England game on the Hail 
Mary pass and in the Week 14 Seattle-Jets game and the Vinny Testaverde 
play at the goal line. The officials do everything they can to get 
it right. Unfortunately, these things can and do happen. There are 
2,300 plays in the 15 games each week. There are 155 plays in a game. 
The problem can come on three or four plays. Other than that, oftentimes, 
people don't even know we exist. Q. That is the problem, isn't it? 
Those three or four plays can unfairly change the outcome of a game, 
right? A. The great official stays in the background. He enforces 
the rules. But this is not a perfect world and football is not a perfect 
game. Players aren't perfect. Coaches aren't perfect. But officials 
are asked to be perfect the first game and then improve every week. 
Their life is a fishbowl and it is then microscopic within that fishbowl. 
But really, that is the beauty and the challenge of being an NFL official. 
Q. So, what did you do or say to your officials after those calls 
caused such a ruckus and negative attention on your group nationwide? 
A. I shared with them the calls we made in those areas and the corrections. 
I told them about the numbers involved in plays throughout the course 
of the year and a game and told them to keep everything in perspective. 
I reminded them it is not a perfect game. I reminded them of the positives. 
I told them I think that over all we do wonderful work. I told them 
we had to work even harder. Q. There were reports that you were under 
fire, might even be fired, and that the league would seek a quick 
remedy by coming directly after you. Has your job been threatened? 
A. No. No truth to that whatsoever. Q. Would you talk about what goes 
into the officials' year-round preparation? A. There are 112 officials, 
all professionals _ lawyers, dentists and educators among them. We 
begin preparing on April 1. The 112 are taught the new rules implemented 
at the March owners' meeting. There is a 275-item test. Then, on May 
1, there is a 250-item test. In the spring they visit training camps 
and visit with coaches and players. This is communication that puts 
a face on the officials and their job and on the coaches and players 
and their jobs. In July we have our clinic, and the officials are 
put through a tough physical exam and stress test. They go out to 
training camps with the different teams; more work with the players 
and coaches. Officials communicate with them and among themselves, 
because that is how you learn. In the preseason, they receive a 40- 
to 50-play training tape. They are rated during the season and review 
tapes of their performances each week during the season. The top 11 
receive post-season assignments. And then April rolls around and we 
start again. It's pretty much a year-round thing. Plus, we scout the 
colleges and sign college officials. We seek the best officials out 
there. Q. Some have called for officials to be truly year-round, holding 
only the job of official. Isn't there a need for that? A. I truly 
do not believe that. We are doing everything humanly possible right 
now in preparation and study. The problems that primarily come up 
deal with things that happen in a millisecond or things that are blocked 
from an official's view. I don't think a year-round, officials-only 
job will solve that. Q. That sounds like an endorsement for instant 
replay, then, right? A. Replay is an officiating tool. It could be 
there to help the official. I'm not saying it's the answer to everything. 
On certain plays it can help out. Right now the pace of the game is 
good. We've got to be careful not to slow the game or break up the 
flow. We have to move judiciously. Q. Then I guess you were relieved 
when the competition committee voted, 7-1, against instituting replay 
for the playoffs and then when the NFL commissioner, Paul Tagliabue, 
agreed? A. The owners voted, 21-9, against replay before the season. 
To play the regular season one way and then the playoffs another could 
have been a problem. Q.There is the notion that replay would make 
officials more hesitant, even angry that Big Brother is watching from 
above, ready to embarrass them. True? A. I was down on the field and 
used instant replay and did not think anything like that. I don't 
think our other officials do, either. Q. So, what about the future? 
Do you see replay inserted for the 1999 season? A. The competition 
committee did vote, 7-1, recently against replay for this year's playoffs. 
But it also voted, 6-2, for some form of replay for next season. There 
is interest. Will it slow down the game, though? Will it break up 
the pace? That is the question. It is tough stuff. Q. Do you take 
the scrutiny and criticism personally? Do your officials right now 
feel hounded and hunted? A. Once you put on a striped shirt you are 
subject to criticism. Sometimes we make an error and we deserve the 
criticism. We understand the fans' allegiance to their teams. Sometimes 
the attacks from all sides are very personal. But we must have the 
personal fortitude and professionalism to stand in there. One of our 
officials, head linesman Terry Gierke, suffered a severe knee injury 
in the Baltimore-Minnesota game last week. He is out for the year. 
People don't think of the sacrifice and the pain sometime. But we 
are professionals. And we have a conscience. And that is the greatest 
attribute of these men. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>