<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0193 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As they plunge into the uncharted waters of the impeachment trial 
of a modern president, senators are uncertain about what lies ahead. 
Some think they are in for a long ordeal on the Senate floor that 
could last until next summer or even longer. Others think that President 
Clinton and the Senate will quickly cut a deal in January and short-circuit 
a trial before it gets started in earnest. Still others expect something 
in between _ a procedure short of a full trial, that lasts for some 
weeks but may then be shelved. But all the senators and staff experts 
interviewed last week agreed on an essential point: Unless unanticipated, 
damaging new evidence against the president arises, the Senate will 
never muster the two-thirds majority necessary to convict him and 
remove him from office. ``There is no question that there are not 
67 votes against him,'' said Sen. Phil Gramm of Texas, one of the 
president's most ardent Republican opponents but also a senator who 
usually has a sure sense of where his colleagues stand. Another point 
to remember is that although it takes a two-thirds majority to remove 
a president from office, a trial can be stopped before it begins or 
at any time after it starts by a simple majority vote of the senators. 
The Senate will have 55 Republicans and 45 Democrats. The fact is 
that no one knows what may develop. There is no reference book that 
spells out what an impeachment trial in 1999 would look like. There 
is no staff expert who has mastered all the legal and political nuances. 
Most important, the Senate has been out of session for two months 
_ the senators scattered around the country _ so there has not been 
the give and take necessary to reach a political consensus. Sen. Trent 
Lott, the Republican leader, insists that he has made no plans for 
how the Senate will proceed, and there is no evidence to the contrary. 
Lott, who has stayed in Mississippi during the House deliberations, 
said he did not want to appear presumptuous while the matter was before 
the House. But Lott has said that he has no plans to call the Senate 
back into session this year. And he leaves no doubt that he expects 
an impeachment trial next year. ``The Senate will do its constitutional 
duty,'' he said last week on CNN. ``We will go to a trial, and there 
won't be any deal-making as we begin our job in the Senate.'' But 
Lott hinted that at some point after a trial began, the Senate might 
decide to stop it. ``There are a number of votes on procedures that 
may be demanded along the way, and we'll have to work the will of 
the Senate,'' he said. The best guess is that on Jan. 6, when the 
106th Congress convenes, the Senate will pass a resolution stating 
that it is prepared to receive the articles of impeachment from the 
House managers, as the small group of representatives selected to 
act as official prosecutors of the case are called. On Jan. 7, if 
the schedule holds, the managers will walk across the Capitol to the 
Senate and read the articles on the Senate floor. That day or the 
next, Chief Justice William Rehnquist will be sworn in to preside 
over the trial, as the Constitution requires. (The Founding Fathers 
realized that it would be a conflict of interest to have the vice 
president, who also serves as president of the Senate, manage the 
impeachment trial of a president.) Rehnquist's oath will probably 
be administered by Sen. Strom Thurmond, R-S.C., the president pro 
tem. The chief justice will then swear in the 100 senators as jurors 
in the trial. Next, the Senate will vote to notify Clinton formally 
that the proceedings have begun, and a schedule will be set. The president 
will probably get a month or more to file a written response to the 
impeachment charges, and the House will get time to prepare its reply. 
During this hiatus the negotiations over a deal will begin. One possibility 
is that the Senate might agree to stop the trial in return for the 
president's acceptance of a stiff censure. A trial could also end 
quickly if Clinton decides not to present a defense at all _ like 
a defendant in a trial so confident of victory that he rests his case 
without calling witnesses. Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, is one who thinks 
that is the most likely outcome. He explained: ``If I were the president, 
I would want to get this thing over with as soon as you can. He knows 
there are not 67 votes there. I don't know anybody who would argue 
there's a chance to have 67 votes at this point. But who knows what 
else might come up if he got into a trial.'' Gramm agreed with that 
assessment. ``Why would he want to have an extended trial?'' Gramm 
asked. ``From his point of view, this is all about damage control.'' 
Sen. Frank Lautenberg, D-N.J., said he thought that script was unlikely. 
``I think it goes nine innings, meaning we have a long-drawn-out process,'' 
he said. Many other Democrats and some Republicans agreed. Taking 
the middle ground, Sen. Robert Bennett, R-Utah, said he expected the 
Senate to begin operating on two tracks, dealing with legislation 
in the afternoon and with the trial either in the morning or in the 
evening. Then, after ``a sufficiently legitimate period of time,'' 
Bennett said, the Senate could vote to end the trial. ``The Senate 
can't just pass a motion right up front to stop the trial,'' he said. 
``That would be a terrible slap in the face of the House institutionally. 
So we need to put some time in. If they have gone through the seriousness 
of voting impeachment, we should go through the seriousness of having 
a trial. ``But if after a while, we can say we have sifted through 
the issues and have decided to suspend the trial, then there's face-saving 
all around. The House can live with it. The president can live with 
it. And we look like statesmen.'' Sen. Patrick Leahy of Vermont, the 
top Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, has had his legal staff research 
impeachment issues and has decided that the rules would require the 
new House that takes office next month to vote to reappoint the managers 
who would present the case to the Senate. Leahy said it was possible 
that the new House, with a smaller Republican majority than the current 
one, would vote against naming managers. That would end the case, 
because there would be no prosecutors. Otherwise, Leahy said, ``we 
are in for a long, long, long trial.'' If there is a full-scale trial, 
it would bear no resemblance to anything anyone alive has ever seen. 
It would be part legal and part political, governed partly by arcane 
Senate rules that were created for the trial of President Andrew Johnson 
in 1868 and partly by rules of law. In all of American history, there 
have been only 13 such trials and only seven convictions, all of federal 
judges. Johnson's trial 130 years ago was the only one of a president. 
In some respects, the trial would be like one in a courtroom. There 
would be opening statements, presentation of witnesses and evidence 
by both sides, cross-examinations, rebuttals and closing arguments. 
Potential witnesses like Monica Lewinsky and Linda Tripp would testify 
under oath, in public, presumably on television, no matter how distasteful 
and embarrassing their testimony. The House would hire professional 
prosecutors and the president would hire defense lawyers to question 
witnesses and argue their cases. Because an impeachment trial will 
be part of the president's official duties, his legal fees will be 
paid by the government. But other elements would be quite different 
from a courtroom trial. The senators, sitting as jurors, would be 
the judges not just of facts but also of law. By majority vote, they 
could overrule decisions of Rehnquist. In most impeachment cases, 
the rules allow the Senate to choose a 12-member committee to hear 
evidence, sparing most senators from the tedium of a trial. But Senate 
history makes clear that the authority is not to be delegated in the 
trial of a president. The senators, who in normal circumstances think 
nothing of talking for hours on the most routine matters, would not 
be permitted to speak in public session during the trial. To question 
a witness, they could pass a note to the chief justice, who would 
pose the question. All the senators' deliberations would be in closed 
session with no personal staff members or reporters present. And their 
time for speaking in those sessions would be strictly limited _ 10 
minutes maximum for each senator on preliminary motions and 15 minutes 
on the final verdict. The biggest difference from a courtroom trial 
would be that the verdict would not be based primarily on facts or 
law. Some senators would doubtless decide on the basis of politics, 
others on their judgment of what would be best for the country. Hatch, 
the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, said he was in this last 
category. He had no doubt, he said, that lying to a grand jury, the 
first charge against Clinton, was an impeachable offense that could 
justify removal from office. But he said he might not vote that way. 
``It comes down to what is in the best interest of the American people,'' 
Hatch said. ``Should we really throw the president out of office for 
this kind of prevarication? I don't know. It's not an easy question 
to answer. It's one I'm struggling with.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>