<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0280 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Over the last decade the 614,000-square-foot Willingboro Plaza went 
from a vibrant regional shopping center to a ghost town _ 13 shuttered 
buildings spread over 56 acres at the western edge of the Burlington 
County Township of Willingboro. An open-air mall, it fell victim to 
enclosed malls and big-box retailers. Now, Renewal Realty LLC, a Manhattan-based 
developer, plans, in partnership with the township, to transform the 
derelict property along Route 130 into a mixed-use development that 
will double as the town center for this community of 37,000. The development, 
called Willingboro Town Center, will have up to 1.2 million square 
feet of new and renovated retail, light industrial and office and 
civic space and up to 240 town houses, as well as 3,000 parking spaces. 
Twenty-five percent of the project will be open space. The 7.5-square-mile 
township is considering running a minivan service around town to the 
site and the plans to construct light-rail line along the nearby Delaware 
River from Trenton to Camden. Willingboro Plaza ``was a blight that 
implied the rest of the town was decaying,'' said Lavonne Bebler Johnson, 
the acting mayor. Its redevelopment will change that and provide an 
``environment where people can live and work, and not shut down at 
night,'' she said. The project is part of a larger redevelopment plan 
by Burlington County to revive the Route 130-Delaware River commercial 
corridor, which sits in the northwestern sector of the county and 
extends along the river and the highway through 12 towns, from Florence 
16 miles south to Cinnaminson. The corridor has suffered from blight 
and economic decline, leaving it pockmarked with empty buildings like 
those at Willingboro Plaza, which is one of four key sites the county 
has identified in its renewal effort. The overall plan, which takes 
a regional approach to redevelopment, was devised after two years 
of discussions among state and county officials as well as the leaders 
and residents of the 12 corridor towns. The corridor plan also reflects 
the goals of the state's Development and Redevelopment Plan, which 
encourages growth in areas where sewers, highways and mass transit 
links are available. In less developed areas, where those facilities 
are lacking, the plan tries to manage growth by encouraging mixed-use 
and compact development. At its heart, the corridor plan calls for 
reinventing the highway strip, now a dying retail hub, into a patchwork 
of light industrial, office and retail uses as well as housing. ``The 
market says that Route 130 is no longer the region's retail center 
and that its heyday is not coming back,'' said Mark Remsa, principal 
planner at the Burlington County Office of Land-Use and Planning. 
``But without making significant changes in the four targeted areas, 
nothing in the corridor can be preserved.'' Willingboro Town Center 
will be developed in phases over the next five years at an estimated 
cost of $60 million to $70 million, including the $2 million needed 
to clean the site of low levels of hydrocarbons and rid the buildings 
of asbestos. The initial $20 million phase of the project, which includes 
the cleanup, began last month and last week demolition started on 
the first of the empty buildings _ 10 of which will be razed by the 
spring. The remaining three will be recycled into other uses. The 
first phase also calls for the construction of some 50 residences 
and 65,000 square feet of commercial and light industrial space in 
two buildings, as well as the renovation of an existing 100,000-square-foot 
two-story building for use by public institutions. Negotiations are 
under way with the local library and Burlington County College to 
relocate from elsewhere in the township to the development, said Robert 
Stang, managing director at Renewal. The college and library are expected 
to open within the development in mid-2000, he said. Renewal will 
develop most of the property itself but will join other developers 
for certain components of the project, particularly the housing, Stang 
said. The units are expected to be a mix of rental and for-sale residences 
designed for professional couples and older households. Redeveloping 
the property is also important for Willingboro, which saw its tax 
base erode with the demise of the old shopping center. The loss of 
jobs as businesses closed also took a toll on this old farming-turned-bedroom 
community, which started its modern life in the 1950s as the nation's 
third Levittown; the community briefly bore that name. The 11,000-house 
development built from 1957 to 1972 included Willingboro Plaza, which, 
like other retail outlets along Route 130, thrived through the 1970s. 
In the early '70s, a section of Interstate 295 opened, cutting through 
the county and shifting growth. Within a decade, enclosed malls began 
popping up along I-295, drawing shoppers and businesses away from 
Route 130. That set off alarms two-and-a-half years ago, prompting 
the county to come up with the corridor plan, which Remsa called ``a 
roadmap for developers.'' The county has submitted the plan to the 
Office of State Planning for approval. If approved, he said, it would 
give all 12 corridor towns priority from state agencies for approvals 
and financing for physical plant and road improvements. In the last 
two years Willingboro also stepped up efforts to work with the former 
owners of Willingboro Plaza to turn it around _ all to no avail, said 
Mayor Johnson. In 1997, she said, ``we got tough with the owners,'' 
by enforcing municipal and fire codes, resulting in $900,000 in fines 
against them. Last January the two parties struck a deal, under which 
Willingboro waived the fines against the owners. In turn, the plaza 
owners dropped their pursuit of a $98,000 tax reduction and agreed 
to deed it over to the township. The township then entered an agreement 
with Renewal to redevelop the site. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>