<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0096 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even the smartest bombs have trouble undercutting Saddam Hussein's 
ability to make new weapons of mass destruction because the Iraqis 
are masters at hiding their assets, United Nations weapons inspectors 
and other experts say. Seven years of inspections in Iraq have taught 
experts that the Iraqis have extremely well-developed plans for moving 
weapons and factory machinery out of the way of bombs, said Scott 
Ritter, the American concealment expert who resigned from the United 
Nations Special Commission in August. The Iraqis have also fine-tuned 
the ability to reconstitute programs quickly, an Iraqi exile with 
knowledge of these projects said, citing this as a sign of the high 
priority Hussein places on keeping prohibited arms at any cost to 
the Iraqi nation. Ritter said in an interview that Iraq's Military 
Industrial Commission had an emergency dispersal plan, which U.N. 
inspectors have seen. ``The Military Industrial Commission has an 
evacuation plan for each facility,'' Ritter said. ``In fact, they 
run an emergency operation center that makes the call. This emergency 
operation center is linked in with an organization called the joint 
committee that's run by the presidential secretary. The joint committee 
makes these calls at national level.'' Experts who study Iraq's evasion 
techniques said that an announcement on Wednesday in Baghdad that 
the country was being divided into four military regions was a signal 
that a plan for nationwide evasive action was in place. ``The joint 
committee is the one that ordered Iraq broken up into four sectors 
and set up regional headquarters,'' Ritter said. ``In addition to 
evacuating MIC facilities, for example, the joint committee will order 
the Republican Guard to disperse.'' The Republican Guard, Hussein's 
elite army, has been a major target of the American strikes. Khidhir 
Hamza, an Iraqi nuclear scientist who has lived in exile in the United 
States since 1995, said that in the past, the Iraqi government has 
moved material all around the country to conceal it, at one point 
parking valuable equipment in date-palm groves near a technical college. 
Other exiles, who asked not to be identified because they still have 
relatives in Iraq, said that Hussein's regime could foist military 
equipment on the homes or businesses of ordinary Iraqis at will. Civilian 
neighborhoods become temporary ammunition or weapons dumps, they said, 
and no dissent is possible. When people are killed, the Iraqi government 
can use them again, for propaganda. A year ago, U.N. arms inspectors 
were able to watch an evacuation in process at some sites, after arms 
teams were withdrawn but video cameras kept running. When teams returned, 
cameras showed empty spaces where suspect equipment had been, Charles 
Duelfer, deputy executive chairman of the Special Commission reported 
at the time. ``We actually noticed the Iraqis removing material away 
from our cameras,'' Ritter said. ``The reason they were removing those 
materials was that they were implementing their evacuation plan.'' 
``They move all the equipment out of a building to evacuation sites, 
and these sites change all the time, and they are designed to minimize 
damage that will occur from air strikes,'' he added. ``One of the 
most graphic examples of this was in 1993, when the United States 
fired cruise missiles into Iraq and hit the Zafaraniya complex,'' 
he said. The complex contained a factory called Al Rabiyah, where 
machinery for the Iraqi nuclear industry was installed. ``We completely 
destroyed it,'' Ritter said. ``Impressive hits. But it was totally 
evacuated. Within eight weeks they had rebuilt the facility and reinstalled 
the equipment. All the personnel were back to work and they were doing 
what they were doing beforehand.'' ``Since 1993, they've had five 
years to refine their capability, and its almost a certainty that 
the high-value items Iraq wants to keep have been evacuated and hidden 
_ not hidden from inspectors, but hidden from the air strikes,'' he 
said. ``They will be put into forests, covered with tarpaulin,'' he 
said. ``They will be put into civilian housing areas, along the streets. 
In some cases the Iraqis just move them next door. These are precision 
air strikes, so they hit the site, blow it up. But nothing's there.'' 
At the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, 
Anthony Cordesman, a Middle East expert, has studied how Iraq disperses 
valuable weapons programs to private sites all over the country to 
make these stashes of components virtually impossible to locate, and 
therefore almost immune from surprise attacks. Furthermore, even if 
the United States military knew where these sites were, hitting them 
would involve large civilian casualties. On Thursday, Pentagon officials 
said they had not targeted biological and chemical weapons sites to 
avoid the potential for contaminating the population. But inspectors 
wonder how it could be that years of sleuthing by the Special Commission 
failed to find such sites, while American military officers seemed 
to know where they were. Ritter, who said that during his seven years 
on the Special Commission he had inspected some of the sites hit this 
week, said that some of the target buildings may have been evacuated 
by the end of October, when Hussein stopped cooperating with arms 
inspectors and hunkered down for a possible attack, which almost came 
on the weekend of Nov. 14-15. When inspectors resumed their work in 
Iraq after Hussein backed down to avoid attack, they found that some 
buildings had been completely cleaned out, as Richard Butler, the 
executive chairman of the Special Commission, wrote in his report 
made public on Tuesday. ``We have aircraft hitting Republican Guard 
sites,'' Ritter said. ``I can tell you my experience with the Republican 
Guard in times of crises. They don't park their tanks in nice neat 
lines so bombers can come in and blow them up. They distribute their 
tanks across miles and miles of territory.'' Last February, reporters 
covering Secretary General Kofi Annan's trip to Baghdad landed at 
the Habbaniyah air base northwest of the Iraqi capital and saw military 
aircraft under camouflage also scattered over a wide area of scrubland. 
At Pentagon briefings, Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen and Gen. 
Henry H. Shelton, Chairman of the Joints Chief of Staff, acknowledged 
that results from the bombing were mixed and that it might not be 
possible to know exactly what was in a building that had been hit. 
They showed a photo of Republican Guard barracks that had been destroyed, 
but were unable to say whether there had been soldiers inside. ``The 
Republican Guard barracks were empty,'' Ritter said. ``I inspected 
those barracks. The ones they destroyed contained old uniforms, expired 
ammunition, food supplies, derelict bedding, smelly latrines. The 
troops are elsewhere.'' In news conferences this week, the Iraqis 
also said that some buildings hit were empty. Deputy Prime Minister 
Tariq Aziz sneered at American claims that the Defense Ministry had 
been hit, saying that it was an old building with nothing in it. Reporters 
in Iraq are not allowed to look at military sites, so independent 
confirmation of claims made anywhere is impossible. The United States 
also hit buildings at the Military Industrial Commission headquarters 
and the Special Security Organization's headquarters. Butler's report, 
which served as the American justification for military action, said 
that inspections of those buildings was called off because they were 
found to be cleared not only of suspect material, but also of the 
furniture. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>