<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0120 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A parliamentary committee on French military involvement in Rwanda 
before and during mass ethnic killings in 1994 has concluded that 
successive governments in Paris made ``errors of judgment,'' but it 
has absolved France of any responsibility for the killings. The committee, 
led by former Defense Minister Paul Quiles, a Socialist, was made 
up of legislators from both government and opposition parties. It 
was formed this year, after Paris newspapers charged that French military 
advisers had helped train the Rwandan government forces and paramilitary 
militias that did much of the killing. Perhaps least surprising was 
its criticism of the United Nations for delaying military action to 
stop the deaths of at least 500,000 people, most members of the minority 
Tutsi ethnic group, once militias of the Hutu majority began the killing 
in April 1994. French troops provided the backbone of a U.N. force 
that went in to try to protect civilians in late June. The committee's 
report pinned blame for the delay on the international community, 
led by the United States, which was traumatized by the killings of 
American soldiers in Somalia the previous year. Nor was Washington 
eager to approve expensive military operations that would add to its 
mountain of unpaid U.N. dues, the committee said. There was no whitewash 
of what it described as numerous French failures. Neither Socialist 
nor conservative governments appreciated the seriousness of the situation, 
the committee found, after the first 30 French military advisers went 
in to train Rwandan police and army forces in 1991. This involvement 
followed attacks in 1990 by Tutsi rebels using bases in neighboring 
Uganda. The training detachment had strict orders not to participate 
in Rwandan government military or security operations, according to 
the report, which drew on classified documents and 110 hours of testimony 
by 88 military and civilian witnesses and experts, including Americans. 
(The document is available on the Internet at http://www.assemblee-nationale.fr/2/2rwanda.html.) 
But President Juvenal Habyarimana of Rwanda had convinced himself 
that France ``would be behind him no matter what happened, that he 
could do anything he wanted on the military and political level,'' 
the committee reported, quoting Herman Cohen, the State Department 
official responsible for Africa policy from 1989 to 1993. Cohen also 
told the committee that the United States had trained some rebel commanders 
but had not provided aid to their organization. Accepting that testimony, 
the legislators poured cold water on the idea that the United States 
had somehow been trying to edge the French out of Rwanda, a former 
Belgian colony. ``There was no American plot with the object of supplanting 
French influence in Rwanda,'' the report read. While looking over 
their shoulders for American plots, the committee suggested, French 
authorities failed to see how military aid to help combat the Tutsi 
rebellion was strengthening Hutu backers of Habyarimana's regime for 
the final slaughter. From 1990 to April 1994, France sold 137 million 
francs' worth of arms to Rwanda, about $24.5 million worth at current 
exchange rates. This provided more than 10,000 mortar rounds, a million 
bullets and three Gazelle helicopters. France also gave the Rwandan 
authorities three more Gazelles and more ammunition. ``If France did 
not participate in battle,'' the report read, ``nevertheless on the 
ground it was extremely close to the Rwandan armed forces. It continuously 
participated in the working out of battle plans, provided advice to 
the general staff and to sector commanders, proposing redeployments 
and new tactics. It sent advisers to instruct the Rwandan armed forces 
in the operation of advanced weapons. It taught mining and ambush 
techniques, suggesting the most appropriate emplacements.'' According 
to the report, authorities in Paris disregarded occasional warnings 
from French advisers in the field that some of their advice could 
be put to bad use. As violence mounted in early 1993, ``France in 
no way incited, encouraged, aided or supported those who orchestrated 
the genocide and began it in the days that followed the assassination,'' 
the report said. But, it added, ``France maintained its presence and 
developed its military cooperation against a background of ethnic 
tensions, massacres and violence, as if impervious to a context whose 
seriousness it underestimated.'' Mass killings began after a plane 
carrying Habyarimana and President Cyprien Ntaryamira of neighboring 
Burundi was shot down from the ground by a SAM-16 missile near the 
Kigali airport on April 6, 1994. The plane, an executive jet, was 
flown by a three-man French military crew. The committee did not resolve 
the question of who shot down the plane _ Tutsi rebels or Hutu opponents 
of Habyarimana's negotiating strategy. It found plausible evidence 
that either group could have obtained SAM-16s from Uganda. It also 
called for further investigation to resolve the mystery of the crash, 
which unleashed the catastrophic killings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>