<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0100 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
An inevitable price of the United States' and Britain's use of force 
in Iraq is that it arouses considerable unease around the world, especially 
if it fails. Although only Russia has publicly vented irritation at 
the United States' decision to punish President Saddam Hussein, many 
other governments, especially in the Middle East, have watched the 
attacks with consternation, either from uneasiness about any nation 
that would take on itself the role of global policeman, or from concern 
about local repercussions, or from unanswered questions about what 
the United States is trying to achieve. However justified the attacks 
might appear to the administration, and even to most Americans, newspaper 
commentaries in much of the rest of the world have speculated extensively 
on a potential link to President Clinton's impending impeachment. 
Beyond that come assertions that the United States is abusing its 
unchallenged global power and reach. Although Russia's pique seemed 
largely shaped by the humiliating loss of its own superpower status, 
it also reflected a broader irritation wi5Y0$1220%, .!Y20POLI :/ Z! 
49 3 - ms slJT122110 naY20POLI e, quOUT-TNS th Washington's readiness 
to be the solitary sheriff. ``In dealing with rogues, a purist American 
approach is dangerous,'' said Richard Haass, director of foreign policy 
studies at the Brookings Institution. ``It stimulates a backlash and 
all sorts of ripple effects that are counterproductive. It's not something 
that will happen overnight, but we are beginning to see a growing 
resentment factor. We see it with China, Russia, some Europeans, in 
what we used to call the third world.'' Such reactions may be unavoidable, 
experts say, adding that most critics would be silenced if the United 
States achieved some demonstrable success, like the replacement of 
Saddam's dictatorship with some benign and defensible new government. 
But that does not seem likely anytime soon, and according to the experts, 
most any other outcome would have its own problems, especially for 
the United States' allies in the Middle East. The concern is not only 
strategic; with the spread of satellite television in the Middle East, 
images of Iraqi civilians bloodied by American bombs are certain to 
rouse anger on Arab streets. ``There will be a deepening problem in 
the Arab world if our campaign does not end in a significantly chastened 
and punished regime in Baghdad,'' said Robert Satloff, executive director 
of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. ``The leaders will 
become more nervous, more likely to tiptoe around the Iraq issue if 
we end too precipitously, if we end before our real goal has been 
met.'' The main goal publicly proclaimed by the Clinton administration, 
that of ``degrading'' Iraq's capabilities for deploying weapons of 
mass destruction, is ``Washington-speak,'' Satloff said. What the 
Arab leaders need to know, he said, is whether the United States is 
truly undermining Saddam's power, whether the attacks are setting-off 
revolts and by whom, and whether any potential leaders of a coup against 
Saddam would be assured of support. ``There is certainly great concern 
in the Arab world about these developments,'' agreed Hussein Hassouna, 
the representative of the Arab League to the United Nations. ``The 
first and foremost concern is whether this bombing will lead to more 
loss of life, more destruction of property among innocent Iraqi people, 
who have been suffering since 1991 under a very harsh system of sanctions. 
There are certainly strong feelings of solidarity with the Iraqi people 
in the Arab world.'' Beyond the reaction of the streets, Hassouna 
said, the bombings opened many troubling uncertainties. They meant 
the effective demise of the U.N. Special Commission created to monitor 
Iraq's weapons program, which for all its weaknesses at least represented 
an international consensus. And they reopened the perennial sense 
among the Arabs that the United States displays a double standard, 
bashing Iraq for developing weapons of mass destruction while keeping 
silent about Israel's suspected nuclear arsenal. Finally, Hassouna 
said, there is the old concern about what would happen if Iraq broke 
up, potentially setting off civil war and floods of refugees to neighboring 
countries. ``The bombings open the way to so many uncertainties, which 
don't make the future seem much brighter,'' he said. The attitude 
reflected the fact that for many Middle Eastern governments, the situation 
before the bombing was basically not bad. The United States maintained 
a military umbrella over the gulf, and Iraq's arms programs and oil 
exports were effectively limited. It is another question, though, 
whether the status quo was tenable, given Saddam's open defiance. 
``The point is that this was a no-win situation,'' said Geoffrey Kemp, 
director of regional strategic programs at the Nixon Center in Washington, 
``We were taking a huge risk by not acting, and we're taking a huge 
risk with these bombings.'' Most experts agreed that many of the anxieties 
of Middle Eastern governments would be lifted if the operation ended 
successfully. But failure, Satloff said, ``would be seen to carry 
the seeds of an even worse situation.'' ``It all depends how this 
thing turns out,'' he continued. This venerable principle of international 
affairs, that nothing succeeds like success, was cited by many experts 
in Near Eastern affairs. But one problem with it, said Anthony Cordesman, 
a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies 
in Washington, is that the administration has not really spelled out 
what success would entail. ``We have no doctrine, no ground rules,'' 
he said. ``We have not set out what were doing beyond degrade, we 
haven't defined what success is to the rest of the world. One of our 
problems is that we're so self-obsessed that we have not dealt with 
the rest of the world.'' At the same time, Haass, who worked on the 
National Security Council during the Bush administration, and the 
other experts said there was no lingering doubt that Saddam was a 
rogue, and that none of the questions about the military operation 
suggested any support for him, nor any question that it was time for 
him to exit. ``I would withhold judgment until we know the impact, 
until we know how much damage this has done to his power structure, 
or psychological damage to those around him,'' said Kemp. ``In other 
words, this may be a more effective strike than it appears, and we 
could be lucky, and hasten his demise. On the other hand, if this 
is not the case, and Saddam is still there, and he has a lot of physical 
damage he can exploit, and he still has his weapons of mass destruction, 
we would begin to see a significant erosion of support.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>