<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0053 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Scenario No. 1: The Jets clinch their first divisional title in 30 
years by defeating the Buffalo Bills here Saturday afternoon, sweep 
their season series, and render all arguments of a competition tainted 
by incompetent officiating irrelevant. Scenario No. 2: The Bills beat 
the Jets, tie them in the standings but find themselves in position 
to lose the American Football Conference East based on the divisional-record 
tie breaker, thereby setting off another round of upstate umbrage 
and making a stronger case for instant replay. Whatever the case, 
given the presumption of honesty and integrity, shouldn't officiating 
any game in any sport mean never having to say you're sorry? Before 
it legislates anything else, the National Football League should junk 
its unofficial policy of apologizing to teams victimized by blown 
calls. To be fair about this, we checked in last week with George 
Young, the league's director of operations, and he insisted that the 
NFL does not call up teams to invoke the ``S'' word. ``We do not say 
sorry, or apologize, to the teams,'' Young said. ``We simply encourage 
the coaches and general managers to send in the plays they think should 
be reviewed. If I'm a coach, I want to know why the penalty was called, 
so I can go to my player and say, `This is what happened.' And if 
there was a mistake on the part of the official, the coach should 
get the courtesy of explaining to the player that what he did wasn't 
wrong.'' Sounds fair, but what about the disputed sideline call that 
went against the Bills at New England three weeks ago? That play had 
nothing to do with defensive technique, or any rule beyond the one 
that says a receiver must have his feet in bounds when he catches 
the ball. The next play was a pass interference call in the end zone 
with no time left that resulted in an extra play for the Patriots 
and the winning touchdown, a better argument for Young's explanation, 
but no more justification for calling the Bills to inform them of 
anything. A recent newspaper photo of Amani Toomer's touchdown in 
the Giants-Broncos game showed one official signaling that the catch 
had been made out of bounds while another's arms were raised in touchdown 
salute. The photo underscored the point that in most disputed cases, 
officials are not missing calls based on interpretation of the rules, 
but as a result of the angle from which they make the call. The league, 
upon further review, then makes its phone call and pours technical 
verbiage on a raw wound created by human error. This combustible mix 
immediately produces what Young called ``a breach of confidentiality.'' 
The team officials, still seething by the middle of the week, are 
thrilled to spin this admission of error by the league as one of guilt. 
Whatever its intention, the NFL puts itself in the position of appearing 
to apologize for human error, for the very officials Young calls ``the 
best in sports.'' I can think of many more worthy causes of apologia, 
decisions that embarrass the NFL far more than any botched coin toss, 
or call. Somebody from the NFL ought to call the politicians in Oakland, 
a struggling city that has already lined Al Davis' pockets, but may 
apparently soon be held up at gunpoint for more. Ditto Los Angeles. 
Somebody from the NFL owes every football fan in Baltimore an apology 
for allowing Robert Irsay to steal their Colts and sticking them with 
Art Modell's pitiful Ravens. Apologize to every player who has ever 
been tacitly encouraged to destroy his internal organs with performance-enhancing 
drugs. Apologize for the growing legion of players with police records 
of assaulting women, and coaches like Bill Parcells who justify the 
likes of David Meggett by blaming, in so many words, those seeking 
fortune and thrills. Apologize to the country for Jerry Jones, for 
helping to make the Bud Bowl part of American junk culture, for anything 
involving the Dallas Cowboy cheerleaders. My son suggested that the 
NFL apologize to American Indians for the Washington Redskins. He's 
9 years old, and gets it. What he doesn't get is the undercurrent 
of disrespect and animosity directed at officials, and what a terrible 
precedent it sets for kids. The first rule of sports _ as relearned 
the hard way by Chuck Knoblauch not long ago _ is to accept the call, 
deal with it, overcome it. The Pittsburgh Steelers screamed they were 
robbed on Thanksgiving Day, and haven't won a game since. The Patriots 
got a gift in the Buffalo game but are nonetheless fighting for their 
playoff lives. The Bills came into Saturday's game with a chance to 
beat the Jets on the field, to give themselves a mathematical chance 
for the division and a playoff berth to do further damage. Teams ultimately 
rise and fall to their qualitative level. The season usually plays 
itself out. No apologies necessary for that. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>