<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0283 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With an improbable cast assembled, then cajoled into becoming a team 
by the demanding Bill Parcells, the Jets captured their first division 
title in almost 30 years on Saturday with a difficult 17-10 victory 
over the Buffalo Bills. The last time they could call themselves a 
division champion, the Jets were still playing in the American Football 
League. It was 1969, the time of Woodstock and Joe Namath, and Muhammad 
Ali was in exile. Now the Jets can also clinch an important first-round 
playoff bye if the Jacksonville Jaguars lose Sunday night at Minnesota 
or if the Jets win their regular-season finale next Sunday at Giants 
Stadium against the New England Patriots. The Jets improved their 
record to 11-4, equaling the franchise record for victories in a season, 
and Vinny Testaverde, who threw for two touchdowns, brought his record 
as their starting quarterback to 11-1. Testaverde completed 14 of 
23 passes for 184 yards and was not intercepted. He won the duel with 
the Bills' resurrected veteran, Doug Flutie, who finished 14 of 38 
for 220 yards with 1 touchdown and 1 interception. With 2 minutes 
15 seconds left in the third quarter, the Jets broke a 10-10 tie as 
Testaverde connected on his 25th touchdown pass of the season, one 
under the club record. He hit a wide-open Dedric Ward, the Jets' speediest 
receiver, who had eluded inexperienced cornerback Donovan Greer. Ward 
turned it into a 71-yard touchdown, scampering the final 50 yards 
with Greer at his heels. Back in 1960, when the team was still the 
Titans, Al Dorow tossed 26 touchdowns. Joe Namath tied that mark in 
1967. Flutie got the Bills back down to the Jets' 22-yard line with 
under four minutes remaining in the game, but his pass for Kevin Williams 
was bobbled and deflected to Victor Green, who dived for the interception. 
Replays appeared inconclusive as to whether Green actually had possession 
when he hit the ground, but the Jets were awarded the ball. The disappointments 
had rolled by year after year for the Jets. Many of these Jet players 
were not even alive in 1969, when they captured their last division 
title. And how many knew that that was in the old American Football 
League? A year later, the leagues merged. And the Jets had been the 
only club from that original, post-merger group of 26 teams that had 
never won a divisional title. Testaverde, a player who had been cut 
by Baltimore at the age of 35 and waited around much of last summer 
before being signed, has led the Jets this far _ as improbable a hero 
as some of the rest of the cast Parcells and his staff had assembled. 
Consider that Saturday alone, Dave Meggett was in on a big run on 
the opening score; Bryan Cox helped position it by stripping the ball; 
and Pepper Johnson recovered it. Meggett had been out of work since 
being cut by the Patriots in May, when a court appearance clouded 
his future; Cox had been working at home after being released by Chicago; 
and Johnson was returning from knee surgery. But Parcells loved them 
all. Flutie came into the game with a 5-0 record at home, in a season 
that the 36-year-old veteran of the Canadian Football League has called 
``my second rookie year.'' For much of the opening half, which ended 
in a 7-7 tie, he cavorted like a rookie, as he was being hurried repeatedly 
by the Jets' pass rush. But he tossed several completions just as 
onrushing defenders leveled him. The Jets have a remarkably small 
player of their own in wide receiver Wayne Chrebet, and he helped 
lift them to a 7-0 lead in the opening quarter. First, the Bills coughed 
up the ball, a rarity. Buffalo entered the game having fumbled only 
five times all season, which tied the Bills for the second-best mark 
in the league. Overall, they had turned the ball over fewer times 
than all but five clubs. But Antowain Smith, carrying the ball at 
the Jets' 20-yard line on what was shaping up to be a Bills scoring 
drive, was met by Cox. This was Cox's first regular-season appearance 
here since his famous incident in 1995, when he had a fight and then 
spit at the fans. Cox, apparently unfazed Saturday, stripped the ball 
from Smith and Johnson recovered it for the Jets. Testaverde then 
helped march the Jets 79 yards to a score. On the first play of the 
drive, Keyshawn Johnson joined Chrebet in the 1,000-yard receiving 
club as he snared a 16-yarder. It marked the first time since 1986, 
and the tandem of Al Toon and Wesley Walker, that two Jets had achieved 
the milestone. Then Dave Meggett, playing for the third time under 
Parcells, appeared for the first time in a Jets uniform and produced 
some minor heroics. On a second-and-11, Meggett dashed for 18 yards, 
almost breaking all the way for a score. Chrebet made a diving catch 
for 22 yards and finally snared a 7-yarder in the end zone from Testaverde. 
Flutie was to throw 26 times in the half, completing only 12, but 
he made several big plays on third down. One pass to Williams was 
good for 22 yards and moved the Bills beyond midfield in the second 
quarter. From there, Flutie, who also ran twice in the first half, 
scrambled down to the 30. After getting to the 25, Flutie was under 
intense pressure from Cox, who hit him just as he released a screen 
pass to Thurman Thomas. Thomas caught the ball 5 yards downfield and 
ran the rest of the way to the end zone to complete a 25-yard pass 
play that helped tie the score. The Bills got close enough for a chip-shot 
field goal in the closing seconds of the opening half, but Steve Christie's 
28-yard attempt was wide to the left. John Hall, though, successfully 
booted a 48-yarder, through the same uprights, to close out the Jets' 
opening drive of the third quarter. It gave them a 10-7 lead, and 
marked the 13th successful field goal, in 16 tries, since John Kidd 
became the punter and new holder for Kidd. Later in the period, Christie, 
kicking into the wind, generated a 44-yard field goal. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>