<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0177 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The House of Representatives impeached President William Jefferson 
Clinton for perjury and obstruction of justice on Saturday and called 
on the Senate to try him, convict him and remove him from office. 
The critical first votes nearly tracked party lines. After Rep. Ray 
LaHood of Illinois, the acting speaker, ruled a last-minute Democratic 
bid for censure out of order, 228 members, all but five of them Republicans, 
voted to impeach him for perjury before a federal grand jury here 
on Aug. 17. With 206 representatives, including five Republicans, 
voting no, the impeachment was adopted at 1:25 p.m. ET. The vote to 
impeach him for obstruction of justice in trying to cover up his affair 
with Monica Lewinsky by inducing her and others to lie was narrower, 
221-212. Twelve Republicans, apparently less persuaded by the evidence 
on this charge, voted no but five Democrats again voted yes. Two other 
charges were voted down. An accusation of perjury about Ms. Lewinsky 
in the Paula Jones sexual harassment lawsuit was rejected, 229-205, 
with 28 Republicans breaking ranks with their leaders. Some of them 
said that perjury in a civil case was not serious enough for impeachment, 
even if perjury before a grand jury was. Five Democrats voted to impeach. 
That vote came before the obstruction charge was approved. Finally, 
the House overwhelmingly rejected an accusation of abuse of power, 
a term taken from the proceedings against Richard M. Nixon in 1974. 
The article accused him of perjury in his answers to 81 questions 
the Judiciary Committee had sent him in hope that he would admit lying. 
The vote was 285-148. Eighty-one Republicans defected from their party; 
only one Democrat deserted his. Even before the votes, Republicans 
pressed another line of attack on the president, demanding Clinton's 
resignation. Rep. Bob Livingston, nominated for speaker last month 
by his party, startled the House when he called for Clinton's resignation 
and announced he would set an example by not running for speaker and 
would resign from the House after 21 years of service in the wake 
of this week's disclosure of his own extramarital affairs. Clinton 
rejected the advice immediately. His spokesman, Joe Lockhart, said, 
``The president has no intention of resigning.'' By calling on Livingston 
to reconsider, the president argued more broadly against resignation 
under fire. Perhaps speaking to both cases, Lockhart said, ``It would 
be wrong to give in to this insidious politics of personal destruction.'' 
Unless Clinton changes course and resigns, the Senate will conduct 
only the second impeachment trial of a president in the 209-year history 
of the republic. Clinton will be the first elected president put on 
trial, since Andrew Johnson, impeached and acquitted in 1868, had 
been elected vice president and succeeded to the White House on Abraham 
Lincoln's assassination in 1865. Sen. Trent Lott of Mississippi, the 
majority leader, has insisted that no bargaining over censure can 
prevent the trial from starting. Considering the degree of partisanship 
displayed Saturday, assembling the two-thirds majority required under 
the Constitution for conviction is most unlikely. Sixty-seven votes 
would be required, and there are only 55 Republicans in the Senate, 
along with 45 Democrats. The Republican argument, over and over, was 
that Clinton had lied in denying having sexual relations with Ms. 
Lewinsky. Rep. Dick Armey of Texas, the majority leader, said, ``A 
nation of laws cannot be ruled by a person who breaks the law.'' Rep. 
Nancy Johnson of Connecticut said: ``There can be no justice without 
the truth. That is just profoundly so, and that is why perjury matters.'' 
Rep. Gerald Kleczka of Wisconsin began the Democrats' arguments by 
saying, ``What the president did was wrong, both personally and morally, 
but his acts did not threaten our democracy and thus do not rise to 
the level of impeachable offenses as defined by our founding fathers 
in our Constitution.'' Rep. Charles Schumer, New York's senator-elect, 
said: ``The rule of law requires that the punishment fit the crime. 
Allow us to vote for censure.'' Saturday's votes were the penultimate 
step in the most serious conflict between Congress and a president 
since Nixon resigned in the face of impeachment and certain conviction 
on Aug. 9, 1974. But while that case spun out from a 1972 break-in 
at Democratic headquarters in the Watergate complex, this one began 
with a murky land deal in Arkansas in 1978. Through the efforts of 
Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel under the law enacted in the 
wake of Watergate, the investigation spread to examine Clinton's affair 
with a White House intern. All year it has preoccupied the capital 
despite an immense disconnect with public opinion; since the scandal 
became public in January, polls have shown that the public opposed 
impeachment and wanted the inquiry brought to an end. Even on Friday 
night, after a 13-hour debate, a CBS News Poll of 548 people showed 
that only 38 percent wanted their representative to vote for impeachment; 
58 percent wanted a no vote. The conflict now enters uncharted seas, 
since the Nixon resignation cut the matter short and the Johnson trial 
occurred in a different America, with no nuclear weapons or cable 
television or public opinion polls. But the capital was still rife 
with confident speculation. Some guessed, or hoped, that the results 
of the recent poll, which showed increases in support for resignation 
as a way to spare the nation a trial in which Ms. Lewinsky and Linda 
Tripp would be star witnesses, would weaken Clinton's resolve. Others 
thought the Republicans, seeing dismal numbers in polls about their 
party's standing in the United States, would be the first to blink. 
With a majority in the Senate, they have the power to end a trial 
at any time after the Senate receives notice of impeachment on the 
day it convenes, Jan. 6, or the next day. But while Clinton has focused 
on the polls, and the CBS News survey showed that 64 percent still 
approve of his handling of his job as president, resignation could 
almost immediately subject him to criminal prosecution. And Republicans 
have steadfastly ignored the polls all year, and confronted them directly 
on Saturday. Representative J.C. Watts of Oklahoma, newly elected 
as chairman of the Republican caucus, said: ``What's popular isn't 
always right. You say polls are against this. Polls measure changing 
feelings, not steadfast principle. Polls would have rejected the Ten 
Commandments. Polls would have embraced slavery and ridiculed women's 
rights. ``You say we must draw this to a close. I say we must draw 
a line between right and wrong, not with a tiny fine line of an executive 
fountain pen, but with the big fat lead of a No. 2 pencil. And we 
must do it so every kid in America can see it. The point is not whether 
the president can prevail, but whether truth can prevail.'' Last weekend, 
when the Judiciary Committee recommended the four articles of impeachment, 
Clinton's side still hoped to prevail with the help of 20 to 30 Republican 
moderates who were uncommitted. As the week wore on, almost all of 
them broke against the president. One who did not, Rep. Christopher 
Shays of Connecticut, said Saturday: ``After Judge Starr's report 
to Congress in September, and his presentation to the Judiciary Committee 
in November, I concluded that impeachable offenses were not proven, 
and that the proven offenses were not impeachable. ``But the president's 
continued failure to come to grips with his actions, the sincerity 
and arguments of members of the Judiciary Committee from both sides 
of the aisle, the change of heart and conviction by members on my 
side of the aisle who originally opposed impeachment and who now support 
it, and the strong and powerful opinion of so many of my constituents 
who oppose my position and who wanted the president impeached caused 
me to rethink my position.'' He added: ``Yesterday morning, before 
I visited with the president, I concluded that my original position 
was the correct one, for me. I believe that the impeachable offenses 
have not been proven, and that the proven offenses are not impeachable.'' 
But Rep. Tom DeLay of Texas, who has led the Republican effort to 
force Clinton from office, dismissed his and other arguments as moral 
relativism. He began by praising Livingston: ``There is no greater 
American in my mind, at least today, than Bob Livingston, because 
he understood what this debate was all about. It was about honor and 
decency and integrity and the truth; everything that we honor in this 
country. It was also a debate about relativism vs. absolute truth.'' 
He continued, ``The president's defenders have said that the president 
is morally reprehensible, that he is reckless, that he has violated 
the trust of the American people, lessened their esteem for the office 
of president and dishonored the office which they have entrusted him, 
and that _ but that doesn't rise to the level of impeachment.'' Rep. 
Jose Serrano of New York said, ``My constituents don't hate Bill Clinton; 
they love him and they're praying for him right at this very moment. 
You may have the votes today to impeach him, but you don't have the 
American people. And let me tell you something, I grew up in the public 
housing projects of the South Bronx. I can see a bunch of bullies 
when I see them. The bullies get theirs, and you're going to get yours, 
too.'' Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois, the Judiciary Committee chairman 
who brought the charges to the House floor, said the Congress and 
the American people needed to distinguish between private acts of 
infidelity and public acts by public officials. In Clinton's case, 
he said, the House was dealing with ``a serial violator of the oath 
who is the chief law-enforcement officer.'' He said that the Senate 
could be ``innovative and creative'' in deciding how best to punish 
Clinton, but that the House was bound by the Constitution to move 
ahead with articles of impeachment. ``Justice is so important to the 
most humble among us,'' Hyde said. ``Equal justice under the law _ 
that's what we're fighting for.'' Democrats, reading from the same 
Constitution, voiced diametrically opposite conclusions, and attacked 
the fairness of the proceedings that culminated Saturday. ``We're 
losing track of distinction between sins and crimes,'' said Rep. Jerrold 
Nadler, D-N.Y. ``We're lowering the standards of impeachment. What 
the president has done is not a great and dangerous offense to the 
republic.'' Democrats also criticized Republicans for impeaching Clinton 
at the very moment that U.S. troops waged war against Iraq. ``Six 
days before Christmas our troops are in battle, and a lame-duck Congress 
is rushing to overthrow the commander in chief,'' said Rep. David 
Bonior of Michigan, the second-ranking House Democrat. The ghosts 
of Watergate hung over the House chamber. One Republican cited the 
parallels between the charges the House Judiciary Committee brought 
against Nixon 25 years ago, and the counts that the same committee 
brought to the House floor for affirmation on Saturday. ``Nixon cheated. 
He cheated the electoral system,'' said Rep. Lindsey Graham, a South 
Carolina Republican. Now, Graham said, the House is voting to impeach 
Clinton ``because we believe he committed crimes that result in cheating 
our judicial system.'' But Democrats assailed the very premise on 
which the Republican majority built its impeachment case against Clinton. 
Rep. John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, the ranking Democrat on the Judiciary 
Committee, assailed the four articles of impeachment, count by count, 
as unfounded by evidence and failing to rise to impeachment. He saved 
his most savage scorn for the final count, abuse of power. ``The majority 
has simply tried to dress up the perjury counts in the Watergate abuse-of-power 
language,'' Conyers said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>