<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0152 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Sunday, Dec. 20: Since 
the House of Representatives mirrors the best and worst in the American 
political system, it was perhaps fitting that Saturday was such a 
tumultuous and unpredictable day. It saw an orderly, if misguided 
use of the constitutional process. It brought passage of two articles 
of impeachment against President Clinton on a brutal party-line vote 
that defied the will of the American people. It brought the abrupt 
resignation of Rep. Robert Livingston, a Republican leader who had 
failed to seize his opportunity to lead his party from the thicket 
of blind partisanship. Yet, with both the White House and the majority 
party in Congress locked in a crisis of leadership, one element remained 
unchanged. The way back to stability is adoption of a censure resolution 
that condemns Clinton for lying under oath, but allows him to remain 
in office. The task of securing that outcome passes dramatically to 
the Senate, a body that prides itself on being the American government's 
citadel of balanced judgment in the midst of crisis. As the magnifying 
lens of history fixes upon the Senate, we will see whether its majority 
leader, Sen. Trent Lott, can carry the burden that crushed Livingston. 
The latter will be viewed in the short term as a victim of the sexual 
puritanism he had wielded as a weapon against Clinton. But in the 
longer view, Livingston will be remembered for allowing the hard-liners 
in his party to rush the country to an unnecessary impeachment showdown. 
Lott's first challenge is to block the move by House Republicans to 
force Clinton to follow Livingston's example by resigning. The attempt 
to force the president to resign would be a repudiation of the public 
will. Moreover, it would threaten the rule of law by showing that 
Congress cannot define and enforce an appropriate penalty for a president 
who has failed in his duties, but whose misconduct does not meet the 
constitutional standard for removal. Lott's second challenge, then, 
is to guide the Senate to the stern, bipartisan resolution of censure 
that has already been endorsed by many Republican elders. Tim Russert 
of NBC News has reported that discussions are already underway among 
a bipartisan group of senators about a censure that would involve 
some form of presidential admission about false testimony, a heavy 
monetary fine and an effort to restrain Independent Counsel Kenneth 
Starr from further prosecution of Clinton. If Lott refuses to allow 
this kind of flexible, bipartisan search for censure, the burden of 
his abdicated leadership will fall upon respected members like Joseph 
Lieberman on the Democratic side and Orrin Hatch for the Republicans. 
Through cooperation, they can guide the Senate toward a punishment 
that fixes Clinton in history as a president who lied under oath, 
but avoids the taint of partisan vengeance associated with the House 
impeachment vote. But even if the senators behave responsibly, they 
and the country face the problem of dealing with a battered president 
whose calculated strategy of lying over the airways and under oath 
has prolonged this crisis for a full year. If Clinton clings to his 
deluded effort to make Congress and the American people endorse the 
insulting fiction that he did not lie under oath, he will feed the 
Republican efforts to force his resignation. He will also invite a 
showdown at his Senate trial on the strong evidence behind the impeachment 
article charging him with grand-jury perjury. Under Senate rules, 
the 45 Democratic members need only 6 Republicans for the simple majority 
that can adjourn the trial at any time and open the way to a censure 
resolution. But these votes cannot be purchased with more lies from 
Bill Clinton. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>