<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0108 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the House voted on impeachment, President Clinton had already worked 
out a strategy to govern as no president has for 130 years, under 
impeachment and in the glare of Senate trial. The White House is planning 
a much more aggressive defense of Clinton's conduct before the Senate 
than it presented to the House, alongside a blaze of campaign-style 
events early next year to promote his policies around the country. 
On Saturday morning, his senior aides spent more than two hours discussing 
proposals for his State of the Union Message next year, even as they 
monitored the turbulent debate before the impeachment votes on Capitol 
Hill. Anticipating Republican resistance to any legislation backed 
by Clinton, his aides are prepared to argue that the Republicans are 
in effect shutting down the government for partisan reasons, once 
again. ``The Republicans run a risk if they pursue a strategy that 
puts America's interest last,'' warned Joe Lockhart, the White House 
press secretary. ``The public has a certain amount of tolerance for 
partisan politics, and they've had just about enough.'' But even some 
of the president's loyalists wonder if this approach _ versions of 
which he has used time and again to battle back from political reversals 
_ will work now, in the untried, complex political environment he 
enters with Saturday's vote. ``There's no way he's going to be able 
to get anything done,'' said Leon Panetta, the former chief of staff. 
``It's very tough to get anybody's attention when there's a train 
going by behind you. They'll see your lips moving, but they won't 
hear anything.'' White House aides as well as outside experts argue 
that Clinton will retain a stronger hand in foreign policy, where 
the chief executive is always freer to act. The real question, they 
say, is whether he can promote his ideas domestically, against contemptuous 
opposition in the legislative branch. Clinton has been acting on a 
lesson he has repeated to his aides since he first confronted national 
scandal as a candidate in 1992: ``If I make this about their life, 
rather than mine, we'll all be better off,'' as one Clinton adviser 
recalled it on Friday. But Republicans will try to make it about him, 
the White House expects, arguing that he should resign. ``He is not 
resigning,'' one of Clinton's closest advisers said. ``It's just not 
in his nature.'' Impeachment and the Senate trial, together with the 
venom coursing through Washington, could guarantee legislative stalemate 
well into 1999, in the view of White House aides and other political 
experts. But the president will be ready to present himself as bursting 
with ideas. For weeks now, Clinton has been meeting behind closed 
doors at the White House to pick budget priorities for next year and 
to tote up his annual laundry list for the State of the Union address. 
He will promote those ideas, many of which are poll-tested for popularity, 
in a trip around the country immediately after the speech, aides said. 
Topping that list this year is a plan to fix Social Security, which 
the White House is still formulating. For years, Clinton has counted 
on achieving entitlement reform as a lasting accomplishment. The White 
House is also planning to push for more spending for school construction, 
tax cuts for scientific research, and regulation of managed care plans. 
The president wants to present a plan to cut smoking among children, 
and to revive a call to tighten the campaign finance system. In foreign 
affairs, Clinton can also expect challenges to authority, which began 
even before he ordered strikes on Iraq last week. But the United States 
_ and the executive branch _ still wields so much clout in foreign 
affairs that Clinton is likely to keep more room to maneuver overseas. 
With the continued support of leaders like Prime Minister Tony Blair 
of Britain also giving Clinton some shelter, the White House is sketching 
out foreign travel for him next year. Over and over, Clinton's aides 
in recent conversations recalled the battles fought and won over the 
last six years, when the ``chattering classes'' _ as they uniformly 
refer to almost anyone on the margins of professional politics _ counted 
them out: The health care debacle of 1994; the budget shutdowns of 
1995; and even 1998, when Clinton managed to achieve many of his budget 
priorities despite the furor over his relationship with Monica Lewinsky. 
``The history of Bill Clinton,'' said Don Baer, a former senior aide, 
``is that when he does come back _ as I think he will again _ he's 
always stronger.'' Rahm Emanuel, another former adviser with close 
ties to Clinton, provided a preview of the likely White House line 
of attack: ``One way or another, they've determined to have another 
lockdown of the government, and you can't allow that kind of political 
carelessness to govern.'' But the argument that the Republicans are 
obstructionist may not work after the House of Representatives has 
branded Clinton unfit for office. ``If Clinton were a Franklin Roosevelt, 
and if his agenda were, say, Roosevelt's agenda of 1935 _ with Social 
Security and rural electrification and aid to farms _ then that argument 
on Clinton's part would be much more persuasive,'' said William Leuchtenburg, 
a professor of history at the University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill. ``But this is a man who ended the welfare system, who said the 
era of big government is over, who has been advocating programs such 
as putting school children in uniforms. There's not a lot of Clinton 
program to rally around.'' Rather than simply block the president's 
program, Republicans, with new leadership in the House, may try to 
push their own proposals through, to capitalize on and underscore 
his weakness. But a larger House Democratic minority in the next Congress 
and an infuriated White House are likely to block any such move. White 
House aides said they would welcome any ensuing debate. ``We'd like 
nothing better,'' said one senior adviser. ``It's the reason why we 
cleaned house in '98.'' If Clinton's strategy works, and he survives 
the Senate trial, his own urge to score some legislative achievements 
may cause dissension within the Democratic Party. Congressional Democrats 
will be more interested in storing up frustrated goals to run on in 
2000 than in passing legislation. ``You could see a very delicate 
situation between the president and the Democrats,'' Panetta said. 
While Clinton is pushing his policy proposals, an expanded team of 
presidential defenders will be fighting conviction by the Senate. 
White House aides said the model would be the two days of defense 
before the House, rather than the many weeks of White House complacency 
about accusations against Clinton. In addition to being frustrated 
at their own lackluster defense after the midterm elections, Clinton's 
aides are very angry. ``We're going to fight it aggressively,'' said 
Douglas Sosnik, Clinton's senior adviser. ``The vote in the House 
was not on the level, and people know that. And our people are motivated, 
they know that the president was not treated fairly. This was not 
about facts or the law, it was about politics and trying to get the 
president.'' While the White House had only weak links to the House 
Democrats, four of Clinton's senior aides have strong ties to the 
Senate, including to such prominent Republicans as Sen. Orrin Hatch, 
R-Utah, chairman of the Judiciary Committee. John Podesta, the chief 
of staff; Gregory Craig, the special counsel; Steve Ricchetti, the 
deputy chief of staff, and Sosnik have all worked as Senate aides. 
Clinton is also trying to recruit George Mitchell, the former Senate 
majority leader, to help with his defense. Hoping to tap a vein of 
discontent over the House's action, the White House, perhaps through 
the Democratic party, plans to encourage public pressure on the Senate 
not to convict. ``We're going to take this thing to the country,'' 
said one aide to Clinton. And James Carville, the longtime Clinton 
strategist, said he would form a political organization _ perhaps 
a political action committee _ to hold Republicans accountable for 
their impeachment votes. ``They're going to get the blame for doing 
this,'' he said. ``They've put something into motion, and they're 
going to have to live with the consequences of it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>