<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0158 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Against all expectations, the corruption scandal at New York City's 
largest municipal union could end up transforming the union into a 
more formidable adversary in coming contract negotiations with the 
city, labor experts say. While the scandal has in some ways hobbled 
District Council 37, Lee Saunders, the man sent in by the parent union 
to run the council, has promised to take a more aggressive negotiating 
stance than that adopted by Stanley Hill, who was forced out last 
month as executive director. Hill was widely seen in the city's labor 
movement as having an accommodating approach toward Mayor Rudolph 
Giuliani in negotiating the union's five-year contract, which included 
a much-disliked two-year pay freeze. In contrast, Saunders has put 
Giuliani on notice that he will bargain hard on workfare and other 
issues about which Hill was largely docile. ``You're going to see 
a more militant union, more progressive, more aggressive,'' Saunders 
said in an interview last week. The council's current five-year contract, 
which covers 120,000 workers, expires in 2000, but many union leaders 
predict that negotiations for a new contract will begin next year. 
Saunders has talked about invigorating the union to get members more 
engaged _ in part to help put more pressure on the city. Under Hill, 
the district council's membership was largely passive, except in a 
few of the locals, most notably the hospital workers' local, which 
has repeatedly demonstrated against the mayor's plans to privatize 
or close city hospitals. ``I don't think the union could be weaker 
than it was,'' said Greg Tarpinian, president of the Labor Research 
Association, a New York consulting group. ``The reality is nobody 
is talking about a more conciliatory D.C. 37. If you had gone from 
something that was a fighting force to something that was in crisis, 
that would be one thing. But that's not the reality. Lee Saunders 
now has something to prove to the membership.'' Other unions are also 
spoiling for a fight. Many of their leaders say they are angry that 
District Council 37's contract was ratified with the help of vote 
fraud and that the city pressured them into accepting contracts. They 
say they are ready to demand extra money for their members _ if not 
as a Christmas bonus, then in a future contract. On Nov. 30, the council's 
parent union, the American Federation of State, County and Municipal 
Employees, took control of its affairs. The parent union's president, 
Gerald McEntee, put Saunders in charge as the Manhattan district attorney 
broadened his investigation into allegations of embezzlement, kickbacks 
and vote fraud. There is still no consensus about who might become 
the union's next executive director. Some union officials have suggested 
that Saunders might take the job after his trusteeship ends in a year, 
but Saunders says he is not interested. Of course, if Saunders was 
interested _ and labor experts say it would be unwise for him to admit 
that now _ he could be expected to talk tough about future negotiations 
to gain support of the membership. Deputy Mayor Randy Levine said 
the city was eager to begin talks even though more than a year remains 
in the current pact. ``We would love to meet and start negotiations 
early because there are many productivity steps and other concessions 
that we'd like to obtain,'' he said. ``There aren't going to be any 
wage increases without the continuation of serious productivity gains.'' 
But he added: ``I don't believe you're going to see any of them choosing 
to come to the table with us. They all think that they would do much 
better with the next mayor, whoever that is, than with Rudy Giuliani.'' 
The negotiating landscape has already changed. Hill had been chairman 
of the Municipal Labor Committee, which coordinates bargaining strategy 
for nearly 100 municipal unions, but he has been replaced by Randi 
Weingarten, president of the United Federation of Teachers. In the 
past few years, she has taken a more combative stance toward the city 
than Hill. Ms. Weingarten suggested that the vote fraud had made many 
other union leaders hungry to challenge the mayor. ``More and more 
unions are saying that in light of the fraud, the mayor has a moral 
obligation to come up with something more for the workers,'' Ms. Weingarten 
said. But Levine said: ``Nobody's entitled to any bonus. None of these 
unions are going to get any advantage from that malfeasance.'' In 
the 1960s and '70s, District Council 37, then led by Victor Gotbaum, 
was able to win innovations in its contracts that other municipal 
unions sought to copy. Some labor experts predict that McEntee will 
push District Council 37 and Saunders to play such a role again. ``D.C. 
37 used to be a pattern setter for other municipal employees nationwide,'' 
said Carol O'Cleireacain, who at one time was the district council's 
chief economist. ``Gerry McEntee certainly understands that a more 
aggressive pattern from this council is going to benefit government 
employees nationally.'' Since Hill was forced to take an unpaid leave 
on Nov. 30, intrigue has swirled over who will run the council once 
the trusteeship ends. The scandal has left a leadership vacuum: Hill 
is gone; the union's associate director, Martin Lubin, and another 
top official, Mark Shaplo, have resigned over their role in rigging 
the contract ratification vote. Charles Hughes, president of the largest 
local, has been expelled after a union panel found that he had embezzled 
more than $1.7 million. And Albert Diop, president of the second largest 
local, is a target of the district attorney's investigation. There 
is also general agreement that two dissenters who have pushed hardest 
for reform _ Ray Markey, president of a librarians' local and Mark 
Rosenthal, president of a motor vehicle operators' local _ will not 
become the next executive director. Rosenthal rules himself out. ``I'm 
not qualified,'' he said. ``I'm just a worker.'' Markey also denies 
interest, insisting that the next executive director should be Charles 
Ensley, a longtime Hill critic who heads a local representing 14,000 
social workers. But Ensley, who has made enemies in his years battling 
Hill, also said he was not interested, and said he was thinking of 
retirement. Union officials say Hill has told them he would like to 
return as executive director, but he is under investigation and some 
union leaders predict that he will be disqualified from returning. 
In such a case, Hill's supporters may rally around James Tucciarelli, 
a Hill ally who heads a local representing 1,000 sewage treatment 
workers. Tucciarelli denies interest, and several union officials 
said they doubted he could be elected because of his identification 
with Hill. Another name often mentioned is Zachary Ramsey, assistant 
director for research and negotiation at the council. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>