<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0110 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad appears to be serenely back 
in control of events in his country after three months of political 
turmoil that included a public scolding by Vice President Al Gore. 
Street demonstrations that sought to duplicate the protests that brought 
down Indonesia's president, Suharto, have petered out. Public enthusiasm 
for the protests did not seem strong enough to overcome a general 
political apathy and an aggressive reaction by the police. The trial 
of former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim, whose dismissal and 
imprisonment in September touched off the demonstrations, has degenerated 
into an undignified soap opera of lurid sexual charges and cat fights 
among lawyers. All this is not to say that Mahathir's troubles are 
over. He has embarked on an experiment of economic nationalism that 
many outside experts say could bring ruin to both the nation and its 
leader. He has created, by his treatment of Anwar, a reform backlash 
that still festers and could flare again. And his actions have opened 
the way for a variety of possible challenges, from democrats to radical 
Moslems to political opportunists. Anwar is charged with five counts 
of sexual misconduct and five counts of corruption. Most of the corruption 
charges involve accusations that he tried to cover up sexual indiscretions. 
The week before last, one of the main witnesses against him, his wife's 
former driver, appeared to contradict earlier testimony that Anwar 
had sodomized him. But there was a possibility that the driver, Azizan 
Abu Bakar, had misunderstood a question and Anwar's lawyer was careful 
to drop the matter and let the confusion remain. Last week, the high 
point of the trial came when the prosecution dragged a queen-sized 
brown mattress into court, asserting that it was used by Anwar for 
trysts with the wife of his former secretary and that it was stained 
with his semen. Prosecutors said DNA tests were being conducted. Anwar, 
in the dock, responded by smiling, folding his hands beside his head 
and making a gesture of sleeping. As the humiliation of Anwar, his 
protege, proceeded, Mahathir made a show of rising above the fray. 
He has not commented recently on the trial and he has brushed aside 
Gore's remarks. During a meeting of Asian leaders in Kuala Lumpur 
last month, Gore offended many Malaysians by speaking bluntly about 
the harsh treatment of Anwar and praising protesters. Mahathir also 
seemed pleased to be the target of an attack by international financier 
George Soros, who suggested that the prime minister should step down 
for the good of his country. ``Soros can speak until he is blue in 
the face,'' Mahathir said. ``It makes no difference.'' Mahathir, who 
has ruled Malaysia for 17 years, will turn 73 this month. Until he 
turned against his deputy and heir apparent, Malaysia had been respected 
as one Asian nation where the question of succession was not an issue. 
But differences over economic policy and a veiled challenge in June 
by supporters of Anwar for leadership of the government party appear 
to have caused Mahathir's angry reaction against him. The prime minister 
said Thursday that he was thinking of naming a replacement for Anwar 
before a party congress set for next year. Asked what qualities he 
might be looking for in a deputy, Mahathir replied with what appeared 
to be a joke, ``An exact replica of myself, if it is possible.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>