<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0042 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It has gotten to the point where drastic action may be necessary. 
You know those movies about Ebola virus outbreaks, where the guys 
in sterile suits come in, seal off the area and completely irradiate 
it? They may have to do that to Washington. Just eradicate us and 
start from scratch. On Friday evening, we had the frightening scene 
of Republicans so crazed with hatred of the president that they were 
railroading through an impeachment even though the United States was 
at war with Iraq, even though the House chamber was mostly empty, 
even though Republicans were huddled in a glass house on the issue 
of sex and lies, even though Americans were sensibly refusing to be 
drawn into the madness, even though the White House was still pitching 
a tent and planning sleigh rides for a Winter Wonderland press party 
on Monday. (The White House was keeping the journalists quarantined 
outside this year, but encouraged them to bring their kids. To soak 
up some of that cozy family atmosphere, no doubt.) Why are the Republicans 
so hellbent, when everyone in his right mind agrees that impeachment 
is an outlandishly over-the-top punishment for Clinton and a self-destructive 
course for the country? Because they genuinely hate the president. 
They think he's a dishonest, immoral, issue-stealing, spoiled, selfish 
child of the '60s. They don't think they're going to pay a political 
price for this, and if they do, they don't care. A lot of Republicans 
have made a calculation that, for their kinds of voters, they are 
better off going along with Livingston, Delay, Hyde and the right 
wing. It might be a great time to see a lot of combovers, but it's 
not a great time to see a lot of stature. The House debate was not 
history. It was just a more hideous version of ``The McLaughlin Group.'' 
No one's listening. Everyone's spewing. Washington has always bristled 
with hypocrisy. Now it's rotting with hypocrisy. Two of the Republicans 
doggedly pursuing the nation's first sexual impeachment have now been 
exposed as hounds. Henry Hyde, who worries about the American flag 
falling, has confessed to falling into an adulterous temptation. And 
Speaker-elect Bob Livingston just had to own up to multiple extramarital 
affairs. When Livingston confessed his sins to Republicans, they gave 
him a standing ovation. Their justification for their double standard 
was that Livingston had never lied under oath about his affairs. (I 
guess the vow to his wife doesn't count as an oath.) While Republicans 
tried to draw the distinction that Clinton had perjured himself, they 
ignored that the president had been lured by the Starr-Jones attorney 
team into testifying on Monica Lewinsky. Does anyone seriously think 
that Livingston, or most pols, would have eagerly fessed up when asked 
excruciating questions about their extramarital sex lives? Ordinarily 
one would feel sorry for Livingston being outed. But the Republicans 
have brought on themselves this sexual doomsday machine of Larry Flynt, 
Clinton investigators and journalists by focusing so single-mindedly 
on Clinton's sex life. Even the looniest Democrat made far more sense 
Friday night than the most ``judicious'' Republican. ``An impeachable 
offense should be one that threatens liberty, not chastity,'' said 
James Traficant of Ohio. The Republicans were so determined to do 
their high-tech lynching that they engaged in wacky role reversals. 
Many Republican hawks argued that Bill Clinton should not be bombing 
Saddam, claiming the timing was suspicious, even though they had hammered 
him for not bombing five weeks ago. In an incredibly unseemly display, 
Trent Lott, the majority leader, and former Bush national security 
adviser Brent Scowcroft and Bush Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger 
chimed in on the attack. So here were Democrats standing strong on 
defense, arguing that the Republicans put America in a weakened position 
internationally by forcing through an impeachment vote during a military 
action. And here were Republicans giving their newly elected Speaker 
a standing ovation for his confession of serial adulteries. There's 
too much hate here. And I hate it. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>