<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0275 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The QE2 was docked at Casablanca in 1989 when Jeanie Bowers Scott, 
then performing on board as an opera singer, received a call from 
her husband, George. ``I bought a building for $13 million,'' he said, 
``and when you get back we are moving in with a bunch of college students.'' 
The Scotts did indeed move into 521 West 49th St. with 176 students. 
But Scott did not buy the building, since he did not have the $13 
million. Instead, he negotiated a lease-purchase agreement on the 
unoccupied apartment building; the purchase itself never came about. 
The landlord, who until then was having trouble renting in that area, 
furnished each apartment, and the Scotts, who had moved into the top 
floor, held an open house for representatives of local colleges that 
they knew were looking for off-campus dormitory space. The building 
was fully occupied in 90 days and a lucrative niche business was born 
_ a business that leases rooms in bulk from building owners and rents 
them to students. Today Educational Housing Services _ the largest 
provider of student housing, other than colleges and universities, 
in New York City _ manages three off-campus residences. The residences, 
with 1,958 beds, house close to 4,000 students over the course of 
a year from 22 institutions of higher education. Six hundred beds 
at the George Washington Hotel, at 23 Lexington Ave., are leased to 
the School of Visual Arts; the St. George Hotel in Brooklyn Heights 
accommodates 794 students from many schools, and 202 Tillary St. in 
downtown Brooklyn houses 160 students from 12 schools. Scott, a 52-year-old 
businessman, had foreseen a decade ago a growing need for safe, affordable 
dormitories. Today there are 630,000 students in the metropolitan 
area, according to a survey done for Student Advantage, a company 
that offers a variety of retail discounts. The Scotts' original building 
on West 49th Street near 10th Avenue was sold three years after it 
opened as a student residence and the 176 students had to be relocated 
in 30 days. Scott found alternative rooms in what he knew were ``underperforming 
buildings,'' many in grade B hotels, which he quickly renovated with 
fresh paint and new furniture. That established a pattern for Educational 
Housing Services. The company's largest source of rental space is 
still in B-level hotels. Scott does not own any of the properties, 
but negotiates long-term leases for large blocks of rooms, performs 
the necessary cosmetic makeovers and staffs them with experienced 
managers _ often with hotel management experience. The company is 
organized as a not-for-profit corporation. ``That allows us to borrow 
money for renovations at favorable rates, be approved by the New York 
State Dormitory Authority and not be bound by rent-stabilization laws,'' 
Scott said. Scott is president and chief executive of EHS and Ms. 
Scott is executive vice president. Their salaries this year total 
$277,500, Scott said. The business Scott runs is not uncommon in other 
parts of the country. GMH Associates of Wayne, Pa., is the largest 
provider of private student residences in the country, with 30,000 
beds for students in 17 states. It owns and manages residences for 
27 institutions of higher education. During the academic year EHS 
rents 60 percent of its units directly to schools under contract (40 
percent in the summer). The remainder of the beds are rented to students 
directly. To qualify for a room a student has to be enrolled in a 
school working toward a degree or certificate. Most of the students 
are referred to the company by the schools. Others come through the 
Internet (www.studenthousing.org) or through ads in The Village Voice. 
``We got 1,000 to 2,000 hits a week in the summer'' said Lindsay Baker, 
director of marketing for Educational Housing Services. ``We are 100 
percent rented now _ actually we are over-rented and have 100-150 
students on a waiting list.'' The rooms vary in price from $1,400 
a month for a large single in the studio building annex of the St. 
George to $680 a person in a three-bedroom in the same building. At 
the newly renovated property on Tillary Street, loft-style studio 
apartments are $775 a month for a single room to $725 each for a three-bed 
suite, which also has a kitchen. There is no minimum stay. Students 
attending a college in the metropolitan area for short-term projects 
or internships can rent by the week. According to state regulations 
there must be one residence director living in a dormitory building 
for every 25 undergraduates and one for every 40 graduate students. 
When schools contract for blocks of rooms, their own staff members 
reside with the students. The George Washington Hotel is subleased 
for 12 years to the School Of Visual Arts. Students abide by school 
regulations and pay dormitory fees directly to the college. The building 
also has 138 long-term hotel residents, who cannot be forced to move. 
But as their rooms are vacated, students can take them over. ``The 
rooms are small but you can have a single with its own bathroom,'' 
said Beau Mitallu, a third year fine arts student from Pittsburgh. 
He is one of 15 student resident assistants whose rent is paid for 
in exchange for supervising other students. His air-conditioned room 
is decorated with photos from home and wall-to-wall oil paintings 
from his classes, and, he said, for $75 a year ``I get a TV and cable.'' 
Every room in the EHS system is furnished, has its own bathroom, color 
cable TV and air-conditioning. The newest building on Tillary Street, 
an industrial site that was gutted and refitted to EHS specifications, 
also has data lines for computers. The Tillary Street building opened 
this semester. The eight floors were divided into 1,000-square-foot 
loft-style studios shared by three or four students. Some have private 
bedrooms for single-room requests. Each has minimal furnishings and 
a sleek new kitchen. Thirteen rooms on two floors were leased to Pratt 
Institute, which needed beds for 44 students this semester. ``We needed 
a stopgap while our new dormitories are being built,'' said Christopher 
Kasik, director of residential life and housing at Pratt. ``We were 
limited in terms of location and we like referring students to EHS 
because they are in the business of working with students and schools 
and have policies that are identical to colleges, as opposed to landlords 
who just rent space. ``It's not on-campus living but it's as close 
to the experience as possible,'' he said. The new apartments are more 
expensive than Pratt's own dormitories, for which a student pays an 
average of $550 a month. Pace University's 428 beds on its Manhattan 
campus were full this September when it contracted for 170 beds in 
the St. George Hotel in Brooklyn Heights. ``We have our own professional 
residence life person living in the building so that we can exercise 
some control,'' said Philomena Mantella, vice president of enrollment 
and student life at Pace. ``And we usually house upperclassmen or 
graduate students off campus.'' Ninety-eight students from Marymount 
Manhattan College are also housed at the St. George _ on four floors 
of their own. Leah Webb, a theater major, has just moved to New York 
from from Charlotte, N.C. ``Brooklyn Heights is a nice transition 
from a day at school in Manhattan,'' she said. ``Our hallway is really 
like a college dorm. People are in and out of your room constantly.'' 
Technical schools like the Institute of Audio Research for careers 
in broadcasting, the School for Film and Television and even Berlitz 
also house students with EHS. Scott, who never attended college, entered 
higher education as an administrator in 1972 at Robert Morris College 
in Chicago. Later, he moved to New York, where he worked at Tobe Coburn 
and then Katherine Gibbs, both two-year schools that give associate 
degrees in such fields as fashion and business. At the time of Scott's 
first foray into housing, he was vice president of the American Musical 
and Dramatic Academy, a small private performing arts school in Manhattan 
that had no residence facilities. ``Offering dormitory space turned 
the school around,'' Scott said. ``In two years, it went from 32 students 
to 300.'' In his five-year plan, Scott said, he hopes to find more 
rental buildings _ this time class B and C office structures below 
34th Street in Manhattan that now have high vacancy rates. He is also 
looking into expanding into other areas of the country, and even London. 
But for now he faces the very problem he set out to solve for others 
_ finding space in New York City that is affordable to college students. 
One neighborhood that he is now surveying is Brooklyn's Dumbo (Down 
Under the Manhattan Bridge). And, he says, New Jersey might be next. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>