<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0302 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Clinton declared Saturday afternoon that he intended to 
serve ``until the last hour of the last day of my term,'' in an appearance 
outside the Oval Office with his wife at his side and two busloads 
of congressional Democrats shoulder-to-shoulder behind him. Clinton 
called for a quick, ``Constitutional and fair means of resolving this 
matter'' and vowed ``to do the work of the American people.'' He never 
used the word impeachment, which friends say he fears will now be 
bound forever to his name. Then, as dusk darkened a gray, clammy day 
in Washington, the president grasped Hillary Rodham Clinton's hand 
and waded back through the Democrats to attend a meeting of his senior 
foreign policy advisers. He called off the airstrikes against Iraq 
that he launched Wednesday night, on the evening before the scheduled 
House debate on his impeachment. ``I am confident we have achieved 
our mission,'' Clinton said Saturday evening in a second statement 
to reporters, demonstrating to his supporters that he would resolutely 
perform his job despite all distractions _ but fueling suspicions 
of detractors that the raid was timed for political effect. A few 
of each group were clustered outside the iron gates of the White House 
Saturday evening, and their distant cries of support or protest could 
be heard just beyond the Rose Garden, where Clinton appeared with 
the Democrats in a stark display of the partisanship cleaving Washington. 
After announcing his decision on Iraq, Clinton donned black tie for 
a holiday dinner at the White House. That brought to a jarringly festive 
end his darkest day in an almost unimaginable sequence of events set 
in motion 20 years ago, when he and Mrs. Clinton signed papers on 
a money-losing land investment along the White River in the Ozark 
Mountains in Arkansas. It was while investigating that deal and related 
matters that Kenneth Starr, the independent prosecutor, learned of 
a possible presidential affair and lies under oath. And it was from 
the dining room off the Oval Office where president sometimes met 
with Monica Lewinsky that Clinton watched Saturday as the House voted 
on articles of impeachment against him. He missed the vote on Article 
I, aides said, because he was meeting in the Oval Office with a spiritual 
adviser, the Rev. Tony Campolo. As he watched, Clinton showed great 
interest in the handful of members who broke with their parties to 
support or oppose impeachment, advisers said. Vice President Al Gore 
entered the room during the fourth vote and said, ``It's not fair, 
what they've done to you,'' according to one aide who was present. 
Different friends and advisers sensed different emotions in Clinton 
over the last 24 hours: Some detected deep anger where others felt 
a wash of remorse. To many of his aides, nervously searching for signs 
of distraction or weakness, Clinton presented only the confident, 
upbeat face he has maintained through years of personal and political 
crisis. One aide found Clinton to be ``like a Calvin Klein ad: he's 
somewhere between obsession and denial.'' Uniformly, Clinton's friends 
and advisers said he is confident the Senate will not convict him, 
and that he will not resign. And uniformly, they said he is sick at 
heart about the ``politics of personal destruction,'' which he denounced 
from the White House lawn Saturday afternoon. ``We are a good and 
decent country,'' Clinton said in his five-minute remarks. ``But we 
have significant challenges we have to face. In order to do it right, 
we have to have some atmosphere of decency and civility, some presumption 
of good faith, some sense of proportionality and balance in bringing 
judgment who against those who are in different parties. We have important 
work to do.'' Though he had expected and had braced for the blow of 
impeachment, the president was still in for a shock Saturday morning, 
when he was told that Robert Livingston had stepped aside as House 
speaker after acknowledging extramarital affairs. ``What is happening?'' 
President Clinton asked in astonishment of an old friend, Terence 
McAuliffe, moments after learning the news. ``This is terrible for 
the country.'' In describing the telephone conversation later, McAuliffe 
said: ``The unfairness that the president has been subjected to, he 
doesn't want to see it happen to anybody else.'' Indeed, Clinton dispatched 
Joseph Lockhart, his press secretary, to tell reporters that he wished 
Livingston would reconsider. But Lockhart said Clinton had no intention 
of accepting Livingston's challenge from the House floor that he follow 
his example. ``He believes it would be wrong to give in to the politics 
of personal destruction,'' Lockhart said. Clinton's friends insist 
that he is deeply remorseful about his behavior. ``He has had a knot 
in his gut for months,'' McAuliffe said. ``He is in agony over this.'' 
But he kept to his normal routine Saturday, giving his weekly radio 
address, about Iraq, and cheerfully shaking hands with some 80 family 
members of aides who sat in. The president made only a glancing reference 
to any heartfelt contrition Saturday afternoon, saying, ``I have accepted 
responsibility for what I did wrong in my personal life, and I have 
invited members of Congress to work with us to find a reasonable bipartisan 
and proportionate response.'' By car and bus, the Democrats came to 
the White House after losing their battle to fend off impeachment. 
They attended a brief, private rally with Clinton in the East Room 
before strolling in clumps of two and three under the colonnade and 
past the Rose Garden, where a few white roses were in bloom, to wait 
for the president in front of a bare, spreading Saucer Magnolia tree. 
They jostled one another and some joked, until Rep. John Lewis of 
Georgia, standing with hands folded and brow furrowed in the front 
row, shushed them. Clinton emerged moments later from the Oval Office, 
brushing his cheeks before Mrs. Clinton slipped her right hand into 
the crook of his left arm and, smiling, descended with him along a 
curving path to join the Congressmen. Clinton appeared to choke up 
as Gore introduced him, declaring: ``I know his heart and his will.'' 
Then he stepped to the blue lectern affixed with the golden presidential 
seal and thanked the members for their ``defense of the Constitution 
and the best in America.'' He did not publicly thank Mrs. Clinton, 
who journeyed to the Hill this morning in a till-the-last-dog-dies 
defense of the president. But he clutched at her hand as they stepped 
from the podium, and he would not release it even as she reached up 
to hug one congressman. As the president re-entered the Oval Office, 
Betty Currie, his secretary and one of Starr's most prized witnesses, 
reached up to hug him and kissed him on the cheek. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>