<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0139 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Washington may be focused on only one thing, but in Corporate America 
the concern now centers on profits. Just in time for Christmas, a 
host of companies have been announcing plans to cut employment in 
the new year. Those cutbacks have had little effect on the unemployment 
rate, and are not likely to mar a truly joyful Christmas for the country's 
retailers. But they may be a harbinger of a weaker economy. Americans 
feel flush for the same reason that many companies are worried. The 
good news for consumers has come from falling commodity prices, which 
over all are at a 20-year low. Oil has led the way, but everything 
from wheat to copper is down. For users of such things, the declines 
have the same economic effect as a tax cut. But those who rely on 
these commodities for income _ or who rely on the people who rely 
on them _ are starting to suffer. There are layoffs by farm equipment 
makers, as well as by energy companies. Financial-service companies 
are worried about loans to countries, companies and individuals that 
are dependent on commodity sales. Many companies have found they cannot 
raise prices because of competition _ some of it from companies whose 
usual markets in Asia and Latin America are in recession _ but the 
tight labor market in this country is forcing them to pay more for 
workers. Real wages are rising at the fastest rate in decades, while 
corporate profits are beginning to fall. There are signs of overcapacity 
in many industries, so companies are cutting back on the high rate 
of investment in new plants and equipment that was seen in 1996 and 
1997. Since the Asian crisis began in the summer of 1997, forecasts 
about imminent trouble for the American and Western European economies 
have been consistently wrong. But next year could be a time when problems 
start to be felt more widely. The price of crude oil is now $11 a 
barrel, less than half the nearly $27 of two years ago. To get that 
much economic stimulus in 1999 and 2000, oil would have to plunge 
to $5, which seems unlikely. Nor will strong corporate investment 
continue to fuel growth. Few now fear recession, in large part because 
of faith in the Federal Reserve's economic omnipotence. The consensus 
may be right, but a recession in 1999 or 2000 would not be the first 
one to surprise economists. A rule of thumb in politics is that the 
president gets the credit or the blame for the economy whether or 
not he deserves either. A corollary is that it is far better for a 
president to take a recession early in a term, and thus get credit 
for the ensuing recovery, than it is to have a downturn that is fresh 
in voters' minds. Jimmy Carter and George Bush seemed to have weak 
economies when they sought re-election, and lost. Ronald Reagan took 
a severe recession early in his first term, but the economy was doing 
well by the time he faced re-election. Richard Nixon probably would 
have won in 1960 if the economic outlook had seemed brighter, and 
a recession in the next two years would, by that reasoning, be very 
bad news for Al Gore's hopes in 2000. Unless, that is, President Clinton 
and Gore can find someone else to take the fall. If the battle to 
remove Clinton winds through a good part of 1999 and coincides with 
economic and stock-market reversals, the Democrats will no doubt blame 
Republicans for putting the nation through such a spectacle. There 
is no guarantee that would work, but it might. If so, the Republicans 
in Congress would have accomplished a rare feat: by trying to throw 
out a popular president, they would have insulated his administration 
from blame for bad economic news that arrived on that president's 
watch. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>