<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0091 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the holy month of Ramadan began in the Islamic world, the United 
States and Britain on Saturday began a fourth day of strikes on Iraq 
after what they said had been a thunderous overnight assault that 
focused on President Saddam Hussein's Republican Guards. From the 
outset of the bombing on Wednesday, President Clinton said the United 
States was sensitive to carrying out strikes against an Arab state 
during the monthlong period of fasting and religious study. But the 
Pentagon's commanders also said that the start of Ramadan would not 
be a barrier, and as night fell in Iraq, Baghdad's air-raid sirens 
sounded once again and anti-aircraft fire burst in the air. The Clinton 
administration has said the strikes are intended to diminish Iraq's 
ability to produce weapons of mass destruction and threaten its neighbors. 
And the Pentagon said it has methodically been hitting, in wave after 
wave, targets designated for that purpose. But it has given little 
indication of what would define success and has not said when the 
raids would stop. A day after disclosing that the first strikes had 
severely damaged or destroyed only a portion of their targets, the 
Pentagon said Saturday that U.S. and British forces had struck roughly 
100 targets with more than 400 sea- and air-launched cruise missiles 
and thousands of tons of bombs from fighters and bombers. In his weekly 
radio address, delivered as the House deliberated his impeachment, 
Clinton said the attack was ``going well,'' but he gave no indication 
of when the strikes would end. He also indicated that even after the 
current strikes ended, the United States would again attack Iraq if 
Saddam's government tried to rebuild the chemical and biological weapons 
at the heart of its dispute with the U.N. weapons inspections. ``Where 
do we go from here?'' he said. ``We stand ready to use force again.'' 
A second aircraft carrier, the Carl Vinson, entered the Persian Gulf 
and moved into position to participate in a fourth day of strikes, 
joining the carrier Enterprise, whose F-14, F-18 and EA-6B jets have 
pounded Iraq for three days. Accompanying the Carl Vinson are six 
cruisers and destroyers able to fire still more Tomahawk cruise missiles. 
Even though the attacks resumed, officials at the Pentagon said the 
assault was winding down pretty much according to plan. Pentagon officials 
insisted Saturday that the preliminary assessments did not accurately 
portray the success of the attack. Many of the targets that received 
little or no damage have been struck again, a military official said. 
Officials said that several of the targets that were not entirely 
destroyed were moderately damaged, including many barracks and headquarters 
of the Republican Guards, one of the primary targets of the latest 
mission. The Guards, Saddam's elite troops, are considered a key element 
of his ability to maintain tight control over Iraq. U.S. cruise missiles 
also hit the headquarters of Saddam's Ba'ath Party in Baghdad, badly 
damaging it, Pentagon and British officials said. Iraq's refusal to 
allow U.N. weapons inspectors to inspect the building, suspected of 
containing documents and other materials related to Iraq's chemical 
and biological weapons, was one of the reasons the United States and 
Britain cited for targeting it. In Iraq, there were signs of destruction 
after the third night of the attack unleashed the most punishing strikes 
yet in Baghdad. Saddam's government again denounced the strikes and 
said they had shot down 23 of 60 cruise missiles fired into Baghdad 
overnight, a claim that the Pentagon discounted. Reflecting the diplomatic 
sensitivity of continuing the attack during Ramadan, a period of dawn-to-dusk 
fasting, Clinton prepared a videotaped address to be broadcast in 
the Arab world Saturday, explaining the U.S. rationale for striking 
Iraq. Declaring the ``most profound admiration for Islam,'' Clinton 
said Saddam's regime had disregarded the United Nations, other Arab 
states and his own people. ``In the days ahead, I hope all Muslims 
will consider Americans' sincere desire to work with all people in 
the Middle East to build peace,'' Clinton said in the videotape. Clinton's 
address was issued after the swelling anger in the region. President 
Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, one of the closest U.S. allies in the Arab 
world, called for an immediate halt to the strikes. In Syria, protesters 
attacked the U.S. and British embassies and the residence of the U.S. 
ambassador, Ryan Crocker. Marine guards at the U.S. Embassy in Damascus, 
largely emptied of staff, fired tear gas to disperse stone-throwing 
protesters, but three of them managed to scale the building, tear 
down the American flag and burn it. In London, George Robertson, Britain's 
defense secretary, said that the attacks, which included strikes by 
British Tornado jets, had hit 100 military and industrial targets 
and had caused ``substantial damage'' to Iraq's biological and chemical 
weapons programs and to the Republican Guards. U.S. and British jets 
also struck an oil refinery near Basra, in the south, that U.S. officials 
said was generating illicit profits for Saddam despite U.N. sanctions. 
While the United States and Britain have said overthrowing Saddam 
is not an objective, Robertson made it clear that the strikes on the 
Republican Guard were meant to weaken Saddam's control. ``If the Republican 
Guard ceases to support Saddam, his brutal regime is under immediate 
threat,'' Robertson said. ``We want the Republican Guard to know that 
the cozy life they have led under Saddam is under attack, and we think 
they have got that message very clearly.'' Prime Minister Tony Blair 
said he could not guarantee that the air assault would topple Saddam. 
But he added, ``It would be wonderful if Saddam could be removed from 
power.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>