<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0270 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When J. Dennis Hastert was first elected to Congress from Illinois 
in 1986, he quickly became a protege of Robert Michel, the moderate, 
gentlemanly Republican who led the party in the House in the years 
before it won control of Congress in 1994. But Hastert, a former high 
school government teacher and wrestling coach, owes his sudden status 
as front-runner in the unexpected race for speaker to his association 
in the last few years with a very different type of Republican leader, 
Rep. Tom DeLay of Texas, his party's whip. DeLay, No. 3 in the House 
Republican leadership and an unyielding conservative, is as emblematic 
as anyone of the bitter partisanship that now dominates the House, 
and he has a powerful and loyal base of support that he mobilized 
Saturday to back Hastert, his chief deputy, as speaker. Rep. Dick 
Armey of Texas, the majority leader, quickly endorsed Hastert as well, 
and Hastert's allies said he would have no trouble winning the votes 
he needed. Hastert's ability to make friends and win respect across 
the party's ideological, generational and regional divides, Republicans 
said, is the principal factor propelling him in a flash from obscurity 
toward the speakership. If he prevails, he will have to handle his 
own bruised and fractious caucus, help heal the wounds the House inflicted 
on itself during the impeachment proceedings, and assume the mantle 
of national leadership that would come with a post behind only the 
vice president in the line of constitutional succession to the presidency. 
``In my opinion, Denny Hastert is the best of all the people,'' Newt 
Gingrich, the departing speaker, told Republicans who gathered Saturday 
afternoon to plot strategy after the impeachment vote and Robert Livingston's 
decision to give up the position before he ever assumed it. Another 
Republican leaving Congress, Rep. Bill Paxon of New York, said Hastert 
was ``the kind of overarching figure that our party needs at this 
moment.'' In a statement, Hastert said the speakership was ``a calling 
I have not sought,'' but a ``duty I cannot ignore.'' The flip side 
of Hastert's wide acceptance among House Republicans is that he has 
no strong base of his own, almost no public visibility and no articulated 
agenda. Some Republicans said Hastert would have to overcome a perception 
that he was backed by DeLay and Armey precisely because he would leave 
them with considerable power. Indeed, neither DeLay nor Armey appeared 
to give any consideration to running for speaker themselves, apparently 
having concluded, as they did last month after Gingrich announced 
he was stepping down, that they would have a difficult time winning 
the needed support to move up from roles more suited to the hard-edged 
tactical politics they practice. Other possible rivals to Hastert 
for the speakership were leaving their options open Saturday afternoon. 
Rep. Christopher Cox of California, who had run against Livingston 
last month, said he was considering running again. Hastert is likely 
to be viewed with some suspicion by the party's right wing, which 
was a constant source of unrest during Gingrich's speakership and 
which may have sent the signals that led to Livingston's departure. 
Although he is reliably conservative on social issues like abortion, 
Hastert is best known for brokering deals, particularly on health 
care issues, the subject to which he has dedicated much of his time 
in the last few years. ``Denny is referred to as the coach, and he 
has the coach's ability to bring the team together in the locker room 
and motivate them to get things done,'' said a senior Republican aide 
in the House. ``I don't know that he's perceived ideologically one 
way or the other. He's a low-key, conciliatory fellow, quiet, unassuming 
and effective. He is able to bring people together.'' Hastert, who 
will turn 57 on Jan. 2, was a high school teacher and coach for 16 
years. He began his political career as a member of the Illinois Assembly 
from 1980 to 1986, when his party asked him to run for Congress. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>