<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0191 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For Seton Hall, it came down to playing with what you have. While 
Northwestern came into Continental Arena on Saturday with Evan Eschmeyer, 
one of the most experienced and solid big men in the nation, Seton 
Hall has a talented and tough backcourt that includes Rimas Kaukenas, 
the fourth-ranked 3-point shooter in the nation. When the Wildcats, 
behind Eschmeyer's inside play, threatened to upset the Pirates, it 
was Kaukenas who banked in a tough jumper and then buried a pair of 
3-point field goals to give Seton Hall back its composure and the 
lead. On the other end, it took a team effort, but the Pirates held 
Eschmeyer in check just enough to escape with their fifth consecutive 
victory, 63-52. Eschmeyer led all scorers with 22 points. But after 
converting a 3-point play with 11 minutes 29 seconds left in the game 
to give Northwestern a 44-42 lead, he scored only one more point, 
hitting one of two free throws with 1:20 remaining and the game out 
of reach. Gary Saunders led Seton Hall with 17 points and when the 
game was on the line, Kaukenas, who finished with 15 points, awoke. 
After Shaheen Holloway hit one of two free throws, Kaukenas, who entered 
the game hitting 65.2 percent from beyond the arc, drilled his first 
3-pointer of the game to put Seton Hall in front by 46-44. Eschmeyer 
then allowed an entry pass to slip out of bounds off his hands. Kaukenas 
hit another from 3-point range to stretch the lead to 49-44. With 
Duane Jordan providing a feisty defensive effort against Eschmeyer, 
as well as contributing 12 points, the Pirates were able to pull away, 
stretching the lead to as many as 13 in the closing minutes. The Pirates 
entered the game with a four-game winning streak, the school's longest 
in four years, and a 6-3 record, which included a victory at Syracuse 
in their last game. For Northwestern, the loss snapped a five-game 
winning streak and lowered its record to 5-2. With nearly as many 
NBA scouts in the stands as fans to see Eschmeyer, the Pirates were 
left with the difficult task of trying to control him with a short 
and shortened roster. Before the game, the Pirates announced that 
freshman center Damian Dawkins would be lost for the remainder of 
the season, leaving the 6-foot-10-inch Charles Manga as the only center 
on the roster and the only player taller than 6-7. Eschmeyer, a sixth-year 
senior, entered scoring 20.8 points a game. He had helped the Wildcats 
defeat the Pirates in each of the last two seasons, scoring 19 points 
and grabbing 18 rebounds last season and posting 18 points and 11 
rebounds in 1996. Manga did what he could and received help from the 
6-6 Jordan, who had done a solid job on Syracuse's Etan Thomas when 
Manga got in foul trouble. Manga worked feverishly, trying to muscle 
the 6-11, 255-pound Eschmeyer out of the post and deny him the ball. 
When that failed and Eschmeyer got the ball down low, the Pirates 
collapsed defenders around him, tempting the Wildcats to try to beat 
them from outside. In the first half, Eschmeyer had 12 points on 5-of-7 
shooting, but turned the ball over three times. It was not until Northwestern, 
which starts three freshmen and a sophomore alongside Eschmeyer, got 
some help for him from the outside that it was able to get into the 
game. The Pirates opened a 22-12 lead midway through the first half, 
but Northwestern inched back and took a 30-28 lead when Eschmeyer 
was double-teamed in the lane and found Joe Harmsen alone inside. 
The Wildcats took a 33-30 lead into the half. Dawkins had averaged 
3.2 points, 3.8 rebounds and 12.8 minutes of playing time over the 
first five games of the season. It was determined that the dizziness 
and migraine headaches he had been suffering may be related to a heart 
problem. Dawkins fainted in practice on Dec. 4 and has not been able 
to play since then. Dawkins returned home to Brampton, Ontario, to 
spend the holidays with his family and will return to school for the 
winter session. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>