<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0068 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The House Republican drive to impeach President Clinton, in the face 
of considerable evidence that the American public is firmly in Clinton's 
corner, would appear to be either astonishingly principled or stunningly 
ill-advised. It is hard to recall a moment in the nation's history 
when Congress so completely defied public sentiment, disregarding 
warnings about the political repercussions. But should the sight of 
the Republicans in the 105th Congress rallying around impeachment 
really have come as a surprise? The merits of the case against Clinton 
aside _ even many Democrats acknowledge that most Republicans are 
acting out of genuine conviction _ the outcome suddenly seems almost 
inevitable, given the political dynamics that rule this city today 
(and despite all those shrewd predictions to the contrary just a few 
weeks ago). If anything, the polls invoked by Democrats in arguing 
against impeachment, and by pundits in predicting that it never would 
happen, obscured rather than illuminated what was taking place on 
Capitol Hill as the lawmakers began to cast their votes on impeachment. 
The polls failed to account for the forces that shaped the president's 
catastrophic week: the depth of Republican anger at Clinton, the tepidness 
of the nation's support for him and, most of all, the fact that when 
it comes to Congress, all politics really is local. Consider the polls. 
There is a huge gap between the public and congressional Republicans 
in their views both of Clinton and the penalty he should pay for his 
attempts to cover up his liaison with Monica Lewinsky. The public 
has been unwavering in its opposition to impeachment _ two-thirds 
oppose it, according to the most recent New York Times/CBS Poll, completed 
Thursday night. Clinton's approval rating remains as robust as ever, 
and the public's view of Republicans is as low as it's been in the 
14 years that the Times/CBS Poll has been asking the question. But 
these are national polls, and when it comes to the actual districts 
that members of Congress represent, and where they have to run, opinions 
about Clinton can be quite different. ``When you actually break it 
down, probably 180 Republican districts _ 180 out of 228 _ are solidly 
Republican districts, and they would be solidly anti-Clinton districts,'' 
said Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., who advocated censure instead of impeachment. 
``In those 180 districts, there's no damage in voting for impeachment. 
In fact, it would be very popular.'' David Moore, the managing editor 
of the Gallup Poll, said his polls consistently found a sharp partisan 
division on impeachment: Republicans, particularly conservative ones, 
and the people most likely to actually vote, were the most vigorous 
advocates of Clinton's removal from office. That district-by-district 
variance with national sentiment offers an explanation for the reaction 
of some Republican House members to the notion they were defying public 
opinion. ``Please don't let anyone suggest that public opinion wasn't 
weighed in the final decision,'' said Rep. Sherwood Boehlert of New 
York, one of the last of the moderate Republicans to come out in favor 
of impeachment. ``I certainly gave public opinion from the people 
I represent thought and consideration. But what do you do when public 
opinion is evenly divided, give or take a few points? We do what we 
were elected to do. Deliberate. Consult. Consider. Vote.'' Beyond 
that, for the Republicans who considered their decision in purely 
political terms _ not something that anyone was publicly admitting 
last week _ the case for impeachment was even more compelling. Republicans 
who voted against impeachment were explicitly defying the position 
of the congressional leadership. They were inviting retribution from 
the domineering right wing of the Republican party: a primary challenger 
in two years or a drying up of campaign contributions. And this Democratic 
president was particularly ill-equipped to counter those pressures. 
Clinton has throughout his career done better with voters than with 
legislators, and he has had especially bad relations with Congress. 
There are many Republicans in this Congress, which has always been 
fiercely partisan, who think Clinton has simply been caught doing 
before a grand jury what he has been doing to Congress and the public 
for years. The Judiciary Committee portrait of the president as fundamentally 
dishonest simply gave legal force to their own view of Clinton. ``They 
have a deep animosity to Clinton,'' said the Rev. Robert Drinan, a 
former Democratic congressman from Massachusetts who is a law professor 
at Georgetown University. ``And more and more I think it's cultural. 
These people say that Clinton is responsible for abortion and homosexuality. 
They just dump on him.'' To make matters worse for Clinton, his own 
support seems, while broad, perfunctory. There is no evidence of a 
fervor that may have made Republicans think twice. ``They are firm 
in their view that he should not go,'' said Andrew Kohut, director 
of the Pew Research Center for People and the Press. ``But I do not 
think they are emotionally involved with him.'' Lowell Weicker, the 
former Connecticut senator who was one of the first Republicans in 
1974 to urge the impeachment of Richard M. Nixon, and who supports 
Clinton's impeachment, said the president's position in the polls 
was a testimony more to the way women and minorities viewed the Republican 
Party than to Clinton himself. ``If you are women, if you are a minority, 
why would you want to kick out a man that you perceive as your friend 
and put yourself in the hands of a political party governed by the 
religious right?'' Weicker said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>