<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0057 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After rising since the early 1990s, the use of marijuana and other 
drugs by teen-agers may be ebbing, however modestly, according to 
a new survey that is considered the most reliable gauge of substance 
abuse among secondary school students. The annual survey of nearly 
50,000 students around the country, titled Monitoring the Future, 
was conducted at the Institute for Social Research at the University 
of Michigan and released on Friday. Though the levels of drug and 
alcohol use remain higher than they were several years ago, the survey 
reported, all grades that were studied showed a slight but often statistically 
significant drop in overall drug use in the previous 12 months. Last 
year, the institute's researchers found use of illicit drugs declining 
only among eighth-graders. That trend continued this year, and drug 
use declined slightly among 10th- and 12th-graders, as well. ``I think 
this is the best news we've had to bring the country in some years,'' 
the principal researcher, Lloyd Johnston, said in a telephone interview. 
``Young people seem to be appreciating more fully the dangers of various 
drugs, including alcohol and cigarettes.'' The overwhelming majority 
of adolescent drug use involves marijuana, which remained widespread. 
This year, 49 percent of 12th-graders and 22 percent of eighth-graders 
sampled said that they had tried marijuana. But the number of 12th-graders 
who smoked marijuana in the previous month declined to 22.8 percent 
from 23.7 percent, while the number of eighth-graders using it dropped 
to 9.7 percent from 10.2 percent. The decline in regular use was more 
noticeable among 10th-graders: 18.7 percent had smoked marijuana in 
the previous month, compared with 20.5 percent a year ago. ``We certainly 
are not back to levels at the beginning of the '90s and it's too soon 
to trumpet victory,'' Johnston said, ``but certainly it's very encouraging 
news that this upward trend has finally begun to reverse.'' The use 
of harder drugs, notably heroin and cocaine, remained statistically 
small and appeared to level off or decline for most groups surveyed. 
Among high school seniors, 2 percent acknowledged experimenting with 
heroin, marginally down from 2.1 percent a year ago. But 9.3 percent 
said they had tried cocaine at some point, compared with 8.7 percent 
last year. Asked about their use in the previous 30 days, 2.4 percent 
of the seniors said they had snorted or smoked cocaine, compared with 
2.3 percent a year ago. And 0.5 percent said they had used heroin 
in the previous month, a statistic unchanged from last year. Alcohol, 
primarily beer, remains the substance most frequently abused by teen-agers, 
though even its use declined. Among eighth-graders, 23 percent said 
they had drunk alcohol in the previous month, compared with 24.5 percent 
last year. Among 10th-graders, monthly alcohol use dropped to 38.8 
percent from 40.1 percent. But 8.2 percent of eighth-graders admitted 
getting drunk in the previous month, a slight rise from the 8 percent 
who reported doing so a year ago. Among high school seniors, 32.9 
percent said they had been drunk in the previous month, compared with 
34.2 percent last year. The survey also showed tobacco use down slightly. 
Johnston and his fellow researchers, Jerald Bachman and Patrick O'Malley, 
attributed the changes in drug-seeking behavior to a reassessment 
by teen-agers of the risks and to stronger expressions of concern 
by parents and other adults. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>