<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0032 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After scoring five or more goals in five straight games, the Devils 
regressed on offense Friday night. They played below their standard 
defensively, as well, and the result was that their 10-game unbeaten 
streak at Continental Arena ended in a 5-2 loss to the Calgary Flames. 
Afterward, the Devils' reaction indicated that a game like this one 
was going to happen sooner or later. It happened sooner, and it came 
on a night when the Devils were lackadaisical in their approach to 
defense. ``Even in the games we won, we didn't play good defense,'' 
Patrik Elias said of the Devils' scoring binge in the previous five 
games, which produced 28 goals. ``We gave them too many chances,'' 
said Lyle Odelein, the reliable defenseman. ``We got caught too many 
times.'' Scott Stevens and Bobby Holik scored for the Devils, who 
are now 18-8-3. The Devils dominated the game for the most part, but 
were able to convert only two of the 38 shots they fired at Jean-Sebastien 
Giguere. Although several Devils players agreed that the defensive 
effort was not up to their standards, Coach Robbie Ftorek said he 
was satisfied with his players' performance. Ftorek admitted, however, 
that his team's overall defense needed to improve. ``We have to be 
a little bit tighter back there,'' he said. The chief victim of the 
poor defensive play was Chris Terreri, who lost for the first time 
in his fifth start in goal. Terreri, who played for only the second 
time in the last 15 games, allowed two goals to Cory Stillman and 
one each to Clarke Wilm, Dave Roche and Theo Fleury. The Devils were 
so loose on defense that Stillman's second goal came on a two-on-none 
breakaway. Terreri was in goal when the Devils turned up their offense 
with seven goals in a victory over the Islanders on Dec. 5, which 
touched off the recent scoring burst. The Devils also allowed five 
games that night, and a total of 20 during the five-game binge. Friday 
night Terreri did not face a shot until the midway point of the first 
period as the Flames came out with very little spunk, enabling the 
Devils to take control early. The slow start by the Flames could be 
attributed to fatigue after their previous night's game in Philadelphia, 
when they earned a 3-3 deadlock with the Flyers by scoring all their 
goals in the third period. The Devils forged in front Friday when 
a shot by Stevens from the right circle, just 57 seconds into the 
game, hit the inside of the left post and landed in the net. Calgary 
capitalized on its first manpower advantage and tied the game on Stillman's 
11th goal of the season. It came at 13 minutes 43 seconds on a deflection 
from the low slot of a shot by Fleury. In an almost identical scoring 
manner, Holik earned a goal on the Devils' first manpower advantage 
by deflecting Dave Andreychuk's shot in the low slot to give New Jersey 
a 2-1 advantage at the first intermission. It was the sixth consecutive 
game in which Holik scored a goal, tying the franchise mark shared 
by Valery Zelepukin, Pat Verbeek and Kirk Muller. The Flames tied 
the score again 3:43 into the second period, this time on Wilm's third 
goal of the season. Wilm got behind Denis Pederson on the right and 
barely beat Terreri under the right skate. Pederson was the center 
of the Devils' checking line because Bob Carpenter missed his second 
game in the last four, this one with a bruised foot that most likely 
will keep him out of the game at Montreal on Saturday night. Some 
loose checking by the Devils in their zone cost them when Roche scored 
for Calgary with 4:46 left in the second period. He beat Terreri from 
close range to put the Flames in the lead, 3-2. They sealed the victory 
with third-period goals by Fleury and Stillman. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>