<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0324 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Rep. Robert Livingston, who rocked the House on Thursday with his 
revelation that he had had adulterous affairs, stunned the Capitol 
again Saturday by saying that he would not serve as speaker and would 
quit Congress in six months. Republicans moved swiftly to fill the 
leadership vacuum and by Saturday night, Rep. Dennis Hastert of Illinois, 
an affable conservative who is perceived as a pragmatist, was the 
all-but-acclaimed successor. Livingston jolted his colleagues, standing 
in the well of the House he has served for two decades and outlining 
his reasons why he would vote to impeach President Clinton, when he 
veered unexpectedly into calling on the president to resign. This 
drew boos and catcalls from Democrats who shouted that he should quit 
instead. He then did just that. ``I was prepared to lead our narrow 
majority as speaker, and I believe I had it in me to do a fine job,'' 
he said. ``But I cannot do that job or be the kind of leader that 
I would like to be under the current circumstances. So I must set 
the example that I hope President Clinton will follow. I will not 
stand for speaker of the House on Jan. 6.'' The move was so unexpected 
that it momentarily eclipsed, at least in the House, both the vote 
to impeach the president, which had seemed inevitable for days, and 
the bombing in Iraq, which was deemed so momentous this week that 
the House postponed its vote on impeachment until Saturday. Members 
were reeling from sensory overload as they staggered off the House 
floor in between the four impeachment votes. ``There have been so 
many bombshells,'' said Rep. Michael Castle, a Delaware Republican. 
``We have bombshells in Baghdad and we have bombshells in the House 
of Representatives. You can't turn your back for 10 seconds.'' Members 
were surprised not only by Livingston's gesture but by its timing, 
leaving the Republicans and the House with no leader in the midst 
of a process that could result in the removal of the president from 
office. The speaker is second in line to the presidency after the 
vice president. Next in line is the president pro tempore of the Senate, 
who at the moment is Sen. Strom Thurmond, the 96-year-old Republican 
from South Carolina. Both sides in the impeachment debate sought quickly 
to exploit Livingston's resignation. Republicans who favored impeaching 
Clinton pointed to Livingston as an example of courage and said the 
president should likewise put the country first and resign. ``He understood 
what this debate was all about _ it's about honor and decency and 
integrity and the truth,'' said Rep. Tom DeLay, the majority whip. 
Democrats, fearing that Livingston's resignation could escalate calls 
for Clinton to quit too, immediately pleaded with Livingston to reconsider 
and cast him as a good man destroyed by a savage system. In a stirring 
speech applauded even by Republicans, Rep. Dick Gephardt of Missouri, 
the Democratic leader, praised Livingston as a ``worthy, good and 
honorable man'' and said his resignation was a grave mistake. ``It's 
a terrible capitulation to the negative political forces that are 
consuming our political system and our country,'' he said. Rep. Jerry 
Nadler, Democrat of New York, said of the resignation: ``It is a surrender 
to a developing sexual McCarthyism. Are we going to have a new test 
if someone wants to run for public office _ are you now or have you 
ever been an adulterer?'' Asked if the president would follow Livingston's 
example, Joe Lockhart, Clinton's spokesman, said: ``The president 
is going to do what's in the best interest of the country. It would 
be wrong to give in to this insidious politics of personal destruction.'' 
Hastert began lobbying on the House floor within moments of Livingston's 
resignation. By late afternoon, Hastert had the public backing of 
the current leadership, including Reps. Dick Armey and DeLay of Texas 
and Newt Gingrich, the current speaker. About 100 members, including 
conservatives like Steve Largent of Oklahoma and a few moderates like 
Castle, declared their support for him Saturday night after he assured 
them that he had no skeletons in his closet. Livingston's decision 
was so sudden that even Hastert, according to aides, did not know 
of his plans when he left the Capitol at 11 p.m. Friday. Leaders were 
eager to fend off fears that a leadership shakeup, following several 
weeks of upheaval after the disappointing Nov. 3 midterm elections, 
would further destabilize the Republicans as they try to control the 
House with the slimmest majority in years. By evening, Rep. Christopher 
Cox of California had decided not to challenge Hastert for the speakership. 
In a sign of the Republicans' division, the party could not even agree 
when to pick a new speaker. At a closed meeting shortly after the 
impeachment votes were counted, 60 Republicans voted to hold a new 
election for speaker on Tuesday; 61 voted to hold it Jan. 5, a day 
before Congress returns and was to install Livingston. Most members 
left town with no intention of returning before January, but leadership 
aides said that Hastert had the speakership ``wrapped up.'' Technically, 
Gingrich remains speaker until Jan. 6, but he has folded his tent 
and removed removed himself from the daily operations of the House. 
DeLay, the No. 3 in the House Republican leadership, was expected 
to fill the power vacuum at least temporarily, indeed if not in title. 
He said he would not run for speaker because that would force him 
to move from Texas to Washington, which would make him ineligible 
to keep his foster children. But DeLay is viewed as too partisan to 
step into the role of speaker, and Armey is viewed as too weak. On 
Friday, Larry Flynt, publisher of Hustler, the sex magazine, told 
a news conference in Los Angeles that his investigators had found 
four women who said they had been involved with Livingston over the 
last 10 years. Flynt, who said he wanted to expose the ``hypocrisy'' 
on Capitol Hill, had offered $1 million to anyone who could prove 
sexual indiscretions by members of Congress. ``Nothing makes me happier,'' 
Flynt said in a statement Saturday, ``than to think I might have contributed 
to the resignation of that right-wing radical.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>