<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0049 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The scenes were gnawingly familiar: the video-gamelike renderings 
of air strikes, the beribboned generals with their maps and pointers, 
the unshaven Iraqis gaping into craters dug by U.S. cruise missiles. 
It was so routine, in fact, that this latest act of war against Iraq 
hardly delayed the debate in the House of Representatives over impeachment 
of a sitting U.S. president. And yet because this U.S.-Iraqi contest 
of cat and mouse has occurred so often in the past eight years without 
vexing, let alone trapping, the mouse _ there, once again, was a smiling, 
sinister Saddam Hussein clad in his natty foulards or his field marshal's 
epaulets _ many are asking a broader set of questions this time around. 
What is the endgame? What is the long-term strategy? How many more 
times can this happen? In fact, while this bombing campaign has looked 
like a larger version of half a dozen previous ones aimed at forcing 
Saddam to abide by United Nations resolutions or to back away from 
allied protected zones, President Clinton and Congress have called 
it something much more significant. This, they say, is the first salvo 
in a campaign to remove Saddam and install a government more democratic 
and less dangerous. And while analysts and officials here and abroad 
applaud such goals, they wonder whether such a policy shift goes beyond 
the rhetorical. They are quick to point out that even if the Americans 
are serious, the task is enormous not only because of Saddam's continuing 
grip on power but because of the political culture of the Iraq he 
has built over the last three decades. Any serious new government 
would have to come from Iraq's professional and middle classes. Yet 
it is these people who have been the direct beneficiaries of the universities, 
bridges, roads and secular, modernized structure that Saddam has created. 
That makes them, paradoxically, the ones with most to lose if he departs. 
They are also the ones who have suffered most from U.S.-led international 
sanctions against the country, watching their fixed government salaries 
disappear and selling their artwork and appliances for a pittance 
to feed their families. The urban poor are used to scraping by, and 
villagers can _ and do _ turn back to farming. The urban middle class 
has truly felt punished. And given the divided and ineffectual foreign-based 
Iraqi opposition, the fierce mistrust of U.S. intentions felt across 
the Arab world, and the fear of Iraqi middle classes that the first 
result of any coup would be to bring the pent-up wrath of northern 
Kurds and southern Shiites down on them, the challenge of installing 
a new government becomes clear. Many people point to the continuing 
international trade sanctions as the first problem. ``There is a sort 
of naivete about sanctions bringing democracy to Iraq,'' said Denis 
Halliday, the Irish U.N. official who ran the oil-for-food program 
in Iraq until quitting this year, declaring that sanctions amounted 
to a ``declaration of war against the Iraqi people.'' He and Unicef 
officials say the lack of spare parts for the electric, sewer and 
water networks are contributing to the deaths of more than 6,000 infants 
a month there. While the West blames Saddam for those deaths, most 
Iraqis, while not pleased with their president, blame the West. Clovis 
Maksoud, a former Arab League ambassador to the United Nations and 
now a professor at American University in Washington, agreed, saying: 
``There is a deep dissociation with Saddam in Iraq. But when they 
are attacked by the Americans, they rally around the flag, and he 
happens to be the flag.'' Even analysts who urge the United States 
to actively promote a coup against Saddam and consider the sanctions 
a useful form of pressure on the regime say getting to the dictator 
will be extremely difficult physically and politically. ``Nobody admires 
him anymore, but most Iraqis still accept and support him,'' said 
Amatzia Baram, an Israeli specialist on Iraq from Haifa University 
who is spending the year in Washington. ``The only hope is to separate 
him from his power base, prove to his power base that life is more 
dangerous with him than without him. That is part of the point of 
these bombings.'' Others counter that the bombings have little effect 
on people accustomed to suffering, that they view the missiles the 
way a drowning man might see rain. Saddam's power base consists largely 
of portions of the Sunni Muslim tribes and clans in central Iraq. 
And while it is true that a majority of Kurds in the north and Shiite 
Muslims in the south are sick of him and his rule, the chances of 
a rebellion even by them are widely viewed as slim. Opposition groups 
do not exist in any organized fashion within Iraq. Those on the outside 
have been heavily infiltrated by the regime or are so splintered and 
inept as to offer almost no hope for a coherent replacement regime. 
It is also entirely unclear how most Iraqis would respond to a transparently 
U.S.-led putsch. One frequently heard criticism of the Iraqi National 
Congress, the main umbrella opposition group based in London, is that 
it is a spineless vassal of the CIA. ``No self-respecting Iraqi would 
stand up with the United States when his country is being attacked 
in this fashion,'' asserted an Iraqi businessman and intellectual 
who is known in Iraq as an opponent of the regime and spoke on the 
condition of anonymity since he continues to live there. ``How can 
you side with forces bent on destroying not just the regime but a 
whole country?'' For many Iraqis, relying on the United States to 
replace Saddam would be the equivalent of Palestinians asking Israeli 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to save them. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>