<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0269 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
These are the 10 lawmakers, five Republicans and five Democrats, who 
broke party ranks on the crucial first vote on impeachment to charge 
President Clinton with lying to a federal grand jury. Republicans 
who voted against impeachment: CHRISTOPHER SHAYS, Conn., 53. Elected 
in August 1987 in a special election. For much of his 11 years in 
Congress, he has been a champion of reform and moderate causes, challenging 
the conservative members of his party on issues from abortion to gun 
control to campaign finance reform. But his conservative credentials 
are never in doubt; he remains a loyalist to Speaker Newt Gingrich 
and supports fiscally conservative policies. CONSTANCE MORELLA, Md., 
67. Elected in 1986. A liberal Republican on issues like gun control 
and abortion, her conservative thinking is most evident on economic 
issues. She faced a well-financed Democratic challenger this fall 
who accused her of moving to the right. She won re-election with 60 
percent of the vote. PETER KING, N.Y., 54. Elected in 1992. He shuns 
the label ``moderate.'' He is proud to have received a 100 percent 
rating from the Christian Coalition and is unabashed about opposing 
abortion, affirmative action, bilingual education, gun control and 
anything that smells like a ``good government'' proposal. AMO HOUGHTON, 
N.Y., 72. Elected in 1986. A leading moderate Republican who has a 
reputation as one of the nicest members of Congress. He is one of 
the creators of a weekend-long retreat to promote civility in the 
House. He has been a leading critic of Independent Counsel Kenneth 
Starr's investigation of Clinton, but supported the opening of the 
impeachment inquiry by the House. MARK SOUDER, Ind., 48. Elected in 
1994. Although he voted against impeaching the president for perjury, 
he voted in favor of the third article approved by the House Saturday, 
which charges the president with obstruction of justice. He has been 
a voice for conservative issues in the House and comes from a heavily 
Republican district. He has also displayed an independent streak by 
opposing Gingrich in the 1996 budget negotiations. Democrats who voted 
for impeachment: GENE TAYLOR, Miss., 45. Elected in October 1989 in 
a special election. As a Southern white Democrat, he is part of a 
dwindling political breed in Congress. He has a fiscally conservative 
voting record and has distanced himself as far as possible from Washington 
Democrats who are disdained in southern Mississippi. In 1996 he announced 
he would not support the re-election of Clinton. PAUL MCHALE, Pa., 
48. Elected in 1992, he did not run for re-election this year. He 
supported Clinton enthusiastically in both the 1992 and 1996 elections 
and voted for Clinton's positions about 75 percent of the time. In 
August he became the first House Democrat to call on Clinton to resign. 
In November he offered a censure resolution as an alternative to impeachment. 
RALPH HALL, Texas, 75. Elected in 1980. Throughout his career in Congress 
he has been a staunchly conservative Democrat who regularly sides 
with the Republicans. He supported substantial portions of the Republicans' 
Contract With America in 1995. CHARLES STENHOLM, Texas, 60. Elected 
in 1978. The 10-term Democrat has emphasized conservative issues and 
political independence in his increasingly Republican district. He 
often bucks his own party on such issues as federal spending and abortion 
rights, voting with Clinton about half the time. VIRGIL GOODE JR., 
Va., 52. Elected in 1996. First won election by campaigning as an 
old-fashioned conservative on such issues as guns, abortion and tobacco 
while appealing to more liberal constituents with his support for 
civil rights and federal support for education. Like the other Democrats 
voting in favor of impeachment, he was one of the 31 Democrats who 
voted to open the impeachment inquiry. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>