<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0050 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The scenes were gnawingly familiar: the video-gamelike renderings 
of air strikes, the beribboned generals with their maps and pointers, 
the unshaven Iraqis gaping into craters dug by U.S. cruise missiles. 
It was so routine, in fact, that this latest act of war against Iraq 
hardly delayed the debate in the House of Representatives over impeachment 
of a sitting U.S. president. And yet because this U.S.-Iraqi contest 
of cat and mouse has occurred so often in the past eight years without 
vexing, let alone trapping, the mouse _ there, once again, was a smiling, 
sinister Saddam Hussein clad in his natty foulards or his field marshal's 
epaulets _ many are asking a broader set of questions this time around. 
What is the endgame? What is the long-term strategy? How many more 
times can this happen? In fact, while this bombing campaign has looked 
like a larger version of half a dozen previous ones aimed at forcing 
Saddam to abide by United Nations resolutions or to back away from 
allied protected zones, President Clinton and Congress have called 
it something much more significant. This, they say, is the first salvo 
in a campaign to remove Saddam and install a government more democratic 
and less dangerous. And while analysts and officials here and abroad 
applaud such goals, they wonder whether such a policy shift goes beyond 
the rhetorical. They are quick to point out that even if the Americans 
are serious, the task is enormous not only because of Saddam's continuing 
grip on power but because of the political culture of the Iraq he 
has built over the last three decades. Any serious new government 
would have to come from Iraq's professional and middle classes. Yet 
it is these people who have been the direct beneficiaries of the universities, 
bridges, roads and secular, modernized structure that Saddam has created. 
That makes them, paradoxically, the ones with most to lose if he departs. 
They are also the ones who have suffered most from U.S.-led international 
sanctions against the country, watching their fixed government salaries 
disappear and selling their artwork and appliances for a pittance 
to feed their families. The urban poor are used to scraping by, and 
villagers can _ and do _ turn back to farming. The urban middle class 
has truly felt punished. And given the divided and ineffectual foreign-based 
Iraqi opposition, the fierce mistrust of U.S. intentions felt across 
the Arab world, and the fear of Iraqi middle classes that the first 
result of any coup would be to bring the pent-up wrath of northern 
Kurds and southern Shiites down on them, the challenge of installing 
a new government becomes clear. Many people point to the continuing 
international trade sanctions as the first problem. ``There is a sort 
of naivete about sanctions bringing democracy to Iraq,'' said Denis 
Halliday, the Irish U.N. official who ran the oil-for-food program 
in Iraq until quitting this year, declaring that sanctions amounted 
to a ``declaration of war against the Iraqi people.'' He and Unicef 
officials say the lack of spare parts for the electric, sewer and 
water networks are contributing to the deaths of more than 6,000 infants 
a month there. While the West blames Saddam for those deaths, most 
Iraqis, while not pleased with their president, blame the West. Clovis 
Maksoud, a former Arab League ambassador to the United Nations and 
now a professor at American University in Washington, agreed, saying: 
``There is a deep dissociation with Saddam in Iraq. But when they 
are attacked by the Americans, they rally around the flag, and he 
happens to be the flag.'' Even analysts who urge the United States 
to actively promote a coup against Saddam and consider the sanctions 
a useful form of pressure on the regime say getting to the dictator 
will be extremely difficult physically and politically. ``Nobody admires 
him anymore, but most Iraqis still accept and support him,'' said 
Amatzia Baram, an Israeli specialist on Iraq from Haifa University 
who is spending the year in Washington. ``The only hope is to separate 
him from his power base, prove to his power base that life is more 
dangerous with him than without him. That is part of the point of 
these bombings.'' Others counter that the bombings have little effect 
on people accustomed to suffering, that they view the missiles the 
way a drowning man might see rain. Saddam's power base consists largely 
of portions of the Sunni Muslim tribes and clans in central Iraq. 
And while it is true that a majority of Kurds in the north and Shiite 
Muslims in the south are sick of him and his rule, the chances of 
a rebellion even by them are widely viewed as slim. Opposition groups 
do not exist in any organized fashion within Iraq. Those on the outside 
have been heavily infiltrated by the regime or are so splintered and 
inept as to offer almost no hope for a coherent replacement regime. 
It is also entirely unclear how most Iraqis would respond to a transparently 
U.S.-led putsch. One frequently heard criticism of the Iraqi National 
Congress, the main umbrella opposition group based in London, is that 
it is a spineless vassal of the CIA. ``No self-respecting Iraqi would 
stand up with the United States when his country is being attacked 
in this fashion,'' asserted an Iraqi businessman and intellectual 
who is known in Iraq as an opponent of the regime and spoke on the 
condition of anonymity since he continues to live there. ``How can 
you side with forces bent on destroying not just the regime but a 
whole country?'' For many Iraqis, relying on the United States to 
replace Saddam would be the equivalent of Palestinians asking Israeli 
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to save them. According to this 
view, the United States cannot countenance the prospect of a rich, 
powerful Arab country capable of challenging U.S. and Israeli primacy 
in the region. Iraq, with its vast oil reserves, ancient culture, 
fertile midlands and sophisticated technology, is simply too threatening. 
So keeping Saddam weak and in office is the best alternative; the 
United States would make sure that any new government would serve 
U.S. interests first. Many Arabs also say they were grievously offended 
by all the decorous talk of bombing before the onset of the holy month 
of Ramadan this weekend, as if hurrying to bomb Muslims before Ramadan 
was a way of showing respect. The result of all this suspicion, fueled 
by howls of ``double standard'' regarding U.S. policy toward Israel 
and the Arabs, is that even Iraqi opposition figures who believe that 
their hope is in Washington worry about the appearance of that relationship. 
``We tell the Americans, `Don't hug us too tight,' '' said Ghassan 
Atiyyah, editor of the London-based Iraqi File, an opposition publication. 
Last month, Congress earmarked nearly $100 million for opposition 
groups, a sum that seems princely until placed against the hundreds 
of millions spent on military attacks this past week. Atiyyah met 
with U.S. officials some weeks ago to urge them to finance the establishment 
of a new Iraqi opposition group in exile, what he calls a ``council 
of wise men,'' that would draw on all sectors of Iraqi society in 
exile. While the Iraqi National Congress has Kurds, Shiites and Sunnis, 
Atiyyah said that ``the INC may have been an umbrella group, but it 
is now an umbrella with too many holes in it that can't cover anything.'' 
He says the opposition groups are missing the link to the Iraqi center, 
both geographical and political. There is an acute need for moderate, 
liberal and secular opposition figures, members of the middle class, 
as well as Iraqis who come from the geographical middle of the country. 
The aim of such a group, he said, would be ``Iraqism,'' a melting 
pot nationalism for all the country's ethnic and tribal groups. The 
irony _ although it is perhaps also the strength _ of such a goal 
is that it mirrors Saddam's own accomplishments. So even the many 
Iraqis who despise their president worry that without him the nation 
would fall apart, that Muslim fundamentalists, aided by neighboring 
Iran, would gain undue influence. ``Removing Saddam would only be 
a first step in dealing with most of these issues, even if Saddam 
can be removed,'' argued Anthony Cordesman of the Center for Strategic 
and International Studies in Washington. Any leader following Saddam, 
he said, would have to maintain ``at least a quasi-authoritarian regime'' 
to prevent deterioration into tribal bloodshed. There is also the 
risk that assassination of Saddam would simply lead to a takeover 
by one of his two brutish sons or by his chief bodyguard and other 
close lieutenants, changing things not at all. Most Iraqis within 
the country lack any real sense of political alternatives. Maksoud, 
the former Arab League ambassador, speaks of their ``political illiteracy'' 
and Atiyyah, the London opposition figure, asserts that ``almost anyone 
who can think clearly has left the country already.'' But others say 
this is untrue. Iraq is not an underdeveloped country. Per capita, 
it has long had more engineers, scholars, writers and professionals 
than any other Arab state. It is probably not an accident that its 
scientists are the ones in the Arab world who produced such an arsenal 
of weapons. ``Iraq is not Ethiopia or Somalia,'' said Radwan Abdallah, 
a Jordanian political scientist. ``There is still an intelligentsia 
and middle class there. It has enormous resources. To change things 
requires a great deal of planning, energy and effort. You need a strong 
outside hand. But it is a country with talent and organizational skills. 
It is certainly not beyond hope.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>