<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
William Jefferson Clinton was impeached on charges of perjury and 
obstruction of justice Saturday by a divided House of Representatives, 
which recommended virtually along party lines that the Senate remove 
the nation's 42nd president from office. A few hours after the vote, 
Clinton, surrounded by Democrats, walked into the South Lawn of the 
White House, his wife, Hillary, on his arm, to pre-empt calls for 
his resignation. The man who in better days had debated where he would 
stand in the pantheon of American presidents said he would stay in 
office and vowed ``to go on from here to rise above the rancor, to 
overcome the pain and division, to be a repairer of the breach.'' 
Later, Clinton called off the bombing in Iraq, declaring the mission 
accomplished. Clinton became only the second president in history 
to be impeached. At 1:22 p.m., the House of Representatives, after 
two days of angry and emotional debate, approved, 228-206, the first 
article of impeachment, accusing Clinton of perjury for misleading 
a federal grand jury last Aug. 17 about the nature of his relationship 
with a White House intern, Monica Lewinsky. In the noisy House chamber, 
a lone Republican applauded. Five Republicans crossed party lines 
to vote against impeachment. Five Democrats broke with their party 
to support it. The margin was enough to forestall charges that the 
president's fate might have been different if the vote were delayed 
to the 106th Congress, which will have five more Democrats. A second 
article of impeachment, charging Clinton with obstruction of justice, 
passed on a narrower vote of 221-212. It accused him of inducing others 
to lie in order conceal his affair with Ms. Lewinsky. This time 12 
Republicans voted no, while five Democrats voted yes. ``The president 
of the United States has committed a serious transgression,'' said 
Rep. Dick Armey, R-Texas, the House majority leader. ``Among other 
things, he took an oath to God to tell the truth, the whole truth 
and nothing but the truth, and then he failed to do so, not once, 
but several times.'' To ignore this, he said, is to ``undermine the 
rule of law.'' Two more charges against Clinton were defeated. An 
article accusing the president of perjury in the Paula Jones sexual 
harassment lawsuit was rejected, 229-205, with 28 Republicans breaking 
ranks. And the House overwhelmingly rejected, 285-48, an accusation 
of abuse of power stemming from Clinton's legalistic answers to 81 
questions put to him by the House Judiciary Committee. Eighty-one 
Republicans defected from their party. Only one Democrat deserted 
his. The Senate would conduct only the second impeachment trial of 
a president in the 209-year history of the Republic. Clinton will 
be the only elected president put on trial. Andrew Johnson, impeached 
and acquitted by one vote in 1868, had been elected vice president 
and succeeded to the White House on Abraham Lincoln's assassination 
in 1865. Sen. Trent Lott, R-Miss., the majority leader, announced 
just after the House vote that senators ``will be prepared to fulfill 
their constitutional obligations.'' Lott said, ``There are steps that 
precede the beginning of an impeachment trial. Once the Senate is 
organized as an impeachment proceeding, there will be pleadings and 
motions that come before the taking of evidence. That makes it difficult 
to determine at this time when an actual trial will begin.'' The House 
acted on a crisp pre-Christmas Saturday when American politics seemed 
to be descending into the very cannibalism that Speaker Newt Gingrich 
had warned of when he was toppled a month ago. Hours before Clinton 
was impeached for his efforts to cover up his affair with Ms. Lewinsky, 
Rep. Robert Livingston, R-La., who had been chosen to succeed Gingrich 
as speaker, shocked the House by announcing he would leave Congress 
because of revelations of his own adulterous affairs. Still, it was 
Livingston on Saturday who called for Clinton's resignation from the 
House floor. Charging that Clinton had undermined the rule of law 
and damaged the nation, Livingston said, ``I say that you have the 
power to terminate that damage and heal the wounds that you have created. 
You, sir, may resign your post.'' As some Democrats shouted back, 
``You resign,'' Livingston said, ``I was prepared to lead our narrow 
majority as speaker and I believe I had it in me to do a fine job. 
But I cannot do that job or be the kind of leader that I would like 
to be under current circumstances. So I must set the example that 
I hope President Clinton will follow.'' With a sex scandal now consuming 
one of their own, the House's impeachment debate turned more than 
ever into a discourse on sin and morality in politics. Rep. Tom DeLay, 
R-Texas, the House majority whip, who had helped make the speaker-designate 
and has been one of the fiercest critics of Clinton, choked back tears 
as he praised Livingston. He said his friend ``understood what this 
debate was all about.'' ``It was about honor and decency and integrity 
and the truth,'' DeLay said, his voice breaking, ``everything that 
we honor in this country. It was also a debate about relativism versus 
absolute truth.'' He charged that the president's Democratic defenders 
would lower the standards of society. Equally passionate, Rep. Dick 
Gephardt, D-Mo., the House minority leader, said men were imperfect, 
and he asked Livingston not to resign, for a moment drawing a bipartisan 
standing ovation. ``Our founding fathers created a system of government 
of men, not of angels,'' Gephardt said, his face reddening with emotion 
as he spoke. ``No one standing in this House today can pass a puritanical 
test of purity that some are demanding that our elected leaders take. 
If we demand that mere mortals live up to this standard, we will see 
our seats of government lay empty and we will see the best, most able 
people unfairly cast out of public service.'' When he finished he 
walked slowly up the Democratic side of the aisle, Democrats applauding 
him and hugging him as he moved along. The Republicans remained fixed 
in their seats. Saturday's votes were the penultimate step in the 
most serious conflict between Congress and a president since Richard 
Nixon resigned in the face of impeachment and certain conviction on 
Aug. 9, 1974. But while that case spun out from a 1972 break-in at 
Democratic headquarters in the Watergate complex, this began with 
a murky land deal in Arkansas in 1978. Through the efforts of Kenneth 
Starr, the independent counsel, under the law enacted in the wake 
of Watergate, the investigation spread to examine Clinton's affair 
with an intern. Clinton, in a finger-wagging performance last January 
at the White House, told the nation he did not have sexual relations 
with ``that woman,'' Ms. Lewinsky. He denied sexual relations with 
her in a deposition in the sexual harassment case brought against 
him by Paula Corbin Jones. Only in August, after it became known that 
Ms. Lewinsky had preserved a blue dress that provided evidence of 
their affair, did Clinton tell the nation and a grand jury that he 
had had an ``inappropriate relationship'' with her. Republicans took 
great pains to distinguish Clinton's case from Livingston's revelations 
that ``on occasion I strayed from my marriage.'' Rep. Henry Hyde, 
R-Ill., chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, who himself saw 
a past affair come to light as he presided over the House's nine-week 
impeachment inquiry, said: ``Infidelity, adultery is not a public 
act, it's a private act, and the government, the Congress, has no 
business intruding into private acts.'' But he said that Clinton had 
become a commander in chief who by lying in legal forums ``trivializes, 
ignores, shreds, minimizes the sanctity'' of his oath of office. Rep. 
Nancy Johnson, R-Conn., said ``there can be no justice without the 
truth.'' Democrats argued back that the president's actions were wrong 
and deserved censure but did not rise to the level of impeachment. 
Rep. David Bonior, D-Mich., the House minority whip, said Republicans 
were trying to ``hijack an election and hound the president out of 
office.'' Moments before the impeachment votes, Democrats tried to 
bring to the floor their own proposal to censure Clinton. But after 
some debate, their motion was held to be not germane to impeachment 
and ruled out of order by Rep. Ray LaHood, R-Ill., whom Gingrich named 
to preside over the impeachment proceedings. The Democrats appealed 
the ruling, expecting to lose because such appeals are considered 
a challenge to the right of the majority party to run the House. Their 
motion failed 230-204. Two Republicans, Constance Morella of Maryland 
and Peter King of New York, broke with precedent and crossed party 
lines to vote with the Democrats. As their motion failed, the Democrats 
briefly marched out of the House chamber in protest. But they returned 
to vote on the four articles of impeachment. For one year the Lewinsky 
scandal has preoccupied the capital despite an immense disconnect 
with public opinion. Since the scandal became public last January, 
polls have shown the public opposed impeachment and wanted the inquiry 
brought to an end. Even on Friday night, after a 13-hour debate, a 
CBS News Poll of 548 persons showed only 38 percent wanted their representative 
to vote for impeachment; 58 percent wanted a no vote. The conflict 
now enters uncharted seas. The Nixon resignation, for one, cut the 
matter short, and the Andrew Johnson trial occurred more than 100 
years ago, in a different America, one without nuclear weapons or 
cable television or public opinion polls. Despite Lott's recent assurances 
that he will move ahead, some wonder whether the Senate may yet flinch 
from a trial because of the popular will. But Republicans have steadfastly 
ignored the polls all year. Rep. J.C. Watts, R-Okla., the newly elected 
chairman of the House Republican conference, said in debate Saturday, 
``What's popular isn't always right. You say polls are against this. 
Polls measure changing feelings, not steadfast principle. Polls would 
have rejected the Ten Commandments. Polls would have embraced slavery 
and ridiculed women's rights. ``You say we must draw this to a close,'' 
Watts continued. ``I say we must draw a line between right and wrong, 
not with a tiny fine line of an executive fountain pen, but with the 
big fat lead of a No. 2 pencil. And we must do it so every kid in 
America can see it. The point is not whether the president can prevail, 
but whether truth can prevail.'' Yet, for all of the Democrats' charges 
of excessive partisanship Saturday, enough Republicans did pick and 
choose among articles of impeachment to send only two of the four 
that had come out of the House Judiciary Committee on to the Senate. 
A number of Republicans said they did not think a perjury charge in 
Ms. Jones' civil case warranted impeachment, particularly since Clinton's 
deposition had been held by a judge to be immaterial. Many of them 
also looked dimly at impeaching the president for abuse of power _ 
a term taken from the proceedings against Nixon in 1974 _ simply because 
his answers to 81 questions from the Judiciary Committee were legalistic 
and evasive. Rep. David Hobson, R-Ohio, said he supported impeachment 
of the president for lying to a grand jury but not in the Jones case. 
``Even if it's true, I worry whether it rises to the same threshold 
for impeachment,'' he said. ``I didn't want to pile on.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>