<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981219.0240 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Residents of New Orleans, where Rep. Robert Livingston, R-La., grew 
up, and of its suburbs, which he has represented in Congress for two 
decades, were just getting their minds around the revelation that 
the fabled straight-shooter had admitted to extramarital affairs when 
the news hit early Saturday that he had decided not to stand for speaker 
and would retire from Congress next year. ``It's like we've had a 
double dose this week,'' said Edward Renwick, director of the Institute 
of Politics at Loyola University, which Livingston attended in 1973, 
when he was beginning to consider running for office. ``Everyone I've 
talked to was so shocked by the announcement the other day of the 
affairs. I can't tell you how many people said to me that they couldn't 
believe it. And now this.'' It has been less than two months since 
Livingston emerged as the likely successor to his mentor, Speaker 
Newt Gingrich. Livingston, a 55-year-old fiscal conservative, grew 
up modestly in New Orleans' Uptown district, overcoming his father's 
abandonment of the family and working his way through private schools 
and Tulane University and into a successful career as a prosecutor 
and eventually a seat in Congress. Friends and colleagues almost universally 
described him as a hard-working, pragmatic conservative who was devoted 
to his wife, Bonnie, and their four children. Some said they were 
stunned by the revelations of marital infidelity and by Livingston's 
unexpected announcement in Congress that he would retire as a result. 
``The group reaction is surprise and disappointment,'' said Hans Jonassen, 
a friend for more than 40 years. ``It's just such a shame.'' Suzanne 
Haik Terrell, the only Republican on New Orleans' City Council, who 
described Livingston as one of her political mentors, said: ``I don't 
think he decided to resign for any political reasons. I think it was 
a moral decision, just a totally personal, moral decision. It's an 
incredible pity.'' Quinn Hillyer, an editorial writer for The Register 
in Mobile, Ala., who was Livingston's press secretary for many years, 
said he was angry and sickened when he learned of the congressman's 
decision to step down. He said he hoped Livingston would reconsider. 
``I am convinced that what happened is that Bob is a stand-up guy 
and will take raps even when he doesn't need to,'' Hillyer said. ``If 
Bill Clinton had the decency that Bob Livingston has in his little 
finger, Bill Clinton would resign tomorrow.'' When Livingston told 
his fellow Republicans on Thursday about the affairs, their response 
was a standing ovation. So it was unclear to Livingston's friends 
back home what happened in the next 48 hours to persuade him to resign. 
Did he lack the stomach to go through weeks of grilling about the 
affairs? Were there more damaging revelations to come? Did political 
rivals within his own party use this as an excuse to advance their 
own positions? The loss of Livingston in the House will also have 
serious financial consequences for the region. ``This is very bad 
for Louisiana and for New Orleans,'' Renwick said. ``Here he was, 
head of appropriations and about to become speaker, so the state and 
city have been getting things from him for years. And now, after this, 
nothing.'' With many people traveling or finishing up their Christmas 
shopping, news of Livingston's decision spread slowly through New 
Orleans. But that did not stop the jockeying to succeed Livingston 
in Congress from beginning. Ms. Terrell, the City Council member, 
said she was stunned to receive calls from political allies within 
hours of Livingston's announcement, wondering if she would make a 
run for his seat. She said she was disgusted to hear that at least 
three potential candidates had already let their eagerness be known. 
Livingston nearly announced his retirement earlier this year, but 
had been talked into running again, partly because of concerns among 
Republicans that his departure might open the way for David Duke, 
the right-wing candidate whose former ties to neo-Nazi groups had 
embarrassed the Republican Party in the past. On Saturday, Republican 
officials were putting together lists of names of those who might 
be called on to run for Livingston's seat. And some Democratic officials 
were pushing the candidacy of Dan Foley, a former civil district clerk 
of court in Orleans Parish. ``I am convinced we can find a Democrat 
to beat David Duke in 1999,'' said Russell Henderson, a Democratic 
political consultant in New Orleans. Renwick said he was marveling 
that the controversies swirling around Clinton had apparently ended 
yet another career in public service, while the president continued 
to ride high in the polls and cling to office. ``This whole deal claims 
another victim,'' Renwick said. ``From Gennifer Flowers to today, 
how many victims have been claimed? It would be quite a large cemetery. 
And it happens to his friends and to his enemies. Everyone Clinton 
touches eventually pays a price.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>