<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981203.1286 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When he was arrested for trying to overthrow Venezuela's government 
in a bloody coup attempt six years ago, Lt. Col. Hugo Chavez announced 
to the world his struggle was just beginning. ``New and better opportunities 
will emerge for us in the future,'' he said on national television 
before being hauled off to jail. Those words sound like an understatement 
with presidential elections just five days away. The 44-year-old former 
coup leader has capitalized on public disgust over corruption and 
declining living standards to become the presidential front-runner. 
His candidacy is seen as a bright red warning sign for Latin America 
and a likely blow to conventional wisdom that claims democracy and 
free markets are inescapable. Chavez insists he is ``a democrat from 
head to toe'' but Venezuelan elites are terrified he will impose a 
dictatorship if elected. No one knows for sure what a Chavez presidency 
would be like. But there is nothing vague about the anti-establishment, 
anti-corruption credo he has preached since being pardoned four years 
ago by President Rafael Caldera. Recent polls have shown Chavez about 
10 points ahead of his closest rival, Yale-educated former governor 
Henrique Salas Romer. Despite having toned down his populist rhetoric, 
Chavez still wants to dissolve Congress and trash the current constitution 
in favor of a new one. To wealthy Venezuelans and the U.S. government, 
which has denied Chavez a tourist visa, his attempted coup was unforgivable. 
But Chavez insists it was a just reaction to a fraudulent democracy 
that has excluded most Venezuelans from the bounty of the world's 
largest oil reserves outside the Middle East. Clues about why so many 
Venezuelans see Chavez as a hero can be found in the western farming 
town of Sabaneta, where the candidate grew up poor, dreaming of becoming 
a professional baseball player. Unemployment in the town is rampant, 
government services are nil and most children are malnourished. Chavez's 
cousin, 31-year-old grade school teacher Euclides Quinones Chavez, 
says he sometimes has to stop class to buy food because the kids are 
too hungry to concentrate. Chavez, who likes to paint landscapes, 
write poetry and quote South American liberator Simon Bolivar, speaks 
constantly of giving a ``human face'' to capitalism. Most of his life 
has been defined by rebellion. After graduating from Venezuela's Military 
Academy in 1975, he spent years building an underground organization 
inside the army to oppose military corruption. ``I realized we had 
to organize ourselves to defend our dignity,'' he says. As a young 
officer in the late 1980s, Chavez was assigned to the presidential 
palace to help guard then-President Carlos Andres Perez. The two men 
passed each other in the palace halls and greeted each other respectfully. 
At the time, Perez had no idea this obscure soldier was already plotting 
to overthrow him. Eventually, military commanders got word of Chavez's 
machinations and banished him to an isolated outpost near the Colombian 
border. But Chavez*s tirades against corruption also earned him friends 
in high places. At midnight on Feb. 3, 1992, Chavez and three other 
mid-level officers led some 15,000 rebel soldiers intent on imposing 
a ``progressive'' civilian-military junta. By noon the next day, dozens 
of people lay dead and the government had the upper hand. A month 
after the failed coup, Caracas residents staged a raucous demonstration 
against Perez, banging their pots and pans together and shouting, 
``Viva Chavez!'' A second coup attempt by Chavez loyalists on Nov. 
27, 1992 also failed, but within a year President Perez was forced 
from office on corruption charges. For the past four years, Chavez 
has crisscrossed Venezuela in a grassroots campaign to build support 
for his Fifth Republic Movement, the successor to the Bolivarian group 
that staged the coup attempts. ``The hour of reckoning has come for 
the corrupt,'' shouted a supporter last weekend as Chavez rode in 
an open jeep through the colonial streets of Carora in western Venezuela, 
his wife and one-year-old daughter by his side. Half-naked children 
in white-stucco houses peered through windows as the caravan passed. 
A beaming Chavez reached out to hundreds of clamoring hands. ``We're 
going to build a true democracy,'' he vowed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>