<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981203.1279 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the worst breach of the Kosovo cease-fire, Yugoslav border guards 
killed eight ethnic Albanians on Thursday, adding new urgency to the 
efforts of the U.S. envoy who is trying to negotiate a permanent peace. 
Several other armed incidents were reported as envoy Christopher Hill 
presented Serbian President Milan Milutinovic with a revised plan 
for the future of the Serb province. Hill said some progress was being 
made, but warned that time was at a premium because of fears that 
fighting, which had been at a lull as winter approached, could resume 
by spring. ``I feel a sense of urgency,'' Hill said. ``Spring should 
be the time for plowing and not for fighting.'' The eight armed ethnic 
Albanians were killed near the town of Prizren when nine of them fired 
on Yugoslav soldiers guarding the border with Albania, the pro-government 
Serbian Media Center said. Yugoslav troops were not injured, the center 
said Yugoslavia's army command confirmed the deaths and said the ethnic 
Albanians were trying to cross the border into Kosovo illegally. Ethnic 
Albanian rebels, who have been fighting for Kosovo's independence, 
have frequently used illegal border routes to arm themselves in neighboring 
Albania. The clash came a day after three ethnic Albanians were gunned 
down in their car in Kosovo's capital Pristina. A woman pedestrian 
was injured. Serbian police said they found three automatic weapons 
and two hand grenades in the car, which was raked by machine-gun fire. 
On Thursday, rebel spokesman Adem Demaci blamed the killings on Serbia's 
secret police, saying one of the victims was a leading member of the 
rebel Kosovo Liberation Army while the two others were civilians: 
a journalist of the main Albanian language newspaper Bujku and a university 
student. The journalist, Afrim Malici, had complained he was being 
followed by Serbia's secret service, his colleagues said. Before meeting 
with Milutinovic, Hill said the new draft reflects previous comments 
by rival Serb and ethnic Albanian officials on how to achieve a settlement 
for the ethnic Albanian-majority province in southern Serbia. Kosovo's 
Albanian leadership wants independence from Serbia but is willing 
to settle for full autonomy as a first step. Serbia and the Serb leaders 
of Yugoslavia are strongly opposed to any plan on Kosovo that would 
sidestep Serbia. Hill did not elaborate, but said the new plan does 
not explicitly specify whether Kosovo will become the third Yugoslav 
republic or would remain a Serb province. Republic status for Kosovo 
would give it equal say with Serbia and Montenegro, the two republics 
that make up Yugoslavia. Hill planned to present the plan to ethnic 
Albanian officials on Friday. In a statement after meeting Hill, Milutinovic 
said he would ``carefully study'' the new U.S. proposal, but added 
the Serbian position should be ``the main basis for the political 
solution'' of the Kosovo crisis. Hundreds of people were killed and 
up to 300,000 were left homeless after Yugoslav President Slobodan 
Milosevic launched a crackdown against Kosovo separatists in February. 
Bloodshed abated after Milosevic promised U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke 
on Oct. 12 to end the Kosovo campaign and begin political negotiations 
on the province's future. The cease-fire was reached under threat 
of NATO airstrikes. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>