<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981203.1278 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In defiance of the United States, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
said Thursday he will not back down from a decision to suspend the 
Wye River peace agreement over what he says are Palestinian violations. 
``We are not to be made fools,'' said an angry Netanyahu, who won 
unanimous backing from his Cabinet ministers after they watched footage 
of an attack on an Israeli soldier by a Palestinian mob. Ministers 
watched a video of Wednesday's brutal attack. When the tape ended, 
the decision was unanimous: Israel would suspend its West Bank troop 
withdrawal. Holding Yasser Arafat's Palestinian Authority responsible 
for the attack, Netanyahu said: ``I cannot allow myself to see Israeli 
citizens being lynched, or about to be lynched by a crazed mob that 
received incitement from Palestinian officials.'' The latest crisis 
to plague the Mideast peace accord cast a pall over the upcoming visit 
of U.S. President Bill Clinton, just days before he was to arrive 
in the region to oversee implementation of the second phase of the 
deal he helped broker. The Israeli decision appeased hard-liners in 
Netanyahu's coalition whose support for the premier had been waning 
since he signed the latest accord to cede more war-captured land. 
Ahead of a crucial parliament vote Monday over whether to call early 
elections, the decision to freeze the peace process has brought right-wingers 
back into Netanyahu's fold. Members of the National Religious Party 
said they would now vote with Netanyahu and block attempts to end 
his administration prematurely. Supporters of the bill said they might 
delay the vote because they no longer have a majority. Netanyahu said 
he would only resume implementation once Palestinian leader Yasser 
Arafat publicly dropped plans to announce a state in May and accepted 
Israel's criteria for the release of Palestinian prisoners. U.S. State 
Department spokesman James Rubin rejected the Israeli conditions, 
saying the Wye River peace agreement ``should be implemented as signed.'' 
Meanwhile, violence erupted for a second straight day in three Arab 
neighborhoods of Jerusalem following the stabbing death of a Palestinian 
man in the city. Palestinian rioters threw stones at police and Israeli 
motorists. Six Israeli police officers and three Israeli civilians 
were injured by rocks. One Palestinian was struck by a rubber bullet 
fired by police to disperse stone throwers on the Mount of Olives, 
and 19 stone-throwers were arrested. In Tel Aviv, a shack housing 
five Palestinian laborers from the Gaza Strip was set on fire, and 
police said they were investigating whether the arsonists had political 
motives. The laborers escaped unharmed. The latest cycle of violence 
began Wednesday morning when an Arab street cleaner was stabbed to 
death, apparently by a Jewish extremist, in a mixed Arab-Jewish neighborhood 
of Jerusalem. Hours later, an Israeli soldier and civilian were attacked 
by a Palestinian mob, fresh from an anti-Israel demonstration near 
the West Bank town of Ramallah. When Netanyahu convened his so-called 
security Cabinet to play a videotape of the incident, the atmosphere 
in the room was tense, Justice Minister Tsahi Hanegbi said. Israeli 
and Palestinian officials argued over whether the attack on the soldier 
was orchestrated or spontaneous. The incident began when about 150 
Palestinian university students, many supporters of Arafat's Fatah 
faction, staged a march in Ramallah to press for Israel to release 
Palestinian prisoners in its jails. The group then headed to the outskirts 
of town to throw stones at Israeli cars, including the one the soldier 
was riding in. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>