<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981203.1274 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A single photograph _ that of a young Israeli soldier cowering under 
the blows of a Palestinian mob _ ignited a fierce nationwide debate 
Thursday over whether Israel has lost its military nerve. The photo 
was splashed across the front pages of every newspaper in Israel. 
While the prime minister and others wondered out loud why the soldier 
never opened fire with his M-16 rifle Wednesday, other Israelis insisted 
the new recruit would not be alive today if he had acted otherwise. 
``What has happened to us, for God's sake? Are we a country with a 
strong defense force or have we turned into a country of wimps?'' 
wrote Yaacov Erez, the editor-in-chief of the Maariv newspaper. His 
words struck deeply into the psyche of Israel, a country founded on 
the ashes of the Holocaust and whose aim was to never allow Jews to 
be vulnerable again. Assaf Meyara, 19, was recovering Thursday from 
multiple injuries inflicted by a dozen Palestinians who smashed the 
windows of the car he was sitting in, dragged him out and struck him 
repeatedly with chunks of concrete. The mob, fresh from an anti-Israel 
demonstration, also stole Meyara's rifle as he ran to safety, then 
set his car on fire. The ambush prompted Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
to freeze troop withdrawals from the West Bank and suspend implementing 
the latest U.S.-brokered Mideast peace accord. Netanyahu suggested 
Thursday that Meyara should have followed open-fire procedures and 
should have been more prepared. ``If a soldier or civilian is caught 
in a life-threatening situation, it is his right and even his obligation 
to save himself in accordance with the law,'' he told reporters. Defenders 
of Meyara, including President Ezer Weizman, said it was a mistake 
to judge a young soldier newly assigned to the often violent West 
Bank. On radio talk shows, many Israelis said Meyara escaped alive 
because he didn't open fire and risk the chance of having his gun 
grabbed and turned against him. ``Assaf was in (the West Bank) for 
all of three weeks, without a full briefing, without experience, he 
was alone without other soldiers and he acted like any officer, general 
or even the army's chief-of-staff would have to save his life,'' said 
Meyara's mother, Lisa. In a military-minded country where a majority 
of its citizens are drafted for lengthy army service, many questions 
regarding standard training and procedures were raised as a result 
of Wednesday's attack. Meyara's rifle was not loaded, and some reports 
suggested it was in the back seat of the car instead of in Meyara's 
possession at the time _ both serious violations of army regulations. 
Moments before the car Meyara was riding in was attacked, an Israeli 
army jeep drove through the same intersection on the outskirts of 
the Palestinian-controlled city of Ramallah. The jeep was pelted with 
chunks of rock by the same group of Palestinians and then drove off, 
rather than remain on the scene, clear the junction and help protect 
other Israeli cars. Veteran Israeli defense correspondent Ronnie Shaked 
said the images of both Israeli soldiers and civilians fleeing from 
Palestinians has crushed Israel's deterrent image of strength _ and 
will encourage Palestinians to further test Israeli troops. An unnamed 
army official quoted by Maariv said the army may issue charges against 
Meyara for not using his weapon. An army spokesman said any possible 
discipline would only come after an investigation. Meyara's mother, 
an immigrant from England, told Israel radio her son was not sure 
he was permitted to shoot at the crowd. She also said she would leave 
the country with her son if the army tried to punish him. ``We could 
have been on the way to a funeral today,'' she declared. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>