<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981203.1600.0516 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Change could be blowing through Britain's house of lords. Hereditary 
lords, those born with their titles, may soon be given the boot. But 
Richard Blystone finds that won't happen without a fight. Call them 
an absurdity and an anachronism, and they'll agree happily, and then 
ask if you've got something better to replace them. If the country 
and the nation, after due deliberation, come up with a Better idea 
and decided that the house of lords is past its past its sell by date, 
then I think they will find that most of us will leave the stage with 
dignity. Even the reformist labor government hasn't yet offered an 
alternative, but at last month's state opening of parliament, the 
handwriting was on the gilded wall. "A Bill will be introduced to 
remove the right of hereditary peers to sit and vote in the house 
of lords." It could not be announced without the queen, and she could 
not refuse to announce it. But the hereditary lords won't go without 
a fight. Most of the time, most of the dukes, marquises, viscounts, 
earls and barons, whose titles were bestowed upon their ancestors, 
leave the work of the upper chamber to the lords who are only there 
for life, usually veterans and experts in many fields, ennobled by 
the queen at government request. But occasionally the aristocrats 
Muster to weigh in on issues they think important. They outnumber 
the life peers two to one, and they are mostly conservative. Hence 
the fury of prime minister, Tony Blair, with a huge elected house 
of commons majority, when the lords last month rejected for a fifth 
time his bill on the system for European parliament voting. This happens 
not only to labor governments. Margaret Thatcher's mighty conservatives 
tasted defeat by the lords, nearly 300 times in their 18 years in 
power. For prime minister Blair it's also a question of modernizing. 
It has a very important part in Blair's rebuilding Britain's image, 
his determination to cut it off in at least parts of that ancient 
history, in his mind contradicts what he thinks Britain should be 
in the modern world. Some fear disenfranchising the dukes would eliminate 
the monarchy. Some don't. Nobody really knows. Britain's constitution 
is not an everlasting temple of marble, more a kind of rain forest 
with layers of organic matter in various states of preservation. Tamper 
with that political ecosystem, and heaven knows what could happen. 
Richard Blystone, CNN, London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>