<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981203.2130.1465 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During the advent of cable, the chances of people changing away from 
the major networks seemed remote. Now, pro wrestling, "rugrats" and 
"south park" are staging a revolution. Paul Vercammen reports. There's 
celebration in the airwaves at the western cable show, because television's 
goliaths -- the major broadcast networks including NBC, CBS, ABC and 
fox, just keep losing viewers to the "davids" -- the smaller cable 
channels gathered here. We and a bunch of other networks are increasing 
the amount we're spending on programming, doing more original programming, 
some different programming, some with a different attitude and a different 
viewpoint. And people watch programs, not networks, anymore. Nielsen 
media research shows the big broadcast networks' share of prime-time 
audience dropped to 69% last year, with cable viewership rising to 
an all-time high 37%. And last November's prime-time ratings for all 
but one of the biggest six broadcast networks dropped from a year 
ago. NBC's popular "Seinfeld" is gone. Many cable shows are finding 
their niche. It's not a case of the cable stations making inroads 
with one huge show with "Seinfeld"-like ratings. Rather, it's a case 
of chipping away with two flavors of wrestling all sorts of movies 
and even those smart-mouthed kids from "south park." Cable's top-rated 
shows include USA network's "wwf wrestling" and TNT's "Wcw" which 
can bring in 4 million to 5 million viewers per live broadcast. Wrestling 
is so popular right now. Instead of dealing with small-time advertisers, 
we're dealing with large people, like AT&T, General Motors. The big 
boys are coming to the table. But the broadcasters stress the cable 
stations can't touch their ratings, especially for flagship programs. 
Take "ER," averaging just under 30 million viewers a week. Even though 
you're not delivering as large a share of the audience as you were 
five years ago, it is still the largest share available, which makes 
it that much more valuable. And some media watchers say the broadcasters 
loss isn't all about cable. I think there are a lot of things that 
are attracting the new consumer, if you will, including the Internet 
and including going outside and playing with your kids. But media 
gadfly Michael Moore, who debuts on bravo with "the awful truth" in 
spring, charges the broadcast networks with dumbing down. The top 
ten shows are all the intelligent shows -- "ER," "60 minutes." You 
would think that the network executives would go, "what we need is 
more intelligent television." But that's not what they do. They keep 
putting on the same crappy sitcoms and the same boring dramas. And 
that's why they're losing viewers. And the cable networks' gains come 
in all shapes and sizes. Paul Vercammen, "CNN Entertainment News," 
Anaheim, California. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>