<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981203.0130.1441 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It may seem like spring in much of the nation, but the scene at many 
suburban malls leaves no doubt as to what season it is. Jeanne Moos 
reports. Finding the perfect gift is easy compared to finding the 
perfect parking spot. The parking spaces at the malls are going fast. 
Motorists use maneuvers they don't teach you in drivers Ed. We brought 
my grandmother's just so we could get a close spot. This is her grandmother's. 
ho, ho, ho. The holiday spirit is upon us. You're getting that spot. 
Actually, the only fight we stumbled on was between a husband and 
wife over a dent someone else had left on their car. You want me to 
fight over that . and you're worried about the car. You're not leaving 
are you? There are 11,000 parking spaces here at Roosevelt field mall 
in garden city, long island. That's good news when you're looking 
for a space. Bad news when you're looking for your car. was it in 
k1 or l1? l1 or m1? This is crazy. I can't find my car. There it is. 
Sometimes, strangers form alliances between those who are leaving 
and those who are looking. Come around. I'll stand out there and wait. 
Tell her to come over here. The only thing worse than trying to find 
a place to park your car is finding a place to park your carcass at 
the food court. Kids wailing, hungry shoppers making desperate beelines 
to tables only to find the tables turned on them. And once you manage 
to stake out a table -- We found a table, but no chairs. Don't expect 
charity when it comes to chairs. Dammit. She had her hand on it. She 
was pulling on it and I said, "let go of it. My husband's right there." 
Those without tables couldn't disguise how much they coveted mine 
as I lingered -- make that, overstayed. And when they say, "deck the 
halls," did they really mean with hot dogs? No tables, no chairs and 
if you're looking for a seat at the mall restroom, get in line. Okay, 
I'm taking reservations. Warm seat for one. Yeah, I'll take two. two. 
a group of teenagers gave us a blow-by-blow of the standoff one of 
their mom's faced over a parking spot. "This is my spot and I've been 
waiting for a very long time." And then she started making these like 
hand motions at us. Hold it, who got the spot? We did! I find a parking 
spot anywhere I want. Okay, okay, okay. Some motorists stalk shoppers 
returning to their cars. Whoo! But Rudolph the reindeer lucked out. 
We got a spot, yay! Somebody better rein in this deer. Happy new year! 
Jeanne Moos, CNN, garden city, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>