<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981203.2100.1069 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Our two guests know the law and the background well. Lawrence Walsh 
served as independent counsel in the Iran-contra investigation. Irv 
Nathan is a former justice department official serving under presidents 
carter and Clinton. With us tonight from Washington. Irv, let's begin 
with you. Can you tell the American people what gave rise, gave birth, 
what was the notion that said you know what, folks, we got to have 
a mechanism so we can have someone independent fly in, swoop down, 
and solve these cases? Yes, absolutely. It was the Watergate investigation, 
and it was the Saturday night massacre of archibald Cox who was a 
special prosecutor who was not appointed by the court and not appointed 
by this mechanism which created a very serious constitutional crisis 
in our country. This statute was enacted in the late 1970's. It has 
worked for 20 years. In the first 15 years it was re-enacted three 
times by overwhelming majority in the Congress and during that time 
it proved rather successful. Over the last five years it's been subject 
to a number of abuses. In part because of the selection of some of 
the people involved, and in part because some of the actions of those 
people. My belief is it needs to be modified to eliminate the potential 
for abuses but the core concept to assure fairness and impartiality 
in the investigation of high executive officials is still valid and 
should be preserved. Lawrence Walsh, next question to you. Counselor, 
where do you think it went wrong, in your opinion, fr creation to 
present day application? It's too broad. It applies to too many officers 
in the government. It mandates the appointment of an independent counsel 
for cabinet, subcabinet members. I don't think there's that degree 
of intimacy with the attorney general that this should be mandated. 
I think only the president, vice president, and the attorney general 
herself, if they're under investigation, then you need an independent 
counsel. Second -- What do we do in those cases? The other case, they 
can let the other prosecutor move. There isn't that intimacy between 
the department of justice and department of agriculture that the department 
of justice couldn't prosecute an agricultural department crime. Second, 
it should -- the independent counsel should not be appointed to investigate 
matters that occurred before election of a president or the appointment 
of an officer. Second -- or third, they should not be investigating 
the private activities of the officer or the president. It should 
be limited to official misconduct. Misconduct and misusing the power 
of the presidency or the attorney general's job. Irv Nathan, as you 
know, one of the criticisms has been in Starr's case, this guy should 
have been called on the carpet at least a couple of times by the three-judge 
panel, by the attorney general. Could you please let us know where 
you're heading in this investigation, let us know what your intentions 
are so we can prepare. I think it is right and I agree with some of 
the suggestions that judge walsh has made. I should say that I think 
politically the statute is in very serious trouble. I think there's 
a consens around town that it will not be re-enacted and I think after 
that you will see some very serious political chaos, because we have 
a very sad situation in this city in which we have the criminalization 
of politics, and we have demands for investigations and for prosecutions 
really for partisan political purposes. I think this is very unfortunate. 
This statute is the victim of unintended consequences. The purpose 
of the statute was to keep politics out of the criminal law process, 
and in fact it has injected politics and that's been a very unfortunate 
situation. Lawrence Walsh, do you have concerns that in a world without 
the statute, justice will be done? no. I think it would be done if 
the statute is repealed. We would be back where we were when Archie 
Cox was appointed by the attorney general. I don't think another president 
would ever do what President Nixon did and order an attorney general 
to fire an independent counsel. But in any event, the statute could 
preserve the protection of an independent counsel, regardless of by 
whom he's appointed. If the attorney general appoints an independent 
counsel, at least by statute provide that he can't be fired except 
for cause, as is now the case and except after a hearing before the 
district court of the district of columbia. Irv Nathan, why does it 
have to be an all or nothing proposition? Can't they create a hybrid 
law this would take out the bad aspects this job and retain some of 
the independents? I think exactly right. I think they need to look 
at a group of -- a group of nonpartisan lawmakers should get together 
with a group of other people like the American bar association, try 
to weed out the potential for abuses but keep the core concept and 
one of the them is what you have suggested. There have to be some 
limitations on the authority and some shortening of the duration and 
unlimited budgets that are involved and particularly the prosecutions 
of third parties who are unrelated to the events that are -- that 
gave rise to the jurisdiction of the independent counsel. With that 
thought, gentlemen, thank you very much. Irv Nathan, judge Walsh, 
appreciate your thoughts and coming on the air with us tonight. Thank 
you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>