<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981203.2100.0047 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And good Thursday evening to you. We're going to begin tonight with 
a story just now breaking out of the american southwest. Texas to 
be exact where for days now hundreds of law enforcement officers have 
been fanned out involved in a manhunt for a fugitive. The scope of 
which has never been seen in at that that area before. This was not 
just any fugitive. He escaped from the very active death row in the 
state of Texas. Tonight, there has been a discovery, a dead body not 
far from the prison. It turns out to be the former prisoner. With 
a late report tonight, we are joined by the NBC Dallas bureau, reporter 
Jim Cummins. Martin gurule was sentenced to die for a 1992 murder 
in corpus Christi, texas, and he and six other inmates tried to break 
out of death row on thanksgiving evening. The other six were pinned 
down in a hail of gun fire but gurule got over the two fences with 
the razor wire on top of them at the last minute and disappeared. 
The authorities were alarmed and concerned because as you know in 
death row -- You mentioned it's a very active death row and anybody 
on death row in texas fully expects to die. So for the next several 
days there was a massive manhunt. 500 law officers, some 70 dogs be 
three helicopters night and day looking for gurule. As late as today, 
there was alarm that he had gotten away, that perhaps he was in Mexico. 
The governor of Texas even spoke out about it and said it bothered 
him. He said it was something he talked about around the water cool 
like everyone else and that he asked the Texas rangers to get to the 
bottom of this. He wanted answers and he wanted them now. Well, tonight 
about 5:30 P.M. central time, two off duty prison guards who were 
fishing in the trinityy river four miles away from death row spotted 
a Bloated body. Larry Todd, a spokesman for the prison system told 
us they were able to confirm that it is indeed gurule and that it 
appeared he had been dead for several days. And so the search, of 
course, has been called off, and the people of Texas are breathing 
a Sigh of relief tonight, Brian. Jim, I know it's early yet. Do we 
know anything about cause of death? Was he perhaps hit by the same 
gun fire that pinned down his fellow escapees, and second, what is 
the net -- has the net effect been on the entire prison system in 
Texas? It appears he was injured. They don't know how yet and they 
probably won't until they do an au pair -- autopsy on the body. There 
was blood where he went over on the fence. For a long time on death 
row in Texas, a few model prisoners -- and he was among them were 
allowed to work in a factory, were given freedom, were allowed to 
go out in the recreation yard while the others, about 350 of them, 
were on lockdown. In their cells most of the day. For the time being 
it appears all of them will be on lockdown and the reason they're 
doing that now is becse they are alarmed that gurule could even get 
as far as he got, because they always thought that this was the safest, 
most secure death row in America. Brian? NBC news correspondent Jim 
Cummins in our Dallas bureau tonight. Thank you, Jim. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>