<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981203.2100.1845 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A major aviation story to report tonight involving an aircraft flying 
thousands of people around the globe as a group, as we speak. It involves 
safety concerns about fuel pumps used on 747's. Matthew Eappen covers 
aviation among other subjects for the "New York Times." He's covering 
the story tonight from Washington. We've heard many warnings coming 
out of the T.W.A. incident. This appears to be another one. When does 
this go out, how serious is it? Hi, Brian. It went out this morning 
as an emergency warning from the federal aviation administration. 
It is not directly related to T.W.A. 800. This is not the reason T.W.A. 
800 crashed, but that explosion has made the f.A.A. very nervous about 
problems like this one, so they reacted very strongly when this came 
N. these are pumps deep in the fuel tanks, and they have a little 
seal -- looks like a washer about the size of a 50-cent piece. The 
shaft of the pump goes through the seal. The seals have been breaking 
down very quickly. And then the shaft sags. Metal parts inside rub 
together and the F.A.A. thinks can produce heat and srks. That's fine 
if the pump is deep under the fuel, but if the tank is almost empty 
as the T.W.A. 800 tank was, you can have an explosive atmosphere and 
the F.A.A. thinks it's possible this could detonate a tank. So like 
automobile tanks at gas stations, fume STS big danger but with a Full 
tank -- With a full tank, you're safe because the mixture is too rich 
or the possible ignition is completely smothered. There is no oxygen. 
After T.W.A., a lot of the attention went to the old 747 100 series, 
the first series that rolled off the line there 25 years plus old 
these days. Doeshis discriminate as to age of airaft? A little bit. 
It is --hese are replacement seals N most of these airplanes. They've 
been installed on planes of all ages. The newest 747's have fuel tanks 
not only in the wings where most fuel tanks are, but in the tail, 
in the horizontal portion of the tail, and they carry enough fuel 
back there for about another 400 miles. The problem with the tail 
tanks is that they're shallow and they're meant to be burned dry. 
They're meant to be completely drained. You can't land with fuel in 
those tanks. The F.A.A. told the airlines who fly the 747 400, the 
one with the tail tanks not to put any fuel in them at all. Now this 
will create some problems for long transpacific flights. Some of them 
used to go nonstop. They may now have to stop somewhere or they'll 
have to fly with fewer passengers or less cargo. Is this as aggressive 
as you've seen the F.A.A. in -- intent direct proof of course their 
business is safety -- intent direct proof they are really speculating, 
let's try to stop these kind of problems before they pop up? They 
have an official goal of reducing accidents by 80% over the next few 
years and they said this afternoon one of the reasons they moved out 
so aggressively on this is in pursuit of that goal. I think that Boeing 
also recognizes that the atsphere is changing and that the F.A.A. 
is going to be a little bit more aggressive. Matt wald, one of the 
best in the business at covering avepings the that story will be in 
tomorrow's "New York Times." Thanks for coming on the air. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>