<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981203.2100.2043 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In New York City this week there was a controversy over a book introduced 
to a third grade class. It resulted in the teacher leaving the school, 
actually fearing for her life amid threats. The issues here are race 
and literature. The report we get tonight is from NBC correspondent 
Rehema Ellis. Ruth Sherman never imagined reading a children's book 
to her third grade class would change her life for the worse. But 
it did. I'm scared. I don't ever want to go into that area again. 
The 27-year-old teacher at this elementary school in new RK city was 
temporarily transferred last week, after she was threatened by some 
angry parents who questioned her use of a book entitled "nappy hair." 
Reverend her better Doherty objects to any violence but understands 
some of the concerns. I don't know the teacher's tivation or competence 
but it's the material that I found offensive. The book told in a gospel 
like call and response style describes a family's good natured teasing 
about a little black girl's thick kinky hair. Page after page illustrates 
life for the child with a -- with the nappiest, the fuzziest, the 
most screwed up, jeezed up, northed hair. For some blacks, the language 
does touch a nerve. The word nappy is sometimes used in a derogatory 
way to describe a black person's hair. E book written by a black woman 
and -- is praised in a book review and is praised as Columbia University. 
I think the reason why it's so painful is that it's black-on-black 
insult. Most white people don't know the word at all unless they've 
heard a black person use it against a black one. And also it's -- 
tends to be a gender insult. It's a -- it's usually used by females 
against females. Little girls -- get those naps off your head. Comb 
your hair. Some educators tall it a segregation of blackness, pointing 
to lines like one nap of her hair is the only perfect circle in nature. 
Ruth Sherman was using the book as part of self-esteem lessons in 
a school of mostly black and Hispanic children. Controversy erupted 
when some parents got hold of a few photocopied pages and were offended 
by the language but once people read the whole book, opinions changed, 
and parents rallied to the teacher's defense. Island have my children 
read it, sure. Yes, I would. Some even pleaded with the teacher to 
return. And Ms. Sherman, come back. Following an investigation, the 
school department concluded the book is appropriate, and offered Ruth 
Sherman her job back. But it's too late. This week Sherman decided 
to permanently transfer to another school. I really don't think it's 
hit me yet that I'm not going back to that school. I was out shopping 
this weekend buying things for these kids for their treasure chest 
and homework raffle and it hasn't hit me that they're not mine anymore. 
Ironic, a teacher who used a book to promote understanding has become 
a Victim of intolerance. Rehema Ellis, NBC news, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>