<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981203.2100.2413 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The current fight over impeachment, what has been a string of misdeeds 
by the chief executive are all but certain to become the chief legacy 
of President Clinton when historians sit down to write T. we have 
two prominent historians with us this evening. Stephen Hess served 
in the Eisenhower and Nixon dimensions and advised presidents Carter 
and Ford. He's now senior fellow in governmental studies at Brookings 
institution. His last book, by the way, concerned a topic most consider 
an absolute oxy moron -- campaign etiquette. He is with us from Washington 
tonight. Also with us this evening Douglas Brinkley, director of the 
Eisenhower center for American studies, professor of history at the 
University of New Orleans. He is the author recently of the book "the 
history of the United States." He joins us from Miami and Mr. Hess, 
let's begin with you. I heard you on the radio this week. You are 
asked constant to compare and contrast these times with the watergate 
hearings 25 years ago. You were able to find really no high moment 
in what is going on right now. no. So different really. It was an 
electric feeling here at the comparable time, 20, 24 years ago. We 
thought we were about to depez a president for the first time. No 
one thinks this we're going to depose Bill Clinton. The crimes are 
so utterly different. Minimum wage that was a true corruption of the 
-- of the system. This is a private sex act that somehow got dragged 
into a public persona and role and, you know, there is something else 
about it, too. It's just the sequencing. That was the first time. 
Ne of us had been around before when a president left office. Now 
we -- most of us -- or at least my age -- remember that very well 
and we survived, and so I think that makes a difference, too. Douglas 
Brinkley, it's been said very cynically that this is the perfect scandal 
for the 1990's. It's not really serious. It's not really dangerous, 
and no one really seems to care. Well, there is some truth to that. 
I think it's a great American soap opera, and, you know, we keep following 
it and I think it's -- most people are now bored with it and you feel 
like it's time to pull the plug on the soap opera but I think that 
the 1990's in general will be different than Bill Clinton. I think 
the 1990's, history will judge as kind of an era here, even though 
there's the turmoil in the White House this year and some of the ugly 
aspects this scandal plagued administration, the 1990's and America 
-- in america have been a very good time to be alive. Stephen Hess, 
let's ask the question the other way around. Is there any way that 
this does not dominate Bill Clinton's legacy when you doug and all 
the other historians sit down to count it up and look back at what 
looks like it's going to be eight years in office for Bill Clinton? 
Yeah, I think it has to be. William Jefferson Clinton, 42nd president 
of the United States who was -- fill in the blank -- censured. It's 
a shame because when I look at Bill Clinton, most presidents -- most 
presidents second terms are not as good as their first terms unless 
something like a war interveeds. He did so much on the job training 
where at least I had the feeling he was going to have a better second 
term and then January 21 when we woke up and learned the name Monica, 
it was like a guillotine cutting through his administration and it 
totally destroyed the sixth year in office which is a Very important 
year when you think of the White House, of the presidency as an hourglass 
with the sand running out and now he's getting to that Lame duck ism 
in the seventh and eighth year. Doug has written the first paragraph 
of the chapters on Bill Clinton. Can you supply us with the second? 
Well, I think the second will be the economic prosperity of the 1990's 
-- the fact of the balanced budget, the fact that he was able -- Bill 
Clinton -- To Ward off his republican rivals and his enemies. People 
like Newt Gingrich are suddenly vanished from the scene and Bill clinton 
keeps on ticking but I think the key that's been happening in the 
1990's is America's trade policy and the heart of our foreign policy 
with things like apec and this notion of a global economy, globalization, 
the notion that a billion E-mails go out after hour, that the way 
computers are changing our life and information is changing our life, 
and I believe in the future when people are writing about the 1990's, 
we may see longer paragraphs about Bill Gates and Ted Turner, possibly 
Madeline Albright, the first secretary of state, than Bill Clinton 
per Se. Stephen Hess, no one is on tape in this case saying a million 
dollars, we could get that, but this is the first American president 
who is a student of Watergate. Who worked at the staff level on Watergate. 
And here we are with a house committee for better or worse about to 
-- it seems -- to draw up at minimum one article of impeachment. The 
strange thing about it is we all knew that the cover-up was worse 
than the crime, and the standard convention was let it all Hang out. 
Make it into a 48-hour story, if you will, but yet in a strange way, 
Bill clinton has used many of the same techniques that Richard Nixon 
used in terms of sto walling, and it does appear as if it's going 
to work. That he isn't going to be deposed as president of the United 
States but he certainly has done awful things to this place in history 
as a result. Doug Brinkley, does that speak more to the resilience 
O E man, or to our times? Well, you know, I think it speaks to one 
man, first off. I think Bill Clinton is not a product of Watergate 
and didn't think about those historic lessons, but he's more modeled 
his career after John kennedy, that famous photograph, the handshake 
between young Bill Clinton and John Kennedy, and the good part of 
that is that Bill Clinton realized that he -- the kind of charisma 
factor that we remember. The picture of him playing the saxophone 
and meeting people and the glamour he want the so much to be part 
of his White House. Remember, Bill Clinton does not own a home. He 
spends his time in Martha's vineyard. Doesn't even have a house in 
Arkansas but he learned the wrong side of the camel years, too and 
that's that you can get away with the reckless Hugh brings that Kennedy 
got away it. Now the press will hold you accountable. They scrutinize 
every aspect of every politician's life. The way to make it big as 
a journalist is the I got you. Get something on a politician, and 
the fact that Clinton somehow never learned that historical lesson, 
that in the 1990's here you can't get away with the wolves nipping 
at your heels, you can't get away with something like an affair with 
an intern in the White House and it's that problematic spreakt of 
his character that I think makes him sort of a very troubled president 
and one that will never rise in our public estimation to greatness. 
Just a few seconds remaining. Stephen Hess, does this mean by design 
that only boy or girl Scouts need apply to run in the year 2000? I 
Don think so. Although I do think that -- that there will be a reaction 
to this. And that in the year 2000, at least, the slogan will be character 
counts. But I don't think the presidency itself has been particularly 
damaged by this. Most of what has happened in the course of this last 
year is remedial. The Paula Jones case I think should be reversed. 
The independent counsel law should be let -- die in a natural death. 
Some of the issues, such as the protective secret service -- the courts 
were a little cavalier about something should be done about, but they 
will be done. The presidency is a resilient institution. Very happy 
both of you gentlemen could make the time to be with us tonight. Thank 
you, Stephen Hess, Doug Brinkley. Safe trip tomorrow. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>