<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981203.2100.3014 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
You may recall a story in the news almost a month ago now. We told 
you the story of a man who went to extraordinary lengths to save an 
employee who had been kidnapped in central America. The boss wound 
up becoming a hostage in exchange, in the process with -- with violence 
against traveling executives on the rise, many companies in this country 
are taking no chances. They're actually training their employees in 
counterterrorism. With more on that, correspondent Jim Cummins. In 
the movie "clear and present danger" Harrison Ford played the deputy 
director of the C.I.A. who is ambushed by hitmen working for a columbian 
drug lord. This is Hollywood, of course, but for many business executives 
and governments officials traveling abroad, the threat of coming under 
attack is very real. Last year, four American oil executives were 
shot to death in Pakistan. Only days after a Pakistani man was dwicted 
of murdering two C.I.A. employees. In October, a Canadian mine drilling 
executive traded places with one of his employees who had been taken 
hostage by left I didn't say columbian rebels. They know they're operating 
in a dangerous part of the world. They know they have to have tools 
to enhance their security and we're anxious to help them improve their 
security posture. Bob Lucas is director of international training 
incorporated's facility in texas. The whole emphasis of had we do 
and all the programs we have is early recognition and avoidance of 
an incident. I. T. I. provides its students with mock scenarios that 
simulate potentially life threatening situations. Courses can last 
from a day to a week with the average cost about $2,500. Students 
learn how to handle cars at high speeds and how to act when boxed 
in by wood-be attackers. We're not involved in teaching people how 
to drive fast from a race car standpoint. What we are teaching them 
is how to get out of a dangerous situation once an attack unfolds. 
But sometimes even the best training can't stop an assassin's bullet. 
One tool security experts often recommend is an armor the car with 
windows more than an inch thick. Bullet resistant batteries, an added 
1600 pounds of protection, the price tag about $100,000 per vehicle. 
What the armored car does for you from a security standpoint is it 
buys you time. You can -- you have time to react to an attack and 
respond to it. And safely. I. T. I. also provides its clients with 
intense weapons training. The 13-acre firing range gives the students 
the opportunity to become familiar with a variety of guns. If you're 
going to carry a handgun or any type of weapon, shotgun, handgun, 
or anything like that, you need to come -- go to somebody who needs 
-- who knows how to tell you what is the proper way of loading, unloading, 
and help you make that decision. When can I shoot, when can I not 
shoot? Of course, no amount of training guarantees safety, but knowing 
how to react could be the difference between life and death. Jim Cummins, 
NBC news, pearsall, Texas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>