<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981203.1830.0893 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth." Tonight, the manhunt is massive. So why can't 
the man be found? Texas law officers are still desperately seeking 
that death row inmate who gave them the slip from death row on Thanksgiving. 
He is Martin gurule, 29 years old, and guilty of killing two men during 
a Robbery at a restaurant in corpus Christi back in 1992. He has been 
on death row for more than five years. But now, he's nowhere to be 
found. And in Texas, everyone from the governor to the man on the 
street is asking, "has Martin gurule gotten away with murder?" NBC's 
Jim Cummins reports from Texas tonight, "in depth." It's been almost 
a week since convicted killer Martin gurule made texas history, the 
first man to break out of death row since a member of bonnie and Clyde's 
gang did it back in the 1930's. And now the authorities are beginning 
to ask themselves that embarrassing question, is it possible that 
gurule, a desperado from death row got away? I'm upset about it. And 
when I stand around the water cooler, I ask the same question. But 
fortunately, my question's got a lot more weight, so I've asked the 
texas rangers to step in and answer the question for me. At first, 
they concentrated their manhunt within seven miles of the prison walls 
in the piney Woods of east Texas, constantly reassuring everybody 
that their man was nearby. If he's still in the area, that we believe 
he is, he is looking for transportation. But those who know him say 
gurule is charming, Witty and smart enough to have arranged for a 
getaway car long before his breakout. All across Texas every day there 
are dozens of frustrate ing false sightings of the fugitives. We didn't 
find what we were looking for. In the search area, it's nerve-wracking 
for residents like Gerald hunt, who is afraid to go home without the 
police behind him. We've been away for a couple of hours and just 
wanted to double check before we go back in. Many, if not most texans, 
suspect gurule is long gone, perhaps south of the border. What's worse, 
Mexico usually doesn't extradite criminals facing the death penalty 
in this country. What happened to Martin gurule? Where is this guy? 
He went across the road. He backtracked his tracks. He jumped in his 
car, and he took off to Mexico, part of the Mexican mafia. He had 
plenty of people help organize this thing. For many people, this manhunt 
is becoming comical. I think he's hanging out with Jimmy Hoffa. That's 
right, we can only hope. If they don't find him here in the next few 
days, they'll probably never find him. Today, as they began circulating 
gurule's wanted poster on the internet, the authorities conceded their 
manhunt now extends into Mexico. We will bring back this fugitive. 
We will bring him back dead or alive. And it really doesn't make any 
difference, in my opinion, which that might be. Meanwhile, it's back 
to business as usual for the Texas criminal justice system. I have 
to get back and take care of an execution tonight. The first of six 
executions planned over the next 12 days in texas. The same fate that 
awaits Martin gurule if the authorities ever find him. Jim Cummins, 
NBC news, Dallas. One more note -- there is now a $5,000 reward posted 
for any information leading to the capture of Martin gurule. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>