<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0413 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When a fire broke out recently in an attic of the Royal Palace here, 
the flames were quickly detected and extinguished. But that accident 
reignited a simmering controversy over the way the palace is being 
used that is far more difficult to stamp out. The Reggia di Caserta, 
begun in the mid-18th century for Charles III, the Bourbon king of 
Naples, to rival Versailles, is one of the most imposing palaces in 
Europe. President Clinton dined under its gold ceilings during the 
Group of Seven summit meeting held in Naples in 1994. Film director 
George Lucas chose its late Baroque marble staircase for a scene in 
his coming ``Stars Wars'' movie, ``Episode One: The Phantom Menace.'' 
The palace has 1,200 rooms (Versailles has 700) and is surrounded 
by a 250-acre park that includes a 256-foot cascade. Unlike Versailles, 
however, the palace in Caserta is not solely a museum. Only 44 rooms 
are open to the public. Eight hundred rooms are now under military 
occupation _ specifically, the Italian air force's training school 
for noncommissioned officers. The museum director, the Culture Ministry 
and art lovers want the military out. But the general in command at 
Caserta and his men would prefer to stay, and they argue that they 
have no other place to go. Local officials are caught in the middle: 
They want the military to leave the palace, but they also want them 
to stay in Caserta, where they provide 300 jobs and spend about $9 
million a year. The emotional, many-sided battle being fought in Caserta, 
moreover, is decades old, and far from unique. It took nearly 50 years, 
but the Culture Ministry finally secured an agreement with the Defense 
and Finance ministries in 1997 to move an officers' club out of the 
Palazzo Barberini, one of Italy's national galleries, in Rome. Retired 
officers are still having genteel lunch here under their 17th-century 
dining room's ceiling fresco, but the museum is renovating a smaller 
1930s villa in the back of the property in the expectation that the 
officers will move someday. In Italy, a country overflowing with art 
treasures and historical monuments, countless buildings have cultural 
significance. The Italian military owns or occupies some of the finest 
properties, including a 14th-century convent in Perugia now used by 
the army as a foreign language school. But police academies, tax inspectors 
and dentists also work out of historic buildings. The incident at 
Caserta, which occurred shortly after the new culture minister, Giovanna 
Melandri, was appointed, lighted a fire in Rome. Mrs. Melandri, 36, 
vowed to expel the military from Caserta and from dozens of other 
cultural sites. She said the air force had agreed to find a new location 
by Feb. 2. ``Our patrimony is so rich and enormous, it would be impossible 
to turn it all into museums,'' Mrs. Melandri said in an interview 
in her office. ``But we have to look at improper use of historical 
buildings. In Caserta, we need to find a use for the available space 
that is more compatible with a museum. A military school is incompatible.'' 
In Caserta, from opposite wings of a palace spread over four courtyards, 
the soldiers and the museum workers seem as compatible as hostile 
neighbors in a crowded Neapolitan high rise. Vincenzo Zuccaro, a museum 
public relations official, indignantly pointed out an 18th-century 
vault fresco by Mariano Rossi that had to be restored because of water 
damage Zuccaro said was caused by cadets' showers above. The museum 
director, Livio Ricciardi, complained about cooking smells from the 
school kitchens. But he confessed that he had no plans or proposals 
on how to use the additional rooms if and when the school moves out. 
``We hope they'll leave soon, but when they do, we'll be at a loss,'' 
he said. ``For one thing, I don't know what rooms they have and what 
they look like.'' Asked why not, he replied, ``I've never been invited.'' 
The commander of the school, which was established here in 1948, said 
that as a soldier, he would obey orders to retreat from the palace. 
``Caserta is in our hearts,'' the commander, Gen. Alessio Santicchi, 
said. ``Of course we would be unhappy to leave but that is a sentimental 
discourse. On a practical level, if they told us, leave so we can 
do this this and this, I would understand. But to be told just to 
go away, that I do not understand.'' Like other officers there, General 
Santicchi argued that the school spends $800,000 a year to maintain 
its part of the building, and is a useful tenant. He argued that the 
fire was detected, and put out, only because his men were living nearby. 
``Our fear is that if we leave, nothing will take our place,'' he 
said. ``It's like seeing a home turn into an abandoned house.'' But 
his case is complicated by the fact that 10 years ago, the air force 
decided that the palace was getting too small for the school, and 
began building a $125 million complex eight miles away in Capua, with 
most of the money coming from the European Economic Community. It 
took 10 years to build, and by the time it was close to completion, 
cuts in the military budget had whittled down enrollment at the school 
from 2,000, to 900 today. Now, the air force argues, Capua is too 
large for the school, and would be too costly to run. Mrs. Melandri 
said it was the military's problem to find a new site by Feb. 2. Santicchi 
noted that even if the air force chose Capua, that site was not ready 
for habitation. ``They haven't built the barracks, and that could 
take another year or two,'' he said. Caserta Mayor Luigi Falco, who 
said he wants to convert other unused military buildings in town for 
the school, laughed merrily at Mrs. Melandri's February deadline. 
``That,'' he said, ``is not a realistic deadline. It's an Italian 
deadline.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>