<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0303 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
William Forsythe, the American choreographer who has been artistic 
director of the Frankfurt Ballet in Germany since 1984, is a prodigious 
talent but no prodigal son. He refuses to come home. But he does drop 
in occasionally to create new works and restage old ones for major 
American ballet companies. More rarely, he visits with his own troupe, 
now officially billed as Ballett Frankfurt on its tours, and shows 
off a more anarchic side of his highly organized choreography. There 
is no contradiction here. Much of Forsythe's work is about order and 
disorder. This theme, spectacularly enhanced by a leitmotif of death 
and rebirth, races through ``Eidos: Telos,'' the raucous full-evening 
piece that he has chosen for Ballett Frankfurt's appearance at the 
Brooklyn Academy of Music, its first visit to New York in a decade. 
The work has its considerable cerebral overload but the apocalyptic 
ending or new beginning, depending on your view, is well worth the 
wait. Within the darkening storm of Forsythe's eclipse-prone lighting 
design, a violinist with an electronic device is joined by three trombonists 
blasting out their long-awaited crescendo. The world before us seems 
to break apart. The sound is augmented by the vibrations generated 
by two lines of brightly costumed dancers as they repeatedly touch 
two sets of cables strung across the stage. When they disappear, Dana 
Caspersen, whose exceptionally recited monologue dominates the previous 
and second act, returns to the center. Bare-breasted until now, she 
crawls out of her saffron skirt as if hatching from an egg. Nude and 
knock-kneed, she is no longer identified with a mythic Persephone 
but becomes a distorted, even grotesque creature emerging into a world 
without creature comforts. When I saw ``Eidos: Telos'' in Montreal 
in 1995 shortly after its German premiere, I did not catch the full 
intensity of its rage against death. Yet for all its moments of pure 
dance (there are many), the piece is chiefly about this explosive 
ending, a catharsis. The Next Wave Festival at the Academy (30 Lafayette 
Avenue, Fort Greene) where ``Eidos'' is to be performed through Friday 
night and at matinees Saturday and Sunday, seems to be just the right 
place for such an experimental work. Forsythe, nonetheless, does not 
play by familiar rules. He does not aim to please, and this production, 
both highly rewarding and exasperating, does not fit into neat categories 
of American dance. Even the title, as described in the program note, 
has several levels of meaning. Essentially it can be translated from 
the Greek as ``Form: The End.'' For all the choreography's conceptual 
structure ( Forsythe provides diagrams in the program to suggest how 
he composed it with input from the dancers), ``Eidos'' is not pure 
form. There is an Expressionist tinge here, rooted in the idea that 
body language betrays or reveals emotion. Those used to Forsythe's 
experiments with classical technique, especially his off-balance toe 
work in ballet companies, may be disconcerted by the pieces he creates 
for his own troupe. Often using spoken words, they do not always rely 
on dance alone and their dramatic subtext can be made up of visual 
non sequiturs. That Forsythe can still choreograph brilliant neoclassical 
ballets in Frankfurt is also true. Last October, the hit of San Francisco 
Ballet's season at City Center was a restaging of his ``Vertiginous 
Thrill of Exactitude,'' a ballet that splendidly explored the classical 
vocabulary. ``Eidos'' was created ``in choreographic association with 
the ensemble,'' as the program credit says and Forsythe has apparently 
given the dancers choices about what kind of movement has gone into 
portions of the fixed choreography and when they can perform it. Any 
collaborative process has its strengths and weaknesses and at worst, 
the part where the dancers look most natural is the least interesting. 
But the most powerful formal passages, one suspects, may be all Forsythe. 
The highlight is the stunning ensemble at the end of Act II when men 
and women, all in long skirts with bustles to provide an arched look, 
waltz into dissolving patterns and line dances. This hallucinatory 
vision is ruptured by a distancing effect. Antony Rizzi, already seen 
as an outstanding dancer in Part 1, delivers a scatological diatribe 
about finding himself in the land of the dead. That world is evoked 
earlier by Ms. Caspersen, an American like Rizzi, who recites a text 
she wrote, inspired by ``The Marriage of Cadmus and Harmony, '' a 
book about Greek myths by Roberto Calasso. Her verbal imagery, like 
her flailing animal-like postures on all fours, is visceral: she sees 
herself as a Persephone who is a spider woman, burrowing in and out 
of the earth. Dragged down to Hades every six months, Persephone can 
return to earth only at springtime. Here, as anywhere, her fate is 
to say hello but also an inevitable goodbye. Ms. Caspersen's performance 
is extraordinary, uninhibited but disciplined. And when she stuffs 
yellow cellophane into a suspended light projector, this rage is just 
right. Forsythe has never been shy about polishing up punk-style theatrics. 
Less convincing is his incorporation of ``Self Meant to Govern,'' 
a piece he choreographed in 1994 and which has become the first of 
the three parts in ``Eidos.'' Essentially, it is an exposition of 
the way Forsythe can dislocate conventional ballet steps and positions 
while stylizing the movement with extreme isolations of parts of the 
body. The fact that the six dancers wear socks gives them a slippery 
ride along the floor cloth on the stage. But after some time, the 
traction-free trajectories, spliced in with rubber-legged collapses 
to the floor become less interesting than Thom Willem's music. A Dutch 
composer whose electronic chords often provide a basic beat for Forsythe's 
works, Willem is in a more expansive mood here. Maxim Franke is the 
violinist who produces the jagged melody onstage and Christian Dembowski, 
Daniel Scherf and Mike Tetzner are the trombonists at the side of 
the stage who break up the monotony. Rizzi, Christine Burkle, Jacopo 
Godani, Francesca Harper, Tamas Moritz and Andrea Tallis are the earthy 
excellent dancers who may or may not take their cues from a metronome 
and four clock faces set on the floor. There is also a digital clock 
in the rear, whose numbers work backward to a countdown. Time is the 
tenous link among the three sections. In the third, the ensemble is 
more expansive, placed in ever-changing spatial compositions until 
its ritualistic play with the cables onstage prepares the final explosion. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>