<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0513 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two off-duty corrections officers fishing at a bridge on the Trinity 
River late Thursday afternoon came across the body of a man in inmates' 
clothing caught in the current, and officials said it appeared to 
be Martin Gurule, the convicted murderer who vanished early Friday 
after becoming the first inmate to escape from death row in Texas 
since 1934. The bloated body was found at 5:30 p.m. under a bridge 
about four miles from the Texas prison system's Ellis Unit, where 
all of the state's death-row inmates are held and from which Gurule 
escaped last Friday shortly after midnight. Prison officials said 
Thursday night that they could not yet say for certain that the body 
was that of the 29-year-old Corpus Christi man, who was convicted 
after the 1992 murder of a restaurant owner and a cook during a robbery. 
But, they said, since the body was in prison-style clothing and shoes 
and no one else was missing from the prison, it appeared likely. Gurule 
was one of seven inmates who plotted to escape from the largest death 
row in the United States by cutting through a fence surrounding a 
prison recreation yard and moving onto a nearby roof. At 12:20 a.m. 
Friday, the men dropped to the ground and began to move toward the 
two perimeter fences surrounding the Ellis Unit, when officers in 
two guard towers 200 feet away opened fire. All but Gurule surrendered 
immediately. Gurule made it over the two 10-foot fences, topped with 
razor wire, and into the nearby piney woods that flank the facility 
on three sides. Police dogs later lost his scent down a nearby road 
and the authorities began a six-day manhunt that included guards posted 
along all roads near the prison, boat patrols on the Trinity River, 
and teams of officers on horseback and officers with dogs picking 
through the dense woodlands. Over the weekend one dog team found the 
2-inch piece of hacksaw blade that Gurule and the others apparently 
used to cut their way through the fence. But before the discovery 
of the body on Thursday, there was no indication of what had become 
of the escaped inmate, which led to growing speculation that he had 
slipped past the officers and out of the rough woods surrounding the 
prison. The long manhunt transformed Gurule _ before his escape a 
little-known inmate on Texas' death row _ into a nationally known 
fugitive, and there were many reported sightings of him throughout 
the state. What might have happened to him became a hot topic of conversation. 
There was speculation that he was still hiding in the woods or that 
he had made it past the police lines and forced his way into a passing 
car. All the time, though, prison spokesmen said they remained convinced 
that Gurule was still somewhere in the woods, largely because they 
had no hard evidence that he was not and because the vast majority 
of escapees are caught before getting more than a few miles from the 
prison. As tension mounted and pressure built on officials to explain 
what had happened and where Gurule had gone, Allan Polunsky, the chairman 
of the Texas Board of Criminal Justice, said prison officials intended 
to bring Gurule back ``dead or alive, and it really doesn't make any 
difference in my opinion which it will be.'' On Wednesday, officials 
changed their tactics, easing up on the dog and horse patrols into 
the woods, hoping to make Gurule believe that the pressure was easing 
and it was safe for him to move. Still there was no sign of him. So 
earlier Thursday, as the manhunt moved into its sixth morning, prison 
officials announced a reward for information leading to Gurule's capture. 
Prison officials said on Tuesday that they were closing down the work 
program that allowed about 150 of the death-row inmates access to 
the recreation yard for several hours each day _ rather than the one 
hour per day other condemned prisoners receive _ and a commission 
was appointed by prison officials to investigate the escape. Mac Stringfellow, 
a member of the state board that oversees the Texas prison system, 
said the investigation would be aimed at finding out what had gone 
wrong and what could be done to prevent future escapes. But Texas 
Gov. George W. Bush said Thursday, before the discovery of the body, 
that he wanted another, more independent investigation by the Texas 
Rangers. ``I'm upset about it,'' he said. ``I've asked the Texas Rangers 
to step in and answer the questions for me and for Texas.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>