<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0542 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Republicans on the House Judiciary Committee on Thursday abandoned 
their effort to add campaign finance issues to the impeachment inquiry 
and canceled plans to question the director of the FBI and a former 
Justice Department prosecutor about their investigations into fundraising 
practices in the 1996 election campaign. The decision by Rep. Henry 
J. Hyde, the committee chairman _ just two days after the committee 
issued subpoenas to witnesses on campaign finance _ cleared the way 
for the panel to vote on articles of impeachment next week. In returning 
to accusations against President Clinton in the Monica Lewinsky matter, 
Hyde told Republicans in a conference call that no evidence of impeachable 
offenses was found in a review of secret memorandums on campaign finance 
written by the FBI director, Louis Freeh, or the former prosecutor, 
Charles La Bella. Committee officials had examined the memos to see 
why the two law enforcement officials had argued to Attorney General 
Janet Reno that an independent counsel should look into Clinton's 
1996 re-election campaign. Hyde announced that the Judiciary Committee 
instead would pursue fundraising questions next year as part of its 
traditional oversight role over the Justice Department. With the House 
vote on impeachment moving into its critical stages, more Republican 
turmoil surfaced Thursday as some moderates assembled a proposal to 
censure Clinton instead of impeach him. It would condemn Clinton's 
behavior and require him to admit he had deceived the American people. 
It would also require Clinton to pay a financial penalty of an undisclosed 
sum, which would require his consent in order to overcome constitutional 
hurdles. Circumventing the House Republican leadership, the group 
sent the proposal directly to the White House for scrutiny. The moderates' 
stance put them at odds with Rep. Tom DeLay, the House Majority Whip, 
who has come out vehemently against censure in recent television appearances 
and is fighting to keep such a proposal off the House floor. ``The 
main purpose is to make sure the president is not allowed to walk 
away unpunished,'' said Rep. Peter King, R-N.Y., who was working on 
the proposal along with Rep. Mike Castle, R-Del. ``A vote on impeachment, 
which we believe will not pass, would be giving the president a victory 
he would not deserve,'' King said. ``This is to show that Republicans 
as the governing party have a strong resolution condemning the president's 
behavior.'' A senior White House official confirmed that discussions 
about the censure proposal were under way with King, who has a good 
relationship with the administration. The discussions were the clearest 
indication to date that the White House is developing a back channel 
to devise an alternative to impeachment that would be attractive to 
moderate Republicans. The administration official, speaking on condition 
of anonymity, stressed that the White House was doing more listening 
than talking. ``It's more King saying, `here's what we're doing,' 
more than anyone here saying, `This is what we want,' '' the official 
said. King said about 20 Republicans were backing his proposal, although 
he declined to name his supporters. But with Republicans divided over 
how to end the White House scandal, those pushing to impeach the president 
questioned how many Republicans were really supporting his plan. ``There 
is no censure groundswell,'' said one Republican official promoting 
impeachment. ``Out of 228 Republicans, 220 don't want censure.'' Under 
pressure from Democrats and Republicans alike to grab hold of the 
impeachment process and wrap it up, Rep. Robert Livingston, the incoming 
speaker, raised his profile Thursday and said he would prefer to see 
the House finish impeachment proceedings this year. But he refused 
to indicate whether he would allow House consideration of censure. 
``I'm just not going to make a decision on that,'' Livingston said, 
adding that he was waiting to see the recommendations of the Judiciary 
Committee. The committee is expected to vote along party lines late 
next week to recommend at least one article of impeachment against 
the President for perjury. Sitting side by side with Trent Lott, the 
Senate Majority Leader, at their joint news conference, Livingston 
tried in vain to highlight a broader Republican agenda. ``Is there 
a question other than on impeachment that we could maybe ...,'' Lott 
began to say, trying to change the subject. He was met with a chorus 
of No's from reporters. In other developments Thursday, the Republican-controlled 
Judiciary Committee and the White House battled again over how Clinton's 
defense would be presented next Tuesday. Thomas Mooney, the committee's 
chief of staff, told the White House that the lawyer appearing on 
Clinton's behalf would be ``subject to at least one full round of 
questioning'' by the 37-member panel. He said that the lawyer would 
be allowed to review some of the committee's evidence, but that the 
counsel would not be allowed to take notes or make copies of materials. 
Mooney gave the White House until Friday to name the witnesses it 
planned to call. In a sharp attack on the panel's position, the White 
House press secretary, Joe Lockhart, said, ``The committee's erratic 
behavior leaves the fundamental focus on its inquiry unclear. Their 
actions have been chaotic, partisan and irresponsible, fundamentally 
limiting the president's ability to present a coherent defense.'' 
The Judiciary Committee has been struggling with management of the 
inquiry ever since the November elections when House Republicans suffered 
unexpected losses partly attributed to the public's weariness over 
the Lewinsky scandal. It has heard from the independent counsel, Kenneth 
Starr, and from convicted perjurers, but it has not questioned major 
witnesses like Ms. Lewinsky. The committee recently skidded into trouble 
as it tried to broaden the inquiry beyond the Lewinsky matter. It 
briefly looked into the incident involving Kathleen Willey, a former 
White House volunteer who said the president had groped her. She was 
said to have been pressured to change her account. Then this week 
it veered quickly in and out of campaign finance matters. With the 
committee considered certain to recommend at least one article of 
impeachment for perjury, the question is whether the House will succeed 
in impeaching Clinton by a narrow margin. A crucial question is how 
many Republican moderates will break with their party. Key Democrats 
_ including Rep. Paul McHale of Pennsylvania, who has been one of 
Clinton's harshest Democratic critics _ also planned strategy Thursday 
with Rep. Dick Gephardt of Missouri, the minority leader, to try to 
reach moderate Republicans to promote bipartisan censure options. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>