<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0452 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Americans bought more sport utility vehicles, pickup trucks and vans 
than cars last month, for the first time since a brief period at the 
end of World War II, as very low gasoline prices, low interest rates 
and a strong economy kept overall auto sales brisk. Sales of so-called 
light trucks reached 50.8 percent of the market last month, mainly 
because of a steep climb in sales of sport utility vehicles. The broad 
popularity of these vehicles began in the early 1990s and has accelerated 
in the last three years with the introduction of much bigger models 
like the Ford Expedition and Dodge Durango. Domestic and foreign automakers 
sold cars and light trucks last month at a brisk annual rate of 15.4 
million vehicles, up 2.2 percent from a year earlier. Ward's Auto 
Info Bank, an industry data service, predicted that this year would 
be the second-best ever for sales in the United States, trailing only 
the 16.0 million sold in 1986. Plunging gasoline prices and changing 
tax laws produced a surge of sales then. Domestic and foreign automakers 
sold 579,845 light trucks and 562,190 cars last month, according to 
Ward's. Light trucks typically account for a slightly higher share 
of new vehicle sales in November than in any other month, as Northeast 
buyers snap up four-wheel-drive vehicles in preparation for winter. 
Excluding commercial purchases, American families bought more light 
trucks than cars in November and December of last year. But November 
of this year marks the first time since a brief period at the end 
of World War II that overall auto sales, including purchases by rental-car 
agencies and other commercial fleets, have included more light trucks 
than cars. Rental agencies have historically bought mostly cars. Light 
trucks are typically bigger and more powerful than cars, and millions 
of Americans are turning to them now that gasoline prices have fallen 
so steeply. Light-truck sales have also increased this year because 
of aggressive marketing. For years, demand for sport utility vehicles 
and minivans outstripped supply. But by the mid-1990s, practically 
every automaker had decided to design new light-truck models and build 
new factories for them or convert car factories. Light-truck production 
is now surging as a result. Ford Motor Co., which has been rapidly 
expanding production of full-size sport utility vehicles and pickup 
trucks, announced Thursday that it sold 1.3 percent more vehicles 
last month than a year earlier, as a 7.4 percent jump in its light-truck 
sales more than offset an 8.4 percent drop in its dwindling sales 
of cars. General Motors Corp., which still sells more cars than light 
trucks, suffered a 5.6 percent fall in overall sales, as its car and 
light-truck sales eroded. The giant automaker has been short of inventory, 
partly because it is switching factories to the production of new 
full-size pickup-truck models and partly because of a crippling two-month 
strike last summer that left its dealerships almost barren of popular 
models even as other automakers' sales were climbing. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>