<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0304 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Christian Berard may not be a household name in the United States, 
but in the 1920s and '30s he was the Paris equivalent of Andy Warhol: 
a tortured, drug-taking but multitalented artist, versatile in many 
fields and a darling of society. With ``Decors Imaginaires,'' a current 
show of his gouaches at Rainbow Fine Art through Dec. 19, and seven 
drawings for sale in Sotheby's Dec. 9 auction of ``Dance, Theater, 
Opera'' designs, Berard is ripe for rediscovery. He was unbelievably 
facile, as good an easel painter as he was a creator of theater sets 
and costumes, fashion illustrations for Vogue and Harper's Bazaar 
and murals for friends' houses. This ability has confused art critics 
trying to evaluate him, but his paintings are in the collections of 
the Museum of Modern Art, the Menil Collection in Houston and the 
McNay Art Museum in San Antonio. Berard was born in Paris in 1902, 
the son of the city's official architect, and died in 1949. His prodigious 
talent was recognized at an early age, says a 1988 biography by Boris 
Kochno. Berard studied with the painters Maurice Denis and Edouard 
Vuillard and had his first gallery show in 1925. His paintings were 
soon bought by influential collectors, including Gertrude Stein. In 
1926 he did a portrait of Coco Chanel, who became a friend, and he 
went on to inspire other couturiers, including Christian Dior and 
Elsa Schiaparelli. Jennifer Roth of Sotheby's described the appeal 
of Berard's work: ``It was the lightness of his touch. He had a sensitive, 
beautiful line. One doesn't learn this; you are born with it.'' In 
1930 Berard designed his first theater sets, at the Comedie-Francaise 
for a Jean Cocteau play, ```La Voix Humaine,'' the first of many collaborations 
with Cocteau. In 1931 Berard became a designer for a new incarnation 
of the Ballets Russes, formed in Monte Carlo with George Balanchine 
as choreographer. Sergei Diaghilev, the original Ballets Russes impresario, 
who died in 1929, had tried to rid theater of its artifice. Diaghilev's 
genius was in finding unknown artists in the fields of art, music, 
design and choreography and combining their talents in a Gesamtkunstwerk, 
a total work of art. Balanchine also employed artists, among them 
Joan Miro, Alexander Benois and Andre Derain as well as Berard, who 
did the sets and costumes for Balanchine's ``Cotillon'' in 1932. That 
year he began painting the gouaches at Rainbow Fine Art (15 E. 82nd 
St., Manhattan). As Linda Hardberger, curator of the Tobin Collection 
of Theater Art at the McNay Museum, said: ``Instead of hiring outside 
people to do sets and costumes afterward, Diaghilev made it a collaborative 
process from the beginning. He used real painters to do scenery. The 
music and dance were reflected in the costumes and sets. It was a 
holistic approach.'' Berard was a great charmer. Called Bebe for his 
cherubic face, he was a bear of a man and, evidently, very good company. 
His friends included Elsa Maxwell, the cafe society hostess in New 
York; Jean Hugo, the great-nephew of Victor; a popular architect, 
Emilio Terry; Salvador Dali, and members of French society like Vicomte 
Charles de Noailles and Prince Jean-Louis de Faucigny-Lucinge. He 
painted decorative screens for friends and portraits of fellow talents 
like Cecil Beaton and Horst P. Horst. He also worked on interiors 
with Jean-Michel Frank and the Giacometti brothers. Rainbow Fine Art 
is selling the Berard gouaches with exceptional examples of furniture 
by his peers, including a 1928 Emile-Jacques Ruhlmann lady's desk 
in rosewood; a circa-1936 round table with gilt patina by Frank; a 
Eugene Printz lacquer table with a double tray in a semicircle, and 
a Giacometti bronze gueridon, or stand, in the form of a tree. Ultimately, 
Berard's popularity worked against him. In a catalog for a Berard 
retrospective in Marseilles in 1973, Gaston Defferre wrote: ``By demanding 
too much of its enfants terribles, by never wanting any party to be 
without them . . .Paris, its high society, its snob coteries, its 
designers thought they were serving greatness, when in fact they were 
doing it a disservice. Berard gained nothing from this but an unfortunate 
reputation for frivolity.'' He added, ``Berard was the innovator who 
got the theater out of its rut.'' Among the Berards in Sotheby's sale, 
the first that the auction house in New York has devoted to costume 
and set designs since 1986, is the sketch of an angel done for Jean 
Giraudoux's 1943 play ``Sodom and Gomorrah.'' There are also five 
Berard illustrations for a special edition of ``Gigi,'' Colette's 
novel. The sketches once belonged to Kochno, a Russian ballet librettist 
who was Berard's companion. The estimate for each is $1,000 to $1,500. 
Other lots in Sotheby's sale include a painting of a harem woman dancing 
in a skimpy outfit of yellow, purple and orange chiffon. Dated 1911, 
it is by Leon Bakst and based on his costume design for the Odalisque 
in ``Scheherazade,'' a modern ballet Diaghilev produced for the Ballets 
Russes in 1910. It is estimated at $40,000 to $60,000. Baksts are 
sought after by Baron Hans Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemisza and by Robert 
Tobin of San Antonio, two important collectors of theater art. In 
1914, Diaghilev asked the Russian painter Natalia Gontcharova (1881-1962) 
to design costumes for the Ballets Russes' ``Coq d'Or,'' based on 
a Pushkin story. It was her first work for the company, and the sketches 
are in a primitive style, reflecting her love for Russian folk art. 
(Estimate: $4,000 to $8,000 each.) Diaghilev also commissioned sets 
and costumes from Maurice Utrillo (1883-1955) for the slapstick 1925 
ballet ``Barabau.'' This is thought to be the first full-length ballet 
Balanchine choreographed and the only work Utrillo did for Diaghilev. 
Utrillo's watercolors, one for a male costume, the other for a female 
one, are estimated to bring $8,000 to $12,000 each. A man wearing 
a red suit is framed by white birches on the edge of an idyllic lake 
in an Alexander Benois gouache decor for a 1930 Paris production of 
``Sadko,'' a takeoff of a Russian fairy tale. Estimated at $6,000 
to $8,000, it looks like a finished painting. Also in the sale is 
a Joseph Urban gouache for the 1912 production of the ``The Tales 
of Hoffmann.'' Urban (1871-1933) was an Austrian architect who immigrated 
to the United States before World War I and designed 55 productions 
for the Metropolitan Opera, as well as furniture and architecture, 
including the New School for Social Research and Mar-a-Lago, the Palm 
Beach mansion commissioned by Marjorie Merriweather Post. The gouache 
in the sale was, the catalog says, part of Urban's first work for 
the Boston Opera, which was so successful that it established him 
as a stage designer in America. The sale also includes a rare Giorgio 
de Chirico costume design for Apollo in Euripides' ``Bacchantes,'' 
which Alexandre Iolas produced in Athens in 1937. But it doesn't have 
the wit or grace of a Berard. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>