<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0379 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mercy Makhalemele found out she was HIV-positive when she was pregnant 
with her second child. She was 23, had been married for five years, 
and was faithful to her husband. She cried all the way home from the 
prenatal clinic, but was too afraid to tell anyone for nearly a year. 
When she finally did tell her husband, he beat her to the ground, 
knocking her against a lighted stove and badly burning her wrist, 
she said. Then he threw her out of the house, refusing to believe 
that he had given her the virus. The next day, he went to the shoe 
store she managed. With everyone watching, he shouted at her to collect 
all her things, he would have nothing to do with someone with HIV, 
the virus that causes AIDS. Her employers dismissed her that afternoon. 
``My story,'' she told a women's group gathered for a luncheon in 
Durban recently, ``is not just my story. If you talk to other women, 
you will hear 90 percent the same. It will not be 50 different stories. 
Rejecting us is not going to solve the problem of this disease. It's 
just going to cause stress. So please, just accept us. `' Across sub-Saharan 
Africa, the AIDS epidemic is everywhere. In several countries, one 
out of four people are now infected with the virus and will probably 
die within 10 years. The disease is flooding hospitals, changing the 
face of work places and producing hundreds of thousands of orphans. 
But go to a village and ask if anyone is suffering from AIDS and the 
answer will likely be no, there is only malaria or tuberculosis or 
diarrhea. It is hard to find anyone who publicly admits to being HIV-positive. 
Many go to their graves with their secret, so great is the stigma 
attached to AIDS. Discrimination against people with HIV exists to 
some degree in most countries around the world. But experts say the 
problem is particularly severe in Africa, where little has been done 
to study or attack the stigma. The shame that people feel and the 
treatment they suffer at the hands of their communities has far-reaching 
consequences for efforts to fight the spread of the virus and treat 
the sick, experts say. For one thing, it keeps people from wanting 
to find out whether they have AIDS, and it encourages even those who 
know they are HIV-positive to act as everyone else does, and perhaps 
even spread the disease. For instance, a mother who is trying to hide 
her HIV status may be unwilling to try infant formula to help prevent 
transmission to her child if other mothers in her village are breast-feeding. 
Fear of discovery can also keep people from seeking services of any 
sort. In South Africa, facilities earmarked for AIDS patients often 
stand virtually empty even though the help they offer is desperately 
needed. In Richard's Bay, on the coast north of Durban, the town's 
six largest employers have converted an old farmhouse into a nine-bed 
AIDS hospice open to any of their 10,000 employees, many of whom live 
in shacks. The building is surrounded by flowering gardens and services 
include counseling for families, free meals and visits with traditional 
healers if they are wanted. But despite a local HIV infection rate 
estimated at 30 percent, the compound is rarely used. ``It's such 
a huge disgrace to be diagnosed with HIV/AIDS that people will suffer 
all sorts of discomforts rather than associate with a facility that 
is clearly known to be for people with AIDS,'' said Jenny Rogers, 
who designed the hospice. Those people who do come forward, even to 
tell their families, face daunting prejudice. In some rare cases, 
they have been stoned. But most often they are simply rejected by 
their families or isolated, their utensils and bedclothes kept separate 
from everyone else's, their needs suddenly last on the list. Some 
are thrown out of their churches and hounded from their homes. As 
Ms. Makhalemele was making her plea for tolerance, a 19-year-old boy 
was alone in a Durban hospital suffering from tuberculosis. A few 
weeks before, she had taken her pitch to the boy's rural village and, 
inspired by her courage, the young man had told his neighbors that 
he too was HIV-positive. Later that day, his neighbors had gathered 
around his house and, hissing and pointing, had forced him to leave. 
His horrified family also wanted nothing to do with him, though efforts 
at reconciliation were under way. Some experts also argue that the 
isolation that AIDS victims experience can even hurt their family 
or community economically. ``You have perfectly normal people who 
cannot continue to contribute to society anymore,'' said Jean Louis 
Lamboray, a policy adviser for UNAIDS, the United Nations agency that 
deals with AIDS. ``If they have a shop, they lose their customers, 
they lose their suppliers and soon they are out of business. That's 
the typical story, 1,200 times over.'' While the way people with AIDS 
are treated varies from country to country across the continent, the 
discrimination seems to be somewhat worse in southern Africa, which 
has among the world's fastest rising rates of infection but few effective 
AIDS programs. Yet even to the north in Uganda, which is often held 
up as a model country because it has an aggressive AIDS education 
and prevention campaign, secrecy remains an issue. A 1993-4 survey 
of more than 700 clients who had been in counseling sessions at an 
AIDS services group found that more than 60 percent had not told their 
spouse or regular partner. The clients urged the organization to find 
an out-of-the-way location so that people could attend without being 
identified. Experts say that discrimination continues even now. A 
1997 study in the southern African country of Zimbabwe found that 
only one out of 10 people caring for someone with AIDS was willing 
to admit that they were nursing someone with the disease. Patients 
themselves were only slightly more likely to reveal their status. 
Sixty-five percent had told no one. In South Africa, Peter Busse, 
head of the National Association of People Living With AIDS, estimates 
that fewer than 100 of the country's three million HIV-infected people 
are completely open about it. ``When something like World AIDS Day 
comes around, we have trouble finding 20 people to go on television 
and radio shows,'' he said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>