<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0555 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kenneth Starr's prosecutors did not forbid Monica Lewinsky to call 
her lawyer when they first confronted her at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel 
on Jan. 16, and in fact they gave her several opportunities to call 
anyone she chose, a federal district judge concluded in a finding 
unsealed this week. Contrary to that finding, issued last April but 
kept sealed until now, President Clinton's lawyers and House Democrats 
have argued that prosecutors mistreated Ms. Lewinsky by repeatedly 
refusing her the opportunity to call her lawyer, Francis Carter. They 
maintain that the incident illustrates Starr's overzealousness, perhaps 
even misconduct. The ruling, by Judge Norma Holloway Johnson, part 
of a ream of documents ordered released this week by a federal appeals 
court, sheds further light on the controversial episode at the Ritz-Carlton, 
which occurred five days before the Clinton-Lewinsky scandal became 
public. The independent counsel's prosecutors approached Ms. Lewinsky 
there to try to win her cooperation in an investigation of whether 
President Clinton or others had lied under oath to cover up his affair 
with her. But Ms. Lewinsky's subsequent accusation that the prosecutors' 
efforts amounted to bullying led the White House and congressional 
Democrats to mine the incident for material they believed embarrassing 
to Starr. On Wednesday, White House lawyers demanded of Rep. Henry 
Hyde, R-Ill., who as chairman of the House Judiciary Committee heads 
the Clinton impeachment inquiry, that they be permitted to look at 
all decisions by Judge Johnson ``addressing the question of whether 
Ms. Lewinsky was denied access to her counsel, Frank Carter, on Jan. 
16.'' The president's lawyers said they needed the information in 
order to mount a defense of him before the committee next week. But 
in her decision, issued on April 28, Judge Johnson said lawyers and 
agents from Starr's office had not barred Ms. Lewinsky from calling 
her lawyer and had ``acted within the ethical rules in questioning 
Ms. Lewinsky without her attorney present.'' The judge's decision, 
which sprang from complaints to her by Ms. Lewinsky and Carter, was 
subsequently upheld by an appellate court. James Kennedy, a White 
House spokesman, said lawyers had not reviewed the newly unsealed 
documents and would have no comment Thursday. Judy Smith, Ms. Lewinsky's 
spokeswoman, also declined to comment. Starr's spokesman, Charles 
Bakaly III, said: ``This is an example where our prosecutors did not 
discuss rulings that would have helped us to respond to attacks against 
the office. We were prohibited from discussing it, because it was 
under seal, and we adhered to that.'' Criticism of Starr's office 
is not entirely absent from the ruling, however. Judge Johnson said 
she was troubled by the fact that prosecutors had begun immunity discussions 
with Ms. Lewinsky at the Ritz-Carlton meeting without obtaining her 
lawyer's permission, in violation of Justice Department regulations. 
``The court expresses its concern,'' the judge wrote, ``that the Office 
of Independent Counsel may have acted improperly in conducting immunity 
negotiations without the presence of her counsel, but declines to 
take further action on this particular matter.'' When Starr testified 
before the Judiciary Committee two weeks ago, Abbe Lowell, counsel 
for the committee's Democrats, suggested that prosecutors and agents 
had held Ms. Lewinsky against her will for hours. By Ms. Lewinsky's 
own account, one prosecutor at the hotel told her that she could go 
to prison for 27 years if she was convicted of perjury, and, when 
she said she wanted to call her mother to seek advice, Jackie Bennett, 
Starr's deputy, told her: ``You're 24. You're smart. You're old enough. 
You don't need to call your mommy.'' When questioned before the Judiciary 
Committee, Starr testified that Ms. Lewinsky had been free to leave 
the hotel at any time and had never been threatened or otherwise mistreated. 
He also said she had been given several opportunities to call anyone 
she chose. ``I think her perception was incorrect,'' Starr said. ``We 
made it clear to the witness that she was, in fact, free to leave. 
And the Ritz-Carlton, shall I say, is a fairly comfortable and commodious 
place.'' At no point in his testimony did Starr mention the rulings 
that had exonerated his office. The accusation of mistreatment was 
first raised by Ms. Lewinsky and Carter last winter. Ms. Lewinsky 
had hired Carter to help her draft an affidavit in the Paula Jones 
case in which she denied having had a sexual relationship with the 
president. The affidavit was filed on Jan. 16, several hours after 
Ms. Lewinsky had been approached by Starr's prosecutors and agents 
at the Ritz-Carlton, in suburban Virginia near the Pentagon. The ruling 
by Judge Johnson that resulted from the Lewinsky-Carter accusations 
was sealed until now because some of it related to grand jury testimony. 
It was unsealed by court order this week because that testimony has 
since become public knowledge, largely through Starr's impeachment 
referral to Congress. In addition to the judge's ruling, statements 
by two lawyers and three agents from Starr's office were released 
Thursday, and they portray in detail the questioning of Ms. Lewinsky 
at the hotel. Their accounts contrast sharply with Ms. Lewinsky's 
recollection that prosecutors refused her repeated attempts to call 
her lawyer and tried to bully her into agreeing to cooperate with 
their inquiry. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>