<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0429 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Japanese government said Thursday that the economy had shrunk 
at an annual rate of 2.6 percent in the third quarter, signaling deeper 
troubles ahead for Japan as it struggles through its worst recession 
since the end of World War II. Although the figures were a bit worse 
than expected, they offered the first indications that government 
money is helping as it trickles into the economy. But the effects 
so far have been slight, underscoring the challenges that Japan's 
leaders face in trying to steer the nation out of recession and help 
steady the world economy. Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi has staked his 
reputation on the promise that he would not let Japan's economic problems 
deteriorate so badly as to cause recessions in other countries. But 
polls show that consumers _ threatened by shrinking bonuses, falling 
overtime pay and rising unemployment _ are gloomy, and the economic 
figures show that they are spending less. Spending on building or 
renovating homes fell 9.7 percent from July through September, compared 
with the 1997 quarter. And Japanese corporations, increasingly idle, 
pulled back by cutting investment in factories and equipment 14.4 
percent compared with a year earlier. The government has started to 
carry out a $140 billion economic package, including programs to pave 
roads and build bridges. Last month it announced a second package 
with nearly $200 billion worth of tax cuts, loans, investment projects 
and other economic stimulants to be introduced next year. But if confidence 
continues to erode, even this may be inadequate. ``The third-quarter 
figures really are the 1990s in a nutshell,'' said Robert Alan Feldman, 
chief economist at Morgan Stanley here. ``The government attempts 
to offset the collapsing demand with government spending have not 
been sufficient to bring about growth.'' Many economists worry that 
a continuing cycle of spending sprees will bury Japan in debt and 
ruin its future finances just as pension costs rise and the labor 
force shrinks. Budget deficits are rising quickly. Less than two years 
ago, the combined deficits of national and local governments represented 
3.7 percent of the gross domestic product, and Japan was considered 
one of the world's most fiscally prudent countries. But by the end 
of the current fiscal year on March 31, 1999, the combined deficits 
are projected to reach 9.8 percent of output. And this year, for the 
first time, the accumulated national debt will exceed the size of 
the economy. The main reasons are the two economic stimulus packages 
and a vast debt burden the government took over from Japan National 
Railways. The accumulated debt is expected to rise to 111 percent 
of the gross domestic product by the end of March, according to figures 
released Wednesday. ``The debt situation is getting really really 
scary,'' said Brian Rose, an economist with Warburg Dillon Read here. 
``We may not get out of this. The economy has been bad for eight years, 
and we may be waiting another eight years.'' One of the biggest challenges 
for the government will be raising money in a smooth manner, without 
unnerving the financial markets. To pay for the new spending package, 
it must increase the amount of debt it issues every month. Although 
it would appear to be a perfect time to raise funds, with interest 
rates a sliver above zero, investors are nervous about seeing Japan 
flood the credit market with new bonds. Indeed, with returns so low 
and risk increasing, investors are shying away from government bonds. 
That means that yields on the new bonds may have to be increased to 
encourage buyers. But higher yields mean higher interest rates, which 
the government wants to avoid. What lies ahead may be more worrying. 
In 2000, Japan faces an enormous redemption of 10-year bonds, an amount 
that could exceed 100 trillion yen, or $833 billion. This year, its 
redemptions are expected to run not much more than $150 billion. ``It 
could be a disaster,'' said Akihiko Yokoyama, a fixed-income analyst 
with J.P. Morgan here. It is not surprising, then, that many economists 
do not expect an economic recovery soon, even though in a report issued 
Wednesday, the World Bank forecasts that Japan will achieve 1.4 percent 
growth in 2000. According to an economic assessment issued Thursday 
by the Japan Center for Economic Research, the two most important 
influences on the economy are bad debts held by banks and the excess 
capacity and idle machinery in factories. As companies try to increase 
efficiency, they are more likely to cut expenditures and dismiss workers. 
And as banks try to dispose of bad debts, they are likely to be increasingly 
reluctant to lend, which makes it hard for relatively healthy companies 
to grow. The Japan Center, a private research institute, said that 
the government's stimulus packages might increase growth slightly 
next year, but that the economy would probably shrink again in the 
following two years, as the deficit grows and public spending ebbs. 
Sustained economic revival will probably not come until the year 2002, 
the report said. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>