<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0279 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The premise was simple enough. Now that I am closer to my second childhood 
than to the first one, would I be able to find any spaces as dark, 
dank and nurturing as the poolrooms of my adolescence? It was in these 
vaguely disreputable parlors, up stairways or below street level, 
that at the age of 15 I found refuge from the purposefulness of school, 
from dreams of glory and fears of failure, and though I probably didn't 
realize it, from the looming rituals of sex and courtship. Once you 
walked into places like the long defunct one on Burnside Avenue in 
the Bronx, you were immediately comforted by the notion that your 
parents would not be happy if they knew you were there. It wasn't 
quite like running away to join apache dancers in Marseilles, or visiting 
a joss house, but the poolroom had an unmistakable yet acceptable 
touch of the sinister that was so alluring back then, when we were 
in a hurry to grow up and used forged draft cards to buy beer. We 
were exploring various sins, and the pool hall was indeed an academy 
of more than just billiards. Like so many of the old haunts, the place 
on Burnside had cuspidors, brass or chrome bowls on the floor that 
were also known as spittoons. Men walked in to take numbers. Almost 
everybody smoked and put out the cigarettes on the floor. A lot of 
people were passing through before graduating to jobs, college, women, 
but some stayed longer. We knew who the lifers were, and we were not 
quite sure whether we were impressed or scared by them. The man who 
ran the place was a muscular, big-bellied man named Ralph, who wore 
a sleeveless undershirt I used to associate with the actor Burt Lancaster 
but today would make more sense on the model Kate Moss. He dispensed 
wisdom and lore. He would tell us about wonderful hustles in which 
sharks who were on the lemonade _ that is, people who were hiding 
their own true speed by pretending to play worse than they could _ 
suckered fishes into high-stakes games. He would tell us about the 
guy in thick glasses who attracted attention by holding out a 10-dollar 
bill and asking for change for a 5. He would tell us about the legendary 
Ralph Greenleaf, who played in the `30s. I am particularly grateful 
to him for repeatedly telling me that I was never going to be any 
good, that I had no heart and that all things considered I should 
concentrate on my schoolwork. In those days we would visit pool halls 
in many boroughs, watching games of eight ball, nine ball, pocket 
apiece, captivated by fierce matchups. Downtown, in more ornate places 
like Julian's on 14th Street and McGirr's on Times Square, where women, 
then known as girls, would rack up the balls at the start of each 
frame, we watched games in which losers paid out with thick wads. 
And we learned lessons that went beyond applied geometry and vector 
analysis to human nature. We learned about who we could trust a lot 
and who we should trust less. We realized that some people who could 
win when they had nothing riding on the game often lost when the stakes 
went up, while others did much better for money than for fun. We also 
learned that there were people who used a lot of English on their 
stories, and that just because this kind of thing was fun to listen 
to, you didn't have to believe all of it. Well, that was then. What 
about now? The search centered on Greenwich Village, the East Village 
and Chelsea, where the Yellow Pages showed a relatively large concentration 
of billiard parlors, though far fewer than there used to be. The first 
stop was Fat Cat at 75 Christopher Street, just off Sheridan Square. 
It was promisingly subterranean, as cut off from the world as a mine. 
But there were patches of Day-Glo light, two Ping-Pong tables. At 
two of the eight pool tables being used, pairs of young women played 
against each other. At two other tables men were playing with women 
on what appeared to be dates. Back in the '50s, this was unthinkable. 
Moreover, there were no longer any overhead strands of beads with 
which one kept score. Raising your stick and moving 3, 4 or maybe 
even 10 beads over to mark a run used to be a matter of delight, accomplished 
with a flourish. Now, players just rotated a dial on the end of the 
table with their thumbs to keep track of the balls they sank. It's 
much harder to rub it in this way than by flicking the overhead markers 
so that everybody in the place can see what was what. Also, no one 
seemed to bang the heels of their sticks on the floor to signal appreciation 
of an opponent's good shot. Finally, the CDs on the jukebox played 
all the time. When pool rooms had spittoons, they did not have jukeboxes. 
A friend accompanying me on this exploratory ramble was young enough 
to advise me that the music was being performed by the artist formerly 
known as Prince, the Fine Young Cannibals and the Eurythmics. We played 
eight ball. My stroke had disappeared over the previous four decades, 
but I was sure it would come back. I told myself it was like riding 
a bicycle. At least I didn't rip the felt. We played for a while and 
then wandered over to SoHo Billiard, off Houston Street at 298 Mulberry 
St., a ground-floor establishment with big picture windows. We asked 
for a table. ``Smoking or non?'' asked the young man. Yes, that is 
what he asked. I tried to picture Ralph from Burnside Avenue asking, 
``Smoking or non?'' I couldn't do it. It turned out that the lower 
pit was the nonsmoking area and the upper tier was for smokers. Though 
neither of us smoke, we decided that in an effort to recapture the 
days when we went to pool halls in order to flirt with risk and danger, 
we would shoot on one of the upper tables and take our chances with 
the second-hand smoke. Of course we were in the minority, as there 
were seven tables being used in the non area and only six in smoking. 
One of those six was a family group, two moms and two young boys of 
about 8 or 10. In the nonsmoking pit one player, a man who appeared 
to be of my cohort, was wearing a derby hat and another sucked on 
an unlit cigar. A few others wore suspenders. The suspicion arose 
that they may have been lifers, but none of them seemed to be playing 
well enough. Perhaps this was a hustlers' convention, in which everyone 
was on the lemonade, hiding his own true speed. Probably, they were 
just patzers like me. There was a bar in addition to the music, and 
among the soft drinks available was kiwi-flavored soda water. At a 
nearby table, one player asked his friend what he could get him from 
the bar. ``Well, since I am a person of color,'' said the man, taking 
aim at the cue ball, ``you can get me a Heineken.'' The surroundings 
were pleasant, but I thought my stroke would come back quicker if 
we found someplace more sinister and less wholesome. We headed uptown 
to Julian's Famous Pool Hall at 138 E. 14th St., which in my day had 
been to pool what the Moulin Rouge was to the cancan. Surely, there 
we would find the atmosphere we craved. Julian's was closed. It was 
over. The gold lettering on the second-floor windows showed that before 
the hall lapsed its owners had sought to exploit its authenticity 
in the nostalgia market. The sign said, ``Photo Shots and Film Location.'' 
There were other signs that said ``Warning: Poison,'' presumably to 
deter potential trespassers or literate vermin. We turned northwest, 
to Broadway Billiards at 10 E. 21st St. It was quite busy. Men, women, 
music, no overhead beads. Some people brought their own cues. There 
was a bar with television sets showing sporting events and sports 
chat. No one seemed to be escaping from anything. There was a prominent 
sign that said, ``No Gambling, No Profinity, No Yelling.'' No one 
was visibly disobeying. As in the other spots, people were playing 
with their friends, and no strangers came by asking for a game, as 
was common years ago. My game kept improving. I was losing by less. 
I liked rubbing the blue chalk on the cue stick. Memories came back. 
Undone homework assignments. Wasting hours. Wasting days. We signed 
off. Maybe we could still find something a little less tame, though 
truthfully, hope was fading. We stopped at Chelsea Billiards at 54 
W. 21st St., where things were even more up-market. Some of the tables 
had beige rather than green felt. Regulars could store their cue sticks 
in lockers. Stylish jackets with the club logo were on sale for $175. 
But there were photos of great old pool players, including the legendary 
Ralph Greenleaf. We looked around but did not play, and headed to 
the last stop, the Billiard Club at 220 West 19th Street. This was 
pretty much like Chelsea Billiards, maybe even more so, with a polished 
brass plaque out front that said, ``Established Aug. 1988.'' There 
were overhead fans and a lot of neo-old-fashioned wood trim that made 
it look like somebody's idea of a gentlemen's club, only this one 
also had women. Most of the male players wore ties, though some had 
loosened them. Many looked as if they had put in full days of merging 
and acquiring and zeroing in on opportunity with their Bloomberg machines. 
It looked as if they were all having a good time, but as for me, I 
really didn't find what I was looking for. THE INS AND OUTS OF THE 
BILLIARD PARLORS Here is information on the Manhattan pool halls mentioned 
in the article: FAT CAT, 75 Christopher St., (212) 675-6056. Open 
Sundays through Thursdays, 2 p.m. to 2 a.m.; Fridays and Saturdays, 
2 p.m. to 4 a.m. Hourly rates: $3.75 a person; $4.50 on Fridays and 
Saturdays. Special rate: $5 a person daily for four-hour session from 
2 to 6 p.m. SOHO BILLIARD, 298 Mulberry St., (212) 925-3753. Open 
daily, 11 a.m. to 3 a.m. Hourly rates: $7 for the first person; $2 
for each additional person. BROADWAY BILLIARDS, 10 E. 21st St., (212) 
388-1582. Open daily, 24 hours. Hourly rates: $3 a person weekdays; 
$4 weekends (1 p.m., Fridays through 6 a.m. Mondays). CHELSEA BILLIARDS, 
54 W. 21st St., (212) 989-0096. Open daily, 24 hours. Hourly rates: 
$4 a person or $8 a table from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.; $5 a person or $10 
a table from 5 p.m. to 9 a.m. BILLIARD CLUB, 220 W 19th St., (212) 
206-7665. Open daily, 11 a.m. to 2 a.m. (later on weekends). Hourly 
rates: $7 a table 11 a.m. to 7 p.m.; $10 an hour after 7 p.m. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>