<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0549 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Imagine, after walking in on the middle of a poker game, that you 
are asked to choose which player will be the ultimate winner. Would 
you automatically pick the player with the biggest pile of chips? 
If your answer is no, then you believe in risk adjustment. You realize 
that it matters how a player won his chips. If he did so with one 
lucky bet, he is unlikely to be the overall winner. A shrewder choice 
would be the player who has fewer chips but has won them with relative 
consistency. The same kind of considerations apply to selecting an 
investment adviser. But while many people have no difficulty understanding 
risk adjustment in poker, they resist applying it to their portfolios. 
They only want to know which adviser has made the most money, period. 
This is particularly puzzling in the current market. If nothing else, 
the market's 20 percent selloff earlier this year should have convinced 
investors that ignoring risk was dangerous. The best reason to focus 
on risk adjustment: You can sleep better at night by doing so. Or, 
alternatively, you can make more money. All it takes are some pretty 
simple tactics. If you weren't weighing risk, you might be drawn to 
the portfolio of Prudent Speculator, an investment newsletter edited 
by Al Frank. It has made more money than any other newsletter since 
mid-1980, when I started monitoring the industry. Over those 18-plus 
years, it has produced a gain of 17.7 percent annualized, compared 
with 16.1 percent for the broad market, as represented by the Wilshire 
5000 index. But consider how much risk Frank incurred in achieving 
those returns. When measured by volatility, his portfolio was two 
and a half times riskier than the market as a whole. Now ask yourself 
how much money you could have made on your own, without subscribing 
to Frank's newsletter, if you were willing to incur a similar amount 
of risk? A whole lot more. Imagine a portfolio that, by borrowing 
money, bought $250 of an index fund for every $100 of its net worth. 
Such a portfolio would have been no riskier than Frank's, yet over 
this same period would have made 21.2 percent annualized, or 3.5 percentage 
points more per year _ after paying the broker loan rate on the borrowed 
funds. And the investor would not be paying a cent in newsletter subscription 
fees. Another way to look at these results: Adjusted for risk, Frank's 
returns lagged the index by 3.5-point percentage points the price 
paid for focusing on raw, unadjusted performance alone. Just as risk 
adjustment tempers Frank's achievement, it sometimes increases the 
attractiveness of other advisers who may have made less money. Such 
advisers haven't produced as high a raw return, but have been more 
consistent. A good illustration is Growth Stock Outlook, edited by 
Charles Allmon, which gained 11.9 percent, annualized, since mid-1980. 
But Allmon's portfolio was only half as risky as the market, and only 
about a fifth as risky as Frank's portfolio. In other words, in return 
for five times the risk, Frank gained 5.7 percentage points more per 
year. That's a poor trade-off. Investors who are not inclined to risk 
adjustment might point only to the ultimate difference in returns 
and ask: Why forfeit those 5.7 percentage points? After all, you can't 
take a Growth Stock Outlook's lower volatility to the bank. But you 
can. Let's assume that you subscribed to Growth Stock Outlook but 
were willing to incur as much risk as the Prudent Speculator. By cutting 
the cash position that Allmon otherwise was recommending, and then 
by using margin, you could have built a leveraged Growth Stock Outlook 
portfolio whose risk matched the Prudent Speculator's. Over the period 
of 18-plus years, this leveraged portfolio would have returned 23 
percent, annualized _ or more than 5 percentage points a year more 
than Frank's. That would be something to bank on. __ Mark Hulbert 
is editor of the Hulbert Financial Digest, a newsletter based in Alexandria, 
Va. His column on investment strategies will appear every other week. 
E-mail: strategy(AT)nytimes.com. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>