<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0453 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
At the close of an international conference on Holocaust-era assets, 
Russia surprised the chairman Thursday by handing over three secret 
documents that might help Jewish families recover art confiscated 
by the Nazis in World War II. Valery Kulishov, director of the restitution 
department at the Russian culture ministry, gave the papers to the 
chairman, Under Secretary of State Stuart Eizenstat, as a symbol of 
Russia's new commitment to contribute to an international database 
on looted art. One document is a September 1942 letter written by 
a Nazi cultural aide identified as Dr. Fucke-Michels, to Hans Posse, 
whom Hitler chose to procure art for the Nazi leader's museum in Linz, 
Austria. It reads: ``Since there is an acute danger that the Jew Gutmann 
might flee the country and might bring with him a precious medieval 
German manuscript, this manuscript was confiscated in 1938.'' Kulishov 
said the medieval manuscript, which belonged to Rudolf Ritter von 
Gutmann, is now in the Vienna National Library. The Russian move was 
one of several unexpected gestures at the conference, which concluded 
not only with general agreements to return Nazi-looted art, settle 
unpaid insurance claims and open national archives, but also with 
the promise that the work to redress the wrongs of World War II would 
go on in new meetings next year and beyond. Switzerland said it would 
sponsor a meeting on the Internet next year about the fight against 
racism and anti-Semitism. Sweden invited governments, institutions 
and educational experts to attend a conference in Stockholm on Holocaust 
education and research in 1999 or 2000. Poland said it wanted to organize 
a conference to find ways to return synagogues, churches, schools 
and other property confiscated from religious organizations in World 
War II. Lord Janner, chairman of the Holocaust Educational Trust in 
Britain, suggested that Austria, which won praise at the conference 
for a new law enabling the restitution of art in its state museums, 
sponsor another conference on looted art. And Noach Flug, a Holocaust 
survivor who is secretary-general of the World Jewish Restitution 
Organization, suggested that delegates meet ``next year, in Jerusalem.'' 
Eizenstat began organizing the conference a year ago after a meeting 
in London on the issue of Nazi gold. The major achievement of the 
conference was agreement on 11 principles to bring about the restitution 
of stolen art. ``The art world will never be the same in the way it 
deals with Nazi-confiscated art,'' Eizenstat said. The guidelines 
call on governments, museums and art dealers to search their art holdings 
for Nazi plunder, place all the information in a central database 
on the Internet and resolve claims quickly through negotiation, not 
litigation. The guidelines are non-binding, but Eizenstat said they 
carried a ``moral commitment.'' The Russian concessions at the conference 
were the greatest surpise. Russians have always considered wartime 
booty to be partial reparation for the deaths of 20 million Russians 
in the war and the damage the country suffered. Moscow recently passed 
a law precluding the return of ``trophy art'' that Soviet troops took 
from German and Central European museums. The new offer applies only 
to individual victims of the Holocaust or their heirs. The two other 
documents Kulishov released included a list of art stolen from Austrian 
Jews and taken to a collection point in Vienna and an outline of the 
private collections confiscated from Leo Furst, Louis Rothschild and 
Alexander Hauser, all Austrian Jews. The documents alone may not prove 
ownership, experts here said, but could bolster ownership claims when 
added to information from other archives. The delegates to the conference 
from 44 countries and 13 Jewish and gypsy groups agreed to place on 
the Internet, with links to related sites, the work of 17 historical 
commissions on the Holocaust as well as the proceedings of this year's 
conference and one held in 1997. It has not been decided who will 
maintain the site, a State Department spokesman said. Some delegates 
to the conference expressed disappointments. In their closing statements, 
Ukrainian and Russian delegates made pleas to include their non-Jewish 
survivors of concentration camps in the relief fund created a year 
ago for Jewish survivors. And Thomas Borer, the Swiss ambassador for 
Holocaust issues, asked Americans to drop their class-action suits 
against insurance companies and instead pursue their claims before 
an international commission. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>