<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0404 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If God had truly made man in His own image, as widely alleged, there 
would be no dentists. No designer in his right mind, much less a perfect 
and omnipotent God, would have settled for teeth at the top of the 
human eating mechanism. Had some draftsman shown Him blueprints featuring 
a tooth-equipped jaw, God would surely have said, ``Pshaw! I can do 
better than that,'' and that would have been the end of teeth. Instead, 
I spent two hours the other day with a mouth full of cotton, metal, 
slowly hardening plastics, rubber gloves and a variety of other people's 
fingers. After the usual moment of self-pity, I tried lifting a sinking 
spirit the good old-fashioned way; to wit, by looking on the bright 
side. Suppose man had no teeth. Would politics be possible without 
teeth flashing to mask faces terrifying with insincerity? What would 
have become of the Kennedys, of Ronald Reagan, Jimmy Carter, Nelson 
Rockefeller, Teddy Roosevelt? Think of George Washington with his 
famous false teeth and painfully clamped lips. Father of our country 
he may have been, but he lacked teeth that dazzle. Isn't this why 
Americans have always felt uneasy toward him, never comfortable as 
they feel toward toothy rascals we constantly vote for while blinded 
by the glare of their teeth? A world without teeth? It would mean 
lovers on tube and screen preparing to kiss with no sparkling incisors 
and canines to bare to the camera. Today's entertainment lovers go 
at each other with widely parted jaws and dripping teeth, like those 
lions on PBS that are always chewing on poor, helpless wildebeests. 
A world without teeth? We'd be denied Dracula movies and the radio 
wit of the great Fred Allen sponsored by Ipana for the smile of beauty 
and Sal Hepatica for the smile of health. With no toothpicks pouring 
off the factory line, how could we tell when the cake is done? Yes, 
it is thin stuff, and two hours is long. The dental chamber, however, 
offered another distraction: television. The set, mounted at ceiling 
height with its greedy salesman's eye staring down, was tuned to one 
of those perpetual news channels. This day there was no perpetual 
news, just perpetual olds: Two Congressmen spoke of their respect 
for the Constitution. Snow was falling on Western mountains. Children 
had murdered their parents. Parents had murdered their children. President 
Clinton had let photographers show him exuding the look of leadership. 
Movie stars were having children out of wedlock. Extravagantly paid 
athletes said they were being ``disrespected.'' Forced to watch this 
for two hours, I was astonished by the intense concentration on money. 
Commercial after commercial urged viewers to turn over money to this 
or that bank, this or that brokerage house, the implied promise being 
that the money would be miraculously multiplied by financial wizards. 
Did banks and brokers advertise constantly _ or at all _ on TV before 
the present Golden Age of Money? Beer, cars, soda pop, aspirin tablets 
were TV's lifeblood in my youth. The typical TV addict of those years 
would have been hard pressed even to say what a broker did or why 
a bank should be considered trustworthy if it paid you 2 percent for 
your money and lent it back at 12 percent. It was as depressing as 
a Novocaine needle to sit there awash in all this appalling evidence 
that so many lives are now consecrated to the money game. All those 
brokerage-house commercials! There must now be millions and millions 
of people willing to let Wall Street desperadoes handle their money. 
Money, money, money, money was apparently the perpetual news. There 
were minute-by-minute bulletins from Wall Street. The Dow was up, 
the Dow was down, the Dow was steadying. The Nasdaq was down, up, 
down, up, down ... Actors posing as bankers and brokers were pleading 
for money and promising happiness, which apparently would ensue once 
you were chin deep in money. Was it for this that Americans died at 
the Alamo? And won the battle of Midway? And heroically suffer the 
consequences of faulty jaw design? 
</TEXT>
</DOC>