<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0567 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Representatives of doctors and hospitals agreed on Thursday to a state 
plan to provide patient treatment at reduced costs for the next 90 
days for members of the financially troubled HIP Health Plan of New 
Jersey while the state tries to get it back on a sound footing. At 
the same time, the New Jersey banking and insurance commissioner, 
Jaynee LaVecchia, who is the court-appointed supervisor of the rehabilitation 
of the 194,000-member health plan, proposed sweeping changes in state 
regulations of health-maintenance organizations. She said the changes 
would tighten regulation of HMOs and curb some of the business practices 
that got HIP in trouble. But even as Ms. LaVecchia detailed the newly 
won support from health providers for her plan to pull HIP from the 
brink of financial ruin, she announced the failure of yet another 
HMO, American Preferred Provider Plan. The 3-year-old company, based 
in Paterson, is a Medicaid HMO with 44,000 members whose cash assets, 
state officials assert, were looted by its owners and used to help 
start Medicaid HMOs in other states. Ms. LaVecchia insisted that each 
of the troubled HMOs represented a discrete problem, not a systemic 
weakness. Under the plan for HIP, doctors and hospitals would immediately 
get 30 percent of what they are already owed by the state's fourth-largest 
HMO from unpaid claims. They also agreed to accept payment of just 
75 percent of what they bill the insurer for treatment of its members 
over the next three months. State officials also promised the providers 
to push for passage of a guaranty fund, financed by the state's 23 
HMOs, that could retroactively pay them some of the money they would 
agree to forgo for now. If at the end of 90 days HIP remained in trouble 
and insolvent, Ms. LaVecchia said, it would be liquidated, its members 
sent to other health plans and its assets sold to allow further repayment 
of its creditors. The state's plan comes more than a month after officials 
first moved to take over the ailing, nonprofit HMO and forced it to 
sever its 18-month relationship with Pinnacle Health Enterprises, 
a for-profit company that had purchased the insurer's network of 23 
health centers and, under contract with the plan, provided HIP members 
with all health services and took care of all billing and claims operations. 
The takeover prompted a race to the courts by the state to get control 
of the centers and the 91.5 percent in monthly premium payments that 
HIP had sent to Pinnacle and that will now be used to finance the 
plan's rehabilitation. It also set off Pinnacle's mad scramble to 
the shelter of bankruptcy protection to maintain control of the $70 
million in assets it had acquired from HIP as well as to protect other 
assets of its parent company, PHP Healthcare Corp. of Reston, Va. 
Ms. LaVecchia said that one of the eight legislative and regulatory 
changes she was recommending would prevent a state-licensed insurer 
like HIP from transferring assets to an unlicensed contractor like 
Pinnacle. Had such a provision been in place 18 months ago, she said, 
the HIP and Pinnacle arrangement could not have occurred and the providers 
would not be having their current problems. Ms. LaVecchia noted that 
the health-care providers were owed more than $100 million in past 
claims by HIP. ``But,'' she said, ``we are hopeful that they will 
join us in this plan.'' Robert Conroy, a lawyer representing the Medical 
Society of New Jersey, said the society endorsed the plan and would 
recommend that its members sign formal agreements. Just last week 
the society and its members were cool to a similar discounting of 
their past and future claims to HIP, he said, but the leaders of the 
society changed their minds after the commissioner's new proposals. 
``This thing couldn't be open-ended, because our doctors needed a 
window in which they could plan financially,'' Conroy said. ``And 
the retroactivity was crucial.'' Gary Carter, the president of the 
New Jersey Hospitals Association, said he, too, would recommend that 
the group's 112 member hospitals agree to the plan. The one dissenting 
voice on Thursday came from the perennial antagonist of the providers, 
the New Jersey Association of Health Plans. Paul Langevin, president 
of the HMO trade group, angrily termed the idea of surcharging his 
members to pay retroactive bills of hospitals and doctors ``counterintuitive'' 
and added that it would only drive up premiums for HMO members. The 
proposed regulatory changes that would clamp down on some operations, 
he said, amounted to crippling strictures that would put many companies 
out of business. Meanwhile, Len Fishman, the state's commissioner 
of health and senior services, whose agency shares regulation of HMOs 
with Ms. LaVecchia's agency, said his office had received a few complaints 
from HIP members who said that doctors or hospitals were refusing 
to treat or admit them. Most of the problems were quickly resolved, 
he said, adding that under the court order obtained by the state to 
take over the operations of HIP, health providers were forbidden to 
deny treatment. ``Everyone would agree that there is an ethical obligation 
for doctors and hospitals, but there is also a court order that requires 
them to provide care,'' said Fishman, refusing to discuss what the 
state would do to those who did not comply. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>