<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0488 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Expensive, over-the-top, glorious department-store windows at Christmas 
time are a ritual as integral to the season in New York City as overpriced 
chestnuts sold by street vendors and traffic snarls near Rockefeller 
Center. News shows troop over to Saks Fifth Avenue and Lord &AMP; 
Taylor for their 20-second spots of Santas, chimneys and the small 
voices of children's choirs, while tourists line up three deep between 
Thanksgiving and New Year's to take in the festive window scenes. 
But what amounts to a moment's thrill for those who pass by the windows 
is the result of months of tedious, highly guarded planning among 
retailers, who are looking for much more than appreciative gawking: 
They see the windows as a competitive tool for increasing news-media 
attention and store traffic. ``The windows are certainly competitive,'' 
said Sheri Wilson-Gray, executive vice president of marketing at Saks. 
``Christmas is a key selling season with lots of tourists and infrequent 
customers, and great windows give you an advantage.'' Window dressing 
has attracted even more attention in recent years as competition among 
department stores has grown increasingly intense at the same time 
that their merchandise has become increasingly similar. The windows, 
then, set the tone and image for each retailer, especially for those 
shoppers who come only at Christmas and may not know the character 
or style of each store. The competition is especially heightened this 
year, as New York City experiences a record flow of tourists, or in 
the stores' views, potential shoppers. With Gimbels, Bonwit Teller, 
B. Altman and other department stores now resting in the retail graveyard, 
the attention has come down to a few prominent players, who spends 
thousands of dollars on their windows to stand out and draw customers 
in. The windows rarely feature merchandise for sale in the store, 
but rather a theme the retailer hopes is alluring. Details count. 
Creative directors may spend weeks choosing the perfect ribbon, or 
ferreting out pumpkin-scented room spray. ``Windows are getting much 
more intricate and detailed since the economy has improved,'' said 
Sam Joseph, visual director for windows at Macy's. In the early part 
of the decade, when the economy was less rosy, many windows were more 
austere and featured headless mannequins and far fewer trimmings, 
he said. Now opulence is in. ``To the retailers who still do it, it 
has become more important,'' said Simon Doonan, the creative director 
of Barneys New York and author of a new book, ``Confessions of a Window 
Dresser'' (Penguin Studio, $40). ``They are more of a marketing springboard, 
because windows create a buzz about the store.'' A huge part of all 
the buzzing is because of Doonan, who has raised the bar for Christmas 
window displays in the 13 years that he has been doing them for Barneys. 
His mandate for drawing attention grew out of the store's former geographically 
challenged spot at 17th Street and Seventh Avenue, where nary a tourist 
would go to see holiday displays. ``We needed to be a destination; 
people needed a reason to go down there,'' said Doonan, adding that 
the tradition remained even after Barneys opened a branch at the heavily 
trafficked Madison Avenue and 60th Street and later closed its original 
store. Doonan's windows are a big departure from mistletoe and gentle 
Santas. He tends to pepper his displays with inside fashion jokes 
and playful sendups of celebrities, from Madonna to Anne Heche to 
Margaret Thatcher as a dominatrix clad in a British flag. He also 
draws heavily from other pop culture. In this year's installation, 
for instance, he made a kitchen stool out of Comet cans and walls 
from Jiffy Pop popcorn containers. Another year's display featured 
a Christmas tree created with condoms. Doonan's work has sometimes 
landed him in hot water, as in 1994, when he hired the artist Tom 
Sachs to make a ``Hello Kitty Nativity Scene,'' which featured the 
Three Kings in the form of Bart Simpson, the Madonna (the religious 
icon) depicted as Madonna (the singer) in leather and the Kitty (the 
popular figure decorating children's school supplies, hair accessories 
and the like) as the baby Jesus. After protests from Roman Catholic 
groups, he took the display down. His displays have inspired others 
to do offbeat holiday windows with pop-culture references. The windows 
at Sony Plaza on Madison Avenue this year were done by Martha Stewart, 
and feature giant versions of her frosted animal-shaped cookies, elaborate 
food displays and a parody of her personal calendar, which is featured 
in the front of her magazine each month and lists her plans for things 
like antique shows in the Hamptons and a great deal of mulching. On 
this calendar: ``Tie bows with tweezers'' and ``Iron 311 yards of 
ribbons.'' ``We want people to stop and look,'' said Christine Belich, 
Sony's creative director. ``And we know people are not going to come 
into the store because there is a TV in the window.'' Many stores 
stick to the traditional imagery of Christmas and still attract attention. 
This year at Saks, each window depicts children from the 1920s looking 
at parts of the world through their attic telescope. Lord &AMP; Taylor, 
the master of childhood themes, is using Peter Pan this year, with 
the tag line ``Think Happy Thoughts.'' Lord &AMP; Taylor's trademark 
is technology; it has the world's only hydraulic window display, which 
is created in the store's basement and actually rises into the windows 
each November. But whether the windows feature condoms or finely crafted 
puppets, the displays take months of planning. Ms. Belich at Sony 
started doing her work in April by poring through Martha Stewart Living 
magazines. ``You have no idea about the details,'' she said. ``The 
color of the thread used to embroider the tag line on the window frame? 
Everyone had an opinion on that. We decided to use silver on a `Martha' 
green. We looked at 10 samples of pine cones before we selected one. 
We went through 20 samples of frosting styles before we found the 
one thing that was perfect. It couldn't be almost perfect. It had 
to be perfect.'' At Bloomingdale's, Michael Fisher, the creative director 
of visual merchandise, found a way to scent the store's sidewalks 
with essence of pumpkin for the window unveiling this year. He will 
not say how he accomplished this task. He does not want other stores 
copying the trick. Joint ventures are also common now. Barneys received 
some financial help from In Style magazine for its windows this year, 
and in a pleasantly tacky way that only that store's tribute to popular 
culture could get away with, the magazine is plastered all over the 
display. Bloomingdale's worked with the magazine in the past, too. 
The relationship is partly financial and partly a means of marketing: 
For a small fee, In Style can glean some hipness from being in the 
right store window (and maybe attract a few new customers of its own). 
Although he is certainly the leader of his generation, wacky window 
displays did not start with Doonan. In the 1930s, during the height 
of the dada art movement, artists were called upon to create nontraditional, 
if not downright macabre scenes for store displays. In 1938, Salvador 
Dali put a bathtub with a bloody-faced mannequin in a Bonwit Teller 
Christmas window, and later some windows displayed a Santa falling 
off a tree. Macy's first moving figures were featured in their windows 
in 1898, but the real art of display did not get going until the late 
1920s, said Jane Stubbs, the curator of the new show ``Just Window 
Dressing?'' at the Municipal Art Society, which looks at the history 
of the retail art. ``In department stores here in 1905,'' Ms. Stubbs 
said, ``they would put paper flowers in the windows and mannequins 
with missing body parts and sleeves hanging down because they didn't 
have arms.'' Window design experienced a certain frenzy during the 
1970s, reflecting, perhaps, a sense of decadence in fashion and lifestyle 
similar in many ways to today's. ``In the 1970s, there was this great 
explosion of controversial talent,'' Ms. Stubbs explained. ``There 
was Candy Pratts Price, whose windows at Bloomingdale's had a slightly 
violent edge, but the city at that point was undergoing a very tough 
time.'' One of window dressing's greatest stars, Gene Moore, died 
just last month. Moore was best known for his work at Tiffany's, where 
he did windows for several decades. But he worked for many retailers, 
including the Clarence House fabric store, where he once did a display 
featuring three wise women in Norma Kamali dresses looking at a street 
sign that pointed to Bethlehem, as well as to Paris and New York. 
No one knows whether those windows sold more fabric, but sometimes, 
even today, the larger goal of windows is to feed not simply the cash 
register but also the ego. ``This is absolutely competitive,'' said 
LaVelle Olexa, senior vice president of fashion merchandise at Lord 
&AMP; Taylor. ``As a retailer, you are always interested in what other 
retailers are doing. Windows in New York are always compared store 
to store, and you want to put your best face forward.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>