<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0561 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite the presence of Michael Jordan at the bargaining table for 
the first time in more than a month, there were few encouraging signs 
Thursday that the five-month-old National Basketball Association lockout 
would end soon. Owners and players, negotiating for the first time 
in 13 days, exchanged angry words during bargaining sessions that 
began at 11 a.m. in Manhattan and lasted late into the night. Two 
participants in the meeting said there was no compromise between the 
players union and the owners, who rehashed old proposals. ``It's been 
less than amicable and several times talks almost broke off completely,'' 
said one participant, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. ``But 
enough key people on both sides decided that an open dialogue was 
better than none at all.'' The two sides broke for lunch after meeting 
for almost two hours. They met again for nearly five hours before 
caucusing between about 6:30 and 7:30 p.m. Neither the owners nor 
the players took a dinner break, going straight back into the bargaining 
room. There was a sense of urgency conveyed by Commissioner David 
Stern. He was said to have made an impassioned plea to the players 
that losing the season would have a devastating effect on the league. 
Madison Square Garden's president, Dave Checketts, also grew emotional, 
a league official said. As he was giving a comprehensive presentation 
of the NBA's plan for a collective bargaining agreement, Checketts 
argued with the union's chief outside counsel, Jeffrey Kessler, and 
other union lawyers. But it was Jordan's presence that created the 
biggest stir. He got out of a limousine at about 1:45 p.m. and took 
an elevator one flight up to the bargaining session. In town for a 
board of directors meeting for Oakley Sunglasses, it was Jordan's 
first appearance at the negotiations since Oct. 28 _a marathon session 
that ended at 1 a.m. in a Manhattan law firm. At one point that night, 
Jordan was part of a five-person group that included the union's executive 
director, Billy Hunter, and Stern. Though Jordan spoke up Thursday 
and questioned owners about their proposals, he stayed for only four 
hours. About 5:45 p.m. he left to meet his wife for a family engagement 
and returned three hours later. The two sides still argued over how 
to divide roughly $2 billion in annual income over the next five to 
seven years. The recent stalemate was prompted by a failed negotiation 
on Nov. 20, a session in which both sides claimed more progress than 
any since the lockout began on July 1. But within 48 hours, all progress 
was shelved. The union was upset about an owners proposal that would 
severely limit the signing of Larry Bird free agents, players who 
can sign for any amount over a team's salary cap. The owners then 
accused the union of reneging on its acceptance of a complex tax formula 
that was to be used as part of an escrow system in the final years 
of a proposed seven-year plan. It was unclear late Thursday night 
whether they had made progress on those economic issues or myriad 
others that separate them. But with each announced productive session 
disintegrating into charges and countercharges within days over the 
past two months, an aura of pessimism permeated Thursday's talks. 
``We felt our last offer gave them what they wanted, which is cost 
certainty,'' Alonzo Mourning said Thursday morning. ``They're trying 
to take everything from us. This lockout will not end until the owners 
get as much as can from the players. It comes down to greed on their 
part.'' Russ Granik, the deputy commissioner, said: ``There's a sense 
of urgency, but the owners have said they won't operate our business 
in a way that makes no financial. Obviously, you get more worried 
as each day goes by.'' Given that it will take about a month for training 
camp and free-agent signings to take place after an agreement in principle 
is reached, the earliest the season could start _ provided marathon 
negotiations produced a settlement in the next week _ would be the 
second week of January. That timetable would mean about a 48- to 50-game 
schedule, figures that straddle the line of being considered a legitimate 
season. The next major casualty of the lockout will most likely be 
the All-Star Game in Philadelphia on Feb. 14. Granik and Stern have 
been quiet about the possibility, preferring instead to try to salvage 
the game. But one league official, on condition of anonymity, said 
an announcement could be forthcoming in the next few days. To make 
up for the cancellation, the league will probably award Philadelphia 
the 2002 game. Golden State and Washington have already been selected 
to be host to the 2000 and 2001 games, respectively. ``David and Russ 
have done all they could to try and make it work, but it's just probably 
too late in the game at this point,'' the official said. ``We would 
probably need a miracle.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>