<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0432 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Just the other day, Joe Torre addressed a charity luncheon and proclaimed, 
``I don't want to work; I just want to bang on my drum all day.'' 
Oops, that was a Todd Rundgren lyric. No, what Torre did say was, 
``I don't want to win 126 games. I want to win the World Series the 
old-fashioned way.'' What is ``the old-fashioned way?'' What was Torre 
trying to tell us? Was he sending out a signal that nobody should 
be too greedy next year? Was he flirting with the subversive concept 
that it might even be exciting to have more competition, possibly 
even from the underclass known as the small-market teams? Officer, 
arrest that man for being un-American. Maybe Torre was merely recycling 
the old theory by his fellow New Yorker, Billy Loes, who once said 
he had no desire to win 20 games for the Brooklyn Dodgers because 
then everybody would expect him to do it all over again. (Loes never 
did, so it never became a problem for him.) Now the Yankees have won 
125 games in one calendar year, setting a record, and they have all 
their significant players coming back. So why are we talking about 
the Yankees in December? Is it because we are compulsive knee-jerk 
baseball fools? Is it to avoid dealing with Parcells and basketball 
lockouts and college gambling scandals? Well, maybe. But this is also 
a public service, a latter-day Paul Revere shouting out a warning: 
``The carpetbaggers are coming! The carpetbaggers are coming!'' It 
says here the Yankees should forget about Roger Clemens, who has just 
stomped his seven-league boots and said he wanted out of Toronto. 
Clemens says the Blue Jays are not committed to winning. And here's 
the sad part: Toronto is apparently going to accommodate him, sell 
him off to the highest bidder. Toronto _ the biggest city in Canada, 
a two-time World Series champion _ has become a small-market team, 
psychologically, which only tells me baseball is sicker than we think. 
Despite the talk of Clemens pitching in his hometown of Houston, we 
can only assume he is not going to the Retro Real Baseball League 
because pitchers have to take their turn at bat, and Knockdown doesn't 
like the sound of that. We are told that the Rocket would accept a 
lot of George Steinbrenner's dollars. How nice. In his lust to win 
a World Series (did somebody say Mookie Wilson?), Clemens would allow 
Bernie and Tino and Derek and Paul to score runs for him. In other 
words, Roger Clemens needs the Yankees more than the Yankees need 
him. Actually, the Yankees don't need Clemens at all. They've got 
Wells and Cone and Pettitte and El Duque and Irabu and Mendoza, and 
if they can't win with these guys, everybody should be fired. Who 
needs a rent-an-ace cluttering up the top of this rotation? Steinbrenner 
should have learned his lesson last July when his young but astute 
general manager, Brian Cashman, shied away from Randy Johnson, who 
was moping his way out of Seattle. Actually, it was Cashman's judgment 
not to give up major league talent for renting Johnson for a few months. 
Needless to say, once Johnson went to Houston, Cashman sweated out 
his personal nightmare of Johnson breaking off Snappy curves in the 
Stadium in October, which never happened. You can't live your life 
in fear. So what if the Rocket sells his services to an American League 
team? The Yankees are on a roll. They terrorized baseball for a few 
weeks with their fourth-string left fielder, Shane Spencer, and when 
he had a bad inning or two, Torre went to his fifth-string left fielder, 
Ricky Ledee, and won the World Series. Steinbrenner should also consider 
the mood of the clubhouse. One reason the Yankees won 125 games was 
that there were no hot zones, no brooding corners. Clemens is a great 
competitor, works hard and deserved his fifth Cy Young Award, but 
he demands a certain amount of space. In these days of free agency, 
cohesion and continuity don't count for much. Todd Hundley was shuffled 
off by the Mets as soon as Mike Piazza was signed, and now the Mets 
are bringing back Bobby Bonilla, who has a history of polemics. The 
Mets are also talking to Rickey Henderson, one of the great leadoff 
hitters of all time, but an aging egotist who caused eyes to roll 
in the clubhouse during his tenure with the Yankees. There must be 
a limit to how much money can be spent, how many attitudes can be 
stocked in one clubhouse. Let the Yankees try to win another with 
the same delightful cast, even if they have to win it ``the old-fashioned 
way,'' whatever that is. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>