<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0551 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Eight months after a point-shaving scandal embarrassed its basketball 
program, Northwestern University suffered another blow involving gambling 
Thursday when four former football players were indicted on perjury 
charges related to betting on their own games. The indictments, announced 
here by federal prosecutors, charge the players with lying to a federal 
grand jury when they denied betting on Northwestern games in 1994, 
as the Wildcats finished a dismal season with a record of 3-7-1. Only 
one of the players is accused of taking action to throw a game. The 
indictment charges that Dennis Lundy, a star tailback on the team, 
testified falsely when he denied fumbling the ball on purpose in a 
November 1994 game against Iowa. Lundy, 26, of Tampa, Fla., was then 
Northwestern's career-leading rusher. In his testimony, which was 
excerpted in the indictment, Lundy blamed the fumble on a sprained 
wrist on the previous play. ``I got hit on the arm real good, and 
the ball just came out,'' he told the jury. Prosecutors, however, 
have alleged that the game film did not support Lundy's claim. Lundy 
and Michael Senters, of Dallas, were charged with one count of perjury, 
and Gregory Gill of Pittsburgh and Christopher Gamble of Marietta, 
Ga., were charged with two counts. They were accused of betting for 
and against Northwestern on various games, including the 1994 contests 
with Iowa, Ohio State and Notre Dame. While there have been gambling 
scandals involving college football players, most involved players 
betting on sports but not attempting to affect the outcome of games. 
The National Collegiate Athletic Association said Thursday that it 
knew of no previous case of point-shaving in football. And it is highly 
unusual that two gambling scandals in two sports would surface at 
the same university within a year. Last week, two former Northwestern 
basketball players and two gamblers were sentenced to prison terms 
of one to two months for trying to fix three basketball games against 
Wisconsin, Penn State and Michigan in February and March 1995. Thursday's 
indictment alleges that the four players ran up gambling debts by 
betting from $25 to $1,000 per game on college and professional sports, 
paying a 10 percent surcharge on losing bets. The indictment means 
only that the four have been charged, not convicted. They will appear 
next week in U.S. District Court, their first opportunity to enter 
a plea. If found guilty, they could be sentenced to prison terms of 
up to five years on each count of perjury. ``These four student athletes 
betrayed their school, their teammates, their fans and their coaches,'' 
said Scott Lassar, the U.S. attorney for Chicago, who announced the 
indictments. Even though it was the second gambling scandal in less 
than a year at a school known more for the fierceness of its College 
Bowl team than its appearances in the Rose Bowl, there was little 
stir on the Evanston campus Thursday. ``It didn't really upset me 
that much,'' said Jeff Esser, a student who was preparing for next 
week's exams. ``People who come to school here are more focused on 
academics than what the football or basketball teams are up to.'' 
The indictments, though, were announced on the afternoon of the annual 
banquet for Northwestern's football team. After winning the Big Ten 
title in 1995, earning a rare trip to the Rose Bowl, the team has 
declined into its usual mediocrity. It finished 5-7 last year and 
slid to 3-9 this season, without a victory in the conference. Gary 
Barnett, who came to Northwestern as the football coach in 1992 with 
the goal of ``taking the Purple to Pasadena,'' said he had never questioned 
the integrity of the players charged. ``To hear that there were other 
guys involved in some of it, it hurts,'' Barnett said. ``It doesn't 
indict a program. It doesn't indict the school. It indicts the individuals. 
The stain is on the individuals, not on the school.'' The football 
scandal was unusual in at least three respects. Point-shaving in basketball 
is believed to be more common than in football, where it is harder 
for a single player to affect the outcome of a game. Point-shaving 
also usually involves a favored team playing poorly to win by less 
than the point spread. The Northwestern football and basketball players 
were underdogs accused of betting on their teams to lose by more than 
the spread. And unlike the Northwestern basketball players, the football 
players were not charged with receiving bribes to fix the outcome 
of games. Prosecutors said the basketball players received money from 
gamblers, while the football players put up their own money. The basketball 
and football scandals at Northwestern are connected by a former football 
player, Brian Ballarini. He has admitted that after injuring his knee 
he became a bookmaker, taking wagers from student athletes. He pleaded 
guilty last summer to gambling charges. He told investigators that 
he knew of Northwestern football players who placed bets with him 
against their team. At his sentencing, Ballarini said he was a gambling 
addict and lashed out at Northwestern officials for not helping him. 
Northwestern officials said they would have helped him but that Ballarini 
had denied gambling. Prosecutors said a key piece of evidence would 
be videotape of the Northwestern game against Iowa in November 1994. 
In the third quarter, Northwestern was inside the 1-yard line with 
a chance to cut into Iowa's 35-13 lead. Lundy fumbled a handoff on 
the goal line and Iowa recovered. Iowa, favored by only 6 points, 
won the game, 49-13. A teammate, Rodney Ray, believed that Lundy had 
a gambling habit and complained openly that Lundy fumbled intentionally. 
Against Ohio State just a month earlier, Lundy failed to score on 
a two-point conversion attempt that would have tied the score. Ohio 
State, which was favored by 15 points, won by only two points, 17-15. 
Barnett told reporters that Lundy had run the wrong play. An assistant 
coach overheard Ray's accusation and reported it to Barnett. Northwestern 
hired an investigator, who discovered that Lundy and a basketball 
player, Dion Lee, had been betting on college sporting events. Lee 
held the Big Ten record for most three-point field goals in a game. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>