<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0455 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Some Boeing 747s have a fuel-pump part that can wear out after a few 
flights and possibly lead to fuel-tank explosions, the Federal Aviation 
Administration said Thursday. The agency issued an emergency order 
to reduce the risk of potentially explosive sparks from the pumps 
in a move that will cut the range of the newest planes by 400 miles. 
The order, which requires changes in how fuel is stored in the tanks 
of the 747s, came after airlines noticed pump failures and returned 
14 pumps to Boeing. The pumps had a bearing shaped like a washer, 
about the size of a half-dollar coin, that was wearing away, letting 
metal parts rub against each other. Each 747 uses 10 or 12 of the 
pumps, and Boeing said it had shipped airlines about 700 suspect bearings 
either in pumps or as replacement parts. The aviation agency said 
that the flaw was not the cause of the explosion on TWA Flight 800 
two-and-a-half years ago. The agency has attributed the explosion 
to a spark in the center fuel tank, but the pump bearings found in 
the wreckage off New York showed no wear. Still, the order is an example 
of the greatly increased worry by inspectors about the safety of fuel 
systems on the planes, and the latest in a series of orders covering 
potential ignition sources in the planes' fuel systems. Elizabeth 
Erickson, the agency's director of aircraft certification, said in 
a telephone interview, ``our concern has been heightened in this area.'' 
Tom McSweeney, the associate administrator for regulation and certification, 
said that the action, which will have more impact on airline operations 
than most FAA orders, was indicative of the agency's effort to cut 
accidents by 80 percent. Stephen Hatch, Boeing's chief engineer for 
747s, said that the accident and the subsequent discovery of a variety 
of problems in fuel systems had changed the atmosphere. ``We're being 
extra conservative here,'' Hatch said. Tests showed that the fuel 
pumps would overheat, he said, but the temperatures were too low to 
cause a fire or explosion. The agency is still exploring the biggest 
proposal to come out of the TWA crash, which is to switch jets to 
a fuel less prone to form explosive vapors. The pumps covered by Thursday's 
emergency order are at the bottom of the tanks, and when they are 
running they are usually immersed in fuel, which lubricates them and 
eliminates oxygen, so there can be no fire or explosion. But it has 
been standard procedure to run the pumps to empty the tanks almost 
completely, at which point the pumps are running dry, unlubricated 
and exposed to fumes. In addition to ordering the replacement of suspect 
bearings, the agency told airlines to stop using fuel tanks in the 
horizontal stabilizers of 747-400s, the newest model. Those tanks 
in the horizontal portion of the tail carry 3,300 gallons of fuel. 
They are shallow, and, if the plane climbs steeply, the pumps may 
be exposed. Another standard procedure is to burn fuel in those tanks 
before landing, to prevent the plane's center of gravity from shifting 
too far back, but burning all of it means running the pumps dry. Without 
the tanks, the planes' range is cut to about 8,000 statute miles, 
from 8,400 miles. On a long trip, the plane consumes more than 6 gallons 
a mile. Airlines could compensate by flying with fewer passengers 
or less cargo, or by stopping to refuel. ``On long-haul operations 
in the Pacific,'' Ms. Erickson said, ``they won't be able to do one 
hop straight through.'' For some airlines, that could mean having 
to fly with an extra crew, experts said, because adding a stop could 
make the workday longer than agency rules allow. It could also mean 
some planes might have to carry more flight attendants. United Airlines 
owns 35 of the 747-400s, more than any other domestic airline, and 
its routes from Chicago to Hong Kong and from the West Coast of the 
United States to the South Pacific, Hong Kong and Taipei could be 
affected, said Joe Hopkins, a spokesman. Engineers at the airline 
were looking for an inspection system that would satisfy the FAA and 
allow continued use of the tank, he said. A spokesman for Northwest 
Airlines, Jon Austin, said that the Detroit-to-Beijing route might 
be affected. In addition, the order Thursday required older 747s without 
tail tanks to fly with more fuel in the center tank, which is routinely 
pumped dry in flight, and to switch off the pumps with the problem 
while thousands of gallons of fuel remain inside. Some of that fuel 
can be recovered and used by small ``scavenge pumps,'' but, especially 
on shorter trips, the effect will be to require planes to fly with 
thousands of extra pounds of fuel. The agency said it did not know 
what the order would cost. There are 1,087 747s in operation, of which 
246 are registered in this country. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>