<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0545 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Leave it to a playwright who has been dead for 2,400 years to jolt 
Broadway out of its dramatic doldrums. Sophocles' ``Electra'' opened 
at the Barrymore Theater Thursday night, in a magnificent new production 
that represents soul-satisfying drama at its most passionately, intensely 
alive. In the director David Leveaux's startling staging, the play 
is both a timeless family tragedy and a lurid tabloid crime story. 
The foul deeds of ``Electra'' may have been recorded nearly two and 
a half millenniums ago, but in this masterly modern-dress version, 
they are as raw as the lead item off the police blotter. The portrait 
of a family convulsed by violence and betrayal is so potent and harrowing, 
it leaves you dazed and weirdly giddy. A daughter plots murder, a 
mother is butchered, a son is up to his elbows in blood. And you couldn't 
be more delighted. With the astounding Anglo-American actress Zoe 
Wanamaker in the title role, giving the proverbial performance of 
her career, this ``Electra'' is the most significant restaging of 
a classic on Broadway since a revisionist ``A Doll's House'' with 
Janet McTeer 20 months ago. It's a provocative evening that not only 
reacquaints you with the direct, unprocessed power of Greek drama 
but also provides a depth of pleasure you associate more frequently 
these days with great movies; you're swept along by the narrative, 
majestic in its directness and simplicity. If there is any justice 
in the theater world, every playgoer with a hankering for drama with 
some flesh on it _ no doubt about it, this is theater for meat-eaters 
_ will place an order for this full-course meal, served in 90 gripping 
minutes. Thanks to a sleek and hypnotic text by Frank McGuinness, 
who also wrote the ``Doll's House'' adaptation, and the urgent, authoritative 
performances by a flawless ensemble that also includes Claire Bloom, 
Pat Carroll, Michael Cumpsty, Stephen Spinella, Daniel Oreskes and 
Marin Hinkle, Leveaux's ``Electra'' is a family fight for any and 
every time and place. Designed by Johan Engels to exist in some fantastic 
limbo between the classical and contemporary worlds _ the set encompasses 
both fragments of Greek columns and broken pieces of modern furniture 
_ the production erases the 2,400-year gap in the blink of a blackout. 
Everything Sophocles' antique characters feel, from Electra's inflammatory 
grief to Clytemnestra's frozen ire, can stir as well, it seems, in 
latter-day hearts, even if today we shrink from expressing our darker 
impulses so boldly. Something quite wonderful happens when ancient 
words are conveyed with such brio. A Broadway audience is galvanized. 
How strange, and cathartic, it can be to listen as characters vent 
their lusts and fears and rages without any hint of self-consciousness. 
Greek drama doesn't go in much for small talk; while the characters 
in modern drama live in a universe of subtext, shading the meaning 
of everything they say, Sophocles' figures have a refreshing lack 
of regard for obfuscation. ``I want you to taste the bitterness of 
death'' is how Orestes, superbly played by Cumpsty, greets Aegisthus 
(the equally fine Daniel Oreskes), moments before slaughtering him. 
Leveaux's production was unveiled last year at the Donmar Warehouse 
in London and won Ms. Wanamaker an Olivier Award (over such formidable 
competition as Dame Judi Dench in ``Amy's View,'' due on Broadway 
in the spring). After a brief run this fall at the McCarter Theater 
with its new American supporting cast, it arrived at the Barrymore 
for an eight-week run. Along the way, Leveaux, best known for his 
direction a few years back of an acclaimed ``Anna Christie'' at the 
Roundabout with Liam Neeson and Natasha Richardson, has refined the 
production, making the climaxes sharper, improving the lighting effects 
and, it seems, helping the actors take bigger risks in coloring in 
the more schematic aspects of their characters' relationships. Electra's 
feelings for Orestes, for instance, are now more ambiguous. Upon his 
return from exile, she gives her brother a lingering kiss on the mouth. 
Seeing him again is a passionate relief for her; she gains strength 
in the revival of her homicidal hopes. From its earliest incarnation, 
the power center of this production has been Ms. Wanamaker and her 
shattering Electra, roaming Leveaux's physically as well as psychically 
wrecked world in her murdered father's oversize coat. Her eyes puffy, 
her scalp dotted with red patches, as if she had been tearing her 
hair out in clumps, she is a figure of pitiless resolve, unable to 
purge her obliterating sorrow over the murder of her father, Agamemnon, 
at the hands of her mother Clytemnestra (Ms. Bloom) and stepfather, 
Aegisthus. ``Pain, pain, pain, pain,'' Ms. Wanamaker declaims, the 
word shriveling in her throat like a dry cough, until it practically 
chokes her. The actress is endlessly inventive but never strident 
or showy. In spite of her tragic countenance, it's a lyrical performance; 
the music in her raspy, octave-climbing speaking voice never stops. 
Neither does her agitation. Electra has lost everything in the loss 
of her father: power, position, control over her destiny _ she is 
under a kind of house arrest _ and her powerlessness is expressed 
in a restless pacing of the stage. This space offers no comfort, no 
consolation. Such a forceful actress needs aggressive sparring partners, 
and in the terrifyingly grand Ms. Bloom, she meets her match. Looking 
ravishing in a scarlet gown and voluminous red shawl, Ms. Bloom's 
Clytemnestra is vainly, haughtily feminine. This woman dresses to 
kill. In her fiery exchanges with Ms. Wanamaker, you get a vivid picture 
of a noblewoman enmeshed in her own desperate struggle to maintain 
her power. The portrayal unmasks Clytemnestra's maternal side as well; 
Ms. Bloom has a splendidly manipulative moment in reminding Electra 
that it was Agamemnon's sacrifice of their daughter Iphigenia that 
prompted her own murderous revenge. The counterbalance to Ms. Wanamaker's 
tumultuous encounters with Ms. Bloom occur in the more tender scenes 
with Ms. Hinkle, playing her flexible sister, Chrysothemis. The impressive 
Ms. Hinkle continues to grow in the role. Her stature is dictated 
by her softness. The actress has a delicate touch but stands her ground 
with Ms. Wanamaker; her pleas for conciliation have the ring of sisterly 
concern as much as self-preservation. No less substantial is Cumpsty's 
Greek statue of an Orestes. He embodies the heroic without ever seeming 
a stick figure. His reunion with Electra, masterminded by Stephen 
Spinella's touching portrayal of Orestes' servant, is now the production's 
emotional centerpiece. The performances work all the way down the 
line. Ms. Carroll, in peasant garb, has found her footing as the play's 
navigator, Chorus of Mycenae, intelligently asserting herself as the 
conscience of the piece, choosing moments to egg Electra on or to 
advise a more cautious tack. Oreskes, arriving late in the play and 
dressed in white linen, like a California businessman, lets us feel 
Aegisthus' sense of kingly prerogative at the precise moment that 
he realizes his life is about to end. As befits the best of Greek 
tragedy, there's nothing frivolous in this production, and nothing 
overwrought. The brutal economy of the work comes to a stunning resolution 
in the play's perfect closing line, enunciated by Ms. Carroll. ``The 
deed,'' she declares, ``is done.'' A final moment, with the triumphant 
Ms. Wanamaker poised on a damaged table. Over her face, she places 
a Greek mask. Lights out. PRODUCTION NOTES `ELECTRA' Sophocles' drama 
adapted by Frank McGuinness; directed by David Leveaux; sets and costumes 
by Johan Engels; lighting by Paul Pyant; sound by T. Richard Fitzgerald; 
movement direction, Jonathan Butterell; production stage manager, 
Robert Cohen; associate producers, Marcia Roberts, Lauren Doll, June 
Curtis and Lynne Peyser; production supervisor, Larry Morley; general 
management, EKTM: Eric Krebs/Jonathan Shulman. The McCarter Theater/Donmar 
Warehouse and Duncan C. Weldon production presented by Krebs, Randall 
Wreghitt, Anita Waxman, Elizabeth Williams and Lawrence Horowitz. 
At the Ethel Barrymore Theater, 243 W. 47th St., Manhattan. With: 
Zoe Wanamaker (Electra), Claire Bloom (Clytemnestra), Stephen Spinella 
(Servant to Orestes), Michael Cumpsty (Orestes), Pat Carroll (Chorus 
of Mycenae), Daniel Oreskes (Aegisthus) and Marin Hinkle (Chrysothemis). 
</TEXT>
</DOC>