<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0434 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was just past 4 on Wednesday afternoon, the sun was no longer strong 
enough to penetrate the gray overcast, and darkness meant it was time 
for Serbs to get home in this part of Kosovo province, where they 
run the government and the police but where ethnic Albanians make 
up 97 percent of the inhabitants. Two armored personnel carriers equipped 
with 20-millimeter cannon sat at police headquarters, with flak-jacketed 
officers keeping nervous watch, fingering their assault rifles. Three 
doors away, Divna Djindjic, a Serb, hurried through the daily inventory 
in the family grocery store with her husband and their two young daughters, 
and the family made ready to rush home and lock the door against the 
dangers they feel they can no longer avoid. ``The girls can't even 
go to school any more, it's too dangerous,'' said Mrs. Djindjic. ``The 
Albanians, the terrorists, can do anything they want now.'' Though 
there is little combat, the war in this province of the Yugoslav republic 
of Serbia has taken a new turn. Ethnic Albanian rebels are spreading 
their influence to places they had not controlled before NATO threats 
made the Serbian government withdraw many police and army units. Expanding 
the area they control without having to fight for it allows the ethnic 
Albanian rebels to undercut U.S. efforts to fashion a negotiated settlement 
to the war. ``This expansion is something that has not been completely 
seen by the West, but we are not hiding it,'' said Adem Demaci, the 
chief civilian representative of the rebels. ``We have advanced in 
many, many places.'' ``For example, all the Albanian villages around 
Pristina are now in our control,'' he said, speaking of the provincial 
capital. ``Our military units are preparing the ground for civilian 
control of local administration, like schools and police.'' Diplomats 
concede that they do not have a full picture of rebel advances. But 
they say they are concerned that Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian leader 
who is now president of Yugoslavia, will respond by breaking the cease-fire, 
and they admit to a certain powerlessness in their attempts to keep 
the rebels contained by talking with them. ``All we can do, really, 
is jawboning,'' said William Walker, the U..S. diplomat in charge 
of the international monitoring mission in Kosovo. ``I think at some 
point Milosevic will react,'' he added. ``I think they are trying 
to provoke him.'' While Western governments were able to force Milosevic 
into curtailing attacks on ethnic Albanian civilians by threatening 
air strikes, there is no equivalent threat against the guerrillas 
known as the Kosovo Liberation Army, or KLA. They have no military 
installations to be bombed, and their fighters are typically lightly 
armed militia members who spend most of their time with their families. 
``We don't have leverage on the KLA,'' said a senior Western diplomat. 
``It is a missing element in our overall strategy.'' In this region, 
less than 20 miles from Pristina, Serbs are afraid that if they travel 
out of their villages they will be assaulted or kidnapped by rebels. 
There have been more than 200 kidnappings, and many of the victims 
are feared to have been killed. But even in the largest town, Podujevo, 
fear closes in on Serbs when the sun begins to fall and they retreat 
to their homes. Many are leaving Kosovo altogether, local officials 
say. The chief official of this county, Srboslav Bisercic, said the 
police are now too afraid to do more than perfunctory patrolling. 
``They go from the police station behind my office, down the main 
streets of town and out to the motel on the highway. Then they go 
back,'' he said. ``There are 78 villages in this county and the police 
don't go to any of them.'' At the same moment Bisercic was speaking, 
less than one mile away from his office ethnic Albanian civilians 
were helping rebel fighters fortify their newest bunker. As the civilians 
filled sandbags to protect the long bunker dug into the front yard 
of a school as well as three nearby firing positions, fighters with 
new uniforms, boots and rifles casually patrolled the road and stopped 
cars to question those inside. Ethnic Albanians account for more than 
90 percent of Kosovo's population, and most of them support the rebels' 
goal of establishing a separate country. In the village of Repa, Vujo 
Milosevic, 38, a Serb who was born there, said: ``There are no problems 
at all between Serbs and Albanians in our village. We work together 
and live together. Look, my Albanian neighbors just helped get the 
tractor going.'' ``But down that road there are other Albanians who 
don't know me, and that's why I can't leave,'' he said, pointing to 
the narrow track, flanked by brown corn stalks poking through the 
snow, that he used to use to get to the town of Podujevo. Vujo Milosevic 
has a job in Podujevo, but he said: ``I haven't gone to work for three 
days, and my children can't go to school. There is no protection for 
us.'' Just outside the town rebels frequently set up a checkpoint, 
stopping cars and sometimes threatening people, residents said. They 
say the checkpoint appeared recently, after police stopped patrolling 
the road. Many, perhaps most, Serbs in Kosovo would eagerly move to 
other parts of Serbia, but that would greatly reduce the government's 
claim to the province. There is a law that prohibits Serbs from selling 
their property to ethnic Albanians. ``Those of us in this village 
who could afford to leave without selling their land have gone _ all 
my brothers did,'' said Vujo Milosevic, ``It's just people like me 
who are too poor who are staying behind.'' Across Kosovo, the emotions 
released by the growing fear among Serbs is taking several forms. 
Despondency seems to wash over most, as they try to think of what 
they can possibly do in the face what they see as the impossible dilemma 
of living here in fear or fleeing as impoverished refugees to another 
part of the country. In the school in Podujevo, where 266 ethnic Serb 
students from the whole county are enrolled, there were panic and 
anger as well as confusion about whom to blame. Last week, classes 
were canceled because it was considered too dangerous to bus students, 
and teachers milled around the corridors discussing what could be 
done to improve safety, but there were no conclusions. Some teachers 
acknowledged that NATO threatened air strikes because it was the only 
way to stop government attacks on ethnic Albanian civilians. But one 
teacher said: ``This is because NATO supports the Albanians. It will 
only stop when NATO stops protecting them.'' She said she would not 
give her name because that might put her in danger. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>