<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0385 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yasser Arafat wants everybody to understand his plan. Almost every 
day he or one of his top men says it: On May 4, 1999, he will declare 
the creation of an independent state of Palestine covering the whole 
West Bank and whatever of Jerusalem he chooses. We understand him, 
all right: he is trying to leap over the final round of talks with 
Israel. Nobody expects those talks to be finished and the boundaries 
settled by May 1999. The final talks deal with life-and-death issues 
like secure borders for Israel. Arafat wants to settle borders himself, 
for Palestine and for Israel. The man knows Israel would never accept 
a Palestine he prefabricates. It would decide how much frontier security 
Israel has; guess. So he knows that if he runs to meet his May 4 mirage 
and declares it real and alive, the chances for peace that had recently 
seemed likely would be replaced by the probability of war. Palestine 
in May could become Palestine never. Is it bluff, a trick, or a sick 
man's willingness to gamble his people's future against his last days 
of glory? Not likely. Israeli officials believe, and so do I, that 
he counts on most of the nations of the world, including America, 
to give silent or stated acquiescence to un-negotiated Palestinian 
independence, despite the repeated promise against change without 
full negotiation, despite what Arafat's self-chosen borders would 
cost in blood. Most Israelis believe the past five years of negotiation 
will lead to an independent Palestine. It would have been guaranteed 
by the Palestinians' passion for nationhood, their willingness to 
fight for it, the enormous concessions of land and self-government 
made by the previous Israeli government, and the decision by Prime 
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's government to accept land for peace 
on the condition of Israel's own definition of its security. But the 
Palestinians are fatally underestimating Israeli determination not 
to have an Arab-drawn Palestine imposed on them. At the United Nations 
last week Dore Gold, Israel's representative, said with total clarity 
that if Arafat went through with a unilateral declaration of independence 
Israel would be free to take all necessary steps, ``including the 
application of Israeli rule, law and administration'' to all Jewish 
settlements and security areas on the West Bank. On Sept. 23, Netanyahu 
gave the same warning in one word. He paused so I could write it down: 
annexation. In October came the U.S.-Israel-Palestinian conference 
in Wye, Md., and the agreement for an additional 13 percent withdrawal 
by Israel, to be followed by the final negotiations. They were supposed 
to deal with the gut issues of Palestinian nationhood _ secure borders, 
water, protection for Jewish settlers, Jerusalem. Things seemed to 
be going along pretty well _ which meant Israel turned over more territory, 
Palestinians accepted it, and waited for the other agreed slices. 
Total agreement to date: Arafat control of the Palestinian population 
and 40 percent of the land. After Wye, the stepped-up drive started 
for a May 4 Palestine stuffed down Israel's throat before the end 
of the critical final talks. On Wednesday, Palestinian musclemen invited 
TV cameramen to a demonstration that turned into a near-lynching of 
an Israeli soldier. The tape sickened all Israel _ including members 
of the Cabinet. They knew that if Israel accepted the public beating 
of Israeli soldiers on Israeli territory, the question would not be 
Palestinian sovereignty someday, but Israeli sovereignty right now. 
So Thursday, Israel said no more land transfers to Palestinians unless 
Arafat formally withdraws his May 4 plan, and acknowledges Israel's 
statement at Wye that it will not release from prison the men Palestinians 
were demanding freed _ captured Hamas killers. On Dec. 14 President 
Clinton will visit Gaza, a great triumph for Arafat. Israelis and 
Palestinians know that if Clinton remains silent or wobbly about Arafat's 
forced-birth plan, he will be siding with or rationalizing what Israel 
cannot accept. The fruit of his visit would be a betrayal of all Israelis 
and Palestinians who will die because Yasser Arafat is already digging 
their graves. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>