<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0445 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
After tornadoes, El Nino rains and an ice storm swept across large 
swaths of the nation, Congress enacted an emergency spending measure 
in May providing $2.6 billion in natural disaster relief. Deep inside 
that bill, though, in a last-minute addition, the oil industry won 
a big concession: relief of $66 million from the amount owed for extracting 
oil from federal lands. Then in October, with Congress wrangling over 
a huge spending bill and eager to cut deals and leave town, the oil 
industry won again as the House leadership reaffirmed that relief. 
Indeed, in the end, Congress even sweetened the deal a bit, by extending 
the break a little longer. Such is the power of Big Oil in Washington, 
and two of the biggest players in this monolithic and highly effective 
industry lobby are Exxon Corp. and Mobil Corp. Rich in cash, aggressive 
in style, with issues ranging from foreign policy to taxes and the 
environment, Exxon and Mobil have been effective in pushing their 
agenda through behind-the-scenes contacts at the highest level of 
government and through arm-twisting in Congress. ``Some companies 
have a narrow range of interests to lobby on,'' said Jennifer Shecter, 
a researcher at the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonprofit group 
which tracks Washington lobbying. ``But, by its very nature, oil is 
so pervasive and it is so affected by government policy that they 
care about everything.'' With the oil and gas industry generally marching, 
and lobbying, in lockstep, it is often hard to separate Exxon and 
Mobil from their rivals. While somewhat different in their approaches, 
both companies are big supporters of the American Petroleum Institute, 
an industry trade association that spent $3.7 million on lobbying 
in 1997. They often join industry coalitions created to lobby about 
a specific topic _ the lifting of sanctions to oil-producing nations 
like Iraq, for example, or the ability of U.S. oil companies to swap 
oil with Iran. By themselves, Exxon and Mobil have a combined total 
of 15 full-time lobbyists on their payrolls in Washington, and employ 
other Washington lawyers and lobbying firms as well. Last year, Mobil 
spent $5.3 million on federal lobbying and Exxon spent $5.2 million, 
according to the Center for Responsive Politics. Combined, this would 
make them the fifth largest entity in spending on lobbying the federal 
government. As multinational corporations with businesses in far-flung 
spots, Exxon and Mobil's interests in Washington touch on many trade 
and finance issues. The two companies have won favorable tax rulings 
before the IRS and the Treasury Department concerning the use of foreign 
tax credits to reduce their U.S. tax bill. They are sensitive to the 
State Department's Middle East and Asian policies, especially since 
oil is often found in pariah nations such as Libya, Myanmar and Iran. 
They are generally supportive of Arab nations. And new issues, like 
the proposed Caspian Sea pipeline route _ a region where Mobil has 
operations _ have engaged them. ``They are probably most effective 
behind the scenes,'' said Martin Lobel, a Washington lawyer who represents 
consumer groups and small oil companies. ``They'll get their economists 
and lawyers to see the IRS and the companies will stay relatively 
hidden. You've got maybe two Ph.D economists in the entire IRS and 
Exxon can hire as many as they want. We were once in a big battle 
with Exxon on the issue of oil overcharges and there must have been 
30 economists on the other side.'' Edward Rothschild, a senior associate 
with Podesta Associates, a Washington lobbying firm, said that the 
two companies' lobbying on complicated tax issues had paid off handsomely. 
``There's a lot of esoteric issues, especially in taxes, but which 
are worth hundreds of millions of dollars,'' he said. ``There were 
efforts by the Clinton administration in the last two budget bills 
to reduce the value of the foreign tax credits. But Exxon and the 
industry descended and those provisions were quietly eliminated. I 
don't know who they talked to, but they got the job done.'' While 
Exxon and Mobil are usually allied on industry issues, each has a 
different operating style: Exxon is more aloof and somewhat diffident 
about how it is perceived; Mobil is quicker to defend its public image 
and more willing to enter the political fray. Exxon's brashness was 
evident when the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill, one of the worst environmental 
catastrophes in U.S. history, became a giant tax break, as the company 
wrote off all disaster-related expenses _ including legal bills and 
cleanup costs. Mobil makes practically no campaign contributions, 
while Exxon is a leading donor to the Republican party and candidates. 
In the 1996 presidential election cycle Exxon contributed $593,928, 
donating 95 percent to Republicans; in the last congressional races, 
Exxon gave $475,855, 84 percent to Republicans. This GOP tilt could 
help the companies in the next Congress: the three new top House leaders 
are all Republicans from the ``Oil Patch'': House Speaker Bob Livingston 
of Louisiana, Majority Leader Dick Armey of Texas and J.C. Watts of 
Oklahoma, the party's new conference chairman. On Capitol Hill, Exxon 
and Mobil opposed the Clinton administration's efforts to gain Senate 
approval of the Kyoto Protocol, an international treaty to curb global 
warming that had won support by other oil companies like Royal Dutch/Shell 
Group and British Petroleum. And, in the last Congress, they won significant 
victories to halt the Interior and Treasury departments' efforts to 
get oil companies to pay more in royalties for oil and gas extracted 
from federal lands and pay back some $345.5 million in past royalties 
that Interior says is owed. The Justice Department has even filed 
suit to get collect these royalties; last August, Mobil spent $56.5 
million to settle these claims. Meanwhile, in Congress, Exxon leads 
an industry effort to pay royalties owed to the government in oil 
rather than in cash _ a proposal the government strongly opposes. 
``The oil companies lobby in a very coordinated way,'' said a staff 
member for a House energy-related committee, who spoke on condition 
neither neither he not his committee be identified. ``They rely heavily 
on the American Petroleum Institute, but they've also got their people. 
Exxon's lobbyist is very friendly and outgoing and the company is 
really involved in the royalty issue. On a technical point, Exxon's 
lobbyist will bring in 11 people to talk to you about it. They are 
incredibly influential.'' Lynn Russo, an Exxon spokeswoman, said it 
was too early to tell how the company's lobbying would be affected 
by the merger, a view shared by Donald Turk, a spokesman for Mobil. 
Mobil does plan to continue paying for op-ed newspaper ads and for 
the ``Masterpiece Theatre'' television series through 1999, Turk said. 
If history is any guide, the companies' lobbying expenses will undoubtedly 
rise while the merger faces federal scrutiny: Bell Atlantic Corp.'s 
lobbying costs shot up to $15.6 million at the time of its merger 
with Nynex, and Boeing Co.'s costs rose to $10 million as it was acquiring 
McDonnell Douglas. Still, the specter of a combined Exxon-Mobil juggernaut 
on the Potomac scares some. ``They will be so huge and interested 
in an incredible number of issues,'' said Charles Lewis, executive 
director of the Center for Public Integrity, a Washington nonprofit 
group. ``They'll come up with new lobbying battlegrounds.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>