<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0436 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Specialty stores and discounters outdistanced major department store 
chains in holiday sales during November, monthly results from big 
retailers showed Thursday. Stores like Ann Taylor, the Gap and Sharper 
Image saw double-digit sales increases compared with a year ago. Same-store 
sales, a more accurate gauge of a retailer's strength, increased at 
double-digit levels for those companies as well. (Same-store sales 
are sales at stores open for a year or more.) But chains like May 
Department Stores and Dayton Hudson Corp. saw modest increases in 
same-stores sales last month, the companies said, while another major 
department store retailer, Federated Department Stores, had a small 
decline. Analysts attributed the gains at discounters and specialty 
chains to efforts by those companies to focus on a core customer group 
or product category. ``The biggest surprise is the strength in the 
apparel specialty retailer,'' said Rick Gallagher, a vice president 
of the National Retail Federation, a trade group. Because of sluggish 
sales at major department stores, he said, ``a lot of people came 
to the wrong conclusion that apparel wasn't selling in November.'' 
John Staton, a partner in the retail strategy group at Andersen Consulting 
in Chicago, said he believed the sales reports sent a clear message 
to major department store companies: ``It suggests that department 
stores need to think about who their customer is and how to serve 
them.'' Same-store sales at Ann Taylor rose 11.2 percent in November 
due to demand for its career clothing, sweaters and tops. Gap, which 
also includes Gap Kids, Old Navy and Banana Republic, said same-store 
sales jumped 16 percent, as sales rose 40 percent in the month. Garments 
high in demand this year, such as fleece pullovers and cargo pants, 
were found in abundance in its stores. The Sharper Image said same-store 
sales rose 17 percent, as its largely male customers showed strong 
demand for products ranging from ionic air purifiers to to soothing-sound 
machines. The National Retail Federation still forecasts a 4.5 percent 
to 5 percent increase in same store sales for all retailers during 
the months of November and December. That should translate into a 
15 percent rise in earnings, similar to last year's gains. But this 
year's gains will come on the strength of discounters, wholesale clubs 
and the specialty stores. Last year's increase was attributable to 
strength across most of the industry, including department stores. 
The limited interest in cold weather wear including sweaters and flannel 
pajamas _ largely because of unexpectedly warm temperatures which 
are about 20 degress above normal in some areas of the United States 
_ has been one of the major problems for department stores this holiday 
season. Federated, which owns Macy's and Bloomingdale's, had a 0.2 
percent decline in same-store sales in November, as sales fell 1.5 
percent decline in the month. May Department Stores, a chain which 
includes Lord &AMP; Taylor, Hecht's, Filene's and Foley's, said same-store 
sales rose 0.1 percent. Such retailers take a bigger hit from sluggish 
apparel sales because about 80 percent of their inventory is clothing. 
Discounters, in contrast, have a more varied mix of products, including 
some necessities like food, health care and personal care items that 
need to be replaced more often than clothing. Wal-Mart Stores, the 
nation's largest discounter, said same-store sales rose 7.6 percent; 
Kmart saw a 2.5 percent increase in same-store sales and Family Dollar 
Stores said same-store sales rose 6.2 percent. Dayton Hudson, had 
a 3 percent increase in same-store sales with most gains attributed 
to its Target discount stores. Despite the problems department stores 
face, analysts said last-minute shoppers could still help their holiday 
profits. ``Last year it all came at the last week, so it's not written 
in stone,'' said Jeff Feiner, a Lehman Brothers analyst. ``This next 
week is real key. If departments stores don't hit it big, you have 
the indications it could be a problem.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>