<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0294 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Time for holiday shopping. Why not first stop at a bookstore and give 
yourself a treat? This is a good season to catch up on reading. It's 
also good for rambling around the neighborhood of a writer many readers 
are only now beginning to catch up with: the brilliant social satirist 
Dawn Powell. Her glittering novels, especially those set in New York, 
offer a rare opportunity to reflect on the dependence of cities and 
books for mutual survival. Take home a stack. You'll thank me. Powell, 
who died in 1965, would have been 102 years old on Nov. 28. This is 
a shocking milestone, for Powell's voice is among the freshest in 
contemporary letters. Her writing flourished in the 1940s and '50s, 
but only recently has she begun to receive her full due. The campaign 
to rescue Powell from oblivion was begun by Gore Vidal and led by 
Tim Page, the chief music critic for The Washington Post, author of 
a new biography on Powell and a former music critic for The New York 
Times. It has been a miracle of modern literary life. Eleven of Powell's 
15 novels are in print, more than at any point in her stressed-out 
lifetime. Published by Steerforth Press, the handsome paperback editions 
feature atmospheric New York cityscapes bordered with dusky, metallic 
colors. The voice that emerges from those covers is as sharp as their 
design. Powell's tone is comic but her themes are profound. Collectively, 
her books paint a panorama of the energies a great city marshals to 
corrode as well as nurture people's dreams. They also attest to one 
woman's triumph over dragons. ``I don't know why anyone in New York 
worries about good neighborhoods,'' she said. ``They never see their 
neighbors anyway so it might as well be a bad neighborhood.'' _ From 
``A Time to Be Born'' by Dawn Powell (1942) A native of Ohio, Powell 
spent most of her life in Greenwich Village. In a letter to a friend 
in the late 1950s, Powell writes about a niece who came to New York 
but declined her aunt's invitation to visit because it would have 
conflicted with a scheduled tour of the Village. ``I was so startled 
to think I almost prevented them from seeing mysterious Greenwich 
Village that I didn't think to say, as an acquaintance suggested, 
`But dearie, your Auntie Dawn IS Greenwich Village.''' Powell may 
exaggerate, but her unspoken retort was not an overstatement. Late 
in her life, The New York Times Magazine published a picture of Powell 
in a local antiques store. Life magazine posed her in some Village 
coffeehouses for an article that never ran. And her books offer the 
most luminous portrayal of life downtown in the era between Edna St. 
Vincent Millay and the Stonewall uprising. The Village has changed 
dramatically since Powell's death. Rents have skyrocketed. The Loews 
movie theater on Greenwich Avenue, the Women's House of Detention, 
the Brevoort Hotel and other landmarks are barely memories. Bohemia 
dispersed long ago to the East Village, Soho, Tribeca and beyond. 
Most catastrophically, the bookstores that once lined Eighth Street 
and Fourth Avenue have dwindled to a small fraction of their former 
number. Still, thanks to preservation laws that did not exist in Powell's 
day, much of the neighborhood's physical character remains intact. 
Blocks of low-rise buildings let in lots of sky. West of Avenue of 
the Americas, the Manhattan grid remains happily scrambled. West Fourth 
Street still crosses West 10th Street. Most of the buildings Powell 
lived in still stand. And the place retains its image as a refuge 
from social conventions and constraints. Powell's novels and the city 
illuminate each other: the desire for refuge is a pivotal idea in 
her writing. ``There must be some place along the route, a halfway 
house in time where the runners may pause and ask themselves why they 
run, what is the prize and is it the prize they really want,'' Powell 
reflects in her novel ``The Wicked Pavilion.'' ``What became of Beauty? 
Where went Love? There must be havens where they may at least be remembered.'' 
Greenwich Village offered Powell refuge but not security. Perhaps 
she didn't want that. She wasn't a stranger to comfort. From the early 
1940s through the mid-'50s, she occupied a duplex in a doorman building 
on a good block of 10th Street, complete with a top-floor maid's room 
that she used as a writing studio. But she was not one for putting 
down roots. Her diary is peppered with periodic descriptions of moves 
from one apartment to the next, and this nomadism corresponded to 
something in her temperament. In 1937, she wrote in her diary: ``Homes 
are bad places. Either they are so comfortable that no other place 
else could offer as much sheer convenience, yet psychic and family 
connections are such that you can never enjoy these comforts _ this 
cozy study filled with invisible foes, interruptions, responsibilities, 
worry, hatred. Or else you have no comfortable place in your home 
to work and in spite of privacy and other ideal personal relations 
are unable to enjoy it.'' She thought of herself as ``a permanent 
visitor'' in New York. ``My Home Is Far Away,'' the title of one of 
her most autobiographical novels, conveyed a perpetual desire for 
displacement. To write, she would sometimes hole up at seaside hotels, 
like the Traymore in Atlantic City, N.J., or the Half Moon in Coney 
Island, Brooklyn. Summers were often spent in a tumbledown cottage 
on Long Island's North Shore. Powell could be romantic about squalor. 
In ``The Wicked Pavilion,'' she tracks one of her characters as he 
makes a nocturnal visit to a dilapidated house way out in Queens (she 
had College Point in mind) that he had shared years before with two 
pals who were seeking their private Bohemia, a simulation of Left 
Bank Paris. Here, isolated from worldly distractions, the trio devoted 
themselves to art. Powell never lived in College Point, but a few 
years after the publication of this book she found herself virtually 
homeless. In 1958, when her building went co-op, Powell and her husband, 
Joseph Gousha, had to give up their apartment. Powell was in her early 
60s. Her husband, an advertising executive, had recently retired. 
For two years, the couple lived in sublets and cheap hotels. Possessions 
went into King Arthur Express Storage. Mostly books, plus: ``One hall 
desk, oak. Doll head in carton and dolls. Secretary desk. Three straight 
chairs. One large dirty rug. Three small dirty rugs.'' When her husband 
became mortally ill, Powell found an airless flat with a deceptively 
impressive Fifth Avenue address. Later, with financial help from a 
friend, Powell moved into a penthouse apartment in a prewar high-rise 
on the corner of Christopher and Bleecker Streets. (I briefly sublet 
this place in the late 1970s, long before I'd heard of Dawn Powell.) 
The elegant reprise was short-lived. Two years after she moved in, 
Powell was interred in a mass grave on Hart Island, New York's potters 
field. ``Why does anybody come here?'' countered Ricky? Philippe gave 
this question some judicious thought. ``They come because they have 
always come here,'' he said. Why did they come here the first time, 
then? Nobody ever comes to the Julien for the first time. _ From ``The 
Wicked Pavilion'' (1954) Powell hardly lived as a hermit. She and 
Gousha spent much of their time and income dining out, and it showed. 
Powell was plump. But she relished the social spectacle far more than 
the food. In her diary, she seldom raves about dishes. Instead, there 
are snippets like this: ``November 3, 1952. Ethel regarded her first 
drink politely, allowing it to simmer before her for several minutes, 
as if it was merely a formality like a service plate to be taken away 
untouched when something she really wished would be served. However, 
just as the other ladies were ordering a second round she suddenly 
dashed off her potion in one gulp and by dinner time was quite as 
tight as anyone else.'' In ``The Wicked Pavilion,'' Powell wrote a 
whole book about a restaurant. The Cafe Julien, a kind of Grand Central 
for the book's characters, is based on Powell's favorite hangout, 
the Cafe Lafayette, on the ground floor of a hotel that was on University 
Place between Eighth and Ninth Streets. Reginald Marsh painted a picture 
of the place to illustrate the jacket of the book's first edition. 
Remember cafe curtains? The Lafayette was the haven's haven, a mixture 
of new and familiar faces where Powell found provisional stability 
amid urban flux. The cafe turned out to be nearly as impermanent as 
a dust jacket. The hotel was torn down in the 1950s to make way for 
a concrete apartment block, the ugly Brevoort East. To read about 
the other restaurants Powell frequented is to return to a time before 
American cooking became inventive. For culinary adventure, you ate 
Italian, Chinese, Spanish and so on. You can taste the period's flavor 
at Powell's surviving Village haunts, places like El Faro, at Horatio 
and Greenwich Streets, and Grand Ticino on Thompson Street. At the 
Ticino, writers used to stow their manuscripts in shelves that still 
hang above the tables. For fancy nights out, Powell and Gousha headed 
uptown _ to the Rainbow Room, the 21 Club, Tavern on the Green or 
the St. Regis Hotel. But if I were giving a dinner in Powell's honor, 
I might hold it at Grange Hall. The restaurant wasn't around in her 
day, but it has an archetypal Village location. The heartland cuisine 
recalls Powell's Ohio childhood. But maybe the best way to revisit 
Powell's New York would be to drop by Chumley's, a former speak-easy 
with a still unmarked door, guzzle two or three gin martinis in quick 
succession, and rush out into the streets before the buzz wears off. 
Any city can look magical when you're bombed, as Powell, Gousha and 
their friends often were. Considering how much alcohol they consumed, 
it's amazing that Powell was so productive. It's also fair to say 
that the city looks after drunks. If she'd moved to the country, like 
Jackson Pollock, she might well have run into a tree. Powell was not 
a secret drinker, nor did she condemn the usual vices. In her diary, 
she deplores ``the hypocrisy of blaming X's downfall on alcohol, women 
and social climbing, when these were precisely the things that enabled 
him to become a success in the first place.'' Viewed from our present 
puritanical perspective, she and her pals seem enviably free from 
guilt or shame. But some reviewers were put off by Powell's reluctance 
to be a moral judge. What Vidal termed her Petronian neutrality was 
often taken as cynicism. Powell professed surprise at this reaction. 
She believed she was defending love and beauty from the forces arrayed 
against them: arrogance, betrayal and competitiveness, to name a few. 
September 29, 1959. The Coney Island Sunday Crowd around Washington 
Square . . . Girls carrying on fight. One walking ahead. Other shouts 
``I tell you I'm sick _ I don't feel good _ I'm sick.'' The other 
one pushes on. ``Okay, you're sick. Eat a hamburger.'' _ From ``The 
Diaries of Dawn Powell: 1931-1965'' If there's to be a commemorative 
plaque, Page suggests it should be placed at 106 Perry St. Powell 
wrote or began several of her best novels there. But I propose that 
they rename the Washington Square Arch in her honor. The Dawn Powell 
Arch. She was very fond of this City Beautiful souvenir. On walks, 
she would stroll down to the arch, take in the light and eavesdrop 
on conversations. Then she might walk back along Eighth Street, perhaps 
stopping for a milkshake before she returned home and poured the day's 
first drink. For many, the Dawn Powell revival is driven by something 
more than the pleasure of discovering a forgotten first-rate writer. 
There is also the fear that the city she wrote about won't be around 
much longer in a form Powell would recognize, i.e., a New York that 
can't sustain writers capable of chronicling it. In the essay that 
sparked the revival, published in 1987 in The New York Review of Books, 
Vidal already delivers last rites. It's easy to agree with Vidal when 
you walk around the Village today and note the scarcity of bookstores. 
Of the few that remain, only Three Lives &AMP; Company (another spot 
that opened well after Powell's death) projects a proper bibliophilic 
fervor. It's fabulous that we'll soon be able to download books into 
palm-size computers, but the experience won't be the same as letting 
your eyes graze over the covers of books that a literate manager has 
arranged in a shop window. The physicality of Powell's books is as 
eloquent as a skyscraper. A shelf of them is a skyline. They are palpable 
tributes to the towering city of work. The diaries document this repeatedly: 
Powell goes out into the streets, into bars, theaters and other people's 
houses, returns home with images, chunks of dialogue, fashions them 
into a city on the page, sends her portrayal back into the world, 
awaits reviews, musters her spirits against disappointing sales, meditates 
on her unpopularity, sallies forth and begins again. The process was 
itself a magic wheel turning, each spin animating city and author 
alike. Powell's diaries offer written proof that the city was never 
comfortable for writers, and perhaps shouldn't be. A self-created 
observer, Powell did not oppose change. In her last novel, ``The Golden 
Spur,'' a young man, savoring his first day in New York, stands on 
a sidewalk and watches wreckers pull down an old department store. 
He asks the gentleman beside him why the event has drawn such a big 
crowd. The man replies: `` `In the first place, this was a splendid 
old landmark and people like to see the old order blown up. Then there 
is the glorious dirt and uproar which are the vitamins of New York, 
and of course the secret hope that the street will cave in and swallow 
us all up.' Jonathan looked down uneasily at the boards underfoot. 
`Dear old Wanamaker's.' His companion sighed. `If I had paid their 
nasty little bill, perhaps they would never have come to this. Well, 
mustn't get sentimental.' '' NEW YORK _ Here is a selection of sites 
in Dawn Powell's beloved Greenwich Village where she lived, wrote, 
strolled and cavorted. 1. EL FARO, 823 Greenwich St., at Horatio Street. 
When Powell ate here in the 1940s, exotic food consisted of Spanish, 
Italian and Chinese cuisine. 2. 106 PERRY ST. Powell wrote or began 
several of her best novels at this address, where she lived from 1926 
to 1934. 3. 95 CHRISTOPHER ST. Powell's last residence, 1963 to 1965. 
4. CHUMLEY'S, 86 Bedford St. (between Bleecker Street and Seventh 
Avenue). A former speakeasy and watering hole for thirsty spirits 
in Powell's heyday. 5. GRANGE HALL, 50 Commerce St., at Barrow Street. 
Although not around during Powell's time, this dining place, in a 
peekaboo cul-de-sac, evokes the mood of Bohemian Greenwich Village. 
6. GRAND TICINO, 228 Thompson St. A onetime literary haunt where hungry 
writers parked their manuscripts in shelves that still hang above 
the tables. 7. WASHINGTON SQUARE ARCH. A favorite Powell site where 
she would eavesdrop on the chatter of the city. 8. CAFE LAFAYETTE 
(demolished), University Place between Eighth and Ninth Streets (currently 
site of the Brevoort East apartment building). A hangout where the 
author held court and which she called the Cafe Julien in her fiction. 
9. 35 E. NINTH ST. Powell wrote some of her most powerful novels during 
her sojourn here from 1942 to 1958. 10. 9 E. 10TH ST. Powell's home 
from 1934 to 1942. 11. THREE LIVES &AMP; COMPANY BOOKSTORE, 154 W. 
10th St. Although Powell died before this bookshop opened, it projects 
the ambiance of a time when the area around Eighth Street and Fourth 
Avenue was a mecca for small bookstores. 12 43 FIFTH AVE., at 11th 
Street. Despite the impressive address, Powell lived in an airless 
flat here from 1960 to 1963. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>