<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0403 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Only a year ago, when the New York Jets weren't this good, when their 
defense wasn't holding the opposition to the second fewest points 
in the NFL and the offense wasn't the sixth highest-scoring unit, 
they had very special special teams. They virtually defined the Jets' 
renaissance under Bill Parcells in 1997. Leon Johnson returned a punt 
66 yards for a touchdown, as well as a kickoff 101 yards. Aaron Glenn 
produced a 96-yard kickoff return for a score. The opposition had 
little success, though: No one scored against the Jets' special teams. 
But in Sunday's opponent, the Seattle Seahawks, the Jets face a club 
that has shown Jet-like dominance on special teams. The Seahawks have 
produced a league-high three touchdowns on kick-returns, including 
two by the dangerous Joey Galloway on punts. He is also their leading 
receiver with 48 catches, an average of 16 yards and 6 touchdowns. 
The Seahawks are now one of the league's best special teams' units 
following a season in which they were probably the worst. They then 
hired the Redskins' Pete Rodriguez as assistant head coach as well 
as special teams' maestro. The Seahawks are the last obstacle before 
the Jets begin their final triad against division opponents. And the 
Jets, despite their 8-4 record and first-place division tie, are trying 
to recapture some of the special special teams' status they have not 
enjoyed to the same degree this season. When the weather gets cold, 
Parcells believes, his special teamers will be better than the opposition's. 
They are tougher, he claims. But so far they have not returned a kick 
for a score. Meanwhile, the Jets have yielded a 69-yard punt return 
for a touchdown to the Ravens' Jermaine Lewis, something they did 
not do at all last year. Much of the Jets' failure to dominate in 
punt returns this year is because they are being taken seriously. 
The team's revival began in Seattle with the very first game of the 
Parcells' era. The Jets exploded to a 27-3 half-time lead in their 
opening game last year at Seattle, and went on to trounce the Seahawks, 
41-3. That game set the tone for the season. Chris Hayes, one of the 
Jets' leading special-teams' tacklers, contends, ``Everybody's gunning 
for us nowadays, and you have to work that much harder.'' Leon Johnson 
added, ``They're playing us differently this year. You can game-plan 
for something, and then the other team tries something new. Last year, 
for example, there weren't too many directional punts against us.'' 
But this year the object has been to try to keep the ball away from 
Johnson, or to simply boot it so high he cannot return it. Last year 
he fair-caught only 6 balls while returning 51 punts. This year he 
has called for a fair catch 11 times while returning only 22. Meanwhile 
Johnson has been battling a knee injury this season. His longest punt 
return has been only 19 yards. He averaged 12.1 yards a return a year 
ago, but only 6.8 this season. Of course, this year's Jets are a better 
team because the offense and the defense is better. Last year the 
special teams had to offset more Jets' problems. Against Seattle, 
the Jets must offset Galloway, especially on special teams. Rodriguez 
has tried different things to motivate the elusive return man. ``I 
came in and said to Joey, `I think we can be good on punt returns 
if you work on it,''' recalled Rodriguez. ``Last year he had a turf 
toe and he didn't want to do it. ``He got a big play in preseason,'' 
said Rodriguez, ``and he told me, `Hey, Pete, if it's going to be 
this easy I'll do it all the time.''' Still, Galloway has to be primed, 
so Rodriguez reminds him that the Cowboys' Deion Sanders doesn't mind 
returning punts, and if it's good enough for Deion, well... As for 
the Jets, right now their kicking game is better than it has been 
all season. John Kidd's arrival has not only elevated the punting 
game, it has improved place-kicker John Hall's percentage as a new 
holder. Kidd is punting for an average of 42.2 yards. More significantly, 
his net is 5 yards higher than Brian Hansen's, whom he replaced. And 
with Kidd holding, Hall has been successful on 10 of his last 12 field 
goal attempts. His season's average is up to 72.4 percent. Along the 
way, the Jets have become the conference's top team in getting good 
position following kickoffs-as well as keeping back opponents. That 
combination, along with their proven power on offense and defense, 
could be a deciding factor as the race enters its final four games. 
EXTRA POINTS _ Not surprisingly, KEYSHAWN JOHNSON, the only Jet on 
the injury list the last two weeks, was upgraded to ``probable'' from 
``questionable'' with a hamstring injury. _ VINNY TESTAVERDE became 
the first Jet in five years to earn the American Conference offensive 
player of the month award. The quarterback led the Jets to a 4-1 record 
in November, starting with a fourth-quarter comeback victory in Kansas 
City. For the month he tossed 9 touchdowns to 3 interceptions. He 
previously was named the player of the month in 1995 in Cleveland 
and 1990 at Tampa Bay. BILL PARCELLS was not impressed: ``If you go 
by Wednesday's practice, he'd be down in Toledo pitching for the Mud 
Hens.'' _ KEYSHAWN JOHNSON is hosting his annual ``Key's Kids'' luncheon 
at the Official All-Star Cafe on Saturday. For the last three years 
Johnson has brought a number of youngsters from various New York programs 
to Jets' home games. At the luncheon he will lead them in a Jets' 
trivia contest. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>