<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0467 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
They are not sure where it will go, what it will cost or when it will 
be finished, but leaders of the Connecticut legislature are moving 
swiftly to approve a deal that sports economists think will be the 
biggest giveaway in the history of professional sports _ a new stadium 
for the New England Patriots. In the two weeks since Gov. John G. 
Rowland stunned the public and the sports establishment by luring 
Patriots owner Robert Kraft to Hartford, the fine print of the deal 
has prompted a round of second-guessing by legislators of both major 
parties who are alarmed by a price tag that could rise to more than 
a billion dollars, and by a host of unanswered questions. Not a single 
parking space is included in the stadium's budget, the land at the 
site where officials hope to put the stadium is polluted with cancer-causing 
coal tar, and taxpayers would be liable for millions of dllars in 
guarantees each year if luxury seats go empty. In addition, the deal 
promises to raise instantly the value of the Patriots by $100 million 
because of the deal's favorable terms, while the state's projection 
of its own profit stands at $3 million over the 30-year term of the 
deal. ``We're writing a blank check to the Patriots,'' said state 
Rep. J. Wayne Fox, D-Stamford. State Rep. John Thompson, D-Manchester, 
said he was imploring his colleagues to reconsider their euphoria. 
``The momentum is to do it as fast as possible, but there are at least 
six or seven serious questions, and I think there will be more,'' 
he said. And state Sen. John Kissel, R-Enfield, said Connecticut would 
be jeopardizing other programs by taking on such a huge debt for a 
stadium. ``People understand you can't keep charging everything in 
the hopes that things will remain rosy,'' he said. But the skeptics 
and opponents remain a small minority. So far, only about 12 of the 
state's 186 legislators have indicated that they would vote against 
the plan when it comes up Dec. 15. Rowland said this week that he 
did not care how rich his state makes the Patriots and that the deal 
would be passed by the legislature easily and in just one day. ``Bet 
the ranch on it,'' he said after a Christmas tour at the Executive 
Residence. ``Full speed ahead. Go, Pats!'' How is it that Connecticut, 
which fancies itself ``the land of steady habits,'' has gone giddy? 
The stadium deal would allow Hartford to begin a long-dreamed-of redevelopment 
project along the Connecticut River, giving the city the hope of halting 
the downtown decay that began with the exodus of manufacturing jobs 
in the 1950s. Also, a major-league team would give Hartford, which 
has fought a reputation for dullness ever since Mark Twain arrived 
in 1868 and complained about the paucity of cigar stores, a chance 
to be known for something besides insurance-company headquarters. 
No longer could Bostonians dismiss Hartford as ``the filing cabinet 
of the Northeast.'' The state plans to spend $350 million on a new 
stadium, which the Patriots would use rent-free in return for a 10 
percent tax on tickets and an agreement to stay in Hartford for 30 
years. Already, that is an unusually good deal, according to several 
sports economists, but then there are the extras: The state would 
guarantee up to $17.5 million a year for luxury boxes and club seats 
that go unsold, would pay for the team's insurance, would give the 
team catering rights for University of Connecticut games that are 
played in the stadium and would throw in $15 million for a practice 
center elsewhere in Connecticut. In addition, the state promised to 
make any road improvements necessary so that the stadium could be 
cleared in one hour or less. The tentative deal that Rowland and Kraft 
signed last month also gives the team any money from advertising signs 
in the stadium and ``any and all other sources of revenue from or 
relating to the stadium that may be developed in the future.'' On 
top of that the governor agreed to pick up the tab for major repairs 
at the stadium. While the governor's aides insist that the deal is 
``revenue neutral,'' Andrew Zimbalist, an economics professor at Smith 
College and one of the nation's leading authorities on stadium financing, 
estimates that it will cost Connecticut taxpayers $30 million to $50 
million a year. The state's potential liability over the 30 years 
of the lease includes $375 million for construction and infrastructure 
improvements, $525 million in guarantees for unsold luxury seats and 
boxes, and $115 million for a capital-improvement fund. ``This could 
set a record in terms of the richness of the deal,'' Zimbalist said, 
pointing to the size of the guarantee for luxury seats and the fact 
that it is being paid by the government instead of by business groups, 
as is more common. By contrast, the St. Louis Rams pay a city commission 
rent of $250,000 a year, plus the city received $80 million in fees 
from preferential seating licenses. The Tampa Bay Buccaneers, which 
moved into a new stadium this year, pay a city authority more than 
$3.5 million each year in rent. The Baltimore Ravens paid the city 
$10 million for the right to sell the name of the team's new stadium 
(still on the market). ``Most of these stadium contracts are sweetheart 
deals,'' said Dean Bonham, a consultant in Denver who specializes 
in valuing teams, ``but this is a gimmee from beginning to end. If 
it gets put together, it will be unquestionably the best deal for 
any owner in the NFL and, in all probability, the best deal in professional 
sports.'' The state had promised to have the stadium ready for 2001. 
But the company that owns a steam plant situated on the proposed site 
is demanding $100 million to move, a figure that is not in the project's 
budget. Negotiations seem to be at an impasse. Arthur Marquardt, president 
of the plant's owner, CTG Resources Inc., said the state or the developer 
would have to pay for the demolition and replacement of the plant 
since it would not result in any growth of his business. But Rowland 
said, ``We're not paying the whole freight.'' In another twist, regulators 
say that a half-dozen environmental permits and studies will be required 
because of the extensive pollution caused . Those studies may make 
the three-year construction schedule impossibly optimistic. Rowland 
says he still believes the stadium can be built on time, but he is 
now calling that a ``target date.'' And leaders say the legislation 
will not specify a location for the stadium, in case the problems 
with the proposed site become insurmountable. Among the reasons that 
the deal has encountered such little resistance is the widely held 
belief that it will help jump-start a long-dreamed-of redevelopment 
project along the Connecticut River. The project, Adriaen's Landing, 
which is to include a convention center and hotel, is the Hartford's 
main hope for emerging from the downtown decay that began with the 
exodus of manufacturing jobs in the 1950s. In addition, Rowland, a 
Republican, has managed to make the Democratic leaders unofficial 
partners in the deal he signed with Kraft on Nov. 19. Although Rowland 
negotiated with Kraft in secret for months, he brought the leaders 
of the House and Senate, both of which are controlled by Democrats, 
into the negotiations four days before the deal was announced. It 
cannot have hurt his cause that Senate President Pro Tempore Kevin 
Sullivan is from West Hartford, and the House Speaker Thomas Ritter 
is from Hartford. After months of conference calls between the governor's 
aides and Kraft's lawyers, a new voice joined them as the final terms 
were worked out - a lawyer for Senate Democrats. The result is that 
instead of shooting holes in the governor's plan, legislative leaders 
are looking for ways to make the deal work, no matter how many wrinkles 
arise. ``I think I sold five skyboxes this morning,'' Ritter said 
this week. Legislative leaders said they are treating the proposed 
deal like ``a treaty signed by the governor,'' and will permit their 
members to make no major changes. When the governor's office released 
the plan's financial details this week, the haste showed. A state-financed 
report by the consulting firm of KPMG Peat Marwick seemed to prove 
the governor's claim that the stadium would wind up costing taxpayers 
no money. But then the governor's aides acknowledged that the report 
did not consider the cost of paying the guarantee on some skyboxes, 
which would be necessary under what they billed as their conservative 
scenario. After an occasionally tense meeting with the governor the 
next day, Rep. Moira Lyons, D-Stamford, who is the House majority 
leader, said she needed more information than was in the report and 
asked for ``a breakdown of what the real costs are.'' The governor's 
aides said they would get back to her. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>