<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981203.0536 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial for Friday, Dec. 4: The New 
York state Legislature's attempt to tiptoe into Albany to pass a quick 
and quiet pay raise has turned into a loud, messy disaster. The Assembly 
Democratic majority, whose members were hungriest for salary hikes, 
came up with a bill that substantially increased legislators' pay 
while maintaining their status as part-time workers who enjoy innumerable 
favors from friendly lobbyists. The Senate Republicans, between bursts 
of rhetoric about the importance of curbing the power of unions in 
schools, revived an outrageous piece of special-interest legislation 
for their friends in the police union. Gov. George Pataki, who constantly 
complains about the dysfunctional Legislature, could have taken this 
opportunity to press for serious reforms in the way the Assembly and 
Senate operate. This would also have been the perfect time to bring 
up what he contended during the campaign was his secret plan to reform 
campaign finance laws. But instead the governor attempted to use the 
pay raises as a bribe to get the Assembly to approve a sweeping charter 
school bill. The idea of charter schools, which would be free from 
supervision by the normal education bureaucracy but paid for by public-school 
funds, is intriguing. But if poorly done, a charter schools program 
could drain local school systems of resources, borrow money that would 
have to be repaid by taxpayers if the school failed, and leave children 
at the mercy of educators who are even less qualified and well supervised 
than the worst public-school employees. Obviously, this is not the 
sort of change that should be passed by a lame-duck Legislature during 
a three-day session, with pay raises dangled as the reward for cooperation. 
The Senate Republicans attempted to sweeten the school bill by adding 
on at least one goodie for every sector of the education establishment, 
making the legislation even more unwieldy. They also passed a long-moribund 
Assembly bill taking away New York City's control of contract negotiations 
with the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association. That measure has long 
been sought by city police officers, who rightly suspect the state 
board would give them more generous contracts. The idea that the Republicans 
would tie the hands of a Republican mayor in such a critical budget 
issue is incredible. But it demonstrates a mindset less interested 
in theories like local autonomy than in special-interest politics. 
The best thing the Assembly Democrats did during the special session 
was to leave town without passing the charter schools bill. The presumption 
now is that Pataki will sign the pay raise and police union bills, 
but only if he gets his own charter school legislation in return. 
This page has supported the idea of raising legislators' pay if it 
is combined with reforms. But the scene in Albany this week has made 
it obvious that nobody deserves any financial rewards this year. The 
Assembly should drop charter schools until next year and stay home 
for the holidays. Pataki should veto the pay raise bill, the police 
bill and all the other dribs and drabs of legislation that were swiftly 
passed at the behest of lobbyists with friends in the right places. 
Forget this session ever happened and allow everyone to start fresh 
in 1999. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>