<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981203.2000.2348 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Looking in the encyclopedia under Hong Kong and you'll read these 
words "has one of the world's finest natural harbors. While Victoria 
Harbor may be fine, but natural is not the best word to describe it. 
For one thing, it's a got a lot more gunk and garbage than Mother 
Nature ever put there. And for another, it's not half the size nature 
intended and it's set to get smaller still in a few years. The World's 
Michael Swyto takes across the harbor. Take a ride on the Star Ferry. 
The green and white boats are a landmark in Hong Kong. They've been 
carrying commuters and tourists across the waters of Victoria Harbor 
for over 100 years. At 28 cents a ride, the 7-minute journey between 
Hong Kong Island and Chim Sa Chou on the Caldin Peninsula is one of 
the cheapest thrills in town. Look up, and the city's skyline and 
green mountains seem to rise right out of the water. But, look down... 
Well, I tell you if you worked where I'm working, which is on the 
pier, three sides of my office are surrounded by the harbor water. 
And I look out the window and I'm sick to see what I see in there. 
And I don't think I'd be swimming in there any more. Tal Ho points 
to rubbish floating in the water from the office of his architectural 
firm. He's been telling me about the old cross Harbor swimming race, 
which use to be a feature of Hong Kong life every fall. Ho completed 
the swim in 45 minutes back in 1955. The sea was pretty rough, I remember. 
And in it, you can not see more than 10 feet away from you because 
you are always below the wave. The last cross-Harbor swimming race 
was held in the 1970's. It was discontinued for public health reasons. 
Hong Kong dumps raw sewage and industrial waste into the harbor. Doctors 
say that if you merely fall into its waters today, you risk attracting 
a host of illnesses; including conjunctivitis and Hepatitis A. Passengers 
on the Star Ferry are oblivious of such concerns. While Victoria Harbor 
is one of the busiest in the world, accidents are rare and few people 
ever fall in. These passengers will notice a drastic change in the 
shape of the harbor, though if the Hong Kong government follows through 
with its plans for a major land reclamation. The person plans to reclaim 
from the harbor a total of 1297 hectares, which means about 5 square 
miles. Winston Chu heads up the Society For The Protection of The 
Harbor. They have taken out of the harbor, before the Year 1990 about 
10 square miles. So, the harbor even up to the year 1990 is already 
half the original size. What they intend to do now is to cut it make 
another half. The government says it doesn't have a choice. Wilton 
Fong is a principal assistant secretary for planning. He points out 
that most existing land in Hong Kong is mountainous and not suitable 
for development. There's virtually no room for us to expand our central 
business district. There's also virtually no land for us to to solve 
the traffic congestion problem in central. So, the only way to improve 
our transmitting infrastructure in central is reclamation. Originally, 
some of the new land in the middle of town was suppose to be for parks 
and outdoor cafes. Now, it's looking like it'll just be more high-rises. 
This lead a weekly English language publication, HK Magazine, to write, 
" what was once envisaged as a lung for the central city, has been 
compromised, shrunk, and warped into a cramped, exhaust choked space 
where people will be more likely to develop lung cancer. Winston Chu 
agrees. Their plan is to put 650,000 people into the half of the city 
by reclaiming the harbor. But, this is like putting 650,000 people 
into Central Park in New York. It simply doesn't work. It would destroy 
the city with pollution, air, water, by over density of people and 
also traffic. It does attract so many problems. It's nothing less 
than insanity. The new, smaller harbor is expected to shape for another 
five or ten years. But, the government is hoping to get the ball rolling 
within the next 12-months. Winston Chu and The Society For The Protection 
Of The Harbor have started a petition to stop this. Once the plan's 
made and they let out the contracts, the tender for the engineers 
and the consultants and the construction companies, it has got to 
go ahead. In a survey by the University of Hong Kong, 69 percent of 
respondents disapproved of further reclamation. The government says 
this public sentiment could force it to trim back some its plans. 
In the meantime, Hong Kong residents would be wise to enjoy Victoria 
Harbor, polluted water aside, while they can. For The World, I'm Michael 
Swyto, in Hong Kong. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>