<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981203.2000.2006 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The civil war in the Democratic Republic of Congo has been like a 
bad dream for a nation that suffered through more than its share of 
nightmares. The target of the rebellion President Laurent Kabila overthrow 
long time Dictator Mabuto Sese Seko only last year. Now, after four 
months, or four months after their campaign the oust Kabila, rebels 
control the eastern half of Congo. But, they appear unlikely to complete 
the job by force and equally unlikely to surrender. Philip Garavich 
is the author of "We Wish To Inform That Tomorrow We Will Be Killed 
With Our Families", an account of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. Garavich 
says the west has a difficult time understanding let alone solving 
the Congo crisis. There's no question that the war that's currently 
being fought in the Congo involves the most number of parties to fight 
in an African war, yet the American State Department Representative 
for Africa Susan Rice has called it the 'first African World War". 
And really what that's all a reference to is the fact that now converged 
in the Congo, one has the armies of at least 6 countries, as well 
as at least again as many guerilla movements of one sort or another. 
So, what we have is kind of a trans-African war with many different 
issues at stake in the large combat. I think that this has made it 
seem almost too complicated to grasp. It's not. There are very basic 
issues. And what are some of those issues? I mean are we talking about 
a conflict of ethnicity or of resources or what? We're talking about 
a conflict of political leadership essentially. You have a country 
that much of which has been ungoverned for much of the last several 
decades. Under Mobuto, the Congo, which is a country the size of Western 
Europe or the United States east of the Mississippi. It's an immense 
country bordering nine African countries. And in many ways, as a result, 
it's sort of a crucial strategic and economic hub for much of central 
and western Africa. The Congo under Mobuto was really left to rot. 
And Kabila, the current president, was installed in May of 1997. He 
inherited a situation of a country where large parts of it had no 
central government. It had no real loyalty to anything but the idea 
of being part of the nation. And so what was need was to build from 
zero or less than zero some kind of a national government. He failed 
utterly to do so. He never built a national army. And essentially 
by mid-summer of this year, you had a rebel movement where people 
disenchanted with Kabila and his military, about 80 percent of his 
military went into mutiny. A lot of his political class went into 
rebellion. And with the support of Uganda and Rwanda seized control 
of much of the eastern part of the country. And this is an interesting 
point, because he is being opposed by many of the same forces who 
actually put him into office last year. Yes. And because he has-because 
the rebels have foreign backing, he and his few supporters internally 
have made a great effort to make it sound like this is a war of foreign 
aggression. That's how the rhetoric has been going out of the Kabila 
regime, which is Uganda and Rwanda attacking us. This is an ethnic 
war. And in order to try to drum up support this extremely unpopular 
president Kabila has sought to embrace the rhetoric of the Rwanda 
genocide which is to say these are foreigners and these are not particular 
members of the Tutsi minority and we must fight them man, woman, and 
child and all of them must be considered enemies. He's also enlisted 
the former militia and military of the Hutu power armies that committed 
the genocide Rwanda in 1994. These are essentially fugitive war criminals. 
Some of their leaders under indictment from the international tribunal 
who had been camping out in neighboring countries. He's brought them 
back and put them into action. There was a United Nations report, 
Philip, that warned the situation in the Great Lakes region it's said 
is rapidly heading toward a catastrophe of incalculable consequences 
and requires comprehensive and decisive measures on the part of the 
international community. To what extent should this conflict be of 
concern beyond the shores of Africa? Well, beyond the shores of Africa, 
there has been an extremely clear reluctance to get overly involved. 
It's obvious that, you know, it's not going to overflow, so that suddenly 
this war creates warfare outside of Africa. What it will do is it 
will make tremendous instability. It will create humanitarian and 
political crises in a way that I think anybody who's interested in 
the stability of Africa would be interested in trying to avoid the 
escalation of this war. Now, there are millions of small efforts being 
made by various Africa mediation groups as well as by various international 
mediation groups, but so far they've been quite fruitless. Philip 
Garavich is journalist and author and expert on the Great Lakes Region 
of Africa. Thank you, Philip. Thank you very much. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>