<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981203.2000.2904 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This it The World. I'm Lisa Mullins. First of all, a belated Happy 
Thanksgiving to you and yours. The World's Eddie Mare has written 
us another letter from London. I'm sorry for not reaching you all 
last week, but Thanksgiving is just another aspect of America that's 
pretty meaningless over here, like baseball and Ross Perot. If I can 
apply that psychology in reverse, I want to write this week about 
a great British tradition which is pretty meaningless to you, like 
cricket or the Duchess of York. I bumped into an American friend of 
mine over the weekend as we waited to attend our first pantomime of 
the season. I told her I was thinking of writing to you about the 
experience. "Oh", she exclaimed, "you'll never be able to explain 
pantomime in under three minutes. It's too bizarre". Please, let me 
prove her wrong. Every Christmas is the pantomime season. The Panto, 
as it's called for short, is a uniquely British tradition, combining 
our love of theater with our ability to laugh at anything to do with 
bodily functions and pawn shop all British men secretly have dressing 
up as a woman. The best Pantos have an element of farce, lavish sets, 
music, familiar roles, and topical jokes. You take children to a pantomime, 
but it's always understood they'll only get half the jokes. The others 
are all adult humor with a childish quality. I fear that I'm losing 
it. Let me try this. Pantos are always based on very tales with stock 
characters and an ending everyone knows before they go in. Insert 
your own Lloyd Webber joke here. For instance, the one I saw at the 
weekend was "Cinderella". Pretty girl from central casting, two burly 
men dressed up as women play the ugly sisters. There's an awkward 
butler and a bumbling prince. All pantomimes involve audience participation. 
You boo when the baddie comes on, cheer when the goody-two-shoes shows 
up. And the cast members are obliged at some point in every pantomime 
to yell, "Oh, yes, it is" to get the stock response from the entire 
audience, bellowed at the tops of their voices, "Oh, no, it isn't". 
I know what you're thinking, it sounds chaotic and sometimes it is. 
But, if you're ever over in Britain between November and February, 
do go along to see a pantomime to watch the British at play. Pantos 
are performed all over the land; in church halls and West End theaters. 
They pretend to be innocent fun, but they entitle themselves "Dick 
Wellington", and "Puss In Boots". It will be your only chance to see 
serious actors on stage wearing full custom including green tights 
slapping their thighs and proclaiming "12 O'clock and no signs of 
Dick". We actors in the professional Pantos productions are often 
the stars of TV soap operas. For many people in the audience, it's 
their only trip to the theater all year. The jokes are corny. The 
acting redefines over-the-top. And everyone has seen the same show 
a dozen times. But, like turkey leftovers, life wouldn't be the same 
without it. Until next time, yours truly, Eddie Mare. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>