<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981203.2000.0521 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Meanwhile, Prime Minister Netanyahu has another crisis on his hands, 
on Israeli's northern border. For 15 years, Israeli troops have controlled 
the buffer zone in Southern Lebanon to protect against attacks by 
Iranian-backed Hezbollah guerrillas. The occupation has always been 
controversial but never more so than in the past few weeks. Seven 
Israeli soldiers were killed in Southern Lebanon last month and 16 
others died there earlier this year. Now, more Israelis are calling 
for unilateral withdrawal, but a majority still says security guarantees 
must come first. The World's Richard Myran has talked with people 
on both side of the border and sent us this report. Israeli mother 
Rachel Bandor asks her two sons, Staf and Achel as they watch TV if 
they've done their homework for school. Her elder son Or isn't at 
home. He's in Lebanon in a commando unit as part of his army service. 
The Bandor family live in Afagalaine in northern Israeli. From the 
window of the den in the family home, you can see the 20 brown colored 
hills across the border in Lebanon. Rachel Bandor is one of the founders 
of the Four Mothers Movement, which calls for the Israeli army to 
withdraw from Lebanon. I think that we are strong enough that if there 
will be a problem after we withdraw from Lebanon we act to those problems. 
We have to take the chance. Because if we are not taking any chance, 
you can stop all your life and be smug of killing. And what my shouting, 
stop this, stop this killing, because why to send our children to 
die, why, because the adults can't stick together and solve their 
problems. With 70 Israeli soldiers killed in Lebanon in the past two 
weeks, the voices calling for the Israeli army to withdraw are getting 
stronger. Latest opinion polls show 40 percent of Israelis are in 
favor of a pullout, twice as many as last year. Even so, the majority 
of Israelis, especially those living close to the border with Lebanon 
are still against it. Galia Goldberg has come Susie's Hair Boutique 
in the town of Kerlasomona to have her hair trimmed and set. Kerlasomona 
sits just a mile or two from the border with Lebanon. Goldberg lives 
in a neighboring village, Over the years, the guerrilla group Hesbura 
has targeted this area with rockets, causing causalities and bringing 
normal life to a halt. Galia Goldberg has a son who served in Lebanon. 
And while she'd like to see an end to the bloodshed, she thinks the 
Israeli army should remain where it is. My heart says to end the war. 
But, my brain says to expect. On one hand, everyday we open the radio 
with trembled hands. We are anxious if something happened at night, 
maybe some of our soldiers died on the firing range. We live on the 
border.. What happened now in the security zone will happen in our 
place where we live or on the fence. In the security zone itself, 
British troops in the blue bullet-proof vests and blue helmets of 
the United Nations patrol along a potholed road. The wide UN jeep 
travels over the gray rocky terrain passing the occasional village 
where bombed out homes stand as reminders to the decades of conflict. 
There are more than 4000 UN soldiers in southern Lebanon. The army 
first came here in 1978 following an incursion into Lebanon by the 
Israeli army. Kemo Gatso who has been with the UN since its arrival 
in Lebanon says the recent wave of attacks are having a big impact 
in Israeli. All this accumulation of causalities in this base has 
generally. This is the primary end of the cause of the debate. I don't 
see it in the immediate future without some sort of a deal with Syria 
or Lebanon or somebody. But, I will not rule out some of the traditional 
beligning in Lebanon. For ordinary Lebanese, who live in the security 
zone, life continues in the shadow of the conflict. Ahamad who doesn't 
want to give his full name, runs a shop in the village of Tibat. On 
the hill above the village is an Israeli army position. 20-years ago, 
20,000 people lived in Tibat. Today, there are 800. The constant war 
between the rival armies and militias drove them away. And while today, 
the rest of Lebanon is peaceful, Ahamad says the bloodshed will continue 
in the south until Israeli leaves. We hope that they withdraw and 
we'd like to have peace in our area. But, the situation, we don't 
only think about this. So, you don't think it's any closer? Any withdraw? 
No. No. We don't believe this time will be happening. The new Lebanese 
Prime Minister, Salim Haus, appointed only yesterday isn't talking 
of any soft deals with Israeli either. He's sticking to the traditional 
line along with powerful neighbor Syria that Israeli must pull out 
of southern Lebanon unconditionally, something Israeli refuses to 
do. So, for now, the conflict already two decades old goes on. For 
The World, this is Richard Myran on the Israeli-Lebanese border. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>