<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981203.2000.2667 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We return now to the heart of France for the answer to today's geography 
quiz. This region is full of forest and it's home to the Cathedral 
of Mamoge and home to a dessert that's made with locally grown cherries. 
Here with the answer is Kathy Shaw, spokeswoman for the Cordon Bleu 
Home Collection Cookbook Series. We're talking about the Demisan region 
today which is located in the central area of France. And I understand 
this is a very volcanic area where the soil is rich, but the geography 
is uneven. But, there is one premium fruit that grows there and that's 
in our dish that seems to be typical of the region. And what is it? 
It's cherries. And they're the main ingredients for a traditional 
dessert called Cloffeetea. And this is a deep rich, kind of a rich 
custard with fruit and the fruit as you said being cherries. What 
is the origin of the word Cloffeetea? Cloffeetea is derived from actually 
a local dialect from the cloffeer which means to fill. It was a dessert 
that was made by the farm hands that they would eat once they came 
in from the fields. So, it's kind of peasant food? yes. And gives 
us the brief rundown in how you make and how they made it. Actually, 
it would be very simple. When they would leave for the fields in the 
morning, they would take cherries, simply remove the stems living 
the seeds in, thrown them into a buttered stoneware dish and then 
make a very simple batter that's very similar to a crepe batter. Pour 
it over and stick it at the back of their stove to cook for the day. 
Now, I have a question, is it OK to be authentic to this dish and 
take out the pits? We took them out to save everyone's dental work. 
We all appreciate that, Kathy. Now, cloffeetea from what I understand 
is a good fundamental recipe that can teach you how to make a good 
crepe batter and some of the secrets involved in that, what are they? 
There's a trick because it's an actually fairly runny batter that 
if you add the liquid to quickly, you will get lumps. You're guaranteed 
to get lumps. So, one of the tricks is to mix it in gradually, patiently 
and the results will be a fairly smooth batter. And I'm told that 
if you know how to make something like this cloffeetea, or the fundamentals 
of French cuisine, that you can pretty much cook anything from any 
kind of culture, is that true? Yes. I am of Asian-American heritage 
and I can say that I've graduated from school. I did the program in 
Paris. And I made my family specialties and I have to say that I do 
it much more efficiently, much more consistently, much faster than 
I did before, simply because I have the skills that I learn when I 
was there. And I don't really consider them as being French, but more 
like just the technique. Kathy Shaw, spokesperson for Le Cordon Bleu 
home collection series of cookbooks, we appreciate your speaking with 
us. All right. Thank you very much for having me. And if our listeners 
would like to the recipe for the French desert coffee tea, then they 
can visit our Web site at www.theworld.org Or drop us a postcard at 
The World, 125 Western Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts, 02134. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>