<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981203.2000.3209 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Our musical closer today, we head south of the border to meet a young 
man who comes from north of the border. Lots of kids get involved 
in extracurricular activities, but the American drummer for a Mexican 
rock and hip-hop band got more than he bargained for when he and his 
family moved to the Mexican capital. The World's Marco Berman explains. 
This is Malotov. Don't judge the band by the first few bars of "El 
Canta De La Estrellas". Malotov is Mexico's top rock and hip-hop act. 
Malotov's drummer is 21-year old American Randy Ebright who moved 
to Mexico City with his family when he was 15. There wasn't too many 
American sports, like basketball, baseball, and football. So, I basically 
just got really heavily into music. And started jamming with some 
people. And one of the first people started jamming with in Mexico 
would later be one of the original bass players of Malotov. That's 
basically how I got into it, like a short version. Malotov had entered 
a music contest and won. And as luck would have it, the band's Mexican 
drummer quit two months later. Enter Gringo Randy Ebright. The bass 
player with Malotov called him up and said there was vacancy. Ebright 
signed up. But, he didn't exactly come from the kind of pedigree you 
might expect from a kid who would join a young and angry Mexican hip-hop 
band. See, Mr. Ebright, Randy's dad, is classic establishment. It's 
a -- yes, he works for the government of The United States. Not just 
any old part of the government of The United States. Ebright's dad 
is an agent with the Drug Enforcement Agency. And ironic twist for 
a Mexican hip-hop band. But so far, the professional and generation 
gap haven't ruffled any feathers in the Ebright household or in the 
band. Randy Ebright and his fellow bandmates in Malotov don't sing 
too many political songs, even though Randy has a few thoughts about 
political issues. For example, he considers it hypocritical for the 
United States to certify Latin American countries as being good and 
bad fighters in the war on drugs. I think all the treatment that's 
been going on towards Mexico is hypocritical. But, I'm a different 
person than my father, so I have my own opinions and my father has 
his own opinions. I'm not going to go home and bullshit him about 
politics. He's my father. And I respect for what he believes. I'm 
not going to try to make him think differently. He's too old for that, 
you know. But, Mr. Ebright, who now lives back in Detroit, while Randy 
continues his career in Mexico City, is not too old to enjoy Malatov. 
He's a music nut. He's like-he grew up in a musical family, so he's 
very proud of what's going on, And proud with just cause. Malatov 
has become an international recording phenomenon. Here's the drum 
and bass re-mix of Malatov's hit "Give You The Power", featuring Randy 
Ebright on percussion. For The World, this is Marco Berman. "Give 
You The Power" from Malatov. In Boston, I'm Lisa Mullins. I hope you'll 
join us again tomorrow for another spin of the world. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>