<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981203.2000.0882 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The largest community of churches in the world opened its 50th Anniversary 
assembly today in Harrier Zimbabwe. The site is significant. IN a 
few years, there are expected to be more Christians in Africa than 
any other continent. Assembly leaders representing 330 denominations 
hope to address Africa's daunting humanitarian needs to communicate 
more effectively with their African followers, mainstream Christian 
churches are incorporated some of the styles and substance of their 
indigenous counterparts. From Harriere, the BBC's Grant Farret has 
the story. The last time the assembly was held in Africa in Nairobi 
more than 20 years ago, Zimbabwe was still white-dominated Rodesia 
and the end of the apartheid in South Africa was decades away. Little 
wonder then that Zimbabwians are proud to be hosting the assembly 
and are keying to promote a wider appreciation of African spirituality. 
As the main organizer in Harriere for the World Council Of Churches 
Assembly, Rosemary Sesatatima has been working flat out for months. 
Although herself an Anglican, she welcomes the development of indigenous 
churches which add a particularly African tone to the old established 
Christian denominations brought to the region by missionaries in the 
last century. It is still read what the missionaries left, but what 
has happened is that Africans have taken that Christianity and shaped 
it to suit themselves. And of course, cynical people would say that 
people are breaking away from the mainland churches, they're dissatisfied. 
Well, they maybe there might that dissatisfaction, because maybe the 
mainland churches are not addressing the problems of today. The contrast 
between the long established churches and their young indigenous counterparts 
which are springing up all over sub-Saharan Africa is striking. Thousands 
of indigenous or independent Christian denominations are appearing 
all over Zimbabwe and throughout southern Africa. They're thought 
to be the most rapidly growing churches in the region. And one estimate 
suggest that if current trends continue, they'll have more members 
in Africa than the Roman Catholic church within several years. Members 
of these churches, many of them dressed in white robes, can be seen 
gathered under the trees by the roadside. Sebastian Becari, the senior 
chaplain of the University of Zimbabwe, hopes that the more established 
churches will see the young African denominations as a challenge rather 
than a threat. I want to believe that we're going through the serious 
spiritual transition and things are going to settle. But, we do need 
people who are creative enough in our denominations to take in these 
experiences into our regions. My name is Tobius Decary. I'm the bishop 
of the Banari Faith Mission. Any sickness of a person, I will pray 
for them. Bishop Decary is typical of the new church leaders. He and 
fellow worshipers gather in the fields for services which regularly 
last four or five hours and which combine traditional African beliefs 
in spirits and healing with mainstream Christian doctrine. In spite 
of the undoubted suspicion among some in the more well established 
denominations, Bishop Decary sees no conflict with them. We are friends. 
We are friends. But they don't use. We are not different, we are the 
same. We read the bible and we love each other. Whatever the fears 
of the mainstream churches, there's little chance of any denomination 
in Zimbabwe suffering the fate of declining congregations. Zimbabwe's 
economic crisis and the ravages of AIDS are helping to boost church 
attendances, whether the service is held in a cathedral or under a 
tree. The BBC's Grant Farret reporting from Harrier, Zimbabwe. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>