<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981203.2000.1196 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the World. I'm Lisa Mullins. For most of us, this week's fall 
in gas prices feels like good news. The Department of Energy says 
the average gallon now costs 97 cents. Some analyst also believe that 
the low cost of oil has kept the lid on inflation and kept the entire 
economy healthy. But, the age of cheap motoring won't last forever. 
A planned merger of the two largest American oil companies; Exxon 
and Mobil, has raised fears of less competition and higher prices. 
And of course, the clock is ticking on the availability of fossil 
fuels. Daniel Yuergen is chairman of Cambridge Energy Research Associates. 
And first, I'm wondering when you first heard or read the news for 
instance of the huge producers; Exxon and Mobil, combining and merging, 
what was your initial reaction, your gut feeling about that? It's 
been pretty clear for months now that consolidation was in the air 
because how low prices are. These oil prices are below where they 
were in 1973. And this is an industry that has gone through a tremendous 
amount of cost-cutting that is now really suffering from price shock-downward 
price shock and yet still looking to fund to new project to undertake 
the multi-billion, 20-year projects like Caspian oil development or 
natural gas development in Asia. So, I think really mergers are the 
next stage in cost cutting. Of course, the fear is that reduced competition 
will result in higher prices eventually? I think on the global scene 
there's no shortage of competition. I think in the downstream, which 
means where we buy our gasoline, obviously it will be scrutinized 
very carefully by the regulatory authorities in both in the United 
States and in Europe. But, my 87-year old mother still buys her gasoline 
at a discount station in Los Angeles. And there are going to be plenty 
of those around. We'll speak more about that kind of competition specifically 
among the countries and how this whole industry has become even more 
strategically important that it has been, because with new discoveries, 
we are looking into some dangerous in some increasingly remote places 
for oil reserves. And talk a little bit more about how that affects 
us strategically. One of the things that we've really seen since the 
era of the oil crisis in the '70s is sort of a dispersion of searching 
for oil and gas and I emphasize increasing natural gas around the 
world. The world was fairly heavily dependent upon the Middle East. 
You had the development of new, harsh areas like the North Sea, but 
you've also seen the opening up of areas that were closed, most notably 
in what use to be the Soviet Union, the countries around the Caspian, 
they were not countries around the Caspian, they were merely republics 
of the Soviet Union. Now, that's become the scene of a very hot oil 
play involving billions and billions of dollars in complicated geo-politics 
involving countries not only Izerbian and Kaczastan but Iran, Russia, 
Turkey, The United States. And in every part of the world, you have 
either a geographic or physical risk, or you have political and economic 
risk. Do you place much stock in those geologists who say that the 
world has consumer almost half its oil already, its oil reserves already 
and they consider that extremely alarming. Do you subscribe to that 
as well? In 1920, the head of the US Geological Service said that 
the US was going to run out of oil in 9 years and 3 months and it 
hasn't happened yet. I think our some geologist who make those very 
bold assertions, I think there are an awful lot of other veteran geologist 
who don't agree. And history shows that particularly with new technologies, 
you continue to expand the prospects for oil. So, what's the take 
home message here for Americans who at this point are adoring paying 
97 cents a gallon at the gas pump? Americans right now are paying 
very low prices for gasoline. They owe that more than anything else 
right to the events that have happened half around the world. And 
the source of this is really the real estate market in Bangkok, Thailand, 
and a collapse in Asia that's followed, turning high growth countries 
into countries in a deep depression, reducing their oil demand and 
that's what's created the situation that has lead to very low oil 
prices and the intense competition at the gasoline pump. We don't 
see a period of dramatically high prices. But Americans should remember 
that oil is a commodity and prices could well moderately in the future, 
in a few years from now, not go through the ceiling or anything like 
that, but these prices will go up and down. But, the general trends 
is pretty favorable to consumers. Daniel Yuergen, thank you for speaking 
with us. Sure. Daniel Yuergen is chairman of Cambridge Energy Research 
Associates and co-author of the book "The Commanding Times ". 
</TEXT>
</DOC>