<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981203.2000.1516 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Although, or maybe because Bill Gates is believed to be the wealthiest 
man on Earth, the Microsoft chief is often criticized for not giving 
enough of his money to charity. This week Gates sought to crawl that 
criticism. He donated $100 million to immunization programs for children 
in developing countries. Skeptics suggest the donation was timed to 
brush Gates' image which has taken a bruising during the ongoing trial 
against Microsoft. The World Patrick O'Connell spoke to Gates in New 
York. From that groundbreaking court case to one of the largest single 
private donations for child health, there's clearly much to discuss 
with Bill Gates. I asked him first what was the role of philanthropy 
at a time of an increasing gap between the world's rich and poor. 
Well, philanthropy is a very personal thing. In my case, my wife and 
I have decided that most of resources will go back to society and 
help to reduce the gap in terms of access to these new advances, whether 
it be kids have a chance to use computers as they grow up or perhaps 
the first priority is kids have a chance to be healthy. Where is the 
correct interface between your job and your life in the sense that 
when events like this happen, do you wonder about the effect on your 
image at the time when the company is being battered by the government? 
Actually, the image of Microsoft, as a company building great software 
and involved in the PC industry is very, very strong. I, as the CEO 
of the company, and I'm there working hard, meeting the challenges 
that we've got. yes. And at the same time, I think it's important, 
even though I'm still in my 40s to go ahead and get some of this wealth 
where it can make a difference. It's a bad time for the company and 
you're being accused of bullying your rivals and having an improper 
relationship with competitors. Are you sad at how things have turned 
out for Microsoft? Actually, it's a wonderful opportunity for Microsoft 
to tell the story of the PC industry. The PC industry is an amazing 
thing. The choice it has given people in terms of hardware, the quality 
of our software, and it's happened because of the openness that Microsoft 
has had, working with even companies that we compete with, learning 
the information about Windows. So, during the court case, this whole 
story is going to come up. Bill Gates. Microsoft's role in the PC 
industry is of course among the disputed territory of the court case 
in Washington. It's one reason why it's been seen as a case with implications 
far beyond the borders of The United States. For the World, I'm Patrick 
O'Connell in New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>