<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981203.1600.2696 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Scientists reporting in a recent issue of the journal "Nature" say 
they have new evidence for the argument that human-caused emissions 
of greenhouse gases are causing a rise in global temperatures. Jessica 
Berman reports. The study examines more than a hundred years worth 
of temperature data for the northern and southern hemispheres. From 
the data, the researchers derived average yearly temperatures and 
compared them to average annual readings 20 years before and 20 years 
ahead of whatever year they were examining. Lead researcher Tom Wigley 
is a senior scientist at the National Center for Atmospheric Research 
in Boulder, Colorado. Mr. Wigley says investigators were looking for 
what he calls the memory effect of the climate system. And I can explain 
that just by giving you a simple example of what might happen if there 
were no human factors involved at all. The temperatures this year 
are to some degree related to temperatures from last year or maybe 
the last few years because, if last year were a warm year, then the 
oceans would have warmed, and the oceans retain their heat for a reasonable 
period of time. So that warming from the previous year would have 
a knock-on effect for this year so that, in the absence of any human 
effect, then you would see some sort of memory of the temperature 
record, but it would be a rather short term memory. In other words, 
if I went from 1998 back to 1988, for example, then, you know, what 
occurs this year would have no memory or relationship to 1988 or previous 
years. But that is not what Mr. Wigley says he and his colleagues 
observed. He says the data revealed a very substantial memory effect 
of hemispheric temperatures. And the question is, you know, why is 
that there if memory can only be explained by some slow external forcing 
of the climate system. Mr. Wigley says there are two things that might 
account for the lingering rise in temperatures over a period of decades. 
One possibility involves 11-year cycles of sun spot activity in which 
storms in the sun's atmosphere could warm earth's climate. So the 
question then is if we account for the solar effect -- from the temperature 
record if we remove the solar effect, do we get back to the short-term 
memory situation, and the answer, if we just look at the sun's effect 
alone, is that we cannot get back to the short-term memory that we 
would expect to occur in the absence of any of these other factors. 
So if sun storms alone aren't causing long-term rises in earth's temperatures, 
atmospheric scientist Tom Wigley says the other possibility is a manmade 
cause, the burning of fossil fuels. And if we then try to look at 
the effect of both human activities and the sun together and subtract 
those factors from the record, then we do get back to what we would 
expect to occur in the absence of these external forcing effects. 
So what that means is, in order to explain the observation, we need 
to include both natural solar influences and human influences. Experts 
say earth's temperatures have risen about.6 of a degree Celsius this 
century. Many blame the greenhouse effect caused by the accumulation 
of so-called greenhouse gases in the earth's upper atmosphere. Jessica 
Berman, VOA NEWS, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>