<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981203.1600.1351 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In the American West, a proposal to breach four dams on Idaho's Snake 
River is under consideration by residents and government agencies 
that use and regulate the waterway. Retiring the dams would help restore 
the state's badly damaged salmon fishery, but it would also hurt the 
region's river transportation industry. From Boise, Jill Hoyt looks 
at the debate over environment and economy. Biologists estimate 10 
million to 16 million wild salmon used to swim from the Pacific Ocean 
up to mountain streams in Central Idaho to spawn. Now fewer than 10,000 
return. Wendy Wilson says it's tough to find salmon on Idaho's rivers. 
So here I am with my two kids, and the fish aren't here to show them. 
My little boy wants to fish for salmon, and he can't. It's really 
sad. Wilson who directs the environmental group Idaho Rivers United 
wants the government to breach four federal dams along the lower Snake 
River. Opening the dams would allow the tiny salmon smolts freer passage 
to the Pacific Ocean, but David Doeringsfeld, manager of North Idaho's 
Port of Lewiston, says that's an absurd idea. For many people in the 
Northwest, these dams are viewed as almost like cathedrals. It was 
the prosperity and everything that dams brought the region. We aren't 
going to go around and start tearing out cathedrals in the Pacific 
Northwest. The dams were built in the 1970s by the Army Corps of Engineers 
to generate hydroelectric power. As the new dams slowed and broadened 
the river, a thriving salmon fishery was all but destroyed. Will Stell 
who heads the National Marine Fishery Service says breaching the dams 
would definitely bring back the fish. The issue is not would it work, 
but is it necessary in order to conserve our salmon and steelhead, 
or are there other options that will suffice? Those options include 
continuing to transport salmon smolts out to sea on barges and replacing 
existing turbines with more fish-friendly models. Environmentalists 
call these approaches Band-Aids. They point out that the Northwest 
Power Planning Council has spent $3 billion since 1980 trying to recover 
salmon, and the fish remain in trouble. The Corps of Engineers estimates 
that breaching the dams would cost between $500 million and $800 million 
to complete. The Corps' Greg Graham says the process would take place 
gradually over about nine months time. We do it using conventional 
construction equipment, very similar to how the original projects 
were built. You know, we wouldn't blow it up. We'd be removing about 
two feet of the embankment per day. As the barrier is reduced, the 
river's flow would speed up, helping the baby fish make their 900-mile 
trip from Idaho's mountain streams to the Pacific. But removing the 
dams would have other impacts. Even as they destroy the traditional 
fishery, the dams create an economic opportunity. The tamed river 
became an important route to coastal markets for about 2,000 regional 
farmers. These days, the Port of Lewiston bustles with trucks loading 
tons of barley and wheat on to huge barges headed for Portland. Barging 
is cheaper than trucking or shipping by rail, and it has become the 
basis of the Lewiston economy. Again, Port Manager David Doeringsfeld. 
So if you were to destroy these dams, we're looking at an economic 
impact in our local economy of anywhere between 1,600 to 4,800 jobs. 
A restored salmon fishery is unlikely to replace those jobs. Scientists 
say that, at best, a renewed fishery would reach 20 percent of pre-dam 
production. Those who want to retire the dams say affected communities 
must receive some sort of compensation, but it's unclear from where 
it would come. Some say saving the fish is just too expensive, that 
the salmon should go the way of the dinosaurs. Not Wendy Wilson head 
of Idaho Rivers United. We have a chance to try to share the river 
with the fish. The next generation will have a chance to make choices 
that they wouldn't otherwise have. Extinction is forever, and dams 
aren't. Retiring four huge dams on a river as big as the Snake has 
never been done before, and with no support from Idaho politicians, 
it won't be easy. A similar plan on a much smaller dam on the Eloir 
River in Washington was stopped even though it had broad support. 
The National Marine Fishery Service says it will make a decision by 
the end of next year. I'm Jill Hoyt in Boise, Idaho. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>