<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981203.0500.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The scheduled launch of the Space Shuttle Endeavour has been postponed. 
Space agency officials say another launch attempt or attempt to launch 
the component of the shuttle with the component of the International 
Space Station on board will not be made for at least 24 hours. The 
launch was called off just seconds before lift off because engineers 
could not find the cause of an alarm. The shuttle was to rendezvous 
with a Russian-made model of the space station already in orbit. VOA 
science editor, David Mcalary told us about what the importance of 
the mission was. This is International Space Station part two. A couple 
of weeks ago the Russian Czaria module was launched from Viknor Cosmodrome 
in Kazakhstan, and that's in orbit now awaiting link up with the Unity 
module, which is the first U.S. component of the International Space 
Station. Now in contrast to the functions of Czaria, by the way, Unity 
is a six-sided connecting passageway that will be the attachment point 
for all the other U.S. modules to come, about a half dozen of them. 
And it has ports to which those units could be docked in the future. 
Over a period of time, we're going to have all these pieces taken 
up into space at a period of time and we're going to have a space 
station. What use is it? Why do we really need a space station? You 
know, some people are asking that on the ground because the cost has 
burgeoned from 8 billion to at least $40 billion U.S. dollars, but 
the planning is to do continuous research in weightlessness, because 
now the Russians can do that but the United States cannot. The Russians 
have the Mir space station and they've had it since 1986. We have 
had only one space station in our history and that was in the mid-1970, 
early to mid-1970s, but we haven't focused on continuous research. 
And despite all the research that's been done on the shuttle, that 
vehicle is only up for no more than two weeks at a time. And so researchers 
would like to have continuous time in a laboratory in weightlessness 
to do a variety of biological, botanical materials, industrial type 
research because weightlessness offers a unique environment, according 
to the U.S. space agency, NASA. For one thing, we need to know more 
about how the human body responds to weightlessness so we can prepare 
for a long duration space flight such as to Mars. And although there's 
not one on the drawing boards right now, officials keep on talking 
about it for some time in the next century. Perhaps long-term habitation 
of the moon as a starting point for longer flights to other parts 
of the solar system beyond Mars. And, of course, weightlessness is 
the key factor, how the body responds. So more research can be done 
on that. On these long flights, they'll have to grow their own food, 
perhaps do some industrial manufacturing up there. So how plants and 
materials are affected by weightlessness is also of interest. But 
finally, there's an earthly component. On the Earth, gravity does 
different things than weightlessness does. For example, molecules 
are more compressed, and to actually examine how the molecules are 
shaped and what they really, really look like, it's nice to have them 
stretch out a little bit in weightlessness so you can get a better 
X-ray picture of them and find out how - what you can do chemically 
with them better. So that's always been a component of space shuttle 
weightlessness research and will be for the International Space Station 
for the decade or 15 years that it will be inhabited. VOA science 
editor, David Mcalary adds that the space station will not be inhabited 
until the year 2000. He says that is before the entire space station 
will be complete. Completion is not scheduled until 2008. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>