<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981203.0500.1910 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Meanwhile, a Jerusalem-based Israeli human rights group has called 
on Israeli security forces to stop using so-called rubber bullets. 
VOA correspondent David Gullis in Jerusalem reports the bullets actually 
rubber coated steel bullets have killed at least 57 Palestinians since 
1987. The Israeli human rights group, Bett Sellam, says it does not 
contest the right of Israeli soldiers to defend themselves in life-threatening 
situations. But it says the security forces have for years used the 
rubber coated bullets and cylinders selectively against Palestinian 
rioters only, and that soldiers frequently violate their own rules 
of engagement by firing them at close range and in cases where lethal 
force isn't needed. The executive director of the group, Aton Philner, 
told reporters at least 57 Palestinians, nearly half of them teenagers, 
have been killed by rubber-coated bullets since the start of the Palestinian 
uprising or Intifada in 1987, including 15 killed since the signing 
of the Oslo peace accords in 1993. The continued use of the weapons, 
Mr. Philner said, is inconsistent with the aims of the peace process. 
A process of reconciliation between two people have to do with human 
dignity, and you have no human dignity if you not respect life. And 
the policy of Israel that continues to avoid coming to terms with 
the fact that this method is lethal is a policy that displays contempt 
for human life, contempt for Palestinian life, to be more precise. 
A news conference by Bett Sellam included emotional testimony by Bodwan 
Abumayala, an 18-year-old Palestinian from Hebron in the West Bank 
who was struck in the head by a marble-sized rubber-coated bullet 
during a clash between soldiers and demonstrators last year. The youth 
who was in a coma for 12 days remains in a rehabilitation hospital 
more than a year and a half after being injured. He was shot at only 
about half the minimum range, 40 meters, that rubber-coated bullets 
are to be used under Israeli Army regulations. The rules also say 
they may not be fired at children and used only after other means, 
including tear gas, stun grenades, and warning shots fail to disperse 
demonstrators. In a written statement issued in response to the Bett 
Sellam report, an Israeli military spokesman said it ignores the nature 
of the violent attacks with rocks and firearms by Palestinians that 
he said often compel the Army to use such means. He also said the 
rules for the use of rubber-coated bullets have been redefined as 
a result of lessons learned in the past to significantly reduce the 
number and severity of injuries to rioters. David Gullis, VOA News, 
Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>