<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981203.0500.0745 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As voters across Taiwan prepare to cast ballots this Saturday for 
a new parliament, analysts say there is a chance the ruling KMT, the 
Kuomintang Party, could lose its majority for the first time since 
taking over the island more than 50 years ago. Although opinions vary 
widely on the party's chances, some say the KMT may be forced into 
a coalition with one of the island's other political forces. As James 
Mitchell reports from Taipei, the outcome could also affect the upcoming 
presidential elections in the year 2000. Political debate in Taiwan 
has been dominated for months already by Kuobakuoban, that is the 
possibility that the ruling KMT or Kuomintang Party could take less 
than a majority of seats in the new parliament. As voters go to the 
polls on December 5th to choose a new legislative yuan, Taiwan's parliament, 
this remains the single biggest question mark. If the KMT loses its 
legislative majority, it would not only be a major setback, but would 
set a historical precedent. It is true that a decade of democratization 
has given rise to new political forces which whittled away its monopoly 
on power. Nevertheless, the party which has been in control since 
Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalists retreated from China in 1949 has continued 
to dominate the government. The largest opposition force is the Democratic 
Progressive Party or DPP, which ultimately favors independence for 
the island. Observers such as political scientist Joseph Wu believe, 
therefore, that if the KMT is forced to seek a coalition partner, 
it is not likely to turn to the pro-independent DPP. If we look at 
long-term trend of voter turnout for the KMT, ever since 1983 we see 
that the KMT loses about eight percent of the legislative. So if the 
long-term trend holds, then the KMT is going to lose its majority. 
If KMT loses, I think the most likely outcome is probably the KMT 
is going to form a coalition with the independents or it's going to 
be a minority government. And if there's a minority government, then 
we'll see crisis after crisis that we have never seen before in our 
politics. Not everyone agrees the KMT is in trouble. Professor John 
Cheia of National Taiwan University notes that while the DPP star 
is rising, a third party, a new party which favors reunification with 
China, seems to be losing ground. Professor Cheia says this could 
positively affect the KMT's fortunes. I don't see that the KMT's vote 
will shrink to a large extent. Actually I think it's probably in a 
better position than it has been in say 1995 because at this time, 
the new party seems to be in disarray to some extent. So that would 
actually translate to the increase of vote for the KMT. So I think 
the KMT probably will do a good job. Whatever the outcome of this 
Saturday's election, Taiwan's legislative chemistry is about to change. 
Membership in the legislative body is to increase by about 25 percent 
to 225 seats under constitutional changes that abolish the largely 
outmoded Provincial Assembly. As a result, dozens of local power brokers 
are out of a job and many are now looking to parliament to reestablish 
themselves. Some observers worry these new legislators will worsen 
what is seen as a trend towards putting local interests ahead of the 
national interest. They say efforts to push issues such as Taiwan's 
role in stemming the regional economic troubles, as well as the island's 
entry into groups such as the World Trade Organization and the World 
Health Organization will suffer. Others worry that the division of 
power among an increasing number of political players will set Taiwan 
back in its efforts to become a bigger player in the international 
community. But the DPP's international affairs director, Bekim Chao, 
welcomes the possible dilution of KMT power in parliament. She says 
it is a healthy democratic development. No democracy is fully complete 
until there is a peaceful and natural democratic transition of power 
from one party to another. So the KMT has to adopt this reality and 
eventually, the time will come when the DPP comes to power. Whatever 
the outcome on Saturday, the KMT will still control Taiwan's executive 
branch. During presidential elections in 1996, the first ever for 
Taiwan, the party's Lee Teng-hui won a resounding victory. But many 
analysts say the outcome of the parliamentary election, as well as 
that for mayor of Taiwan's two largest cities, could set the tone 
for the next presidential vote in the year 2000. They say if the ruling 
party performs poorly now, the next president could be from the DPP. 
James Mitchell for VOA News, Taipei. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>