<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981203.1600.0407 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Abuses in Afghanistan are drawing the concern of the United Nations. 
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan is planning to send a monitoring 
team there amid growing evidence of major human rights violations 
by several Afghan factions. VOA U.N. Correspondent Max Rustin reports. 
In his annual report on Afghanistan to the U.N. Security Council and 
the U.N. General Assembly, Mr. Annan draws attention to what he calls 
reports of mass killings and gross violations of human rights and 
international humanitarian law in Afghanistan. Mr. Annan says that, 
with the approval of Afghan authorities, he plans to deploy an initial 
group of 12 monitors in major centers in the country. Their objective, 
he says, will be to promote respect for minimum humanitarian standards 
and deter massive and systematic violations of human rights. In the 
19-page report, Mr. Annan says Afghanistan's Taliban has, over the 
last few months, strengthened its hold on power. He says all the opposition 
factions except one have been eliminated as viable fighting forces. 
The U.N. chief reiterates his call for a peaceful settlement to the 
Afghan conflict, but he says blame for the conflict now goes beyond 
the fighting factions within Afghanistan. U.N. spokesman Manuel De 
Almada. Afghanistan, once a flash point of superpower rivalry, has 
now become the stage for a new regional version of the great game 
in which the domestic, economic, and national security interests of 
Afghanistan's neighbors and their supporters are played out, the report 
says. Mr. Annan says a vicious cycle has now developed in Afghanistan 
in which the inability of factions to agree to a political settlement 
is both a cause and the effect of what he calls persistent outside 
interference. He says it is now clear that a political dialogue leading 
to a national reconciliation in Afghanistan cannot be attained without 
a concerted effort by all the outside powers concerned. Reviewing 
internal political developments in Afghanistan over the past year, 
Mr. Annan says there have been two general trends, the fragmentation 
among factions of the opposition Northern Alliance and the strengthening 
of the Taliban. He says this division among partners in the Northern 
Alliance has been one of the main barriers to the conduct of effective 
peace talks with the Taliban. Max Rustin, VOA News, United Nations. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>