<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981203.0500.2332 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The president's lawyers say they will go before the Judiciary Committee 
and the House of Representatives next week to argue their case against 
the impeachment of President Clinton. Correspondent Nick Simeone has 
the latest on the inquiry which has been broadened this week beyond 
the question of whether the president committed perjury when he denied 
an affair with former intern, Monica Lewinsky. White House lawyers 
sent a letter to Judiciary Committee Chairman Henry Hyde Wednesday 
accepting an invitation to appear before the committee next week. 
But before they do, they are demanding the panel turn over documents 
related to testimony by key witnesses, including cooperation by Monica 
Lewinsky, as well as material related to the now expanded probe into 
alleged campaign fund-raising abuses. White House lawyers say such 
material is needed to present a vigorous defense of the president 
whom they insist broke no laws in his public denials of an affair 
with the former intern. But the Republican-led Judiciary Committee 
is expected to draft at least one article of impeachment against the 
president, perhaps relating to perjury before Chairman Hyde wraps 
up the investigation later this month. In the meantime, Democratic 
leaders in Congress are accusing Republicans of attempting to prolong 
the probe by delving again into the campaign finance issue, specifically 
whether the White House broke laws on how it raised money for the 
president's 1996 reelection campaign. On Wednesday, House Democratic 
leader Dick Gephardt accused Republicans of wanting to go off in 50 
different directions, as he put it, by deciding to reopen an old investigation. 
If this was so important to the impeachment inquiry, which again is 
base on a referral from Ken Starr, which had certain materials in 
it and a lot of other material not in it, namely campaign finance 
questions, then they should have been at this six weeks ago, and they 
should have said that their focus was not only on the Starr referral 
but on this as well. He spoke just as a federal judge in Washington 
was granting a request from Republican lawmakers for access to Justice 
Department documents which could shed new light on whether federal 
investigators believe the White House broke the law in its campaign 
fund-raising. The Democratic Party has had to return hundreds of thousands 
of dollars in contributions because of questions about its legality. 
But Attorney General Janet Reno has refused to make documents related 
to the matter public, further angering House Republicans who believe 
an independent prosecutor should be appointed to look into the matter. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>