<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981203.1600.2148 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And I'm Tony Riggs along with Erin Brummett, and this is VOA News 
Now. When dictators clamp down on the media, it is sometimes interpreted 
as a sign that their grip on power is weakening. Some analysts say 
this is the case in Yugoslavia where President Slobodan Milosevic 
has recently not only conducted an extraordinary purge of his inner 
circle but also completely eliminated the country's opposition and 
independent media. Dictators and the media is the subject of today's 
"Dateline." Here is Pamela Taylor. Shortly after concluding an agreement 
to end the fighting in Serbia's Kosovo province, the Serbian parliament 
passed a tough new public information law. The law was based on a 
decree by Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic issued in the face 
of threatened NATO attacks if the fighting in Kosovo did not stop. 
But despite a negotiated cease-fire, the press law, called the most 
draconian in Europe, has continued to be strictly enforced. It calls 
for fines as high as $240,000 against media considered by the government 
to be unpatriotic. The first secretary of the Yugoslav embassy in 
Washington recently defended the new press law at a public forum in 
Arlington, Virginia. Speaking at the Newseum, a museum devoted to 
the news media, Liliana Toshkovic presented this explanation of Serbia's 
media law. The basic provisions of the law, information adopted by 
the assembly of Serbia at the proposal of this government, are aimed 
at future democratizing the field of public information, perfecting 
personal freedoms and rights, and preventing monopolies. Miss Toshkovic's 
explanation did not convince fellow panelist Roy Gutman of the New 
York newspaper "Newsday." Mr.. Gutman won a Pulitzer Prize in 1993 
for his expose of Serb-run concentration camps in Northwestern Bosnia-Herzegovina. 
It just looks from an outside perspective as if the government, and 
particularly the radial party, which is run by a man by Vojislav Seselj, 
who ran organized paramilitary groups during the Bosnian and the Croatian 
war -- it looks like that party which controls the information ministry 
has just decided in a sense to close down the free press. The question 
that's not clear in my mind is why is Serbia doing this now. Roy Gutman 
wasn't alone in his skeptical reaction to the Serbian government's 
official explanation. Another panelist, Slobodan Pavlovic, is a journalist 
with 30 years experience in Yugoslavia and in the United States. He 
asked Miss Toshkovic of the Yugoslavia embassy why President Milosevic 
did not extend the media law to Kosovo since it's a province of Serbia 
and, as such, should be subject to laws passed by the Serbian parliament. 
When she didn't respond, he offered his own answer. Milosevic absolutely 
is not interested in what is directed in Serbian Kosovo. Regardless 
of public proclamations, Mr. Milosevic is, in fact, not interested 
whether Kosovo remain part of Serbia and Yugoslavia or whether it 
will become an independent state which will join Albania. He is only 
interested in retaining power in Serbia at all costs, and in order 
to realize this, he needs to eliminate and confine all those who are 
of a different opinion to his and his wife's opinion. Mr. Pavlovic 
was referring to reports that President Milosevic has become increasingly 
influenced by his hard-line wife Mariana Markovic who also heads a 
leading pro-Communist party. The Yugoslav embassy's Miss Toshkovic 
did not respond to all the questions put to her at the forum. When 
she did, she read her answers from a prepared text, as when she tried 
to explain how Serbia wasn't the only country in the world to have 
press restrictions. Most of the nations, including established democracies, 
result to limitation to absolute media freedoms when faced with internal 
or external press. This is presently true in, just to name a few, 
Israel which has very strident military censorship law, Turkey which 
face a terrorist threat in part of the country, and a number of others 
in the region, such as Greece or Cyprus. Britain, for instance, place 
strict media controls on reporting during the Falkland's conflict, 
and the United States had similar controls during the Persian Gulf 
War. Miss Toshkovic was asked if Serbia considers itself in a state 
of war since the press restrictions she mentioned were done by countries 
at war. She did not respond. Miss Toshkovic defended the Serbian media 
law by saying that every country has the right to protect itself from 
attempts to overthrow the government. If a newspaper or another media 
outlet carries information calling for overthrow of the constitution 
by force, threatening territorial integrity of Serbia and Yugoslavia, 
and encroaching on guaranteed freedoms and rights of the Balkans by 
ethnic, racial, or religious hatred and intolerance, the founder and 
the publisher will be fined Yugoslavia dinars 200,000 to 800,000. 
The concern, expressed by officials like Miss Toshkovic, that the 
Milosevic government might be overthrown or lose its grip on power 
no doubt is being fueled by certain statements emanating from Washington 
and other Western capitals. For example, at a recent State Department 
briefing, spokesman James Rubin said Mr. Milosevic alone is preventing 
Serbia from becoming a democracy. I don't think we would lose any 
sleep if he passed from the scene. We want to see democracy in Serbia. 
There is no democracy in Serbia. Democracy in Serbia is the goal. 
It's not a personality-driven policy. It's a process-driven policy. 
State Department spokesman James Rubin. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>