<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981203.1600.3179 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
About 450,000 foreign students are attending colleges and universities 
in the United States, which is the world's leading destination for 
international students. More than half of the foreign students studying 
in the United States come from Asia. By contrast, only about 75,000 
American students travel overseas each year to study. Yet increasingly 
they are going abroad to study not just language but the full variety 
of academic subjects. That's according to Bill Hoffa, author of the 
book "Study Abroad: A Parent's Guide." Mr. Hoffa spoke with VOA's 
Martin Secrest about the advantages of pursuing an international education. 
A PARENT'S GUIDE": This is a very globally interdependent world. It 
may even be said that today or in the near future an undergraduate 
who is not really alert to the ways in which the world differs from 
the United States is not fully educated. So I think what they're going 
over for is, A, credit toward their undergraduate degree, B, some 
degree of cross-cultural understanding, C, some degree of career enhancement 
since employers are looking for globally educated or at least globally 
alerted employers, and, finally, I would say that while students don't 
go overseas to find maturation and personal development, in point 
of fact, it tends to be one of the byproducts of their time. And most 
students go overseas for just a semester or two studying the curriculum 
of another university? Well, yes and no. This all began as something 
called "junior year abroad." At this point, only about 12 percent 
of U.S. students who are studying overseas are overseas for a full 
academic year, although the absolute number of students who are overseas 
for an academic year is about the same as it was 25 years ago. There 
are some safety issues involved when any student goes overseas, such 
as you describe in your book, "Study Abroad: A Parent's Guide." What 
are some of these concerns? My own thinking about this is that, obviously, 
parents and students bear some responsibility for choosing a program 
that they have checked out and they know is likely to have in place 
the safeguards that are needed to make the program as safe as possible, 
but preparation, I think, really involves more checking out the program 
that it does the country. My own thinking is that it will -- there 
are sort of relatively unsafe programs in quite safe countries, and 
there are relatively safe programs in countries that many people would 
say are less than safe than average. What are the ways to minimize 
the language barrier for students who go to a place where they speak 
only some or none of the language? Well, I guess I would say to make 
sure that they are in a program which offers excellent language instruction 
to supplement whatever they have begun. Beyond that, I would say the 
key is to avoid as many English-speaking people so that they can really 
be surrounded by the native language. I think otherwise it's very 
difficult to escape using English as sort of refuge that one easily 
repairs to, and I think that obviously gravitates against actually 
learning the new language. But there are a long-term advantages, both 
personal and professional, awarded to students who go across the seas 
to study. It's quite clear that the plum jobs in the global job market 
are going to go to people who understand cultures beyond their own. 
Having said that, I also think that -- I'm concerned that, with so 
many more students coming to this country than leaving this country, 
which is a wonderful testimony to the high quality of American higher 
education -- but I'm afraid that I think American higher education's 
probably doing a considerably better job of educating students from 
other countries in American colleges and universities for those plum 
jobs compared to what they're offering to American undergraduates. 
It seems to me the international students in some ways are being more 
well prepared for competition of the great jobs compared to American 
students. Mr. Hoffa, thanks for your insights today on studying abroad. 
HOFFA. You're very welcome. I'm Martin Secrest. Professor Bill Hoffa 
is an educator currently teaching at the School for International 
Training in Brattleboro, Vermont. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>