<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981203.0500.1352 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Older people in the United States often use to live with their grown 
children when they had grown too elderly and infirmed to live on their 
own. Now these children might work thousands of kilometers away. The 
parents may decide to stay in their own communities. This has led 
to a number of different types of housing arrangements, including 
one known as home sharing. Steve Ember has more. On a tree-shaded 
street in Baltimore, 90-year-old Nelly Hall and 40-year-old Sarah 
Ann Morris share Mrs. Hall's well-kept six-room row house. Mrs. Hall 
does the cooking and Ms. Morris cleans. They frequently go shopping 
together and to church events usually on the bus, since Mrs. Hall 
gave away her car when she was 87. Ms. Morris says they share their 
lives. I go to all the family gatherings, and me and Ms. Hall, we 
go to the same church. Ms. Hall is in art sewing guild. I don't sew. 
But the club asked me to join. They tease me, they say, "You're there 
all the time, so you rather, you know, join the club." Although many 
people assume the two women are related, they actually met just three 
years ago through a roommate referral service. Sarah Ann Morris, whose 
severe asthma keeps her from being steadily employed, was living in 
a shelter for homeless women. Mrs. Hall, lonely since her husband 
died, was looking for someone to share her house. Mrs. Hall's daughter, 
who lives in Baltimore and is employed, wanted Mrs. Hall to move in 
with her. But Mrs. Hall was adamant about both staying independent 
and remaining in the house she has lived in for over 35 years. It's 
hard to leave your home and you go to somebody else. I didn't need 
to go to her. I wanted to stay in my own home. Then her daughter learned 
about the St. Ambrose Housing Aid Center, a nonprofit group that for 
a small fee, matches homeowners and home seekers. Mrs. Hall signed 
up and Sarah Ann Morris moved in. Mrs. Hall says she is happy with 
the arrangement. I was fortunate enough to get a nice lady. And Ms. 
Morris says she's gained a lot. Very good family and good friends 
and good neighbors. St. Emerald's home sharing coordinator, Anna Maria 
Keene says Nelly Hall and Sarah Ann Morris had first seemed an unlikely 
match because of Ms. Morris asthma and her inability to pay rent. 
But Mrs. Hall needed companionship more than money, and Ms. Morris 
had excellent references including one from her doctor. Ms. Keene 
says that references for both home seekers and homeowners are the 
secret to the program's success. We ask for four references from people 
who have known the individual for at least five years. We get home 
and work phone number, and we check all the references by phone. After 
a match occurs, the home sharers live together for a trial period, 
usually two weeks. A counselor then meets with both parties to make 
sure that the living arrangement is going well and to discuss any 
problems. Ms. Keene says either party may also call a counselor for 
help at anytime after that. People are really grateful for this. They 
feel like they have a friend, they have someone who can understand. 
Publicized in the newspapers, on signs on city buses, and more recently, 
on the Internet, the program has made 555 matches. More than 90 percent 
have been successful, meaning that those involved have stayed together 
one year or longer. Counselor Annette Brennan reports the participants 
are persons of all races and all ages. Some who seek homes to share 
are businessmen who are transferred to Baltimore for a year or doctors 
who have come to work temporarily in one of the city's hospitals. 
Many other applicants are local residents whose lives are in transition. 
A lot of times, people who home share are leaving relationships and 
need a place. The husband's moved out, needs a place, or the wife. 
We have an awful lot of that. And then we have the low income worker 
who can't afford, doesn't want to stay home with family, but can't 
afford an apartment. So they will do this for a while and move on. 
I would say home sharing for many people is a stepping stone to something 
more permanent. But then there are those matches that have stayed 
together, four, five years, and that's because they want shared housing. 
The home sharing concept believed to have originated in England, is 
now active in more than 400 U.S. communities. Home sharing is growing 
in the United States, the counselors say, because it is an answer 
for a lot of different problems. I'm Steve Ember. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>