<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981203.1600.2516 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Serbia may have the most draconian press laws in Europe, but journalists 
in neighboring Croatia say their situation is not much better. Leading 
Zagreb television journalist Damir Matkovic visited Washington recently 
to drum up support for Forum 21, an organization representing Croatia's 
independent media. Mr. Matkovic said the first objective in Croatia 
should be privatize the state-run television which is dominated by 
the nationalist policies of President Franjo Tudjman. He spoke with 
VOA's Zladas Ahok. Croatian television is under the firm control... 
... because we don't want to have TV under the state control because 
there is no editorial independence. There is no freedom for journalists. 
We are all under the tight control of government. What difficulties 
are you encountering in your attempt to change television into public 
television? We have all kind of difficulties. First of all, there 
is a lack of dialogue. This is the biggest problem because we established 
a very good relationship with, for example, United States, different 
organizations in Europe and United States, but we have never met our 
minister, minister of telecommunications, who is responsible for system. 
So we can discuss, for example, the change with representatives of 
European Union or with the representatives of different organizations 
for United States. That's great, but we have never discussed this 
issues with our own minister of telecommunications who is in effect 
in charge of those problems. Without him or without Croatian parliament, 
there is no change. Do you think that if you changed the television 
to public television that the democratic processes in Croatia would 
improve? Yes, of course, because the TV is the most important source 
of information for a very big majority of Croatian citizens. So if 
they are badly informed, if information is manipulated, as it is today 
-- so we think that removing political control over the content of 
news, for example, because we are speaking most of the news programming 
-- this is a very important task. To promote democratization or to 
promote a more free society, it is necessary to have a free and uncontrolled 
press, a responsible press, especially in TV and radio. Croatian television 
journalist Damir Matkovic speaking with VOA's Zlades Ahok in Washington. 
Dictators and the media was the subject of today's "Dateline." I'm 
Pamela Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>