<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981109.1830.1205 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There is a lot more genetic engineering going on. 60% of the processed 
food on the shelves today likely have some gentlemen netically engineered 
ingredient. Here's ABC's John McKenzie. The end of another harvest. 
But there is something different about this crop. It's a new type 
of corn, one that reduces the need of powerful weed killers, one created 
through genetic engineering. The opportunity that biotech has for 
agriculture is significant. It's going to change the way we grow crops. 
And it's going to change, dramatically, the way we develop foods. 
Scientists can now take genes from plants, and animals and microbes, 
and mix them in unheard of combinations. For example, they can take 
a tomato, add a single Gene from a fish that thrives in cold water, 
and try to develop a tomato that withands colder temperatures. Already 
9% of potatoes, 32% of corn, 38% of soybeans, grown in this country, 
are genetically engineered. Much of them, customized with a bacterial 
Gene that acts as a pesticide. But if a crop kills insects, how safe 
is it for humans? We've carried out hundreds of tests. We've spent 
millions of dollars to establish their safety and to work with the 
government agencies to ensure that these crops are safe. But other 
scientists, looking over other studies say the risks of genetic engineering, 
far outweigh the benefits. These genes are producing new substances 
inside the food we eat. Sooner or later, and probably sooner, some 
of those new substances will cause serious reactions in the people 
who eat them. Two years ago, scientists discovered soybeans, modified 
with a Gene from a Brazil nut, produced a potentially deadly reaction 
in people allergic to Brazil nuts. But allergic reactions are just 
one of the potential risks. Scientists warn it might reduce the nutrients 
in some foods. That it might even create new toxins or poisons. Consumers 
really should have the right to choose whether they expose themselves 
to these new foods and whether they experiment with this new technology. 
But how are they supposed to know, when genetically engineered foods 
are not labeled? The food and drug administration requires that labels 
list any processing change, whether a food has been frozen, or irradiated, 
whether it's been pasteurized or homogenized, but when it comes to 
genetic engineering, the fDA concludes, in effect, it is not relevant 
to consumers. FDA officials declined to be interviewed on camera for 
this report. A group of scientists and consumers are now suing the 
agency to get mandatory labeling similar to what Europe has already 
begun. Today, about 30 new strains of genetically engineered fruits 
and vegetables, are ready for commercial growing. And with each comes 
the same basic question -- what's going on inside the foods we eat? 
John McKenzie, ABC News, Chesterfield, Missouri. John mentioned there 
that the FDA does require a label that food was irradiated. In Europe 
genetic engineering is a hot subject and the European now requires 
that most genetically-altered products have a label. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>