<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981109.1830.0036 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We begin in Washington tonight with winners and losers, 
one Lame duck and an albatross. As the republican party in the Congress 
tries to get its act together for the next Congress, and the next 
election, all the politicians know that congressman Bob Livingston 
of Louisiana is going to be the next speaker in the House of Representatives. 
And now that Newt Gingrich will soon be on his way to other challenges, 
the new republican leadership must try to figure out what to do about 
its soul and the impeachment process. And not in that order. First 
here's ABC's Linda Douglass. The race all but ended today when California's 
Christopher Cox dropped out. All eyes now are on Bob Livingston who 
spent the day on the phone locking into supporters. Livingston says 
by being an efficient manager, he will sharpen the republican message. 
Get the votes we need to get the republican agenda enacted with lower 
taxes and efficient government. But first he must deal with the 800-pound 
gorilla -- the move to impeach the president which is being driven 
by conservatives on the judiciary committee. Some made clear today 
they want the president's head. The evidence presented to the house 
by the independent counsel if it remains unrefuted, establishes that 
the president is guilty of impeachable offenses under these principles. 
The principles of impeachment were debated on Capitol Hill by constitutional 
experts. Former Kennedy administration aide and historian Arthur schlesinger 
scoffed at the notion that Mr. Clinton's behavior is impeachable. 
Everyone lies about their love life. I doubt whether there is anyone 
in this room who at one time or another hasn't told a lie about his 
or her love life. Others disagreed. No person and least of all, no 
president who has sworn faithfully to execute all the laws can pick 
and choose over which matter he will be truthful and over which he 
will not. Some republicans would like to foib a magic bullet that 
would make impeachment disappear. But Judiciary committee members 
don't want to be seen as compromising their principles. Finding the 
solution will be Bob Livingston's first big management challenge if, 
as expected, he becomes speaker. Linda Douglass, ABC News, Capitol 
Hill. so when the new Congress convenes, speaker Livingston will have 
the second most important job there is in the government. He has been 
in the house for more than 20 years, and he certainly has politics 
in his blood. There is a long distinguished history of politics in 
the Livingston family. Several generations ago, Robert R. Livingston 
of New York helped to draft the declaration of independence. He and 
a cousin, Philip Livingston, are signers. There is a mayor of New 
York in there as well. The family homes, along New York's Hudson river 
are among the country's most enduring landmarks. The family moved 
to New Orleans at the time of the Louisiana purchase in 1803, which 
doubled the size of the United States, which Robert R. helped to arrange. 
Okay Still Bob Livingston was not to the manor born. Gentleman from 
Louisiana. I ask unanimous consent. In 1994, after the republican 
revolution in the House of Representatives, the speaker, Newt Gingrich 
appointed his friend Bob livingston over more senior members, to be 
the powerful chairman of the house appropriations committee. I am 
a manager leader. He was a visionary leader. Our forefathers wrote 
a constitution that gave us the opportunity to settle our differences 
by compromise, not by dictate. We're not going to back down. Mr. Livingston 
knows the power of an outburst. The 1995 budget battle. % We will 
never, never, never give in. We will stay here until doomsday and 
merry Christmas. That's the sense of humor people talk about. Bob 
Livingston was ready to retire from Congress this year, to make some 
money as a lobbyist. Newt Gingrich persuaded him to stay on. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>