<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981109.1019 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Overwhelmed by disaster, grim-faced Central American leaders met Monday 
in El Salvador to appeal for more international aid in recovering 
from Hurricane Mitch even as a growing army of rescue workers struggled 
to help hundreds of thousands of victims. With at least 10,000 reported 
dead and their economies shattered by flooding, the leaders were expected 
to ask help with foreign debts and to coordinate long-term relief 
efforts after one of the worst natural disasters of this century in 
the Americas. Some European leaders already were proposing such help, 
echoing a proposal made last week by former U.S. President Jimmy Carter. 
French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin on Monday urged a moratorium on 
debt payments owed by countries hit by Hurricane Mitch. French Finance 
Minister Dominique Strauss-Kahn said the Paris Club of creditor nations 
should suspend their debt service payments for the next two to three 
years. German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer was also urging that 
some debts be forgiven. Honduras owes dlrs 4.2 billion and Nicaragua 
owes dlrs 6 billion, mainly to international lending agencies. Government 
and independent relief organizations from around the world were trying 
to rush aid to tens of thousands in Honduras and Nicaragua isolated 
by ruptured roads, backed-up airports and too few helicopters. Many 
areas were still receiving their first aid, more than a week after 
the storm disappeared. ``We heard on the radio that aid is coming, 
but we're still eating rice,'' said Ann Soto, 19, at a refugee shelter 
in Posoltega in Nicaragua. Former U.S. President George Bush, visiting 
the Honduran capital of Tegucigalpa, said Sunday that aid might be 
needed for years to come. ``The devastation is appalling,'' he said. 
In Honduras alone, 700,000 people will need food for the next month, 
U.N. World Food Program representative Giuseppi Lubatti estimated. 
Presidents Carlos Flores Facusse of Honduras, Arnoldo Aleman of Nicaragua, 
Armando Calderon Sol of El Salvador and Miguel Angel Rodriguez of 
Costa Rica met at San Salvador's international airport for a quick 
summit. Guatemalan Foreign Minister Eduardo Stein also attended the 
meeting, representing President Alvaro Arzu. There was none of the 
jovial backslapping customary at regional summits as most of the leaders 
walked grimly past reporters into their session. Officials said the 
presidents were likely to try to find ways to coordinate often-chaotic 
relief efforts and to plan long-term priorities _ such as restoring 
destroyed roads. They also were planning to urge the United States 
to keep postponing deportations of illegal immigrants, Salvadoran 
Foreign Minister Ramon Gonzalez said Sunday. The U.S. Immigration 
and Naturalization Service temporarily suspended deportations of immigrants 
to Honduras and Guatemala as a ``humanitarian gesture'' until Tuesday. 
Britain said some 1,400 Royal Navy and Royal Marines personnel were 
helping with relief efforts in the region, sending medical teams to 
some of the worst-hit areas. U.S. military engineers were helping 
repair roads, bridges and water systems while moving relief supplies 
into the country. Private charities were sending doctors into remote 
parts of Honduras and Nicaragua. In Nicaragua, where critics have 
accused the government of being slow with relief help, the Interior 
Ministry confirmed Monday it had expelled a U.S. woman under contract 
with the U.S. Agency for International Development, Julie Gare Noble, 
for a ``slanderous, tendentious and baseless report.'' Presidential 
spokesman Gilberto Wong said Noble, who works with non-governmental 
organizations in Wisconsin, had suggested that aid for Nicaragua go 
through non-governmental groups, ``making it understood that the government 
was not reliable.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>