<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981109.0232 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cracking down on student protesters, thousands of police and soldiers 
blocked activists Monday from converging on Parliament to protest 
a government assembly. Riot officers with sticks and shields stopped 
buses carrying 2,000 demonstrators, who waved red and white Indonesian 
flags and yelled slogans against an assembly that will cast rules 
this week for 1999 parliamentary elections. Fears abound that political 
tension will trigger unrest similar to the tumult that ousted former 
President Suharto in May after 32 years of authoritarian rule. He 
quit after deadly riots shook Jakarta and student protesters occupied 
Parliament. This time, the military has deployed 30,000 police and 
soldiers in the Indonesian capital as well as warships in the city 
harbor. Troops patrol the grounds of Parliament and barbed wire barricades 
block some gates. Violence flared on one university campus Monday 
when government-backed civilian guards in trucks briefly hurled rocks 
and plastic bottles at students. Police did not intervene. Students 
also scuffled with police at a courthouse, and white-collar workers 
rallied against the People's Consultative Assembly and its patron, 
President B.J. Habibie. The four-day convention opens Tuesday. Many 
pro-democracy activists reject the 1,000-member assembly, the nation's 
highest legislative body, as a haven for political stooges from the 
Suharto era. It includes Parliament's 500 legislators. Habibie, a 
onetime confidant of Suharto who critics say is moving too slowly 
on reform, wants to hold parliamentary elections next May, followed 
by the selection of a new head of state by a newly designed assembly 
at the end of 1999. Habibie, a German-trained engineer, has undone 
many of the rigid controls that characterized Indonesian political 
life under the 77-year-old Suharto. He has freed some political prisoners 
and allowed political parties and trade unions to form. In the biggest 
protest in Jakarta, 2,000 students milled about on a toll road two 
kilometers (1,2 miles) from Parliament, stymied by phalanxes of police 
and navy marines blocking them. There were huge traffic tie-ups. ``For 
32 years, we've been deceived by the regime. Now is the time for the 
people to voice their interests,'' the protesters chanted. Other groups 
of students were unable to get near Parliament, and police with sticks 
pushed back 70 protesters outside the Supreme Court. One demonstrator 
was injured. At another rally, 60 office workers, many of them wearing 
neckties, shouted their disapproval of the government assembly outside 
the gleaming stock exchange building. In the cities of Semarang, Samarinda 
and Palembang, hundreds of students rallied against the military's 
prominent role in politics. The military has 75 seats allotted to 
it in Parliament. In the city of Mataram, students demonstrated in 
favor of the assembly. The British Embassy warned its citizens to 
stay away from Parliament this week. ``There is a risk of violence, 
particularly if opposing groups demonstrate at the same time,'' an 
embassy statement said. Appealing for calm, military chief Gen. Wiranto 
said a peaceful assembly would restore confidence in Indonesia and 
help it overcome its economic and political problems. ``The meeting 
is a gateway to democracy and confirms that Indonesia is heading on 
a true track of reform,'' he said. The convening of the assembly comes 
as the world's fourth most populous nation grapples with its worst 
economic crisis in decades. Inflation and unemployment are high, and 
millions of people are sinking into poverty. Rioting and looting over 
price rises have occurred sporadically for months in many areas. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>