<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981109.0465 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The bodies of two Serb policemen were found Monday in Kosovo, Serb 
officials said, the latest sign of increasing strain in a month-old 
cease-fire in the restive province. The policemen, who went missing 
last Friday, were found by a police patrol near Malisevo, a virtual 
ghost town in central Kosovo. Initial findings indicated they had 
been shot at close range, the Serb Media Center said. Scattered violence 
is on the upswing in Kosovo, four weeks Yugoslav President Slobodan 
Milosevic and U.S. negotiator Richard Holbrooke reached an agreement 
to halt the conflict. Tension remains high over the killings of five 
ethnic Albanian rebels by Serb police on Friday near Opterusa in central 
Kosovo. Police described the encounter as a shootout and said Kosovo 
Liberation Army guerrillas fired first. But a KLA rebel said the shootings 
were a violation of last month's cease-fire. Foreign diplomatic observers, 
accompanied by a visiting U.S. envoy on war crimes, headed Monday 
to Malisevo to look into the Serb policemen's deaths as well as a 
reported gunbattle Sunday night between Serbs and ethnic Albanian 
rebels in the town. No injuries were reported in that clash. Serb 
authorities suspect the killed policemen were kidnapped by the KLA 
in retaliation for the shootings of the five guerrillas. Dozens of 
Serb police are believed to have been killed since Serbs began cracking 
down on ethnic Albanian separatists last February in Kosovo. Several 
hundred other people have been killed, and as many as 300,000 have 
been driven from their homes in the majority ethnic Albanian province. 
David Scheffer, the U.S. State Department's roving ambassador on war 
crimes, came to Kosovo on a one-day fact-finding tour after attending 
a panel discussion of war crimes in Belgrade. Yugoslav authorities 
have failed to cooperate with the U.N. war crimes tribunal trying 
to investigate allegations of atrocities in Kosovo. Louise Arbour, 
chief prosecutor for the International War Crimes Tribunal, and a 
team of investigators planned a weeklong mission in Kosovo last week 
but were refused access. Arbour and Scheffer have threatened Yugoslavia 
with U.N. sanctions if the authorities continue to defy demands for 
unlimited access. ``The person who should be here is Louise Arbour, 
and she's been prevented,'' Scheffer told reporters in Pristina, Kosovo's 
capital. ``It was critical that she be here'' along with the other 
investigators, he said. The American envoy, who will report back to 
Arbour and to U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, said he 
wanted to visit destroyed villages and other flashpoints from the 
war during his brief tour. He also planned to meet later Monday in 
Pristina with ethnic Albanian leader Ibrahim Rugova and with a top 
Serb official. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>