<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981109.0776 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As disease and starvation threatened to raise the death toll from 
Hurricane Mitch, Central American leaders were flying Monday to El 
Salvador to coordinate strategies for feeding tens of thousands of 
survivors and plan a regional recovery. The leaders of Honduras, Nicaragua, 
Guatemala, El Salvador and Costa Rica were expected to appeal to financial 
organizations to forgive their foreign debts so they can focus on 
recovery. With French President Jacques Chirac due to visit Central 
America next week, French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin on Monday called 
for a moratorium on debt payments owed by countries hit by Hurricane 
Mitch. French Finance Minister Dominique Strauss-Kahn said the Paris 
Club of creditor nations should suspend debt service payments for 
the next two to three years for the countries hit hardest by the hurricane. 
European foreign ministers meeting Monday in Brussels also were discussing 
increases in the dlrs 8.2 million they have already approved for Mitch's 
victims. Relief agencies desperate to feed tens of thousands isolated 
by Hurricane Mitch struggled to deliver tons of food, despite ruptured 
roads, backed-up airports and too few helicopters. Hunger and disease 
threaten to raise the death toll from Mitch, which Central American 
officials estimate has killed more than 10,000 in the region. If confirmed, 
that would make Mitch among the five worst hurricanes ever recorded 
in the Caribbean. ``The Honduran Red Cross is giving out all they 
have. Everything incoming is absolutely necessary,'' American Red 
Cross spokeswoman Ann Stingle said Sunday. On Sunday, the first shipments 
of aid reached many hamlets and cities cut off by flooding, such as 
Choluteca in southern Honduras and Posoltega, Nicaragua, where an 
estimated 2,000 people were killed in a mudslide. But some were kept 
waiting. ``We heard on the radio that aid is coming, but we're still 
eating rice,'' said Ann Soto, 19, at a refugee shelter in Posoltega. 
Former President George Bush was in Tegucigalpa, the Honduran capital, 
when more than 60,000 pounds (27,000 kilos) of aid from the U.S. relief 
group Americares arrived Sunday. He said much more would be needed 
for months _ maybe years _ to come. ``I can tell the American people 
and the people of the world that the devastation is appalling,'' Bush 
said after viewing damage with Honduran President Carlos Flores. The 
Central American leaders also planned to urge the United States to 
keep postponing deportations of illegal immigrants, Salvadoran Foreign 
Minister Ramon Gonzalez said Sunday. The U.S. Immigration and Naturalization 
Service temporarily suspended deportations of immigrants to Honduras 
and Guatemala as a ``humanitarian gesture'' until Tuesday. In Tegucigalpa, 
Bush and Flores said without sustained aid, Central Americans struggling 
to survive could migrate north to the United States. ``If people feel 
there is no hope for their families they will go elsewhere. They will 
go north, if necessary,'' Flores said. In Honduras alone, 700,000 
people will need food for the next month, U.N. World Food Program 
representative Giuseppi Lubatti estimated. Honduran, U.S., Mexican 
and other authorities struggled to overcome logistical problems in 
getting aid to remote areas. On Sunday, a Mexican C-130 cargo plane 
blew a tire while landing in Tegucigalpa, disrupting flights for several 
hours. ``It's taken us a little time to get synchronized. Hopefully, 
this will get a little better,'' said U.S. Army Lt. Col. Mike Morales. 
The first members of a Canadian military team specializing in disaster 
relief were scheduled to leave on Monday for northern Honduras, where 
they will establish an air traffic control system. U.S. military engineers 
were sent to help repair roads and bridges. U.S. forces also will 
help transport pipes into Tegucigalpa to repair the water network, 
now running at 25 percent capacity. In Nicaragua, aid distribution 
has become highly politicized. Victims have accused President Arnoldo 
Aleman of being slow to help some of the worst-hit regions because 
inhabitants overwhelmingly support leftist Sandinistas, the former 
rebels who governed through the 1980s. ``The government has shown 
a lack of competence and a lack of responsibility,'' said former President 
Daniel Ortega, whose Sandinista supporters drove dozens of truckloads 
of aid into Posoltega on Sunday. The military continued to dispose 
of hundreds of bodies of people killed in the massive mudslides in 
northwestern Nicaragua. Lt. Col. Juan Molinares, the army commander 
in charge of the Posoltega region, said soldiers had burned or buried 
538 corpses. Mexican search teams continued to look for victims in 
river banks and debris piles in Tegucigalpa. Assisting a beleaguered 
Honduran Red Cross, the American Red Cross was sending 40 tons of 
water purification chemicals and antibiotics to stem the spread of 
disease. ``We have nothing to drink,'' Argentina Giron, 30, said at 
a Tegucigalpa shelter. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>