<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981109.0778 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A visiting U.S. war crimes envoy saw first-hand evidence Monday of 
the ongoing violence in Kosovo _ the apparently executed bodies of 
two Serb policemen. David Scheffer, the roving U.S. ambassador on 
war crimes issues, viewed the bodies in this devastated central village 
as he toured Kosovo with the Kosovo Diplomatic Observer Mission (KDOM). 
The policemen _ Ilija Vujosevic and Dejan Djatlov _ disappeared Friday, 
the same day that Serb police shot to death five ethnic Albanian guerrillas, 
including a commander of two divisions. Both of the slain policemen 
had gunshot wounds to the head, indicating they had been killed execution-style. 
It was unclear if their deaths were intended as retribution for the 
killing of the five Kosovo Liberation Army members. The rebels say 
police ambushed the five as they drove in two vehicles from Opterusa 
village, while police claim the guerrillas opened fire first on a 
police patrol. Qamil Hajrizi, the father of one of the slain guerrillas, 
said Monday that his son's body was riddled with bullets. ``From what 
I saw, they were certainly ambushed,'' he said after waiting about 
four hours to collect the body from a hospital morgue in the southern 
city of Prizren. ``He was destroyed by many, many bullets.'' Two teams 
of international observers helped Hajrizi, 50, overcome intransigence 
by Serb police, who initially said the father lacked the necessary 
paperwork to recover the remains. The KDOM observers refused to speak 
to journalists. A KLA figure called the killing of the five guerrillas 
an ambush that violated a de facto cease-fire in Kosovo. Under a four-week-old 
agreement between Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic and U.S. envoy 
Richard Holbrooke, Milosevic's forces were supposed to cease hostilities. 
The KLA was not a party to the Oct. 12 agreement, but has declared 
its own unilateral cease-fire except in the case of attacks by Serb 
and Yugoslav forces. Violence by both sides has increased in the past 
week, including at least three incidents in which police reported 
killing KLA fighters who shot at them first. No police were killed 
or injured in any of those incidents. Scheffer and KDOM observers 
went to Malisevo to investigate the report of the missing policemen 
as well as a gunbattle Sunday night. Serb and Albanian accounts of 
who initiated that clash differed, but neither side reported injuries. 
Dozens of Serb police are believed to have been killed since the start 
of a Serb crackdown on ethnic Albanian separatists last February in 
Kosovo, where ethnic Albanians make up about 90 percent of the population. 
Several hundred other people, mostly ethnic Albanians, have been killed, 
and as many as 300,000 driven from their homes. Scheffer came to Kosovo 
on a one-day fact-finding tour after attending a panel discussion 
on war crimes in Belgrade. His visit comes amid a continuing controversy 
over Yugoslav authorities' failure to cooperate with the United Nations 
war crimes panel trying to investigate allegations of atrocities in 
Kosovo. Louise Arbour, chief prosecutor for the International War 
Crimes Tribunal, and a team of investigators planned a weeklong mission 
in Kosovo to begin last Wednesday but were refused access to the province. 
Arbour and Scheffer have threatened Yugoslavia with U.N. sanctions 
if the authorities continue to defy demands for unlimited access. 
``The person who should be here is Louise Arbour, and she's been prevented,'' 
Scheffer told reporters in Pristina, Kosovo's capital. ``It was critical 
that she be here'' along with the other investigators, he said. The 
American envoy, who will report back to Arbour and to U.S. Secretary 
of State Madeleine Albright, said he wanted to visit destroyed villages 
and other flash points from the war during his brief tour. He also 
planned to meet later in Pristina with ethnic Albanian leader Ibrahim 
Rugova and with a top Serb official. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>