<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981109.0261 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Two people were killed and more than 50 injured in clashes between 
political rivals on Monday, a day after a historic trial in the 1975 
killing of the nation's founder reignited old passions. A senior police 
officer said a young boy was killed during a gunfight between supporters 
of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and loyalists of Khaleda Zia, leader 
of the opposition in the parliament. Another victim died of gunshot 
wounds four hours after being admitted to Dhaka Medical College Hospital, 
doctors said. The strike was called by an alliance of seven parties 
headed by Mrs. Zia, a former prime minister, to protest the tear gassing 
of a rally on Saturday that forced Mrs. Zia to flee before making 
a speech. Mrs. Zia claimed police were trying to kill her. Eyewitnesses 
said Monday's fight started after pro-government activists ransacked 
and torched an opposition office, prompting heavy retaliation. They 
were trying to block strikers from marching to the residence of Dhaka 
mayor Mohammad Hanif to protest alleged police brutality. At least 
25 people were injured in separate clashes in the western city of 
Jessore _ one of 60 cities and towns affected by the strike. Earlier, 
riot police fired tear gas shells to scatter opposition activists, 
who smashed vehicles and set off firecrackers to enforce the strike 
that brought the nation's capital of nine million people to a standstill. 
Government offices opened, but attendance was poor, reported United 
News of Bangladesh news agency. The strike halted most traffic, and 
shut down stores and businesses. Banks and schools also were closed. 
Some rickshaw drivers, too poor to lose a day's income of 100 taka(dlrs 
2), defied the strike and risked having their vehicles smashed. Stores 
close because owners fear the shops will be damaged or looted if they 
defy the strike. Many people stay at home becase there's no public 
transportation and private cars are often stoned. Authorities deployed 
more than 5,000 security forces to stem the violence. The traditional 
political rivalry _ often violent _ was heightened by Sunday's conviction 
and death sentences handed down to the plotters of the 1975 coup in 
which Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the country's first prime minister, was 
assassinated. Some of the coup leaders were associated with the opposition. 
The current prime minister, Sheikh Hasina, is the daughter of the 
assassinated leader. Clashes between police and protesters were reported 
mainly in downtown Dhaka, where most of the government offices are 
located. The strike deterred more street celebrations by the governing 
Awami League to welcome Sunday's conviction of 15 former military 
officers involved in the coup. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>