<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981109.0505 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Winnie Madikizela-Mandela and two former security force generals implicated 
by a panel probing apartheid-era human rights abuses are under criminal 
investigation, a prosecutor said Monday. Statements by the prosecutor, 
Jan d'Oliveira, were the clearest signal yet that criminal cases would 
be brought against figures implicated by the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission in gross human rights violations. The commission released 
its five-volume report, the result of more than 2 1-2 years of hearings, 
on Oct. 30. It chronicles the human rights abuses committed by apartheid 
governments and their operatives as well as by the African National 
Congress and others fighting the racist system. The commission has 
the ability to grant amnesty to those who admit their misdeeds and 
are found to have acted with political motives. The report said individuals 
who have not sought amnesty should be prosecuted. Such prosecutions 
could last up to six years, said d'Oliveira, who recently was appointed 
a deputy national director of prosecutions. He said ANC figures were 
among targets of the investigations. The issue of continuing prosecutions 
is significant. Many feel that dragging on criminal reckonings of 
the horrors of the apartheid era will only prolong bitterness and 
delay reconciliation. But supporters of prosecution feel that denying 
justice to the victims is a worse evil. On a practical level, highly 
public prosecutions of ANC figures could have an impact on national 
elections next year, when the party will seek to consolidate its hold 
on power. Madikizela-Mandela has not sought amnesty. The commission 
found her accountable for human rights violations committed by her 
bodyguards, who the report said killed and tortured suspected opponents. 
Madikizela-Mandela was convicted in 1991 of kidnapping and being an 
accessory to an assault on four young men. She was sentenced to six 
years in jail, but paid a dlrs 3,200 fine on appeal. The case and 
testimony about her activities before the Truth Commission was marked 
by retractions and conflicting words by witnesses. ``We have good 
reasons to prepare a prosecution (of Madikizela-Mandela) except for 
those imponderables, at the moment,'' the prosecutor told reporters 
in Pretoria. He said the probe was half completed, and did not specify 
what the accusations were. Madikizela-Mandela, President Nelson Mandela's 
former wife, is an ANC official and among the most prominent anti-apartheid 
activists. In other cases, including one of the two unnamed generals 
implicated during Truth Commission testimony, prosecutors were ready 
to move forward pending decisions on amnesty applications. The commissioners 
hope to wrap up their amnesty work by mid-1999. He said, graf 14 
</TEXT>
</DOC>