<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981109.1600.1499 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Oscars are still months away, but Hollywood already is buzzing 
with predictions. Sherri Sylvester looks at the early contenders. 
Academy members will hurl themselves off the third tier of the dorothy 
chandler pavilion before they nominate me again. Prepare to duck and 
cover. Oscar voters are expected to jump at the chance to honor Tom 
Hanks and "Saving private Ryan." "Saving private Ryan" is the film 
that will dominate the Oscars this year. It's a way, way, way out 
there front-runner. It may seem early, but the Oscar campaign is already 
in motion. Industry soldiers are bombarding voters and even civilians 
with quotes from critics. This may be the year that big-name stars 
outrank Lesser known independent actors. Brad Pitt plays death in 
"meet Joe black." Susan Sarandon and Meryl Streep are near death in 
"stepmom" and "one true thing," respectively. And a dead Robin Williams 
explores the afterlife in "what dreams may come." It deals with such 
kind of emotionally intense issues. I said, "I don't know if I want 
to deal with this for four to five months being near that type of 
dark, you know, pain and loss." And all these different things that 
are kind of at the core of it. Williams has another shot as a doctor 
in "patch Adams." Streep reappears in "dancing at lughnasa." To be 
nominated by your peers is a very, very big deal. Even, and especially, 
if you've been nominated before. Meg Ryan may get her first nod for 
"you've got mail." Jim Carrey could be golden for "the truman show." 
"The truman show" was really well-reviewed. So at the end of the year, 
when all the critics groups start voting, it should do very well. 
And Jim Carrey has a shot, even though he's a comedian. It's almost 
like you're naked and you're saying, "okay, this is me now now. So 
if you reject this, it's my essence you don't like." This is part 
of the reason why I was born. And I will do other films, produce other 
films, produce other films for other people. Nothing will come close 
to meaning what this has meant to me at this particular time. Oprah 
may meet Oscar for her "beloved" despite disappointing box office. 
"A civil action" may Mark an academy comeback for John Travolta. He 
plays a lawyer for children with cancer. Real-life couple Sean Penn 
and Robin Wright-Penn team for "hurlyburly." Kenneth Branagh and Helena 
Bonham Carter pair for "the theory of flight." Among the most anticipated 
films is Terrence malick's "the thin red line." The world war II epic 
may be battling "saving private Ryan" for the best picture prize. 
Sherri Sylvester, CNN, Los Angeles. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>