<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981109.1830.1283 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One of the big complaints that women have had for a long time about 
this country's health care system is that the Stein tifk studies are 
conducted on men. Well, that's changed. Here's NBC's Bob Bazell. Two 
women you don't know, claudette markell and Dianne golradf, both nurses, 
have had a profound impact on your health -- helping researchers discover 
that a cup of coffee poses no health risk. Walking an hour a day helps 
prevent colon cancer. Some fats actually prevent heart disease. All 
of that, and much more groundbreaking health news. They are two of 
120,000 nurses who, since 1976, have taken part in a study that has 
provided an astounding amount of health information for millions of 
women around the world. You can take a look at the results and say, 
"this is what you've helped bring about," a group of women that get 
together and try and make a Difference in other people's lives. Answering 
every conceivable question about their health and lifestyle. Am I 
taking drugs of any kind? Diseases. Have you had the following? Vitamins 
and exercise. Investigators recruited nurses as volunteers in the 
study, because their education and training makes them highly reliable. 
Claudette, who's 64, is happy to report she quit smoking two years 
ago. But now she's dealing with another issue -- I'm not eating excessively 
more, and the weight is just accruing. In fact, the study found that 
women who quit smoking can minimize weight gain by increasing physical 
activity. Dianne reports a problem she thought she was too young to 
have. I have cataracts in both of my eyes. Investigators look for 
clues to the causes of cataracts by comparing millions of pieces of 
information from nurses like Dianne, who have them, with those who 
don't. They do this for dozens of diseases. The payoff is really enormous 
because we learn so much. We're looking at literally dozens of different 
aspects of diet, physical activity, lifestyle, medication use. And 
almost everything that can happen to a woman health-wise in this study. 
Including, for the first time, memory loss. We'll try to relate how 
well they've maintained their memory when they're older to practices 
they had when they were somewhat younger. 22 years old, the study 
already has provided a wealth of medical knowledge. And as claudette, 
Dianne and all the others grow, they'll give us vastly more information 
to help us all live better. Robert Bazell, NBC news, Boston. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>