<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981109.1830.0068 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. Newt Gingrich, who electrified and infuriated Washington 
for four years with his bold republican revolution, tonight is packing 
up, driven from office -- not by democrats, but by fellow republicans 
who blamed him for their embarrassing showing in the elections last 
week. In fact, the palace coup has been swift. And tonight, already 
the attention has shifted to his successor. We begin with NBC's Gwen 
Ifill. Newt Gingrich returned to Capitol Hill today to discover he's 
been replaced. But republicans have already moved on. His successor 
almost certainly Bob Livingston. After three days of campaigning for 
the speaker's post. Livingston is a ten-term lawmaker who chairs the 
appropriations committee, is the only candidate left standing. It's 
going to take sleeves rolled up, day-to-day activity -- just a Slugfest 
on the house floor. With republicans holding only a narrow majority 
in the house, new leaders say they can no longer afford not to cooperate 
with democrats. Livingston rose to the top after three other candidates 
-- James talent of missouri, Bill Archer of Texas and Christopher 
Cox of California, dropped out, all endorsing Livingston. He's got 
a tough task ahead of him. And I want to be sure that he wins by acclamation. 
But the fight for control is not over yet. Jennifer Dunn of Washington 
state today joined Steve Largent of Oklahoma in challenging majority 
leader Dick Armey. And J.C. Watts of Oklahoma said he will run against 
John boehner of Ohio for republican conference chairman. But Dunn 
favors abortion rights, and Watts supports affirmative action, putting 
them at odds with many conservative lawmakers. Republicans watching 
from the sidelines say party divisions have steadily widened in recent 
years. It was an abomination! The way we ended up this Congress with 
everything pushed off, pushed off, pushed off. And then you get up 
to a crisis point. Now that's gotta be changed. And Gingrich was always 
the lightning Rod. The saddest people in town today must be the democrats. 
What're they gonna do with all their Newt posters? He became a very 
easy target. Among the unhappiest republicans in Washington today, 
members of gopac, a republican activist group Gingrich founded. Gingrich 
will address the group's annual meeting tonight. Livingston assured 
one top republican today that it's his intention to be speaker of 
the house, not speaker of the world. A not-so-veiled indication that 
the post-Gingrich era has begun. Gwen Ifill, NBC news, the capitol. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>