<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981109.1830.0950 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth." A hostage drama where the boss puts his life 
on the line for an employee. For more than a month, a Canadian businessman 
has been held captive by marxist rebels in the south American nation 
of Colombia. Those rebels number from 10,000 to 15,000. And they hold 
10 to 12 hostages at any given time, using kidnapping and extortion 
to finance their revolution. Tonight, in the mountains of northeast 
Colombia, the boss is hostage. With the remarkable story of how he 
got there, here's NBC's Mike Boettcher, "In depth." On a remote mountain 
pass in Columbia, one photograph of an extraordinary moment, when 
the boss exchanges himself for one of his own employees who had been 
held hostage for 106 days. Edward Leonard is stunned by the sacrifice 
of norbert reinhart, the employer he'd never met. This gentleman came 
walking towards me and said, "my name is norbert reinhart. You must 
be Ed Leonard." I said, "yes." He said, "your shift is over, it's 
time for you to go home. I'm going to take your place." Reinhart, 
who owns a small Canadian drilling exploration company, had spent 
three months in Columbia trying to gain the release of his foreman, 
who had been kidnapped in June by leftist guerrillas known as the 
revolutionary armed forces. The rebels wanted $500,000 ransom. Reinhart 
couldn't pay it, and told his wife Casey he had one option left -- 
exchange himself for his employee. He said, "we're making one last 
effort at freeing Ed, and if it doesn't work, I'm swapping myself." 
And what did you say? "No, don't do that." But reinhart did it anyway, 
and in the process upset the Canadian government, which had urged 
him to let local authorities handle the problem. So why would a man 
with a wife and three children put his life on the line for one of 
his workers? That sense of responsibility. Like, he was in constant 
contact with Ed's wife and all the stuff was wearing on him. And I 
think he got to the point where that was the only option to get Ed 
out of there, was to put someone else in there. He's a hell of a man. 
I think not many people would do that for their employees. no! Now 
the guerrillas want $2 million to release reinhart. When it learned 
of the exchange, the Canadian government urged reinhart's wife to 
keep it secret, but she now believes the pressure of publicity is 
the only way her husband will ever see his three kids again. My 2-year-old 
asks, "can my daddy call me?" I told her he's on a mountain fixing 
some problems and there's no phone, and he'll call us as soon as he 
can. One month, and still no call, but Casey reinhart believes just 
as surely as her husband walked willingly into danger, he will walk 
away from it. Mike Boettcher, NBC news, Calgary. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>