<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981109.2000.1182 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the world. I'm Tony Kahn. A controversy currently raging in 
Britain sounds familiar. Does the private sexual behavior of political 
leaders merit public scrutiny? Or is it nobody's business? The debate 
reemerged this past weekend when the country's Agriculture Minister 
was forced to acknowledge he's gay after his former lover approached 
a London tabloid with lurid allegations. Today's papers whipped themselves, 
if not the public, into a frenzy over the story. From London, the 
world's Steve Beard has our story. It was business as usual today 
for Nick Brown. The agriculture minister was holding talks in Southwest 
England about the crisis in farming. He refused any further comment 
about his private life except to say he was grateful that his friends 
and colleagues had rallied around him. Everybody has been very kind 
and very supportive. And I'm very moved and touched by the support 
and kind that enshrines me. I think the best way I can repay that 
is by getting on and be an effective cabinet minister and an effective 
agriculture minister. And that's exactly what I intend to me. Prime 
Minister Tony Blair and other cabinet colleagues have pledged their 
full support for Nick Brown and criticized a newspaper that outed 
him. Michael Cashman, a gay member of the Labor Party's governing 
committee says he's pleased when gays come out, but not when they're 
forced out. We have to look at the way the newspapers, in particular, 
tabloids have driven people into the closet over the years. And I 
think the sooner more people come out, that people realize it's a 
different generation out there. People aren't interested. They're 
interested in how you're doing the job. The more people who come out, 
the better it can be and we can get rid of this silly intrusion into 
people's privates lives. It's their private lives. The popular newspapers, 
or tabloids as they're called, are divided over the issue of Nick 
Brown's outing. The Daily Mirror carried one headline that read "Your 
OK to be Gay". And the Daily Express said the story about Brown should 
never have been published. It said that politicians should be left 
alone unless their private lives enpenged on their public duties. 
But, the best-selling tabloid, The Sun, does not agree. This morning, 
it asks "Are we being run by a gay Mafia?". The paper's Political 
Editor Trevor Cavaghnan says citizens have a right to know about secret 
liaisons that could influence policy. Until a week ago, we knew of 
one member of the cabinet who was openly homosexual. Later, we know 
of four which is quite a substantial number and I think if a similar 
number, for instance, Scientologist or Free Mason, I think that would 
be a news story. I think it would be something which would be the 
subject of comments. Gay ministers said Cavahgnan might bring a bias 
to such issues as the lowering of the gay age of consent. But, Angela 
Mason of Stonewall, a gay and lesbian pressure group, angrily rejected 
the charge that gays would be less objective than straights. That's 
saying that lesbian and gay men can't be trusted to do their job professionally. 
And that they're going to go around, but that's disgraceful to say 
that, completely untrue. The current flurry of interest in homosexuality 
in high places follows the recent resignation of the Welsh Secretary 
Ron Davis. After an incident in a public park which was never fully 
explained, he quit his post. The tabloids went into a frenzy of allegations. 
Now, several senior members of the Labor Party have called for a law 
to prevent newspapers and broadcasters from invading people's privacy. 
Clyde Soley, a prominent Member of Parliament, says the newspapers 
have been allowed to regulate themselves and have failed. They have 
a code, the press compliancy code, which they drew up and they say 
they won't do things like this. And yet it happens all the time for 
ordinary people, for politicians, other people as well. So, I have 
to say if the code's not worth the paper it's written on, tear it 
up. The government made it clear today it would not tighten the restrictions 
on the press. But, The Sun newspaper meanwhile says it will continue 
to investigate the sexuality of government minister, further revelations 
seem likely. But, does the British public care? Opinion polls suggest 
there may be a similar mood here to the one manifested in American 
during last week's congressional elections. One recent poll indicates 
that a clear majority of British votes is totally indifferent to the 
sexual preferences of their leaders. For the world, this Stephen Beard 
in London. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>