<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981109.2000.0682 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If the Clinton administration does decide on a military option, it 
may want to do a better job of selling its policy to the American 
people than it did during the previous showdown with Iraq nine months 
ago. Then again, the White House may not even seek public support. 
The world's Andre North explains. As the Clinton Administration ponders 
taking its case for military action before the American people, it's 
eager to avoid scenes like this. The United States. One, two, three, 
four, we don't want your war. Ladies and gentleman. That was last 
February when Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and other key 
members of President Clinton's foreign policy team attempted to sell 
a possible attack on Iraq to a public meeting at Ohio State University. 
It was a humiliating experience for the administration as student 
after student denounced US policy. All he wants to do, Clinton said, 
was send a message to Saddam Hussein. If he wants to send a message, 
we the people of Columbus and Central Ohio and all over America will 
not send messages with the blood of the Iraqi men, women, and children. 
If we want to deal with Saddam, we deal with Saddam. The White House 
was caught off guard, said Richard Haas, who sat on President Bush's 
National Security Council. Essentially, Mr. Clinton's chief lieutenants 
were embarrassed because they couldn't answer the most basic questions 
as to the rationale for what it was we were thinking of doing. President 
Clinton's failure to win sufficient domestic and international backing 
for military action made him receptive to UN Secretary General Kofi 
Annan's agreement with Baghdad in February. But, many believe that 
deal sowed the seeds for today's crisis, giving Iraq the impression 
that US resolve was weakening. And Richard Haas says the White House 
risks repeating the same mistakes it made back then. The administration, 
as is almost always the case with this administration, seems to be 
slow to think about the domestic presentation of its foreign policy. 
It's true that President Clinton has yet to try rallying public support 
for military action. But, Richard Folenraft of Harvard's John F. Kennedy 
School of Government, believes that's because the White House took 
away a different lesson from that public meeting in February. What 
I think the administration learned in Ohio is that we don't live in 
the Macedonian democracy that occasionally you have the public for 
support of individual military actions. And that you need to take 
these decisions privately with your highest advisors and than in consultation 
of your closest allies. I would hate for that to be the case. Former 
National Secretary Member Richard Haas. I think it's a mistake to 
go into any serious foreign policy and counter without the Congress 
and the American people on board, particularly because the sort of 
encounter here that I think is necessary is one that can't be accomplished 
in an afternoon or even a week. If we're simply going to attack Iraq 
in a punitive fashion, I don't think that passes the seriousness test. 
I think the only thing that would probably make sense for the United 
States would be to substitute bombing for inspections and that promises 
to be a very long-term process. And that's the sort of military effort 
that could only be sustained with considerable domestic support. If 
the administration does decide on such an effort, it will hope to 
count on the American people traditional tendency to rally around 
the flag in times of conflict. Back in February, opinion polls shown 
that despite skepticism about President Clinton's Iraq policy, a majority 
was still prepared to back force if all diplomatic options had been 
exhausted. For the World, I'm Andrea North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>