<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981109.2000.0900 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
US is pouring into Honduras, one of the countries Hurricane Mitch 
hit the hardest during its deadly rampage through Central America. 
For Hondurans, the sight of US helicopters bringing in assistance 
is a familiar one. Likewise, many recognize one of the American visitors 
who arrived this past weekend to inspect the damage. The BBC's Tom 
Gibb prepared this report. Allow me to just say that it's an honor 
to have President Bush here to greet the AmeriCare's plane. This is 
not the first visit to Honduras by Former US President George Bush. 
Back in the 1980's, he was closely involved in Ronald Reagan's anti-Communist 
crusade in the region. Then, Honduras was at the center of US policy. 
So his return yesterday to bring aide to the victims of Hurricane 
Mitch was highly symbolic. I'm here to suggest that the volunteer 
sector, governments, international financial organizations, governments 
that may never have been involved with Honduras, ought to look at 
the tragedy here and then try to help. But yes, I think we do have 
the responsibility, nothing to do with history, but just because of 
compassion to take the lead. We're a blessed country and we ought 
to share with others. During the 1980's, the Americans pumped $1.9 
billion into Honduras, much of it went to the Honduran army. The Sufficano 
Airbase was built by the US military to be the center of a massive 
are lift operation to supply anti-Communist rebels in the neighboring 
Nicaragua. Former Opposition Politician Entri Andeus says the aide 
was not primarily for development, but rather to buy Honduran consent 
for the US Cold War agenda. What happened in the '80's is a guilt 
that the whole society, not only the Americans. Everybody was very 
happy to have the Americans here, but things have changed, the world 
has changed, the priorities have changed and the world is not any 
more important in terms of global policy for the United States. Those 
are things that are hard to understand. Most Hondurans you talk to 
on the street complain that they didn't see any of the aide. That's 
certainly true of those living in the shantytowns along the river 
that run through the capital. They lost all their meager belongings 
during the hurricane. Those in power kept the money. The poor didn't 
get any of it. The rich kept the money, which the gringos sent into 
their pockets. I like the United States. It's people are very united. 
I'd liked to go their to work, to make my life better. But, it would 
be good if the Americans controlled their aid better when they send 
it here so the people here don't steal it. Despite the Cold War end, 
US influence remains strong here. Baseball caps, hamburgers, and American 
football shirts are everywhere. In the wake of the hurricane, most 
Hondurans expect the Americans, as well as other countries, to help 
them out. So now, there's a new airlift to reach town cut off by the 
hurricane. Tons of aid are arriving. But the difference is that much 
of it is coming by non-governmental organizations. You have long-term 
projects already running in Honduras. Bill Somalopez is from Christian 
Aid. We work with settles of the population who have been neglected 
by the government who don't have access to education, health, and 
basic tools for their existence. So, if these people have been neglected 
by the government for so many years, which guarantees the group we 
have that the same government would give the money whom we think need 
it most. And there's been a change of attitude by the Honduran authorities. 
They're encouraging people to send donations by independent aid agencies. 
The country desperately needs money however it can. That's the BBC's 
Tom Gibb reporting from Honduras. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>