<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981109.2000.2647 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Thank, Richard. That was a lovely report. And have nice day. See, 
who could possible fault us Americans for a lack of courtesy or impeccable 
manners? Well, the answer is plenty of folks, especially foreign folks. 
Sometimes that vaulted American hospitality can strike non-Americans 
as rudeness. Anne Copeland edits the "New Comers Almanac", a monthly 
newsletter for people new to the United States. So, Ms. Copeland, 
you've got a problem with the way we act here in the States? Well, 
I don't if I have a problem. I think often Americans hear this "have 
a nice day". They either not hear it or they don't hear it as rude, 
but many foreign readers that I have certainly complain to me that 
it sounds so shallow and superficial that it's actually irritating 
to them. That is an interesting point though, isn't it? That if you're 
new to the culture, you may also be new to the language and that you 
might be hearing is the music of the true feelings. Yes. That's right. 
What else do people write to you about what they find? in a similar 
vein, sometimes I've had people say why do Americans say "How are 
you doing?" or "How are you?" and then they don't really listen to 
my answer. And I think one of the things that I realize is cultures 
have different types of politeness routines, if you will. We say how 
are you and really what that means "I greet you". And I invite you 
to greet me back. But that's really all it means. Give me some other 
examples of some of the things that we might not regard as being particularly 
rude, but just simply things we might say under the pressure of business 
that a foreigner but regard really as personal insult. Sure. Or disrespect. 
The other day, I heard an American teacher talking to a group of parents, 
about a fourth of the parents were from other countries. And the teacher 
lean on her desk with one hand and held a cup of coffee in the other. 
And I know that she was trying to say to parents, "You and I are equal 
partners in the education of our children. And you can call me my 
by first name and I'll call you by your first name, because we're 
equals here". But, I'm quite sure that number of the foreign parents 
in that group saw her as either disrespectful to them and she may 
have lost some credibility in their eyes, because she didn't present 
herself as a professional. I think Americans sometimes have problems 
of politeness commission and sometimes problems of omission. well, 
that's an interest point that sometimes it may be the things that 
we fail to do that are insulting rather than the things we do overtly. 
That's right. For example, if something goes wrong and you go to a 
bank, the clerk, we hope, will fix the problem. But, the clerk probably 
doesn't see it as his or her job to repair that customer relationship 
as for example, by apologizing for the inconvenience to the customer. 
So, I've heard a number of people say Why don't Americans apologize 
when they've made a mistake. It would help so much. I'm taking obviously 
the American point of view. You'd expect somebody who's getting lousy 
wages from a big company to apologize for that company's policy to 
a stranger. yes. How dare you. It does sound ridiculous to an American 
ear, doesn't it? But, it doesn't to a Japanese. Anne, thank you very 
much. And I mean that sincerely. Thanks, Tony. Glad to talk to you. 
Anne Copeland edits the "New Comers Almanac", a monthly newsletter 
for people new to the United States. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>