<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981109.2000.0376 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Iraq maintains its defiance of the United Nations over weapons inspections 
today almost daring the United States to attack. This latest showdown 
began 9 days ago when Baghdad suspended all cooperation with UN arms 
inspectors. President Saddam Hussein in insisting that the Security 
Counsel review of the sanctions that have been imposed against Iraq 
after its 1990 invasion of Kuwait. If President Clinton opts for a 
military strike against Iraq, he may try to rally domestic support, 
as we'll hear shortly. The President says that the arms monitors have 
destroyed more weapons than allied forces knocked during the Gulf 
War. David Kaye, a former weapons inspector in Iraq, agrees that the 
inspections have accomplished a great deal. It's hard for most people 
to remember back in 1990 and 1991 at the end of the war how little 
we knew about the Iraqi program. We now know that they had a nuclear 
weapons program that was only a matter of months away from having 
their first crude nuclear weapon. That they had a biological weapons 
program that produce very large amounts of anthrax, botulia toxin, 
Aphix toxin, and gas gangrene. That the missiles, over 300 missile, 
capable of ranging throughout the Middle East and the chemical stockpile 
is mindboggling. It's the largest chemical stockpile certainly outside 
of that mastered by the Soviet Union and The United States. Since 
one of the options is being considered is an air strike where bombs 
presumably might land on or near targets that are that dramatic. What 
do you expect the result to be? A military strike can certainly set 
back temporarily some of its military capacity, if you're lucky. I 
mean we have to assume, and I don't assume it because I've seen the 
Iraqis do it, that they will do the outmost to hide the very vital 
military weapons equipment. It's not going to be easy to find. But 
even if you're lucky and you get most of it. That's equipment that 
can be re-bought. The scientific talent in Iraq and more importantly 
the political determination that comes from Saddam to acquire these 
weapons is going to continue. Military action is not going to affect 
that. Perhaps the scariest thing about these weapons is that they 
can really rely on a breeze, something as uncontrollable as breeze 
to do their killing. If bombs should land on any of these sites, what 
about widespread contamination? Certainly if an air strike were to 
hit a chemical or biological weapon itself, it would have the potential 
for releasing havoc on the surrounding civilian population. I must 
say though I think it highly unlikely that the military, particularly 
a cruise missile strike, will be lucky enough to hit any weapons, 
The Iraqis have hidden these and by and large hidden them very well, 
because the inspectors have been after them. So, it's unlikely except 
by accident that we would ever in a single strike lasting no more 
than a day or two ever impact any of them. The Iraqis have been saying 
you know, you misjudge us, because we could have use this stuff before 
during the Gulf War and we didn't. Along those lines, did you yourself 
get any evidence that they were perhaps more cooperative and helpful 
while you could inspect than they've been characterized as being? 
I think they've showed very little cooperation, almost none with the 
inspectors except when you were not close something that they viewed 
as vital. I mean at that time they could be extremely hospitable. 
The reason they didn't strike during the Gulf War is I think that 
they understood that the consequence of that would be truly horrendous, 
that the US and our allies in the region would have stuck back with 
massive power that would have eliminated the regime. But, Saddam wants 
these weapons for is to guarantee that he stays in power and dominates 
the regime. The use of those weapons, if it results in a massive attack 
by the United States or other states in the region, denies him that 
advantage. So, it's a very calculating attitude the Iraqis have about 
these weapons. Well, finally Mr. Kaye, now that the inspections have 
pretty much come to a dead standstill for the last three months, what 
exactly are we losing in terms of the process that was not implemented? 
Well, I think what we're losing right now is out ability to monitor 
and keep the weapons production capacity that Iraq retains in check. 
The fact that inspectors were only able to inspect, able to run monitoring 
equipment didn't keep the Iraqis from cheating, but it kept them from 
cheating very much. Now, after 90 plus days, I think it's about 96 
days today without any challenged inspections, one has to assume we've 
lost that capability. On the other hand, one has to say a military 
strike, which would result in the end of the inspection process, is 
probably not much different than the current situation in which Saddam 
has ended the inspection process unilaterally by himself. David Kaye 
is a former weapons inspector in Iraq and presently the director for 
the Center for Counter Terrorism at Science Applications International. 
Thank you, Mr. Kaye. Thank you. Happy to talk to you, Tony. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>