<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981109.2000.2892 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the World. I'm Tony Kahn. Well, now it's time to see if you 
know the answer to our geography puzzle. Remember, we were looking 
for a place that's part of South Africa where on the local delicacies 
is a reconstituted caterpillar. Here to give us the answer are two 
very brave young Americans who sampled those delights. They're also 
the authors of beautifully photographed new book called "Man Eating 
Bugs". Peter Manzell and Faith Deluszio welcome. I sort of mean that. 
You brought the answer with you, so I'm entirely sure yet. But, Faith, 
tell us what is the answer to our puzzle. The answer is that it is 
Lopotti worm and it is Lapumalaga, which is the northern province. 
The northern province of South Africa. And people are called Gunda 
people. They've been there since the 12th Century. Presumably, they've 
had a nice long time to get use to eating these things. But, what 
has attracted you two about it. It is fascinating to go to South Africa 
and to all these countries that we visited and enjoy the food they 
enjoy, just partaking of what it is they partake of on a daily basis. 
Peter, why do they partake in it? There must more reasons than simply 
the flavor. Well, before there was fast food or farms or anything, 
people hunted insects. That was the very first thing that people hunted 
and gathered. There are pockets of people left in the world that still 
do this hunting and gathering, but I must say that it's now become 
quite trendy in some places like China, Thailand, Cambodia, parts 
of Mexico to eat insects and they are not found in street stalls any 
more, they're only found in the better restaurants. Can you eat the 
wrong kind of bug? I notice that you've brought in a number of things, 
including some scorpions and that the stingers are still attached. 
I mean do people eat everything on the scorpion? Well, once they're 
deep-fried, the protein that makes up the poison is rendered- They're 
broken down. It's broken down. So, it's no problem. But their little 
tiny stinger could be a problem if it got caught in your throat. But, 
it's just like mushrooms, Tony. You wouldn't walk out in the woods 
and indiscriminately pick mushrooms and eat them. You have to really 
know what you're doing. Do you think that there is a possibility and 
market for bugs in the States the way there obviously is other parts 
of the world. I don't think so. But, 30 years ago, I wouldn't have 
thought that raw fish would be as popular as it is. I mean you can 
find sushi and shaseme in all of the small towns in America practically. 
If the should be the case and we begin the 21st Century with a whole 
new attitude toward bugs, what is likely to be the bug that Americans 
would gravitate to? Well, for flavor, I tend toward the crisper bugs 
and you might be surprise but the stink bug which we had in Indo-china. 
If it's cooked well on the fire, it's kind of crunchy like a nut and 
not too bad. That's a kind of beetle, right, the stink bug? It is, 
yes. It's very flat and there's not much meat which is the way I like 
it. Or ants, which have folic acid. They're kind of sour. And ant 
eggs are actually quite nice. But in Mexico, chaparenas, which are 
grasshoppers, are very, very popular. You can go to Yahuca, find them. 
People sell them in all the markets on the street and some very nice 
restaurants, they serve grasshoppers in a number of different ways. 
Grasshopper tacos, we have a recipe in our book. You do. Well, you 
know, anybody who is really interested in actually their front lawn 
or back lawn into an Al Fresco dining center might want to check out 
some of those recipes. We'll have one of them on our Web site for 
the world at ww.theworld.org. I have been trying as hard as I can 
to prolong this conversation, because I know it's suppose end with 
me eating one of these things. But, I'm afraid I'm running out of 
questions. It's time for me to see what all this talk about the Motani 
is really all about. Could you describe it to me as I kind of hold 
it in my hand and think about what I'm going to do with it? Sure. 
Well, the Motani worm at one time, when it was alive, was actually 
very beautiful green and red and yellow creature that was eating the 
leaves of the Motani tree and the people there were picking them off 
the trees and squeezing out the very bright green guts and then put 
them in water with salt. Boiling them down a bit. Drying them in the 
sun. And you have in your hand now a very dry, very high protein snack. 
Well, here it goes. It's a little bit gray and brown. It's got some 
looks like dusty, fuzzy stuff in the middle. It's about, well, I think 
the half that I've got is about 3/4 of an inch long. So, the whole 
bug, with 800 feet and all, is about what and inch and a half? OK. 
And..crunchy. A little salty. Almost like, I hope Nabisco isn't a 
sponsor, you know those little wheat breakfast cereals. But clearly, 
a lot of fiber, a lot of fiber. Very woody. A lot of these bugs taste 
like the plants that they're eating. Well, care to join me in the.. 
Bon Appetit and here's looking at Motani. Really not bad. I don't 
have to eat the eyes, do I? Not if you don't want to. Well, you'll 
have to forgive me for eating while talking. But, Peter Manzell and 
Faith Deluszio authors of "Man Eating Bugs, thanks a lot. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>