<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981109.2000.2001 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In London today, Former Chilean Ruler Augusto Pinochet continued to 
wait for a ruling on his future. On October 16th, Pinochet was arrested 
in London at the request of Spanish judge. Madrid was seeking Pinochet's 
extradition on charges of genocide, torture, and murder. A London 
court ruled that the former dictator enjoys immunity from prosecution, 
a ruling that's now be appealed to the House of Lords. The United 
States is not involved in these legal maneuvers, but it was involved 
in Pinochet's rise to power. The World's William Troop reports on 
US responsibility for Pinochet, then and now. It's no secret that 
the US government actively supported General Augusto Pinochet when 
he lead a coup against President Salvador Aleneda in 1973. Recently 
de-classified documents show that President Richard Nixon and his 
National Security Advisors Henry Kissinger instructed the CIA and 
other agencies to see that Aleneda was removed from office. It's not 
clear that US officials knew General Pinochet's government would embark 
on such a bloody crusade once in office. It's true. It's true. Pinochet 
when he came was brutal and he smashed not only Alenda's forces, but 
he tried to wreck the Christian Democrats and normal political parties. 
Peter Rodman was Henry Kissinger's Special Assistant at the National 
Security Agency at the time Pinochet came to power. Rodman admits 
that Pinochet committed excesses in the years following the coup, 
but he believes Pinochet should now be left allowed, because prosecuting 
him creates a dangerous precedent. No dictator in his right mind will 
ever relinquish power voluntarily again if this the way he is going 
to be treated. In many case, the most humane thing is some arrangement 
which induces a dictator to step down voluntarily. And if this option 
is lost to us, I think a lot of tyrants will cling to power forever, 
until the bitter end and I think a lot of blood will be shed if the 
world community loses this option. Rodman says the US government wasn't 
responsible for Pinochet's rise to power. He blames Salvador Aleneda's 
Marxist policies for that. And despite the evidence that the Nixon 
Administration was deeply involved in supporting a coup, Rodman says 
the US government actually had a passive role. But others believe 
the US government not only helped Pinochet to power, but also turned 
a blind eye to his government human rights abuses. Peter Cornblu is 
a senior analyst with the National Security Archive in Washington. 
He believes that thousands of still secret US documents on Pinochet 
could easily help convict the general if the US made the papers public. 
The issue is not what the United States knew at this point, it's really 
what the United States can provide in terms of the documents it has 
recording General Pinochet's role in international terrorism and his 
role in the efforts of his secret police kill, torture, and disappear 
people inside Chile. Those documents had been requested by the Spanish 
under a mutual legal systems treaty over a year ago to help with their 
prosecution of General Pinochet. And to date, the Clinton Administration 
has not provided any documents of substance. The Justice Department 
says it has cooperated with Spain's request for documents, but today 
a spokesperson decline to reveal what, if anything, had been turned 
over. In fact, US officials are discussing pressing their own charges 
against General Pinochet. But, this involve mid-level officials and 
does not signal a US willingness to indict Pinochet. A US move to 
prosecute the general would center on the murder of former Chilean 
Official Orlando Latella and his American Aide Ronnie Moffit, 22 years 
ago in Washington. American University Professor Rick Wilson says 
international and US laws would hold Pinochet responsible for the 
action of his subordinates. So, if the traditional rules of commanded 
responsibility in this kind of situation would hold Pinochet responsible 
for the acts that he ordered or he should have known about because 
he was commander-in-chief of this particular force. Of course, to 
try Pinochet in a US court, the Chilean general and senator for life 
would first have to extradited. That could be hard especially if Pinochet 
lawyers win their appeal in London this week. Should the general be 
allowed to leave Britain, he would immediately fly home to Chile and 
would likely never set foot outside his country again. For the World, 
this is William Troop. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>