<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981109.2000.2325 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Even Israeli's defenders have to admit it-Israelis are just plain 
rude. It's the way they are and you just have to deal with it. But, 
there are consequences to poor manners, ranging to a high national 
stress level to unnecessary tensions in the worlds of international 
business and diplomacy. As the World's Richard Myrna reports some 
in Israeli are trying to persuade their compatriots to be a little 
bit nicer. Welcome to business as usual in Tel Aviv's Carmel Market. 
Store holders try to drown each other out as shoppers use their elbows 
to get the best bargains and raised voices tend to dominate daily 
life in Israeli. In the middle of a disorderly throng at Jerusalem 
Central Bus Station and irate old lady shouts at fellow passengers 
trying to jump to the front of the line. And the screaming goes to 
the very top of Israeli society where members of parliament prefer 
yelling at each other to reason debate. Israeli is not an easy place 
for those use to a quiet, order, and mannered life. Israelis are by 
any measure rude, and even by our measure rude. And I can almost rude 
and proud of it. I have an American wife. When we first met, she was 
under the impression that I was angry with all my Israeli friends, 
because every time I talked to any of them we were always yelling 
at one another. In fact, we were just discussing things at a decibel 
level which is common here. Zem Hoffit is a journalist and commentator 
on Israeli life and habits, believes that there are historical reason 
why people behave as they do. This country was founded by socialists 
pioneers who thought that good manners was in some way counter-revolutionary. 
And they encouraged a cult of directness, a cult of bluntness, sort 
of a no frills approach in interpersonal relations as well as everything 
else which stuck. But, efforts are underway to change the way that 
Israelis behave. My name is Tabailase Kubovich. I'm running a. The 
company is seven years old and runs courses for both and individuals 
to teach Israelis to be better behaved. We believe that in the end 
we change the education and the way of the people of Israeli who should 
be proud and no one can say the Israelis are lacking of mannerisms. 
At a management college in Tel Aviv, Tabailse Kubovich coaches a class 
of more than 20 attentive pupils in how to stand and introduce themselves. 
This is the first course she has run at his collage and it's packed. 
Ibabin Biboshet, a sales manager for a car company says she hopes 
the course will teach her important skills for her work. We don't 
have manners in Israeli. We don't get it from school. It's something 
that should be based from kindergarten if you ask me. And I believe 
I can do a lot with my people in the shop and outside of the guide 
of the people of Israeli. Many Israelis are especially anxious to 
improve their behavior as the emerges from years of international 
isolation. Former enemies from the Israeli and Jordanian armed forces 
cement the agreement the countries signed in 1994. With the peace 
process and the end of the Cold War, Israeli established relations 
with countries are the world, increasing the number of its diplomatic 
missions by 30 percent. Istrafil Daen is in charge of training the 
diplomats needed to fill the new posts. He tries to teach his student 
to play down their natural bluntness, but not to lose their Israeli 
character. Communication is so important and openness and sincerity 
are so important. And these attributes that the Israeli people have 
within themselves and we teach them not to lose it. After graduation 
dinner, a group of Tabailse Kubovich's sitting with their backs straight 
and napkins placed delicately on their laps are given last minute 
tips on their table manners. Kubovich believes that Israelis are realizing 
the importance of politeness and that people can change the way they 
behave. The people of Israeli are very, very nice and open-minded. 
When they realize that good manners is good communications, I'm sure-I'm 
sure that we can be a very, very nice country. For the World, this 
is Richard Myrna reporting from Tel Aviv. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>