<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981109.1600.2329 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Well, coming at a tough time for Bangladesh, a second day of opposition 
led strikes has forced schools, businesses, and stores to close. Analysts 
say there could be no worst time for a shutdown since Bangladesh is 
trying to recover from floods which devastated much of the country's 
farms and its infrastructure. VOA correspondent Douglas Bakshun has 
more. In the capital, Dhaka, there was little traffic except for convoys 
of mostly empty buses operated by the State Transport Corporation. 
Police in jeeps and herds of paramilitary troops were deployed to 
maintain increased security. The opposition Bangladesh Nationalist 
Party originally planned the strike for only Monday and Tuesday, but 
has extended the protest to Wednesday. The party acted after clashes 
Monday between opposition and government supporters claimed several 
lives. The opposition originally called the strike to protest police 
action at a Saturday opposition rally during which authorities fired 
tear gas. Analysts say the strike comes at a very bad time for Bangladesh, 
which is just recovering from floods that wiped out vital crops and 
devastated infrastructure including roads and utilities. Analysts 
also say the country's vital garment industry which brings in an estimated 
$4 billion a year is being hurt and foreign buyers are losing interest 
because of the unstable political situation. Commerce Minister Tophil 
Ahmed told VOA this is a peak period for the garment industry. We 
are doing very well in our garment industries, all but one. Bangladesh 
is the fifth largest in the garment profession states and sixth in 
the market of union. And this is a peak period for the garment exporters, 
especially for the month of August, September, October, November, 
December. These are the months when our exporters take the big dive 
for exporting their products to different parts of the world. The 
opposition has launched a number of strikes this year accusing the 
government of harassing opposition workers and leaders. The government 
denies the charges and say the opposition is only stirring up trouble 
to destabilize the country. Commerce Minister Ahmed says it is up 
to the people to decide who is right. You see, the people of this 
country, they're the best judges. They're making their own judgment 
that very, very issue the opposition strike and creating this problem 
in the lives of the people of this country. And I am sure there are 
also sensible people in the opposition that will come to a position 
where this thing will not continue. The strike began one day after 
a Dhaka court sentenced 15 former Army officers to death for killing 
the country's first Prime Minister Sheik Mujibaraman in 1975. Bangladesh 
is currently ruled by his daughter, Sheikha Hasina. The verdict was 
welcomed by most Bangladeshis but angered some opposition politicians. 
Douglas Bakshun, VOA News, South Asia bureau. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>