<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981109.1600.2497 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Clinton administration is calling on India and Pakistan to take 
further steps to ease the danger of a South Asian nuclear arms race. 
The appeal follows Washington's decision to lift most of the sanctions 
imposed against the two countries because of their nuclear tests last 
May. VOA News David Gullis has details from the White House. A measure 
allowing the administration to ease the sanctions was tucked into 
a catchall budget bill Mr. Clinton signed into law several days ago. 
And the president invoked that authority with little fanfare last 
Friday, allowing, among other things, the restoration of U.S. guaranteed 
business loans to India and Pakistan and the resumption of some military 
aid. The president had been required under U.S. nonproliferation law 
to impose sweeping economic sanctions against both countries after 
their nuclear test series even though it was acknowledged at the time 
that they would have a disproportionate effect on Pakistan, a major 
U.S. trading partner. The combined effects of the sanctions and global 
market crisis have brought Pakistan close to default on its foreign 
debt. White House spokesman Joe Lockhart says Friday's sanction move 
should provide some relief. Given the state of the economy and the 
issues that Pakistan faces domestically and economically, this step 
is prudent and appropriate. Mr. Lockhart denied under questioning 
that the action has diluted U.S. nuclear nonproliferation policy and 
he said Mr. Clinton can pursue those objectives more effectively if 
his hands are not tied by congressional restrictions. There's obviously 
been some steps toward - from both India and Pakistan on that issue 
if you remember that the U.N. General Assembly, there were positive 
statements made towards nonproliferation. So we think as the president 
has often said, allowing him the flexibility in using these sanctions 
can often be more productive than the rigid implementation of these. 
Officials here say voluntary nuclear test moratoriums and the resumption 
of dialogue on the Kashmir dispute are among the positive steps by 
the two powers. Mr. Lockhart said additional action being sought by 
the administration includes their signing of the comprehensive nuclear 
test ban treaty, a moratorium on the production of fissile material, 
and adoption of restraints on nuclear capable aircraft and missiles. 
It's hoped the relaxation of sanctions will encourage further steps 
at high level U.S.-Indian talks in Rome next week and during the early 
December Washington visit by Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. 
Because of the nuclear test, Mr. Clinton's graphed plans to visit 
India and Pakistan as part of the Asian trip he begins later this 
week, but he has left open the possibility of a visit next year if 
there is sufficient progress on the proliferation issue. David Gullis, 
VOA News, the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>