<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981109.0500.2645 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In 1990, scientist around the world began work on the human genome 
project, a massive effort to identify the estimated 80,000 genes in 
human DNA. Information gathered from that project so far have already 
helped us learn more about diseases and other health matters. Experts 
say in future years our understanding of life will improve even more 
as scientist study the genetic makeup of other organism. Genetic and 
evolutionary researchers met recently in Chicago to discuss what they've 
learned about the building blocks of life and where their work will 
take them next. VOA's Michael Leland has details. The Human Genome 
Project is not expected to be completed for another 5 to 7 years, 
But Stephen O'Brien of the National Cancer Institute says it has already 
helped scientist learn more about some 50 hereditary diseases and 
why some people get them. Years ago, we didn't understand very much 
about cancer, but we're learning a lot more about the genes that are 
involved and variants that are distributed among human individuals 
are really telling us a lot about why some individuals get sicker 
than others with certain diseases. The Human Genome Project is an 
effort not only to identify the human body's estimated 80,000 thousand 
genes, but also to determine the sequences of chemical compounds up 
to 3 billion separate substances called nucleotides that make up human 
DNA. Mr. O'Brien says those sequences are what make one person different 
from another in appearance, personality, and resistance to disease. 
That variation can explain a lot of the differences in hereditary 
diseases, behavior, and resistance to infectious disease and resistance 
to cancer and talents and all kinds of things. In the near future, 
Mr. O'Brien says scientist will begin mapping the genetic sequence 
of the mouse in hopes of learning more about human diseases and developing 
new therapies. Genetic research has been underway for years in the 
plant kingdom. Scientist in the United States have used genetic information 
to develop new strains of corn as well as potato plants the produce 
their own insecticide. Mr. O'Brien says agricultural genetics is a 
fast growing field. I would say that in the plant kingdom there's 
probably 20 species that have genome projects that are developing. 
Tomato is very advanced. Rice is something that has really been committed 
by particularly in the Asian part of the world because it is a food 
stock. They really have committed themselves to go ahead sequencing 
rice. Scientists are also using genetic information to better understand 
evolution. From the State of Michigan, Wayne State University Professor 
Morris Goodman is a pioneer in the field molecular philo-genetics, 
the evolutionary history of a species based on its genetic characteristics. 
He says genetic research has turned up additional evidence that humans 
and chimpanzees are each others closest relatives, sharing roughly 
99 percent of their genes. Mr. Goodman says it's now important to 
identify the nucleotide sequences of DNA to understand what turns 
certain genes on and off. It's become quite clear for those of us 
concerned with these problems that it will be a great help if we could 
sequence the genomes a group of other organisms and in particular 
for the regulatory sequences. It would be very valuable to have a 
set of primate genome sequence starting with the chimpanzee. Mr. O'Brien 
of the National Cancer Institute predicts that once researchers are 
able to complete the Human Genome Project, they will learn enough 
about the process to one day be able to map the genetic makeup of 
one new mammal each year. Michael Leland, VOA News, Chicago. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>