<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981109.0500.1351 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Cassius Clay, a young man from Louisville, Kentucky, won a Gold Medal 
in the 1960 Rome Olympics in the Light Heavyweight competition. That 
same year, he turned professional. By 1963, he had fought professionally 
19 times winning all of his bouts. A year later, he stunned boxing 
fans by beating Sonny Liston, the world heavyweight champion. Then, 
he announced to the world that he was changing his name to Muhammad 
Ali and was becoming a Black Muslim. Still, he remained in the ring 
as dazzling and nervous as ever. I have a poem that says. This is 
the legend of Muhammed Ali, the most popular fight there ever will 
be. He talks a great deal and brags indeed, of a powerful punch and 
blinding speed. The fistic is dumb and weary, with a champ Foreman 
things got to be dreary. Now, some one with color, someone with dash, 
he rings fight fans are running with cash. This brash boxer is something 
to see, the heavyweight championship is his destiny. Ali fights great, 
he's got speed and endurance, if you decide to fight him, increase 
your insurance. By the mid-1960s, Muhammed Ali was said to be the 
finest fighter of the 20th Century. However, his career was halted 
temporarily. And he lost championship when was convicted of military 
draft evasion. But eventually, his conviction was overturned by the 
United States Supreme Court and Muhhamed Ali returned to the ring 
and regain his championship. "King of the World, Muhammed Ali and 
the Rise of an American Hero" is a new book David Remnick, a Pulitzer 
prize winning author and editor of the New York Magazine. Everybody 
loves Muhammed Ali. And yet, when he was creating himself as this 
great American fighter, and folk legend, and political figure, he 
was an extremely, not divisive figure, but people really couldn't 
understand. They couldn't take him on board. And he was reviled, not 
just by white racists in certain parts of the country, but by lots 
and lots of people, even in the black middle class, they had a hard 
time taking on board a guy who was coming up against the civil rights 
movement by joining the Nation of Islam. David Remnick says that Muhammed 
Ali made a tremendous contribution to the sport of boxing. What he 
brought to boxing and to sport in general was the marriage of size 
and velocity and. He moved like Sugar Ray Robinson. Heavyweights didn't 
do that. Sports writer hated the fact that he danced around the ring 
and kept his hands at his side. This was an offense to their esthetic 
sense of what a heavyweight boxer should be, a guy should wade in 
and crush you with a left hook, like Joe Lewis, or even more so like 
Mike Tyson or Sonny Liston. However, writes David Remnick Ali may 
turn out to have been the pinnacle of boxing and also its end. His 
successors came at a time when boxing itself is fading away. Ali fought 
his last bout in 1981 and his career has left its toll. He suffers 
from neurological deterioration. His speech is slurred and his reflexes 
aren't good. And Muhammed Ali has mellowed. Again, David Remnick. 
His faith now is really not very political. It's directed toward Islam 
in general. There's no more great rhetoric of separatism as there 
was in the early 60s, so Muhammed Ali has changed and the country 
has changed at least to some degree. IN fact, says Mr. Remnick, based 
on. a member of his entourage in the corner said that in many ways 
things have turned out in very difficult strikes for Muhammed Ali. 
Obviously, his health is not nearly what we would want it to be, what 
Muhammed would want it to be. On the other, Checko said he's achieved 
this kind of spiritual peace and very few of us have that. And so, 
the last thing Muhammed Ali wants and that we should go around doing 
is pitying him. Well, I think courage is the operative word. Courage 
in the ring, Courage in politics, in religion, and always with a sense 
of wit, always winking. And that is absolutely unique in this century, 
I think. On his last visit, Muhammed Ali told the author, "Sleep is 
rehearsal for death. One day you wake up and it's Judgment Day. I 
don't worry about disease he says. Don't worry about anything. Allah 
will protect me. He always does". The book is "King of the World: 
Muhammed Ali and the Rise of an American Hero". I'm Dan Neville. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>