<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981109.1600.0414 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad has long been a staunch 
supporter of computer technology as a means of advancing his country. 
He has been pushing an ambitious project for a multi-media super corridor 
for Malaysia and the country as a prime world manufacturer of computer 
hardware, but that technological innovation has come back to haunt 
Mr. Mahathir at a time of political crisis. We have a report from 
VOA's Gary Thomas in Kuala Lumpur. At an impromptu rally of support 
for ousted deputy prime minister Anwar Ibrahim, a young man expresses 
his frustration with the coverage of the case in Malaysian media. 
The media are controlled by government. I don't read newspaper anymore. 
It is a view heard from many quarters in Malaysia, but television 
and newspapers here under the government thumb, the Internet has fast 
become a source of information and an organizational tool for anti-government 
forces. Junghur Muzafur is a professor of political science at the 
University of Malaysia and a prominent human rights activist. He says 
that without the Internet, the reform movement initiated by Anwar 
Ibrahim before his arrest would have withered. If there is one media 
which has played a very big role in galvanizing the reform movement, 
it is Internet. If it had not been for Internet, I don't think all 
those people who are concerned about governance and about Anwar would 
have been able to get their message across. The Internet was popular 
in Malaysia before, but the following arrest of Anwar Ibrahim on sex 
and corruption charges caused a big jump in interest. Izumi Hyzu, 
a Japanese expatriate who is the secretary general of the Asian Pacific 
Internet Association says figures from Malaysian Internet service 
providers show a 20 percent jump in usage in September, the month 
Mr. Anwar was fired and subsequently arrested. The Malaysian political 
reform movement is to let people know of demonstrations which are 
illegal in Malaysia. Web sites also post items of interest particularly 
from foreign media about the Anwar case. Recently, a letter from Mr. 
Anwar smuggled out of prison was posted on the Internet. The irony 
of this, points out, Mr. Tanjra, is that it is Mr. Mahathir who has 
been the leading proponent of information technology for Malaysia. 
The great champion of the new information age as far as that has been 
the prime minister is one who's been promoting the for corridor and 
all the rest of them. And here you have the Internet playing a role 
which I'm sure he would not want it to play. But this, I think, is 
what people describe as poetic justice. Internet association head 
Mr. Izu, said the Malaysian government monitors sites for political 
content, but he adds officials have so far made no attempt to shut 
any of them down or to arrest people for the support for Mr. Anwar 
via the Internet. Gary Thomas, VOA News, Kuala Lumpur. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>