<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981109.0500.2359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A high profile trial in mainland China of an alleged Hong Kong organized 
crime leader is nearing its end. VOA Correspondent Chris Simkins reports 
the case has created a controversy over whether people who create 
crimes in the territory can be tried across the border in China. Alleged 
Hong Kong crime boss Chung Tscong is awaiting a verdict in his trial 
in Quango. Mr. Chung is charged with a series of violent cross-border 
crimes over the last eight years including murder and masterminding 
the kidnap of two of Hong Kong wealthiest property developers. The 
43-year old Chung was arrested in Quango last January. Even though 
most of his alleged crimes were committed in Hong Kong, mainland authorities 
say some of the crimes were planned across the border. Some legal 
experts say this case, the first high profile trial since the handover 
from British rule last year, could set a dangerous precedent. The 
basic law Hong Kong's mini says courts in the territory has jurisdiction 
over all cases in Hong Kong. But, Audrey Yu, head of Hong Kong's Bar 
Associations, says mainland authorities are bypassing the Hong Kong 
legal systems in Mr. Chung's case undermining the one country-two 
systems formula under which the territory was reunited with China. 
We are worried about it. It would set a precedent for the mainland 
trying Hong Kong people for acts down in Hong Kong which may be considered 
by the mainland under a very good system as a crime. I mean what protection 
do we have. Other legal experts and some lawmakers have criticized 
the Hong Kong government for allowing a Hong Kong resident to be prosecuted 
in mainland China where the death penalty is widely used. But Hong 
Kong's Chief Justice Elsi Long says in Mr. Chung's case prosecutors 
lack sufficient evidence to file charges here. Acting Solicitor General 
Stephen Wong adds there is currently no clear cut method to handle 
people accused of cross border crimes. Crimes committed in Hong Kong, 
of course, the courts in Hong Kong have the jurisdiction to try cases 
here in Hong Kong. But it doesn't mean we have exclusive, or the courts 
in Hong Kong have exclusive jurisdiction over crimes committed elsewhere. 
And also, we are very much concerned moving fugitives escaping from 
justice. So, we may be able to strike a balance. And you would agree 
that we should be very careful in considering the terms of agreements 
whereby the fugitives could be transport from one jurisdiction to 
another. And we have to cast the terms in stone, because it affects 
the liberty of individuals. Legal analyst say striking the right balance 
in future cases involving cross border crimes will be difficult because 
Hong Kong and the mainland had two distinct legal systems. Mr. Chung's 
trial lasted nearly three weeks and was closed to the public. A verdict 
is expected soon. If convicted, Mr. Chung faces the death penalty. 
His lawyers would likely appeal such a verdict and push to have him 
tried in Hong Kong where the maximum in penalty is life in prison. 
Honh Kong Justice and Security Department officials say they're working 
to establish a formal extradition arraignment under which Hong Kong 
criminals would be returned for crimes solely committed in the territory. 
Chris Simkins, VOA News, Hong Kong. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>