<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981109.1600.2767 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is VOA News Now coming to you from Washington. American researchers 
report that a killer fungus is attacking the frogs of Central America. 
Scientists are trying to determine where the fungus came from and 
where it might go next. Brian Cislak has our story. The frog kill 
in Panama and Costa Rica is occurring against the backdrop of amphibian 
deaths throughout the world, from North America to Europe to Australia. 
Scientists have reported frogs with strange deformities, attributable 
many believe to such things as environmental mutigens for undiscovered 
viruses. Though scientists are fairly certain that no one agent is 
the soul culprit in frog deaths, the fungus is the first to be identified 
as a major player. Karen Lipps of Southern Illinois University explains. 
These extinctions of these populations of frogs have occurred throughout 
Costa Rica basically all in the mountains, and now we're halfway to 
Panama, almost. So it seems like it's definitely a regional, it's 
not a larger scale phenomenon. Karen Lipps, the herbatologist who 
discovered the Central American frog extinction, says the kitred fungus 
involved decomposes dead matter and usually does not parastize living 
frogs. So why is it doing so and where did it come from? Pathologist 
David Green of the U.S. National Institutes of Health who identified 
the fungus is going to unusual place for the answers. Many of our 
museums around the world will save whole salamanders and frogs and 
toads in alcohol. And these are perfectly good specimens for examining 
under the microscope for the presence of this fungus. I'm doing that 
right now with a group of toads from California and what it boils 
down to is we have found infections of toads in the United States 
going back to the mid-1970s. Pathologist Green says no one knows where 
the organism originated, but it is suspected that there may be some 
frog species in the United States that are resistance to the fungus. 
And that raises the possibility that the infection has been present 
in the United States for centuries or millennia, and just recently 
has been spread to more tropical areas. It is also possible, says 
David Green, that cold northern temperatures may have kept the fungus 
under control in the United States, and that once let loose in a tropical 
climate, it just took off. And if it keeps on going, we may be headed 
for major species extinctions. We expect this infection to continue 
spreading southward and eastward towards the Panama Canal, and in 
a few years, it's going to hit the mountains where this rare and endangered, 
very beautiful yellow frog lives. We can expect this to be wiped out 
and possibly even go extent due to this infection. Mr. Green believes 
that the only way to protect that rare yellow frog species is captive 
breeding followed by re-release into the wild once the fungus plague 
has passed. The question still remains how the fungus traveled to 
Panama. And from that, David Green spins a cautionary tale. I don't 
want to blame tourists or scientists, but in this modern age when 
a person can be hiking in the mountains in Yosemite National Park, 
get on a plane that evening, the next day be in Costa Rica or Panama, 
there is a great possibility that just on the soles of their feet, 
the soil that's stuck between the cleats someone could have carried 
this organism from the United States to Central America. Mr. Green 
adds that all field researchers should properly clean and disinfect 
shovels, boots, and other equipment before moving from one site to 
another lest they inadvertently trigger an ecological disaster. I'm 
Brian Cislak. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>