<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981109.1600.0906 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Pessimism has replaced optimism about the future of Russia. The transition 
from communism has not led to peace and prosperity. In fact, an American 
scholar claims that as Russia has begun to embrace capitalism, its 
business community has become criminalized. VOA's Ed Warner reports. 
If you are a well-meaning businessman, you may walk into an office 
in Moscow and be impressed with its comfortable western appearance. 
A comely secretary politely serves tea and then a smartly dressed 
executive enters and offers a friendly hand. All goes well until the 
visitor balks at some proposal. Then perhaps just as politely, he 
is threatened with death. Doing business in Russia today as simple 
and deadly as that, according to David Satter, a senior fellow at 
Washington's Hudson Institute and a former Moscow reporter for the 
"Financial Times." In a discussion at the Wilson Center, Mr. Satter, 
said the Russian economy has been criminalized. The Russian economy 
is not organized toward productivity. It's organized towards theft. 
Businessmen go into business not in order to create business, not 
in order to create enterprises, but to destroy those enterprises, 
to live off them as long as they can, and to send the money out of 
the country until the day comes when they will follow that money. 
Mr. Satter said an estimated $350 billion has been illegally taken 
out of Russia, enough money to solve all the nation's problems if 
it had been invested in Russia. He blames communism for destroying 
the moral base of Russian society. Without morality and the rule of 
law, he said, no free economy is going to work, and Russia's has not. 
A group of greedy individuals oblivious to the suffering of the mass 
of people manage to seize the nation's assets and milk them dry. Thanks 
to corrupt ties to government officials, the so-called oligarchs, 
won rigged auctions for banks and industries. If any legitimate bidder 
showed up, he was often discouraged at gun point by toughs recruited 
from the dregs of society. By the time privatization really got underway, 
the country was already divided into a class of people who had no 
hope of participating in it. And a group of people who, as a result 
of their ability to amass unearned wealth, were well poised to appropriate 
the resources and the assets that were created by the laborer of the 
entire population. Mr. Satter described a variety of other swindles 
all carried out under the not-so-watchful eyes of so-called reformers 
in the Yeltsin government. These are not genuine reformers, he insisted, 
but careerists who had been thwarted under communism but had no real 
quarrel with it. They were not dissidents. That is too harsh a judgment, 
said Blair Rubel, director of the Kennen Institute. After all, Moscow 
reformers took the advice of Americans who scoffed at the notion of 
morality being necessary for reviving the economy. I hear from very 
senior distinguished tenure faculty members of the best economics 
departments in the country and the world that basically, this argument 
is wrong, that it's backwards, that what you have to do is to create 
a class of property owners through privatization. And those property 
owners will then create the moral and legal structures to defend their 
own property, and they will be forced to do so by the rigor of the 
international marketplace. Mr. Satter said there is a moral vacuum 
in Russia waiting to be filled. A leader of clear integrity would 
appeal to the strong sense of justice among Russians who are repelled 
by the oligarchs. But given conditions in Russia, such a leader could 
also turn out to be a ruthless strong man. It has happened before. 
Ed Warner, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>