<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981109.0500.0352 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Hello again from Washington. I'm Kurt Hanshen along with Charlene 
Porter on VOA News Now. The prime minister of Israeli has renewed 
his call for the Palestinian authority to act more aggressively to 
restrain anti-Israeli militants. Benejamin Netanyahu says Israeli 
will not give up more land unless it gets better security in return. 
That's long been the trade-off Israeli has demanded in exchange for 
returning jurisdiction of more land to the Palestinian authority. 
But, The Wye River Accord established time goals for Israel to actually 
begin a troop withdrawal and give up t hat land. In fact, the first 
was set for next week. But, VOA's Al Peltsel joins us from our Jerusalem 
bureau to say a pullback certainly does not look likely now. Al, what 
was that goal? What is the possibility that a troop withdrawal could 
actually occur still? Well, the goal was for Israeli to make the first 
part of a three stage withdrawal sometime during the coming seven 
days, between today and next Monday. And it doesn't appear that that's 
going to happen. In fact, even last week Prime Minister Netanyahu 
said and to the surprise of a lot of people the Palestinian leader 
Yassir Arafat agreed that that might be delayed by a few days. As 
of this moment, there's no guarantee that it will even happen within 
a few days of next Monday. Al, what's going on? Is this merely slippage 
or are we abandoning some or all of the goals of the Wye River Agreement? 
Well, I think abandon may be a bit too strong, may be slippage is 
a bit too weak. It's somewhere in between. What's happening is that 
Prime Minister has said, in fact he said again this morning, that 
he's not going to go for ratification even of this agreement, much 
less any serious Israeli implementation like a troop withdrawal until 
he's satisfied on two points. One is a Palestinian crackdown on terrorism 
which the Palestinians say they're doing and the Israeli say is not 
tough enough. And that maybe a tough dispute to solve and it's been 
a dispute actually that we've been in one form or another for well 
over a year now. And the other thing Mr. Netanyahu wants is a Palestinian 
commitment to take certain internal political steps to change their 
charter which are referred to in a general way in the agreement, but 
the specific procedure is not referred to and Mr. Netanyahu's demanding 
a meeting a particular body called the Palestine National Council 
and two-thirds vote on a specific resolution and the Palestinian say 
they don't have to do that and they don't really want to do it. And 
actually if you're wondering how these two issues are going to be 
resolved, I think it's going to be with some US involvement. Well, 
there you go. The stalemate over whether the authority is acting exert 
enough security, whether Israeli is satisfied with that. This was 
debated at Wye Rive and the one solution was that the US intelligence 
agency, the CIA, were supposed to come in and kind of act as mediator 
on this issue. Are they in on this? Well, if they're in on it in a 
active way, that hasn't been made public. But you're right. One of 
the major accomplishments of the Wye River Agreement was suppose to 
be an end to this ongoing debate where the Palestinians say they're 
doing all they can and the Israelis say they're not doing enough about 
terrorism. Originally, it was thought that the United States, probably 
the CIA, would be actually the arbitor of this dispute. But, the way 
it came out in the agreement was not an arbitor, not with any enforcement 
role, but certainly a member of various monitoring committees and 
in a position to make public statements evaluating whether in fact 
enough is being done or not. So far, the United States has not made 
any strong public statements in that regard. There was one statement 
where the United States said that the Palestinian security plan was 
adequate. But since then, we haven't had any further statements from 
the United States as to which position, the Israeli or the Palestinian, 
they think is the more valid one. That may come in the coming week 
or so. So, we're just kind of moving slowly and pretty much holding 
the status quo, is that where we seem to be? That's right. And you 
know, the timetable is very complex and fairly specific, but it does 
have some flexibility in it. For example, there's a whole list of 
things that were suppose to happen last week, some did; some didn't. 
There's a whole list of things that suppose to happen this week; some 
may, some may not. And it doesn't have to happen by today. It can 
happen any time during the week. If it doesn't happen next Monday, 
if it happens a few days later, that probably won't be a big deal. 
It's a 12-week timetable. If in the end, it takes 14 or 16 weeks, 
historically speaking that may not be a big deal, but we do have to 
be careful when we have this slippage that it allows more time for 
terrorist attacks and political developments to intervene to the point 
where it may not be completed and that would be very significant. 
It's too early to say it now, but we do need to keep an eye on these 
benchmarks in the timetable; like today, and sort of take stock of 
where we are. And where we are is part way there and we need to keep 
an eye out. OK. Al Peltsel, we count on you to do that for us. VOA's 
Al Peltsel speaks to us from Jerusalem. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>