<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981109.0500.0730 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last Tuesday's Congressional elections here in the US mark the end 
of the 1998 political season, but for some people it's also the beginning 
of the next race for the White House. Already two potential candidates 
have emerge as front-runners for the presidency in 2000; the current 
Vice President Al Gore and the Governor of Texas, Republican George 
W. Bush. VOA's Jim Malone has more. Vice President Gore spent a lot 
of time campaigning and raising money on behalf of democratic candidates 
around the country. Those political favors could come in handy as 
he begins to organize his expected bid for the presidency in 2000. 
Following the Democrats surprisingly strong showing on November, Mr. 
Gore quickly trumpeted his parties success and challenged Republican 
Congressional leaders to focus on the issue Democrats had raised during 
the campaign; improving education and healthcare, and protecting the 
Social Security pension system. Get on with that agenda. Focus on 
the challenges that are confronting the American people in the United 
States of America. And I hope and expect that the Congress will hear 
that message. Several political analyst say Mr. Gore's presidential 
bid will be helped by the strong Democratic show in this year's mid-term 
elections. Republicans were clearly disappointed by the election results. 
Losing five seats in the House, and being held to gain in the Senate. 
But some Republican analyst say if there is a silver lining in this 
year's return, it may be in Texas where Governor George W. Bush, the 
telegenic son of the former president, won a landslide reelection 
victory based on the philosophy on what he calls "a compassionate 
conservative". I show people who pay attention to politics that one 
can adhere to the conservative philosophy and implement policies that 
compassionate for our fellow Texans. Believe I showed people that 
you can adhere to a conservative philosophy and win a sizable portion 
of Hispanic vote and close the gender gap. Governor Bush closed that 
gender gap by appealing to moderate woman voters who in recent years 
have preferred President Clinton and the Democrats. And some analyst 
say Mr. Bush may have hinted at a theme in Texas which could succeed 
nationally if he decides to run for president. Georgie Ann Guyer is 
a columnist for the Universal Press Syndicate, who's spent a lot of 
time in Texas recently covering the Bush phenomenon. He's got the 
new formula for conservatism. It's compassionate. It's caring. But, 
it's tough minded. He talks about authority. He talks about responsibility. 
He talks endlessly about accountability. And I think we've got something 
not just a good candidate there, but somebody who has a real new program, 
exactly the program that the Republicans in Congress did not have. 
But, Governor Bush will have plenty of competition for the Republican 
nomination even with help from brother Jeb, the newly elected governor 
in Florida, and from his father, Former President George Bush. Former 
Bush Vice President Dan Quayle, wealthy Magazine Publisher Steve Forbes, 
and Former Education Secretary Lamar Alexander, are just a few of 
several possible contenders who would quickly move to deflate Governor 
Bush's status as the perceived Republican front-runner. Governor Bush 
may have two important advantages over his rivals for the Republican 
presidential nomination; his name recognition among voters, and a 
proven ability to raise lots of money. The compressed presidential 
primary schedule in 2000, in which most of the party's convention 
delegates will be selected by late March, should reward candidates 
who go into the nominating process well-known and well-finances. Jim 
Malone, VOA News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>