<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981109.0500.2959 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Here in the United States students at most American business schools 
must study what's called Strategic Management, learning the way companies 
are organized. As VOA Correspondent reports Breck Artere reports from 
New York, one management theory is particularly popular now. In the 
1970s, business experts championed a management theory they called 
Strategic Planning. Central management, they argued should set both 
the goals and methods it uses to achieve the company's goals. Then, 
the design school of management became popular. It calls for structuring 
a business to quickly respond to changing economic conditions. In 
recent years however, a management strategy called Learning Scholl 
has become the dominant theory taught at North American business schools. 
Henry Mitzberg, professor of management at McGill University in Montreal, 
Canada, says the strategy allows for maximum flexibility. Today, a 
very prominent school is what we call the learning school strategy 
learning evolving strategy slowly instead of coming out with it like 
Moses coming down the mountain you know with the tablets. That was 
the early view. I think the view today it's more like clay. You kind 
of mold it and shift and so on over time to get it in the right form. 
Mr. Mitzberg, who has written a book called "Strategy Safari", says 
a crucial part of the learnings school strategy is the empowerment 
of overage workers. Those who are actually performing the work, says 
the business expert, often have a much more realistic perspective 
than senior management. The early views were that formulation happened 
and other people implemented. The more current views on the part of 
some people at least is that this is an interactive process that you 
go around and around constantly adjusting and testing and experimenting 
and eventually you get it right which means that the formulators have 
to implement and the implementers have to formulate. Professor Mitzberg 
says companies that adopt this management style must exchange a great 
deal of information at all levels of the organization. That helps 
prevent top management from setting unrealistic goals and prevents 
workers from wandering away from a companies basic strategy. Mr. Mitzberg 
says international competition is one of the main reasons that the 
learning school has taken hold as the most popular form of corporate 
strategy. It's driven a lot more learning use of strategy because 
if things are so complicated you can't just do formalized strategic 
planning and announce a strategy. As soon as you announce a strategy, 
it could be out of date. So, you're constantly adjusting and adapting. 
Mr. Mitzberg says the learning strategy, although formally developed 
in the United States, has been heavily influenced by Asian business 
philosophy; especially case histories involving Japanese corporations. 
He says teaching of the learning strategy is now spreading to business 
schools around the world. Breck Artere, VOA News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>