<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981109.0500.2147 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Former Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim who's trial enters 
its second week has repeated charges that he is the victim of a political 
conspiracy. In an interview with TIme Magazine, Mr. Anwar it quoting 
as saying Prime Minister Matahir Mohammed is desperately trying to 
cling to power. He says the charges against him are a calculated attempt 
to prevent him from become the country's next prime minister. VOA's 
Gary Thomas reports the first of week of testimony was a severe blow 
against he government's case. The government's case took several sharp 
blows from the lead off prosecuting witness, the head of police intelligence. 
The testimony of outgoing Special Branch Chief Mohammed Sirhdeone 
has severely undercut the government's credibility, shaken faith in 
the police, and highlighted the dilemma Mr. Anwar presents to the 
government of Prime Minister of Mahatir Mohammed. Mr. Anwar, who is 
also finance minister, stands charge with 10 counts of sexual misconduct 
and corruption. He categorically denies the charges saying they're 
politically motivated. Since his dismissal my Mr. Mahatir in September 
he has become a rallying point for an embryonic Malaysian political 
reform movement. Mr. Mohammed said he'd testified he might lie or 
break the law if told to do so by his superiors. He said special branch 
officers arrested and coerced potential witnesses, allegedly at Mr. 
Anwar's orders. A report was also produced written by Mr. Mohammed 
Sien to Mr. Mahatir last year saying there was no truth to the allegations 
of sexual misconduct against Mr. Anwar and hinted of a high level 
conspiracy to discredit him. The testimony raises questions about 
who may have been conspiring against Mr. Anwar. Another intriguing 
point is what Mr. Mahatir knew and when did he know it, especially 
when, Mr. Mohammed said he testified, the initial investigations into 
Mr. Anwar's sex life began in1992, one year before he became deputy 
prime minister. The dilemma facing the government presents Mr. Mahatir 
with two scenarios both of them equally unpalatable to the prime minister. 
The ongoing court case against Mr. Anwar can be expected to build 
smoldering resentment among still disorganized anti-government forces 
especially if there are more shattering revelations like those of 
the first week. But, should Mr. Anwar by some stroke of fate be acquitted, 
there is still the unpleasant prospect to the government of him walking 
out a free man into the arms of thousands of supporters shouting "Refumase 
", "reform". This is only the first trial and the cases are expected 
to drag on into next year. But, should Mr. Anwar get off, the government 
would probably rearrest him under the Internal Security Act which 
allows detention without trial as a security threat which would bring 
everything back to square one. Gary Thomas, VOA News, Kuala Lumpur. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>