<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981117.1830.0042 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. Now we know what Monica Lewinsky sounds like. This will 
not qualify as a vital day in history, even in the recent troubled 
history of the Clinton presidency. Still, after all these months, 
the public may now put another piece of the monica Lewinsky jigsaw 
puzzle into place. The house Judiciary committee released dozens of 
tapes of Ms. Lewinsky's recorded conversations with Linda Tripp, recorded 
by Ms. Tripp. We have seen the transcripts of all the conversations 
before. Here today was 22 hours of conversation that Ms. Lewinsky 
certainly never believed the whole country would be listening to. 
From Washington, ABC's Jackie Judd. The many voices of Monica Lewinsky 
talking to a woman she believed was her friend. At times she sounds 
naive. I never expected to feel this way about him. Other times cunning. 
My entire life -- Sometimes like a lovesick girl dazzled by the president 
of the United States. The first time I ever looked into his eyes close 
up and was with him alone i saw somebody totally different than I 
had expected to see. And that's the person I fell in love with. Two 
weeks after that conversation, Lewinsky is desperate. Mr. Clinton 
is not returning her calls and has not come brought her back to work 
at the White House. Linda, I can't take it anymore. I know. I know. 
I just can't. I just can't. oh, my god. It's just too -- it's too 
much for one person. It is too much for one person yes, it is. Tripp's 
sympathy is not all it seems. Not only is she secretly recording the 
conversations, on one occasion, tripp hangs up with Lewinsky and a 
short while later calls lucianne goldberg. The republican who told 
Tripp to tape in the first place, to give her a Fill. Things are really 
hitting the fan over here with her. You know what she said on the 
tape to me last night? What. yep. Good for you. Tripp also convinces 
Lewinsky that she must keep the dress, stained during a sexual encounter 
with the president. The Navy blue dress. Now all I would say to you 
is, the future is a blank slate. I don't know what will happen. I 
would rather you had that in your possession if you need it years 
from now. Weeks later, Lewinsky try ies to convince that they can 
both lie under both about the affair with the president and get away 
with it. They could bring somebody up and all I'd have to say is, 
look it didn't happen. This person is politically motivated. But assume, 
look, there is no one, there is no -- there is no one, nobody saw 
anything. So nobody could know. Last January, not knowing that Tripp 
began cooperating with prosecutors Lewinsky confides in her friend 
that she has signed an affidavit denying she had a sexual relationship 
with the president. I will not get into trouble because you know what? 
The story I've signed under oath, is what someone else is saying under 
oath. who? He will. Oh, the big guy? So there's two people. And it 
said nothing happened. The next day, Lewinsky and Tripp have their 
final conversation at this mall, then FBI agents move in. Lewinsky's 
final words to Tripp are, "thanks a lot." Jackie Judd, ABC News, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>