<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981117.1830.0825 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We're going to take "A closer look" tonight at the very intense meteor 
storm that has been raging above our heads all day. Depending on the 
weather, it was possible to get a glimpse of what happens when the 
earth passes through the tail of the meteor tempel-tuttle. In parts 
of Asia, especially outside the cities, the view was quite good. In 
the U.S., the storm was somewhat more visible in the west. In Norway, 
many people who saw this called the emergency services thinking these 
were distress signals from boats in trouble. These are actually thousands 
and thousands of cosmic dust particles crashing into the earth's atmosphere. 
It is a very rare chance for scientists to study the makeup of comets 
and meteors. Maybe, this is how life came to this planet in the first 
place. Today, the maybe was -- maybe this storm will mess up the way 
we live nowadays. Here is ABC's Ned Potter. It was the fall of 1966, 
and amid the usual earthly concerns, few people much cared that we 
passed through a stream of dust left by the Comet tempel-tuttle. It's 
like a garden hose of material following the parent Comet and the 
earth just brushes by it. The only effect on most Earthlings was a 
show, a meteor shower, just like the ones that happen several times 
a year. But now it's 1998, and as tempel-tuttle makes another pass 
it finds the earth a very different place. Today there are 600 satellites 
in orbit, up from a few dozen back then, passing through the Comet's 
debris. People depend on those satellites for all sorts of routinely 
crucial things. They may be going into a gas station to swipe their 
credit cards, they may be going to an ATM machine. All of these systems, 
many of these systems, depend on satellite communications. We use 
satellites to spy on Iraq, to send TV and telephone signals, to transmit 
financial data. Most astronomers said the Comet dust is so spread 
out, the odds were against any satellite being hit. But it's also 
speeding by at 43 miles a second. And a spec of dust at those speeds 
creates an electric charge around itself. So just one hitting a satellite 
would be like a lightning bolt. To not take it seriously and to have 
something happen to your satellite would not be a smart move. It's 
a tough universe out there. This meteor storm ends just as the sun 
is beginning a storm of its own. Every decade or so it has a surge 
in solar flares, giant radiation storms that reach the earth and beyond. 
Is it meaningless to us on earth? Not at all. In 1989, a flair zapped 
a switching station and cut power to most of eastern Canada. Isn't 
this beautiful? It can only happen in Quebec. Actually, it can now 
happen anywhere. In this age of delicate electronics, we'vevule today, 
to reduce the chances they'd get hit, hundreds of satellites flew 
with their fragile solar panels turned edge-on to the stream of Comet 
dust. The only defense they have against the random violence of the 
universe. Ned Potter, ABC News, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>