<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981117.0873 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Struggling to find a peace formula backed by all Kosovo factions, 
a special American envoy discussed a plan Tuesday with ethnic Albanian 
guerrillas whose support is crucial for the future of any deal on 
the province. Christopher Hill's second meeting with the rebels this 
month came as a top ethnic Albanian politician involved in U.S.-mediated 
talks with the Serbian government for the first time suggested that 
his side could settle for less than independence for Kosovo. Fehmi 
Agani, head of the Albanian negotiating team, told The Associated 
Press his team had proposed a solution that envisaged the Albanian-majority 
Serbian province remaining part of Yugoslavia with a status equal 
to that of the republics of Serbia and Montenegro. ``A period of three 
to five years would be enough to see whether such a union could function,'' 
said Agani, a top aide to the Albanian leader Ibrahim Rugova. ``If 
it could, we would want to stay in it. If not, I don't see why we 
would stay.'' Agani called for a referendum to decide on the final 
status of Kosovo at the end of the three-to-five-year period. He said 
the offer was ``a compromise solution'' but acknowledged it had already 
been rejected by the Serbian government, an illustration of how hard 
it is to bring the two sides together on the future of Kosovo. Serbia 
insists Kosovo must remain within its borders while most of the majority 
ethnic Albanians want secession. The Albanians themselves are divided 
over how tough their policies should be. Authorities have previously 
ruled out Yugoslav republic status for Kosovo, which is basically 
what Agani appeared to be suggesting. Hill, who has drafted a peace 
plan for Kosovo, met the representatives of the Kosovo Liberation 
Army for two hours in ethnic Albanian village of Dragobilje, about 
50 kilometers (30 miles) southwest of Pristina. The talks were held 
in a house in the village, with KLA fighters providing security. Hill 
made no comment, but Jakup Krasniqi, a KLA official who attended the 
talks, said the guerrillas voiced their complaints about the plan 
and would send their final response in a written form within 10 days. 
The rebels' backing of any agreement for Kosovo is crucial. But the 
KLA, which fought Serb forces for months, has in the past ruled out 
any deal that falls short of independence. They have also criticized 
Rugova for his readiness to compromise. Adem Demaci, a guerrilla spokesman, 
said the KLA would have the final say on any deal. ``Rugova can sign 
anything, but there could be no deal without KLA consent,'' Demaci 
told reporters in Pristina. Meanwhile Serbian president Milan Milutinovic 
pressed ahead with a plan to hold direct talks with ethnic Albanian 
politicians, despite their refusal to appear at the meeting. Serbian 
government sources, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Milutinovic 
will travel to Kosovo's capital, Pristina, on Wednesday. The Serb 
authorities are apparently hoping the gesture will demonstrate sincerity 
on their part and ethnic Albanian obstructionism. Agani called Milutinovic's 
invitation for talks ``an act of propaganda.'' He said basic political 
conditions for direct negotiations have not yet been met, adding such 
a meeting could only come after a basic formula had been agreed. The 
ethnic Albanians refuse to talk without U.S. and European mediation, 
saying only foreign countries could guarantee that an eventual agreement 
would be implemented by the Serbian government. They have turned down 
16 Serb invitations in the past six months. The Serbian government 
says the troubles in Kosovo, where hundreds of people have died and 
tens of thousands were left homeless in the authorities' crackdown 
against secessionists, are Serbia's internal matter and should not 
involve foreign mediators. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>