<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981117.1215 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
More than 100 people, mostly in their mid-teens, were arrested Tuesday 
in clashes with police during events marking the 25th anniversary 
of a student uprising against military rulers. Chanting ``Americans 
are murderers'' and ``down with imperialism,'' about 10,000 people 
took part in a march from the Athens Polytechnic University, site 
of the revolt, to the United States embassy, where they burned an 
American flag before dispersing peacefully. A makeshift bomb made 
of three camping gas canisters later exploded in a district of the 
capital outside an office belonging to the Greek Communist Party, 
causing minor damages but no injuries. A previously unknown anarchist 
group claimed responsibility for the blast, blaming Communist Party 
members with helping police make the arrests during the march. The 
demonstrators were surrounded by more than 5,000 police officers who 
were tasked with preventing riots and acts of vandalism from self-proclaimed 
anarchist groups seeking confrontations with police. Every year, the 
commemoration of the 1973 Athens Polytechnic revolt is marred by such 
incidents. Another 5,000 people staged a peaceful march on the United 
States consulate in the northern port city of Salonica, while about 
4,000 Greek Cypriots staged a rally to the American embassy on the 
island of Cyprus. At least 23 people died and hundreds were wounded 
in the revolt when the army stormed the campus on Nov. 17, 1973. The 
actual death toll has never been firmly established, but it is thought 
to be considerably higher. The revolt is credited with helping bring 
the downfall of 1967-74 military rule. The junta is also blamed for 
instigating a 1974 coup on Cyprus, which led to Turkey invading and 
occupying the northern third of the island. Students and the Communist-led 
construction workers union guarded the grounds of the Polytechnic 
in central Athens. Authorities had been worried about 200 arson attacks 
this year that have been carried out by shadowy organizations widely 
believed to be linked to the Polytechnic demonstrators. Two cars were 
firebombed early Tuesday in separate attacks. No one was hurt. The 
atmosphere has been further charged by a string of police scandals 
and recent government education reforms that have led to school occupations 
and teachers' demonstrations. On Monday, Premier Costas Simitis was 
pelted with eggs and oranges during a visit to the Polytechnic to 
lay a wreath at the memorial. Greece's constitution bans police form 
entering the grounds of Athens Polytechnic or other universities except 
with the permission of the academic senate. The commemorations for 
the revolt ends each year with a march to the U.S. embassy to protest 
Washington's widely perceived support of the dictatorship. In January, 
U.S. Ambassador Nicholas Burns issued a public apology for Washington's 
role during the junta. ``I wish my own country had stood more firmly 
on the side of democracy and freedom during those years,'' said Burns. 
Greece's deadliest terrorist group, November 17, takes its name from 
the day the student uprising was crushed. Four Americans and one U.S. 
embassy employee have been among the 22 people killed by the group. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>