<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981117.0879 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The world's newest automaker, DaimlerChrysler AG, officially became 
a member of the global business community Tuesday when its shares 
began trading in Europe and the United States. A balcony overlooking 
the main trading floor of the New York Stock Exchange was decorated 
for the day with the red grille of a Jeep Cherokee and a silver grille 
of a Mercedes-Benz E-class. Horns honked and the headlights flashed 
just before co-chairmen Robert J. Eaton of the former Chrysler Corp. 
and Juergen Schrempp of the former Daimler-Benz AG rang the bell to 
open the day's trading on the NYSE. DaimlerChrysler shares, trading 
under the symbol DCX, were down dlrs 1.50 at dlrs 82.81 1/4 in late 
morning trading. On the Frankfurt, Germany, exchange, DaimlerChrysler 
shares edged up on their first official day of trading. Celebrations 
were planned at DaimlerChrysler plants and offices worldwide. But 
when the ``Day One'' hoopla is over, ``Job One'' will remain: the 
daunting task of truly melding the corporate cultures of two distinctly 
different German and American corporations into one international 
transportation powerhouse. ``From the very beginning, that has been 
their major challenge,'' said David Cole, director of the University 
of Michigan's Office for the Study of Automotive Transportation. ``How 
do you bring them together and get them to function on the same team? 
``I think it's doable, but it's going to be very challenging.'' DaimlerChrysler 
executives insist a new culture will emerge in the months ahead, one 
that they hope will blend the entrepreneurial spirit and creativity 
of Chrysler. with the topflight engineering and focus on quality that 
built Daimler. But some in the industry wonder how open Daimler's 
methodical, top-down culture will be to the looser team approach that 
is credited with turning Chrysler into the most profitable U.S. automaker 
just a few years after it flirted with bankruptcy. Robert Lutz, who 
retired as Chrysler's vice chairman in June after playing a key role 
in the company's turnaround, said the supposed culture clash has been 
overstated. ``Anytime you blend two large organizations, even if they're 
the same nationality, you will have some problems,'' he said Monday. 
The merger's architects, Eaton and Schrempp, have portrayed the creation 
of the new German company as a marriage of equals. While DaimlerChrysler 
will be incorporated in Germany, it will have dual headquarters in 
Stuttgart, Germany, and Auburn Hills, Michigan. Its leadership will 
be divided almost equally between Germans and Americans. Still, turf 
battles are inevitable in any such marriage. How many former Chrysler 
executives, rich with Chrysler stock options that can now be cashed 
in because of the merger, will opt to retire early or go elsewhere 
if they feel underutilized or slighted? DaimlerChrysler executives 
acknowledge the merger won't be easy. Their own study of transnational 
mergers suggests that 70 percent failed to achieve the kind of success 
that was anticipated. And there is no precedent for a German-American 
merger on this scale. ``We're breaking new ground here,'' said Thomas 
T. Stallkamp, president of DaimlerChrysler Corp., the U.S. arm. ``There 
is no model for this. That's both good and somewhat frustrating.'' 
DaimlerChrysler has set a goal of cutting dlrs 1.5 billion in costs 
in the new company's first year.That savings is expected to come in 
large part from combining procurement, logistics and overhead. There's 
little overlap of products and markets, and management has decided 
not to blend product lines for fear of diluting the brands (you won't 
find Mercedes-Benz cars in Plymouth showrooms, for example). That 
means there is less opportunity for savings than there might be with 
two companies that have more redundant vehicles and operations. But 
the stock transaction, valued at dlrs 32.8 billion based on the companies' 
share prices when the deal closed, has been embraced by industry analysts 
precisely because there's so little overlap. Gary Lapidus of Sanford 
C. Bernstein and Co. says the companies complement each other. ``The 
halo of the Mercedes brand and Daimler's engineering capability will 
help Chrysler improve its tarnished reputation on quality,'' he wrote 
in a recent report to investors. ``Chrysler's lean management and 
unique business processes can help Mercedes-Benz re-engineer its way 
to a more competitive cost structure.'' Most analysts expect DaimlerChrysler 
to trigger a wave of more mergers as the industry continues to consolidate. 
Michael Robinet of CSM Forecasting Inc., an industry consulting firm, 
said Peugeot and Renault of France ``are ripe for some sort of joint 
venture or merger,'' and Japan's financially weak Nissan and Mitsubishi 
may be forced to find a stronger partner. If their merger's successful, 
DaimlerChrysler may try to gain a bigger presence in Asia, Robinet 
said. ``This merger begs another merger. Two to three years down the 
road it will set the stage for DaimlerChrysler to merge with a Japanese 
partner.'' Lapidus predicts the current 25 major automakers eventually 
will consolidate down to eight to 12 global companies. Without their 
merger, neither Daimler-Benz nor Chrysler would have survived as independent 
automakers, he says. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>