<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981117.0221 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Trying to resolve the latest crisis with Israel, Palestinian leader 
Yasser Arafat on Tuesday disavowed violence and backed off plans to 
declare independence in May. Arafat's clarifications came a day after 
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu suspended Israel's troop 
withdrawal. The Israeli leader said he would not hand over 2 percent 
of the West Bank by the end of the week, as scheduled, until Arafat 
retracted threats to establish a Palestinian state in May and perhaps 
use force. The Israeli Cabinet was to decide Wednesday whether the 
Palestinians have lived up to their obligations and whether to give 
the go ahead for the upcoming pullback. The withdrawal, the first 
of three, was to have been carried out on Monday, but Israel has fallen 
behind schedule because of a series of disputes and delays. In all, 
Israel is to hand over 13 percent of the West Bank by the end of January, 
in exchange for a Palestinian campaign against Islamic militants. 
The U.S. Mideast envoy, Dennis Ross, said he was confident the row 
would be settled soon. ``Both sides have obligations and both sides, 
I think, will fulfill their obligations,'' Ross told The Associated 
Press after talks with Israeli Trade Minister Natan Sharansky. Ross 
said Arafat assured him Monday night that he would ``correct what 
had been had been said and that he would make it very clear that his 
commitment is to peace.'' On Tuesday, Arafat opened a news conference 
with German President Roman Herzog in the West Bank town of Jericho 
by reading a statement concerning the dispute with the Israelis. ``I 
stress ... that we are protective of the peace process in the Middle 
East and all the peace agreements we signed with the Israelis,'' Arafat 
said. ``Peace is a Palestinian strategic choice and any differences 
in the final status negotiations, we stress that we want them to be 
solved by peaceful means through negotiations, and not in any other 
way,'' Arafat said. Arafat had issued a similar clarification Monday 
night. However, on Tuesday he went a step further by backing off plans 
to unilaterally declare statehood in May, at the end of the five-year 
autonomy period. Israel and the Palestinians are to have completed 
negotiations on a permanent peace agreement by May, but with many 
difficult issues on the agenda, including final borders and the future 
of Jerusalem, it appears unlikley the deadline can be met. Arafat 
also stressed in his statement that such an accord would be reached 
by peaceful means. In a speech Sunday to loyalists from his Fatah 
movement, he had alluded to the use of force, saying that ``our rifle 
is ready'' to take Jerusalem. Israel's parliament, meanwhile, was 
expected to give overwhelming approval to the peace accord Tuesday 
evening, at the end of a two-day debate. Netanyahu had kicked off 
the stormy discussion Monday with the announcement that he was holding 
up the withdrawal. Despite the row, Israeli and Palestinian negotiators 
met Monday night, as scheduled, to try and conclude an agreement on 
setting up a land route for Palestinians between the West Bank and 
Gaza. The head of the Palestinian delegation, Abdel Razek Yehiyeh, 
said he expected all issues to be settled by next week, and said the 
so-called ``safe passage'' could be opened within a month. Another 
committee dealing with the release of Palestinian prisoners was to 
meet Tuesday afternoon. Israel was to free a first group of 250 prisoners, 
out of a total of 750, by the weekend. Hisham Abdel Razek, the senior 
Palestinian on the panel, said Israel was offering to release car 
thieves and workers who had been caught in Israel without a permit, 
rather than prisoners held for security offenses. Abdel Razek said 
the Palestinians complained to the United States that this was a violation 
of the accord. Ross was evasive when asked about the complaint. ``I 
think there was an agreement that there would be 750 prisoners released, 
and that's a commitment that will be fulfilled,'' he said. In the 
first pullback, 2 percent of the West Bank are to be transferred from 
sole Israeli control to joint jurisdiction, and 7.1 percent are to 
go from shared to sole Palestinian control. Israel's government has 
not presented withdrawal maps. The Yediot Ahronot daily published 
its own map and said most of the land changing hands was in the northern 
West Bank, around the Palestinian towns of Jenin and Nablus. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>