<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981117.1190 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The long National Basketball Association lockout could prompt the 
top rookie to flee overseas. Michael Olowokandi, the overall No. 1 
draft pick in the NBA draft last June, says he'll go to Europe to 
play professionally, perhaps in Turkey, if the lockout lasts another 
couple of weeks. ``If there's no resolution, I have to do something. 
If it means going to Europe to take care of myself on financial terms 
and to prove myself, then I don't have a problem doing that for one 
season,'' Olowokandi said. ``Hopefully this lockout is going to end 
soon, but you never know. It could extend into next season.'' The 
lockout moved into its 140th day on Tuesday with no end in sight. 
Commissioner David Stern and union director Billy Hunter have not 
spoken to each other in the 11 days since the last negotiating session, 
and no collective bargaining talks are scheduled. The latest casualty 
of the lockout was the NBA Jam Session, an interactive fan event scheduled 
during All-Star game festivities. The league said vendors and sponsors 
could not set up in time. The game is still scheduled for Feb. 14 
in Philadelphia. Olowokandi's agent, Bill Duffy, said he had preliminary 
talks with Efes Pilsen, a club team in Istanbul, and would advise 
his client to play overseas if he gets a dlrs 5 million offer. ``If 
they cancel the season, or if the season doesn't start until the latter 
part of December, then I'll go,'' Olowokandi said. ``It's not like 
I already have my bags packed, but it's a good possibility.'' Olowokandi, 
a Nigerian citizen, is trying to get a British passport so he can 
be excluded from a European league rule limiting teams to two foreigners. 
Still, he would not need a British passport to play for Efes Pilsen 
because that club does not currently have any non-Europeans on its 
roster. If Olowokandi were to sign overseas, he would be putting at 
risk the dlrs 10 million he stands to earn from the Los Angeles Clippers 
in the first three years of his rookie contract. Also, it would mean 
Olowokandi would have to wait an additional year for free agency or 
to be eligible for a lucrative extension to his NBA contract. Three 
other first-round picks from last June's draft are playing in Europe. 
Dirk Nowitzki, chosen ninth overall by Milwaukee before being traded 
to Dallas, is playing for DJK Wurzburg in Germany. Radoslav Nestrovic, 
picked 17th by Minnesota, is playing out the final season of his contract 
for Kinder Bologna in Italy, and Vladimir Stepania, chosen 27th by 
Seattle, is playing for Olympia Ljubljana of Slovenia. Six second-round 
picks also are playing professionally in Europe: Ruben Patterson of 
Cincinnati (Lakers, 31st overall) is with AEK Athens, DeMarco Johnson 
of UNC-Charlotte (Knicks, 38th) is with Sony Milan in Italy, Andrew 
Betts of Long Beach State (Hornets, 50th) is with Team System Bologna 
in Italy, Derrick Dial of Eastern Michigan (Spurs, 52nd) is with Peristeri 
of the Greek League, Ryan Bowen of Iowa (Nuggets 55th) is with Oyak 
Renault in Turkey and Torraye Braggs of Xavier (Jazz, 57th) is with 
Caja Cantabria of the Spanish League. Four other second-round picks 
_ Corey Brewer (Oklahoma, chosen 51st by Miami), Greg Buckner (Clemson, 
53rd by Dallas), J.R. Henderson (UCLA, 56th by Vancouver) and Maceo 
Baston (Michigan, 58th by Chicago) are playing in the CBA. Vlade Divac, 
who became a free agent after playing for the Charlotte Hornets last 
season, has talked of joining Kinder Bologna until the lockout ends. 
Portland Trail Blazers center Arvydas Sabonis will join the Lithuanian 
national team for the remainer of the lockout. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>