<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981117.0228 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
A leading opposition figure accused Indonesian President B.J. Habibie 
on Tuesday of ruling with an ``iron fist'' like his predecessor and 
onetime mentor, Suharto, following street violence in which at least 
16 people died. ``Habibie's government has started to copy the pattern 
of Suharto's iron fist that oppressed the people,'' said Amien Rais, 
a prominent Muslim leader who is also a likely presidential candidate. 
The International Monetary Fund, which is helping Indonesia to overcome 
its worst economic crisis in 30 years, also warned Tuesday that continuing 
civil unrest and political instability could threaten its chances 
of recovery. If financial markets ``think it's the beginning of a 
prolonged period of instability, then it would affect the exchange 
rate and capital would flow out'' of Indonesia, the fund's top official 
in Asia, Hubert Neiss, was quoted as saying by Dow Jones Newswires. 
Ignoring student calls for his resignation following last week's deadly 
street clashes, Habibie went to the Asia-Pacific summit in Malaysia 
Tuesday on his first trip abroad since unrest dislodged Suharto in 
May. But worried about Indonesia's volatility, Habibie said he would 
commute to the two-day meeting of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation 
forum in Kuala Lumpur. The Malaysian capital is a two-hour flight 
from Jakarta. ``I cannot stay overnight because I have a lot of work 
to do at home,'' State Secretary Akbar Tanjung quoted Habibie as saying. 
Military commander Gen. Wiranto, who is also the target of resignation 
calls, accompanied Habibie to Malaysia, but said he would stay for 
both days of the summit. At least 16 people, including eight students, 
were killed last week in protests and rioting in Jakarta that recalled 
the tumult six months ago that ended Suharto's 32-year autocratic 
rule. Habibie now faces calls to step down despite his pledge to dismantle 
the rigid political system left behind by the 77-year-old Suharto. 
Activists who want swifter democratic change suspect Habibie is maneuvering 
to stay in power. Rais, the leader of the New National Mandate Party 
and former chairman of the second largest Muslim organization in Indonesia, 
accused Habibie of adopting Suharto's hard-line methods, the official 
Antara news agency reported. ``Finally Habibie duplicates Suharto's 
manner to crack down on the student protesters and mass demonstrations,'' 
Rais said to several thousand supporters in Bandar Lampung on Sumatra 
Island, about 250 kilometers (155 miles) west of Jakarta. Rais also 
demanded that Wiranto quit over the student killings. ``Wiranto has 
to take accountability as No. 1 man for security order,'' Rais said. 
Student anger at Habibie intensified after the deadly clashes with 
security forces last week, which touched off mob rioting by thousands 
of youths with no apparent political agenda. Jakarta's streets were 
quiet Tuesday, a Muslim holy day and national holiday. Red and white 
Indonesian flags flew at half-staff outside houses, hotels and offices 
in mourning for the slain students. On Monday, Wiranto stood at Habibie's 
side as the president appeared on national television and accused 
his opponents of orchestrating the street demonstrations. Habibie 
has indicated he will stick by his military commander despite outrage 
over the killings. The violence erupted near Parliament as a special 
government assembly passed political changes that students said fell 
short of true democratic reform. Police said they had interrogated 
18 opposition figures, including two retired generals, over Friday's 
violence, the official Antara news agency reported. Human rights activists 
said the government was trying to create scapegoats for the bloodshed. 
Most of the opposition activists questioned by police had signed a 
petition recently calling for Habibie's replacement with a transitional 
government led by a presidium of community leaders, and for general 
elections to be held immediately. In an apparent concession to opposition 
groups, Habibie has said he would not block moves to speed up next 
year's balloting for a new president. Habibie, who is expected to 
be a candidate, had said earlier that a new president would be selected 
in December 1999. Several leading opposition figures have demanded 
that the national assembly vote for a president within three months 
of next year's parliamentary elections, set for May or June. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>