<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981117.0868 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Yugoslavia and Albania are glad to be playing at home again. Alessandro 
Del Piero, Michael Owen and Dennis Bergkamp are unhappy they're not 
playing at all. Wednesday is Europe's final big night of international 
soccer for 1998, with Yugoslavia and Albania playing on home soil 
again after months of political strife and postponements. With security 
problems finally out of the way, Yugoslavia and Albania have been 
given the go-ahead to play their Euro 2000 qualifying games against 
Ireland and Greece in Belgrade and Tirana. Other qualifying games 
Wednesday are: Northern Ireland vs. Moldova, Malta vs. Macedonia and 
San Marino vs. Cyprus. But the most eye-catching games of the night 
are friendlies _ Italy vs. Spain, Germany vs. the Netherlands, England 
vs. the Czech Republic and Brazil vs. Russia. Some of the big names 
are out with injuries, though, including Del Piero, Owen, Bergkamp, 
Alan Shearer, Edgar Davids and Ronald de Boer. The threat of NATO 
air strikes on military targets in Yugoslavia over the conflict in 
Kosovo forced UEFA to postpone the national team's Oct. 10 Group 8 
game against the Irish in Belgrade. When tensions eased, the game 
was given the go-ahead for Wednesday. The Yugoslavs are playing their 
first qualifying game of the competition, while the Irish already 
have a maximum six points from victories over Croatia and Malta. In 
the same group, Macedonia is strongly favored to win at point-less 
Malta. Due to civil unrest, Albania has not played a home game since 
November of 1996. The Greek team preparing for Wednesday's Group 2 
game at Tirana's Qemal Stafa had a police escort during its training 
session. With only one point from two away games, the Albanians are 
last in the group. The Greeks bid to replace Latvia as group leader 
by winning in Tirana. A 5-0 Northern Ireland victory over Moldova 
would lift Lawrie McMenemy's team from fourth to top of Group 3 because 
Finland, Turkey and Germany aren't involved in qualifying games. San 
Marino has little hope of its first ever European Championship victory 
when it hosts a Cypriot team that downed favored Spain 3-2 in Group 
6. Although no Euro 2000 points are at stake, the games at Gelsenkirchen, 
Salerno and Wembley are valuable in terms of prestige. The Germans, 
Dutch, Italians and Spaniards have relatively new coaches, while England's 
Glenn Hoddle has been under fire after some poor Euro 2000 performances. 
German coach Erich Ribbeck has recalled 37-year-old Lothar Matthaeus 
to the position of libero and 31-year-old Andreas Moeller to midfield. 
Christian Woerns, who completed a two-game suspension after his World 
Cup expulsion against Croatia, is back in defense. Matthaeus, who 
made his international debut against the Dutch in 1980, believes he 
still has a role to play in the national team. ``I hope I can show 
the fans that the so-called `old man' can still do his job,'' he said. 
Frank Rijkaard, who took over as Dutch coach after the World Cup, 
is unable to call up injured stars Bergkamp, Davids, Aron Winter and 
Ronald de Boer. PSV Eindhoven striker Ruud van Nistelrooy and midfielder 
Dries Boussatta of AZ Alkmaar will make their debuts. The game in 
Gelsenkirchen will go ahead amid strong security because Germany-Netherlands 
games often attract serious fan violence. Coincidentally, Italy's 
game against Spain is taking place at the same stadium where a match 
official was hit by a home-made bomb thrown by a fan during the UEFA 
Cup game between Fiorentina and Grasshoppers of Zurich two weeks ago. 
UEFA kicked Fiorentina out of the competition and awarded the game 
to Grasshoppers. Italian coach Dino Zoff likely will field Francesco 
Totti and Filippo Inzaghi together for the first time in attack because 
injuries have robbed him of Del Piero, Pierluigi Casiraghi and Nicola 
Ventola. ``We have many good players so we can do without those who 
are injured,'' said Zoff, who replaced Cesare Maldini after Italy's 
World Cup flop. Spanish coach Jose Antonio Camacho has broken with 
tradition and chosen only one player each from powerhouses Real Madrid 
(striker Raul Gonzalez) and Barcelona (defender Sergi Barjuan). Along 
with Valencia goalkeeper Santiago Canizares, they were the only players 
on Spain's World Cup squad in France. With Shearer, Owen and Paul 
Scholes all ruled out through injury, England coach Hoddle may have 
to call on an aging strikeforce of 34-year-old Ian Wright and 31-year-old 
Dion Dublin against the Czechs at Wembley. Hoddle badly needs a good 
performance and result against the Czechs after a dismal run. After 
losing to Sweden, the English were held 0-0 at home by Bulgaria and 
looked far from convincing in a 3-0 victory over Luxembourg. The Czechs 
will be without AS Roma midfielder Pavel Nedved, who is suffering 
from a knee injury. But the squad contains seven of the team who played 
in the Euro '96 final against Germany at Wembley. In other exhibition 
games Wednesday, Egypt hosts Norway, and Belgium welcomes neighbor 
Luxembourg. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>