<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981117.0130.0080 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Congressional aides tell CNN house Judiciary chairman Henry Hyde may 
ask several more witnesses to appear before the impeachment inquiry. 
They say several republicans want to question some key players in 
Ken starr's investigation of President Clinton, including White House 
aide bruce Lindsey, the president's secretary Betty Currie and friend 
Vernon jordan. Starr, the only witness scheduled so far, will appear 
before the committee thursday. John king has a preview. The prosecutor 
is about to become the chief witness in the impeachment debate, and 
democrats are promising tough questions about his tactics in the Whitewater 
and Monica Lewinsky investigations. The list of, I don't know, maybe 
10 or 12 people who have said to us, "Kenneth Starr's people threatened 
me unless I told them things, and I couldn't tell them those things 
'cause they weren't true." Committee democrats sent a letter to Starr 
Monday, asking that he bring his top deputies along Thursday for questioning, 
too. And this letter from Judiciary committee chairman Henry Hyde 
offers the president's lawyers 30 minutes to cross-examine the independent 
counsel. Such a confrontation would add even more drama to testimony 
that opens a Defining month in the impeachment process. This is the 
very first time in the entire course of judge Starr's investigation 
that he will have the opportunity to speak directly to the american 
people. Republican sources tell CNN that congressman Bob Livingston 
is eager for the house to wrap up its role in the impeachment process 
before he becomes speaker in January. The committee plans to vote 
by mid-December. And if it approves articles of impeachment, republicans 
plan a December vote on the house floor. Two-thirds of Americans surveyed 
in the new CNN/"USA today" Gallup poll oppose impeachment. And more 
than six in ten disapprove of how Starr and congressional republicans 
have handled their investigations. So it's no wonder the president 
is described as increasingly confident he won't be impeached. But 
many democrats still favor some kind of congressional punishment. 
What the president did was very wrong and reprehensible. And I believe 
that some action should, and will, be taken. Starr's won't be the 
only voice heard as the impeachment debate resumes this week. Congress 
is releasing some of those now-infamous Linda Tripp recordings on 
tuesday, giving most people in the United States and around the world 
their first chance to hear the voice of Monica Lewinsky. John king, 
CNN, the White House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>