<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981117.1600.0489 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
People in Asia have had their chance to see the Leonid meteor shower, 
which lights up the night sky every 33 years. According to NASA, the 
Leonid storm can generate between 200 and 5,000 meteors an hour, which 
is causing some satellite operators to brace themselves. Joining us 
now is Dale cruickshank from NASA's ames research center. Hello, Mr. 
cruickshank. We've heard some rave reviews. Can you tell us what the 
view will be like from this part of the world? Most of the, of what 
the people in northern America can see has already taken place. And 
that was you know in the pre-dawn hours today, Tuesday. I could see 
some very nice meteors from my own backyard, even in a brightly lit 
urban area. There's a good chance we can see some more stragglers 
on Wednesday morning and people should look toward the east and overhead 
between 1:00 A.M. and dawn on Wednesday. There's been some concern 
about the threat to satellites floating out there. What is the potential 
for damage? Well, it is a real concern, so far we haven't heard any 
reports of damage of satellites, but what we know is that the particles, 
even though they're only the size of a flain of sand or a little bigger, 
are coming in at such a tremendously high velocity, about 150,000 
miles, that each one of these grains can pack the punch of a rifle 
bullet. It depends really on the particular satellite how well it's 
shielded and hardened against this kind of an attack, but there's 
a good chance that some of the satellites, in fact, will be hit and 
possibly even put out of commission. Although as I say, we haven't 
heard anything about that yet. Explain why this is significant from 
a scientific standpoint. We have the tools in place now to analyze 
the light that comes from these meteors as they streak across the 
sky, and that will in principle tell us something about the Comet 
from which they came. We've known about this Comet for a very long 
time, it was discovered back in 1866. But now we have the scientific 
and technical tools that allow us to analyze the light and give us 
direct information on what that Comet is made out of. We know the 
comets are very different from one to another and we don't know very 
much about this one in particular. Now you tell us most of us probably 
missed the show in north America, but we can look out our windows 
again or look skyward between 1:00 A.M. and dawn? On Wednesday morning, 
that's the best opportunity we have. And I think, because of past 
performance of this particular meteor shower, i think there's a very 
good chance people will see things on Wednesday morning, as well as 
we did this morning. Or else we have to wait what, another 32 years? 
Another 33 years. Then of course it will still depend on where we're 
located. It's too hard to predict that far in advance where the best 
observing sites will be in 33 years. And of course north America was 
not the best site for this time around. It was really the western 
pacific Rim, in Japan and eastern China. And that's where the reports 
are coming from that it is in fact really a Great shower. Well, we're 
sorry we have to miss that. But thank you very much for joining us. 
Mr. cruickshank. Dale cruickshank with NASA ames research center. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>