<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981117.2130.0247 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now you can hear Monica Lewinsky for yourself. Today, the house Judiciary 
committee released 22 hours of conversations linda Tripp secretly 
recorded with the former White House intern. In them, Lewinsky talks 
about her 18-month relationship with president clinton, which he has 
called improper. Transcripts of the tapes were released in October 
with other evidence from independent counsel Ken Starr's investigation 
of the president. In one conversation, the former friends talk about 
how Lewinsky has been subpoenaed to testify in the Paula Jones case. 
Maybe I should just tell the creep, maybe you should just say, "look, 
don't ever talk to me again, it's over. And for now you have this 
information, and do whatever you want with it." I think -- I think 
if you want to do that -- that's what I would do, but I don't know 
that you're comfortable with that. I think he should know. He won't 
settle, he's in denial. Nothing is -- I think if he knew he would 
settle. I don't think so, because he knows that it will just end up 
being me against you. I don't think. I don't want to paint you as 
a bad person. Look, Monica, we already know that you're gonna lie 
under oath. We also know that I want out of this big time. I mean, 
how else is this gonna go? If I have to testify -- if I am forced 
to answer questions and I answer truthfully, it's gonna be the opposite 
of what you say. So therefore, it's a conflict right there. In another 
excerpt, Lewinsky appears to regret her relationship with Mr. clinton. 
Linda, if I ever want to have an affair with a married man again, 
especially if he's president, please shoot me. I promise you, I promise 
you, if you get out of this one alive and unharmed and sane and healthy, 
I tell you what, more and more, the New York thing just seems right 
on. The White House is downplaying the tapes. Spokesman Joe Lockhart 
says most people around the country won't pay much attention to them, 
since the transcripts were released some time ago. Lockhart says it's 
a day in heaven for people who are obsessed with the story. He describes 
White House reaction to the tapes as somewhere between none and indifference. 
We do take a view on the overall effort before ever looking at what 
the standards are to apply to the allegations against the president, 
as far as impeachment goes, before ever sitting down and even as a 
committee looking at how you're going to go forward with this process, 
to just gratuitously dumping out all of the salacious material. Now, 
I think there are some commentators who have made the point that this 
was done as a partisan attempt to hurt the president, and we'll find 
out whether that worked or not. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>