<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981117.2100.1775 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
There will be a time when you will book back on this with bittersweet 
memory. Yeah, probably in about 30 years. Some of the audiotapes released 
today. By the way, they are available on the web site MSNBC.com. so, 
we return to what was our top story this evening, the 22 hours of 
tapes released this morning by the house Judiciary committee by vote 
of the house. It gave most Americans their first chance to hear Monica 
Lewinsky's voice. Until now, it was one of the only unknowns from 
a scandal that has unfolded in a flick and graphic detail. Joining 
us with more on the tapes tonight, NBC news correspondent chip reid. 
He is with us from our Washington bureau. Chip, most folks have been 
out, otherwise busy and at work today. We've watched this unfold over 
the airwaves. What would people be struck by upon first listening? 
And what jumps out at you? Well, topic number one that jumped out 
at me, Brian, is lying, and the fierce debates that raged between 
the two women over the issue of lying, monica Lewinsky making clear 
that she intended to lie when she was called before a deposition in 
the Paul Jones case about her sexual relationship with the president. 
Linda Tripp said, no, I'm not going to lie. Absolutely not. Here are 
some examples of that battle that raged between the two women for 
weeks. I don't think he's a bad person. Monica, we already know that 
you're going to lie under oath. We also know I want out of this big 
time. How else is this going to go? If I have to testify -- if I am 
forced to answer questions and I answer truthfully, it's going to 
be the opposite of what you say. Therefore, it's a conflict right 
there. But it doesn't have to be a conflict. What do you mean? how? 
Tell me how. Tell me how. I'm supposed to say -- if they say as Monica 
Lewinsky ever said to you that she is in love with the president or 
is having a physical relationship with the president -- if I say no, 
that is bleepwleepbleep perjury. That's the bottom line. I will do 
everything I cannot to be in that position. That's what I'm trying 
to do. But I don't know how else to do this. I'm coming up with foot 
surgery in California. I will do anything. I know. I was brought up 
with lies all the time. So, that was how -- that was how you got along 
in life was by lying. I don't believe that. Is that true? Yes, it's 
true. If I wanted something from my dad -- if I wanted money from 
my dad, I had to make up a story. When my parents were married, my 
mom was lying to my dad for everything, everything. She helped me 
sneak out of the house. That's just how I was raised. How do you think 
that makes me feel? I could make you stop crying and I could make 
your life so much easier if I would lie. How do you think it makes 
me feel? I feel like I'm sticking a knife in your back. If this goes 
forward, I know you'll never speak to me again, and I will lose a 
dear friend, someone whose friendship I value very much. And I keep 
my friends over a lifetime. I don't make friends and then dump them 
when they're done with the job. I hadn't planched on -- I never saw 
New York as an ending. I do now. By "New York," she means it's time 
for Monica Lewinsky to get a job and get out of town and hopefully 
leave her troubles behind, and that was one of the other key topics 
of discussion, her job. Monica Lewinsky spent a lot of time venting 
frugstration she couldn't get the president to pay attention, but 
at other times she saw the president doing anything she wanted to 
do. He wants me to have options. He's called people for me. He comes 
back, an he -- but he didn't want to get into it on the phone. Bruce 
-- later he said E eel talk to him when I get back. I don't know what's 
going on here yet, but we'll see. Yeah. Did he understand about you're 
not wanting to go to the U.N. Yes, he did. But what he also said was 
-- he says, look, I want you to -- I want you to think about it. I 
want you to spend some time and think about what -- you know, he had 
-- he's so cute. You know? He's, like, you know, think about what 
kinds of things you could -- what you could do there, you know. He's 
like he's very -- he's a good guy. He's flexible. You know, he's -- 
he's willing to kind of create a position. So, Brian, we have lies 
and jobs. Topic number three, no surprise here, sex, everything from 
phone sex to the definition of sex. At one point, Monica Lewinsky 
was tallying up the conquests she had had in her young life, and they 
got to the president, and they ended up having a Debate over whether 
or not Monica Lewinsky had had sex with the president. So, eight -- 
getting up there. Well, eight over X number of years is -- Not that 
many of years. In the 1990's is not all that unusual. no. Well, I 
guess you can have the big creep in a sort of half-ased way. Not at 
all. I never came close to speaking -- sleeping with him. We didn't 
have sex. What do you call it? We fooled around. We didn't have sex. 
I don't know. I think if you get to orgasm, that's having sex. No, 
it's not. yes, it is. Having sex is having intercourse. You've been 
around him too long. That's his rationale. uh-uh. Then I've had sex 
with a lot more people. oh. Having sex is having intercourse. That's 
how most people would -- All of -- jobs and all of that don't count? 
That is consistent with the president's definition of sex also. It 
does not include oral sex. The question is did Monica Lewinsky arrive 
at that definition on her own or with help from the president? Chip, 
just to jump here, it's unbelievable people have to remind themselves 
of what the subject is, who the subject is. As we mentioned at the 
top of the broadcast, she is often distraught in these tapes but also 
displays kind of a range almost in a manic sense if taken back to 
back here, of emotions. You took the words right out of my mouth. 
Sometimes it's depressive. Sometimes it's manic. These examples always 
follow affectionate conversations with the president of her manic 
state. We have been calling this tape the butt head tape. I -- you'll 
get mad at me. You know what I said at the end? The worst I could 
say. What are you wearing? no. Worse than what I said. I was just, 
like -- you'll die. You're going to smack me. Probably, Monica. What 
do you think I said? God only knows. What's the worst thing I could 
say? Do you love me? yep. I love you? yep. You didn't. We're getting 
off. I'm like, I love you butt head. You didn't. I did. What did he 
say? He just kind of hung up. I hung up. I was like, oh, my God. What 
the hell just came out of my mouth? Butt head. For those of you that 
think Monica Lewinsky is totally divorced from reality, there were 
examples of self-examination. You will. no. No, I won't. I can't wait. 
You know what? We have to get beyond this. He's going to say you're 
crazy and I don't want to have anything to do with you. Why are you 
crazy? Because I am. I'm mushuga. You're not. i am. I'm, like, not 
a normal person. A yiddish expression for crazy. Chip Reid, thank 
you for the review and for joining us in our Washington bureau tonight. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>