<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981117.2100.2438 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It was two weeks ago tonight that the voters defied the conventional 
wisdom and handed it to the republican party in an election widely 
seen as something that was theirs to lose going into it. It cost the 
speaker his job. It will not stop there. With us tonight two top political 
strategists. Peter Fenn is a democratic consultant whose clients include 
the D.C.C. and in New York, we're joined by Jay severin, MSNBC political 
analyst. Jay, first question to you. By this time next week, is Jim 
Nicholson the chairman of the republican party? The question itself 
reminds me of a circumstance which I was advising a Female govep nor's 
election campaign. Her husband took me aside to complain privately 
and said I can't get her to focus on the big picture. She's worried 
about whose uncle's going to be running the elevator and if she doesn't 
focus, I'll be running the elevator. Republicans have to realize now 
the nature and magnitude of the challenge they face going into the 
year 2000 supersedes the tactical matters of what co-lar hair their 
spokes person is going to have. They need to settle the matter of 
strategy, who do we want to be and what we want to stand for. Peter 
Fenn, the question is still on the table. By this time next week, 
will Jim Nicholson be the chairman of the republican party? You know, 
Brian, I doubt it. I think as John Kennedy once said, success has 
a thousand fathers. Defeat is an orphan. And I'm afraid right now 
that a lot of the heads are rolling. Dick Armey, I think, is in serious 
trouble, when his spokeswoman said today that, you know, things look 
encouraging. You're thinking, U oh. That must mean he's in deep trouble. 
There's going to be a lot of changes. But I do agree with Jay on one 
thing, and this is true of both parties -- they have got to focus 
on outside the Beltway and what the problems are that people have 
in their everyday lives and get away from inside the beltway, concerns 
about impeachment. Issuings over the impeachment should be the watch 
word for both parties. I didn't mean to weasel, by the way. My answer 
is no. I didn't mean to call you on it. I think he won't be because 
as a matter of a tactical imperative, you have to change the coach 
when something like this happens. I don't know that that's what's 
going to happen, but that's my suspicion. Jay, that J.C. Watts is 
in the running for a leadership job, it's been said, speaks volumes 
about the modern republican party. He is very unique in Congress. 
He's only been there long enough to have a cup of coffee. What propels 
him to a management job? Well, look, maybe the republicans are wondering 
whether if the all the poster people of the parry are overweight conservative 
whight men named chuck, maybe it's somehow limiting the party's ability 
to reach out to constituencies without which it has no hope of putting 
together the math, which equals 51%. Even though it's largely a marketing 
change a cosmetic change, it isn't going to hurt the republican party 
if they somehow blunder into including, say, a woman. oh, no. A woman 
or an African-American or someone other than the aforementioned chuck 
to represent the party. Peter Fenn? Well, I think J.C. Watts is a 
very charismatic, very bright guy. He gave a superb speech at the 
republican national convention. I think he's one of their rising stars. 
I don't know if they're smart enough to pick him, but I would vote 
for him if I were a republican. Here's a guy with ideas. Here's a 
guy who speaks up at conference committees and gives the republican 
response to the state of the union address. This guy is serious business. 
I don't think you have to take an old war-horse. There are bright 
young stars in both parties, and they should be put up to the front. 
What's interesting about your question, old war-horses now -- that's 
constituted by someone who's been around for about 3 1/2 weeks. Now 
the revolutionaries of a couple years ago are seen as the old fossils 
who are in the way of progress. That says something right there about 
the speed with which this is moving and maybe -- maybe the sense of 
urgency the republican party feels. Jay, to take your line of reasoning, 
when you look at the modern-day states people in Congress, Largent 
doesn't spring to mind. But you're saying it's novelty, it's diversity. 
It's out with the old. If you're from the south, five pounds overweight 
and have a one-syllable first name, you're in trouble. We don't realize 
we're living in a time that's on life support. We have voters who 
say I'm neither republican nor democrat. And this determines elections 
by the long shot. It helps to look like your party is singing a song 
and has singers that vaguely resembles the people in the chorus you're 
trying to attract. I think one of the problems the republican party 
has now is no recognizable spokes person. Livingston, the next speaker, 
has said to folks I'm going to be a manager. Well, I think the republican 
party needs more than that. They may need a manager in house. But 
they need some cars matic people who can speak for the party. Gentlemen, 
I must call an end to this conversation. Thank you for coming on the 
air. Thanks, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>