<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981117.2100.0580 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With us tonight to talk about the fallout from the release of the 
tapes today and a look ahead at the start of impeachment hearings 
on the hill this week, we're joined by two former independent counsels. 
Michael zeldin was assigned to investigate allegations of the bush 
White House. And MSNBC legal analyst Joe digenova, in addition to 
his stint as an independent counsel, a is former U.S. attorney. Both 
are with us from our NBC bureau in Washington. Joe, let's begin with 
you. About halfway through today with the American television watching, 
the public realized except for the food channel you couldn't escape, 
it fell to some like piling on. The airlines like to say we know you 
have a choice in air travel. Someone had a choice in when to release 
these, whether or not to release them at all. Do you think it will 
be looked back on as a mistake? Actually, Brian, I think it was a 
mistake but an inconsequential one because I don't think the American 
people are paying attention to this. They already knew what was on 
the tapes. What we're getting now is texture, the sound of adolescence, 
the sound of manipulation, and by getting a picture of Monica Lewinsky 
it begins to show you wa a terrible, terrible decision the president 
made to have a Relationship with this young woman. But I think this 
is basically of no moment. And I think the hearings are what matters. 
I would not have released the tapes at all. Who made the decision 
to release the tapes? Where does the blame go? The House of Representatives 
voted to release all the information and as soon as possible. I just 
wish they hadn't been released because I don't think it adds anything 
to the debate. I think it is somewhat fascinating to hear the conversations 
between Linda tripp and Ms. Lewinski, but I think other the long haul, 
this will be forgotten. And Michael zeldin, this was kind of considered 
by some in the gopgop a Slam-dunk decision a few months back. But 
we're also saying Monica Lewinsky didn't get the book deal she was 
hoping for. This part has gone south quickly. yes. And I think that 
the process matters. I think the issuance of these reports when they 
were issued, that is, why did Mr. Starr issue his report just before 
the election, when he seems to be submitting new, additional evidence 
that relates to the impeachment inquiry? Why has the Congress decided 
to release these things now? Why is there only a half-hour? All these 
process questions affect the decision as to whether or not the process 
as to impeachment is a fair or unfair one. And I think that's what 
the message is that's coming across. The pre-existing opinions of 
people about Ms. Tripp and Ms. Lewinsky, they haven't changed at all. 
But I think people are getting a message there may be a railroading 
of this process, and that's dangerous. Michael, let me ask you some 
process questions. Why was this week that was politically? Why did 
the tapes come out today? And why is Ken Starr appearing two days 
from now? I don't know is the answer. It seems to me there is a rush 
to get this over, on the one hand, but on the other hand, the rush 
seems to be more of a railroading, giving kangaroos a bad name and 
not allowing the president an ability to contest the process issues 
or the underlying merits of the allegations against him. Joe, the 
story seems to a lot of people, this epic, this event seems to be 
losing whatever appeal it had. Do you think we'll see that reflected 
in the hearing schedule? Perhaps. You know, the chairman had indicated 
earlier that Mr. Starr was going to be the only witness. Now I think 
after some criticism, somewhat conflicting criticism, there appears 
to be a desire to have some other witnesses. We don't know who they're 
going to be. And there appears to be some new paths of inquiry. It's 
quite obvious that the American people have very little interest in 
this process, but there is nonetheless a constitutional duty that 
has to be undertaken and full tilled by Congress because this process 
was started. And lest we forget the president of the United States, 
while he may not have admitted that he committed perjury, has clearly 
admitted he did not tell the whole truth either in the grand jury 
or in a deposition. That has to be dealt with, and it should be dealt 
with quickly. How it will be dealt with is up to Congress. But the 
how part, Joe, is really the key. And what they're doing on the "how" 
side of it is not fair from my appearance of -- Well, I think if the 
-- -- Of the facts. And that's the issue. I learned as a prosecutor, 
perhaps because I started out as a defense attorney, how you get an 
indictment matters as much as you got it. I couldn't agree more. Here 
it seems the matter of getting him is more important than the process. 
That's the danger. I don't agree with that. Henry Hyde isn't trying 
to get anybody. He's one of the fairest and honest members that served 
in the House of Representatives. I think that if some don't show up 
for the hearing they're making a Terrible mistake. Joe, you call it 
new paths of inquiry. Democrats are threatening to boycott the hearings. 
How is it that anyone can say this late in the game, when the programs 
are printed up, you know what? We'd like to take this a little wider 
than we originally thought. And why politically would anyone wanted 
to do that? I'm somewhat puzzled by that myself, Brian. And I don't 
have an answer to that because I'm not running the committee, and 
I haven't been privy to the conversations that are going on. I think 
that chairman Hyde, however, is a man of some moment. And I'm quite 
sure he'll be ready to explain this on Thursday, if not sooner. Michael, 
does he get points, Mr. Hyde, for not running the other way? Well, 
I don't know where he's running because nobody knows what the rules 
are that will be taking place on Thursday. It's still a big crap shoot. 
So, I don't think Mr. Hyde really yet has controlled this process, 
as he ought to. That's the problem he's got to deal with in the next 
two days to let us know that what we'll see is fair. Joe digenova, 
any doubt this president ends his second term battered but alive? 
I think at the moment that would be a good bet. Michael? I think he's 
here through the end, and I think he'll be empowered and doing our 
duty force as our president. Counselors, thank you for coming on the 
air. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>