<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981117.2100.1121 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Federal reserve chairman Alan Greenspan cut short-term interest rates 
today with the agreement of the other fed governors, the third time 
in only seven weeks. For more about why it happened and what may happen 
as a result of it and the street's reaction, we're joined by Ron Insana. 
Ron, how should people feel about this cut? Well, it's more good news, 
Brian. The federal reserve is taking out an insurance policy today, 
helping to guarantee the U.S. economy doesn't slow too much in 1999 
and the financial turbulence doesn't reassert itself down the road 
and push the U.S. economy into recession somewhere maybe six or nine 
months down the road. And what about Wall Street today? The Dow, the 
NASDAQ, and how today might differ from expectations and predictions 
starting with the opening bell? There's the Dow right now. Well, the 
Dow sold off about 81 points just before the fed cut rates. It rallied 
up 91 points, crossed 9100 for a minute, then down again. But it's 
dragged down by a couple of stocks that had nothing to do with the 
fed. Stock markets actually behaved well. If you look back over the 
last four months, the market bottomed out on september 1, the Dow 
trading as low as 7400. Since the fed started cutting rates, the market 
has made an astounding comeback, all the way to about 9100. Ron, it's 
easy to forget this has been a scary period of weeks and months for 
all kinds of American investors, small time, first time, retirees. 
They've really watched this thing start to fall apart. And how -- 
you can't give advice, I know. No one at CNBC can. But what are the 
big players saying about the trends? The big players are probably 
more scared than some of the shawl ones. They took it on the chin. 
But what we say is you do not fight the federal reserve when it's 
lowering interest rates. That has been his toirally good for the market. 
Unless something is different this time. Unless there's another big 
problem like Brazil getting into some serious trouble, the fed has 
told investors that at least for now it's safe to get into the financial 
markets again unless there's a big problem we don't know about at 
this time. Now, what do you look for, Ron, and your peers starting 
with the opening bell tomorrow? We check on the foreign markets from 
overnight. Tokyo is up a couple hundred points. You want to watch 
how the bond market behaves. You really want to watch the behavior 
of the stock market. If the Dow can continue higher, move back toward 
the old high of 9337, a Lot of investors will be em boldened to continue 
buying stocks. Ron Insana. He's had a long day already. Ron, thank 
you very much. Thanks, Brian. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>