<DOC>
<DOCNO> MNB19981117.2100.2953 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For those around the globe who are not under cloud cover tonight, 
the skies have promised to be lit up with the biggest meteor storm 
in decades, reaching its climax just before down. Called the Leonid 
meteor shower because they originate in the constellation leo, the 
storm has proved to be less dangerous than advertised. High in th 
longer shot, a pebble-sized fragment blowing a whole in one. So, intelsat 
sends signals to space to adjust solar panels to make them less likely 
to be hit. Tonight it appears the strategy works. The danger seems 
to be over. But there's science to be learned from this meteor shower 
as well. NASA puts up a balloon bustling with sensors and sets up 
a plane over the pacific. After all -- Donald yeomans -- If we can 
understand what the particles are made of, we can unts what the solar 
system formed from some 4 1/2 billion years ago. Maybe knowledge is 
the hope from the show. Tomorrow's "New York Times" will be covering 
the meteor shower under the byline of veteran journalist, currently 
"New York Times" science writer, malcolm brown. Mr. brown is with 
us for more from our studios in New York. Malcolm, how big are the 
particles, how high up, and can you promise us they don't reach the 
ground? Most of them are smaller than a grain of sand, a few somewhat 
larger. There was one weighing almost an ounce or so reported to have 
landed near a Village in Georgia, the republic of Georgia today, probably 
not connected with this Leonid stream. There are tons of them. Nobody 
really knows how many. It's been compared to sandblasting when they 
comen and hit the earth. They burn up at an altitude of 50 miles or 
so. The small ones can never reach the earth. The odds of seeing ones 
that do are astronomical. If you're lucky enough to have a back yard 
in a dark place, they look like they might as well be station wag 
depons. How is it that such a small particle can make such a brilliant 
light? It's traveling at about 150,000 miles per hour. This little 
particle is made incandescent hot. It's vaporized, and the vapor trail 
is probably 80 feet across or so. The heat is so enormous it lights 
up the sky. I have to say that I have a feeling that a lot of astronomers 
are going to be a little disappointed by this show. The last reports 
that I've had, the maximum hits have been in the neighborhood of Portugal 
and the Canary islands. They've been coming down at a rate at the 
maximum of about 2,000 an hour. That's much less than happened in 
1966. But still it could be a good show for those lucky to be in the 
right positions. That was unanticipateable until it was right on top 
of us. We're still on the air. Of course the worst fears that all 
the satellites orbiting the earth would take a heavy pelting and it 
would basically cause chaos. There's no evidence any of that has happened. 
no. And I think the odds against any given satellite being hit by 
one of these little sand grain-sized particles is about 1 in 1,000. 
But you've got 600 satellites, so the odds are greatly improved, I 
suppose. Still, they've taken steps to prevent problems. They've turned 
the solar panels away. In the case of the Hubble space telescope, 
one of the most costly of the satellites, they've turned the main 
mirror to face the direction opposite the stream so it won't be pock 
marked. But it will take a couple of day, maybe a couple weeks before 
we know if anything's been damaged for sure. Malcolm brown. He covers 
meteors very well. That will be the byline tomorrow morning in the 
"New York Times." Them is kind words, Brian. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>