<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981117.1830.0178 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Now to those tapes. It's not polite. In many cases it's not even legal. 
Who doesn't like to listen in on other conversations? The nation was 
doing just that today through the trivial and the titillating. More 
tonight from the Monica and Linda I got the tie -- the creep a tie. 
Oh, please! I know. It was 20 bucks at Marshall's. Oh, good. Who makes 
it? Calvin Klein! Nice! Yeah, it's Gorgeous. Yeah, Marshall's -- generally, 
every now and then, you can hit. I know! It's really nice. It's real 
different than all the other ones, so I put a funny note with it. 
I'm going to send it with the book. If I wanted money from my dad, 
I had to make up a story. When my parents were married, my mom was 
always lying to my dad for everything. Everything. My mom helped me 
sneak out of the house. I mean, that's just how I was raised. In the 
Catholic religion, there are white lies and there are black lies. 
Those are white lies. Those are like white lies. Those are kind of, 
like, lies like, "you look great," when you really look -- Uh-huh. 
That's not what I am talking about here. I mean, I have outright, 
I have lied to my dad. I have lied my entire life. I brought my mom 
and my aunt to an arrival ceremony. Oh, and did he meet her? No, but 
he knew they were there. And he saw them. Was this after you had started? 
Oh, yea. This was while we were -- I told him I saw him on, like, 
Sunday. And then I said, "oh, look for me at the arrival ceremony. 
My mom and my aunt are coming." But he didn't know which was which? 
No, but he said he saw them and they are cute. And I said, "shut up." 
Not that cute, not cuter than me. I wonder what he was thinking. That 
was some of the trivial. Now to the more important matters in the 
conversations. That story now from NBC's Lisa Myers. The 37 now infamous 
tapes are shockingly candid, as Tripp and her young friend, Monica, 
discuss hair, the president's anatomy, the art of lying under oath, 
and, of course, sex. Sometimes, Lewinsky seems worldly. Other times, 
fragile. This exchange when Clinton had not called her. Tripp taped 
conversations to protect herself, she says, once she became aware 
of wrongdoing. From the outset, she appears to manipulate Lewinsky 
and gathers evidence against the president. October 6th -- Tripp helps 
Monica draft a letter to the president, upping her job demands. October 
23rd -- Tripp Stokes Monica's anger toward Clinton. November 20th 
-- Tripp urges Monica to keep the blue dress with the president's 
DNA, as insurance. And deny it, he did. Linda Tripp had nothing to 
do with that decision to lie or with the president's decision to get 
involved with an intern in the first place. Without Tripp and her 
tapes, chances are the president would never have been caught. Lisa 
Myers, NBC news, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>