<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981117.1830.0816 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" tonight -- go outside and take a look in the skies. 
You might just get a glimpse of those meteor showers streaking across 
the heavens. They are called "the Leonid meteors," because they originate 
in the constellation Leo. The last major display was more than 30 
years ago. Now, people all around the world are awed by the beauty, 
while some are taking urgent action to protect all those satellites 
and spacecraft up there. Tonight, two reports, "in depth," beginning 
with NBC's Robert Hager. High in the sky, an amazing meteor shower 
as earth runs into a Trail of Comet dust, over Asia where it's the 
early hours of tomorrow morning. Beautiful and despite earlier reports 
of dairng, turns out to be no problem for the 600 satellites that 
circle above. At intelsat, operators of one of the largest satellite 
fleets in the world, engineers peer at screens and cautiously pronounce 
all's well. Intelsat's Steven stott -- It looks like everything is 
clear and operating satisfactorily. We have not heard of any reports 
of any major problems. In far-off Japan, they watch as well. And in 
China, too. Aboard the Russian space station Mir, cosmonauts climb 
in their emergency escape vehicle, just in case. And the U.S. space 
agency, NASA, turns the Hubble space telescope away from the storm. 
The fear -- what this animation depicts, electrostatic charges from 
the meteor shower disabling a satellite. Or a longer shot -- a pebble-sized 
fragment blowing a hole in one. To avert that, many, like intelsat, 
send signals to space, adjusting solar panels and other sensitive 
surfaces, to make them less likely to be hit. And tonight, it appears 
the strategy works. The danger seems over. But there's science to 
be learned from this, as well. NASA puts up a balloon bustling with 
sensors. And a plane, over the pacific. After all, the shower is from 
the tail of a Comet. NASA's Donald yeomans -- Comets, of course, are 
the building blocks of the outer solar system. So if we can understand 
what these particles are made of, we can understand what the solar 
system formed from some 4.5 billion years ago. May be that knowledge, 
not destruction, is the legacy of this show in the heavens. Robert 
Hager, NBC news, Washington. This is Jim Avila in Apache trail, Arizona. 
The night skies over the desert, a silent parade of meteoric fireballs. 
I saw a star. It went behind the mountain. It was really cool. It 
was my first time. Oh, wow! The only sound, shrieks of wonder from 
6th graders on a Late-night field trip. Did you see that? It was like, 
swish. Looking to the sky, an ancient tradition. Falling stars seen 
as signs from the gods. You can understand why people thought falling 
stars were magical and holy. Sometimes zairey. The best place to view 
the meteor storm is away from city lights, under a cloudless sky, 
with little moisture in the air. And with the naked eye, cameras have 
trouble seeing the meteors. They move too quickly and the sky is too 
dark. Unless you have a special night vision lens, which turns everything 
green, but allows the camera to track the falling stars. Spectacular 
specks of dust ignited by the friction of hitting the earth's atmosphere 
at 155,000 miles an hour, covering the distance between New York and 
Los Angeles in less than a minute. It was like a ball of gas, or fire 
and it just shot across the sky and then just disappeared into space. 
At Arizona space University, home of America's largest meteor collection, 
evidence that some space rocks do hit ground. The meteorites are really 
these pristine examples of that soup that came together to form the 
planets in the first place. Visible for just two seconds 60 miles 
up, bright shining moments that burn lasting memories. Jim Avila, 
NBC news, Apache trail, Arizona. According to NASA, that last major 
Leonid meteor storm in 1966 generated about Dun 50,000 meteors every 
hour. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>