<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0430 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It is difficult to imagine that Carlos Boozer Jr. will reject a scholarship 
to distinguished, buttoned-down Duke for one to an open-collar commuter 
school like St. John's, but anyone who has ridden the Alaska Marine 
Highway would know why he might. For a reasonable fare, Boozer would 
have the luxury of moving from Queens to midtown, Alumni Hall to Madison 
Square Garden, on an express subway train. It is a little more complicated 
than that in his hometown of Juneau, Alaska. Several years ago, my 
wife and I traveled to that beautiful state capital on an oversized 
ferry with few frills that originates north of Seattle. Three days, 
three nights, an open-air ecological retreat through the narrow passages 
of the sparsely populated archipelago that forms the long Alaskan 
panhandle. The views were breathtaking, the whales stunning, the bald 
eagles inspiring. It also happened to be the middle of August, with 
two pennant races raging in New York and from no point on the boat 
could a radio signal or a baseball score be tracked. Aliens from space 
could brawl on the Jerry Springer show, I tell you, and there would 
be no word of it on the Alaska Marine Highway until the first stop, 
Ketchikan, where I seem to recall a USA Today box miraculously perched 
on the dock. Not exactly a setting to expect a bunch of gangly, sleepy-eyed 
kids with equipment bags slung over their shoulders, in the middle 
of a basketball road trip. Once a season, though, Carlos Boozer's 
team, Juneau-Douglas High School, boards the ferry in Ketchikan on 
a Sunday morning, about 9 o'clock. Eighteen hours later, give or take 
a couple depending on the wind, the players roll up their sleeping 
bags, back home in Juneau. ``We usually get in about four or five 
in the morning,'' George Houston, the Juneau-Douglas coach, said by 
telephone. ``Then the kids go straight to school.'' For 25 years, 
Houston has been assistant or head coach in Juneau, a basketball-mad 
town. Never has he had a Division I recruit close to being as good 
as the 6-foot-9-inch Boozer, the son of a former University of Maryland 
player with whom Houston has won the last two state titles. By last 
season, the most famous fast-talking basketball salesmen from what 
Houston calls ``TV land'' were making their way into Juneau from the 
Lower 48. They all had respectful things to say about the gymnasium 
and the crowd, typically a few thousand strong. ``We are the only 
game in town,'' Houston said. The problem, far more than attracting 
fans, is booking opponents. As Boozer said when he visited St. John's 
with his parents this week, ``For games, it is isolated.'' So much 
so that the 1,700-student Juneau-Douglas school has just two other 
regional opponents, both smaller. Any other schools within sailing 
distance are so diminutive that the sixth man could be a bear. So 
Houston said he plays Ketchikan and Sitka, a beautiful old Russian 
port town, in two-game series, home and away, plus tournaments in 
Anchorage and Fairbanks. Between games and schoolwork, there are player 
fund-raising chores. Those upstate games demand air expense, and a 
budget of about $50,000. Most college coaches will sit in a recruit's 
living room and bluster about the exotic travel his team does, perhaps 
not the wisest pitch for a kid whose neighborhood rival can only be 
reached by air and sea. ``It's sort of like the NBA right there,'' 
said Boozer's father, Carlos Sr., of his son's basketball itinerary, 
while watching St. John's dismantle North Carolina-Asheville Monday 
night. For his sake, I hope Mike Jarvis, the new Red Storm coach, 
slipped young Boozer a map of the Big East Conference, which is still, 
with some exceptions, accessible by Amtrak. From Boston to Hartford 
to East Rutherford to Philadelphia to Washington, a nap and a newspaper 
is all it takes. Having lived in Juneau since his father, a computer 
analyst, moved the family when he was 8, Boozer was bound to be excited 
by bumping into people in a teeming city like New York. He got Martina 
Hingis' autograph at the Garden Monday morning. Jayson Williams just 
happened to show up at Alumni Hall that night. ``Very business-like 
and powerful,'' Boozer called New York. ``A lot of opportunities arise 
when you live uptown.'' He wouldn't exactly be living uptown, or downtown, 
but he would get to play many home games right in the heart of the 
Apple. Then he could take the escalator downstairs, board a New Jersey 
Transit train, visit his sister, who is a student at Princeton. One 
hour by train, give or take a few minutes, depending on the wind. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>