<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0281 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the first time, paleontologists have found fossilized embryos 
of dinosaurs so well preserved that their delicate skin has survived 
in mineralized form, providing a glimpse of reptilian scales in patterns 
bearing a family resemblance to the skin of modern-day lizards. The 
embryonic dinosaur skin was one of several important discoveries made 
a year ago by a fossil-hunting expedition working in the parched northern 
Patagonian badlands of Argentina. Everywhere the paleontologists looked 
over an area more than a mile square they saw gray fossilized eggs, 
whole or in scatterings of shell, lying on the surface or buried to 
depths of 16 feet. They could hardly take a step without crushing 
egg shell fragments under foot. The nesting site was found by scientists 
from the American Museum of Natural History in Manhattan and the Carmen 
Funes Museum in Neuquen, Argentina. They announced the discoveries 
on Tuesday in a news conference at the American Museum. More detailed 
descriptions appear in a report in this week's issue of the journal 
Nature and an article in the December issue of National Geographic 
magazine. ``Finding embryo bones is rare enough, but finding the tissue 
of embryos is truly spectacular,'' said Luis M. Chiappe, a research 
associate at the American Museum and a leader of the expedition. The 
paleontologists said the nesting site was about 70 to 90 million years 
old, in the last epoch of the Age of Reptiles. A preliminary analysis 
by geologists indicates that the egg clusters were laid in the flood 
plain of ancient streams that sometimes overflowed, burying the unhatched 
eggs in layers of mud that protected them from scavengers and decay. 
The eggs were about six inches in diameter, and each one would have 
had the volume of a dozen chicken eggs. Some of them, Chiappe said, 
were quite close to hatching. The baby dinosaurs would have started 
life a mere 15 inches long and grown to an adult size of up to 45 
feet long. One embryo had 32 tiny teeth that reminded paleontologists 
of sauropods, the giant plant-eating dinosaurs with long necks and 
tails, huge bodies and four elephant-shaped legs. A familiar sauropod 
is apatosaurus, often called brontosaurus. But Chiappe said the teeth 
and scale patterns of the Patagonian embryos suggested that they were 
related to a different type of sauropods known as titanosaurs. Rodolfo 
A. Coria, director of the Carmen Funes Museum, said the embryo discoveries 
had opened ``large doors that had been closed for years'' and should 
yield important insights into the physiology and growth rates of sauropod 
dinosaurs. The discoveries, Chiappe said, were also remarkable because 
they were the first dinosaur embryos found in the Southern Hemisphere 
and the first known embryos of sauropods. Paleontologists look forward 
to finding and studying more southern specimens to broaden their understanding 
of dinosaur evolution, which until now has been based almost exclusively 
on fossils from the Northern Hemisphere. And the fossil hunting has 
been especially rewarding in recent years in the relatively unexplored 
Patagonia. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>