<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0141 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I see by the papers that the Dean of Westminster Cathedral in London 
wants to eliminate the Christmas tree. It's a pagan symbol, he says, 
never mind that the queen donates two trees to the cathedral each 
year. I don't know how the dean will wriggle out of this one, but 
I can sympathize with him because I have something equally subversive 
in mind: getting rid of the Thanksgiving turkey. Yes, that sacred 
symbol of holiday plentitude and culinary ineptitude. It's time for 
it to go. Trouble is, I forget about this annual outrage until a day 
or two before it's on us again, when it's too late to drum up support 
for my cause, or to push my preference for fried chicken. So since 
I have to have turkey, I'd like to have good wine with it. But which 
one? First of all, let's keep it American. It's our holiday, so why 
not drink our wines? And let's keep the prices moderate _ around $20 
or less. A lot of these wines are on my perennial list. Why not? They 
are consistently good. A few are here for the first time, including 
two from Gallo, of all people. Let's face it; they are making more 
and more good wines in California these days. There is a belief in 
some circles that since turkey is poultry, it should be paired with 
white wine. Not so. Its strong flavor will tolerate some white wines, 
but it pairs best with robust reds, even rustic zinfandels. Once, 
zinfandel would have been the odds-on favorite for any American festival. 
Like most of us, its ancestors came from elsewhere (Croatia, in its 
case), but now Americans are the only people who make it and it deserves 
a special place at the Thanksgiving table. The 1995 Frei Ranch Zinfandel 
by Gallo confirms that this huge winery's commitment to quality is 
paying off. The wine is a bit softer than might be expected from a 
full-bodied zinfandel, but the color, the aroma and the taste are 
unbeatable. Niebaum-Coppola's Edizione Pennino is a zinfandel named 
after the music publishing house of Francis Ford Coppola's grandfather. 
The label is Italianate, the wine Californian. Fetzer Vineyards is 
in Mendocino County, where some of the best zinfandel grows. This 
winery's skill with the grape comes through in its Barrel Select Zinfandel. 
Jedidiah Steele may have made his name with chardonnay and his good 
pinot noir, but I think his heart is in zinfandel. Try the 1996 Steele 
Zinfandel from the Pacini Vineyard, in Mendocino, of course. Merlot 
is still everyone's favorite American red wine. I'm less overwhelmed 
than others but there are some good ones out there. The Washington 
State winemakers have a special touch with merlot; they give it a 
little more structure, a little more style. The Canoe Ridge and Columbia 
Crest 1995's illustrate this. Robert Mondavi's 1994 Napa Valley is 
also a superlative merlot. In keeping with the leaner style are some 
Long Island merlots. These wines impressed a group of prominent Bordeaux 
winemakers and chateau owners when they toured the North Fork vineyards 
a few years ago. Palmer and Hargraves are worth consideration. Rhone-style 
wines are flourishing in California. There are a couple worth considering: 
Le Cigare Volant, from Bonny Doon Vineyard in Santa Cruz, is Randall 
Grahm's homage to Chateauneuf-du-Pape. It is a worthy evocation of 
the rich Rhone style with a nice touch of spicyness. And there is 
petite sirah. No one is absolutely certain what the petite sirah grape 
really is, although the weight of expert opinion seems to be on the 
side of the durif, a little-known hot-climate grape in France. Whatever 
it is, you will be certain you have opened an excellent bottle of 
wine when you try Stags' Leap Winery's petite sirah, a solid late-fall 
wine. Cabernet sauvignon still reigns as the king of California red 
wines, and there are people who see no reason to drink anything else. 
Even if your tastes are a tad more eclectic, there are cabernets you 
should consider for your big dinner. With its 1994 Stefani Ranch, 
Gallo is a contender, too, along with Fetzer's Barrel Select 1994, 
Beaulieu Vineyards' Rutherford 1995 and the St. Supery 1995. Trefethen 
Vineyards and the less-well-known Turnbull Cellars are Napa Valley 
neighbors producing excellent, if different, style cabernets. Both 
are particular favorites of mine. But then, so are Robert Mondavi's 
Napa Valley cabernet and Simi Winery's Alexander Valley. For die-hard 
white wine fans, there are some great chardonnays. Never much of a 
California chardonnay fan, I must admit it goes well with turkey. 
Estancia's Pinnacles chardonnay from the mountains east of Monterey 
and Edna Valley's chardonnay from San Luis Obispo are two elegant 
wines with enough substance to stand up to any meal. Robert Mondavi's 
1995 Carneros District is another excellent buy. Franciscan Vineyards 
Oakville is always a good bet for price and quality, and if you seek 
diversity, think of Benziger, which offers a Napa chardonnay and a 
Sonoma chardonnay. There are other good white wines _ pinot gris, 
sauvignon blanc, pinot blanc. None are substantial enough for turkey. 
We can drink them after I get rid of all these turkeys. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>