<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0366 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Federal Reserve Board bowed to investors' expectations with its 
rate cuts Tuesday. But for its trouble, it earned only half-hearted 
applause from stock and bond traders. There is a good reason for that 
muted reaction. Ever since investors fled risky markets this summer 
for the safe haven of U.S. Treasuries, the bond market has been leading 
the Fed on interest-rate policy, trading at levels that predicted 
even further drops in key rates. But Tuesday, both stock and bond 
investors seemed to respond to signals in the Fed's comments that 
this, its third cut since Sept. 29, could be the last for the year. 
The two quarter-point cuts Tuesday _ one in the federal funds rate 
to 4.75 percent, another in the discount rate to 4.5 percent _ was 
pretty much what stock traders had been counting on from the Fed's 
monetary policy meeting. Consequently, while the moves briefly helped 
propel the Dow Jones industrial average to around 9,100 points, up 
more than 92 points, by the end of the day the rate cuts were not 
enough to keep the average in positive territory. The Dow ended the 
day down 24.97 points, closing at 8,986.28. Other indexes reacted 
more positively. The Standard &AMP; Poor's 500 crept up 3.45 points. 
The NASDAQ composite ended the day up 16.84 points, almost 1 percent. 
Bond traders had been less cocky about a Fed cut. When the announcement 
came, Treasury bonds mustered only a temporary rally, hitting a wall 
of selling that left the yield on the 30-year bond up just one-hundredth 
of a percentage point, at 5.30 percent. Yields on bonds with shorter 
maturities _ notes coming due in two years and five years, for instance 
_ inched up further. Assessing the markets' reaction to Tuesday's 
move by the Fed is more crucial than usual because financial-market 
stress _ not troubling economic figures _ has driven Fed policy in 
recent months. This is unusual. The last time it happened was in 1987, 
after the stock market crashed. Had the Fed been looking strictly 
at recent economic data, it would almost certainly not have cut rates. 
``Where is the slowdown?'' asked Peter Canelo, U.S. investment strategist 
at Morgan Stanley Dean Witter. ``What they did today was unnecessary 
_ it was a precautionary move. The economy is doing well and is going 
to be doing even better now.'' Indeed, gross domestic product is growing 
at more than a 3 percent clip, there is a boom in housing demand, 
and sales of both automobiles and smaller-ticket consumer goods are 
strong. Consumer confidence is rising again after a couple of troubling 
dips and the stock market is soaring. None of this would typically 
signal a need for a drop in rates. Bond-market stability is, however, 
a more complex matter to measure. The Fed has been looking for signs 
of a credit contraction there that could push the economy into a recession. 
If the markets appear to be more stable in the coming weeks, then 
the likelihood of further rate cuts recedes. By several measures, 
stability is returning to some of the investment arenas that had been 
hardest hit by the Russian default and other meltdowns in emerging 
markets. What had been cavernous spreads in September in the yields 
between Treasuries and non-Treasury debt like junk bonds or mortgage 
securities are much narrower now. The yield on Merrill Lynch's master 
index of high-yield bonds closed on Tuesday 5.37 percentage points 
more than Treasuries with similar maturities. Though still wide, the 
gap is a full percentage point slimmer than it had been. Furthermore, 
investors are piling into junk-bond funds at a furious rate _ roughly 
$1 billion a week recently _ enlivening a market that had been comatose. 
``The environment certainly seems to have changed dramatically from 
late September, when companies were starting to fail for lack of ability 
to roll over their debts,'' Martin Fridson, chief high-yield strategist 
at Merrill Lynch, said. That's exactly the reaction from investors 
the Fed was hoping for. And investors in the stock market are almost 
swaggering again. Canelo noted that after the market crash of 1987, 
it took 15 months for stock prices to recover half of what they had 
lost. Following this summer's market drop, it took less than four 
weeks to recover half of what stock indexes had lost. One reason stock 
prices may have rebounded so spectacularly is that the supply of money 
in the country's financial system has ballooned of late. And while 
some of this money has flowed into the stock market, the growth may 
also preclude a recession next year. ``I have never seen a recession 
take place when money growth is rising at these rates,'' said Lief 
Olson, director of Absolute Return Investors, an institutional money 
management firm in New Canaan, Conn. ``With low inflation, continuing 
growth, and low interest rates, you do not have a recipe for weak 
growth or recession.'' But even if the nation averts a recession, 
higher stock prices may not be the result. Daniel Laufenberg, chief 
U.S. economist for American Express Financial Advisers in Minneapolis, 
is a bull on corporate earnings for next year, but he thinks stock 
prices will only tread water in 1999. Why? Because he reckons that 
interest rates will rise. ``Credit spreads and risk aversion by investors 
has created the need for the Fed to ease,'' Laufenberg said. ``At 
some point, the Fed will have to start focusing on economic fundamentals 
rather than financial market conditions and when they do, I believe 
the Fed will discover that the fundamentals are still very positive.'' 
A rate increase next year, he said, could be the result. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>