<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0192 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
During its brief season, the pumpkin lives literally for the holidays. 
Most people know it as pie _ flaky pastry with a dark, miraculously 
heavy filling of spices, cream, pumpkin and sugar. Traditional, yes. 
But the pumpkin has much more to offer. Next to the potato, the pumpkin 
is the most malleable and perhaps the most dynamic of autumn foods. 
It can be cut into cubes and sauteed so that it remains firm. It can 
be braised in a meat dish, absorbing the cooking juices and slackening 
its shape. It can be mashed and left chunky and starchy. It can be 
pureed and thinned to a silky sauce. And perhaps most interesting 
of all, it teeters between sweet and savory, fruit and vegetable. 
Though it tastes vegetal, it welcomes sugar as readily as salt and 
herbs. But it does not sink into the shadows of a dish. The pumpkin 
has big flavor, which allows it to withstand both adornment and austerity. 
Consider two dishes at the restaurant Etats-Unis on Manhattan's Upper 
East Side. In a pot roast of beef with apples, chilies and bacon, 
slabs of pumpkin soak in the cooking juices, absorbing some of the 
heat of the chilies but maintaining their own raw integrity. And in 
a twice-baked souffleed pumpkin pudding, cubes of pumpkin are enveloped 
in a rich, creamy cloud flavored with Roquefort. But the pumpkin is 
not lost: you can taste a little in every bite. Of course, a pumpkin 
is nothing without a creative cook. Pumpkin puree and pumpkin soup 
are on the menus at countless New York restaurants, but a few chefs 
have managed to extract its essence in original ways _ ways that may 
prompt a reconsideration of the Thanksgiving menu. Terrance Brennan, 
the chef at Picholine, on West 64th Street, makes pumpkin-prune pancakes 
that are absolutely ethereal. Oddly shaped and thin, they are as light 
as whipped cream on the tongue, their rich, buttery pumpkin flavor 
a sly touch. Brennan serves them with slices of venison and shredded 
Brussels sprouts sauteed with minuscule cubes of bacon, apple and 
pumpkin. But Brennan said the pancakes, which he drops like batter 
into a nonstick pan and quickly sautes, would also go well with turkey. 
At 27 Standard on East 27th Street, Babette Audante, the chef, takes 
an unusual tack with soup, using pumpkin as a garnish rather than 
the base. Chunks of bright orange roasted pumpkin rest like an island 
in the middle of an earth-colored Jerusalem artichoke soup. It is 
soothing and rich, and the sweetness of the artichokes challenges 
that of the pumpkin, keeping each bite interesting. A dish at Savoy 
in Soho is a reminder that pumpkin can also stand alone, honest and 
untethered. David Wurth, the chef de cuisine, roasts slices of pumpkin 
with a little olive oil, salt and pepper and serves them alongside 
a leafy salad of mustard greens sprinkled with nut oil and walnut 
pieces and a smear of soft curd goat cheese. Wurth, Brennan and many 
other chefs favor the cheese pumpkin, an heirloom variety that has 
been resurrected in restaurant kitchens over the past few years. It 
is flat, with a pinkish-tan skin, and usually weighs five to eight 
pounds. ``It's oranger, it's brighter and it's denser,'' Brennan said, 
``so you can add things to it without it losing its flavor. You can 
puree it, add a little cream or chicken stock, and the flavor doesn't 
get diluted.'' Though the cheese pumpkin is not widely available, 
it is sold in many green markets and some specialty stores. Joel Patraker, 
the assistant director of the Greenmarket program in New York City, 
suggested looking for one without gashes or bruises and with the stem 
still attached. If it has soft spots or discoloration, but all you're 
planning to do is chop it up for soup, ``then just negotiate for a 
better price,'' he said. Chefs have also taken to a small, squat pumpkin 
called the Jack-Be-Little. It is about the size of a bagel and its 
meat is gently flavored and plentiful, so it can be roasted or steamed 
whole, and it makes a perfect serving for one. It is available at 
most green markets and grocery stores, and even at garden centers. 
(Some Jack-Be-Littles, though, are grown for decorative purposes, 
so it's best to ask if they have been treated with chemicals.) Bill 
Telepan, the chef at Judson Grill, on West 52nd Street, has created 
a devilish dish with this tiny pumpkin, inspired by a recipe by Andre 
Daguin, formerly a chef in Auch, France, in which a large pumpkin 
is baked with foie gras. Telepan fills a Jack-Be-Little with foie 
gras and roasts it. Once it cools, he scrapes the fat off the top 
and mixes it with chopped hazelnuts, walnuts and herbs. The pumpkin 
is served warm, with quenelles of the hazelnut mixture on the side. 
Warm, thin toast is provided for transporting it all. It's too bad 
beds aren't, too, because, though the dish is delicious, that's about 
all you can handle afterward. When it comes to dessert, chefs find 
themselves on shakier ground. Tempted by heady spices like nutmeg 
and cinnamon and rich fillers like eggs, evaporated milk and heavy 
cream, it is just too easy to make a stodgy pumpkin dessert _ like 
many pumpkin pies, pumpkin cheesecakes and pumpkin mousses. Early 
American settlers are not to blame for the leaden pumpkin pie that 
started it all. ``Actually, contrary to popular wisdom,'' said Karen 
Hess, a culinary historian in Manhattan, ``pumpkin pies were made 
in England long ago, in the late Elizabethan period.'' And though 
the pumpkin pie was not part of the original Thanksgiving meal, she 
said, settlers probably began making it soon after for the holiday. 
``It's the right season _ put it that way,'' she said. ``The pumpkins 
were there and ready to go. A couple of hundred years later, chefs 
are beginning to toss tradition aside. The pumpkin desserts at Picholine, 
for instance, are exuberant and refined, and only tinged with nostalgia. 
And they can teach anyone a thing or two about pumpkin. For instance, 
while most pumpkin ice creams are all about pumpkin and spice, Damon 
Brunette, the pastry chef, makes one that is like an eggy custard. 
The flavor of pumpkin surfaces only after a few moments. He serves 
it with a scoop of equally subtle chestnut ice cream on top of a flat 
sugar-coated puff pastry cookie. And his roasted Jack-Be-Little pumpkin 
with a maple panna cotta is so gorgeous you almost don't want to eat 
it. First he bakes the miniature pumpkins, filled with a spiced milk 
to infuse the flesh. He discards the milk, then refills them with 
a maple cream that is so fragile an autumn breeze could break it apart. 
Around the pumpkin are strewn a compote of glistening prunes, apricots, 
figs and cherries like a scattering of fallen leaves. It is perhaps 
the most finessed pumpkin dish around. And maybe it's not the most 
reverent dish to serve on Thanksgiving Day. But it shows the dimension 
the pumpkin has, and frankly I'd take it any day over a pumpkin pie. 
MUSTARD GREENS SALAD WITH ROASTED CHEESE PUMPKIN AND GOAT CHEESE Adapted 
from David Wurth, Savoy Time: 30 minutes \ cup toasted walnuts { pound 
peeled cheese pumpkin or sugar pumpkin, cut into 8 half-inch wedges 
1 tablespoon olive oil Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper 
{ pound mustard greens, trimmed and washed 2 tablespoons walnut oil 
2 teaspoons herb vinegar \ pound fresh curd goat cheese. 1. Preheat 
oven to 300 degrees. Place nuts on a baking sheet, and bake until 
crisped and fragrant, about 5 minutes. Remove from oven, and set aside. 
2. Increase oven temperature to 450 degrees. In a medium-size mixing 
bowl, combine pumpkin wedges, olive oil and salt and pepper to taste. 
Toss pumpkin to coat well. Place a heavy ovenproof skillet over medium-high 
heat for 2 minutes. Add pumpkin, and saute until browned on the edges, 
6 to 8 minutes. Transfer pan to oven, and roast until tender but not 
falling apart, about 6 minutes. Remove from oven and allow to cool. 
3. Place mustard greens in a large mixing bowl. Over the greens, sprinkle 
the walnut oil, vinegar and salt to taste. Toss well, and adjust seasoning 
if necessary. 4. To serve, place a handful of greens on each of 4 
plates. On each plate arrange 2 slices of pumpkin partly on the greens, 
a large spoonful of goat cheese beside the greens and a sprinkling 
of toasted walnuts over the entire salad. Yield: 4 appetizer servings. 
JERUSALEM ARTICHOKE AND CHEESE PUMPKIN SOUP Adapted from Babette Audante, 
27 Standard Time: 1 hour 15 minutes 4 tablespoons butter 1 pound Jerusalem 
artichokes, sliced thin 1 Spanish onion, sliced thin 1 stalk celery, 
sliced thin 2 cloves garlic, peeled and crushed 8 cups vegetable or 
chicken stock 1 Idaho potato, peeled and diced 4 cups cheese pumpkin 
in 1-inch cubes \ cup brown sugar { cup heavy cream Kosher salt and 
freshly ground black pepper 2 tablespoons finely sliced chives. 1. 
In a large flameproof casserole over medium heat, melt 2 tablespoons 
butter. Add artichokes, onions, celery and garlic. Saute until tender, 
about 10 minutes. Add stock and bring to a boil. Add potatoes, reduce 
heat to low and simmer 45 minutes. 2. While soup is simmering, preheat 
oven to 325 degrees. In a small pan, melt 2 remaining tablespoons 
butter. In a medium-size bowl, combine pumpkin and melted butter, 
tossing until pumpkin is well coated. Cover a baking sheet with parchment 
paper, and spread the pumpkin on the sheet in a single layer. Sprinkle 
with brown sugar. Bake until tender and lightly browned on the edges, 
20 to 25 minutes. Remove from oven, and set aside. 3. Add heavy cream 
to soup, and season to taste with salt and pepper. Transfer in batches 
to a food processor, and puree until smooth. Adjust seasoning. 4. 
To serve, place a small mound of the pumpkin in the center of each 
of 6 bowls. Ladle the soup around pumpkin, and sprinkle each bowl 
with about a teaspoon of the chives. Yield: 6 servings. ROASTED JACK-BE-LITTLE 
PUMPKINS WITH MAPLE PANNA COTTA Adapted from Damon Brunette, Picholine 
Time: 1 hour 30 minutes, plus 4 hours' refrigeration 3 cups milk 4 
cinnamon sticks 1 vanilla bean, split and scraped of pulp 6 Jack-Be-Little 
pumpkins 1 cup heavy cream { cup dark amber maple syrup 1 \-ounce 
envelope gelatin 2 star anise 3 cloves 3 allspice berries 2 cups mixed 
dried fruit (such as apricots, cranberries, prunes, cherries and figs) 
2 cups freshly squeezed orange juice 1 cup Armagnac. 1. Preheat oven 
to 375 degrees. In a small pan, combine 2 cups milk, 2 cinnamon sticks 
and the vanilla bean. Bring to a boil, and immediately remove from 
heat. Allow to steep 10 minutes. Remove and discard cinnamon sticks 
and vanilla bean. 2. Slice tops from pumpkins, as close to the top 
as possible. Remove seeds and pulp. Place pumpkin bottoms cut side 
up in a roasting pan, and fill each pumpkin with heated milk, about 
\ cup per pumpkin; reserve remaining milk. Place pumpkin tops in roasting 
pan cut side down. Cover pan with aluminum foil, and bake until tender, 
about 40 minutes. Remove from oven. When cool, discard liquid. 3. 
In a medium pan, combine remaining milk, cream, maple syrup and gelatin. 
Bring almost to a boil; remove from heat and allow to cool. Fill pumpkin 
shells with this mixture, cover with plastic wrap, and refrigerate 
at least 4 hours, or overnight. 4. Place star anise, 2 remaining cinnamon 
sticks, cloves and allspice on a piece of cheesecloth. Tie securely 
with kitchen string. In a medium-size saucepan, combine the dried 
fruit, wrapped spices, orange juice, Armagnac and 2 cups water. Bring 
to a boil over high heat, and reduce heat to low. Simmer, stirring 
occasionally, until fruit is tender and there are about 6 tablespoons 
of liquid left in the pan. Discard spices. 5. Allow pumpkins to come 
to room temperature before serving. Place a pumpkin in the center 
of each of 6 plates, with a pumpkin top leaning against it. Spoon 
a little fruit and juice around each pumpkin, and serve. Yield: 6 
servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>