<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0217 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Poor Casanova! On the 200th anniversary of his death, even the city 
of his birth seems embarrassed to remember him for the single trait 
that made him famous. Instead, Venice has chosen to celebrate him 
not as the legendary libertine and Latin lover but as a traveler, 
writer, freethinker, diplomat, spy, mathematician, gambler, gourmand 
and emblematic dilettante of 18th-century Europe. Well, he was also 
all these things. Indeed, had he not been a writer of some talent, 
he would have left no greater legacy than broken hearts, cuckolded 
husbands and illegitimate children. On the other hand, had his 12-volume 
memoir, ``L'Histoire de Ma Vie,'' or ``The Story of My Life,'' not 
detailed his seduction of women of all ages and social condition (and 
his genuine love for some of them), he would certainly have been forgotten. 
It is, however, a somewhat revisionist portrait of the infamous rake 
that is presented in ``The World of Giacomo Casanova: A Venetian in 
Europe, 1725-1798,'' an exhibition at the Museo del Settecento Veneziano 
in Ca' Rezzonico through Jan. 10. Rejecting what they call ``stale 
cliches'' about the man and his behavior, the show's organizers have 
focused on Casanova's wanderings, with only one gallery dedicated 
to his wooing. The anniversary exhibition might even be a tad opportunistic 
since Venice hardly treated him kindly during his lifetime. He was 
imprisoned in the dreaded Piombi or Leads jail in July 1755, and although 
he escaped 15 months later, he could not return to Venice until 1774. 
Eight years later, he was again forced to flee and this time was never 
allowed back. In fact, he became a ``Venetian in Europe'' as much 
by accident as by choice. Still, traveling clearly suited his restless 
spirit. In 1734, he studied law in Padua, and then, while preparing 
for a career in the Roman Catholic Church, he visited Corfu, Calabria, 
Naples and Rome, discovering on the way that being a young cleric 
was no impediment to torrid affairs. At the age of 21, though, he 
left the church and, while earning his keep as a violin player in 
a local orchestra, he turned to a life of pleasure. Scandals soon 
drew him to the attention of the State Inquisitors, forcing him to 
hop town from time to time and thereby expanding his horizons of passion. 
On one trip to France in 1750, he became a Freemason, an association 
that later provided him with crucial connections across Europe. But 
in Venice, as much as his philandering, it was his apparent links 
to magic and the occult that finally landed him in the Leads in 1755. 
After his daring escape from jail, Casanova had little choice but 
to travel. It is this grand tour _ of love affairs, partying, gambling 
and deal-making, but also of brief stints in prison, predawn flights 
from creditors and failed confidence tricks _ that Ca' Rezzonico's 
exhibition tracks through a series of paintings of the cities he came 
to know, starting with views of Venice itself by Canaletto, Guardi 
and others. Accompanying each oil are amusing quotations from Casanova's 
memoirs. Beside Saint-Quentin's 1755 painting of ``The Entrance to 
the Tuileries From Louis XV Square,'' Casanova offers: ``In France, 
nothing is real; everything is appearance.'' And beside Ricci's painting 
of the Mall in London, Casanova explains: ``The island called England 
is actually a sea with vast sand banks, and those who sail there must 
navigate it with care.'' With a cityscape of Dresden by Bellotto comes 
the reminder that Casanova considered the Saxons decidedly ungallant. 
A painting of the somber Escorial Palace by Michel-Ange Houesse brings 
the suggestion that Casanova enjoyed Madrid: ``The men in Spain have 
a mentality conditioned by an infinity of prejudices, while the women 
are in general more open. Both, however, are subject to passions as 
vigorous as the air they breath.'' While hardly a figure of social 
distinction, Casanova frequently arranged to meet people of power. 
Portraits of some of these are also in the show, among them Catherine 
the Great of Russia, Louis XV of France, Madame de Pompadour, Empress 
Maria Theresa of Austria, King Stanislav of Poland and Pope Clement 
XIII. Of the tsarina, Casanova wrote: ``Without being beautiful, she 
knew how to please with her charm, her friendliness and her intelligence.'' 
No doubt he would have delighted in including a member of royalty 
among his conquests. In practice, they came from all classes, from 
marquise to chambermaid, from landowner to convent girl. ``Seducing 
is not my main characteristic,'' he wrote immodestly in his memoirs, 
``because I have always done this unconsciously after first being 
seduced myself.'' In London in 1763, though, he met his match in Marianne 
Charpillon, a young Swiss prostitute. While he fell for her, she refused 
to surrender, and took his money. She broke his heart. To illustrate 
his life of loves, the exhibition displays some paintings of 18th-century 
women by Longhi, Boucher and Fragonard in suggestive poses as well 
as jewelry, snuff boxes, watches and an assortment of silk items of 
clothing. ``The main occupation of my entire life has been cultivating 
the pleasures of the senses,'' he wrote. And in truth, these also 
included good food and good conversation. When he returned to Venice 
in 1774, he already considered himself enough of a writer to pen a 
fierce attack on Voltaire, although he was forced by penury to spy 
for the very government that once jailed him. And in due time it turned 
against him and forced him anew into exile. No longer a youngster, 
he now wanted a patron more than adventure. In 1785, he met Count 
Josef Karl von Waldstein, who offered him a job as librarian at Dux 
castle near Prague. In 1787, he met Mozart and, according to some 
accounts, may have offered first-hand experience to help revise the 
libretto of ``Don Giovanni,'' written by his old friend, Lorenzo da 
Ponte. It was in Dux that he wrote his memoirs, in French, albeit 
only recounting his life until 1774. And it was in Dux that he died 
in 1798. It was not until the mid-19th century that Casanova became 
a synonym for seduction, but since then he has been a constant subject 
of fascination and opprobrium. He has inspired numerous films, a good 
many of them spoofs, while his life keeps providing writers with raw 
material. Lydia Flem treated him gently last year in her book, ``Casanova: 
The Man Who Really Loved Women'' (Farrar, Straus &AMP; Giroux). This 
year's new books include Andrew Miller's ``Casanova in Love'' (Harcourt 
Brace), just published, and, in France, Philippe Sollers' ``Casanova 
l'Admirable'' (Plon). Still, for all their caution, the organizers 
of the Venice exhibition continue to view Casanova as a potentially 
pernicious influence. Visitors to the museum's bookshop can buy the 
customary catalog, T-shirts and posters. But they can also pick up 
free condoms with Casanova's name on the packet, accompanied by a 
written warning of the risks posed by AIDS to latterday Casanovas 
who engage in unsafe sex. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>