<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0316 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Shares of DaimlerChrysler A.G. began trading officially Tuesday as 
further signs emerged that German executives from the former Daimler-Benz 
A.G. would be the senior partners in the merged company. DaimlerChrysler 
shares, which had been trading on a when-issued basis on Friday and 
Monday, fell 43.75 cents to 83.875. Financial analysts attributed 
the drop in the automaker's stock to continued selling by stock index 
funds because DaimlerChrysler, unlike the former Chrysler Corp., is 
not part of the Standard &AMP; Poor's 500-stock index. Daimler-Benz 
and Chrysler announced their merger last May and completed it last 
Thursday. With $140 billion in annual revenue, DaimlerChrysler becomes 
the world's third-largest automaker in terms of revenues, and the 
world's fourth-largest company, trailing General Motors Corp., Ford 
Motor Co. and Mitsui, a Japanese trading company. The organization 
chart released Tuesday for DaimlerChrysler featured many German executives 
in leading roles. While the new company's management board has 10 
Germans and eight Americans, for example, there are nine Germans among 
the 11 executives who report directly to the company's two co-chairmen. 
Similarly, five of the eight members of the new company's corporate 
integration council are former Daimler executives, as are five of 
the seven members of the company's nonautomotive business council. 
The preponderance of German executives was not entirely surprising 
in a merger that in many respects has amounted to a German takeover 
of Chrysler. The combined company has been incorporated in Germany 
for tax reasons. And while Chrysler's former chairman, Robert J. Eaton, 
and Daimler's former chairman, Jurgen E. Schrempp, will be co-chairmen 
of DaimlerChrysler for three years, Eaton is scheduled to retire then, 
and Schrempp, who initiated the merger, will run the company himself. 
Schrempp said in an interview Tuesday that the presence of eight Americans 
on the management board mattered more than the fact that some of those 
Americans did not report directly to the chairmen during day-to-day 
operations. DaimlerChrysler will, however, maintain separate headquarters 
in Stuttgart, Germany, and Auburn Hills, Mich., a suburb of Detroit. 
American and European shareholders will also hold equal stakes in 
the combined company at first _ 44 percent in each case, with shareholders 
from the rest of the world owning the remaining 12 percent. And Eaton 
and Schrempp vowed Tuesday to keep the two companies' brands distinct 
rather than blurring the differences that separate Chrysler brands 
like Jeep, Dodge and Plymouth from Daimler brands like Mercedes-Benz 
and Freightliner. ``For the customer, in terms of showrooms, nothing 
will change,'' Schrempp said at a news conference. Eaton said DaimlerChrysler 
planned to decide by the end of the year whether to take an equity 
stake in the Nissan Diesel Motor Co. But he said that DaimlerChrysler 
had not been in talks to acquire its controlling shareholder, the 
struggling Nissan Motor Co., Japan's second-largest automaker. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>