<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0378 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a stony courtyard, in the shadows cast by a jumble of old walnut 
and cherry trees, a hundred young monks in blood-red robes squatted 
in small groups one recent afternoon to debate the deeper meaning 
of life. Some yelled, clapping their hands for emphasis. Others sparred 
in softer tones. Some yawned. Some laughed. In ``debating,'' as this 
part of a monk's education is called, the point is to probe thoroughly 
timeless philosophical issues with ordinary questions. ``If a horse 
runs away from its owner, is it really free?'' one young monk asked 
several fellow novices gathered here at Drepung, Tibet's largest monastery, 
a sprawling complex that for centuries has served as a spiritual bank 
of religious life. Behind this peaceful setting, which seems to reflect 
a healthy tolerance for open religious worship, is a more strained 
reality. Over the last four years, Chinese authorities have carried 
out a careful campaign to tighten control over Tibetan monasteries, 
which Beijing has come to see as nests of opposition to Chinese rule 
over this starkly devout Himalayan region. The number of monks allowed 
to enter monasteries has been sharply cut back, and entrance to one 
of these centers of Buddhist learning is now strictly vetted. All 
monks are required to swear patriotic allegiance to China, even though 
many see Beijing as an occupying foreign power. Monks have also been 
required to declare formal opposition to the Dalai Lama, the exiled 
leader whom Tibetans revere as a god and a king and Chinese authorities 
consider a bitter enemy. Hundreds of monks deemed ``unreliable'' by 
the authorities for resisting the clampdown have been expelled from 
monasteries, according to the Tibet Information Network, a nonprofit 
organization based in London. Several dozen have even been jailed 
for voicing sensitive political opinions. Though abbots still nominally 
lead the monasteries, Chinese officials confirm that authority has 
shifted to administrative committees that, while theoretically elected 
by monks, answer directly to Communist Party authorities. Monasteries 
remain self-financed, relying heavily on donations and not on government 
money, except in isolated cases of rebuilding. In addition, Chinese 
authorities have ordered that all monks under 18 leave the monasteries 
and return to normal schools and that no more underage monks be accepted. 
Chinese officials say that although the rule has not yet been uniformly 
enforced, more than 500 young monks have already been forced to leave. 
At Drepung, a majestic collection of white-and-maroon buildings just 
outside Lhasa, Tibet's capital, religious worship is a shadow of its 
former greatness. Drepung once claimed to be the world's largest monastery 
with 10,000 monks, but today there are only 600. ``We have to sit 
through a lot of patriotic education,'' complained a young monk with 
a shaved head and bushy eyebrows. ``You just mumble the words and 
nod.'' A second monk, with sleepy eyes, added: ``Everything is controlled 
by the administrative committee. These people do not understand our 
religion. They think we are dumb.'' Chinese authorities say Communist 
Party leaders decided at a conference on Tibet in Beijing in 1994 
to limit the total number of monks and nuns in Tibet. It was later 
determined that a total of 46,000 monks and nuns would be permitted 
to study at the 1,700 temples scattered throughout the Tibetan Administrative 
Region, which does not include Tibetan areas in other Chinese provinces, 
where religious practice is more relaxed. ``That is enough to satisfy 
the current need,'' said Ma Yingchou, deputy director of minority 
and religious affairs in Tibet. ``We are strictly controlling the 
number of entrants as monks and nuns.'' In Beijing's view, few monks 
would naturally oppose Chinese rule and monasteries are centers of 
dissent because they have contact with anti-China forces overseas, 
namely in India, where the Dalai Lama's government-in-exile is based, 
and in the United States, where many other Tibetan activists live 
and work. ``In recent years, some of the thinking at some monasteries 
was a bit chaotic,'' Ma said, referring to political opinions that 
China regards as nonpatriotic. ``Monasteries must maintain a correct 
quality.'' Justifying China's tough campaign in monasteries, Ma argued 
that efforts to repopulate monasteries after the vast destruction 
of temples by leftist fanatics in the 1960s and 70s had made them 
too lax in the 1980s. Demonstrations that erupted here in 1987, 1988 
and 1989, Ma asserted, happened largely because the authorities were 
too soft. The tough stance adopted in 1994 has achieved its purpose, 
other officials say. In a recent report to Communist Party authorities, 
Deputy Secretary Raidi reported that an ``indoctrination and rectification 
campaign'' had been successfully completed in Tibet's temples and 
monasteries. ``This has solved, in a direct way, glaring problems 
in the area of Tibet's spiritual culture, building a stronger socialist 
spiritual civilization and strengthening leadership at all levels,'' 
said Raidi, who like many Tibetans uses one name. ``Once these decisions 
were made and put into effect, no matter what resistance or what degree 
of interference they encountered, the regional party committee united 
as one to carry them out firmly.'' The Tibet Information Network reported 
that increased control and surveillance of monasteries has led to 
an upgrading of security work by these administrators, beyond their 
original duties as informants. Plainclothes officers, some dressed 
as monks, now patrol larger monasteries. To monks at Drepung, forbidding 
anyone under 18 to enter a monastery is particularly distressing because 
it cramps the study of Tibetan Buddhism's complex battery of ancient 
texts into what they consider an almost impossible time frame. ``It 
takes years to master the basic texts,'' said the monk with bushy 
eyebrows. ``If you don't start until you are already an adult, it 
makes it very hard.'' Chinese officials counter that too many monks 
are deprived of a basic education, and that many young monks who have 
entered a monastery as young as 8 do not do so voluntarily, but are 
instead generally following their parents' wishes. ``Everyone should 
have a basic education,'' said Xu Zhenchang, the Chinese principal 
of Lhasa Middle School, where both Chinese and Tibetan are languages 
of instruction. ``Even those students who choose to become a monk 
at 18 can make a better choice once they have learned a broader range 
of subjects. I think they will make better monks.'' The new restrictions 
apply to nuns as well. At Anitsangkung, a convent on a back street 
in Lhasa, several nuns objected to the way that Chinese authorities 
now decide who can be allowed to join the convent, where 103 nuns 
make their home. ``Work teams'' of Chinese officials arrive every 
two months, one nun said, to review the progress of the rectification 
campaign and to make sure that no one is taking part in any activities 
that might be deemed ``unpatriotic.'' Only one nun was expelled last 
year, she said, but nearly 20 were forced to leave in the three preceding 
years. ``We have to be very careful what we say,'' the nun said, her 
shaved head and simple red robe making her look younger than her age, 
36. Sitting in the sunny courtyard in front of her convent's small 
temple, a chorus of melodic morning vows in the background, another 
nun lamented the tightening of control over Tibetan worship by the 
Chinese authorities. ``They make the rules,'' she said, ``We live 
within them.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>