<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0184 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
We are in the world of evil and evil retaliation in this new novel 
by the distinguished Czech playwright Pavel Kohout, whose works were 
banned for 20 years in his own country. ``The Widow Killer'' takes 
place in the final months of World War II. Prague senses its imminent 
liberation, but the evil of the occupation is reincarnated in the 
evil of having been occupied. A murderer is loose in the city, a deranged 
but resourceful figure who performs a series of ritual slayings, gruesome 
in their details, of German and Czech widows and then, when the Germans 
begin to withdraw, anoints himself the avenger of his wounded nation. 
In the end, a kind of moral reversal takes place in which the victim 
and the victimizer, the Czech and the German, change places, the one 
becoming criminal as the other strives to atone for his misdeeds. 
What starts out, in other words, like a murder mystery, a taut and 
suspenseful thriller, turns into a powerful and gripping allegory 
by a writer steeped in the tragic lessons of Czechoslovak history. 
``The Widow Killer'' is also a provocative book, provocative if only 
because one of Kohout's two main characters is a German policeman 
who is a liaison between the criminal police in Prague and the Gestapo. 
This representative of the Reich, a man at first inclined to assume 
that the death camps are a nasty rumor, transforms himself into a 
good man as he helps the police try to catch the murderer. It is a 
measure of Kohout's success in this novel that this transformation, 
which might have come across as contrived, a sappy illustration of 
human universality, is persuasive in a book that is solidly grounded 
in both history and psychology. The story begins in February 1945 
when the murderer kills a German resident of Prague, the Baroness 
of Pomerania and the widow of a German general who turned against 
Hitler. On the day of the murder, an Allied bomb has landed in the 
city and destroyed some buildings. In the midst of the turmoil caused 
by the bomb, a young Czechoslovak assistant detective named Jan Morava 
is assigned by the Germans to investigate the murder. He is supervised 
in the case by Chief Inspector Buback, a German police official from 
Dresden who works in the Prague Gestapo. The Germans claim to be eager 
to capture the murderer to insure the safety of German civilians in 
Prague. The real reason is that Buback's superior, the Gestapo chief 
in Prague, wants to collect information about the Czechoslovak police, 
the only group in the city that could make serious trouble for the 
Nazis as the Allied and Soviet Armies approach. As the story unfolds 
and the murderer adds to his list of victims, Kohout's story shifts 
increasingly to the freighted relationship between Buback and Morava 
as they try to find the murderer. Morava, an intelligent, discreet 
Czech patriot who hates the German occupiers, marries his girlfriend, 
Jitka, who also works in the Prague police department. Buback takes 
a fancy to the young woman and tries to seduce her. So the two men 
are rivals over more than politics. But their common task leads them 
to a grudging admiration for each other and to a sense of their commonality 
in the face both of a malignant occupation and the malignant Czech 
murderer at loose in the city. What makes Kohout's story effective 
is, in part, the complicated authenticity of its background. ``The 
Widow Killer'' provides a vivid portrait of Prague as the era of Nazi 
occupation ended and the uncertain future yawned. Kohout evokes the 
complicated political situation, which included not only the Nazi 
efforts to hold onto Prague as an escape route for their troops on 
the Eastern front but also the deadly competition between Czechoslovak 
democrats and Communists, both of whom know that the end of Nazi power 
is only days away. At the center of the story is the intense, suppressed 
resentment of the Czechoslovaks toward the occupiers and the inclination 
of some of them to take on a kind of personal megalomania, embodied 
in the Prague murderer, more mysterious in its way than the Nazi political 
cruelty that inspired it. ``Adolf Hitler was the product of a deranged 
nation's political will, horrible but explicable, and therefore defeatable,'' 
Morava thinks at one point. ``The unknown and unpredictable widow 
slaughterer stripped the thin veneer of civilization from mankind 
and threatened to return humanity to its savage prehistory.'' The 
denouement of Kohout's book comes against the background of the five-day 
Prague uprising in May 1945 when the Czechoslovaks, led by the Communists, 
took control of the city from the weakened and demoralized German 
troops. Morava and Buback become allies in two senses: one, to catch 
the widow killer, and two, to prevent the Czechoslovaks from taking 
on the murderous aspects of the departing Nazis. The action is worthy 
of a thriller whose ending it would be unfair to give away here. But 
this is a novel written by a former dissident from Czechoslovakia, 
most of whose postwar history does not inspire optimism. Indeed, Kohout 
leaves us with a brief and bitter afterward, indicating that the end 
of ``The Widow Killer'' was really just a new beginning for Czechoslovakia, 
one in which, at least for a time, good and evil become ever more 
indistinguishable. ``History proves that the worst atrocities are 
always committed by the keepers of a sacred truth, who truly believe 
in their mission,'' Morava's Czechoslovak superior, a consistent moral 
voice in this novel, says at one point. ``And that mission includes 
destroying all other truths _ which, of course, are nothing but lies 
_ along with anyone who supports them.'' That statement would seem 
to be Kohout speaking through the character that represents him in 
this book, which, like its author, is deep and pessimistic but not 
unaware that humankind, sooner or later, can learn something from 
the mistakes of the past. THE WIDOW KILLER By Pavel Kohout Illustrated. 
391 pages. St. Martin's Press. $24.95. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>