<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0292 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
One would not expect, perhaps, that a mild-mannered professor from 
Howard University would turn out to be the Indiana Jones of South 
Africa. One might have had an inkling three years ago, when he restored 
an Ark of the Covenant to the Israelites _ the local branch _ after 
finding it in the museum basement where police had dumped it, letting 
its scroll of the Ten Commandments written in Xhosa gather dust for 
decades. But now any doubts are dispelled, because he has just followed 
that up by bringing the bones of the Prophetess back to her people. 
In doing so, he fulfilled two predictions made by Nonteta Bungu, founding 
mother of the Church of the Prophetess Nonteta, which still claims 
1,000 adherents in the treeless, hut-dappled hills of the Eastern 
Cape. Before she died in 1935 while unjustly imprisoned by the South 
African authorities in an insane asylum, among the prophecies she 
made, her followers say, were: ``I will return in a different form,'' 
and ``Look to the Americans _ they will help you one day.'' The story 
of how Robert Edgar, a 50-year-old professor of African history at 
Howard, the historically black university in Washington, came to uncover 
the bones of a long-dead religious figure here is a triumphant tale 
of U.S.-South African cooperation. And her village's quest to get 
the new government to release her body after the old government had 
refused for six decades to part with it is a parable of change in 
South Africa, where black historical figures are finally getting the 
monuments that English and Afrikaner conquerors had long reserved 
for themselves. The two stories culminated recently on a windswept 
hilltop here in the village of her birth. As the girls' choir of Joe 
Slovo Secondary School sang ``All Is Well'' and one of 600 mourners 
blasted a last salute into the sky with his pistol, the polished wood 
coffin bearing the skull, leg and arm bones of Nonteta sank slowly 
into place beneath a fine new granite headstone. Sixty-three years 
ago, she had been wrapped in a blanket and tossed atop the coffin 
of a prisoner in an unmarked grave in Pretoria. ``I am so happy,'' 
said Tobi Nokrawuzana, 91, who in 1927 walked the 600 miles to Pretoria 
with 30 other church members to see their leader one last time. ``This 
is what I have been praying for for so long.'' And Edgar expressed 
his delight that a mission begun, in a roundabout way, on his first 
visit here as a graduate student in 1973 ``ended just the way I'd 
hoped.'' Nonteta Bungu was born about 1875 in the middle of a messianic 
age for the Xhosa people, the tribes sandwiched on South Africa's 
Indian Ocean coast between the imperialistic Zulus to the northeast 
and the northward-moving whites. With the end of the last Frontier 
War in 1852, the Xhosa had virtually given up armed struggle. Their 
nation had been utterly broken in 1857 by a 15-year-old prophetess, 
Nongqawuse, their Joan of Arc, who convinced them that if they killed 
all their cattle and burned their grain, an army of ancestors would 
rise from the sea to destroy the English invaders. When the ghostly 
legions failed to emerge, the starving people were forced to beg the 
settlers for work. Nonteta did not find her calling until 1918, as 
the worldwide influenza pandemic was decimating her people. During 
her own bouts of fever, she dreamed that God was punishing the earth. 
On recovering, she began to preach against alcohol, adultery and pork-eating, 
and to insist that impoverished blacks unite because a day of judgment 
was imminent. Although her populist message was not anti-white, Edgar 
said, she had the misfortune to be noticed by the government after 
the Bulhoek Massacre of 1921. In that episode, government troops marched 
on the squatter city of 3,000 Israelites, the followers of the militant 
evangelist Enoch Mgijima, whose desperate land seizures were supported 
by the fledgling African National Congress. After days of negotiations 
over eviction, the sides lined up facing each other. Shots rang out, 
and the Israelites charged the machine guns. Minutes later, one soldier 
had been speared and 183 Israelites were dead. The massacre horrified 
blacks and liberal whites. The embarrassed government began cracking 
down on many sects here. Nonteta was arrested and sent to a local 
asylum, her visions and her habit of preaching while ``reading'' from 
her bare hands ascribed to madness. When her followers kept marching 
to visit her there she was transferred to faraway Pretoria. Although 
doctors at Weskoppies Asylum there admitted ``there is no reason she 
should not be so discharged having regard only to her mental condition,'' 
they agreed that she might cause trouble outside and held her until 
she died in May 1935. Word did not reach her followers for two weeks, 
and when they asked for the body, the government said it was buried 
and would stay buried. The South African government considered the 
bodies even of executed prisoners state property. Rumors that she 
was alive, jailed on Robben Island, persisted among her followers 
until 1990, when Nelson Mandela was freed. Last year Edgar returned 
to a village where he had met some of Nonteta's followers 25 years 
ago while researching a book on the Israelites. (The Israelites, modeled 
on a black American church, still have 15,000 members. In 1995, in 
the basement of a museum in Grahamstown, Edgar found their wooden 
ark, captured by police in 1921.) As he wandered around, ``a woman 
suddenly shouted: `Bob Edgar! You're Bob Edgar! But something has 
happened to you _ your beard is white!''' he recalled the other day, 
laughing. ``Because of Nonteta's prophecy _ `Look to the Americans' 
_ my visit back then had become part of the oral tradition.'' Seeing 
how upset church elders still were, even decades later, and suspecting 
that the new government would be sympathetic, he began searching Pretoria 
burial records. At the Rebecca Street Cemetery, he came across a ledger 
entry for ``Nonteto, age 62,'' buried in unmarked plot No. 99 in the 
African Paupers section on May 22, 1935, after dying of stomach and 
liver cancer in the Weskoppies Asylum. She was found. One of those 
who was moved enough to drive 10 hours to attend the funeral the other 
day, bringing his 5-year-old son, was Coen Nienaber, the University 
of Pretoria forensic archaeologist who spent three days in July meticulously 
exhuming Plot 99. ``Usually it's just another skeleton in another 
box and another report to be filled out,'' said Nienaber, who normally 
digs up Iron Age graves for archaeologists and shallow ones for police. 
``This one was special.'' He concluded that the remaining bones were 
indeed Nonteta's. They were those of a 5-foot-6 woman in her early 
60s with signs of advanced cancer, buried, as the records indicated, 
coffinless above the coffin of a male prisoner. So, with about $5,000 
from the provincial government, which is eagerly hunting for nonwhite 
heroes to memorialize, her body was brought back home. Edgar tried 
to give the family the credit, but Denver Webb, the department's director 
of museums, waved that off. ``If you hadn't done the research, we'd 
have nothing,'' he said. ``My deputy is from that community, and he'd 
never even mentioned her.'' Or, as the Rev. Mzwandile Mabelu, current 
head of the church, put it at the end of a long, song-filled service: 
``I thank the earth because Nonteta's remains are here today after 
being in her so long. I thank your God of America because through 
your spirits, Bob has been able to return her. And I thank you, Bob, 
and wish you a good day. Because your task has been great indeed.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>