<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0479 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Yankees' aggressive pursuit of the slugger Albert Belle 
appears to be accelerating negotiations with another free agent, Bernie 
Williams. Williams' agent, Scott Boras, has asked to meet with George 
Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, in Tampa, Fla. Boras is 
looking to engage in his first face-to-face negotiation with any Yankee 
official since the star center fielder became a free agent last month. 
In the mean time, the Yankees will play host to another free-agent 
outfielder, Brian Jordan, at Yankee Stadium Wednesday. Jordan will 
meet with New York Mets officials Thursday. Boras could not be reached 
for comment Tuesday, but the meeting will come at a critical time 
in the Yankees' courtship of Belle, who hit 49 home runs for the Chicago 
White Sox this past season. Joe Torre, the Yankees' manager, played 
golf with Belle in Phoenix on Tuesday, and Brian Cashman, the team's 
general manager, met with the player and his agent. ``It looked like 
he was very interested in us,'' Torre said. ``He was easy to talk 
to.'' Of the temperamental Belle, Steinbrenner asked rhetorically: 
``Can you handle him? I believe we can. It's what my manager wants 
and my general manager wants. I have no fear about it.'' If the Yankees 
were to sign Belle _ who may draw a four- or five-year offer of between 
$10 million and $13 million a year from the Yankees _ they would presumably 
end negotiations with Williams. The ties would be cut between the 
center fielder and the team for which he has starred and led to two 
world championships. In addition, the Yankees' withdrawal from negotiations 
with Williams could cost the center fielder millions and millions 
of dollars. Shortly after Mike Piazza signed a seven-year, $91 million 
contract with the Mets, Boras suggested that Williams could get an 
even richer contract than the all-star catcher did. Boras maintains 
that a large number of teams remain interested in Williams, though, 
as his consistent practice, he declines to identify those teams. On 
the face of it, however, it appears as if the market for Williams 
has shrunk dramatically in the last month. The Los Angeles Dodgers 
were said to be interested, but they signed Devon White. The Colorado 
Rockies supposedly were ready to make a major push, but they re-signed 
Darryl Hamilton and are focusing their efforts on Kevin Brown. Texas 
apparently will not make a significant offer to Williams because they 
do not want to complicate future negotiations with Juan Gonzalez. 
The Baltimore Orioles have stated an interest in Williams, but probably 
would not be willing to offer him anything close to the package to 
which Boras referred. (The Orioles have offered a three-year, $22.5 
million deal to their own free agent first baseman, Rafael Palmeiro.) 
The Boston Red Sox are meeting with Williams on Thursday and Friday, 
and it is unclear whether they would be willing to offer Williams 
more than the failed five-year, $63 million deal they dangled before 
popular first baseman Mo Vaughn. The Arizona Diamondbacks met with 
Williams last week and their interest in Williams appears to be sincere. 
But executives with other teams believe the Diamondbacks are the front-runners 
in the bidding war for left-hander Randy Johnson. What is not known 
is whether any Arizona offer to Williams would be diminished in the 
event the Diamondbacks sign the pitcher. The Yankees' interest in 
Williams has always served as a negotiating anchor for Boras, but 
now the Yankees may be pulling out and that could curtail Williams' 
asking price. The Yankees are serious about Belle; Cashman's get-together 
Tuesday with Belle and his agent is said by others to have gone well. 
Arn Tellem, Belle's agent, is expected to field offers from the Red 
Sox and the Yankees in the next 48 hours and perhaps complete a deal 
by the weekend. Belle also has the option of returning to the Chicago 
White Sox for the remaining three years and $30 million of a deal 
he signed after the 1996 season. Belle must make that decision by 
Dec. 2. Jordan appears to be the Yankees' third choice, for now. He 
will meet with officials Wednesday at Yankee Stadium, after having 
met with the Atlanta Braves on Tuesday. Jim Turner, Jordan's agent, 
said the discussions with the Braves were ``extremely productive,'' 
though he declined to say whether Atlanta made any concrete offers. 
Jordan will also meet with the Orioles later this week. The Yankees 
have also approached the Anaheim Angels about a possible trade for 
center fielder Jim Edmonds and the Montreal Expos about a deal for 
Rondell White, who has specifically asked his team to trade him to 
the Yankees. On Tuesday, Montreal general manager Jim Beattie said 
any team interested in acquiring the 26-year-old White would have 
to give up a lot to get him. As part of their effort to complete a 
1999 contract with Darryl Strawberry, Yankee officials will gather 
with representatives of the players' union and the owners' Players 
Relations Committee Wednesday. Eric Grossman, who represents Strawberry, 
said the deal eventually will be completed, with the Yankees paying 
the outfielder $2.5 million. But the Yankees do not want his salary 
to be subject to a luxury tax in the event that Strawberry, who is 
recovering from colon cancer, is unable to play for part or all of 
the 1999 season. Grossman said Strawberry had four rounds of chemotherapy 
last week and suffered no side effects. Strawberry's weight, Grossman 
said, has increased from the low 180s to 205 pounds. ``He's even started 
throwing some light weights around,'' said Grossman, who reiterated 
that Strawberry's intent is to be ready to play next season. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>