<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0178 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The only daughter of Fidel Castro walks into a midtown French restaurant 
looking disheveled, out of sorts, lost. She is an hour and 20 minutes 
late. She said she had lost her way going to Times Square in the subway 
from an apartment in Jackson Heights, Queens, where she was temporarily 
staying. She knows she has to pose for a picture right after lunch; 
yet, she complains, she forgot to wear makeup, and her ensemble _ 
loose black jeans and a sweatshirt _ can only be called, even in the 
kindest terms, young urban chic. Like her father, Alina Fernandez, 
42, has long fingers and a darkness in her eyes that makes her appear 
distrustful. Unlike her father, she has no power, no money, no home, 
not even a famous last name. But she has stories to tell. And, as 
the children of famous men and women often do, Ms. Fernandez has written 
a book that has just been released _ a tantalizing prospect for anyone 
who is curious about the private life of Castro. Yet very little in 
the book is about Castro himself. As the title accurately reflects, 
``Castro's Daughter: An Exile's Memoir of Cuba'' (St. Martin's Press) 
is the story of Ms. Fernandez and the Cuba she knew for almost 40 
years, the years her father has been in power. ``It is my biography, 
not his,'' she said. ``But it is his name that sells, not mine.'' 
Ms. Fernandez, who said she never had her father's direct telephone 
number, visited his house only once and spent very little time with 
him and his family, seven sons by three women. Since she left Cuba 
in 1993, disguised as a Spanish tourist with a false passport, the 
two have not spoken, she said. But even before she left, relations 
were strained, in part because Ms. Fernandez did not like Castro as 
a father or as a political leader. In 1989, while still living in 
Cuba, Ms. Fernandez began to criticize Castro's government publicly 
and became a fixture in the dissident movement. ``I'm just another 
exile with a story to tell,'' she said, eyeing her bowl of lettuce 
with suspicion. ``I'm nervous today, and when I'm nervous I can't 
eat.'' Ms. Fernandez ordered a tuna salad with dressing on the side, 
but she had the waiter return the tuna to the kitchen. Too big, she 
said. Instead, she asked for a glass of red wine. She fingered her 
cigarettes nervously and, as soon as the lunch crowd had left, she 
lighted up and asked for coffee. She has long had a troubled relationship 
with food. She said she was anorexic for a while and was once so sick 
that one of her four former husbands may have saved her life by putting 
bits of half-chewed food into her mouth, as if she were a bird. ``It 
is not easy being Fidel Castro's daughter,'' she said with a sigh. 
``In Cuba or here. When people see the child of their executioner, 
it reminds them of him. When I see his victims, I can't help feeling 
some tension, some guilt.'' There was pain in her voice, and a touch 
of boredom, too, as she told her story. Ms. Fernandez was born in 
1956, from a liaison between Castro and Natalia Revuelta, a beautiful, 
rich socialite married to a doctor, Orlando Fernandez, who gave Alina 
his last name. Ms. Revuelta fell in love with Castro, who was then 
married to a woman named Myrta Diaz-Balart, in the heyday of the insurrection 
that propelled him to power in 1959. The two met when Ms. Revuelta, 
who knew that Castro was an opposition leader, sent him a key to an 
apartment she kept in a ritzy Havana neighborhood so that he could 
use it to plan his underground activities. When Castro was caught 
and sent to prison in 1953, Ms. Revuelta and Castro corresponded in 
secret until, one day, he mailed to his wife a letter intended for 
Ms. Revuelta and vice versa. Ms. Diaz-Balart filed for divorce and 
later left the country. Once Castro seized control of the government, 
Dr. Fernandez also left the country, with the couple's older daughter, 
Natalie, leaving Ms. Revuelta in Havana with Alina. While Castro visited 
his mistress and daughter quite often in the early years of the revolution, 
he never offered to marry Ms. Revuelta and never treated his daughter 
as such. By the time he offered to give his daughter his last name, 
it was too late. Alina, then 12, told him she preferred hers. As her 
book makes clear, Ms. Fernandez was the victim of her father's mood 
swings. Sometimes he appeared to care for her; most times, he ignored 
her. On occasion he brought her gifts, Balzac's complete works in 
Frenchy and a doll that looked like him. A few times, he called her 
to the presidential palace to admonish her for her rebellious character. 
But, Ms. Fernandez said, there was no pattern to his behavior, making 
it impossible for her to even attempt to please him. ``I lived my 
life as if I were any other Cuban in a country with no food, no electricity, 
no good-paying jobs, no freedom to move, not even freedom to leave 
if you didn't like it,'' she said. ``Being his daughter meant only 
that I was watched all the time.'' But it also meant that despite 
her rebelliousness and obvious dislike of her father's government, 
she was never jailed, as many dissidents were. Nor was her life like 
everyone else's. Jobs were available when she wanted them, and competitive 
swimming and ballet schools readily accepted her as a child. But her 
father rarely sent her money and, like most other Cubans, she said, 
she had to struggle to make a living. It is difficult to read Ms. 
Fernandez's personality. During the course of one interview, she seemed 
shy and frightened, a needy child longing for attention that she knows 
she will not get. But she also comes across as resentful, openly criticizing 
people who were once close friends, and, she says, who attempted to 
use her or control her. And then, she can be warm, too. In conversation, 
she is smart and witty, an inquisitive writer with a sarcastic streak. 
``Alina is a story in damage,'' said Wendy Gimbel, a New York writer 
whose own book about the Revuelta family was released early this year. 
In Ms. Gimbel's book, ``Havana Dreams: A Story of Cuba'', Ms. Fernandez 
is not a likable character. She comes off as unstable, greedy and 
uncaring. Antonio Valle-Vallejo, a writer and Spanish teacher who 
has known Ms. Fernandez since childhood, says that for much of her 
life Ms. Fernandez was punished for being her father's daughter. In 
Cuba, he said, Ms. Fernandez was resented by people who did not like 
her father, envied by those who wished they were related to Castro 
and mistrusted by virtually everyone else. She had few friends and 
even fewer privileges. ``If the world knew the truth about the history 
of this young woman, perhaps her situation would be different,'' he 
wrote in a newspaper column in 1988, the year Ms. Fernandez began 
her desperate attempt to leave Cuba. At the time, she was married 
to a Mexican citizen and wanted to travel to Mexico. Her father denied 
her request. The marriage ended in divorce. Eventually, aided by Spanish 
friends with ties to human rights organizations, Ms. Fernandez left 
Cuba, leaving her only child, a daughter, Mumin, behind. Soon after, 
Castro allowed his granddaughter to leave. Now 20, she lives in Miami 
with her father. After a brief stay in New York, Ms. Fernandez moved 
to Spain. She now lives in Madrid, the one place where she has found 
a measure of peace and where, she says, she hopes she will one day 
be able to stop talking about the man people call her father and she 
calls Fidel. ``I want it to end with the book,'' she said. ``But if 
it doesn't, I've come to terms with it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>