<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0317 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Mike Shanahan is vice president and head coach of the Denver Broncos. 
It's the vice president title that's the thing. Shanahan picks his 
coaches, his players, his practice schedule, his offensive plays, 
the game plan and the Broncos' overall direction. And what a path 
the Broncos are blazing. With their dominating 30-7 victory over the 
Kansas City Chiefs here Monday night, the Broncos are 47-16 in four 
seasons (including the post-season) under Shanahan, have won at least 
9 of their first 10 games in each of the last three seasons, are the 
defending Super Bowl champions and, this season, have won 10 games 
and lost none. It is official now. With six regular-season games left, 
Shanahan and Denver are chasing history: an unbeaten and untied 16-game 
regular season. Who would have thought it possible 10 years ago when 
Shanahan was head coach of the Raiders in a miserable situation where 
control was not his. Shanahan refuses to offer details about his brief 
Raider tenure and continues to keep the depth of his frustration there 
inside. But he has said this: ``I thought I was going to the Raiders 
to be the head coach. That is not what I was.'' A puppet? Maybe. But 
make no mistake, Al Davis, the Raiders' managing general partner, 
was in control. Here is how much: After the Raiders' initial 7-9 season 
under Shanahan in 1988, Nick Nicolau, then the Raiders' receivers 
coach, and Art Shell, the offensive line coach, got into an argument. 
Nicolau was a coach Shanahan had hired. Davis had forced Shanahan 
_ against Shanahan's wishes _ to keep several of the Raiders' assistant 
coaches, including Shell. Several of those coaches did not like it 
that Shanahan had been hired from outside the organization. Several 
of them wanted the job. Shanahan was 35 then, young and fresh and 
full of innovative ideas. Several coaches from the Raiders staff bucked 
against him. They wanted him to fail. Shanahan wanted big changes: 
For example, he wanted to run 80 plays in rapid-fire practices and 
games, rather than the 50 or so plays in the slow-paced style the 
Raiders had long featured. Some coaches and veteran players resisted; 
this was not the Raiders way at all, they insisted. After the Nicolau-Shell 
argument, Shanahan dismissed Shell and a few other coaches. A few 
days later, Davis hired them all back. And then Davis dismissed Nicolau. 
And then hired Fred Biletnikoff as Nicolau's replacement. Power play 
to Davis. Four games into the next season, after a 1-3 start, Davis 
dismissed Shanahan. ``Getting fired is tough on anybody,'' Shanahan 
said here after Denver beat the Chiefs, making the Broncos only the 
eighth team since the merger of the old National and American Football 
Leagues in 1970 to reach 10-0. ``Not succeeding with the Raiders hurt. 
I think some of the edge is taken off that when you win the Super 
Bowl. But we didn't succeed here two seasons ago when we got off to 
a 12-1 start and lost at home in the playoffs to Jacksonville. That 
was an opportunity wasted. That still sticks in my craw.'' In essence, 
this is Mike Shanahan. The failures nearly match the victories. The 
ones who doubted him he remembers nearly as much as the ones who applaud 
him. Winning the last Super Bowl is not enough. He wants another. 
And if it wasn't for that Jacksonville playoff debacle, Shanahan believes, 
he might be shooting for three consecutive rings. Driven. He wakes 
up thinking about winning. He goes to bed thinking about winning. 
And he is willing to pay the price for it _ with tireless work and 
attention to detail. He wants his place in history. Winning the Super 
Bowl again is, indeed, the priority. But 16-0? Believe it, he smells 
it. You want to leave a mark? That would be one for the ages. It is 
a vision dancing in his head. His team's, too. ``If we go 16-0, it 
would not be finished,'' Denver safety Tyrone Braxton said. ``We want 
the Super Bowl again. But Mike is already being called the best coach 
in today's game. We do that, we go 16-0, and he goes down in history 
as one of the best ever. He would never say that, though. He is committed. 
As a defensive player, I always try to get into the opposing offensive 
coordinator's head. It is very difficult to get into Mike Shanahan's 
head.'' Ask Kansas City. Shanahan, besides his superior talent in 
assembling and orchestrating an offense, has a knack for blending 
players' skills with his schemes. Take quarterback Bubby Brister, 
the backup to John Elway. Brister is now 4-0 as a starter this season, 
including Monday night's game when Elway watched with bruised ribs. 
Brister runs better than Elway. First drive versus the Chiefs, Shanahan 
calls for a sell-out on the run and a bootleg keeper by Brister. Thirty-eight 
yards later, Brister was in the end zone and had achieved the longest 
scoring run by a quarterback in Denver history. If Elway were in the 
game, that play at that time would likely not have been called. Rather 
than wring his hands over not having Elway, Shanahan cooked up something 
that would milk what he did have in Brister. The Raiders can expect 
more when they visit Denver on Sunday as the Broncos continue their 
quest. And it is Shanahan who has lately had the last laugh on the 
Raiders: He is 6-1 against the Raiders as Denver's head coach. Bill 
Romanowski, the Denver linebacker who spit on the 49ers' J.J. Stokes 
last season, causing an uproar, appreciates Shanahan. ``That next 
afternoon, things were getting wild, and I walked up to Mike's office 
for advice; I wanted to hear what he had to say,'' Romanowski said. 
He wanted to get into Shanahan's head. ``Mike said I messed up,'' 
Romanowski said. `` He said I had already apologized and that I should 
keep apologizing. He told me to hold myself accountable for my actions.'' 
Blunt and effective. Romanowski did what Shanahan advised. The incident 
could have lingered. It is now barely an afterthought. The Broncos 
have been good for four quarters in nearly every game, but their early 
play has been incredible. They are crushing opponents, 100-13, in 
the first quarter and by 42-3 on both teams' opening drives. This 
indicates two things: Shanahan's scripted plays that start each Denver 
game, that are practiced meticulously, work. It also says that he 
is winning the cat-and-mouse coaching game. Shanahan does the little 
things for his players. Each one has his own hotel room on the road. 
He serves them breakfast and lunch daily at the team's complex. Practice 
on Fridays is less physical because the Broncos don't wear pads. Mondays 
are a day when players arrive for work when they want, as long as 
the work is done. He rewards them financially, too. Produce, and you 
are treated fairly at contract time. ``In my career I have played 
for Bill Walsh, George Seifert, Rich Kotite, Ray Rhodes and Mike Shanahan,'' 
said Romanowski, an 11-year veteran. ``Mike Shanahan is the best coach 
I have played for. When you win a Super Bowl, you get that hungry 
feeling to win another. It starts at the top and by understanding 
what Mike wants.'' By getting into his head. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>