<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0155 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When roasting turkey, some people prefer to wing it, relying on a 
ballpark feeling for doneness. Others _ especially on major holidays 
_ want precision. They want to know exactly what they're getting and 
when they're getting it. And beyond the big day, they want to keep 
track of subtle differences, so they can modify temperatures a few 
degrees each time until they achieve perfection. For this, of course, 
they need a meat thermometer. Most meat thermometers are fairly accurate 
and vary only by two or three degrees. Their ease of use, though, 
varies widely. I tried instant read thermometers, which cannot remain 
in the oven, and oven thermometers, which are inserted in the thickest 
part of the meat at the beginning of cooking. And in the spirit of 
Thanksgiving, I tried them out on a plain roasted turkey. The Hoffritz 
meat and poultry thermometer, $9.99 at Zabar's, 2245 Broadway (80th 
Street), (212) 787-2000, and the Taylor basic meat dial thermometer, 
$5.98 at Zabar's, both oven thermometers, were clunky and difficult 
to read. They have thick shafts that left holes so large the turkey 
looked like it had been shot, and the thermometers were so top heavy 
I had to push them far down in the meat just so they wouldn't fall 
out. The other oven thermometer, made by Polder, is a digital unit 
that sits on a counter top or, with its magnet back, sticks on the 
oven door. It has a thin metal wire that stretches to a long, thin 
metal probe, which is inserted into the meat in the oven. It has nifty 
features, beyond giving continuous temperature readings without the 
cook having to open the oven door, like a timer and an alarm that 
will sound when the desired temperature is reached. It worked well 
and was very easy to read, but I found the wire cumbersome, especially 
when it came time for basting. One wrong move and the digital unit 
could topple to the floor, a pricey loss _ it's $21.99 at the Vinegar 
Factory, 431 East 91st St. (York Avenue), (212) 987-0885. Instant 
read thermometers can be troublesome, too. The Taylor classic one-inch 
dial model, $9.98 at Zabar's, is the thermometer that many chefs use. 
It is small and accurate and usually comes with a clip to attach to 
a shirt _ you can be armed and at the ready on Thanksgiving Day. And 
the shaft is thin, so you can test the meat in several places without 
making it look like Swiss cheese. But it takes about 45 seconds to 
give a reading _ so you have either to take the roasting pan out of 
the oven entirely or to stand there with the oven door open while 
the oven loses heat. Surprisingly, the least professional-looking 
thermometer _ Maverick's Redi-Chek electronic food probe _ proved 
to be the easiest to use. Though it has a long shaft, which can be 
inserted in the meat, it is only the quarter-inch metal tip that measures 
the temperature. This allows you to pinpoint the center of the meat 
and know that exactly that point will be measured. It also works the 
most quickly of the instant read thermometers. You open the oven door, 
insert the thermometer, wait five seconds, press a button, wait another 
two or three seconds and, when it beeps, the temperature pops up on 
the digital display. The thermometer can then be removed and the oven 
door shut, and the reading will remain on the thermometer. Its only 
useless feature is a bar at the bottom of the digital display, which 
reads ``medium,'' ``medium-well'' and so on. (I'll avoid the temperature 
debate here, but whatever point you deem correct, remember that turkey 
continues to cook once it's out of the oven, so take it out when the 
thermometer reads a few degrees below that.) The Redi-Chek is $19.95 
at Broadway Panhandler, 477 Broome St. (Wooster Street), (212) 966-3434. 
Testing these thermometers in a deep pan of 180-degree water revealed 
another characteristic worth considering. First, I dipped them just 
a half-inch into the water, then three inches. The two instant read 
thermometers were not sensitive enough at the tip _ they gave a reading 
20 degrees below what it was, which means that when you insert them 
into a turkey, they may read the internal temperature as lower than 
it is. This explained why, when I tested them on a roasted pork tenderloin, 
which is only about an inch and a half thick, they had such low readings, 
while the Redi-Chek digital indicated the pork was done. And it was 
done. I put the thermometers to one last test: the drop. Thermometers 
so often roll off counter tops, it seemed worth testing their durability. 
I dropped each from counter-top height onto a tile floor. The glass 
in the Hoffritz dial cracked straight down the middle and a piece 
of plastic broke off the Polder. The others survived unscathed. Again, 
the Redi-Chek has an edge. It lies flat on your counter, so it can't 
roll off. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>