<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0145 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Last year, our Thanksgiving turkey was so perfectly cooked that it 
practically ruined dinner. Like many cooks, we had succumbed to the 
mania for solving the classic turkey dilemma: how to fully cook the 
dark meat without drying out the white meat. Since we both spend the 
holiday with Chris' sister, Susan, and her family, she joined us in 
the research. After much consultation, we finally decided we had found 
the solution. And in fact we had. Through a convoluted process that 
involved raising and lowering the oven heat as well as turning the 
turkey upside down, right side up, and from one side to the other 
as it cooked, we thought we had reached turkey nirvana. When the bird 
was sliced, not only were the thighs just right but the breast meat, 
fully cooked with no trace of pink, virtually oozed juice. We all 
exulted that this was one juicy, perfect bird. There was just one 
problem: nobody liked it all that much. When the platter was passed 
around for second helpings, the white meat went begging. Although 
technically excellent, this simply was not the turkey that we all 
remembered from childhood Thanksgivings. When we spooned cranberry 
sauce onto slices of the breast, for example, the juice didn't soak 
into the meat as it usually did. Even the sandwiches we made the next 
day were disappointing; with the meat so juicy, the added mayonnaise 
and cranberry sauce made the triple-deckers we fashioned seem gloppy, 
rather than just right. The experience brought home a lesson sometimes 
overlooked in today's relentless search for culinary perfection: contrary 
to the perfectly fine views you may encounter elsewhere, with something 
as personal as cooking, making something just right can sometimes 
be totally wrong. This maxim is particularly applicable on holidays, 
when ritual and memory are far more important than the actual quality 
of the food being served. On these occasions, the turkey or roast 
or ham is not so much a gustatory delight as a link to the past, a 
central player in a rite that helps binds each of us to our own personal 
history. This year we won't make the same mistake. Instead of fussing 
over the turkey, we will return to cooking it just as our grandmothers 
did. After sprinkling the breast with lots of salt and pepper and 
rubbing it with butter, we will cover the breast with a damp dish 
towel and put the bird into a 400-degree oven. Except for re-wetting 
the towel once or twice with pan juices and taking it off for the 
last hour of cooking, nothing else will be done to that turkey for 
the next several hours except to just let it cook. With no worries 
about pampering the turkey, culinary efforts can be devoted to making 
an array of chutneys and relishes to spoon over the breast meat and 
moisten it. Classic Southern preparations like chow chows or picallilies 
are excellent, and relishes involving cranberries are also popular 
for obvious reasons. But more adventuresome mixtures like chutneys, 
salsas or pickled fruits are also very welcome. In fact, this approach 
is an easy way to combine the requisite tradition with a bit of culinary 
innovation. As an added advantage, these condiments will provide the 
turkey with some real flavor. Let's face it, turkey by itself, moist 
or dry, is just not that exciting. Yet another benefit of this approach 
is that all the relishes can be made well in advance. This means that 
on Thanksgiving Day, you can enjoy being with your guests or use your 
time to make elaborate side dishes, depending on your temperament. 
So let's hear it for turkey with relatively dry white meat. It's less 
work, it lets you observe tradition while also bringing exciting new 
flavors to the table and _ if your culinary heritage is anything like 
ours _ it results in a turkey that looks and tastes like Thanksgiving. 
CRANBERRY-CURRANT RELISH WITH TOASTED WALNUTS Time: 15 minutes 1 cup 
shelled walnuts 1 12-ounce bag fresh cranberries 1 cup currants (or 
substitute dark raisins) 1 cup sugar \ teaspoon vanilla 1 tablespoon 
fresh lemon juice. 1. In a heavy saucepan over medium heat, toast 
walnuts, shaking frequently, until just fragrant, about 4 minutes. 
Remove from heat, chop roughly, and set aside. 2. In same saucepan, 
combine cranberries, currants, sugar and 1{ cups of water, and cook 
over medium-high heat, stirring occasionally, until cranberries begin 
to pop, about 4 minutes. Reduce heat to low, and simmer gently until 
slightly thickened, about 3 minutes. 3. Remove from heat, stir in 
the walnuts, vanilla and lemon juice, allow to cool to room temperature 
and serve. Covered and refrigerated, the relish will keep about a 
week. Yield: 5 cups. PICKLED GRAPES WITH GINGER AND CHILIES Time: 
15 minutes, plus 1 hour resting time 1{ cups white vinegar 1 cup white 
sugar { cup brown sugar 2 tablespoons coriander seeds 1 tablespoon 
ground cinnamon 7 cloves 1 teaspoon salt 1 piece of ginger the size 
of your little finger, peeled and cut into slices about the thickness 
of a dime 3 jalapeno chili peppers, diced thin 3 cups red and/or green 
seedless grapes. 1. In a large saucepan, combine the vinegar, white 
and brown sugars, coriander, cinnamon, cloves and salt. Mix well and 
bring to a boil over medium high heat. 2. Remove from heat, stir in 
the ginger, jalapenos and grapes, and allow to stand one hour. Covered 
and refrigerated, these grapes will keep almost indefinitely. Yield: 
6 cups. GREEN APPLE-APRICOT CHUTNEY Time: 25 minutes 1 tablespoon 
olive oil 1 onion, thinly sliced 1 ripe tomato, diced small 2 green 
apples like Granny Smiths, cored and diced small 1 cup roughly chopped 
dried apricots 1 tablespoon minced ginger 1 tablespoon minced garlic 
1 teaspoon minced fresh chili pepper of your choice 2/3 cup white 
vinegar { cup brown sugar { cup orange juice. 1. In a large saute 
pan over medium heat, heat oil until hot but not smoking. Add onions 
and saute, stirring occasionally, until transparent, about 5 to 7 
minutes. 2. Add the tomato, apples, apricots, ginger, garlic and chili, 
and cook, stirring, an additional 2 minutes. 3. Add the vinegar, sugar 
and orange juice and bring just to a simmer, stirring constantly. 
Remove from heat, and cool to room temperature. Covered and refrigerated, 
this chutney will keep for two weeks. Yield: 5 cups. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>