<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0447 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times said in an editorial on Wednesday, Nov. 18: When 
the 21 Republicans and 16 Democrats on the House Judiciary Committee 
convene Thursday under the uncertain leadership of the committee's 
chairman, Rep. Henry Hyde, the partisan interests will be easy enough 
to discern. Republicans will be trying to determine if recommending 
impeachment hearings to the full House will damage them politically. 
Democrats will be trying to defend a president whose conduct they 
find distasteful and shift criticism to an independent counsel they 
will depict as dangerous. The question for the rest of us _ and especially 
the next House Speaker, Bob Livingston _ is what outcome would serve 
the public interest. This question must be addressed against the backdrop 
of current political realities. There is still a mood of national 
revulsion about President Clinton's conduct, his public lies to the 
American people, his sworn misrepresentations in court and grand jury 
proceedings and his use of others to lie for him, both in public and 
in legal statements. But that mood is moderated by the widespread 
belief, based on troubling evidence, that Kenneth Starr, the independent 
counsel, used improper tactics to catch him. As a result, there is 
little public backing for removing Clinton from office by resignation 
or impeachment on the present evidence. Yet it is imperative, as a 
matter of orderly governance in the future, for Congress to find a 
way to condemn Clinton for his signal failing in one of the core duties 
of his office _ to uphold the rule of law. It must also find a way 
to air the arguments on whether Starr has abused fairness or due process 
in investigating the president. That means at a minimum that Hyde 
must allow Starr's tactics, as well as the president's conduct, to 
be a full part of these hearings. The matters with which Starr has 
been entrusted are too important and his charges against Clinton too 
profound for him to dodge a public accounting. Hyde cannot function 
as Starr's bodyguard. Nor should he, or committee Democrats, rush 
ahead with plans to call other witnesses until the import of Starr's 
testimony can be digested. What will make this already polarized committee 
into a shambles _ and invite the threatened Democratic boycott _ is 
Hyde's decision to suddenly call witnesses like John Huang, the campaign 
finance figure, without establishing an orderly context for working 
through the entire case. The first priority Thursday is to give the 
Democrats and the White House a fair chance and ample time to test 
Starr, just as he must be given a fair chance to argue that his evidence 
warrants impeachment. This page is eager to see Starr's response to 
the accumulation of troubling disclosures about his methods. In the 
past, we have defended the independent counsel against a White House 
campaign of vilification that ignored his status as a duly appointed 
government prosecutor. But the standard we set for him on Jan. 22, 
when the Monica Lewinsky scandal broke, still applies: ``The burden 
on him in this case is to prove he had reason to pursue this line 
of inquiry. He must also show that he did not exceed his mandate or 
abuse his prosecutorial powers through entrapment or the use of biased 
or delusional witnesses.'' The nation needs to hear Starr's answers 
to important questions that the Democrats on the Judiciary Committee 
have every right to raise. Starr said in his referral to Congress 
that he first learned of the Lewinsky affair from Linda Tripp on Jan. 
12. But the office may have been tipped on or by Jan. 9. That is the 
same day Ms. Tripp suggested to Ms. Lewinsky that she refuse to sign 
her affidavit in the Paula Jones case until Vernon Jordan guaranteed 
her a job. Starr needs to react to the Democratic charge that the 
alleged jobs-for-silence deal involving Jordan originated with his 
witness, Ms. Tripp, or his prosecutors. Another area that needs an 
airing is whether there was collusion between Starr's office and the 
attorneys for Paula Jones that could have been designed to catch Clinton 
in a perjury trap. On Jan. 16 Starr's deputies confronted Ms. Lewinsky 
about filing a false affidavit in the Jones case. Yet, at that moment, 
the judge in the case had not yet received the document. How did Starr's 
staff know about it? The question whether Starr knowingly allowed 
Ms. Tripp to feed data about Ms. Lewinsky and her dealings with the 
prosecutors to Ms. Jones' attorneys on Jan. 16 also looms large. Another 
question is whether Starr's staff violated Ms. Lewinsky's rights and 
Justice Department rules during their initial meeting by threats designed 
to prevent her from calling her lawyer. But whatever the verdict on 
Starr, it will not solve the overriding question of what Congress 
and the public can do to protect the institution of the presidency 
from the recklessness and disrespect inflicted on it by Clinton. The 
legal aphorism that questions whether a miscreant should go free just 
because the constable stumbles is useful here. Clinton's lawyers learned 
last Dec. 5 that Ms. Jones' lawyers knew about Monica Lewinsky. That 
means he presumably had more than a month before his Jan. 17 deposition 
to figure out a way to avoid lying. No matter how badly the Republicans 
behave or Starr overreached, Congress has to take notice when the 
possibility of perjury, subornation of perjury and tampering with 
witnesses touches on the presidency. After listening to the lively 
debate among politicians and constitutional scholars, we are more 
firmly convinced that congressional censure is not only allowable 
but essential to the health of the Republic. Clinton has apologized 
only for behaving badly. Congress will have failed in its duty as 
a guardian of the American future if it does not formally condemn 
his failure to respect and uphold the rule of law. Starr's blunders, 
Clinton's recklessness and the tawdriness of the Lewinsky-Tripp tapes 
released Tuesday all contribute to an atmosphere that will make it 
difficult to reach a balanced, carefully considered conclusion. But 
Richard Gephardt, the House minority leader, is right to say that 
Congress must go on record. At the conclusion of the Republican leadership 
election Wednesday, Livingston, as the presumptive Speaker, assumes 
the burden of guiding his fractious party and the erratic Hyde toward 
that resolution. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>