<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0369 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a last-ditch effort to block Rep. Dick Armey from being re-elected 
on Wednesday as House majority leader, one of his two opponents tried 
to get the other to drop out and support his race against Armey. But 
that opponent, Rep. Steve Largent, R-Okla., failed to persuade Rep. 
Jennifer Dunn, R-Wash., to quit. Tuesday both said they were in the 
race to stay and they expected to force a runoff after Armey is denied 
re-election on the first ballot. With just hours until House Republicans 
decide who will lead them in the new Congress, the races for three 
of the five top positions remained hotly contested. Because the ballots 
are secret, there are no reliable forecasts of the outcomes. The three 
races in which the outcomes are not certain are for majority leader, 
conference chairman and chairman of the National Republican Congressional 
Committee. Uncontested are the posts of speaker, for which Rep. Robert 
Livingston, R-La., is to be nominated Wednesday, and majority whip, 
now held by Rep. Tom DeLay, R-Texas. The unsettled state of the leadership 
team reflected the uncertain state of the party as it regroups after 
losing five seats in the midterm elections two weeks ago and plots 
life after Newt Gingrich, the larger-than-life speaker who was forced 
from office after the elections. Armey of Texas, in the No. 2 job 
in the House, alienated a number of members when he supported a failed 
coup attempt against Gingrich last year and then told Gingrich about 
it before it became public. Many members expect Armey to win more 
votes than anyone else on the first round, but not enough _ a majority 
_ to claim victory. So Largent and Ms. Dunn are each hoping to place 
second. Whoever comes in last is eliminated from balloting. Each of 
them is hoping to claim second place, which would win the right to 
face off in another round of balloting against the first-round winner, 
who is expected to be Armey. Monday, Ms. Dunn rejected Largent's suggestion 
that she quit the race and he, if elected, would appoint her to a 
new position of assistant majority leader. ``That's all there was 
to it,'' said Kara Kindermann, an aide to Ms. Dunn. Still brewing 
is a last-minute effort to draft a fourth candidate, Rep. Dennis Hastert, 
R-Ill., into the race for majority leader. Although Hastert has not 
campaigned for the job, he has not said he would not serve. As a result, 
his two most overt supporters, Reps. Thomas Ewing, R-Ill., and Michael 
Castle, R-Del., plan to place his name in nomination Wednesday and 
hope that he survives the first ballot and can go on to win as a consensus 
candidate. Also under fire is Rep. John Boehner, R-Ohio, the conference 
chairman, who is facing a stiff challenge from Rep. J.C. Watts, R-Okla. 
Watts, the only black Republican in the House, on Tuesday claimed 
to have 118 ``solid'' votes, four more than a majority, while Boehner's 
aides said he ``would not play the numbers game.'' The third incumbent 
in a precarious spot is Rep. John Linder, R-Ga., chairman of the party's 
campaign committee. The post is a sensitive one in which crucial decisions 
are made about strategy and distribution of party money in elections. 
Linder, who took some blame for the Republican losses in the elections, 
is being challenged by Rep. Thomas Davis, R-Va. House Republicans 
will choose most of their leaders Wednesday. Only the speaker, which 
is a House-wide position, is elected by both Democrats and Republicans, 
and that election is scheduled for Jan. 6. But the Republicans are 
to nominate their candidate, Livingston, on Wednesday, and because 
there is a Republican majority, he will be elected when the House 
convenes in January. The Democrats held their re-organization election 
quietly Monday and Rep. Dick Gephardt, D-Mo., was re-elected without 
challenge as minority leader. Wednesday, Gephardt announced the appointment 
of Rep. Patrick Kennedy, D-R.I., a son of Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, 
D-Mass., as the chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign 
Committee. The job is a crucial one for fund raising for Democratic 
candidates as they prepare for the elections in 2000, when they hope 
to regain control of the House. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>