<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0440 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
If you missed Martin Short when he made his Broadway debut in Neil 
Simon's ``Goodbye Girl,'' you probably have no idea of his heft as 
a performer in the theater. Among other things, he has the ability 
to dominate a Broadway stage as easily as he fills the television 
screen. He's a singing, dancing actor of legitimate style. He's someone 
who can change his appearance as easily without makeup as with a fake 
beard or jokey eyeglasses or even, I suspect, a bulbous red nose that 
honks when squeezed. Possibly his greatest gift: the ability to take 
over an entire production without allowing the ego to show. He's a 
tireless presence that abhors a vacuum. Yet, for such a powerhouse 
performer, he displays a modesty that defines his singular character 
as a star. Instead of intimidating the members of the audience, like 
so many stand-up comics today, he seduces them with high spirits. 
That is also what makes Short such good company at the Criterion Center 
Stage Right, where he is currently giving insane substance and coherence 
to ``Little Me,'' the Roundabout Theater Co. revival of the schizoid 
1962 Broadway musical. He is playing eight roles, one more than Sid 
Caesar, who starred in the original production. ``Little Me,'' with 
its score by Cy Coleman (music) and Carolyn Leigh (lyrics), is not 
often remembered as one of Broadway's forgotten treasures. It appears 
always to have been a patchy show, the sort that people keep thinking 
they can fix, without ever quite facing the fact that what is good 
about it is the very thing that makes it patchy. Simon's book, which 
he has reportedly revised for the new production, is an adaptation 
of the Patrick Dennis comic novel, a sendup of celebrity tell-all 
autobiographies epitomized in the 1950s by Lillian Roth's ``I'll Cry 
Tomorrow.'' The Dennis work, as I remember it, is very broad, even 
for something intended as parody. It is the tale of Belle Poitrine, 
born Schlumpfert on the wrong side of the tracks in Venezuela, Ill., 
and how, against all odds and in spite of her terrible treatment by 
men, she achieves fame and fortune on the silver screen. Belle is 
the generic Hollywood star as a sweet-natured, big-busted naif, stumbling 
toward happiness through heartbreak as thick as smog. Designed as 
a vehicle for Caesar, ``Little Me'' had built into it a problem that 
has haunted it ever since: The sketches featuring the leading man 
inevitably overshadow everything else in the show. That would include 
Belle, who becomes a supporting character in her own story. ``Little 
Me'' is a revue masquerading as a book show. Though you laugh a lot, 
it has just enough narrative to send you out of the theater feeling 
vaguely confused, unfocused. When it was revived in 1982, with Victor 
Garber and James Coco taking over the Caesar roles, it apparently 
worked even less well, closing after 30 previews and 36 regular performances. 
The new production, directed and choreographed by Rob Marshall, co-stars 
the potentially delicious Faith Prince as Belle, but it is a role 
that remains earthbound while Short takes flight in his succession 
of cameos. One of the funniest: Noble Eggleston, the richest boy in 
Venezuela, Ill., who falls deeply in love with Belle after he wanders 
across the tracks and finds himself among the poor. When the two young 
people touch hands, a crescendo of music is heard. Snob that he is, 
Noble can't deny that Belle, though riffraff, is the love of his life. 
He invites her to his Sweet 16 party, but tells her to come to the 
back door. His mother, of course, objects to their association. The 
almost-crestfallen Noble instructs Belle to go, but to return to him 
after she has acquired the wealth, culture and social position required 
of his consort. In the meantime, he is off to Harvard and Yale (simultaneously) 
to study medicine and law. Such are the ways of the rich, and of Simon's 
fertile brain at its most wholeheartedly lunatic. Among Short's other 
roles: Amos Pinchley, a mean, wheelchair-bound miser, fatally bewitched 
by Belle; Fred Poitrine, an innocent World War I doughboy who marries 
Belle, only to suffer a terrible fate in France, not in the trenches 
but in a clerical accident; Otto Schnitzler, Belle's Hollywood director, 
who also succumbs prematurely and in bizarre circumstances, and Prince 
Cherney, the very Sid Caesar-like reigning monarch of a European principality 
that's approximately the size of Sardi's. There is also Benny Buchsbaum 
who, with his brother, Bernie, runs the vaudeville booking agency 
that introduces Belle to show business. The Buchsbaum brothers could 
be the seeds that later blossomed into Willie Clark and Al Lewis, 
the vaudevillians of ``The Sunshine Boys,'' possibly Simon's best 
play. The serviceable score has two first-rate songs, the waltz-time 
``Real Live Girl'' and the sexily insinuating ``I've Got Your Number,'' 
which is staged here in a way that is meant to be comic but isn't. 
The material given to Ms. Prince, delivered with her hearty mix of 
belt-and-brio, evaporates even as it charms. Marshall's choreography 
recalls the work of Bob Fosse, the original choreographer of ``Little 
Me,'' though at an intentionally far remove. It is as if the Fosse 
movements had been sandpapered smooth to eliminate their distinctively 
erotic thrusts, to soften their sharp corners and angular silhouettes. 
In the one brief moment in the show when he appears to be quoting 
Fosse directly, it's to prompt knowing laughter. nn Something approximating 
the pure Bob Fosse continues to be on view at the Shubert Theater 
where, on Nov. 14, Walter Bobbie's revival of ``Chicago'' entered 
its third year. With the exception of the matron of the Cook County 
Jail, still lustily played and sung by the grand Marcia Lewis, all 
of the principal roles have changed hands, sometimes more than once. 
Ann Reinking, Bebe Neuwirth, James Naughton and Joel Grey are very 
much missed. Yet the John Kander and Fred Ebb score, as well as the 
Fosse choreography as recreated by Ms. Reinking, continue to make 
``Chicago'' one of the blessings of Broadway at its cheekiest. And 
what a smart show this is. The boldest casting decision: Ute Lemper, 
the German actress and cabaret singer, who has performed in New York 
clubs and is now making her Broadway debut. She has taken over for 
Ms. Neuwirth as Velma Kelly, the role she originated in Bobbie's London 
production of ``Chicago,'' in a performance that brought her an Olivier 
Award. Ms. Lemper has a face that resembles the young Garbo's after 
MGM plucked her eyebrows. She is an accomplished singer and dancer 
and is an actress of intensity. Whether she has an ounce of humor 
is still anybody's guess. It is evident that she is a hard worker, 
even though she appears to have little relation to the other performers 
on the stage with her. There is something otherworldly about her that 
has nothing to do with her tiniest trace of an accent. It is as if 
she had been born and raised on Mars. The performance is utterly baffling 
to me, unless her presence is supposed to serve as a link to a genre 
of cabaret theater that ``Chicago'' would be pleased to acknowledge. 
It is certainly not a bad performance; it seems to take place in another 
theatrical dimension. Far more conventional is Karen Ziemba, who has 
replaced Marilu Henner, who replaced Ms. Reinking as Roxie Hart. The 
night I saw the show, Ms. Ziemba took a while to find the center of 
Roxie's small, brazen ambitions. When she did, sometime in the middle 
of the first act, she was home free. Even her Little Orphan Annie 
eyes, rimmed with mascara, amuse. The way that Brent Barrett plays 
Billy Flynn, Chicago's most successful criminal lawyer, the character 
now looks very young and slightly too pretty, but Barrett is good. 
He is a black-Irish charmer, which helps him with juries. He is a 
star con artist in a Roaring '20s city where con artists breed like 
voles. He is all blarney and on the make; two of the show's best numbers 
(``All I Care About'' and ``Razzle Dazzle'') are safe in his custody. 
I also enjoyed Tom McGowan as Roxie's puzzled husband, Amos, though 
not quite as much as Grey. One cause for mourning: because of the 
gulf that apparently exists between the new Roxie and the new Velma, 
the show's superb finale _ Roxie and Velma's singing and dancing double 
act _ has lost most of its sardonic sting. The lyric asks ``Isn't 
it great? Isn't it grand?'' The answer is now all too apparent: it 
isn't. The irony has been lost. ___ Arthur Miller has good reason 
to be impatient with the way that Americans respond to his work. ``The 
Ride Down Mount Morgan,'' his dark comedy about a self-made millionaire 
who turns bigamist, was first done in London in 1991, but it has only 
now reached New York. It is at the Newman in the Joseph Papp Public 
Theater, but it deserves to run far longer than Nov. 29, which is 
its scheduled closing date. ``The Ride Down Mount Morgan'' is the 
most thoroughly involving new Miller play I have seen in years. Here 
is a wise, merciless examination of one totally self-absorbed man's 
dilemma as time marches him toward the end of a life still unfulfilled. 
It is a French farce as it might be conceived in the dark of a long, 
bitter winter's night by a puritan who wants to be a rascal. When 
first met, Lyman Felt (Patrick Stewart) lies in bed in an Elmira, 
N.Y., hospital. He is still heavily sedated after having nearly died 
in an automobile accident, which might have been a suicide attempt. 
As he drifts in and out of consciousness, he becomes increasingly 
aware that he is going to be exposed as the duplicitous heel he is. 
Theo (Frances Conroy), his WASP wife of 36 years, and their daughter, 
Bessie (Kali Rocha), who live in Manhattan, are about to meet Leah 
(Meg Gibson), the much younger Jewish woman Lyman married nine years 
earlier without bothering to get a divorce. Leah lives on the farm 
they share not far from Elmira. Lyman is a liar and a cheat and, though 
now plagued by guilt, the last years have been astonishingly happy 
ones. In the city with Theo, he lives the settled existence of a rather 
stuffy Upper East Sider. In the country, he romps with his 9-year-old 
son, hunts, collects foreign cars and even races them. The thing is, 
he tells himself, he loves and needs both Theo and Leah, each of whom 
he makes extremely happy. He must admit, however, that the situation 
is peculiar: The longer he is with one wife, the more he craves the 
wife in the other household. Only in his dreams does he lie abed, 
sandwiched between the two women. ``Oh the double heat of two blessed 
wives,'' he says. ``This is heaven!'' In fact, he lives in perpetual 
transit. The play moves gracefully between Lyman's dreams and reality, 
between humor that approaches the slapstick and ruminations on Lyman's 
somewhat biased approach to his own morality. He is a big, complex 
character, played with enormous humor, venom and rue by Stewart, who 
is hardly recognizable in gray hair. It is actually a fairly decent 
wig that has the effect of grounding the dramatically bald Stewart 
in the reality of the proper American upper middle class. Ms. Conroy 
and Ms. Gibson are also attractive, though the overall production, 
directed by David Esbjornson, seems comparatively drab for such a 
lively and sometimes explosive text. ``The Ride Down Mount Morgan'' 
deserves your attention, and soon. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>