<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0169 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As a child in France, I had heard that Thanksgiving was a feast for 
family and friends, that it celebrated the harvest and that it always 
included a turkey. It wasn't until I came to America nine years ago 
that I realized that, to be a real Thanksgiving feast, the turkey 
had to be accompanied by stuffing (preferably with chestnuts), sweet 
potatoes (with or without marshmallows), cranberry sauce (with or 
without nuts) and pumpkin pie. Of course, we will have all those things 
on our Thanksgiving table, but this year I'm adding a newcomer: my 
squash and fennel tartlets. I've been playing around with the idea 
for years. My original thought was to have rounds of puff pastry spread 
with star anise pastry cream and some candied fennel, and topped with 
lemon sorbet and a few pistachio nuts. I'd occasionally mention the 
idea to other French pastry chefs, and the response was always the 
same: ``It's too crazy. Forget it.'' But I couldn't get the idea out 
of my head. This year, I thought I'd try out my dessert on an American 
audience. Unfortunately, Test 1 was a flop _ the anise pastry cream 
was too strong for the fennel, but without it the puff pastry and 
fennel were too dry. Three tests later I thought of pumpkin pie, and 
got the idea to use a butternut squash puree in place of the pastry 
cream. Since I didn't want the usual spices that go into pumpkin pie 
_ they, too, would overwhelm the fennel _ I selected squash puree 
au naturel, mild, smooth and almost as rich and buttery as the pastry 
cream it replaced. The squash was the right choice, but the tartlets 
lacked acidity, a problem solved with the lemon sorbet and a splash 
of lime juice in the puree. Then, just when I thought I was done, 
I realized that the pistachio nuts were too bland. First, I toasted 
them; their flavor was better, but their color was lost. Then I omitted 
them _ but the tart needed crunch. Finally, I tossed them in egg white 
and sugar and baked them until they were bumpy, crackly and lightly 
caramelized. Voila! Nuts with looks, taste and enough crunch for the 
tart. Use store-bought puff pastry and sorbet _ the puree, fennel 
and crunchy nuts will be child's play. SQUASH AND FENNEL TARTLETS 
Time: 1 hour \ cup confectioners' sugar 1 egg white 1/3 cup shelled 
and skinned pistachio nuts { pound packaged puff pastry 2 cups sugar 
Zest of 1 lemon, cut in broad strips Zest of 1 orange, cut in broad 
strips 1 clove 1 star anise 2 small bulbs fennel, trimmed and cut 
into thin slices 2 tablespoons unsalted butter 1 butternut squash 
(about 1{ pounds), peeled, seeded and cut into }-inch dice \ cup apple 
cider Juice of 1 lime 2 cups lemon sorbet. 1. Preheat oven to 300 
degrees. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Place confectioners' 
sugar in a small bowl. Spoon half the egg white onto a plate (discard 
other half). Toss pistachios in egg white to coat them; then toss 
them in confectioners' sugar until they are lightly coated and do 
not stick together. Place nuts on baking sheet, and bake until they 
are brown and start to crack. Remove from oven, and set aside to cool. 
2. Increase oven temperature to 400 degrees. On a lightly floured 
work surface, roll out the puff pastry to [-inch thickness, and cut 
into eight 4-inch circles. Place on a parchment-lined baking sheet, 
and put a lightweight wire cooling rack on top of the pastry to keep 
it from puffing too much. Bake until golden, 5 to 6 minutes. Cool 
to room temperature on a rack. 3. In a large saucepan, combine sugar, 
lemon zest, orange zest, clove and star anise with 1 cup of water. 
Place over high heat, and bring to a boil. Turn off the heat, cover 
and allow mixture to rest 5 minutes. Using a slotted spoon, remove 
the zest and spices, and return mixture to a boil. Add fennel, and 
reduce heat to medium-low. Poach fennel until it is translucent, about 
15 minutes. Cool fennel in the liquid. 4. While fennel is poaching, 
place a large skillet over medium heat. Melt the butter, and add the 
squash. Saute until the squash is very tender, about 15 minutes. Add 
the cider, and continue stirring until cider evaporates. Transfer 
squash and pan juices to container of a blender. Add lime juice, and 
process until mixture is smooth. 5. With a small spoon, hollow out 
the center of each pastry round, leaving some pastry for a base. Fill 
each hollow with about 2 tablespoons of squash puree. Top with poached 
fennel, placing some around edge of tartlet, then mounding some in 
center. Scatter pistachio nuts on top of tartlet and around plate, 
and top each tartlet with a small scoop of lemon sorbet. Yield: 8 
servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>