<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Republicans on the Judiciary Committee decided Tuesday to call more 
witnesses in the inquiry into President Clinton, and rejected a White 
House bid for more time to question the independent counsel Kenneth 
W. Starr at the committee's first hearing on Thursday. Clinton's lawyers 
said they wanted 90 minutes to cross-examine Starr, instead of the 
half-hour that Republicans had offered. Starr will have two hours 
to make an opening statement before any questioning begins. ``Anything 
less than 90 minutes would unfairly constrain our ability to explore 
the basis for Starr's testimony, and for any conclusions he may proffer,'' 
Charles F.C. Ruff, the White House counsel, said in a letter to Rep. 
Henry J. Hyde, who heads the committee. Tuesday night, Hyde rejected 
the request and gave Clinton's lawyers until midday Wednesday to accept 
the original offer. House Republicans may announce their additional 
witnesses as early as Wednesday but were waiting in part for Clinton 
to respond to 81 questions from the committee, on whether he lied 
under oath, obstructed justice or tampered with witnesses. The Republicans 
had said that if he agreed to certain facts in the inquiry, that would 
speed the investigation. ``We are waiting until we get the stipulations,'' 
said Rep. Mary Bono, R-Calif. A White House spokesman said Clinton's 
lawyers were working on the responses. The maneuvering came just two 
days before the committee is to hold its first public hearing in the 
inquiry, showcasing the prosecutor who investigated Clinton in a forum 
where full coverage is planned by at least three television networks. 
``It's fair to say we don't have a clear process in mind, but we're 
going to go forward to get the facts,'' said Rep. Christopher B. Cannon, 
R-Utah. To prepare for Thursday's hearing, Starr delivered four more 
boxes of documents to Capitol Hill on Tuesday. The material, requested 
by Democrats, relates to Starr's investigation of Webster Hubbell, 
a former No. 3 official in the Justice Department who became embroiled 
in the Whitewater land deal. The documents were delivered after Democrats 
demanded to know how Starr's investigation leaped from his original 
Whitewater mandate into the Lewinsky scandal. Republicans said the 
documents, which include grand-jury testimony and recordings of Hubbell's 
jail house telephone calls, could help bolster the assertion in Starr's 
report to Congress that the president obstructed justice by concealing 
his affair with Monica Lewinsky. At a hourlong meeting Tuesday, committee 
Republicans debated the merits of calling additional witnesses, including 
Ms. Lewinsky, Vernon E. Jordan Jr., the president's confidant who 
helped her find a job, and Betty Currie, Clinton's secretary. Committee 
Republicans may also call or take a deposition from John Huang, a 
former Democratic party fund-raiser who would testify about his dealings 
with Hubbell. Starr indicted Hubbell last week for the third time. 
Starr has sought to determine whether Huang might have steered money 
to Hubbell to keep him quiet about what he knew of Clinton's involvement 
in the Whitewater land deal. Republicans said they would try to show 
that many of the same people who they say helped buy Hubbell's silence 
also tried to keep Ms. Lewinsky quiet about her affair with the president 
by lining up a job for her in New York. ``It would be a clear possibility 
simply because we know from published reports that Huang has cooperated 
with Starr,'' said Rep. Asa Hutchinson, R-Ark. ``That could make him 
a relevant witness.'' Democrats reacted with fury Tuesday over the 
inquiry's sudden reach into Whitewater and procedures governing Thursday's 
hearing. Democrats initially threatened to boycott the hearing but 
later dropped the idea as Hyde expressed a willingness to accommodate 
them. Rep. Dick Gephardt, the House Democratic leader, said at a news 
conference Tuesday that ``if at this moment, we are launching into 
material that has never been sent to the committee as part of a referral, 
and there is going to be some oral presentation about matters that 
are not in his referral, this is outrageous.'' Meanwhile, Republicans 
on the committee are facing pressure from their own colleagues and 
weary citizens who want to see the inquiry wrapped up and the scandal 
put to rest. A number of Republicans, including moderates from the 
Northeast, say they will not support articles of impeachment on the 
House floor, a move that would surely doom the effort. ``I don't believe 
there's enough evidence to warrant impeachment,'' said Rep. Peter 
T. King, R-N.Y. ``I'm confident a good number of Republicans feel 
the same way. Right now, the trick is to end it and declare victory.'' 
Rep. Jack Quinn, R-N.Y., said, ``Assuming there's no new information, 
I'd vote against it.'' To counter that sentiment, Rep. Bob Barr, R-Ga., 
a member of the Judiciary Committee and one of Clinton's fiercest 
critics, held a news conference with members of 10 national conservative 
groups to shore up support for the inquiry. One day before House Republicans 
elect their leaders, many conservative groups conditioned their future 
support for the Republican leaders on a commitment to pursue impeachment 
proceedings vigorously. ``The Republican leadership has stalled on 
impeachment during its entire four-year tenure,'' said Howard Phillips, 
chairman of the Conservative Caucus, who demanded that Republican 
leadership candidates ``make known now where he or she stands on this 
historically crucial issue.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>