<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0335 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Despite all of the distracting jockeying over witnesses and evidence 
Tuesday, one truth shone clearly about the House impeachment inquiry: 
A process once conceived of as a matter of supreme seriousness has 
become just another piece of political theater on Capitol Hill. Rep. 
Henry Hyde, R-Ill., chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, was 
supposed to save his party from just such a pitfall as the senior 
statesman who would lead the House through the nation's third impeachment 
proceeding against a president. After all, Hyde was not the biting 
Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, R-N.Y., whose Senate Whitewater hearings tarnished 
him before he was defeated this year. Nor was he the hot-headed Rep. 
Dan Burton, R-Ind., whose campaign finance hearings were so discredited 
that Burton had to dismiss his chief investigator. But now as the 
House Judiciary Committee prepares to call Independent Counsel Kenneth 
Starr as its first witness Thursday, Hyde presides over an investigation 
that has become a terrible millstone for his party. Though Hyde has 
yet to call a single witness, the public long ago made up its mind 
that it wanted Clinton to remain in office. It signaled that first 
in polls, and then, more forcefully, in the mid-term elections earlier 
this month. This vexing quandary is causing Hyde and his committee 
to veer first in one direction and then another as they seek to make 
their investigation seem more credible _ and to deal with House members 
who just want to call the whole thing off. ``Since Election Day two 
weeks ago, Republican interest in impeaching this president is running 
out of gas,'' said Rep. Jack Quinn, R-N.Y. ``Henry Hyde is in a bit 
of a bind there. He's started down this track. Now the question becomes 
how do we stop it.'' Hyde has repeatedly insisted that his task as 
chairman of the same committee that presided over the Watergate inquiry 
24 years ago is to enforce the law and make sure no man stands above 
it. ``The president of the United States is the trustee of the nation's 
conscience,'' he said the day the House voted to authorize an impeachment 
inquiry. ``We are entitled to explore fairly, fully and expeditiously 
the circumstances that have been alleged to compromise that position.'' 
But more and more Republicans are saying that the House may very well 
lack the votes to impeach the president, and the incoming speaker, 
Robert Livingston of Louisiana, is said to want the investigation 
wrapped up. In this atmosphere, Hyde is having a great deal of trouble 
balancing the imperatives of a fair and full investigation with the 
idea of an expeditious one. At first, Hyde and committee Republicans 
thought the solution was to showcase Starr as the only major witness, 
accept the record that the independent counsel submitted to the House 
when he said ``substantial and credible evidence'' existed of 11 possibly 
impeachable offenses, and leave it to Clinton to contest any of Starr's 
findings when the president answered 81 questions _ some pointed _ 
from the committee. But that brought stinging criticism from the Democrats 
that Starr was witness to nothing and that he was simply being given 
a platform to rehabilitate his image. He could not resolve the discrepancies 
that exist between Clinton and Monica Lewinsky about their sexual 
contact, nor Ms. Lewinsky's differences with Betty Currie, Clinton's 
secretary, about why Ms. Currie retrieved gifts the president had 
given to the former White House intern. Some committee Republicans 
also say they were concerned that they were not building the clear 
factual record that would allow them to charge the president with 
perjury, obstruction of justice and witness tampering. ``In terms 
of history, 10 years from now when I look back on how I cast a vote, 
I want to say I did it on a factual record and eyewitness testimony,'' 
said Rep. Asa Hutchinson, R-Ark., who serves on the Judiciary Committee. 
``I think that is important.'' So Tuesday the Republicans decided 
to call new witnesses, and were weighing going beyond the Lewinsky 
matter to hear from John Huang, the former Democratic fund-raiser 
who was at the center of the campaign finance controversy in 1996. 
Huang has been granted immunity from Starr for cooperating in his 
investigation of Webster Hubbell, the former No. 3 official in the 
Clinton Justice Department. The Republicans sought in part to blame 
the Democrats for the new strategy. They noted that the president 
has yet to respond to the 81 questions he was sent and that Democrats 
_ who even briefly Tuesday threatened to boycott Thursday's hearing 
_ want to put Starr on trial instead of the president. But it is also 
the case that as uncooperative as the Democrats have been, the committee 
itself did nothing for nearly a month, despite knowing that it wanted 
to complete its inquiry by year's end. It took no depositions and 
waited for the Election Day mandate that never came. So now, the committee's 
Republicans wait to see whether something will change the sense that 
they are investigating a president who will never be convicted in 
the Senate and might not be impeached by the House. ``We'll have the 
hearings and have the debate,'' Hutchinson said. ``I hope Congress 
will be listening to it and we'll see if it changes the dynamics.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>