<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The words book and television tug against each other in a fairly obvious 
way, but I still can't help smiling at the sassy paradox implicit 
in the designation Book TV. That's what C-Span 2 calls the round-the-clock 
weekend programming it introduced in September, displacing reruns 
of the United States Senate, the estimable show this cable network 
carries live on most weekdays. Even pathological readers with fond 
memories of glancing up to watch Dick Cavett joust with the likes 
of Lillian Hellman should be skeptical about an enterprise whose advertising 
line is ``All books. All weekend. Every weekend.'' First, of course, 
Book TV may prove to be an enormous waste of time, yet another invasion 
upon the consciousness by an empty end-of-the-century pretense to 
seriousness. Worse, Book TV may turn out to be addictive, especially 
in concert with its Internet site, www.booktv.org., cutting into precious 
page-turning time. Recently I cranked up the VCR and gave in to the 
urge to find out what Book TV was all about, and I came away from 
my browsing with an odd sense of exasperated admiration. The programming 
_ an array of author interviews interspersed with fly-on-the-wall 
visits to readings, industry discussion panels, book festivals, stores 
and production sites _ has much in it that will enhance the impassioned 
reader's most beloved pastime. But it's not yet expansive enough to 
be addictive; too many of its hours carry the rubric ``Encore Booknotes,'' 
meaning sometimes dated segments of ``Booknotes,'' the worthy interview 
series started 10 years ago on C-Span by its chairman, Brian Lamb, 
and too little of its focus is on places beyond Washington. What Book 
TV is, as the folks at C-Span 2 are quick to point out, is an early 
work in progress, always subject to revision, and that's a rare and 
welcome property in a medium top-loaded with overprocessed episodes 
of inanity. As would be expected, Book TV _ in keeping with C-Span 
and C-Span 2, which are financed by the cable industry as a public 
service _ is dedicated to being a witness of public life for the public's 
good. And as with C-Span's exhaustive coverage of the processes of 
government, Book TV's best and worst moments derive from a commitment 
to switching on the camera and letting it run. One of the most rewarding 
interludes in recent weeks was an appearance by David Maraniss, Bill 
Clinton biographer and Washington Post writer, at the Politics and 
Prose Bookstore in Washington, just after an Election Day on which 
Clinton's fortunes had seemed to tip radically for the better. Maraniss, 
who is regarded by the White House at least as a severe judge of Clinton, 
displayed an almost Clinton-like testiness as he spoke of his being 
eventually closed off from interviews with the president. But then 
the author, most recently of ``The Clinton Enigma,'' went on to reveal 
the kind of humble and informed concern that one hopes for in an influential 
journalist, and to offer real insight on America's most recent political 
morning after. This interlude was soon followed, unfortunately, by 
coverage of the Goodwill Annual Used Book Sale in Washington. Not 
only were cameras trained on straining lines of bargain hunters as 
if they were part of some compelling news event; interviewers also 
tried to have a quick word with this acquisitive bunch. Little was 
learned about book hobbyists, books or even the trafficking in vintage 
volumes. Similarly, a few hours later, a visit to the bookstore at 
the Franklin D. Roosevelt Memorial degenerated into an exercise in 
pricing souvenirs, curiously diminishing the weekend's special attention 
to the sea of writing about the Roosevelts. Book TV may be all books, 
all weekend, but it is decidedly not about all books, as in every 
genre. The producers make clear that they try to highlight only nonfiction 
_ the regular program categories are biography, history, children's 
books and ``the business of books'' _ and they explain this decision 
by saying that it is in keeping with C-Span's calling to concentrate 
on events that influence opinion. While it's easy to understand that 
having a minimal staff would force limits _ Book TV has a full-time 
complement of four people, led by Connie Brod, the executive producer 
_ it seems misguided for an undertaking devoted to the love of serious 
writing to justify sidestepping fiction and poetry on the ground that 
these forms don't influence national life. The spirit of the former 
poet laureate Joseph Brodsky is surely arguing eloquently to the contrary 
right now, and novelists like Philip Roth and Tom Wolfe would probably 
be eager to chime in. Still, thankfully, literature and its interests 
do insinuate themselves into Book TV's categories. A recent business-of-books 
segment, for example, documented an industry conference in New York 
on the future of children's books, and the speakers _ powerful men 
in well-cut suits, charged with the task of making money _ warned 
against movie tie-ins and made surprisingly touching pleas for the 
integrity of the old-fashioned story. Likewise, William Styple, author 
of the children's book ``The Little Bugler: The True Story of a 12-Year-Old 
in the Civil War,'' who was interviewed in the middle of a re-enactment 
of the Battle of Cedar Creek near Winchester, Va., indicated in vivid 
fashion how storytelling could serve history. Even more effective 
in describing how books are something more than repositories of information 
for well-informed citizens was the writer and editor Anne Fadiman. 
In an appearance at the Library of Congress to talk about her book 
``Ex Libris: Confessions of a Common Reader,'' she recalled how her 
first building blocks were the 22 volumes of a set of Trollope that 
belonged to her father, the writer, editor and television personality 
Clifton Fadiman. Those volumes, she added, are now in her library, 
with her father's notes in the margins, and her own and her brother's, 
as well as numerous fingerprints _ evidence of the essence of a family. 
That kind of intensely private experience is a large part of what 
books are all about. And that's what Book TV will be about more and 
more if it finds a way to erase the lines it draws between intellect 
and imagination, and to better balance the concerns of public life 
with those of the public's lives. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>