<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0436 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
It isn't a trivia question to ask which of George Balanchine's ballets 
were on the first program when the New York City Ballet officially 
came into existence on Oct. 11, 1948. As virtually every City Ballet 
subscriber knows by heart, the triple bill consisted of ``Concerto 
Barocco,'' ``Orpheus'' and ``Symphony in C.'' The same program will 
inaugurate the City Ballet's mammoth 50th-anniversary year Tuesday 
night at the New York State Theater, just as it did the 40th anniversary. 
An act of piety, this replay has its limitations. As the 50th-birthday 
celebration will suggest with a spread of 100 ballets over the winter 
and spring seasons, the City Ballet never lived by Balanchine alone. 
He was certainly its dominant figure, but an appraisal of the company 
at its half century must also go beyond an appreciation of Balanchine. 
Nonetheless, there is useful symbolism in Tuesday's program, which 
includes a tribute to Tanaquil LeClerq, a muse to both Balanchine 
and Jerome Robbins through her inimitable performances in the 1940's 
and '50s. Looking back, it is clear what Balanchine defined in the 
1948 triple bill. With three signature pieces choreographed to music 
by Bach, Stravinsky and Bizet, Balanchine announced a company predicated 
not on ballet's stock repertory but on creativity. His fellow Russian, 
the poet Marina Tsvetayeva, once defined the creative compulsion in 
terms he would have recognized. In her essay ``Why I write ...,'' 
she explained: ``Not for the millions, not for some one-and-only, 
not for myself. I write for the poem alone. The poem, through me, 
writes itself.'' To appreciate the City Ballet's achievement is to 
measure a comparable passion for choreography. It has been shared 
not only by Balanchine but also by Robbins and Peter Martins, who 
served jointly as the company's artistic directors from 1983 to 1990. 
Martins has been sole artistic director since then. Balanchine died 
in 1983; Lincoln Kirstein, who founded the company with Balanchine 
and was general director, retired in 1989 and died in 1996. Robbins, 
who left in 1990 but returned to choreograph new ballets through 1997, 
died in July. For the first time, then, the City Ballet finds itself 
bereft of its founding fathers. Does it make a difference? Yes, if 
you expect time to stand still. But as Martins has demonstrated, a 
company can change and still be true to itself. He has asserted full 
control since 1991, when the success of his splendid production of 
``The Sleeping Beauty'' won over even those who will never forgive 
him for not being Balanchine. That he was hailed and assailed anew 
has become irrelevant. One has yet to find a company that dances Balanchine 
and Robbins better than the City Ballet or defends the value of the 
classical idiom so consistently in its entire repertory. Martins is 
here to stay. The City Ballet board has given him a vote of confidence 
by offering him a contract for the next five years; he has agreed 
to sign. But any 50th anniversary should celebrate what has been achieved 
in that half century. Essentially, the company has never faltered 
in its unofficial mission, which is to lead the public, not to follow 
it. It is worth recalling again the words Balanchine uttered upon 
his arrival from Europe to settle in New York. ``Classicism is enduring 
because it is impersonal,'' he told the British critic Arnold Haskell 
in 1933. At that time, when there were barely any permanent ballet 
troupes in the United States, few could understand what Balanchine 
meant by an unmannered (impersonal) and codified (classical) dance 
idiom. By affirming his faith in ballet's 300-year-old classical vocabulary, 
which was hardly in vogue in the 1930s, he laid the foundation for 
the company he was to establish with Kirstein. Classicism in the larger 
sense, with its attributes of harmony and balance, may have been implicit 
in his remark to Haskell. But the truth is that Balanchine was advocating 
a return to the steps of ballet's classical, or academic, lexicon. 
At a time when modern dance and the Expressionist influence in ballet 
were in the ascendancy, Balanchine expressed his loyalty to the language 
of Marius Petipa, choreographer of ``The Sleeping Beauty.'' Renewed, 
this idiom and the neoclassical style could help ballet take hold 
in America and endure. ``Concerto Barocco,'' set to Bach's Double 
Violin Concerto, and ``Symphony in C,'' to Bizet, look timeless today 
because they are, in the best sense, ``impersonal'' and effective 
as formal constructs. By contrast, ``Orpheus,'' with its Stravinsky 
score and biomorphic decor by Isamu Noguchi, as well as its images 
from modernist lyric theater, has a 1940s experimental look. It is 
easy to take the City Ballet's contribution to American culture for 
granted. The quality of the Robbins and Balanchine repertory, now 
brilliantly danced in most instances, is self-evident. One should 
also not forget that in an era once flooded with story ballets, the 
company waged an uphill battle to convince a skeptical public of the 
value of pure-dance works. That Balanchine was drawn in this direction 
is no surprise. He had grown up in Russia, a country that had recently 
rejected its native realist tradition in art. It was not for his generation 
to favor subject over style, or to feel a duty to solve civic problems 
through art. Yet even an American like Robbins, following his success 
with ``Fancy Free'' at American Ballet Theater in 1944, opted for 
a less pictorial approach in his choreography when he joined City 
Ballet at its founding and became associate artistic director in 1949. 
If the City Ballet remains true to itself, this is because it has 
been imbued with the consistent thinking that ruled its precursors, 
the earlier companies directed by Balanchine and Kirstein from 1934 
to 1947. The American Ballet, Ballet Caravan (directed by Kirstein 
alone but using Balanchine's dancers), American Ballet Caravan and 
Ballet Society each had a different emphasis. But each concentrated 
on new works, not stars, and serious music, usually distinguished, 
often commissioned. Despite exceptions, the focus in choreography 
was not on narrative and decor but on the essence of classical dance: 
steps and the combination of steps. ``Concerto Barocco'' and Balanchine's 
``Ballet Imperial,'' both created for American Ballet Caravan in 1941, 
paved the way for the City Ballet's pure-dance esthetic. It is not, 
admittedly, a conception that fits everyone's view of ballet. Even 
Kirstein allowed himself a momentary doubt about Balanchine's reliance 
on music as a springboard for choreography. In 1937 he wrote, ``I 
have come to feel that music unduly tyrannizes him, but then I am 
not a trained musician nor a trained dancer as he is.'' As a choreographer, 
Martins has created his own ballets in the Balanchinian style and 
encourages invited choreographers to do the same, especially in the 
mini-festivals he calls the Diamond Project (1992, 1994, 1997). That 
no one is on Balanchine's level is not a surprise, but this does not 
obviate the value of these exercises in neo-classicism, frequently 
admirable in Martins' case. Now that Kirstein, a fierce if inconsistent 
foe of modern dance, has died, Mark Morris and Twyla Tharp (directors 
of their own modern-dance troupes) will be allowed to storm the gates. 
They have been invited to create new ballets in the year 2000. Ten 
years ago, when numerous ballet troupes turned to modern-dance choreographers, 
Kirstein with his siege mentality could still describe the City Ballet 
as ``a fortress of the traditional classic dance.'' Newcomers would 
be surprised to learn how eclectic the company had once been in its 
early years. Invited to be part of the City Center of Music and Drama 
by Morton Baum, the Center's finance chairman, Ballet Society became 
New York City Ballet. Associated initially with the New York City 
Opera, it became an independent constituent of the City Center in 
1949. From then to 1963, the City Ballet was to a large degree Kirstein's 
company more than Balanchine's. It reflected Kirstein's wide-ranging 
taste: Antony Tudor, Frederick Ashton, Martha Graham, John Cranko 
and the Japanese Gagaku ensemble were the companies or choreographers 
invited in. After the City Ballet's move in 1964 to the new State 
Theater at Lincoln Center, the balance shifted. Balanchine, who created 
masterpieces like ``Agon'' at City Center, was now the dominant creative 
force, not only in terms of quality but also in terms of the increased 
number of his works in the repertory. To grow up in the 1950s with 
the company was nonetheless to see choreographers as strangely disparate 
as Birgit Cullberg from Sweden and William Dollar from the early Ballet 
Society days. The Robbins imprint was especially strong, as epitomized 
by two of his best known ballets, ``Afternoon of a Faun'' and ``The 
Cage.'' Balanchine himself narrowed the scope of the company, eventually 
dropping the Tudor and Ashton works. Ashton's ``Illuminations'' (1950) 
would be worth reviving, if only to show young choreographers how 
a classical ballet translates into the equivalent of the Symbolist 
poetry it comments upon. Who could ever forget Tanaquil LeClercq as 
the aloof white figure of Sacred Love in that ballet? By the time 
Martins joined the company as a dancer in 1970, the City Ballet was 
a different place. Rising expenses at Lincoln Center would soon usher 
in gala benefits, a far cry from the City Center as a people's theater 
in the 1940s, when money was donated by the unions represented on 
the center board. Kirstein was even managing director of the entire 
City Center for several years. As the City Ballet enters a new phase, 
it will not be surprising if it is Kirstein's absence that will be 
most keenly felt. There is no one of his intellectual stature to hover 
in the background, no matter how remotely. His erudition, connections 
and ruthlessness made the City Ballet happen. The promotional material 
for the 50th anniversary celebration contains photographs of Martins, 
Balanchine and Robbins but not of Kirstein. This ahistorical gaffe 
is painful, comparable to American Ballet Theater's omission of its 
own founder's name, Richard Pleasant, at another anniversary gala. 
Yet this emphasis on creative figures is not totally askew. Although 
Balanchine has been professionally mourned for 15 years, his disciples, 
led by Martins, will continue to choreograph in his style. Robbins 
was the company's other voice, with a style that continually redefined 
itself. Martins knows well that fresh choreography is essential to 
the company's profile. Asked recently about his focus for the future, 
he replied without hesitation: ``New ballets will have to be created 
and made on the premises. This is what this place is about.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>