<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0284 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Andrei Sokolov came to this nuclear city more than 30 years ago 
it was a bastion of privilege for the Soviet Union's scientific elite. 
Its very existence was a state secret. Behind barbed-wire fences, 
and hidden inside a mountain of granite, three nuclear reactors produced 
tons of plutonium for nation's nuclear arsenal. Its scientists, the 
nation's brightest, lived the Soviet dream: the best food and wages 
the Kremlin could provide. Krasnoyarsk-26 remains closed off from 
the world. But these days it is an impoverished ward of the state, 
and a vexing worry for Russian and American officials who fear Russia's 
best scientists will leave for aspiring nuclear powers like Iran and 
Iraq. Sokolov, 58, one of the city's top nuclear specialists, says 
he is not leaving. He sometimes goes months without his meager salary, 
and he and his neighbors recently endured a few weeks without heat. 
Like the humblest Russian peasant, his wife, Nadezhda, helps make 
ends meet by canning cabbages, cucumbers and tomatoes from the garden 
at their dacha, and she cannot look back without a twinge of regret. 
``It was better then,'' she said. ``The city was clean. Everything 
was in abundance. There was no economic panic. We were young and everything 
seemed beautiful to us.'' While the Sokolovs are stoical about the 
future, nobody can be sure about the thousands of other specialists 
in Russia's 10 nuclear cities. The Russian government has become so 
concerned about the tumbling morale of its top nuclear scientists 
that it has ordered its security services to secretly monitor them, 
Russia's minister of atomic energy said in an interview. In Washington, 
the Energy Department has pledged as much as $30 million in assistance 
through 1999 to start up new businesses in the hope that the enterprises 
will be able to attract hundreds of millions more in Western investment. 
But critics worry that the aid is too little to make a difference. 
And with Russia's economy in crisis and investors fleeing, attracting 
foreign investment is harder than ever. As winter begins creeping 
across the heartland, nuclear workers have taken to the streets to 
demand back pay. Guards at nuclear laboratories have abandoned their 
posts to forage for food. Power shortages threaten to shut down electronic 
security systems designed to safeguard stores of bomb-grade materials. 
Krasnoyarsk-26 has endured its share of tribulations: a restive workforce, 
months of unpaid wages and the temporary shutdown of its lone nuclear 
reactor, which forced residents to endure the bitter Siberian chill. 
``The situation in the nuclear closed cities is very close to catastrophic,'' 
said Viktor Orlov, director of the Moscow-based Center for Policy 
Studies and an expert on Russia's nuclear complex. The armed guards 
at the checkpoint for Krasnoyarsk-26 provide a sobering reminder to 
visitors that they are about to enter a state within a state. Outsiders 
must get the blessing of the Federal Security Service, the heir to 
the KGB. Passports are inspected and, in the case of foreigners, escorts 
provided. The residential heart of this city of seven square miles 
gives a hint of its past glory. There is an artificial lake with three 
beaches. Its movie theater, which used to receive first-run Soviet 
films the day after they appeared in Moscow, displays an ad for the 
American film ``Titanic.'' There are more sports facilities than in 
most Russian cities of this size, and a well-tended park, which features 
a statue of Lenin staring vacantly into space. (It had been looking 
approvingly at Stalin before Nikita Khrushchev launched his campaign 
to de-Stalinize the nation and the dictator's statue was removed.) 
The train station that the city's scientists and engineers use to 
go to work looks like a typical suburban platform, save for the fact 
it is protected by armed interior ministry guards and serves an electric 
train that heads straight into a fortified mountain. The subterranean 
complex at the other end of a three-mile-long tunnel is a cavernous, 
multistory honeycomb of nuclear reactors, plutonium laboratories, 
cafeterias and workshops _ some 3,500 rooms in all. It is the mountain 
that persuaded Stalin and Lavrenty Beria, his secret police chief, 
to build the complex in this remote stretch of Siberia. The granite 
peak, they calculated, would shelter the complex against an American 
nuclear strike, enabling the Soviet Union to produce bomb-grade plutonium 
after a nuclear war. The nearby Yenisei River, one of Siberia's mightiest, 
would cool the plutonium-generating reactors. No efforts were spared 
to turn this cold war project into a reality. The chief construction 
engineers were military officers. Most of the brawn, however, was 
provided by slave labor. According to the city's records, some 70,000 
prisoners worked here from 1950 to 1964, digging out the mountain 
_ excavating more rock than was used to build the pyramids. Many were 
veterans, farmers and workers, who may have done little more than 
steal a sack of potatoes to feed their families. Several hundred foreigners 
were also brought here for forced labor, including, the city's punctilious 
records show, prisoners from Germany, Poland, Greece, Bulgaria, Romania, 
Spain, Finland and ``one Negro.'' The streets of Krasnoyarsk-26 are 
named after Soviet heros and city founders, but the only trace of 
the prisoners is the pitiful plot of overgrown and unmarked graves 
that straddles the border of the town. Now, some graves have been 
defaced by local vandals while others have been covered by a garage. 
Krasnoyarsk-26's fall from grace has made its present troubles harder 
for many of its residents to bear. Unlike Russia's sorry factory towns 
or collective farms, this city got used to being a pampered enclave 
for the nation's top engineering talent, and many inhabitants cannot 
look back without a nagging sense of regret. ``The early days were 
full of enthusiasm,'' said Ivan Mashkovtsev, a former KGB official 
who used to oversee security at the nuclear complex. Its workforce 
earned 50 percent more than its counterparts outside the city gates. 
Food was ample and there was no rationing or lines. Vacations were 
generous: 36 work days a year and 48 days for those who labored inside 
the mountain. The sense of national purpose was fortified by ironhanded 
secrecy. For the first few years, none of the residents was allowed 
to leave. Later, when travel within the Soviet Union was allowed, 
the word ``plutonium'' was stripped from their vocabulary. If anyone 
asked, they could say that they worked for an iron ore mine or lived 
on a military base. There were no telephone lines connecting Krasnoyarsk-26 
to nearby cities and villages; the telephone lines used by the top 
leadership ran straight to Moscow. Because the city was left off Soviet 
maps, residents called it Krasnoyarsk-26, using the number on the 
post office box where their mail was sent at the open city of Krasnoyarsk, 
40 miles south. Krasnoyarsk's plutonium industry did not stay secret 
for long. According to Russian officials, American intelligence learned 
about the reactors in the 1963, several years after its second reactor 
began to operate. Still, Krasnoyarsk-26's reactors kept churning away. 
According to some Western estimates, they produced more than 40 tons 
of bomb-grade plutonium, about one-third of the plutonium used to 
build the Soviet arsenal. With the world awash in deadly plutonium, 
two of the three reactors here have been shut down. The remaining 
reactor provides heat for the city. It still produces plutonium as 
a byproduct that is separated from the reactor's nuclear waste and 
stored as a powder for safekeeping. To many, the loss of the secret 
city's cold war mission has been a devastating psychological blow. 
``The main problem is probably not the loss of material wealth,'' 
Mashkovtsev said. ``The problem is the way people look at the nuclear 
industry. People here feel like they are unneeded, especially when 
they hear others say that everything they did was unnecessary.'' For 
Valery Lebedev, the director of Krasnoyarsk-26's nuclear operations 
and a veteran resident of the city, holding the complex together is 
an increasingly daunting task. Some 10,000 people still work at the 
nuclear complex. But it has received only two-thirds of the government 
funds it was expecting this year. ``The prices have increased but 
we cannot raise wages, because we do not even pay people what they 
are supposed to be paid,'' Lebedev said. ``We try to do our best to 
pay something. If we don't have money we give food.'' The money crunch 
has taken its toll. Even keeping the lone reactor running is not a 
simple proposition. In September, a budget shortfall delayed a shipment 
of uranium fuel. Then workers in the radio-chemistry laboratory, where 
plutonium is separated from the nuclear waste, mounted a brief protest. 
The reactor was out of operation for weeks, leaving the city without 
heat. ``We are concerned when a person has to think all the time about 
how to feed his family,'' Lebedev explained. ``That's not a good time 
to carry out some important operations.'' It is also affecting arms 
control efforts. The Russian government has promised the United States 
it will convert the Krasnoyarsk-26 reactor and two similar reactors 
at another closed city, Tomsk-7, so that they no longer produce plutonium 
by 2000. But Russian officials said the conversion will almost certainly 
have to be delayed because of budgetary and technical problems. Without 
generous funds from Moscow, the city's character has begun to change. 
It is quieter, greener and safer than most than most Russian cities, 
but it is no longer walled off from the problems of modern-day Russia. 
The shortage of funds has affected the city's medical services which 
suspended all but emergency operations in August when medicine and 
surgical gloves ran out. Like other scientists, Sokolov and his family 
have felt the blow. They live in a cramped, but tidy apartment, crowded 
with books and pictures of grandchildren. Sokolov, tall, lean and 
graced with an impish sense of humor, relishes his work and his colleagues 
and regales guests with tales of his trips through the still untamed 
taiga, the storied Siberian wilderness that stretches north to the 
Arctic tundra. Their rewards for long years of service behind the 
barbed-wire city limits, however, is a meager one. Sokolov's salary, 
which sometimes has been delayed for months, is about $150 a month. 
His wife, a chemist, has been paid more regularly, but only receives 
$30 a month. Their salaries are supplemented by small pensions, granted 
in recognition of their decades of toil. Each receives $37. Their 
children have delivered their verdict on the city's future. The Sokolovs' 
son works in the city, but their two daughters, who received degrees 
in science, moved away years ago and have no desire to return. Pensioners 
and laid-off workers have an even harder time. Valentina Mazurova 
worked as a construction engineer when Krasnoyarsk-26 was a boomtown. 
A sturdy woman with an engaging smile, she has given up her dreams 
of travel and supplements her monthly pension by selling dried fruit 
in the outdoor market. On a good day, she may earn $2. Others residents 
have turned to the world outside the wire for work. Each weekday morning, 
several thousand pile into a caravan of cars and buses that snakes 
its way to the city of Krasnoyarsk. Lebedev would like to see the 
secret city opened up. That, he believes, would bring in new business 
and money and make the city less dependent on the dying military sector. 
Few residents, however, agree. They see the barbed-wire fences as 
a final barrier against the turmoil sweeping the land and want to 
keep Krasnoyarsk-26 closed despite the economic costs. ``The stronger 
the crisis the more people want to live in isolation,'' said the Andrei 
Katargin, the mayor of Zheleznogorsk, the name of the residential 
area inside the fences. In Moscow, the closed cities have become a 
heavy burden for Yevgeny Adamov, Russia's atomic energy minister. 
Krasnoyarsk-26 is just part of the problem. The director of the nuclear 
design center Chelyabinsk-70 shot himself in 1996, as that closed 
city faltered under the weight of unpaid wages. Morale is so low that 
Adamov regularly lectures the authorities in the nuclear cities not 
to pay plumbers and common laborers more than nuclear scientists. 
The approaching winter threatens to make a bad situation worse. Closing 
down the cities is not an option. They are still needed to disassemble 
weapons and safeguard nuclear materials, and nobody wants the scientists 
to be tempted to go abroad. As the cities deteriorated, Russian intelligence 
began the secret monitoring of the top Russian scientists, whose bomb-designing 
skills would be particularly valuable to an aspiring nuclear power 
or to the United States, Adamov said. ``We call them sensitive professions,'' 
Adamov said. ``and we know all these people by name. Even they don't 
know that they are in this group. We make sure they are provided for.'' 
The atomic energy ministry's long-term plan is to cut the nuclear 
workforce by as much as a third and create an equivalent number of 
new jobs in the commercial sector. Of the three-quarter of a million 
people who live in the closed cities, 125,000 work directly in the 
nuclear enterprises. ``People in the closed cities are like children,'' 
Adamov said. ``The gap between ordinary cities and the free market 
is quite big, but the gap between people who lived in a closed city 
and a market economy is enormous.'' The stakes are so high that the 
United States Energy Department has forged an unusual collaboration 
with the atomic energy ministry, its former archrival. It has earmarked 
$30 million dollars to help launch new businesses, which might attract 
Western capital. But it is a small sum and the funds cannot even be 
disbursed until Congress reviews the spending plan early next year. 
The Energy Department is also planning to spend $200 million to help 
Russia dispose of plutonium. That will also involve work in the closed 
cities, though it is not clear exactly how those funds will be spent 
and how much will go to American contractors. ``The cities were in 
trouble before, but now they are getting desperate, said Kenneth Luongo, 
a former Energy Department official and the head of the Russian-American 
National Security Advisory Council, a private group that focuses on 
the problems of the closed cities. ``What little economic progress 
there was is being erased and serious action is required to prevent 
further deterioration.'' At Krasnoyarsk-26, Lebedev has not given 
up hope. His dream is to transform his complex into a high-tech commercial 
center _ a sort of Silicon Valley of Russia. He has tried one plan 
after to try to lure business here but little has happened. A plan 
to assemble Samsung televisions collapsed after import tariffs on 
electronic components were raised. He also drafted a plan to make 
his city a tax-free zone for foreign investors. But the government 
never acted. The complex is so desperate it would like to make money 
storing nuclear waste. But Russian law forbids it from accepting nuclear 
waste from abroad. These days Krasnoyarsk-26 is counting on the construction 
of a $200 million factory to produce silicon for computer chips. The 
Defense Enterprise Fund, a Pentagon-funded group that is trying to 
help Russia convert its military industry to civilian production, 
has paid for some of the planning. The Russian government has already 
spent several million dollars to grow silicon crystals. Krasnoyarsk-26, 
however, still needs to line up major Western investors. With Asia 
in a recession and the United States and Europe possibly on the brink 
of a slowdown, persuading foreign companies to sink hundreds of millions 
of dollars into a Siberian nuclear city is harder than ever. As investors 
ponder their hand, Lebedev is weighed down by more immediate worries. 
This summer, he sent his Moscow superiors a blunt memo describing 
where this once-proud city was headed. ``Wage payments are three months 
behind schedule,'' he wrote. ``The social tension in the shops and 
factories has reached the critical level, and its consequences are 
unpredictable.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>