<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0433 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The phone calls rattled Rep. Tom DeLay's Texas home for days, a jangling 
reminder of the post-election chaos he now faced as House majority 
whip and its third-ranking Republican. Each day, the count of dead 
or wounded Republican leaders increased a notch. But, as this month's 
dial-a-putsch came to a close, DeLay, one of President Clinton's severest 
critics, remained the only one of the top leadership left standing, 
unchallenged and more powerful than before. Somehow, the buckshot 
spray had missed him. It was a feat that seemed especially striking 
to outsiders. DeLay is, after all, the man who crafted a House ``war 
room'' to impeach Clinton, feels tenderness toward the reviled pesticide 
DDT and is known for twisting the arms of lobbyists on K Street. But, 
for most House Republicans, even a few who despise his politics and 
sometimes his manner, DeLay's performance as whip has been first rate. 
``He does his job, and he does it exceptionally well,'' said Rep. 
Sherwood Boehlert, a moderate Republican from New York, who has clashed 
ideologically with the unflinchingly conservative DeLay. ``The main 
skill to bring to that job is to be able to count and to be able to 
look someone in the eye and determine whether or not that somebody 
is being truthful.'' In fact, while Republicans lamented the recent 
election defeats, this slimmer majority practically guaranteed DeLay's 
job security. With Republicans holding only a six-vote margin, the 
task of counting votes and prodding nervous members to stay the party 
line has taken on superhero proportions in the minds of many DeLay 
colleagues. Few Republicans, even those moderates who are extremely 
critical of DeLay's handling of the impeachment issue, proved willing 
to gamble away DeLay's undisputed skills as a whip. ``Nobody probably 
wants the job,'' joked Rep. Matt Salmon, R-Ariz., a conservative who 
said Delay had a ``sixth sense'' for counting votes. DeLay, 51, safeguarded 
his survival in those tumultuous post-election days by doing what 
he does best as a whip: He listened to his colleagues, counted the 
votes, watched Speaker Newt Gingrich step down. Then he made his move. 
An astute politician, DeLay backed the emerging successor, Rep. Robert 
Livingston, R-La., bringing with him the cadre of 65 whips in his 
organization. The alliance clinched the deal for Livingston, chairman 
of the Appropriations Committee, and, in so doing, conferred greater 
power on DeLay. ``If you are a candidate for leadership, you want 
him in your camp,'' said Rep. Rick Lazio, another New York moderate. 
At least for now, DeLay has not taken a position in the three-way 
race for majority leader, the post held by a fellow Texan, Dick Armey. 
Elfish and steely eyed, DeLay, a onetime executive of a pest exterminating 
company in Sugar Land and Texas statehouse politician, has created 
a reputation as a respected and feared adversary, both in Congress 
and in the world of well-heeled lobbyists. Allies describe him as 
generous and upfront, a family man with a wife and daughter, a ``father 
confessor'' who maintains an open door for House members who want 
to chat about legislation or who need assurances that they will not 
suffer for their vote. While DeLay does not shrink from pushing his 
own agenda at times, even if it means twisting some arms, he is seldom 
sneaky in his approach, members say. ``He's honest,'' said Rep. John 
Doolittle, R-Calif. ``And he is a member's member.'' Late at night, 
DeLay transforms his suite of offices into grazing central, laden 
with buckets of fried chicken or platters of barbecue beef to keep 
torch-burning members happy and comfortable. And he makes it a point 
to keep tabs on members' pet projects and their districts, stepping 
in at opportune times to push their ventures along. Among the Christian 
right, he is considered a champion of social conservative causes. 
A rift between Republicans and social conservatives that emerged earlier 
this year was healed after DeLay cobbled together a ``values summit'' 
meeting between the two groups. ``Once he digs his teeth into something, 
he's a pit bull on issues and on winning,'' said Rep. Bill Paxon of 
upstate New York, a close friend who is retiring this year. ``But 
that is not why he is unopposed in this maelstrom. It's because of 
the personal relationships. ``It's important to be respected in this 
town. But the real reason for his personal success has nothing to 
do with people fearing him. It's because they love him.'' But DeLay, 
who grew up on oil rigs in Texas and Venezuela with his father, an 
oil-drilling contractor who wanted a doctor for a son, can rankle 
as often as he can please. Critics describe him as glowering and undiplomatic. 
And while conservatives view him as principled and sincere, moderates 
think he endangers the party's majority with his ideological convictions. 
Once a small-business owner, DeLay came to detest government regulations, 
and as the head of a pest control company, he developed a special 
hatred for the Environmental Protection Agency. In 1995, he tried 
to add 17 riders to the EPA's appropriations bill that would have 
virtually wiped away pesticide and toxic-waste laws. He once described 
DDT as ``not harmful,'' and in 1996 he called the EPA the Gestapo 
of government. Another DeLay move that raised some eyebrows was his 
vote against imposing a $300,000 fine on Gingrich as punishment for 
the speaker's lying to the House ethics committee. This year, DeLay 
led the charge in trying to kill legislation to overhaul campaign 
finance laws, relishing his role as a defender of free speech and 
growing hoarse from his many speeches on the House floor. Even with 
the artillery of his whip organization, he lost that vote. And last 
month, he sparked a feud within his own party when he tried to muscle 
lobbyists into hiring Republicans, not Democrats, a tactic some of 
his colleagues blasted as counterproductive, aides and members said. 
DeLay has made it a mission to try to swell Republican ranks along 
the lobbying corridors and has hit a few rocky shoals because of it. 
He once faced two ethics complaints, one for steering businesses toward 
his brother, a lobbyist, the other for putting pressure on lobbyists. 
Both were dismissed. But it was his fervor to impeach Clinton that 
propelled him into the national spotlight. He was the first Republican 
leader to harpoon Clinton after the Lewinsky scandal broke and call 
for his resignation. ``He is an outstanding whip, absolutely,'' said 
Rep. Christopher Shays of Connecticut, a moderate. ``But his leadership 
skills and his judgment hurt us.'' ``He takes away our mantle of reform,'' 
Shays added. ``These are really, what I think, the most unbelievably 
stupid kind of issues that destroy what we are about as the Republican 
Party.'' A turning point in DeLay's relationship with his colleagues 
came in the aftermath of an aborted coup, last summer, when news spread 
that he had participated in a late-night cabal to overthrow Gingrich. 
The attempted coup severed DeLay's friendship with Armey, who had 
also attended the meeting, and further chilled his rapport with Gingrich. 
Colleagues were furious at DeLay at first, accusing him of treason. 
But at a revival-style caucus, DeLay apologized for his role in the 
plot and delivered a contrite speech. That gesture impressed most 
members. Many still mention it as a reason for his endurance and for 
the loyalty he engenders. ``To me, that kind of stand-up mentality 
and let-the-chips-fall-where- they-may is so refreshing,'' Salmon 
said. ``It endeared me as a diehard DeLay supporter. I told him that 
night, `Tom, I would walk on broken glass for you.' '' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>