<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0359 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
With seven months left in the Board of Education's current five-year 
construction plan, school officials have completed only about a third 
of the major repair projects they identified as priorities when the 
plan was begun in July 1994, according to data released by the board 
this week. While board officials say they are confident that the construction 
is moving forward and that most of the work will be finished by the 
end of the school year, they acknowledge that they cannot know for 
sure. That is because the school system's computers are unable to 
track the progress of construction projects or enable officials to 
predict when the work will be completed. The board's acknowledgment 
that it did not know for certain when it would be able to complete 
dozens of longstanding priority projects _ including the replacement 
of leaky school roofs, buckling auditorium floors, antiquated coal 
furnaces and dangerously rotted window frames _ came on the eve of 
its expected announcement Wednesday asking the city and state to spend 
$11 billion on its next five-year plan, to begin in July. That figure 
is more than double the current five-year budget of $4.6 billion. 
If approved by city and state officials, it will be the largest amount 
spent on the city school construction since before the fiscal crisis 
of the 1970s. Whether school construction officials get that money 
will hinge largely on their ability to overcome a reputation for incompetence 
and wastefulness _ one that has long dogged both the Board of Education 
and the many incarnations of its construction arm, now the School 
Construction Authority. That reputation has only been enhanced by 
a series of construction accidents in the last school year, including 
the collapse of a 10-ton brick facade at a Brooklyn high school and 
the fall of a stray brick that killed a 16-year-old girl at a Brooklyn 
elementary school. It may not be easy. State legislators have scheduled 
hearings in early December on problems in city school construction, 
and the State Board of Regents is readying a new set of guidelines 
for school inspections and repairs. At the same time, the city teachers' 
union is continuing to pursue a lawsuit to force the board to make 
needed repairs. But school officials say they have made improvements, 
decreasing the amount of time it takes to finish projects and increasing 
the amount of work done each year. Lewis Spence, deputy chancellor 
for operations, said the main reason so many projects were still pending 
was that school officials had received money to do much of the work 
only within the last 18 months. The situation is a result of wild 
swings in financing, he said. The board originally agreed with Mayor 
Rudolph Giuliani on a $3.4 billion, five-year plan in the spring of 
1994. A year later, Giuliani, facing citywide fiscal pressures, pared 
$500 million from the budget, forcing school officials to cut projects 
and table a number of improvements to a system in which half the buildings 
were built before World War II. ``You are doing so much triage,'' 
Spence said. ``You do an emergency here and an emergency here and 
an emergency here.'' As money became available, the mayor returned 
it to the schools, raising the construction budget to its current 
$4.6 billion with a mandate to build more classrooms and fix leaking 
walls and roofs. But because much of the money has become available 
only within the last 18 months, it has been almost impossible for 
school officials to finish the work by next July, the end of the capital 
plan, Spence said. Further delaying the repairs was the school system's 
crisis in overcrowding. Spence said that, faced with an influx of 
almost 20,000 students a year, school officials changed course midway 
through the construction plan and emphasized adding space to the overburdened 
system. Instead of building classroom space for 40,000 students over 
the last four years, Spence said, school officials had actually added 
space for almost 70,000, although much of it is in trailers and other 
temporary classrooms. Spence estimated that roughly 70 percent of 
the projects listed in the current construction plan would be finished 
or under construction by the end of the school year. But he said he 
could not be sure, because of a Byzantine accounting system in which 
one computer cannot talk to another. Asked, for example, how many 
of the 315 roofs to be repaired would be finished by July 1999, as 
scheduled, Spence said: ``At this moment in time, we can't give you 
a precise answer to that. We can tell you how many have been funded 
and how many are in construction, but we can't tell you how many are 
going to be done by the end of the year.'' The system's inability 
to track spending was brought into sharp focus earlier this year when 
the School Construction Authority, the semiautonomous agency that 
does the construction work for the board, could not properly account 
for $100 million that it had spent. Though theft or loss has been 
ruled out, officials are still working to reconstruct how the money 
was used. The confusion in record-keeping had a more practical impact 
last spring, when the board ran out of money to pay for small construction 
projects like classroom plastering and upgrades in bathroom plumbing. 
The shortfall forced the board to cancel some projects and abruptly 
shuffle others. Spence said the authority was using a consulting concern 
to rebuild its accounting system. He said that once the new system 
was in place _ preferably by the time the new construction plan takes 
effect next July _ the system would, for the first time, be able to 
track the progress of continuing projects. City Comptroller Alan Hevesi 
said the glitches were of no small concern. ``I am troubled by the 
board and the School Construction Authority's inability to track projects,'' 
he said. ``The fact that they can't go from one budget to another 
and tell us where the money is spent is not a sign of good management.'' 
Spence said that soon after arriving in New York and assuming his 
job in the fall of 1995, he became one of the biggest critics of the 
school construction process, singling out the authority for delivering 
new schools over budget and well after the school year began. But 
he insisted that in recent months, the process had grown far more 
efficient and that the authority was now at work on $1.4 billion worth 
of projects _ almost triple the 1995 level. The authority, he said, 
is capable of handling an even bigger work load; in making its request 
public Wednesday, the board is to propose spending at least $2 billion 
a year on school repairs and construction in each of the next five 
years. Included in that amount, Spence said, will be a big increase 
in money for maintenance _ a perennial frustration for a system of 
so many aging buildings. ``We've got our finger in the dike,'' he 
said. ``The system is not going to fall down. But now it has got to 
get fixed.' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>