<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0199 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When Joseph Baum died in October, this city lost one of its great 
restaurant legends. But his company remains, as does his attention-grabbing 
flair in projects he had been developing with his partners. When people 
think of Joe Baum, many of them think first of the Rainbow Room, which 
he reopened in 1987 after two years of renovation. But before his 
death, the BE Group, a partnership of Baum and David Emil and their 
families) had lost its lease, effective the end of this year, when 
Cipriani International will take over. As for Windows on the World, 
the other high-profile space run by the BE Group, the news is centered 
on Cellar in the Sky, which has been closed for months. When it reopens 
in January, renamed Wild Blue, it will have an a la carte menu of 
simple, forthright fare. ``Joe always wanted a great aged prime steak 
or a special lobster dish, and we'll have that,'' said Michael Lomonaco, 
the chef. Andrea Immer, the award-winning sommelier, plans to offer 
scores of wines by the glass that can be matched with the food. ``But 
we're not doing precise matches this time,'' she said. Wild Blue will 
be entered directly from the elevator lobby on the 107th floor, where 
Milton Glaser's pastel beaded curtain has now been removed. A warmer, 
more relaxed decor is being designed by Larry Bogdanow. Glen Vogt, 
who had been the manager of Patroon, has been hired to manage the 
Windows on the World restaurants, including Wild Blue. Baum was also 
planning to take American cocktails to London. Next year, the BE Group 
will be opening a two-story cocktail lounge and wine bar with a limited 
menu near Berkeley Square in London, a project being designed by David 
Rockwell. And the group is also scouting for a restaurant space in 
midtown Manhattan. Plans are for Charles Baum, Joseph Baum's son who 
is the general manager of the Rainbow Room, to run it. At the Rainbow 
Room, there will be no New Year's Eve gala this year, breaking a 10-year 
tradition. The Rainbow Room will close to the public after dinner 
on Dec. 19, and the last private party is scheduled for Dec. 23. On 
Jan. 1, Cipriani International will become the new leaseholder. Giuseppe 
Cipriani, who heads the company, said the complex would reopen in 
about two months after some refurbishing. Under the new management, 
the Rainbow Room will be used mainly for private parties and will 
be open to the public only on Friday nights and for Sunday brunch. 
To handle the private parties, the Cipriani organization has hired 
Herbert Rose away from the Hotel Pierre, where he was the catering 
director. The Rainbow Room's three levels will be turned into two, 
to allow more seating. The Promenade Bar will undergo the biggest 
change and become another look-alike branch of Harry's Bar in Venice, 
with low tables and chairs. The 40-seat restaurant will offer the 
typical Cipriani menu, featuring carpaccio and risotto. The actual 
bar will be moved away from the windows, so more tables will have 
a view. The restaurant will be open for breakfast, lunch and dinner. 
Gone will be the intimate Rainbow and Stars cabaret; that space will 
be used as a reception area for private parties. But Cipriani said 
that there might eventually be a cabaret in another room. The Rainbow 
Room's chef, Waldy Malouf, is planning to open Waldy's next year at 
25 West 56th Street, with Emil. It will be a 190-seat multilevel restaurant 
with an open kitchen. With its hearth cooking and showy presentation 
(whole fish and suckling pigs), it's another project in which Baum's 
influence will continue to be noticed. ``Everyone is feeling sad and 
conscious of the loss of Joe,'' Emil said. ``There's no replacement 
for Joe.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>