<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0346 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For the first time, the Federal Trade Commission is issuing advertising 
guidelines aimed specifically at the nation's booming dietary supplement 
industry. The guidelines are the commission's second action within 
a week on claims by the industry, which earned nearly $12 billion 
in 1997 and is growing at about 20 percent a year. Last week the commission 
e-mailed warnings to 1,200 Internet sites that it said had made ``incredible 
claims'' for drugs, devices and dietary supplements, including herbal 
remedies that purported to ward off AIDS or cure cancer. In addition, 
the commission has taken legal action this year against seven supplement 
manufacturers over advertising claims for various products, including 
an impotence remedy called Vaegra and a shark cartilage product that 
supposedly cured cancer, rheumatism, arthritis, diabetes, fibroid 
tumors, bursitis, circulatory problems and cysts. Several weight-loss 
potions were also targeted by the commission. The guidelines, which 
are being posted Wednesday on the commission's Web site and sent to 
trade associations for the supplement industry, do not amount to any 
change in policy, said Michelle Rusk, a lawyer for the commission. 
Basically the FTC requires that advertising be truthful, that it not 
be misleading and that advertisers be able to back up their claims. 
The new guidelines explain how those requirements apply to the supplement 
industry and spell out the kinds of claims that supplement manufacturers 
can and cannot make. Jodie Bernstein, director of the FTC's Bureau 
of Consumer Protection, said that in recent years the commission had 
issued similar guidelines to define ``low fat'' for the food industry 
and terms like ``recycled'' and ``recyclable'' for other producers. 
The new supplement guidelines were prompted by the tremendous growth 
of the industry, Ms. Bernstein said, and by confusion among manufacturers 
about what was allowed in advertising. ``There are a lot of new players,'' 
she said. In addition, the Dietary Supplement Health and Education 
Act of 1994 limited the authority of the Food and Drug Administration 
to regulate supplements, and that change left many manufacturers wondering 
what the rules were. Ms. Bernstein said the commission had worked 
with industry and consumer groups for a year to develop the guidelines. 
Response from the industry has been favorable. Alan Raul, a lawyer 
at Sidley &AMP; Austin, a Washington law firm that represents the 
National Nutritional Foods Association, said: ``The FTC has really 
reached out to the dietary supplement industry to provide assistance 
and guidance in the sort of advertising claims on dietary supplements 
that are appropriate. It looks like a thorough, helpful piece of guidance 
that will be useful to the public and to the industry.'' Dr. Annette 
Dickinson, director of scientific and regulatory affairs for another 
trade association, said, ``We think it's a very good idea, and a useful 
guide.'' The guide, a 26-page document, explains that the Food and 
Drug Administration is responsible for claims on labeling, and the 
FTC for advertising claims, including those on the Internet. It provides 
36 hypothetical examples of advertising claims, and explains how the 
law would apply to them. Advertisers are responsible for implied claims 
as well as expressly stated ones, the guide says, so that if an advertisement 
cites ``university studies'' in support of a product, the studies 
must not only exist but also deliver on the implied message, which 
is that they are reliable studies. Similarly, if an advertisement 
says that 90 percent of cardiologists take a certain product, the 
manufacturer must be able to demonstrate not only that fact but also 
the implied claim that the product is good for the heart. Unlike FDA 
labeling rules, which forbid claims that supplements can treat or 
prevent disease, the FTC guidelines allow such claims in advertisements, 
provided that the manufacturer can substantiate them. What qualifies 
as substantiation is also explained in the guidelines: ``competent 
and reliable scientific evidence,'' including tests, analyses, research 
and studies conducted and evaluated by qualified professionals. But 
advertisers cannot, by picking and choosing among studies, present 
only those that back their claims. The guidelines say the advertisements 
must reflect ``the totality of the evidence.'' The commission also 
requires that advertisers disclose, clearly and prominently, ``qualifying 
information'' like side effects or the fact that a weight-loss product 
works only if the consumer also diets and exercises. Companies must 
also disclose whether a person who endorses a particular product is 
being paid for the endorsement and whether the person is qualified 
to make such an endorsement. If, for example, a person identified 
as ``Dr. Jones'' speaks on behalf of vitamins but is a doctor of Romance 
languages rather than of medicine, the advertising is not acceptable. 
Advertisers are also barred from implying that any food supplement 
has been approved by the FDA, which has no authority to regulate supplements 
unless they violate its labeling rules or become implicated in consumer 
illness. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>