<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0304 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Israeli Parliament Tuesday approved the American-brokered peace 
plan by a significant majority, reflecting the widespread, pragmatic 
acceptance here of partitioning the Land of Israel. Prime Minister 
Benjamin Netanyahu, whose Likud Party was created to defend the Jewish 
homeland from territorial compromise, turned his back on the party's 
founding credo. In so doing, he won a far more substantial victory, 
with 75 yea votes, than the Labor Party, with its slim margin of support, 
won for the original Israeli-Palestinian peace accord signed in Oslo 
in 1993. But he did so only with the Labor opposition's support. Only 
half of his coalition government voted for the agreement; two of his 
Cabinet members voted against it; and five ministers, all Likud members, 
walked out of the chambers, refusing to vote. ``You are carried today 
on the hands of the opposition, like in a hammock,'' said Eli Goldschmidt, 
a Labor member of Parliament. ``Onward to peace!'' The decision had 
the makings of a watershed moment, but it did not feel like one here 
Tuesday. After nearly five years of on-and-off again negotiations, 
of terrorism, political assassinations and changes in leadership, 
caution has tempered the enthusiasm _ and the hostility _ that many 
once felt toward the peace accord. There was no clapping or cheering 
when the tally was announced _ 75 for, 19 against, and 9 abstentions. 
Sixteen members did not vote. Shortly before midnight the session 
fizzled out. From the outset, Netanyahu set the tone: ``This is not 
a day of jubilation,''he said. He presented his land-for-security 
plan to the Parliament as a painful and unavoidable reality, and it 
was accepted with resignation. ``I would have expected the prime minister 
to speak of joy,'' Walid Sadek, an Israeli Arab member of Parliament, 
said in the midafternoon. ``To say, `There's peace, happiness, a new 
wind blowing through the region.' But what we heard were words of 
arrogance and of humiliation for the Palestinian people.'' Sadek addressed 
an all-but-empty chamber, typical of the two days of discussion leading 
up to the final hours of full attendance, and full rowdiness. The 
speaker of the Parliament, Dan Tichon, pronounced the decision the 
most difficult in the country's 50 years. But, for two days, the floor 
of the Parliament was generally occupied only by the speaker and the 
next in line to speak. ``People, or should I say, chairs,'' one member 
began. And even as they concluded that they would vote for the ``path 
of peace,'' most members from both left and right maligned the agreement. 
It was a bad plan, they said, or a dangerously delayed one, or hollow 
_ no longer buoyed by the Israeli-Palestinian trust that led to the 
original accord. ``I can say with certainty that this agreement could 
have been obtained a year ago,'' said David Levy, the former foreign 
minister, who resigned early this year, partly out of frustration 
with stagnation in the peace effort. ``And we wouldn't be left, so 
many of us, with a bitter taste in our mouths.'' Zvi Weinberg, a low-profile 
member of Yisrael Baaliya, the Russian immigrant party, was one of 
the few to voice unequivocal support for Netanyahu. ``The agreement 
surrenders a large part of our historical heritage, but I have no 
doubt the prime minister is walking on the right path,'' he said. 
Otherwise, there were few kind words for Netanyahu, and the attacks 
from his own right wing carried the sharpest bite. Benny Begin, a 
Likud member of Parliament, said the prime minister was acting ``like 
a dishrag.'' Hanan Porat, a member of the National Religious Party, 
mocked Netanyahu for ``running whining to his American nanny'' whenever 
he had a disagreement with the Palestinians. Michael Kleiner, leader 
of the right-wing Land of Israel front in the Parliament, pronounced 
Netanyahu finished and the Likud Party irrelevant. ``They broke the 
ideological backbone of their movement,'' he said. ``The whole existence 
of Likud was based on keeping the Land of Israel undivided. Now what 
is the difference between Likud and Labor?'' Still, there was no serious 
talk of bringing down Netanyahu's government, especially after the 
prime minister strengthened a tenuous hold on power early this week 
by persuading the National Religious Party _ all of whose parliament 
members voted against the accord Tuesday night _ to remain in his 
coalition. The far-right Moledet Party attached a vote of no-confidence 
in the government to the vote on the agreement, but it did not appear 
to change the individual members' determination to cast their votes 
either for or against the peace effort. It was not the intention of 
Labor Party members to give Netanyahu a vote of confidence, but they 
essentially did. Even as he presented the agreement to the Parliament, 
Netanyahu sounded a grim note. ``As opposed to others, we don't have 
any illusions,'' the prime minister said Monday. ``We don't believe 
in a new Middle East, and we did not return from Wye with a promise 
that a new sun would shine or that there would be a sudden end to 
100 years of conflict,'' he said, referring to the site of the peace 
talks, Wye Plantation in Maryland. Under the peace memorandum, signed 
at the White House last month, the Israelis agreed to turn over 13 
percent of the West Bank to Palestinian civil control, and to transfer 
an additional 14 percent, already under civil control, to full Palestinian 
control. In exchange, the Palestinians were to clamp down on terrorism 
and incitement, confiscate illegal weapons, reduce their oversized 
police force and ``reaffirm'' the elimination from the Palestinian 
Covenant of clauses calling for Israel's destruction. After the initial 
accord reached in Oslo, Israel began a process of withdrawing from 
the Gaza Strip and major Palestinian cities on the West Bank. With 
this further withdrawal, Israel will have turned over 40 percent of 
the West Bank to the Palestinians. Unlike the Cabinet, which attached 
conditions to its approval of the agreement last week, the Parliament 
appeared to have approved the Hebrew translation of the agreement 
unconditionally. On Tuesday night, a Cabinet meeting was scheduled 
for Thursday to approve the handover of the first chunk of the West 
Bank to be transferred to the Palestinians since the troubled city 
of Hebron was divided early last year. The Cabinet's approval was 
expected, and Israeli withdrawal could start the same day, from the 
area between Jenin and Nablus. On Monday, Netanyahu had threatened 
to suspend the withdrawal until The Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat, 
disavowed remarks he made at a weekend political rally, in which he 
threatened an uprising, complete with rifles, if the peace agreement 
stumbled. On Tuesday, Arafat professed his commitment to diplomacy 
and peace, not violence. And, ending the latest standoff between them, 
Netanyahu later accepted his comments as an apology. ``Yesterday he 
gave the guns speech; today it wasn't exactly the roses speech, but 
it's progress,'' Netanyahu said. While the Parliament was in session, 
leaders of the Jewish settlers met with army and government officials 
to see the final maps of the first withdrawal. On them, the West Bank 
looked like a dalmatian, with splotches of color representing Palestinian 
territory scattered across the strip of land. ``The maps have a lot 
of yellow and brown, but on the ground, God forbid, there will be 
a lot of red,'' said Rehavam Zeevi, head of the far-right Moledet 
Party. Accepting the inevitability of the withdrawal, the settlers 
raised 117 specific objections to the maps, and the officials accepted 
half and promised to make changes. The maps showed that six settlements 
will lie within 500 yards of a Palestinian-controlled area. ``Of course, 
I fight for the government not to give anything, but we must be realists,'' 
said Pinchas Wallerstein, a leader of the settlers. ``So we concentrate 
on the maps, and the practical questions, like will this electric 
line now run through a Palestinian area, where it can be cut?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>