<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0353 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Preparing for his appearance before the House Judiciary Committee 
on Thursday, independent counsel Kenneth Starr has rehearsed testimony 
that details a pattern of obstruction by the White House extending 
beyond the matter of Monica Lewinsky, lawyers familiar with his preparations 
said Tuesday. Although he has not made a final decision about the 
contents of his two-hour opening statement, Starr has discussed the 
possibility of drawing parallels between the White House's alleged 
coverup in the Lewinsky affair and earlier alleged attempts to thwart 
other aspects of the four-year-old Whitewater inquiry, the lawyers 
said. As one lawyer put it, Starr plans to place the allegations of 
perjury and obstruction of justice against President Clinton into 
``historical perspective.'' Starr is also prepared to highlight the 
``systematic'' campaign by the White House and its loyalists to delay 
and undermine his office's investigation this year, lawyers said. 
``People who lie and perjure themselves have been able to get away 
with it by complaining about prosecutors and portraying prosecutors 
as villains,'' Charles G. Bakaly III, Starr's spokesman, said during 
a wide-ranging interview Tuesday. ``We believe we have been the victim 
of a coordinated effort to stonewall and destroy our prosecutorial 
authority.'' The Judiciary Committee, meanwhile, announced Tuesday 
that it would call more witnesses to testify in the inquiry, as the 
White House asked for 90 minutes to cross-examine Starr, rather than 
the 30 minutes the committee had allotted it. To prepare for those 
questions, Starr has spent much of the past several weeks holding 
moot court-style proceedings in his office conference room. While 
a video camera records the sessions, several senior prosecutors rattle 
off hostile questions that they anticipate committee Democrats will 
pose. At one point late last week, Starr told his colleagues, ``We 
apologize to no one for seeking the truth.'' Despite his office's 
exhaustive preparations, lawyers say that Starr does not view his 
appearance as a last-ditch attempt to sway public opinion, an accusation 
made by some Democrats Tuesday. Starr's personal approval ratings 
have been stuck in the single digits for months, in part as a reflection 
of the public's weariness with the 10-month, sex-and-cover-up investigation. 
``He does not seek vindication for himself on Thursday,'' Bakaly explained. 
``But he does seek vindication of the facts and the rule of law.'' 
Starr steered away from raising other areas of the Whitewater inquiry 
in his Sept. 9 referral to Congress, which recommended 11 impeachable 
offenses related to the coverup of Clinton's affair with Lewinsky. 
It was a decision that helped White House lawyers dismiss the report 
as the product of a sex-obsessed inquiry, an argument that has resonated 
with the public. The decision also infuriated some Starr allies, who 
had openly called for Starr to draw parallels between the Lewinsky 
matter and other areas of his inquiry. Starr is determined to defend 
his report's findings on Thursday, his allies said Tuesday. ``He absolutely 
stands by the referral,'' Bakaly said. The stakes are extremely high 
for Starr's appearance as the impeachment inquiry's first witness. 
The fate of the impeachment inquiry, as well as Starr's legacy, is 
likely to depend on the public's reaction to the independent counsel's 
testimony. Lawyers familiar with Starr's preparations said that his 
opening statement would present a dispassionate review of the facts 
and the law in the referral made in September to Congress. By disclosing 
his discussions about possible areas of his testimony, Starr's aides 
may be attempting to gauge the public reaction to the possibility 
that he may widen the scope of his testimony to other matters still 
under investigation. ``This is his last opportunity to make people 
realize that this investigation was not just about sex,'' said Barbara 
Olson, a Washington lawyer who is a frequent defender of Starr on 
television. ``I don't know that Starr is ready for the level of lies 
that he is going to have to face.'' As the solicitor general during 
the Bush administration, Starr, 52, argued cases before the Supreme 
Court, where he felt comfortable with the high court's deeply respectful 
decorum. Starr has no experience making such an important presentation 
amid the partisan free-for-all of the House Judiciary Committee room, 
where snappy soundbites will be the goal of many of the 37 members, 
each of whom will be given five minutes to quiz Starr on any subject. 
Some committee Democrats are preparing to fire hostile questions at 
Starr to portray him as a right-wing, overzealous prosecutor who remains 
determined to destroy the president. They plan to ask Starr questions 
about allegations that his office leaked grand jury material and about 
his prosecutors' contacts last January with conservative opponents 
of the president who had links to Paula Corbin Jones' sexual misconduct 
lawsuit. Democrats on the panel also plan to object to any attempts 
by Starr _ or conservative Republican members _ to steer the hearing 
to matters not contained in the referral. ``We have presumed that 
Starr would confine his testimony to the four corners of the referral 
itself,'' said Jim Jordan, the spokesman for the committee Democrats. 
``It would be unacceptable to our members for Starr to offer unproven 
allegations or innuendo in an effort to somehow rehabilitate a failed 
investigation.'' Bakaly said that Starr has expressed no opinion about 
the public's rather tepid reaction to the Starr Report and its allegations. 
Lawyers and friends described Starr as feeling upbeat and looking 
forward to the opportunity to speak before the Judiciary Committee. 
``Most of all, he sees this as the continuation of his duty to assist 
Congress in their duty to make a judgment,'' Bakaly said. ``We make 
no judgments. We have simply gathered the facts.'' Olson's husband, 
Theodore Olson, who is also a Washington lawyer and a close friend 
of Starr, acknowledged that Starr has no experience presenting the 
facts and the law in a congressional committee room riven by partisan 
politics. ``This is a very different forum from what he is accustomed 
to,'' Theodore Olson said. ``This will be five minutes of interrogation, 
per person, by some friendly and some hostile interrogators. Some 
of them will ask questions, some of them will deliver speeches, some 
of them will engage in argument, some of them may be attempted to 
do some grandstanding for the nightly news. You don't see that kind 
of thing often in court from judges.'' Bakaly agreed, saying: ``In 
the political world and world of public opinion, Starr has been demonized 
by his critics. But in the legal world, Starr has won repeatedly.'' 
Bakaly pointed out that Starr's office has won 15 legal decisions 
against the White House this year on issues such as the president's 
assertion of executive privilege. Starr's allies also complained that 
the White House has successfully advanced the argument that the independent 
counsel has been motivated by a political agenda. ``We have made no 
attempt to influence public opinion.'' Bakaly said. ``Isn't it obvious?'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>