<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0205 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As the United States lurches toward the next century, it's hard to 
know what to worry about first: impeachment, Iraq or the chance that 
every computer in the country will unite in one disastrous mixup on 
Jan. 1, 2000. So many worries, so little time till the millennium. 
``America 1900'' recalls a more optimistic turn of the century, documenting 
January through December 1900 in kaleidoscopic, often spellbinding 
detail. Though this episode of ``The American Experience'' makes no 
explicit comparisons with today, viewers can easily draw their own 
resonant conclusions. The most obvious hint at how the country has 
changed comes early in David McCullough's narration. ``Cynicism and 
self-pity were not in style'' in 1900, he says. Instead, ``people 
felt exhilarated by the possibilities of America.'' Since cynicism 
is so pervasive in today's media culture (a culture so crowded there 
seems little room for self-pity), it is startling to be carried back 
to a time when optimism and hope were the national watchwords. That 
hopefulness is a decidedly American view, in bold contrast to the 
fin de siecle anxiety commonly ascribed to Europe at the same time. 
The United States was ``the most prosperous nation on earth,'' McCullough 
explains, and a dominant world power. Technological advances came 
with dizzying speed. Yet ``America 1900'' also charts the powerful 
undercurrents, including flagrant racism and child labor, that marred 
any chance at a perfect society. Though moving pictures were still 
new in 1900, this show is overflowing with rich black-and-white film 
and photographs, creating what feels like a total immersion in the 
period. Newfangled inventions like X-rays, automobiles and phonographs 
were altering ordinary lives. Horse-drawn carriages plodded alongside 
trolley cars. Women wore long dresses even when indulging in the new 
craze for hiking. And President William McKinley, who in his youth 
had been a Civil War hero, shook the hands of 2,600 people who lined 
up to greet him in the White House at his annual New Year's reception. 
There was only one guard on duty. The confounding sense of rapid change 
was an overwhelming, inescapable emotion. As McCullough notes, ``Men 
and women who had taken six months to cross the country in covered 
wagons now made the trip in six days'' by train. ``America 1900'' 
is most astute when it imagines the psychological effect of such turns. 
John M. Staudenmaier, one of the historians on the program, posits 
how the average person of 1900 feels as electricity, indoor plumbing 
and other whirlwind advances improve his life: ``I am surrounded now 
by systems that make me an idiot because I do not know how they work, 
nor do I know how to fix them.'' (That should comfort everyone struggling 
to program a VCR.) Proceeding in a blithe, roughly chronological style, 
the show often stops to focus on selected individuals and their stories. 
The Loumas, a family of Finnish immigrants, lost nine members during 
a mining disaster in Scofield, Utah. Frances Benjamin Johnston made 
a career for herself as a photojournalist, at a time when the field 
itself was primitive and few women had careers at all. Her work, included 
here, ranges from a portrait of Mark Twain to images of exhausted 
women working in a factory in Lynn, Mass. The horrors of the age were 
often as conspicuous as its progress. Some of the most nightmarish 
photographs here are of lynchings: in one, dozens of white men pose 
proudly for the camera while a black body hangs from a nearby tree. 
Many Americans of the last century took such injustices for granted; 
many others saw them as bumps on the road to a better future. At three 
hours, ``America 1900'' is a bit long, and occasionally repetitious 
as it circles back in time to pick up the thread of a story. Yet whenever 
it begins to drag, some energizing detail pops up. When McKinley won 
re-election in November 1900, in many cities the news was relayed 
by giant stereopticons projecting his image on screens on the sides 
of buildings (a low-tech anticipation of Jumbotrons everywhere). In 
1901, McKinley was assassinated in Buffalo, N.Y., while at the Pan-American 
Exposition, a symbol of hope and progress. ``America 1900'' points 
out the irony, then chooses to end with a display of New Year's fireworks 
and the promise of the fresh presidency of Theodore Roosevelt. This 
final note of optimism seems forced, though. It is McKinley's murder 
that carries the dominant tone of the new American century, in which 
assassination would be merely one of its violent hallmarks. PRODUCTION 
NOTES: THE AMERICAN EXPERIENCE America 1900 PBS, Wednesday night at 
8 (Channel 13 in New York) Written by Judy Crichton and David Grubin 
and directed by Grubin. Allyson Luchak, senior producer; Geof Bartz, 
editor. Music by Michael Bacon. Produced by David Grubin Productions. 
Produced for PBS by WGBH/Boston. Margaret Drain, executive producer; 
Mark Samels, senior producer; David McCullough, narrator and series 
host. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>