<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0168 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The great American gift for invention meets its match in the turkey, 
the great American bird. The turkey itself is not the problem, it's 
the yawning chasm within, a black hole in the culinary universe that 
somehow manages to absorb and deaden anything that wanders near its 
force field, making ``stuffing'' synonymous with ``dry, volumetric 
bore, often tricked out with oysters in a hopeless search for personality.'' 
An unlikely solution to the stuffing crisis has emerged in an unlikely 
place _ Nougatine, the cafe at Jean Georges, where a savory, steaming 
square of bread pudding rounds out a dish of baked poussin and roasted 
carrots. Within the bread pudding's custardy interior lurk surprises 
_ a nugget of wild mushroom, a long seam of sauteed spinach, chewy 
deposits of Swiss cheese, bits of leek and Swiss chard. A sprinkling 
of Parmesan cheese on top gives a light crunch to each bite. Within, 
it's all soft, fragrant comfort food. Jean-Georges Vongerichten, the 
restaurant's executive chef, says he thinks of the dish as cousin 
to the farinette, a traditional omelet from the Auvergne region of 
central France, where a single egg would be stretched with flour, 
mixed with milk and then cooked like a pancake. Eaten with a chunk 
of cheese, it made a workingman's afternoon meal. The farinette appears 
on the menu in the main dining room of Jean Georges, wrapped around 
escargots and molten raclette. In the cafe, the farinette idea comes 
back down to earth, in a form that Americans will have no trouble 
understanding. Hereabouts, it's called stuffing _ or, technically, 
dressing, since it's not actually inside the bird. And in late November, 
it doesn't take a genius to know exactly what to do with it. SAVORY 
BREAD PUDDING Adapted from Nougatine at Jean Georges Time: 45 minutes 
8 ounces sourdough bread, cut into 1-inch cubes 4 ounces Swiss cheese, 
grated 2 ounces Parmesan cheese, grated 3 tablespoons butter 4 ounces 
mixed wild mushrooms (shiitake, oyster, black trumpet or others), 
sliced 2 cups roughly chopped fresh spinach 1 cup chopped Swiss chard 
leaves 1 leek, white and light green parts only, rinsed well and very 
thinly sliced One-third cup Swiss chard stems, diced 1 large egg } 
cup whole milk } cup heavy cream Salt and freshly ground black pepper. 
1. In a large mixing bowl, combine the bread, Swiss cheese and half 
of the Parmesan cheese. 2. In a large skillet over medium-low heat, 
melt 1 tablespoon of the butter. Add mushrooms, and saute until tender, 
2 to 3 minutes. Transfer mushrooms to the mixing bowl. Add 1 tablespoon 
of the butter to the skillet, and add the spinach and Swiss chard 
leaves. Saute until wilted, about 2 minutes, and transfer to the mixing 
bowl. 3. Bring a small pan of water to a boil, and add the leeks and 
Swiss chard stems. Blanch for 1 minute, remove from heat, and drain 
well. Add to bread mixture. 4. Preheat oven to 400 degrees. Rub the 
inside of an 8-inch-square baking pan with the remaining 1 tablespoon 
butter. In a medium bowl, beat egg just until blended. 5. In a saucepan 
over medium-low heat, combine milk and heavy cream. Bring to a boil, 
and remove from heat. While whisking vigorously, add about { cup of 
the hot milk mixture to the egg, then return the egg mixture to the 
pan, and whisk until blended. Add milk mixture to the bowl of dry 
ingredients, and stir. Transfer mixture to the baking pan, pressing 
gently on surface. Bake pudding until set, about 15 minutes. 6. Remove 
pan from oven. Preheat a broiler with a rack about 6 inches from the 
heat. Unmold pudding onto a cookie sheet or other flat pan. Sprinkle 
remaining Parmesan cheese on top of the pudding, and place under broiler 
until golden brown, about 20 seconds. Serve while hot. Yield: 8 servings. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>