<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0350 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The nation's Roman Catholic bishops on Tuesday elected Bishop Joseph 
A. Fiorenza of the Diocese of Galveston-Houston, a soft-spoken prelate 
known for his concern for the poor and immigrants, as president of 
the conference that serves as their collective voice. The bishops 
also elected Bishop Wilton D. Gregory of Belleville, Ill., as vice 
president, the first time that an African-American prelate has been 
chosen for one of the top two positions in the National Conference 
of Catholic Bishops. Gregory's election is all the more notable given 
that of the 269 diocesan and auxiliary bishops in the United States, 
only 14 are black. As vice president, he will be in the favored position 
to succeed Fiorenza when his term expires in three years. The election 
of both men, on the second day of the bishops' semiannual meeting 
at a Capitol Hill hotel, continues a tradition in which the church's 
American hierarchy has elected leaders regarded as consensus builders 
_ a trend that has continued even as the number of outspoken conservatives 
among the bishops has grown as a result of recent appointments by 
Pope John Paul II. Cardinal Bernard Law, archbishop of Boston, said 
he expected Fiorenza would be ``very sensitive'' to the various members 
of the conference, a quality the cardinal also attributed to the current 
president, Bishop Anthony M. Pilla of Cleveland, whose term ends Thursday. 
Law said that Gregory ``was elected on his own merit, but given that 
he is an African-American, it's a wonderful moment in the history 
of the church.'' Fiorenza, who will become the first conference president 
to head a diocese in Texas or the Southeast, was elected on the first 
ballot, receiving 164 votes of 265 cast. Voting was by secret ballot. 
Although 10 prelates were nominated for the position, the serving 
vice president is traditionally elected president, while other candidates 
compete for vice president. A native of Beaumont, Texas, Fiorenza, 
67, grew up as the son of an immigrant barber from Sicily. As a young 
priest in Houston, he joined other clergy members marching for civil 
rights with the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. in Selma, Ala., in 1965. 
Around that time, Fiorenza said in an interview, he formed a friendship 
with an African-American Baptist pastor in Houston, the Rev. William 
Lawson, that continues to this day in a collaboration between the 
Galveston-Houston Diocese and black Baptists to renovate run-down 
housing through a community development corporation. Fiorenza, who 
served six years as bishop of San Angelo, Texas, was installed in 
1985 as head of the Galveston-Houston Diocese, where he is the spiritual 
leader of 862,000 Catholics. He said he hoped the conference would 
help the church continue ``to raise before the nation the issues of 
justice and fairness for the poor and the immigrant and those who 
for whatever reason are kept on the fringes of society.'' Gregory, 
initially competing against eight other candidates, emerged as the 
front-runner after the first ballot for vice president. He then prevailed 
in a runoff with Archbishop Justin F. Rigali of St. Louis, whose archdiocese 
will host Pope John Paul II during a two-day visit to that city in 
January. Gregory, 50, recently served as chairman of the conference's 
committee on liturgy at a time when proposed liturgical changes were 
an often contentious subject among the bishops. Gregory holds a doctorate 
from the Pontifical Liturgical Institute in Rome. A native of Chicago 
and a former auxiliary bishop in that city under the late Cardinal 
Joseph Bernardin, Gregory was installed as head of the Belleville 
diocese in 1994, becoming spiritual leader to 113,000 Catholics in 
the southern quarter of Illinois. He is one of five African-American 
bishops currently heading a diocese in the United States. Black Catholics 
number an estimated 3 to 4 million, out of about 61 million Catholics 
nationwide. In remarks to reporters after his election, Gregory said, 
``I hope it's a sign of the church's honest and sincere desire to 
include African-Americans at all levels of leadership and at all levels 
of the church. ``I hope that African-American Catholics will first 
of all pray for me,'' he added, ``and second of all see this as a 
sign of love.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>