<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0443 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Weeb Ewbank, who coached the Baltimore Colts of 1958 and the New York 
Jets of 1968 to pro football championships in monumental title games, 
died Tuesday at his home in Oxford, Ohio. He was 91. Ewbank, who attended 
the Jets-Colts game in Indianapolis last Sunday, sitting in the Jet 
owner's box, was the only coach with title winners in both the National 
Football League and in the American Football League. That distinction 
has dimmed over time because the NFL has been the only major league 
for decades. But in the 1960s there were two competitive leagues, 
American and National, and the Jets were the first from the AFL to 
win the interleague championship, the Super Bowl. That happened in 
Miami on Jan. 12, 1969, and it was certainly the highlight of Wilbur 
Charles Ewbank's 45 years as a football coach. The Jets of the AFL 
beat the Colts of the NFL, 16-7, in what came to be regarded as pro 
football's greatest upset. It also established the competitive credibility 
of the Super Bowl, which soon became the nation's most-watched sports 
event. The outcome of Super Bowl III linked Ewbank's name forever 
with Joe Namath, the Jets' flamboyant quarterback, although coach 
and athlete _ 36 years apart in age _ had little in common. Namath 
at first laughed at Ewbank and once during a game described him as 
``you little butterball.'' This was when the round coach, 5 feet 7 
inches and 195 pounds, was knocked into the mud twice by a cluster 
of players. By the time of their Super Bowl season, the playboy Namath 
had nothing but respect for his coach, the many fines forgotten. Ewbank 
did, however, run a loose ship. He did not care about Namath's Fu 
Manchu mustache, or various hair preferences of the other players. 
Or even if they occasionally stayed out late. ``As long as they produce,'' 
he said. ``Their job is to play football.'' Ewbank had easily convinced 
the Jets that the Colts, who had lost only one game and were favored 
by 18 points, could be beaten and his game plan exploited a defect 
on the right side of the Baltimore defense. Nervous during the contest, 
Ewbank continuously chewed ice cubes and spit out the fragments. The 
fourth period, he said, seemed to take forever to end. Ewbank died 
on the 30th anniversary of a game that season that, in contrast to 
the magnificent Super Bowl upset, provided unhappy memories. This 
was the so-called ``Heidi game,'' in which NBC television cut away 
from the Jets-Raiders game in Oakland to show a made-for-television 
``Heidi'' movie with the Jets leading by 32-29 and 65 seconds remaining. 
The Raiders went on to score two touchdowns and won by 43-32. Some 
fans who had been watching the game on TV did not know the final score 
until they heard the 11 o'clock news. An hour after the game, Ewbank 
telephoned his wife, Lucy, back in New York. ``Congratulations,'' 
she told him. ``For what?'' he asked. ``On winning,'' she replied. 
``We lost the game,'' he informed her. In Ewbank's remaining five 
seasons as the Jets' coach, they never played in another championship 
game and had only one winning campaign. His overall record for 20 
seasons as a pro football head coach was modest _ 134 victories, 130 
defeats, seven ties. In addition to his two best-known title teams, 
he coached the Colts to the 1959 NFL championship, when they defeated 
the Giants in the title game for a second straight year. With the 
Colts and the Jets, Ewbank inherited losing teams and rebuilt them 
into championship ones. It took five seasons in Baltimore, and he 
finally achieved his goal thanks to the emergence of another remarkable 
quarterback, Johnny Unitas. The Colts, at the end of the 1958 season, 
beat the New York Giants for the NFL championship in the first sudden-death 
overtime game, something that helped project pro football into the 
nation's consciousness. The final score was 23-17 and the common reference 
became ``the greatest game ever played.'' The modest Ewbank never 
made such claims. He took his triumphs calmly, and after the Jets' 
Super Bowl victory, his midfield comment to Don Shula, the losing 
coach, was almost an apology: ``We had all the breaks.'' Nor did Ewbank 
publicly gloat about defeating the team owned by the man who had dismissed 
him six years before, Carroll Rosenbloom. That certainly hurt. But 
Ewbank remained grateful that Rosenbloom, then a part-owner, had helped 
give him the chance to become a head coach in the NFL in 1954. He 
had been a head coach at University High School in Oxford, Ohio, 1930-1942, 
and at Washington University in St. Louis, in 1947 and 1948. World 
War II gave Ewbank the opportunity to move into big-time football 
when he joined the Navy. He was assigned to the Great Lakes Naval 
Training Station outside Chicago where he was an assistant coach under 
Paul Brown. Ewbank and Brown had been college teammates, pint-size 
quarterbacks, at Miami University in Ohio. Again he was one of Brown's 
assistant coaches with the Cleveland Browns, during 1949-1953. Ewbank 
was voted to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1978, five years after 
his retirement. But the one he boasted about was the Indiana Sports 
Hall of Fame, which quietly took in this native of Richmond, Ind., 
in 1974. It was in Richmond, as a child, that Ewbank became Weeb because 
that was how his brother pronounced his given name, Wilbur. Ewbank 
lived in retirement at his college town, Oxford, Ohio, and for years 
had a full schedule of appearances at football and charitable affairs. 
Almost always he had a shepherd, Lucy, his wife of 72 years, who survives 
him along with three daughters, eight grandchildren and 17 great-grandchildren. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>