<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981117.0305 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The decision by Moody's Investors Service to downgrade Japan's pristine 
credit rating has called into question whether more than $800 billion 
worth of government financial stimulants aimed at reversing the country's 
prolonged economic decline has all been for nothing. The step by Moody's, 
announced Tuesday, reflected increased skepticism by the credit-rating 
service about the effectiveness of the Japanese government's bureaucratic 
regulatory and political systems after eight years of economic decline. 
``It may be difficult for the present government or possible future 
governments to balance conflicting policy objectives of the long run 
to achieve a durable recovery in economic growth, to relieve the fiscal 
burden of the government and to restore solvency and vitality to the 
financial sector,'' Moody's said. Japan's credit rating is now lower 
than that of Italy, an economy with an irregular history and debt 
levels exceeding its annual output. At the new level of Aa1, down 
from triple-A, it has become the second member of the Group of Seven 
major economies with a credit rating below the top level. Canada's 
debt is rated lower by Moody's, at Aa2. Although the near-term effects 
of the move were not totally clear, Japanese leaders denounced it. 
Given Japan's big trade surplus, impressive savings rate and vast 
foreign-currency reserves, no one really thinks Japan will default 
on its credit obligations. ``Japanese government bonds are the most 
trusted in the world,'' Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa declared. 
Miyazawa noted that Japan would issue 35 trillion yen in government 
bonds, roughly $287 billion worth at current exchange rates, by the 
end of the fiscal year on March 31, and that they were selling well. 
Eisuke Sakakibara, the prominent vice finance minister for international 
affairs, suggested that the downgrading raised more questions about 
Moody's credibility than Japan's. ``Personally, I think if Moody's 
continues to behave like that, the market evaluation of Moody's will 
go down,'' he asserted. To be sure, the ratings agencies have been 
criticized for failing to spot the poor credit quality at the core 
of Asia's problems, and several commentators dismissed the statement 
accompanying the downgrading as little more than a recitation of views 
expressed by others. Another agency, Fitch, lowered its ratings of 
Japanese sovereign debt to AA-plus in September. And although Takahira 
Ogawa, director of sovereign ratings at Standard &AMP; Poor's in Singapore, 
told the Dow Jones news service on Tuesday that he saw no immediate 
reason to re-examine its triple-A rating for Japan, he said the agency 
was monitoring the effects of recent policies to determine its future 
direction on Japanese debt. ``It's not as if the information they're 
relating or the concerns they're raising haven't been discounted already 
in the markets,'' said Craig Chudler of Salomon Smith Barney. ``The 
danger is not the direct impact of the rating _ so many other things 
are going on that are affecting the cost of financing,'' but that 
the government ``is responding in a way that says it's not getting 
the point.'' The financial markets seemed unfazed by Moody's decision. 
The price of the benchmark 10-year government bond fell only slightly 
Tuesday _ enough to drive the yield up by 0.015 percent, to 0.86 percent. 
The benchmark Nikkei stock index finished marginally lower, inching 
back 15.27 points, or just over a tenth of 1 per cent, to 14,413. 
Robert Alan Feldman, chief economist with Morgan Stanley Dean Witter 
here, said the cost of a downgrading from triple-A to Aa1 was minimal, 
noting that the lowering of Canada's debt to Aa2 in 1995 had little 
effect on that economy or Canadian corporations. ``There is not a 
doubt in anyone's mind that Japan might default on an obligation,'' 
he said. Economists and analysts said that Tuesday's downgrading had 
largely been factored into markets after Moody's announced in July 
that it was considering lowering Japan's sovereign debt rating. How 
the downgrading will affect Japan's battered corporations was open 
to interpretation. Most analysts said that Moody's and other agencies 
had already lowered corporate ratings, but a few worried that Tuesday's 
action would set off a further round of reductions. Many regarded 
Moody's decision in August to lower Toyota's triple-A rating to Aa1 
as laying the groundwork for cutting Japan's sovereign debt rating 
on Tuesday. Toyota, with $20 billion in cash at its disposal and very 
little debt, is one of the bluest blue-chip companies in the world, 
and few found Moody's rationale for lowering its ratings convincing. 
The downgrading came the day after Japan announced one of the biggest 
economic-stimulus packages on record, pledging to spend $195 billion 
to invigorate the economy. That brought total Japanese stimulus spending 
to more than $800 billion since 1992, which was clearly on Moody's 
mind. According to a report from the Organization of Economic Cooperation 
and Development, Japan's public debt, including that of regional governments, 
was 93.1 percent of the nation's gross domestic product in 1997, compared 
with 120.3 percent in Italy, 98.8 percent in Canada and 64 percent 
in the United States. ``To date, such fiscal stimulus packages have 
not led to sustained economic growth, but rather are increasing domestic 
debt substantially,'' Moody's said. ``It is uncertain whether future 
packages would provide a self-sustaining boost.'' Moody's also cited 
the demands of cleaning up the debt-laden banking system, on which 
the government is spending $208 billion in a separate rescue package. 
The agency said Japanese banks were ``much weaker than financial systems 
in other advanced industrial countries.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>