<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981117.2000.0373 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the World. I'm Lisa Mullins. As Iraq radio today announced 
the return of UN weapons inspectors to the country, a spokeswoman 
for the UNSCOM monitors said they're ready to get back to business. 
We're looking forward to a professional and productive relationship 
with the Iraqi authorities over the next few days and you know, time 
will tell. We've got a lot of work to do. We've got important work 
to do. We want to get on with it as directed by the Security Council. 
The monitors will be looking for evidence of banned Iraqi weapons. 
After the Gulf War, Robert Gullucci was in charge of that mission. 
He is now the U.S. special envoy for nonproliferation and dean of 
Georgetown University's School of Foreign Service in Washington. Mr. 
Gullucci, the inspection teams are now back in Baghdad. How has their 
mission changed following their last confrontation? I am guessing 
that they are going to go back in with the early objective of testing 
Saddam Hussein's commitment if that's the right word, to abide by 
Security Council resolutions. In other words, I expect that they will 
undertake inspections that will press the Iraqi's somewhat with respect 
to compliance. So what do you think are the top priorities at this 
point? What's the most important work remaining to be done. I think 
everybody has looked at this starts with the toughest problem and 
that's biological weapons capability. This is quintessentially dual 
use, that is to say the capabilities are produced biological weapons 
intersects with the capability to produce various benign capabilities, 
pharmaceutical medicines, etc. But I think that has to be an objective 
of the inspections and in each of the areas actually there are issues 
to be resolved. That is to say, both chemical weapons, ballistic missiles 
and nuclear weapons capability. But the biological has a certain special 
quality to it, both because we learned, all of us, the world learned 
quite late in the game of inspecting Iraq about their offensive capability 
and because it is so hard to track. So you are convinced that Iraq 
still has the ability to grow biological agents for use in weapons, 
something that Iraq denies. What I'm convinced of is that the Iraqis 
have not yet been fully forthcoming in any of the areas that they 
are obliged to provide a record. The special commission as I understand 
it, is not yet satisfied that it has an adequate explanation and documentation 
on which to establish a baseline to move to a monitoring regime. They 
are still in a different mode and when they do get to a monitoring 
regime, then they are still going to have to of course conduct surprise 
inspections if they're going to remain effective. The United States 
has said that any kind of infringement of the inspectors will lead 
to an immediate military response with no further attempts at mediation. 
Based on your own experience, what do you think it'll take to disrupt 
the work of the inspectors? I think if the inspection teams tell the 
Iraqis they wish to inspect a site and are denied entrance to that 
site or delayed in a way that would allow the Iraqis to move material 
out of the path of the inspectors, it would seem to me that would 
be adequate evidence of Iraqi refusal to allow the commission to do 
what they are required to do under resolution 687. And how optimistic 
are you that the weapons inspectors will be able to carry through 
with this until their job is done? I can't say that based on past 
experience I would have much optimism. We can all have hope that inspections 
will be successful that we can avoid the use of military force. You 
can't expect military force to be used without injuring and death 
of innocents and nobody involved in this can want that to happen. 
But there's also the responsibility that the president has and the 
other members of the Security Council to insure that Iraq does not 
acquire the weapons of mass destruction. I do not have confidence 
in short that based upon past experience that the Iraqis are going 
to accept the inspections as they are required to. I hope they will, 
but I would hardly say I have confidence that they will. Robert Gullucci 
is the U.S. special envoy for nonproliferation speaking to us from 
Washington, DC. Thank you very much. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>