<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981117.2000.2020 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the World, a co-production of the BBC World Service, PRI and 
WGBH in Boston. I'm Lisa Mullins. It was most undiplomatic. Vice President 
Al Gore at an international trade conference in Kuala Lampur lauded 
anti-government protesters as brave people. Malaysia's foreign minister 
was outraged and called Gore's remarks gross interference in the internal 
affairs of the country. The rhetoric has been so severe that today, 
Japan urged the United States and Malaysia to cool down and focus 
on the summit. A Japanese official said there are more effective, 
discreet ways to work out bilateral problems. Peter Rodman is a former 
senior official under President Reagan and Bush and he's now with 
the Nixon Center for Peace and Freedom. Mr. Rodman, when remarks like 
this are made, they don't come at the spur of the moment. Are they 
intended to sow the seeds of revolution? Oh, I'm sure the administration 
knew what it was doing by its own lights, I think Mahateer, the present 
prime minister, has not been a friend of the United States and the 
deputy premier Anwar Abraham is somebody who's well regarded in the 
western world. And so what is happening to him is clearly unjust. 
I think the administration felt that it was proper to intervene vocally. 
But I wonder at what cost? I mean there might be some kind of immediate 
gratification attached to standing up against dictators or speaking 
out for freedom. But what's the cost of doing that? Well, I think 
you are raising the right point. I mean, human rights is now part 
of the dispensation. It's part of foreign policy but human rights 
is a kind of weapon, like other instruments of diplomacy. It for a 
long time and it's enshrined in the United Nations charter. For a 
long time countries followed the principle that interference in the 
internal affairs of another country was a no-no. In fact this was 
considered a fundamental principle of international order. The fact 
that Vietnam - I'm old enough to remember when the great controversy 
over Vietnam or at least part of it was you know, how wrong it was 
for the United States to try to interfere in the internal affairs 
of another country. So what changed that? Something happened in the 
'70s, 1970s where suddenly it became conventional wisdom that not 
only was it permissible to interfere in other countries' domestic 
affairs, but it was even mandatory to interfere in other countries' 
domestic affairs over human rights concerns and you know, all of us 
feel some sympathy with this objective but it is a delicate matter. 
And I think when a government such as the United States, particularly 
the United States, undertakes a campaign of this kind, it better have 
some idea of what objective it seeks and what the risks are. So it 
just doesn't become a basis for international anarchy. Right, because 
words as we know can be dangerous and they're read in different ways. 
Words are read in different ways in different countries. In this particular 
case or in other cases that you might think of in terms of history, 
what's the potential for them to backfire? Well, in this case, maybe 
it's not too risky, because Malaysia's a small country. I think Mahateer 
is isolated. I think Anwar Ibraham had a lot of friends in the rest 
of southeast Asia as a general matter as you suggested, it's a weapon 
and you know, if countries that all get in the habit of denouncing 
each others internal affairs and this is a formula for international 
conflict in a new dimension. And has it backfired in the past, in 
the recent past? Well, the example I'm thinking of is Iraq where the 
president just the other day announced that our objective is to change 
the government of Iraq. Now here again I sympathize with this. In 
fact I support it, but as long as the United States realizes that 
in this case a campaign to undermine the regime of Saddam Hussein 
means more than rhetoric. It means supporting an opposition and once 
you undertake a commitment of this kind, you better fall through. 
You better have a strategy for carrying it out. Just declaring a virtuous 
position on human rights is not self enforcing. It's not self fulfilling. 
There are times when we may want to do it and in the case of Saddam 
Hussein I think really does warrant it. But we better have a strategy 
and a serious policy and we better be willing to sustain what is rather 
difficult and ambitious if we really want to give effect to our virtuous 
aspirations. Peter Rodman is with the Nixon Center for Peace and Freedom. 
Thank you very much Mr. Rodman. Thank you. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>