<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981117.2000.1257 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the World. I'm Lisa Mullins. Nations have a way of capturing 
their virtues in a symbol. In America, it's mom and apple pie. The 
Swiss love their clocks. France has Catherine Deneuve and the Jamaicans? 
Well, we've asked the World's Boris Maximoff to tell you their story. 
This believe it or not is a Jamaican crowd watching a cricket match. 
Yes, cricket, one of the most stodgy and incomprehensible games on 
the globe, a sport which no foreigner will ever understand. After 
all, both teams wear the same uniform. Nothing much happens on the 
field. The average game lasts four or five days and players break 
up for tea now and then. This very English invention, perfectly suited 
for green lawns, drizzly sky and warm beer has been enthusiastically 
adopted by Jamaicans and other English-speaking West Indians as the 
national game. And here on the islands, it isn't just a game. It's 
a metaphor, a symbol of what life is, should and will be. It is indeed 
possibly the only thing that unites all the islands in the West Indies. 
And its significance is far greater than just a sport. Simon Crosko, 
a sportscaster for Radio Jamaica. He is not the only one to talk of 
cricket as bigger than simply an athletic endeavor. Everyone in Jamaica 
talks about cricket roughly in the same tone of voice that you would 
normally use for something deeply revered, even hallowed. It's said 
that it characterizes life. I mean this, it mimics life rather, the 
game. You know, you're a bats man. You go out on your day. You will 
hit the ball and you'll come out tomorrow and you'll make naught. 
And that is so much like life. You get a great day today. You might 
not necessarily have a great one tomorrow. And you never, you never 
actually master it. It only needs one ball and your entire innings, 
your input in that part of the game is finished. And it teaches you 
something about life. Before you think that Simon Crosko is yet another 
sportscaster who read too much poetry in his life, consider this. 
That very day, an international cricket match was being played. Jamaica 
versus United States. The crowd in the stands was having a huge party. 
The music was blaring. Beer was flowing. Laughter was in the air. 
And when these men and women are asked what is so good about cricket, 
they say... MAN 1: Cricket is basically a gentleman's game. It is 
played in a good spirit, no former rival who likes football So it's 
a traditional game. And if you want it, you can get the feeling. It's 
a Jamaican game. It's a Caribbean game really. It's a fun. It's sort 
of togetherness. It's a game where everybody come together. You know, 
it's teamwork. One person can't play cricket. So it also help to make 
a move cohesive unit out of Jamaicans, Caribbeans and the world. Both 
the fans in the stands and Simon Crosko kept repeating that cricket 
is a gentleman's game where rules are obeyed strictly and unfailingly. 
In these islands where chaos seems to be a way of life, the sport 
of middle class English people is the pastime. Of course history is 
to blame. Simon Crosko. Obviously being a former colony of Britain, 
we learned the game from the British when they were here and as a 
result of that, because of being a colony, having learned the game, 
cricket then became, because we were so good at it, it became a way 
to hit back at the colonial masters. West Indian cricket players routinely 
score their best results playing against England. Against these guys 
one makes a supreme effort. Simon Crosko says race comes into play 
too. I think this is true of the non-white countries who play cricket, 
that it is always an opportunity to get something over on the white 
man and it's almost in direct conflict with the very essence of the 
game which is that gentlemanly conduct and so on. But for us here, 
it is a chance and I think that the racial element, although never 
flaring up into ugliness is always underlying as far as I'm concerned. 
And the West Indians are famously good at the game, making the English 
quietly despair. The Jamaicans and other West Indians took the game 
over in the ultimate, almost aesthetic revenge of the formerly colonized. 
Like in the Jamaican poem... WOMAN 2: What a joyful news. I feel like 
my heart going burst. Jamaica people colonize in England in reverse. 
Oh and by the way, I have no idea who won that cricket match in Kingston, 
USA or Jamaica. After all, if cricket is not a game, but a symbol, 
who cares what happens on the field, especially if you are like me 
and will never understand the intricacies of the sport. For the World, 
this is Boris Maximoff. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>