<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981117.2000.2997 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This is the World. I'm Lisa Mullins. Every 33 years, the temple tuttle 
comet orbits the sun. Every November, the earth crosses its trail. 
Nothing special about that, but every 33 years, after the comet has 
made a fresh pass, the debris heavier than usual. The result is the 
bright leonid meteor shower, which is putting on a spectacular show. 
While we Americans don't have a great view, Asians have front row 
seats as the World's Clark Boyd reports. Keep your eyes on the road, 
not on the heavens. That was the message in Thailand today, where 
thousands of star gazers piled into their cars and headed for Doy 
Intanown, the country's highest peak, to catch a glimpse of the leonid 
meteor shower. Others, like NASA scientist Peter Yanesky, didn't have 
to climb a mountain. He was on board a specially designed plane, above 
the east China Sea. High above any cloud cover, Yanesky and crew were 
able to take pictures and measurements of the shower. You see these 
bright, on occasion go less than wide on the sky that leave these 
night glows that hang there for a while. They can last for 10, 15 
minutes. Not everyone is as thrilled. Governments and private companies 
with billions of dollars worth of satellite equipment circling the 
earth are worried that debris from the temple tuttle comet mighty 
wreck technical havoc. From his base in Colorado, Air Force Colonel 
Mike Kelly explains. There's a mechanical damage which could be caused 
by the impact of a large fragment of comment debris. We call a large 
fragment would be the size of a chocolate chip or maybe up to the 
tip of your finger size. But the more likely problem is the very, 
very fine particles smaller than house dust. When they rub across 
the surface of the space craft, they can short out some electrical 
circuits. Kelly and crew are tracking the effect of the shower on 
about 60 Air Force satellites, including 27 involved in the global 
positioning systems satellite array. So far Kelly says, no problem. 
Our satellites are putting out an excellent navigation signal. They're 
meeting all of our customers requirements, both civil and military. 
We're quite pleased with the way our satellites are doing thus far. 
So the sky is not falling. But don't tell that to certain eastern 
European countries. Today's headline in Romania's leading newspaper 
read, Romanians, stay inside. Leonid, the toughest meteor rain. And 
national radio, in the former Soviet Republic of Georgia warned drinkers 
to be especially careful during the Leonid shower. Because it said, 
in times of world cataclysms, people tend to become drunk more easily. 
The station did not elaborate. For the World, this is Clark Boyd. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>