<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981117.2000.3165 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The homogenization of American music is a sorry trend indeed. Popular 
radio stations here in New England play pretty much the same songs 
the stations on the west coast or in the deep south or the Midwest. 
But all over the country, real musicians continue to make real music 
by drawing on their cultural roots. The World's Tracy Tong takes us 
to Hawaii for an example. This is Hawaiian music, tourist style, ukuleles 
and steel guitars accompanied by swaying hips. This is the real thing, 
Hawaii slack key guitar. Hawaiian slack key has its roots in the 1830s. 
Back then Mexican and Spanish cowboys or vaccaros brought the traditional 
guitar to the islands. The Hawaiians were intrigued by the instrument 
and when the Vaccaros left, the Hawaii cowboys or honeolos retuned 
and relaxed the strings. It became slack key or kehuali. With this 
tuning, the player picks the bass and rhythm cords on the lower strings 
and the melody on the upper strings. The slack key style gained enormous 
popularity in the late 1800s during the reign of King David, the merry 
monarch, who dedicated himself to preserving the Hawaiian dance and 
music that had been vanishing under the influences of foreign cultures. 
Hula and chants are often integrated within slack key guitar pieces. 
Today, slack key is part of the musical landscape. One of the masters 
is 73-year-old Ray Kani, who started playing when he was only 9. Known 
as the slack key ambassador, Kani performs in the old style. Simple, 
smooth and sweet and nothing is sweeter than the song Kani opens nearly 
every show with, Vioka Aniani. Kani performs in the traditional slack 
key style. Musician Searle Pakinuwi takes a contemporary approach. 
Searle Pakinuwi grew up surrounded by slack key guitar music. His 
father Gabby Pakinuwi was the king of slack key. Gabby gained popularity 
on the mainland when Ry Cooder happened upon one of his records while 
in Honolulu and recorded with the Pakinuwi family. When Gabby died 
in the 1980s, Searle and his brothers continued the legacy, playing 
in the style they learned from their father and adding some outside 
influences. I can play blues in slack key. I can play jazz in slack 
key. I can play rock and roll in slack key too, to play their type 
of tunings with their type of music. Country music may never be the 
same. In fact for years, Nashville has picked up on Hawaiian style 
picking. Hawaiian flavored country or country flavored Hawaiian. It 
would be most un-Hawaiian to worry about it. As the locals say, no 
worry, no problem. For the World, this is Tracy Tong. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>