<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981117.2000.0899 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For some time now, there's been a growing debate about the seriousness 
of malnutrition in North Korea. Some relief agencies who travel there 
regularly say the situation has improved from a year or two ago, but 
the testimony of one recent visitor suggests otherwise. Congressman 
Tony Hall, a Democrat from Ohio, has just returned from a week's tour 
of North Korea. He describes the situation as desperate, but says 
this only becomes apparent when you move beyond the capitol. You have 
to scratch the surface and take a look at it. I think when you go 
into the capitol, you see things like they're improved. I mean people 
are riding bicycles. That's something I've never seen before and people 
look a little bit healthier in the capitol of Quinyang but once you 
get outside, you see in hospitals and nurseries and primary schools 
and orphanages, you see a different story. What did you see? Well, 
you see hospitals again without heat and you see people operating 
on other people without pain medication. They have to hold them down. 
And you see the pharmacies without any pharmaceuticals, no antibiotic. 
You also see something that I haven't seen, I didn't remember on my 
last trip. You see more grave markers up in the hills and the mountains 
as you travel through the mountains to different cities. And that's 
something that's very new. In terms of a comparison, do you feel as 
though it is getting better or how would you compare it? I would say 
that our food is getting through, but it's not enough food. But I 
would say the problem is is that they've had three or four years now 
of real hardship, with very few grams of food and that wears on you 
after a while and I would think because of that, there's a tremendous 
health problem and I think they're going over the edge. I think that 
when you look at the fact that 95 percent of their water is contaminated, 
the children at the ages of one and two are malnourished to the point 
where it's acute and the fact that you see people now eating leaves 
and twigs. As a matter of fact, they're grinding them up into something 
they call substitute food or alternative food. In visiting a place 
on the far northeastern part of the country, I said I'd like to see 
a food distribution center. So they took me there and the only thing 
they really had there was leaves and bark and cornstalks and what 
they do is they grind them up into powder and then they try to make 
noodles out of it. And that's becoming more normal now. It sounds 
as though for all that you saw, you saw for the most part what the 
government wanted you to see. Although I guess on previous trips, 
you've gone secretively. I have and there's no question that what 
I have seen is, you know, like especially the orphanages, that these 
are the kids that they're feeding. And they have sores and they have 
severe malnutrition. So I saw the best. But I also have, I've also 
been there four times so I can compare them with a lot of different 
places all over the world. And North Korea and their health problems 
has to rank probably the worst country in the world, certainly in 
the top four and which is ironic. Because in the '80s, North Korea 
ranked near the top of third world nation's relative to their health 
care. Are you at all concerned about, in terms of the United States 
and the aid that it's providing, which started as a humanitarian response 
to the famine, but is now being questioned by some, as it's become 
wrapped up in getting North Korea to comply with U.S. demands to curb 
its threatening nuclear weapons program. Are you concerned that those 
ties are too closely, that those two items are too closely linked, 
that United States aid should not come with strings attached? I think 
that food should never be used as a weapon and I don't think it should 
be linked. The other thing that we need to be concerned about is that 
we should never be embarrassed about helping people that are starving 
to death. And our aid is going to help people that are dying, children, 
women, the elderly. As a matter of fact, you don't see many elderly 
anymore. They're - it's like they've disappeared and I think a lot 
of them have passed away. So we should never be embarrassed about 
doing that. Ohio Congressman Tony Hall, speaking to us from Washington, 
DC. Thank you very much. You're welcome. Thanks. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>