<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981117.2000.2349 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Millions of people living in what used to be the Soviet Union still 
pine for the old communist ways, for the anthems, the all-powerful 
state, even for the KGB. For these people, there is one place in the 
former Soviet empire that's like a walk down memory lane. In the self-proclaimed 
Muldoden republic of Transmestria, they can still experience Soviet 
style communism in all its tattered glory. The World's Patrick Cox 
is our guide. Transnestria is a 25 mile wide sliver of territory on 
the eastern edge of Muldova, itself a tiny post communist nation wedged 
between Romania and Ukraine. When Muldova declared independence from 
the Soviet Union seven years ago, Transnestria declared independence 
from Muldova. No country on earth recognizes Transnestria. The United 
States calls it a separatist regime and dismisses its demands for 
statehood. But that hasn't stopped Transnestrian authorities from 
introducing local currency, stamps and license plates. The self styled 
government owns nearly everything here, from steel mills to neighborhood 
cafeterias. Most of Transnestria's 700,000 residents neither receive 
salaries nor do they pay rent. Many simply scratch out an existence 
exchanging produce and other goods at street markets. Transnestria 
does boast the odd private concern, like this newly opened western 
style mini-market. It's owned by a local band of Cossack mercenaries 
which receive special government privileges for having fought against 
Muldova during a brief war six years ago. Cossack Black Sea Deputy 
Leader Gregori Sherbachenko strides around the brightly lit store 
in his army fatigues, a filterless Soviet cigarette hanging from his 
lips. He's extremely proud of the new market. People are happy with 
him because the quality of the goods is better and the choice is better. 
So we're trying to develop a commodity and not think long about war. 
The only trouble is virtually no one can afford to shop here. Black 
suited security staff roam the aisles in greater numbers than customers, 
not surprising in a hyper-inflationary economy where buying a single 
U.S. dollar on the street costs you 1.2 million Transnestrian rubles. 
Not that everyone's poor. Transnestria has a reputation among Russia's 
criminal class as a lawless place perfect for money laundering. Back 
at his barracks, Cossack leader Sherbachenko gives his version of 
Transnestria's 1992 war for independence from Muldova, a conflict 
that cost several hundred lives. The whole Transnestria nation fought 
against Moldovans so all man carried guns. And I can even draw parallel 
with the Second World War upon them. stood up against the Germans. 
We showed the Moldovan soldiers what it's like to be a Cossack. Transnestria 
has something of a killing field history, most notoriously as the 
site of a World War II concentration camp where tens of thousands 
of Jews and gypsies were put to death. In keeping with past dark times, 
Transnestrian authorities have to this day retained a powerful KGB. 
They have imprisoned political opponents. They've closed down private 
media outlets and they've set up roadblocks at the so-called border 
with the rest of Moldova, manned by guards decked out in Soviet uniforms. 
Today, de facto we are an absolutely independent and sovereign state. 
Alexander Karaman, who calls himself vice president of Transnestria, 
also characterizes Transnestrian civil liberties as the freest in 
the former Soviet Union. Karaman may be the only politician in the 
world who views the Serb republic of Bosnia as a model for his own 
land's future development. Outside his office in the supreme Soviet 
building, there's a new 30-foot high marble statue of Lenin, a showy 
example of why some Moldovans call Transnestria a Soviet Disneyland. 
Vice President Karaman argues that the Soviet system works just fine 
here. We didn't have to close any hospitals and not to close any schools. 
Pensioners are getting their pensions on time. We have a constant 
supply of electricity and houses are heated in winter. So although 
some people said that we still have, use some Soviet methods, I think 
we are running our country well, since everything works. Transnestria 
didn't work so well for the Kazakaro family. Forty-four year old welder 
Vascili Kazakaro, who's ethnic Russian, grew up in Transnestria, but 
during the separatist war, he fought against the Transnestrians, who 
he regarded as Kremlin puppets. Kozakaro has no regrets about siding 
with the largely ethnic Romanian Modovans. This is the only people 
who are now never fought a war to acquire land. They also fought defensive 
wars. Both sides committed atrocities during the war and after the 
fighting finished, Kazakaro knew it wasn't safe to stay in Transnestria. 
When 6,000 Russian so-called peacekeepers moved in to patrol the territory, 
Kazakaro moved out. Now the family of five share a one-bedroom refugee 
apartment in Moldova's capital Kishinau. Vasili Kazakaro spends much 
of his time sitting at his kitchen table drinking tea. I have not 
had a permanent job since '92 and now I take occasional jobs outside 
Moldova. Moldovan and Transnestrian authorities claim to be serious 
about ongoing negotiations for a peace accord, one that would guarantee 
autonomy and perhaps even a modicum of human rights in Transnestria. 
Meanwhile, the communist authorities there are not treating all people 
equally. In Terrasbo, Transnestria's largest city, classes are taught 
in Russian in every school but one. Here at school number 20, 800 
Romanian-speaking children cram into nine tiny decrepit classrooms. 
Ethnic Romanians make up 40 percent of Transnestria's population, 
but the Soviet authorities insist that almost all of them study in 
Russian. School number 20 has paid a high price for flaunting the 
official line. The authorities have closed it several times and says 
principal Yan Yovcha, government sanctions vandals have wrecked it. 
The school was destroyed and all the were destroyed and in the morning 
when children came to school, they were stopped by a chain of policemen 
outside who wouldn't allow anyone to get in and in the meantime the 
people who destroyed the school could go away. Transnestrian authorities 
regard school number 20 as a breeding ground for Romanian nationalists, 
who they fear will one day try to force Transnestria, along with the 
rest of Moldova, into unification with Romania. Anti-Romanian discrimination 
here forced of thousands of families to move away, but most remain, 
says school principal Yovchev. They have their houses here and their 
ancestors have been borne here and have lived here so it doesn't make 
sense to move anywhere. For more than 50 years, the Soviet Union rigorously 
repressed even benign forms of nationalism. In this isolated anachronistic 
enclave of the old Soviet empire, that policy continues but with less 
success. Parents are clamoring to send their children to school number 
20. Classes there are now taught in three shifts. And patriotic songs 
like this one that celebrates the Romanian language have become powerful 
unifying symbols. Despite laws that legal monitors say are more repressive 
than even the Soviet Union's it seems the communists who rule Transnestria 
may not be able to stop history in its tracks. For the World, I'm 
Patrick Cox. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>