<DOC>
<DOCNO> PRI19981117.2000.0636 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Robert Gullucci's skepticism is widely shared in Washington where 
officials from the president on down are already looking past something 
they consider inevitable, another Iraqi effort to obstruct the inspections. 
The World's Andrew North reports. In his statement at the weekend, 
President Clinton stated his solution to the threat posed by Iraq's 
weapons of mass destruction. Over the long term, the best way to address 
that threat is through a government in Baghdad, a new government, 
that is committed to represent and respect its people, not repress 
them, that is committed to peace in the region. Over the past year, 
we have deepened our engagement with the forces of change in Iraq, 
reconciling the two largest Kurdish opposition groups, beginning broadcasts 
of a Radio Free Iraq throughout the country. We will intensify that 
effort. But Iraqis opposed to Saddam Hussein heard similar encouraging 
words from President Clinton's predecessor almost eight years ago. 
That is for the Iraqi military and the Iraqi people to take matters 
into their own hands, to force Saddam Hussein the dictator to step 
aside and to comply with the United Nations resolutions and then rejoin 
the family of peace-loving nations. We have no argument with the people 
of Iraq. Our differences are with Iraq's brutal dictator. That was 
during the Gulf War and President Bush appeared to offer support for 
the Iraqi opposition. But just two weeks later, as Saddam Hussein 
surrendered and the Iraqi people took matters into their own hands, 
they discovered the limits of Bush's support. He did not send U.S. 
troops to their aid and within weeks, Republican guard forces had 
brutally destroyed the rebellion. And so President Clinton's word 
bring back bad memories for Iraqi dissidents such as Hammeed Biarti 
of the Supreme Council for Islamic Revolution in Iraq. People are 
skeptical about these promises because they feel they were betrayed 
the time for Iraqi people to take matters in their hand and when there 
was an uprising, they were crushed by Saddam. The Bush administration's 
embarrassment toward the Clinton administration that publicly calling 
for the Iraqi leader's removal is risky. Harvey Sickerman of the Foreign 
Policy Research Institute, fears that Mr. Clinton may have forgotten 
that lesson. I think that the president in order to ease the palpable 
frustration that once again the United States has been diddled, the 
president decided to add some rhetorical supplement to his general 
statement to suggest that we're going to be doing a lot more. The 
reality according to Sickaman is that America's ability to topple 
Saddam Hussein has been seriously limited for the past two years. 
Our best chance at doing this was to knock down the box 1996 and when 
we failed to react effectively to Saddam's move north and that killed 
a lot of the Iraqi opposition and also removed the CIA's safe base 
of operations. Not only did this collapse leave the CIA without a 
base inside northern Iraq, it also left the Iraqi opposition in disarray. 
Some hope that the recent passing of the Iraq liberation act by Congress 
will change that. It calls for almost $100 million in support to dissident 
groups, but it does not guarantee an arms supply to Iraqi rebels or 
U.S. military support in the event of an Iraqi uprising. A prominent 
Iraqi dissident leader told the World today that if the administration 
was serious about toppling Saddam Hussein, it would back up its threats 
with military muscle. For the World, I'm Andrew North. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>