<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981117.1600.0360 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Italy says it will not extradite Kurdish rebel leader, Abdullah Urjalon 
to Turkey. At the same time Italian Prime Minster Masse Modelaima 
says Rome will not grant political asylum to Mr. Urjalon unless it 
is convinced he has renounced terrorism. Turkey's cabinet is expected 
to approve legislation today to abolish the death penalty, as it seeks 
the extradition of Abdullah Urjalon from Italy. Meanwhile, two Kurdish 
men set themselves on fire outside of Russia's Parliament Building 
to protest his arrest. One of the men remains in critical condition. 
VOA's Peter Heimline has details. Police say that two protesters unfurled 
a banner in front of the Parliament Building in central Moscow early 
Tuesday, then doused themselves with gasoline and struck a match. 
Police quickly extinguished the flames and rushed both men to a local 
hospital. A statement faxed to news agencies said the two men left 
a letter, claiming their act was to protest an international conspiracy 
against Kurdish rebel leader Abdullah Urjalon. Mr. Urjalon was arrested 
at a Rome airport as he stepped off a plane from Moscow. Mr. Urjalon, 
founder of the Kurdish Workers Party or PKK has spearheaded a lengthy 
Kurdish separatist campaign against Turkey, in which tens of thousands 
of people have been killed. Turkey regards him as a terrorist and 
has filed charges against him that carry the death penalty under Turkish 
law. The Kurdish leader had operated for some time from a base in 
Syria. But recently Syrian authorities forced him out in the face 
of fierce Turkish pressure. He fled to Russia where he was denied 
asylum. Then flew to Rome, where he was arrested. Turkey has been 
pressuring Italian authorities to hand over Mr. Urjalon but Italy 
does not extradite suspects to countries with the death penalty. The 
rebel leader had applied for asylum in Italy, even as Turkey moves 
quickly to amend its laws to abolish the death penalty. Mr., Urjalon's 
arrest has triggered demonstrations in several cities including a 
hunger strike in Moscow by about 100 PKK supporters. A Kurdish community 
spokesman estimates 150,000 Kurds live in Moscow, and a total of nearly 
1 million in the countries of the former Soviet Union. Peter Heimline, 
VOA News, Moscow. Kurds in a number of other countries including Lebanon 
and Armenian are on hunger strikes on behalf of Mr. Urjalon's case. 
They have also been demonstrations and marches or hunger strikes by 
Kurds in Germany, Austria, Romania, Denmark and Turkey. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>