<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981117.1600.1344 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Between the late 1800s and the early 1960s, the vast copper reserves 
beneath Butte, Montana gave that town a world-wide reputation as the 
richest hill on earth. Butte copper played a crucial role in electrifying 
the west. And is credited with helping to win both world wars. Most 
of Butte's copper mines are closed now, but the gritty and colorful 
people who worked in them are still a powerful presence in the city 
of 33,000: VOA's Adam Phillips visited Butte recently and has this 
report. John Shay of Butte, Montana is 74 years old, but the power 
in his grip would command the respect of a man half his age. Mr. Shay 
was 15 years old when he began his working life mining along side 
his dad almost a kilometer and a half below the earth. I tell you 
working under ground wasn't a joy, it was a necessity. Eventually 
Mr. Shay became what is called a ropeman. We're the guys that lowered 
all the big machinery down the mines. We built those big head frames. 
We lowered the drills, we put the cages down in the mine, the underground 
hoists. We built that great big drag line that you see sitting over 
there. 85 year-old Al Hooper nods at his friend John Shay, leans forward 
in his overstuffed chair, and looks out the living room window at 
a mammoth metal hoisting apparatus, one of many that still tower above 
the Butte city streets. He remembers when he got his so-called "rustling 
card" permitting him to work underground 12 hours a day, seven days 
a week, in exchange for $a day. I got mine, I think I was 16, and 
I told him I was 18: They knew I wasn't. But they used to figure, 
yeah, he's a Butte kid. He deserves a job. And the first time I went 
underground, there was another young guy there at Wharton School with 
me. We was kind of proud in a way that we were finally doing men's 
work, without somebody standing over us. And we'd get we had to use 
some brains. That's what we liked about it. We didn't have somebody 
- like nowadays - somebody leading you around. Mr. Shay recounts just 
some of the skills a miner needed to perform his task. He is a man 
of all trades. He had to set them timbers. He had to know how to use 
his blockin and his wedges. He had to know how to put the railroad 
down for his cars. He had to know how to run that muck machine. He 
had to know how to use the dynamite. He had to know how to drill with 
the drills. He was a craftsmen of craftsmen. The dangerous process 
of mucking, that's blasting the rock with dynamite, and shoveling 
up the copper-laden debris, was what advanced the mind in search of 
more metal. In Butte, that was an around the clock process that created 
nearly 4000 kilometers of tunnels below the town. Again Al Hooper. 
In the early days, you had guys that drove horses. You had a hauling 
system to haul your rock to the shaft. And it had to be put on the 
cage, was hoisted to the surface, dumped into a bin, and railroaded 
to Anaconda, to the smelter in Anaconda. When I was a miner, I was 
a hard rock miner, up in the mountain mine. The hashers caress me 
and the chambermaids blessed me. And my contract was paying fine. 
That's Keith Shannon, he was a switchman between 1938 and the early 
1960s. It was his job to break up and recombine the trains, and to 
direct the engineers who worked the five railroad systems that ran: 
between Butte where the mines were, nearby Anaconda where the Smelter 
was, and the outside world with its demand for raw material. I loved 
my work. Did you feel that you were a part of a great enterprise? 
I sure did. We used to have a little saying. I'm the guy that put 
the must in the mustard, the cust in the custard, and the one, two, 
three, four most wonderful man. I can start a freight train with one 
wave of my hand. Does that kind of explain the power that you felt. 
Today most of Butte's underground mines lie idle, victims some say, 
of union demands, the globalization of the metals mining industry, 
and alternative technology that favors other methods of metal extraction. 
A large number of jobs are with the environmental protection agency 
and others, charged with the cleaning up the toxic waste generated 
by the copper mines during the city's boom years. Still John Shay, 
for one, remains hopeful that the spirit of the town will see it through. 
The Butte miner and the people that worked in Butte and lived in Butte, 
without a doubt, were some of the toughest people that ever were. 
They never looked for trouble, but man they never ran either. They 
never walked away from it. And that's old Butte, Montana. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>