<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981117.1600.2478 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Washington has been host to several interfaith conferences in recent 
months, as leaders from all religions attempt to educate and overcome 
stereotyping. Earlier this month, Christians, Jews and Muslims met 
at the National Cathedral, which is Episcopal, to discuss their diversion 
theologies. VOA's Ed Warner attended the two-day conference and reports 
the participants found hope on a personal level despite their differences 
on doctrine. I take the very heretical position that I assume that 
we are all wrong and all trying different paths up the hill. And that 
for me is a very important personal metaphor. I do climb mountains. 
Each cliff has multiple pathways up. There is not a best pathway. 
But there are very separate pathways. And if you try to combine them, 
you are going to fall. These pathways have their own integrity. Speaking 
at an interfaith conference, Rabbi Daniel Schwartz said, dialogue 
among different religions may lead to greater understanding, but not 
to agreement. For example, Christianity, Judaism, and Islam have radically 
different interpretations of the Bible. Howard University History 
Professor, Sullei Manyong made the same point from a Muslim perspective. 
We do not only have similar narratives with different interpretations, 
but there are points where we divert fundamentally and there is no 
way you can bring us together. The Christian concept of original sin 
will never be accepted by the Jews or the Muslims. The Muslim acceptance 
of Muhammad as the final prophet will never be accepted by Jews or 
Christians. Yvonne Hadad, professor of Islamic History at Georgetown 
University said all kinds of dialogue are underway, but the more we 
talk, the less we seem to agree. We are creating very angry people. 
So that in my class I have people who absolutely are convinced that 
their understanding of history is the accurate history. And they are 
fully convinced that the other's history is absolutely false. Mix, 
we come into a place like this, and we share our common faith, and 
we all talk about the love that we God has taught Jews, Christians 
and Muslims. And then we go back to our churches and our mosques and 
our synagogues and we teach hate. Professor Hadad, a Christian, said 
growing religion intensity targets Muslims in America. The speakers 
said dialogue, like that at the National Cathedral, brings people 
together and lets them know one another apart from the rigors of theology. 
For Rabbi Schwartz, this personal connection is crucial. The religious 
makeup of his own family enforces tolerance. Though his wife is Jewish, 
his father-in-law is an Egyptian Muslim, and his mother-in-law an 
Iranian B'hai. His wife's sister is Catholic, and she has cousins 
who converted to Buddhism in Japan. Sullei Manyong said he came from 
a strong Muslim family in Africa but was educated by Irish Catholic 
nuns. Today he is able to startle westerners with the Latin they taught 
him. He remains a devout Muslim, but personal experience gave him 
a lifelong sympathy for another religion. VOA Correspondent Ed Warner. 
Islam and the West was the subject of today's Dateline. I'm Pamela 
Taylor. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>