<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981117.1600.2150 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
I'm Tony Riggs, along with Victor Morales, this is VOA, News Now. 
Islam is one of the fastest growing faiths in the west, a growth due 
primarily to immigration from largely Muslim lands. In the United 
States, the sometimes uneasy relationship between Islam and other 
religions has grown worse in recent times following what many Arab 
Americans see as Hollywood's tendency to make Muslims America's new 
enemy, after the fall of communism. Islam and the West is the subject 
of today's Dateline. A new American film about Islamic terrorists 
in New York has sparked a wave of protests by Arab-Americans in the 
Muslim community in the United States. The Siege, starring Denzel 
Washington, Bruce Willis, and Annette Benning is criticized for reinforcing 
a Hollywood stereotype of Arabs. Director Edward Zweick says, in fact, 
the film dramatizes the results of stereotyping when the US military 
puts the entire Arab-American population of Brooklyn New York into 
a detention camp. But some fear the message may be lost on the average 
movie goer. A review of the film in the New York Times notes that, 
"while the screen play is very even handed, the images of scheming 
Arab villains speak louder than words. Katayun Vaglari of VOA's Arabic 
service spoke to Mr. Zweick and asked him why it is so often Arabs 
who are portrayed in this way, and not Israelis or Serbs or other 
terrorists groups like the Irish Republican Army. The experience in 
the United States of the World Trade Center was very, very painful 
and the experience even this last year of the bombings of the embassies 
in Tanzania and Kenya were similarly so. There have been investigations 
that have revealed that Osama bin Laden has indeed had a terrorist 
network in the United States. And the idea was to try to create a 
situation where the United States has got to confront the same kind 
of issues that the rest of the world is dealing with. And one has 
to make the choice, and the choice that is of the moment right here, 
is the issue of Islamic terrorism. Because there is also a very sizable 
and important American Arab community in the United States. And the 
movie presumes to talk about prejudice, talks about our own capacity 
for racism, talks about the dilemma of being a patriotic American 
who happens to be Arab or Muslim. And how does one deal with that 
reality of our own prejudice here. It's also very much about the United 
States policy. We supported several elements of fundamentalist Islam, 
the Jihad in Afghanistan, to try to destabilize the Soviet Union. 
And elements of that group were very involved in the attempt to blow 
up the World Trade Center here, as they have been involved with Osama 
bin Laden. So in some sense it's trying to question our own complicity 
and involvement in these issues. But, people in the United States, 
the Arab-Americans, they are afraid that this is going to be a new 
trend, replacing the communism. You know in the past, the bad guy 
was from communist countries and now Islam has replaced it. Do you 
think something like that is going to happen? Well, I would not support 
any kind of wanton vilification or demonization of any group. I wouldn't 
support just the creation of an enemy so as to have a convenient antagonist 
for a film. That's exploitative. But I don't believe that's at all 
what we did. In fact I think we've done quite the opposite. We've 
done something that is rather sympathetic and compassionate to the 
plight. But since you have criticized the American policy as well, 
did you get any reaction from the government? No, I have yet to speak 
to anyone from the American government. They tend to understand that 
criticisms of policy is in the course, and in the prerogative of artists. 
It's interesting, I think the movie is in some way much more critical 
of our involvement. And yet there has been no protest about that. 
I think this reveals great sensitivity on the part of the American-Arab 
groups, because they have indeed been so ill-treated before. I think 
it's over-sensitivity, I think it's a narrow understanding of the 
movie and what the movie aspires to be. But, sometimes there is great 
pain in acculturation, and great fear. And because there is so much 
that has gone on in the news having to do with Islamic terrorism, 
this group fears that, that is going to in some way inflame passion. 
But I don't think they are right. That hasn't been the result now 
of showing this movie, now to millions of people. There is an on-going 
dialogue with the production and with the Arab community. Resulting 
to some changes in the movie, could you please mention some of the 
changes that you made? They were not that significant, I have to say. 
We were talking about -- I certainly didn't want to portray the Mosque 
as necessarily a center of terrorist conspiracy. There has been some 
involvement in the past, documented of that. But I don't want to make 
this movie in any way inflammatory about Islam itself. It's about 
a small fanatical group. To that end, I tried to make that carefully 
delineating. Edward Zweick director of the film, "The Siege", speaking 
with Katayun Vaglari of VOA's Arabic Service 
</TEXT>
</DOC>