<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981117.1600.2692 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The Meadowlands, a spacious wetland in the state of New Jersey, some 
10 kilometers west of New York City, has been a dumping ground for 
two centuries. But, in recent years, New Jersey has been trying to 
restore the region to its natural state. With a report on that effort, 
here's VOA's Martin Bush. Just across the Hudson River from Manhattan 
lies a vast wetland known as the Meadowlands. This 83 square kilometer 
tract was once a garbage dump. In fact, the largest garbage dump in 
the United States. Nearby New Jersey communities discarded their industrial 
and human waste there for more than 200 years until a court ordered 
the dumping to stop, in 1971: Trash of all sorts: bed springs, derelict 
trucks, demolition rubble, worn out clothing, broken furniture, still 
shows up in the Meadowlands main waterway, the Hackensack River, and 
in the areas hundreds of creeks and streams. But change is on the 
way. The New Jersey Meadowlands Development Commission is making a 
steady effort to make the land useable. Largely as a result of the 
commission's work, says its naturalist Don Smith, 129 species of animals 
now make their homes in the Meadowland. MEADOWLANDS NATURALIST: We're 
converting these large heaps of covered garbage into habitats both 
for wildlife and for people to enjoy as open space. In the course 
of a year, we'll have over 260 species of birds utilizing the Meadowlands 
for one period of time or another. Some come here and nest, raise 
their young, and migrate south. Some are resident year round, such 
as Ringneck Pheasants, some of the Mourning Doves etc. And some of 
the shore birds and water foul that use our wetlands systems come 
from the tundra on their way to southern South America. And they stop 
off by the tens of thousands to feed on the mud-flat habitat. Below 
the tall garbage hills of the Meadowlands, motorists drive by on the 
New Jersey Turnpike. In the distance behind the eight-lane toll road 
rise the sky scrapers of Manhattan. To the south, jet planes take 
off and land at busy Newark airport. The Meadowlands worse problem 
is toxic liquids, or Leachates from the garbage. But naturalist Don 
Smith says, the Development Commission is controlling this contamination. 
This landfill has over a one-mile dike all around its perimeter - 
that's a clay bentonite dike that goes down 40 feet. And it has, if 
you will, a big French drain on the interior side of the dike, a 30-inch 
plastic perforated pipe that collects the leachate and then delivers 
it to a treatment plant. We've sampled some critters that were born 
and raised on this land fill, and they are perfectly clean. Who will 
pay for the restoration of the Meadowlands, mostly the Meadowlands 
itself. The areas decomposing garbage produces methane gas, which 
the Development Commission pumps out and sells to generate electricity. 
Naturalist Don Smith says, we're taking low quality functioning wetlands, 
and turning them into high quality wetlands, trying to insure the 
ecological health of New Jersey's Meadowlands. This is Martin Bush, 
VOA News. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>