<DOC>
<DOCNO> VOA19981117.1600.3189 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> TRANSCRIPT </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
And this is VOA News Now. Well they are driven, reliable, exacting 
and natural leaders. This is how some researchers describe many people 
who are the first to be born in their family. And later born children 
will often take on different characteristics, according to two authors 
of different books about birth order. VOA's Martin Secrest has more. 
Families have a dynamic that is greatly influenced by when children 
are born, says Frank Celaway in his book, "Born to Rebel". Well, children 
in a family occupy different roles or positions. First borns are parent 
identified. They serve as a surrogate parent. They are very closely 
allied to parents, they admire their parents and try to emulate their 
ideals. They do well at school for example. Younger siblings come 
along and that spot has been taken. So, they try to find some other 
place in the family. They tend to rebel against the authority of their 
elder sibling, and hence they end up more open to experience. And 
they are more sociable. Mr. Celaway says he became interested in the 
topic of birth order while working on a book about scientists who 
were considered radical in their day. And I noticed that the great 
supporters of Darwin's ideas or Copernicus' ideas tended to be younger 
siblings. Their opponents, especially their vehement opponents were 
first borns. Frank Celaway says that birth order and gender have the 
greatest impact on personality development. They are significantly 
more important than most other things like class or race. Other things, 
including your social class, sometimes make a difference in how these 
factors spell themselves out. But by far, birth order is surprisingly 
important. Being born first has its advantages, and in that environment 
children can rise to great heights or even outer space. Kevin Lehman 
is the author of the new birth order book. And he says that first-born 
and only-children get their parent's undivided attention. They're 
guinea pigs. As parents we practice on those suckers, and they are 
the ones that get blamed for everything all the youngest ones got 
away with. Of course they got away with murder. So, we really groom 
first-borns for success. Astronauts are in the news today. Of the 
first 23, 21 first-borns, 2 onlys, not a middle or a baby in the bunch. 
Only children, says Mr. Lehman, much like first borns, are driven 
and disciplined. But middle children are more diplomatic and sociable, 
and inspired to be different. They play off what's ever above them 
in the family. They are the opposite of what's ever above them in 
the family, in all probability. But to put it in a word, they are 
nice, they are nice people. And they never had mommy and daddy to 
themselves. They are the fewest pictures in the family photo album. 
That's the plight of the middle child. So they get squeezed, it's 
a bad rap in many ways, but they are very talented people who do very 
well in relationships. By comparison, says Mr. Lehman, children who 
are the last to be born in their family are often more rebellious, 
less disciplined, and have a better sense of humor than their older 
siblings. He says such children have a greater need to be reined in 
by parents who might be inclined to let their off-spring bend the 
rules. We go to easy on babies. A little rug pulling, holding them 
accountable - they are great people, very affectionate and loving, 
but - they need a little bit more discipline than the other kids above 
them. Researcher Frank Celaway agrees, saying that later born children 
are 15 times more likely to buck the system, than their eldest sibling. 
He said that he studied famous historical figures to determine how 
birth order effected their lives. He looked at first-borns such as 
Josef Stalin, Albert Einstein, Linus Pauling, and Newt Gingrich, and 
later-born rebels, such as Fidel Castro, Leon Trotsky and Thomas Jefferson. 
Mr. Cellaway says that historical examples have modern day relevance. 
The findings that I have made in history seem to be just as present 
in present-day populations. And in almost 100 studies show, for example, 
among individuals alive today the first ones are more ambitious, more 
conventional, more conscientious and more aggressive than the younger 
siblings. And the younger siblings are the flip-side of the coin. 
That's Frank Celaway, author of the book, "Born to Rebel: Birth Order, 
Family Dynamics, and Creative Lives". As New York Times newspaper 
reviewer, Derek Bickerton points out, "birth order theory could be 
a means to analyze other important events and ideas, such as the Protestant 
Reformation, or the French and American Revolutions." I'm Martin Secrest. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>