<DOC>
<DOCNO> ABC19981026.1830.1204 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
This week we're going to spend some time "beyond the horizon." Which, 
you can guess is motivated in part by the fact that senator John glenn 
is scheduled to go back into space this week, 36 years after he was 
there the first time. The space agency NASA is positively ecstatic 
about all the attention they are getting. After the countdown began 
today, John Glenn and his crew mates -- they are destined to be the 
"others" on board -- arrived at the Kennedy space center from Houston 
where they have been training. 3,000 reporters have asked for credentials 
to cover the launch. And even though there's a healthy debate about 
whether this is science or a Publicity stunt, we will also be there 
live on Thursday. One of the things NASA very much wants to do this 
week is generate interest for a mission to Mars. So let's take "A 
closer look" at a possible Mars mission. Here is ABC's Jack Smith. 
The spacecraft is good for launch. NASA hopes to send astronauts to 
Mars by the year 2014. We have liftoff. No other planet is so likely 
to have harbored life. And on no other do scientists so strongly want 
to establish a human outpost. We're going to be walking on Mars. Not 
with a one-shot mission, we're going to have a permanent presence 
on mars. Because a Mars vehicle would be too heavy to launch from 
earth, it would be assembled piece by piece in earth's orbit. Half 
a dozen astronauts would then take six months to rocket the 34 million 
miles to Mars. They'd spend the next year and a half exploring and 
conducting experiments, then head home. Mission time -- 2 1/2 years. 
Mars is really going to be the place where humans will establish a 
second home in the solar system. And where they will begin to find 
the answers to some really critical questions that relate to the origins 
of life. NASA is already laying the groundwork -- with last year's 
pathfinder, and two more unmanned Mars missions in the next three 
months alone. It's also redesigning today's 200-pound space suits. 
They have to weigh much less because there's gravity on Mars. And 
cutting-edge medical technologies are being developed -- wearable 
computers, tested recently on Everest. We would like to have this 
type of equipment on the astronauts as they go forward with space 
voyages, monitoring them remotely and providing them assistance. But 
the biggest challenge is bringing the cost of the mission down. One 
revolutionary idea is to save weight by pre-positioning on Mars an 
empty spacecraft for the trip home. That vehicle has within it the 
capability to generate its own fuel from the mars atmosphere, making 
methane and oxygen out of carbon dioxide atmosphere. So that we don't 
have to carry that fuel. Why go to Mars at all? Well, if traces of 
old life are found, that means the universe may be full of life, that 
we're not alone. But there's another reason. There's no substitute 
for human beings doing whatever human beings do wherever they can 
do it. And that is eventually going to take us away from earth. It's 
going to take us to Mars. And I think it will even take us beyond 
to the stars. And it's the human component that gives it meaning. 
All engines running, liftoff. It's what we learned during the Moon 
program -- machines may be cool, but on earth, we need to see our 
own kind out there, pushing the limits of exploration. The world's 
fastest human being -- Jack Smith, ABC News, mountain view, California. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>