<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981026.0497 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In a victory for a determined government, South Korea's top five conglomerates 
apparently are finally facing up to the need to restructure their 
businesses around a relatively few core sectors. Under government 
pressure, the five heavily indebted conglomerates, or chaebol, were 
required to submit their restructuring plans to their creditor banks 
by the end of September. If they failed, the government threatened 
to have the banks, most of which it controls, call in their loans 
and cut off their lines of credit, an almost certain death sentence. 
The chaebol got the message. The question now becomes whether their 
plans are workable _ whether the chaebol can find anybody to buy the 
money-losing affiliates they now seem willing to shed, whether their 
proposed mergers will actually stem bloated production. Creditor banks 
are reviewing the plans of the five conglomerates _ Hyundai, Samsung, 
Daewoo, LG and SK _ and will report to the government in a few weeks. 
The government will review those reports and give a yes or no to the 
individual chaebol by mid-December. It is uncertain whether those 
that fail to meet the government's criteria will be given additional 
time to submit new plans. The government wants the five chaebol to 
focus on core businesses, including automaking, electronics, petrochemicals, 
shipbuilding and banking and financial services, giving up money-losing 
subsidiaries in everything from soft drinks to amusement parks. A 
restructuring of the bloated chaebol was a key promise South Korea 
made to the International Monetary Fund in exchange for a dlrs 58 
billion bailout of its economy last December. The government originally 
gave the chaebol until July to come up with their restructuring plans. 
They failed to meet that deadline. Then the government threatened 
crippling penalties and set the new deadline. ``No one should doubt 
the government's will to restructure chaebol fraught with problems,'' 
Kim Dong-su, a spokesman for the Financial Supervisory Commission, 
said. But he said the process will be complex and take time. The Korea 
Exchange Bank, the main creditor of the nation's largest conglomerate, 
Hyundai, said Monday its review was proceeding ``smoothly.'' Other 
banks, including Choheung, Hanil and Korea First, confirmed that they 
also were reviewing proposals from the other four top conglomerates. 
All refused to disclose details. But local media reported that Hyundai, 
which has already liquidated four affiliates, plans to reduce the 
number of its subsidiaries from 62 to 35 by the end of next year through 
mergers, sell-offs and liquidation. That will help Hyundai consolidate 
or restructure its business around five core sectors, including automaking, 
construction and engineering, electronics, chemicals, and financial 
services, they said. Other conglomerates also plan to overhaul operations 
around key businesses, trimming 30 to 40 percent of their affiliates, 
the media reports said. The open government intervention provoked 
debate among financial experts and academics. ``Government intervention 
is unavoidable. It has become apparent that chaebol can do nothing 
on their own,'' Lee Pil-sang, an economics professor at Korea University, 
said. He pointed out that all past governments had no will or reason 
to tame the family-owned chaebol, which fueled South Korea's rapid 
economic expansion in the 1970s and 80s and with which they maintained 
cozy, corrupt relations. Lee Han-ku, head of the private Daewoo Research 
Institute, was critical of the government moves. ``The forceful restructuring 
is unrealistic. Indebted companies will have to be liquidated through 
sell-offs. Who will buy them?'' Lee said. ``Chaebol know that they 
should slim down to survive. Even if it takes time, they should be 
given time to restructure on their own,'' he said. The conglomerates 
have been accused of overexpanding and over-diversifying during the 
country's boom years on bad loans won through collusion with government 
and bankers. A typical South Korean conglomerate is controlled by 
a single family and has 40 to 60 cross-funded subsidiaries. As of 
April 15, the number of affiliates among the nation's top five chaebol 
totaled 257, including 62 for Hyundai, 61 for Samsung, 37 for Daewoo, 
52 for LG and 45 for SK. One government report shows that the 30 largest 
chaebol groups account for one-third of South Korea's industrial output 
and lead its export-driven economy. About a dozen conglomerates collapsed 
under huge bank debts last year, chasing away foreign investors and 
thus fueling a financial crisis. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>