<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981026.0777 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The German subsidiary of General Motors Corp., Adam Opel AG, named 
new top bosses Monday to resolve a boardroom crisis caused by the 
abrupt recall of its chairman to Detroit. Robert Hendry, head of GM's 
Swedish Saab division, will replace Gary Cowger as chairman of the 
management board on Nov. 1, Opel said. Opel personnel chief Wolfgang 
Strinz was named Hendry's deputy. The arrangement was seen as a face-saving 
compromise for GM and its German managers at Opel, which has suffered 
from declining profits and market share in recent years. Union leaders 
had complained the management turmoil of recent weeks was only hurting 
the company's image further. ``We have to have an end to the chaos,'' 
said Rudi Mueller, chairman of the Opel works council at the main 
Ruesselsheim plant. ``We want to produce cars again instead of headlines.'' 
The bickering goes back to June, when GM installed Cowger as chairman 
of Opel's management board over much German resistance. Then last 
week it suddenly decided to recall him to Detroit to head GM's troubled 
U.S. labor relations. On Saturday, in a surprise move seen as another 
sign of worsening relations, Hans Wilhelm Gaeb resigned as supervisory 
board chairman after almost 18 years in office. An Opel statement 
said only that Gaeb's resignation was due to differing perceptions 
of the company's business strategies. GM had sought to replace Cowger 
with Peter Hanenberger, the European product development chief, but 
German unions opposed naming him, because they blamed him for quality 
problems at Opel in recent years. Opel's German board, which had to 
approve the chairman, is evenly divided between labor and management 
representatives. With Hendry, GM maintains an American at the top 
of Opel, while Strinz becomes the highest-ranking German at the company. 
Seeking to improve its global performance, GM recently announced plans 
to merge its two big, independent automotive units for North America 
and the rest of the world into one. The new boss is an American, G. 
Richard Wagoner Jr. At an extraordinary meeting Monday, the supervisory 
board tapped Hans Barth, vice president in charge of project and production 
support for GM Europe, to take over for Gaeb, effective immediately. 
At a news conference, Barth said GM and the Opel team had settled 
all disputed questions over the past few days. Michael Burns, head 
of GM's European Operations, said Cowger had to go back to Detroit 
because he was the only one able to deal with GM's labor problems 
following this summer's damaging strikes there. ``Nobody expected 
the severity of the strike in the U.S. when the decision about the 
change at Opel was made'' in June, said Burns, who was also named 
to the supervisory board to fill Gaeb's vacancy. Hendry will retain 
his title at Saab for two years, while spending most of his time at 
Opel, Barth said. A deputy will be named at Saab to handle the daily 
work there. Burns stressed that Opel and Saab will remain two independent 
brands. However, he didn't rule out that Hendry's dual leadership 
role will result in closer cooperation between the two GM units. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>