<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981026.0226 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The arrival of fall fashion hasn't sparked the usual buying frenzy 
at Ting May Lung's shoe store this season. In fact, sales are down 
30 percent from last year, and Ting has slashed prices on the new 
merchandise to try to sell it. It's not the predominance of platform 
heels that is putting customers off. ``The economy's bad,'' the 35-year 
old shop-owner said. ``We've ordered a little less stock, but not 
that much less because you earn as much as you sell.'' Ting's plight 
is similar for retailers across Hong Kong, from the small, family-run 
shops, to the retail chains, to the high-end boutiques. As the territory 
tightens its belt in a recession, the retail sector is getting squeezed, 
if not strangled. Profits have dwindled, and some companies are reporting 
losses. The sector has taken a ``double whammy,'' said Arthur Woo, 
an economist at HSBC Securities Asia Ltd. Tourism has waned, while 
local consumers, faced with diminishing asset values and soaring interest 
rates on mortgages, are spending less in this former shopping mecca. 
Retail sales, which include clothing, electronic goods, watches and 
jewelry _ items often on the shopping lists of visitors to the territory 
_ declined for the 10th consecutive month in August. For the first 
eight months this year, retail sales fell by 15 percent from the same 
period in 1997, the government said Monday. Plunging retail sales 
don't bode well for the economy as a whole. The retail sector only 
represents a small percentage of Hong Kong's gross domestic product, 
but in some ways it is a key part of the territory's identity. The 
streets of Causeway Bay, a popular shopping center, are littered with 
vacant shops, while most of those remaining are plastered with signs 
advertising sales. The streets are still bustling, just not with big 
spenders. Even discounts of up to 90 percent aren't luring some people 
to pry open their purses. Just one year after retailers were bursting 
at the seams with expansion plans, the plummeting sales have forced 
retailers to close shops, cut salaries and lay off workers. That has 
resulted in a 17 percent unemployment rate in the retail sector, according 
to a recent survey by one union, compared with the 5 percent total 
unemployment, a 15-year high. Hoping to boost sales, several shops 
have even resorted to deception. They hang up ``Last Ten Days'' signs 
outside, but 10 days pass and the stores remain open. Makeshift stores 
have set up in recently vacated spaces, paying half the regular rents 
for short-term leases and selling discounted items for as long as 
they can make a profit. For instance, Yan Jin Zhi has been renting 
a non-air conditioned shell of a store with plaster walls and cement 
floors for several months. One evening, running his fingers down a 
notebook of the daily tally, the 60-year-old bookseller shook his 
head. At 7 p.m., the day's sales were about 1,000 Hong Kong dollars 
(U.S. dlrs 130) shy of the 3,000 Hong Kong dollar (U.S. dlrs 387) 
daily rent for his shell of a store in one of the city's popular shopping 
districts, Mong Kok. ``We've cut prices by half, rented out space 
in front of the shop to umbrella and cell phone accessory vendors, 
which looks bad, but there's no other way,'' Yan said. ``There's just 
no money to earn.'' Several retailers, unable to make ends meet after 
closing shops and laying off staff, asked employees to take pay cuts. 
That led the Labor Department to issue public statements reminding 
stores about workers' rights in the territory. When 16 employees of 
casual clothes retailer Apple Shop refused to sign agreements on salary 
cuts, they were fired, local newspapers reported. Management refused 
to even discuss the case. Meanwhile, at the top of the line, luxury 
retailer Dickson Concepts (International) Ltd., whose operations include 
the Warner Brothers Studio Stores and Polo/Ralph Lauren outlets in 
Hong Kong, fell victim to the recession and cut salaries by 10 percent. 
Yet for as many retailers cut back or fold, there may be a silver 
lining to the downturn, or maybe a silver-plated lining. Discount 
stores, once an exception in this name-brand conscious city, are taking 
advantage of cheaper rents and more cost-conscious consumers to finally 
set up shop. ``Ten dollar'' stores, where everything costs just 10 
Hong Kong dollars (U.S. dlrs 1.30), are doing a brisk business with 
choosier, cost-conscious customers. For instance, although it is reluctant 
to brand itself a ``discount'' store, Watson's Wine Cellar opened 
a few months ago to offer wines at prices as low as 39 dollars (U.S. 
dlrs 5). ``There's still growth, but maybe the growth is not at the 
top end,'' said Jeanette Peterson, the store's wine liaison. ``In 
the retail sector across the board, people are looking for a price 
point, and if they don't find it they don't buy it.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>