<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981026.0242 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
President Boris Yeltsin, who has recovered from a recent illness, 
worked at his country residence on Monday in preparation for a trip 
to Austria, his press secretary said. Yeltsin, 67, has recovered from 
the respiratory infection that forced him to cut short a trip to Central 
Asia earlier this month. But he has still not returned to work full 
time in the Kremlin, and he is limiting his Austrian trip to one day 
instead of the two originally planned. Press spokesman Dmitry Yakushkin 
said Yeltsin was working Monday at his Gorky-9 residence outside of 
Moscow, getting ready for his trip to Vienna on Tuesday, the Interfax 
news agency said. Yeltsin's agenda in Vienna includes a meeting with 
Austrian Chancellor Viktor Klima, the present holder of the rotating 
European Union chairmanship. The two are expected to discuss security 
issues, including the recent Middle East peace agreement and the crackdown 
on ethnic Albanians in Yugoslavia's Kosovo province, and Russia's 
economic crisis. Yeltsin was quoted as telling an Austrian newspaper 
that he was ``absolutely convinced'' that Russia would overcome its 
problems. ``We will move neither from the reforms which are directed 
toward the building of socially oriented market economy, nor from 
further democratization of society,'' Yeltsin was quoted as saying 
in Sunday's Neue Kronen Zeitung newspaper. In Vienna, Yeltsin is also 
scheduled to meet with International Monetary Fund and World Bank 
officials to discuss economic assistance. Russia has said it is counting 
on further disbursements of a dlrs 22.6 billion bailout package to 
pay its bills for the rest of the year. The IMF froze the loan after 
the Russian economic crisis erupted in mid-August, and has said it 
will not deliver any more payments until it sees signs that Russia 
has a plan for coping with the crisis. Officials accompanying Yeltsin 
will sign a number of economic agreements that should bring dlrs 600 
million in direct investment to Russia, the ITAR-Tass news agency 
said. Yeltsin has been weakened by recurring health problems in recent 
years, including heart bypass surgery in 1996. The president and his 
doctors insist that Yeltsin will serve out the less than two years 
that remain of his term, and they deny that he has serious health 
problems. Russian media have speculated that Yeltsin will not undertake 
any more foreign trips, but Interfax said Monday that a visit to India 
in December is still on. Yeltsin also plans several meetings in November 
with foreign guests, including Japanese Prime Minister Keijo Obuchi, 
German Chancellor-elect Gerhard Schroeder, Italian president Oscar 
Luigi Scalfaro and Queen Beatrix of The Netherlands, Interfax said, 
quoting the deputy head of the presidential administration, Sergei 
Prikhodka. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>