<DOC>
<DOCNO> APW19981026.1058 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu got past the first of several political 
hurdles Monday aimed at challenging a new Mideast peace deal by winning 
a no-confidence motion in parliament. But the threat of early elections 
loomed after legislators decided to present a bill to parliament calling 
for a spring vote. Selling the new land-for-peace deal to hard-liners 
in his coalition government has not been easy. A brutal killing of 
a Jewish settler, apparently by Palestinians, in the West Bank city 
of Hebron Monday was likely to make the process even harder. In a 
demonstration outside the premier's home later Monday, hundreds of 
right-wing Israelis carried torches and angry signs calling for Netanyahu's 
resignation. Many chanted `` Bibi go home,'' and ``Bibi is a traitor,'' 
referring to the prime minister by his nickname. Some protesters scuffled 
with police and tried to break through a barrier. Police said 21 protesters 
were arrested. Still, lawmakers from the dovish Labor party and its 
left-wing partners made good on a promise to back the premier in parliament, 
at least until the new accord signed Friday with Palestinian leader 
Yasser Arafat, is implemented. ``We believe the prime minister should 
be removed from office and we believe in early elections ... but we 
will not trade our principles for political gain. For the sake of 
peace, we will not allow (Netanyahu) to fall,'' said Labor lawmaker 
Eli Goldshmidt, explaining to parliament why his party did not vote 
against the premier Monday. The no-confidence motion brought by the 
tiny extreme right-wing Moledet party failed to pass with eight votes 
for, 21 against and 15 abstentions. A majority of the 120 lawmakers, 
including Netanyahu, did not even show up for the vote, which had 
almost no chance of passing. Labor's Knesset support is key to Netanyahu 
who faces growing opposition to the peace plan from within his own 
coalition government. But hardliners opposed to the West Bank withdrawal 
and opposition legislators hoping to bring down Netanyahu agreed Monday 
to join forces for early national elections. In a first step toward 
toppling the Netanyahu government, the Knesset Law Committee voted 
to hold a first reading on a bill to disperse parliament and hold 
new elections within 100 days, suggesting the date for the elections 
was March 16, after the current peace accord is to be implemented. 
Committee chairman Hanan Porat said the first reading of the bill 
could be held within two weeks. A bill needs to be approved in three 
readings before it becomes law. The early elections bill will need 
to be backed by 60 of the 120 legislators. Supporters of the bill 
said they were confident they could pass the legislation. Meanwhile, 
Israeli police said they found the body of a murdered Palestinian 
man outside of the Jewish settlement of Itamar in the West Bank. Police 
spokeswoman Linda Menuhin said the body was discovered after an anonymous 
caller speaking in Hebrew said that a Palestinian had been killed 
in revenge for the Hebron murder earlier in the day. Israel TV identifed 
the deceased man as Mohammed Zalmouk, a Palestinian from a neighboring 
village who works in the olive groves outside of Itamar. Menuhin said 
it was not yet clear how the man was killed and that police were investigating. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>