<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981026.1130.1463 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When the shuttle "discovery" blasts off Thursday, senator John Glenn 
will become the oldest American to orbit the earth. In 1962, he became 
the first. Garrick Utley looks back at the space program in those 
pivotal years. Godspeed, John Glenn. How long ago was it when John 
Glenn orbited the earth and came back a national hero? It was when 
chubby checker was teaching Americans a new dance. And the United 
States began sending a few military advisers to a distant place called 
south Vietnam. It was a time which belongs in a museum, the national 
air and space museum where John Glenn's "friendship-7" capsule has 
become a historic relic, and a national treasure. A treasure because 
that first flight of an American in orbit restored to the nation a 
self-confidence which had been badly bruised. The bruises had come 
from a small object, no larger than a couple of basketballs. The Soviet 
sputnik satellite launched in 1957. It looked like this and sounded 
like this. Those beeps from space grated on American pride. The real 
impact was that our assumptions about the Soviet Union might have 
been wrong, in that our assumptions of superiority, technically, might 
have been wrong. Those were the coldest years of the cold war. The 
Soviet military arsenal included powerful Rockets that, in April, 
1961, launched Yuri gagarin, the first person in space. U.S. launch 
Rockets had failed repeatedly, and publically in their tests. Pressure 
was building to put an American into space. These are the astronauts. 
There had been much fanfare and hope when the first seven astronauts 
were chosen. They were more than test pilots facing the flights of 
their lives. They were the modern knights who would restore American 
lustre and leadership in the race for space. Americans were in awe 
of them. They were our gladiators, they were the ones who were going 
to win the game for us. a game in which President Kennedy, in 1961, 
raised the stakes audaciously. I believe this nation should commit 
itself to achieving the goal before this decade is out of landing 
a man on the Moon, and returning him safely to the earth. It was a 
stirring challenge to the nation and the Russians. There was only 
one detail missing. The United States was committed to sending an 
American to the Moon before it had managed to send even one into orbit 
around the earth. But John Glenn's time was coming. All systems go. 
As launch time approached, prayers came from the Pope at the vatican. 
In perth, Australia, people left their lights on as a beacon for Glenn's 
nighttime passage overhead. And then the 40-year-old Marine corps 
test pilot, atop a 92-foot long atlas rocket lifted off into history. 
Three, two, one, zero. Garrick Utley, CNN, Washington. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>