<DOC>
<DOCNO> CNN19981026.1600.0085 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Senator John Glenn and all but one of his six crewmates have arrived 
at cape Canaveral, Florida. That should be the Kennedy space center 
in Florida. They will be making last-minute preparations for their 
mission aboard the space shuttle "discovery" scheduled to liftoff 
Thursday. Glenn was the first American to orbit the earth back in 
1962, and public interest in his new mission is high. More than 300,000 
people are expected at nearby vantage points for the afternoon launch. 
77-year-old Glenn says the outpouring of interest has surprised him. 
But it took time for his family to embrace his participation. I felt 
angry, I just didn't, I didn't want him to go, I didn't want any of 
us, him to go through it and all of us to have to go through worrying 
about what might happen, if anything went wrong. And it's taken some 
time to get used to it, and at this point, he's so excited and happy 
about it that I'd be very disappointed if he didn't get to do it. 
Dave and I have both grown up with dad's choices of jobs, thaned he 
in, our whole lives, we've had death as kind of A, something to deal 
with, from his time in Korea, to test pilot work, to the astronaut 
program, and even politics is not the safest of professions these 
days. And so I think that's been there and I kind of had the response 
of, I've been there, I don't want to do that any more. It's very -- 
also, I think I've gotten very used to having a private life. Earlier 
in Houston, defense secretary William Cohen gave the crewmates a Department 
coin to take with them on their trip to the launch site. For his part 
in the mission, Glenn has been training for months. Keith Oppenheim 
takes a look. Talk about a guy on the move. Preparing for his nine 
days in space, John Glenn has spent much of the year doing things 
most 77-year-olds generally avoid, like being dropped into a Pool 
in full gear, learning how to escape the shuttle at low altitude or 
riding in a centrifuge that compresses his body with a force three 
times normal gravity. This is not going to be a joy ride for senator 
Glenn. He is very, very heavily loaded with lots of experiments. The 
experiments on Glenn's body will make him a near perpetual patient, 
all part of NASA's effort to compare space travel with the aging process. 
I told the people doing it that I had seen better looking things under, 
bugs under a microscope studying biology than I looked like. But remember, 
this is a man used to roughing it. Glenn's training 36 years ago was 
grueling. Now, when he isn't tumbling out of crawl spaces, getting 
rides in jets, learning to eat modern space food, taking pictures 
or getting his picture taken, Glenn can focus on science. And while 
not everyone agrees this mission will produce good science, few doubt 
John Glenn believes he is going to make a difference. It's that kind 
of basic research that you're looking at that extends life, that makes 
life more enjoyable and does so much for people all over the world. 
It's exciting, and I'm just glad to be a part of it. Keith Oppenheim, 
"Headline News." 
</TEXT>
</DOC>