<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981026.1830.0073 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Good evening. We begin tonight with what could very well be a deadly 
campaign of terror directed at doctors who perform abortions across 
the northern tier of the United States and into Canada. Abortions 
that are are legal. The FBI is deeply involved in the investigation, 
and a New York family tonight is in deep mourning for the loss of 
a father and a husband, a Doctor, who was assassinated in his home. 
Dr. Barnett slepian was buried he is the seventh doctor or abortion 
clinic worker to be killed in this country in the last five years. 
Here's NBC's Rehema Ellis. Mourners file into the suburban Buffalo 
chapel to honor Dr. barnett slepian. In this community, known to its 
residents as one of the safest towns in america, shock has now given 
way to anger. We are outraged that somebody would have the audacity 
and gall to do that to another human being. It happened Friday night, 
10:00. A single bullet from a high-powered rifle crashes through his 
kitchen window, striking the doctor in the back. Slepian's wife and 
four sons were at home. A family friend says one of the sons was in 
a nearby room watching television and heard his father cry out, "I 
think I've been shot." Authorities say the sniper was hiding in the 
dark in the Woods behind the house about 100 feet away. Slepian's 
murder may fit a pattern of attacks that have occurred over the past 
four years in upstate New York and Canada. They're all doctors, all 
doctors who provide abortions. They were all shot in their residences 
from outside the residence, those are the similarities were pursuing. 
In fact, slepian had been warned by police as recently as Friday morning 
to be cautious of possible attacks, even to draw the drapes in his 
home after dark. The 52-year-old gynecologist had been threatened 
by anti-abortion protesters in the past, facing criminal charges for 
assaulting a picketer outside his home in the late 1980s. But slepian 
was well known and well liked in the Buffalo area known more for delivering 
babies than for being one of four area doctors performing abortions. 
He delivered this man's premature twins. He did an emergency C-section 
that saved their lives. If he wasn't around, my youngest wouldn't 
be here. That's a fact. Tonight, the FBI is offering a $100,000 reward 
for information leading to the arrest and conviction of whomever's 
responsible for the doctor's murder. A condolence letter from the 
president and Mrs. Clinton to the slepian's was read at the funeral. 
The first murder in two years in this quiet community now has women's 
doctors across the country fearful tonight. Rehema Ellis, NBC news, 
Amherst, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>