<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981026.1830.0881 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
NBC news "in depth" -- tonight, John Glenn, entering the home stretch. 
It's the dream he's been dreaming for 36 years, another chance to 
soar into space. And now he's just days away from liftoff. But first, 
the 77-year-old Glenn had to complete 522 hours of training that cost 
$275,000. NBC's Robert Hager is already at the launch site, where 
he begins tonight's "In depth" reporting. The countdown under way 
today. "T" minus 18 hours and two days. But a late arrival here for 
the astronauts, John Glenn and the others, flying in from home base 
in Houston in small, T-38 trainer planes. Mission commander Kurt brown. 
Better late than never, is what I say. The one-hour delay, because 
during a refueling stop, one of the t-38s wouldn't restart. Astronaut 
Scott parysinzky, temporarily left behind, until another plane could 
be sent, missing the arrival ceremony. Glenn, meantime, on Thursday's 
flight. It's really gratifying to see people get so fired up about 
the space program again and about their interest in it, and this is 
gonna be a very research-rich flight. The astronauts, greeted by family, 
Glenn by his wife, annie, as nASA keeps a wary eye on weather. By 
launch, that hurricane Mitch to the south and high pressure to the 
north could combine to cause blustery winds. NASA cautiously predicting 
a 60% chance of launching Thursday. If there's a delay, same for Friday. 
One other minor technical glitch, a small sensor on one of the shuttle's 
main engines isn't working. It's right here. It's used to sense whether 
the engine nozzle is pointed but it's only used before liftoff, when 
engineers have other ways to tell how the engine's aimed, so it's 
not a mission-delaying kind of problem. As many as 250,000 visitors 
expected in central Florida to watch the shot, some today signing 
a huge billboard for presentation to John Glenn on his return. 3,000 
journalists expected, too, by liftoff. And for one of the astronauts 
arriving, a special occasion. Today is Steve Robinson's birthday. 
So we all should sing happy birthday, right? Yeah. Robinson, in charge 
of all the experiments on the flight, turning 43. Happy birthday, 
Steve Robinson, happy birthday to you all right. I hope these guys 
fly better than they sing. Liftoff target, Thursday afternoon, just 
over 60 hours and counting. Robert Hager, NBC news, cape Canaveral. 
Once he's back in space, John Glenn won't be sitting around, simply 
enjoying the view. His schedule is crammed with experiments, some 
even taking place while he sleeps. So what will science get out of 
John Glenn's big adventure? We continue our "in depth" reporting with 
NBC's Robert Bazell. They'll monitor John Glenn's body for a total 
of ten medical experiments. Fellow astronauts will take blood 12 times 
during the nine-day flight. Machines will record blood pressure, brain 
waves, respiration and dozens of other measurements. He'll even swallow 
this capsule, a miniature radio transmitter, that will constantly 
send the temperature from the inside of his body. We are really in 
an important area here of trying to get at the underlying processes 
of aging. But what has aging got to do with space? Plenty. It turns 
out that the weightlessness of space travel rapidly but temporarily 
brings on many of the problems of aging -- difficulty sleeping, loss 
of bone and muscle, decline in the immune and cardiovascular system, 
and difficulty with balance. NASA has been studying this problems 
for years. As we develop countermeasures for these specific changes, 
maybe those countermeasures will be useful back on earth, either as 
therapies or to help people as they get older. One experiment will 
compare Glenn's sleep in this lab in Boston and on the shuttle, where 
crowded quarters, weightlessness and a new day every 90 minutes make 
sleep difficult for everyone. We hope to see how his sleep changes 
in the space environment. In the other crew members, who are of a 
younger age. Other key experiments will look at muscle loss. On earth, 
starting at age 25, we lose about 0.5% of our muscle every year. But 
in space, astronauts lose 1% a week, and NASA wants to learn how to 
stop it. Do the scientists really expect they will reach any grand 
conclusions from their observations of this one man over nine days? 
Of course not. But the top scientists remain enthusiastic. I believe 
that a successful experience of John Glenn in space now will provide 
a shot in the arm to the elderly like nothing that we have ever seen, 
But beyond the inspiration, Glenn, as a volunteer in space, will be 
providing information that may help us all someday to understand the 
aging process. Robert Bazell, NBC news, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>