<DOC>
<DOCNO> NBC19981026.1830.0529 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> CAPTION </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Election day is a week from tomorrow in this most unusual political 
year, a Year when voters seem more turned off than ever before. But 
at the same time, there's a lot at stake. For instance, the balance 
of power in the Senate could change dramatically. Republicans need 
just five seats to be able to break a filibuster. There are nine Senate 
races around the country that are very competitive, with a week of 
campaigning to go, from California and Washington, Wisconsin and Illinois, 
to both carolinas. And of course there's always the possibility of 
an impeachment trial coming up. One of the closest and nastiest Senate 
races of all is going on here in New York. Republican incumbent Alfonse 
D'Amato challenged by democratic congressman charles Schumer. On the 
airwaves and in appearances, this campaign has turned into the political 
equivalent of a schoolyard brawl. Here's NBC's Lisa Myers. Senator 
Alfonse D'Amato is the republican democrats would most like to beat, 
colorful, controversial and very deceptively shrewed. In 18 years, 
he's delivered so much money and help to people back home, he's known 
as senator pothole, a hero in some neighborhoods. Alfonse D'Amato 
is the fonz. He's the anti-senator. He's the street fighter who is 
fighting for New Yorkers' interests. But this year, D'Amato may finally 
have met his match. Chuck Schumer. Democrat Chuck Schumer, a Brooklyn 
congressman who championed popular gun control legislation and is 
as tough and relentless as D'Amato. The bottom line is New Yorkers 
can't trust Al D'Amato. Now are we lying when we say, "congressman, 
you missed more votes, than all but five congressman in the United 
States"? Is it true or not? Let me say this. Is it true or not? Let 
me say this. Is that a lie? Even by New York standards, this race 
is viscous. D'Amato portrays Schumer as a big taxing liberal who puts 
his political ambitions above the needs of voters. Schumer portrays 
D'Amato as ethically challenged, a liar and an embarrassment. Schumer 
votes for foreign aid for countries like Mongolia, but votes against 
upstate New York. If you live in Mongolia, Schumer's your man. D'Amato, 
too many lies for too long. Still, in the closing days, the biggest 
damage to D'Amato has been self-inflicted. He referred to his opponent 
as a "putzhead" then compounded the problem by denying it. What did 
Al D'Amato say six hours before admitting he used a crass slur to 
attack Chuck Schumer? I just have no knowledge of ever doing it. I 
just don't. Tonight polls show this race dead even, the central issue, 
d'Amato himself. Will he survive the fight of his life or will democrats 
finally close what even his enemies say has been an unforgettable 
show. Lisa Myers, NBC news, New York. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>