<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0439 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In his quest for another term, Gov. George Pataki and his fellow Republicans 
have mounted the most successful fund-raising operation in New York 
history, drawing support from thousands of donors, many of whom share 
a common trait: They do business with the state. Pataki and the Republican 
State Committee have collected more than $33 million since 1995, helping 
him ward off some formidable would-be challengers and allowing him 
to spend well over $1 million a week in the final stretch of the campaign. 
Millions of dollars came from donors with specific interests in action 
by the sprawling state government, from regulatory changes on issues 
like rent laws and utility rates, to consulting contracts and construction 
projects worth as much as tens of millions of dollars each. In many 
cases, the Pataki campaign or the party solicited donations around 
the same time that contributors had matters before the Pataki administration, 
according to interviews and records. While some of these companies 
and individuals have done business with the state for years and have 
contributed to whoever is in power, Pataki has attracted more money 
from a wider spectrum of businesses, according to an analysis of campaign-finance 
records. And many began giving large amounts only when the state was 
making decisions important to their bottom lines. Bell Atlantic contributed 
$45,000 just as it sought approval to expand. Developers gave more 
than $400,000 while they were competing to buy the site of the New 
York Coliseum in Manhattan. And a consulting firm that won a $15 million 
state contract sent three donations totaling $50,000. One example 
is a Long Island insurance conglomerate called the Robert Plan, which 
in July 1997 became one of the biggest backers of the Republican State 
Committee in recent years, giving $100,900. Less then two months later, 
the state Insurance Department agreed to transfer control of most 
of the assets of two nearly bankrupt insurance companies in Binghamton, 
to the Robert Plan, giving it 23,000 new policies and an outpost in 
upstate New York. The department and the conglomerate said the contributions 
_ the first and only ones it has made to the campaign or party in 
Pataki's term _ had nothing to do with the arrangement. But that set 
of transactions, and others like it, shows how the Pataki campaign 
and the Republican fund-raising apparatus have benefited both from 
the powers of incumbency and from the state's relatively weak campaign-finance 
laws. Compared with many other states, New York has high contribution 
limits and no constraints on who can give to candidates. The disclosure 
rules are lax _ the Pataki campaign has often released lists of contributors 
in tiny type and alphabetized by first name, making analyzing the 
records difficult _ and the loopholes are easily exploited. There 
is little enforcement of the laws. Earlier this month, Pataki described 
the state's campaign-finance system as ``dreadful,'' but he did not 
offer any proposal to change it. He and his campaign aides declined 
to be interviewed for this article. In response to questions, a spokesman 
for the campaign, Michael Marr, read a one-sentence statement: ``These 
reckless insinuations are the product of an overactive imagination.'' 
Pataki's aides have previously defended his fund raising, saying no 
one contributes because they are pressured or receive favors. The 
aides say donors are motivated by their support for his policies on 
issues like crime, welfare and the economy. They also point out that 
people with no interests before the state have given millions of dollars. 
In the 1994 election campaign, the most expensive in the state's history, 
Pataki raised nearly $15 million, about $3 million more than the Democratic 
incumbent, Gov. Mario Cuomo. Pataki has collected more than $20 million 
for his current campaign. His Democratic opponent, Peter Vallone, 
the New York City Council speaker, has taken in less than $6 million, 
most of which he spent in the primary campaign. Pataki's only rival 
in campaign spending is the Independence Party candidate, Thomas Golisano, 
a businessman from Rochester who has vowed to pour $20 million of 
his own money into the race. It is legal for Pataki and other candidates 
to accept money from these donors as long as there is not a specific 
trading of government actions for contributions. But the practice, 
while widespread, has stirred criticism in recent years from advocacy 
groups, which say the timing of these donations is often questionable. 
In the case of the Robert Plan, the party received a $69,900 donation 
from the conglomerate's president, Robert Wallach, on July 3, 1997, 
the same day it got $31,000 from the Robert Plan. Two months later, 
after long negotiations, Pataki announced the transfer of business 
to the Robert Plan. The state insurance superintendent, Neil Levin, 
said in an interview that the department did not know about the contributions. 
``That in no way was discussed or factored in,'' he said. He said 
an outside consultant helped to manage the deal, which was approved 
by a state judge. He said no one else expressed interest in the two 
companies. Under the deal, the Robert Plan assumed most of the policies 
held by two nearly bankrupt companies, Home Mutual and New York Merchant 
Bakers, after the state determined that their collapse would harm 
policyholders and took control of the companies. In return for getting 
the new policies, the Robert Plan, based in Bethpage, promised to 
pay some of the companies' debts and keep most premiums level for 
a year. John Reiersen, president of Eagle Insurance, the subsidiary 
of the Robert Plan that absorbed the other companies, said the contributions 
did not play a role. ``There was not any particular quid pro quo here,'' 
he said. For companies that are heavily regulated, gaining a favorable 
ruling from the state administration can have a sharp effect on revenues. 
Last year, two of the region's largest communications companies, Bell 
Atlantic and Cablevision Systems, asked the state Public Service Commission 
to approve important expansion plans. In both instances, the companies 
applied around the time that they or their executives donated large 
amounts for the first time to the Pataki campaign or the party, according 
to records. One plan involved the sale of cable systems. On June 9, 
1997, Cablevision announced that it was acquiring several cable systems 
in New York from Tele-Communications Inc., which in turn received 
33 percent of Cablevision. Some consumer advocates charged that TCI 
and Cablevision were forming an illegal alliance. Nine days later, 
the state party received a total of $45,000 from three members of 
the Dolan family, which controls Cablevision. The plan was approved 
in November 1997. The Dolans had not donated before during Pataki's 
term and Cablevision previously had given a total of $2,600 to his 
campaign and the party. Charles Schueler, a spokesman for Cablevision, 
said the Dolans had contributed at a long-scheduled fund-raising event. 
``Their participation was not related to any business matter, but 
an expression of support for Governor Pataki and his economic policies,'' 
he said. In a statement, David Flanagan, a spokesman for the Public 
Service Commission, said approval of the Cablevision plan was routine. 
``The application was subject to full public scrutiny before it reached 
the commission for a decision,'' he said. Bell Atlantic went to the 
state seeking permission to offer long-distance service in New York, 
a move that it said would offer consumers more choices. Long-distance 
companies objected. A few weeks after Bell Atlantic filed with the 
commission in November, the Pataki campaign, while not mentioning 
the pending state decision, asked for a donation, said Paul Crotty, 
a group president at Bell Atlantic. On Dec. 12, 1997, the campaign 
received $25,000 from the company and $20,000 from Ivan Seidenberg, 
its chief executive. ``We didn't do it before because we hadn't been 
asked before,'' Crotty said. He denied a link between the donations 
and the commission, saying, ``Governor Pataki has been pretty good 
to any company that is like Bell Atlantic.'' Flanagan emphasized that 
the commission set rigorous conditions for Bell Atlantic to offer 
long-distance service, which the company is now trying to meet. Developers 
have been another major source of contributions, as they have been 
for politicians of both major parties. One of the largest development 
projects handled by Pataki administration was the sale of the New 
York Coliseum, perhaps the most coveted development site in Manhattan. 
By the time the state awarded the project this summer to a partnership 
of Related Cos. and Time Warner, the nine development teams that had 
bid, as well as their principals, had contributed a total of more 
than $400,000 to the Pataki campaign and the party, records show. 
An executive on one of the losing development teams said officials 
of the Pataki campaign and the party often solicited all nine teams, 
particularly the five finalists. The Coliseum was not mentioned in 
these requests for money, but the context was understood, the executive 
said. ``There was such a huge amount of pressure on all of these guys,'' 
said the executive, speaking on the condition of anonymity. ``The 
unsaid dictum was that if you do business with the government, you 
had better support your government.'' The state picked Related Cos. 
and Time Warner in July 1998. On May 18, the Republican State Committee 
received $10,000 from Related. On June 9, it received $50,000 from 
the Time Warner parent corporation, the first time it had given to 
either the governor or the state party. Edward Adler, a spokesman 
for Time Warner, said, ``The notion that we gave the money in exchange 
for anything to do with the Coliseum project is ridiculous.'' State 
officials denied that there was any link. But the Coliseum bidders 
were not the biggest supporters in the real-estate industry. Landlords 
lobbying to end rent regulations were. Since 1995, the Rent Stabilization 
Association, the landlords' group, and its officers have given a total 
of nearly $1 million. Pataki has been more open to changing the rent 
rules than his predecessors, though he fell short of fulfilling the 
hopes of landlord groups last year when he brokered a compromise with 
the Democrats that left the system of rent regulations largely in 
place. The pattern of state action and political contributions is 
highlighted in a consulting contract awarded to the firm of Deloitte 
&AMP; Touche. In 1996 and 1997, Deloitte &AMP; Touche was one of three 
consulting firms seeking a $15 million contract to improve a state 
health-care and nutrition program. During the bidding, it donated 
$25,000 to the party. In the two months after the firm won in February 
1998, it contributed $15,000 more to the party and $10,000 to the 
Pataki campaign. Before the bidding, the firm had given a total of 
$4,000. The two other firms made no contributions, records show. Robert 
Hinckley, a spokesman for the state Health Department, said Deloitte 
&AMP; Touche received the project because it had the lowest bid and 
the best application. Deloitte &AMP; Touche said its donations were 
``unrelated to the work.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>