<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0351 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
Kathleen Willey, a one-time White House volunteer who has said she 
was briefly groped in the Oval Office by President Clinton, may have 
once tried to help Paula Corbin Jones succeed in her sexual misconduct 
lawsuit against the president, according to a court documents filed 
by a former Jones lawyer. The statement by the lawyer, Joseph Cammarata, 
was contained in previously-sealed documents from Mrs. Jones' lawsuit 
that were released Monday in Little Rock. But the documents also show 
how Mrs. Willey came to staunchly resist getting involved in the Jones 
lawsuit. Kenneth Starr, the independent counsel, who has reported 
to Congress that Clinton may have committed impeachable offenses in 
connection with the Jones lawsuit, is still investigating whether 
anyone sought to influence Mrs. Willey to alter her account of her 
encounter with Clinton. In an affidavit, Cammarata said that when 
he was representing Mrs. Jones, he received a telephone call in January 
1997 from a woman who did not give her name but who said she had an 
experience with Clinton similar to that of Mrs. Jones. Cammarata said 
he became confident that the woman was Mrs. Willey because the caller 
was familiar with material that could only be known at the time by 
Mrs. Willey. Months later, Mrs. Willey said she did not make any telephone 
call to Cammarata, the documents released Monday showed. But at the 
time Mrs. Willey denied she was the caller, she was working to keep 
her distance from the Jones lawsuit. One document showed that Mrs. 
Willey hid in her house for days to avoid being served with a subpoena. 
Mrs. Willey's lawyers, according to some of the documents, said that 
her experience with Clinton was not relevant to Mrs. Jones' case. 
In August 1997, Mrs. Willey's lawyer told the court that the Jones 
lawyers were trying to invade her privacy and that she had no testimony 
that would help Mrs. Jones. The hundreds of pages of documents released 
Monday by Judge Susan Webber Wright of Federal District Court also 
showed that Mrs. Jones' lawyers complained that the White House was 
behind an effort to delve into her sexual history, hoping to portray 
her as sexually promiscuous despite a pledge by Clinton's lawyers 
not to do so. The papers, like a similar batch released last week, 
vividly portray the bitterness between the Jones' lawyers and those 
for the White House. Some of the papers document the unsuccessful 
effort by Mrs. Jones to buttress her claim that she witnessed distinguishing 
characteristics in the president's genital area when he exposed himself 
in her presence. The documents include graphic testimony by Mrs. Jones' 
sister, Lydia Cathey, of Mrs. Jones' account of what happened in a 
Little Rock hotel room in 1991. But Judge Wright, the documents show, 
reviewed affidavits by Clinton's doctors and ruled that Mrs. Jones' 
allegations were ``baseless and scurrilous.'' Mrs. Jones sued the 
president in 1994, saying that three years earlier, when he was Governor 
of Arkansas and she was a state clerical employee, he had her summoned 
to his hotel suite in Little Rock, dropped his pants and asked her 
to perform a sex act. Clinton has denied her account although he has 
said it is possible she came to his room for an innocent introduction. 
Judge Wright dismissed Mrs. Jones' suit in April, ruling that even 
if her account were true, she could not make out a case of sexual 
harassment. Last week, a panel of three federal judges in St. Paul, 
Minn., heard arguments on whether the suit should be reinstated. The 
documents released Monday show Mrs. Jones' lawyers appealing to Judge 
Wright to prevent depositions being taken of men in Arkansas who testified 
they had found Mrs. Jones eager to engage in sex. The depositions 
were taken by William Bristow, an Arkansas lawyer representing Danny 
Ferguson, the state trooper who Mrs. Jones said brought her to Clinton's 
room and who is also a defendant in the lawsuit. Clinton's lawyer, 
Robert Bennett, in a television appearance in June 1997 threatened 
to delve into Mrs. Jones' sexual history, saying it would show her 
reputation could not have been so affected by rumors of a sexual encounter 
with Clinton. But after an avalanche of criticism from women's groups, 
the White House backed off. Mrs. Jones' lawyers complained in their 
court filings that Clinton's lawyers were behind Bristow's effort 
to disclose people who said they had engaged in sex with Mrs. Jones. 
During a deposition of a man who said he met Mrs. Jones in an Arkansas 
bar and soon was having sex with her, Bennett passed a note to Bristow, 
according to the documents. Mrs. Jones' lawyer suggested that Bennett 
was orchestrating what he called a ``smear campaign'' against Mrs. 
Jones while publicly insisting the White House would not engage in 
such tactics. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>