<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0451 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
When holding forth on almost any subject, George Bernard Shaw usually 
got to the truth of the matter with blunt, unsentimental brilliance. 
But the most unfair thing he ever said, in his ``Maxims of a Revolutionist,'' 
was: ``He who can, does; he who can't, teaches.'' True, there are 
plenty of bad teachers. But many bad teachers are quite good at what 
they teach. They just can't teach. Conversely, there are some extraordinarily 
good teachers who are not entirely comfortable doing what they teach, 
but know how to teach it. Think of Tatyana Tarasova, the coach of 
the young Russian figure-skating sensation Ilya Kulik, who won the 
gold medal at the Winter Olympics in February. Kulik may be the most 
talented male figure skater ever. His unlikely coach, though a former 
skater, is a chunky, middle-aged, tear-prone woman with big hair and 
a thick fur coat who wraps the apple-cheeked heartthrob in her maternal 
arms after each routine. Clearly, Ms. Tarasova doesn't get on the 
ice and demonstrate the way to nail a quadruple jump. What she provides 
Kulik with is expert analysis of his every move, precise instructions, 
choreographic tips and essential psychological support. Of course 
there are also great teachers who do what they teach very well indeed. 
But they may not be able to do it in quite the sustained way that 
professionals who don't teach can. Among the best examples are music 
teachers who thrive in the cloistered atmosphere of a conservatory 
or university, superior musicians who are not cut out for the grind 
and pace of a professional solo career but who can play superbly. 
A certain quality of athleticism is essential to a touring musician, 
and not just for hot young virtuosos who can vanquish the arm-blurring 
octave passages of the Tchaikovsky Piano Concerto. Even a refined 
pianist like Claudio Arrau had an athletic kind of stamina that enabled 
him to maintain his high standards despite a performing schedule that 
would defeat most university-based teachers. There are many master 
teachers who are revered by young musicians as performers yet who 
seldom stray from the environs of a conservatory or college campus. 
There, it is the process of working that sustains them, like a monk's 
daily ritual of chanting and prayer. And, to them, passing on the 
practice to younger musicians is a sacred and self-empowering trust. 
Some of these teachers, though renowned within musical circles, have 
low profiles among the larger concertgoing public. For example, the 
pianist Howard Karp, a longtime faculty member at the University of 
Wisconsin in Madison, is an elegant musician, a Romantic by nature 
whose performances are spacious, imaginative and technically exquisite. 
There is the cellist George Neikrug at Boston University, a bold musician 
and excellent instrumentalist who has guided a few generations of 
students into professional careers. Among cellists, Neikrug is enormously 
respected. But how many people outside that small sphere know of him? 
Lately, the teacher I'm thinking about in particular is Donald Currier, 
professor emeritus at Yale University, who recently turned 80 and 
is grappling right now with cancer, with encouraging results so far. 
Currier is a pianist of exceptional refinement and musical understanding. 
He, too, is respected among musicians and revered by the students 
he taught during a 38-year career at Yale. I was one of them. By nature 
he is a buttoned-down New Englander. Often, when I arrived at his 
studio for a lesson, he would seem distracted, even sullen. But once 
I started playing, he grew animated and infectiously involved. I remember 
the day that this rather inhibited man started dancing around the 
room to illustrate the sprightly gait of a movement from Schumann's 
``Carnaval.'' Currier has done some memorably beautiful playing. There 
was a remarkable performance of Ravel's ``Gaspard de la Nuit,'' which 
he played not as a display of daunting technical difficulty, too often 
its fate, but as a wildly rhapsodic, musically sophisticated work. 
The way he restrained the shimmering ``Ondine'' movement, the hypnotic 
steadiness he brought to the obsessive, softly repeated octave motive 
in the ``Gibet'' movement and the surging energy he summoned in the 
final ``Scarbo'' movement transfixed an audience one evening at the 
university's Sprague Recital Hall. But who heard it, or even heard 
about it outside that small hall? There were other performing highlights 
of his Yale career: a lyrically wistful account of Chopin's Piano 
Concerto No. 2 with the Yale School of Music Orchestra, a Schumann 
recital capped by a triumphant performance of the Symphonic Etudes 
and, with some student players and faculty colleagues, an exhilarating 
performance of Hummel's Piano Septet, virtually a concerto for piano 
and six instruments, a work that helped Liszt conquer Russia. But 
to give such performances, Currier, like other college-based musicians, 
needed time to work steadily, with peace of mind and a supportive 
environment. He never had the kind of facility and endurance that 
allow a pianist like Emanuel Ax to play so often and still so well. 
This is not to suggest that Ax's stamina is some mere athletic prowess. 
Prodigious facility is not incompatible with musical depth, and interpretive 
insight is not the sole province of musicians who ruminate in conservatories. 
In fact, as a teacher Currier knows how important it is for a young 
musician to develop a capacity to learn music quickly. A lot of work 
will come to someone who can substitute on short notice for an ailing 
accompanist, or learn a composer's new chamber piece in a few days. 
Currier liked to brag a bit about one student who showed up at a lesson 
having learned Chopin's First Ballade in a week, and played it not 
badly at all. ``How about learning No. 2 for next week?'' Currier 
asked. The student did. Then, with some more prodding, he learned 
No. 3 and No. 4 over the next two weeks. Still, helping students to 
work steadily on an important recital program, sometimes for an entire 
academic year, is standard practice and an important discipline for 
teachers consecrated to the art of music. After all, a pianist learning 
Schumann's ``Carnaval'' or Elliott Carter's Piano Sonata is never 
really finished. Ideally, each reworking and performance should gain 
in musical insight and pianistic assurance. Much exceptional performing 
is being done by teachers in safe small halls on campuses sometimes 
far way from major urban musical centers. More power to them and, 
especially, to Donald Currier. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>