<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0209 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The only time Dr. Joel Berger feels silly about dressing up like a 
moose is when tourists catch him in the act. Otherwise, it is serious 
scientific work. Berger and his wife, Carol Cunningham, wanted to 
find out if the near-extinction of big predators like wolves and grizzly 
bears in the contiguous 48 states had wrought any changes in moose 
behavior. One way, they figured, was to drop predator scents in the 
form of wolf urine and bear scats near the moose and observe their 
reactions. Easier said than done. Making the drops in known moose 
hangouts and then watching from a distance was too imprecise; for 
instance, one cannot tell with enough exactitude when a moose notices 
the scent. To maintain sufficient control over the experiment, it 
is necessary to drop the scent within five yards or so of the animal. 
But although moose are generally docile and tolerant of humans, there 
are limits to how closely they can be approached, and one never knows 
when a given moose might get annoyed. Berger and Ms. Cunningham, biologists 
at the University of Nevada at Reno who are also affiliated with New 
York's Wildlife Conservation Society, tried throwing balls of dung 
and snowballs saturated with urine in the direction of the moose (``This 
is high-tech science,'' Berger said), but could not throw them far 
enough. Slingshots did not work very well, either. ``We just couldn't 
get the distance or the right slingshot to handle that volume,'' he 
said. So the two scientists asked a designer who had worked on the 
``Star Wars'' movies to make a moose suit. Like trick-or-treaters 
or vaudeville actors, Berger and Ms. Cunningham got into the suit, 
he in the front, in the pitching and data-recording position, Ms. 
Cunningham in the back. What the moose thought can only be guessed, 
but the tactic worked. The researchers were able to get close enough 
to deliver their pungent experimental items, in at least one instance 
going nose-to-nose with a live moose. Using this technique, the two 
scientists compared the reactions of two moose populations to the 
scents. One was in Alaska, where wolves and grizzlies still abounded, 
the other was in the Grand Teton National Park in Wyoming, where no 
wolves and very few grizzlies remained. The results seem clear: The 
Alaskan moose became wary, alert and agitated in the presence of wolf 
urine. They would stop feeding and look around for minutes at a time, 
and the hair on the backs of their necks would sometimes rise. Bear 
dung provoked an even stronger reaction; the moose ``freaked out, 
basically,'' Berger said. But the Teton moose appeared unfazed by 
the wolf urine and reacted in a much less agitated fashion to bear 
scats than the Alaskan moose had. In another phase of the research, 
the two researchers also found that when predators are no longer in 
the picture, moose tend to ignore the caw-caw of ravens. Where predators 
roam, ravens often follow in hopes of picking up a quick scavenger's 
dinner, and moose ordinarily would treat their calls as an alarm. 
All of these findings are preliminary, because the research is still 
in progress. But Berger says it looks as if the near-wipeout of wolves 
and grizzlies in the contiguous states has resulted in changes in 
``a suite of behaviors'' among moose. If so, that is one more way 
in which humans, who are responsible for the predators' disappearance, 
have altered the world of the moose. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>