<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0182 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
For years, many endurance athletes have believed that exercising in 
thin mountain air is the best way to improve performance at sea level. 
But recently, a team of doctors gave a new spin to the high-altitude 
hypothesis and discovered that living a more sedentary life in the 
mountain air while training at a lower level gives athletes the greatest 
gains. ``It gives a 1 or 2 percent improvement,'' said Dr. Benjamin 
D. Levine, a co-author of the study and a professor of internal medicine 
at the University of Texas Southwestern in Dallas. ``That may not 
seem like much, but that's the difference between winning the gold 
medal and not getting to the finals.'' Called ``living high and training 
low,'' the program is gaining acceptance among some athletes. Dr. 
David Martin, chairman of the sports science subcommittee for U.S.A. 
Track &AMP; Field, the national governing body for track, is encouraging 
elite distance runners to adopt the program. And athletes all over 
the world are finding innovative ways of putting the research into 
practice. For decades, exercise scientists have known that the body, 
even if sitting or sleeping, responds to high altitude by creating 
more red blood cells to boost oxygen levels. The increased oxygen 
can, in turn, enhance an athlete's endurance during training and competition. 
But the benefits of high-altitude training, which gives an even greater 
boost to red blood cells, are offset by the negatives, said Levine, 
who also is the director of the Institute for Exercise and Environmental 
Medicine at Presbyterian Hospital of Dallas. Humans cannot fully compensate 
for the limited oxygen and therefore cannot train at their maximum 
ability, he said. As a result, the athletes lose muscle and their 
performances may suffer. Early studies showing the benefits of high-altitude 
training are now considered suspect by many sports physiologists. 
Dr. Anthony A. Sucec, professor of exercise and nutritional science 
at San Diego State University, said that researchers often monitored 
only a small group of athletes, used no control groups, and did not 
factor in psychology. ``Most runners are city people, they train and 
live in smoggy places,'' he said. But when they get to altitude, they 
may be able to train harder because the environment is attractive, 
they like the clean air, there's no distractions, and they're more 
relaxed.'' The uncertainty was enough to persuade the United States 
Olympic Committee to pay for Levine's five-year study, which was published 
last year in the Journal of Applied Physiology. For the report, Levine 
and his former colleague, Dr. James Stray-Gundersen, an orthopedic 
surgeon who now works in Norway, monitored 39 collegiate and national 
caliber runners. After working out at sea level in Dallas to reach 
a base fitness level, the athletes were sent to live and train at 
various altitude combinations. When the camps ended, only those who 
lived high and trained low improved their performance in a five-kilometer 
run at sea level. They bettered their times by an average of 13.4 
seconds. In contrast, the group that lived high and trained high was 
an average of 3.39 seconds slower, while the athletes who lived low 
and trained low were an average of 26.7 seconds slower. Finding high-altitude 
living quarters within commuting distance of low-altitude training 
facilities can be challenging. Elevations of at least 8,000 feet are 
believed to be required for high-altitude living and below 4,000 feet 
for low-altitude training. The runners who benefited most in Levine's 
study had a 30-minute drive between their rooms in Park City, Utah, 
and a track in Salt Lake City. To get around the commute, Finnish 
sports officials built a so-called nitrogen house that simulates altitudes 
of nearly 9,000 feet. Nordic skiers and biathletes spend the day training 
outside at sea level, then go indoors to eat and sleep in an environment 
that is pumped rich with nitrogen to reduce the amount of oxygen in 
the air. Sian Welch, a triathlete from San Diego, is trying another 
tactic. She spent $12,800 for a sleeping chamber that could simulate 
altitudes higher than the Rocky Mountains. The chamber, a cylinder 
made of a fiberglasslike material and made by a company based in Boulder, 
Colo., is just long enough inside for a person to lie on a small mattress. 
Once the chamber door is shut, a vacuum pump draws out the air until 
the level reaches that of the desired altitude. Athletes typically 
spend all night inside breathing the thin air while they sleep. ``I 
feel like the races are a little easier for me because of the chamber,'' 
said Ms. Welch, who placed eighth this month in the Ironman Triathlon 
in Hawaii. Levine called the concept of such chambers ``intriguing 
but untested.'' They are also a point of debate with some athletes 
and officials who believe that using high-altitude chambers is unfair 
and akin to the illegal practice of blood doping, which involves athletes' 
removing some of their own blood, allowing their bodies to replenish 
red-blood cell supplies, then intravenously restoring the removed 
blood to increase their oxygen-carrying abilities. The International 
Olympic Committee is considering whether the chambers should be banned. 
``No one has a problem with athletes going to the mountains,'' said 
Dr. Don McKenzie, a professor of medicine at the University of British 
Columbia in Vancouver who advises Canadian Olympic athletes. ``But 
when it comes to artificially inducing that environment, then there 
are some concerns.'' Athletes who live in high-altitude areas have 
also found creative ways to simulate the lower altitudes they need 
for training. When attending high-altitude training camps in such 
places as Winter Park, Colo., altitude 8,000 feet, U.S. cyclists sometimes 
do sprints on stationary bicycles while wearing gas masks that feed 
them air that is as rich in oxygen as at Death Valley, Calif. ``The 
problem with being at that high an altitude is that you can't work 
out at the same intensity as lower down,'' said Sean Petty, director 
of athlete performance for U.S.A. Cycling, the sport's national governing 
body. ``So on some days we would ride the stationary bikes with the 
oxygen masks set at sea level or just below. Then, on other days, 
we would train on the road.'' In the United States, the most common 
form of living high and training low is probably the block system. 
For example, the United States swim team may spend several weeks training 
in the relatively high altitude at the Olympic Training Center in 
Colorado Springs, altitude 6,000. The team then descends to sea level 
for three to six weeks of training in places like Tuscaloosa, Ala., 
and San Diego. ``I use the altitude to produce the cardiovascular 
strength,'' said Jonty Skinner, one of the team's coaches. ``I take 
them down to sea level for the sprints to push them to a higher level.'' 
Levine called such programs ``suboptimal if not completely ineffective.'' 
He added that the benefit of living and working out in Colorado Springs, 
the home of several United States sports teams, is questionable because 
the air there is too thin for maximum training but not thin enough 
to boost endurance. He suggests another, more scaled-down version 
that he says is effective but demands less travel: Athletes live at 
a high altitude part of a week and go through relatively light workouts. 
The other part of the week, they must commute to sea level for sprints. 
``It's just more convenient,'' Levine said. Though altitude training 
tactics are used primarily by elite athletes, some neighborhood gyms 
are trying them as well. For example, members at the Lakeshore Towers 
Sporting Club by 24 Hour Fitness, in Irvine, Calif., can work out 
on a treadmill in a sealed room in which the oxygen level is maintained 
by a filter at 8,000 feet. ``Anytime you can increase your oxygen 
delivery system, you increase your endurance,'' said Kyle Hettinger, 
fitness supervisor at the club. But, Levine called this concept ``the 
worst of all circumstances.'' People who use these rooms, he said, 
do not stay inside long enough to get a boost in red blood cells and 
cannot train at their maximum because there is too little oxygen. 
As beneficial as living high and training low may seem, it is not 
for all athletes. Among them are those who do not respond to high 
altitude. In research published this month in the Journal of Applied 
Physiology, Levine reported that nearly half of the runners he studied 
had no increased oxygen carrying capacity after living for four weeks 
at a high altitude. For some unknown reason, their bodies did not 
adjust to the climate. It is possible, Levine speculated, that such 
athletes must be exposed to even thinner air to respond. But high-altitude 
training is absolutely necessary, physiologists agree, when athletes 
prepare for competition in high altitude locations, like Mexico City, 
home of the 1968 Olympics. If they do not, they may suffer from altitude 
sickness that will leave them gasping for air. Scientists are expected 
to study more precisely what altitudes are required for living high 
and training low, and whether high-altitude sleeping chambers are 
effective. Despite his enthusiasm for high-low training, Levine warns 
that it is no magic bullet, especially for amateur athletes. The extra 
bump that an amateur athlete may get from altitude is grossly outweighed 
by the benefit such an athlete can get from careful, controlled training 
at sea level, Levine said. Altitude is not a panacea.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>