<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0435 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
In an industrial part of this suburban town, behind a chain link fence 
topped by barbed wire and a pole with a forlorn and tattered wind 
sock, is an unintended monument to the atomic age: a three-acre, 20-foot-high 
mound of radioactive dirt tightly sheathed in matte black polyethylene. 
The dirt, the remaining pile of what was once two, is on the site 
of the Middlesex Sampling Plant, one of several top-secret sites around 
the country where uranium was tested in the Manhattan Project, which 
built the atomic bomb. But the speed with which the country deciphered 
the atom and harnessed its destructive power has not been duplicated 
in cleaning up the Middlesex site, 35 miles southwest of Manhattan. 
The secrecy surrounding the Middlesex plant was lifted more than three 
decades ago, and since then residents and local officials have tried, 
through a host of federal agencies, to clean up the site, whose radioactivity 
is not considered dangerous. Kenneth Kohl has a furniture repair and 
refinishing shop next to the site. His rear window looks out over 
the covered pile. ``After a while you just don't notice it,'' Kohl 
said. ``I didn't suspect what kind of work they were doing there when 
I bought this place 25 years ago, but then these guys in white protective 
suits started doing all this digging and testing back in the early 
'80s.'' Kohl looked out at the pile and said, perhaps to convince 
himself, ``I guess that pile will be gone one day.'' Just as the people 
of Middlesex were seeing the first tangible steps toward cleanup _ 
one pile was taken away by the Army Corps of Engineers last year _another 
Federal agency entered the picture. Late last month, the Environmental 
Protection Agency announced that it would add the site to the Superfund 
list by early December. One might think this would be an occasion 
for cheering. But residents of this community of 13,500 are numb. 
They have already waited decades for action. Now they fear that another 
layer of bureaucracy will only push back the day that the site can 
finally be declared clean. The EPA did not step in because of any 
new health threat. No government agency has ever said that the site 
was a health hazard, and no local group has ever made such a charge. 
The Superfund designation came mainly because, for the first time, 
the agency took note of subsurface contamination at the site. The 
agency also noted some minor leaks of contaminated water in 1996 that 
have since been corrected. According to Rich Cahill, a regional spokesman 
for the EPA, there was a need to address some low-level radioactivity 
in material up to five feet beneath the asphalt surface of the Middlesex 
plant and the potential of more ground water contamination. The residents 
of Middlesex add these findings to the long list of problems and responses 
they have collected during the last 20 or so years, enough to fill 
three borough Health Department file cabinets full of studies, letters 
and minutes of hearings. They are wary of adding a Superfund folder 
to the file cabinets. ``I'm afraid it means another level of bureaucracy 
and more delay,'' said Kevin Sumner, an environmental health specialist 
with the Middlesex Borough Health Department. For Raymond Reefer, 
who has lived across the street from the fenced-in area for 21 years, 
the prospect of another agency getting involved triggered all the 
nervous speculation of wondering about a new neighbor. After all, 
he said, during the last two decades he came to know the people plotting 
the cleanup of the site by their first names. They swarmed over his 
house and property dozens of times with their measuring devices. They 
paid his electric bills when dust from demolition and digging required 
him to keep his windows closed in summer. ``That pile has been a real 
eyesore and a real pain in the neck,'' Reefer said. For years, Reefer's 
friends who visited asked about the mounds visible from his front 
porch, now seen through an autumn tangle of bright yellow aster and 
delicate white fleabane. When he explained about the radioactive dirt, 
they would kid him, asking whether he glowed in the dark. The Middlesex 
plant was established in 1943 to sample ores from the Belgian Congo 
for uranium, thorium, radium and beryllium and then ship them to locations 
where weapons work was being done. In 1955, the Atomic Energy Commission 
took over the site and used it for limited sampling of thorium-bearing 
ores until 1967, when it decontaminated the buildings and grounds 
by sandblasting, vacuuming, acid washes and soil removal. It was deemed 
clean by the standards of the time, and the agency moved on. Beginning 
in 1969, the Middlesex location was used for a time as a training 
site for the Marine Corps Reserves. But with the growing national 
concern about environmental contaminants, in 1974, the Department 
of Energy, which took over from the Atomic Energy Commission, resumed 
control of the Middlesex location and 46 other sites that figured 
in the development of nuclear weaponry and nuclear energy. The goal 
was to do a more thorough cleanup of the sites so that they could 
be safely used as commercial or residential property. The Mayor of 
Middlesex, Ronald Dobies, said that well before 1974 the borough had 
been concerned about the plant. Awareness of the site's original use 
came only in 1960, accidentally, when civil defense officials carrying 
Geiger counters were stunned when their counters started registering 
over the borough landfill. They later found that in 1948 a contractor 
building an asphalt loading area at the sampling plant less than a 
mile away had dumped some of the dirt in the municipal landfill. Some 
of this dirt also went out as ``clean fill'' to other projects, including 
the rectory of Our Lady of Mount Virgin in adjacent Piscataway, Dobies 
said. All of this material was subsequently retrieved and returned 
to the sampling plant site, and accumulated in two large mounds of 
dirt and debris, both covered with and sitting on plastic liners to 
keep moisture from seeping from the pile and carrying radiation to 
the subsoil. Unlike the most hazardous radioactive waste, which has 
a half-life of hundreds of thousands of years, the low-level variety, 
like that at Middlesex, has a half-life of as little as 90 days and 
as long as 200 years. It tends to be material that has been irradiated 
through exposure to other radioactive material. It is not considered 
lethal, even after long exposure, but it could cause illness or have 
uncertain long-term effects. As Federal and state environmental officials 
worked on cleanup and removal plans, local residents were skeptical, 
Dobies said. ``We weren't sure whether to believe the state and federal 
governments when they kept telling us that there was no health danger,'' 
he said, noting that the borough hired its own consultants in the 
early 1980s to get an independent opinion. Similarly, Reefer, the 
site's neighbor, did not believe the borough's finding that there 
was no health hazard, and enlisted a friend with a Geiger counter 
and some radiation expertise to accompany him on clandestine, late-night 
forays to the sampling plant site. They would run the Geiger counter 
over the grounds, he said, and eventually he was satisfied that there 
was no danger. ``The site wasn't doing my property values any good, 
but it seemed safe,'' Reefer said. Meanwhile, national debates raged 
over how to transport and dispose of low-level radioactive waste safely, 
delaying final plans for Middlesex. Also, budget cuts at the Department 
of Energy pushed the Middlesex site further down the list of priority 
cleanup locations. Three other sites in New Jersey _ in Maywood in 
Bergen County, in Wayne in Passaic County and in Deepwater in Salem 
County _ kept their high spots on the priority list. Those three sites 
are being cleaned up now. The department came under increasing criticism 
from Congress for not finishing the cleanups more quickly. By 1997, 
24 of the 46 sites used for nuclear projects had been cleaned. At 
the insistence of lawmakers like Rep. Robert Franks, whose district 
includes Middlesex, the responsibility for the cleanups was switched 
to the Army Corps of Engineers in 1997. ``That created an initial 
problem for us, because we had developed a rapport with Bechtel Corp., 
which was doing the cleanup of the site for the Department of Energy,'' 
Dobies said of the company that was maintaining the radioactive sites 
and making plans to remove the material. ``We fought it for a while, 
but decided to try to build rapport with a new group. And so far, 
there has been nothing negative with the Corps of Engineers.'' The 
Army Corps of Engineers, with some extra financing last year, removed 
one of the two mounds to a federally operated disposal site for low-level 
radioactivity in Utah. This part of the cleanup cost $12 million. 
Allen Roos, director of the Middlesex site for the Corps of Engineers, 
said that additional money is expected in next year's budget, but 
it is not yet certain that the corps will be removing the remaining 
pile right away. ``But we don't believe that EPA being involved is 
going to add years on to the process or delay it any,'' he said. When 
the Department of Energy was heading the effort, it projected completion 
of the cleanup of the remaining 22 sites on the list by 2002, at a 
total cost of nearly $1 billion. But price tags have varied, based 
on whether the site is to be cleaned for commercial use or to a more 
pristine level for residential use. The corps now says the cleanups 
will not be completed until 2006 at the earliest. ``They could have 
a good program,'' Dobies said, ''but without money to back it up, 
it goes nowhere.'' 
</TEXT>
</DOC>