<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0445 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
The New York Times will say in an editorial Tuesday, Oct. 27: The 
weary Mideast bargainers of Wye Plantation will not find much rest 
in the weeks ahead. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel and 
the Palestinian leader, Yasser Arafat, now face the fights of their 
political lives back home. Both men redefined their political identities 
in negotiating the new peace agreement. Netanyahu, after five years 
of criticizing the Oslo peace agreements and telling Jewish settlers 
he would yield no more territory on the West Bank, belatedly embraced 
Oslo's formula of land for peace. He is now gambling his political 
career on carving out a new majority of the broad Israeli center, 
which could let him break free from his current allies on the religious 
and settler right. Arafat, who for a decade has tried to preserve 
Palestinian unity by equivocating about terrorism, finally closed 
the door on any return to confrontation and violence. Hamas and other 
violent opponents of Oslo are now likely to redouble their efforts 
to challenge his authority at home and undermine his credibility with 
Israelis through new terrorist outrages. The time to break free from 
the politics of stalemate had clearly arrived, for reasons that were 
evident at the White House signing ceremony. King Hussein of Jordan, 
long a stalwart peacemaker, is now frail from cancer and chemotherapy. 
Arafat's trembling lips testified to his failing health. Prime Minister 
Netanyahu evokes a new generation of Israelis who are reluctant to 
shoulder lifelong military duty. Netanyahu and Arafat showed great 
courage in changing their positions. But the first responses have 
been rude parliamentary challenges to Netanyahu and new violence from 
Palestinian and Israeli extremists. The main opposition party, Labor, 
has promised to assure ratification for the new peace agreement and 
will protect the Netanyahu government from right-wing challenges for 
at least the next two weeks. But after that, political warfare is 
likely as Labor and others challenge Netanyahu for the center ground. 
Arafat's challenge is even greater. With Monday's murderous attack 
on an Israeli security guard in Hebron he must move firmly to capture 
and punish those who kill in the name of Palestine. With the apparent 
reprisal murder of a Palestinian by a West Bank settler, Netanyahu 
needs to show the same firmness against Jewish extremists. Arafat 
must also begin to allow more constructive forms of political debate 
in Palestinian-administered areas. Too often he has confused cracking 
down on terror with cracking down on peaceful dissent. There must 
be legitimate channels for nonviolent political discussion and debate. 
Israeli and Palestinian politics must now catch up with the changes 
made by Netanyahu and Arafat. If they do not, the promise of peace 
may again be betrayed. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>