<DOC>
<DOCNO> NYT19981026.0441 </DOCNO>
<DOCTYPE> NEWS </DOCTYPE>
<TXTTYPE> NEWSWIRE </TXTTYPE>
<TEXT>
As Rep. Barbara Kennelly's car headed back toward this capital city 
after a recent campaign event, she turned to glimpse the red maple 
and golden beech trees on the hills. ``Doesn't that look beautiful?'' 
she said. ``That's the only good thing about campaigns: you can see 
the leaves.'' It was a unusual statement for a candidate for governor 
and someone who has spent more than two decades in public office. 
A moment later, she added emphatically, ``I like serving.'' Mrs. Kennelly 
speaks with great enthusiasm about the achievements of her 17 years 
as a Democratic congresswoman from Connecticut. And many of her allies 
contend that she would bring to the State House the same attributes 
she took to Congress: an ability to compromise, a civil demeanor, 
and a set of liberal principles about the responsibility of government 
to help those in need. But at the same time, those supporters acknowledge 
that she has little stomach for what it takes to get there. With a 
week left until the election, polls show Mrs. Kennelly so far behind 
her highly popular opponent, Gov. John Rowland _ 48 percentage points 
at last count _ that some here wonder whether she is heading for one 
of the biggest political humiliations since John Peters, a National 
Republican, defeated Calvin Willey, a Democrat, by 44 percentage points 
in 1832. ``I think, quite honestly, that it would have been difficult 
for any Democrat to knock out the governor,'' said James McBrayar, 
an assistant professor of American politics at the University of Hartford. 
``That said, I think this was a largely invisible campaign.'' Many 
of Mrs. Kennelly's missteps have been well documented. Although polls 
showed her running even with the incumbent when she announced her 
candidacy a year ago, she waited many months before beginning a television 
advertising campaign and failed to build a strong campaign organization. 
It is also likely that the early polls were skewed by her high name 
recognition, and therefore gave a misleading indication of her strength. 
But much of her campaign problems seem traceable to her political 
style. She clearly loves the business of governing and talks passionately 
about the deal-making that goes on out of the public eye, the collegiality 
of Washington and the intense, late-night work of getting bills passed. 
But just as clearly, Mrs. Kennelly, 62, does not have a taste for 
the more public, retail aspects of politics. She says she enjoys meeting 
people on the campaign trail, but she recoils from publicity stunts 
and negative campaigning, two techniques that are usually effective. 
As a Congresswoman, she achieved a quiet style partly by doing without 
a press secretary to promote her and by avoiding outspoken comments, 
preferring to use her reputation as a team player to get legislation 
passed. And when she ran for re-election every two years, it was usually 
against lackluster opposition. Working most effectively out of the 
limelight seems to be a family trait. Mrs. Kennelly's father, John 
Bailey, was chairman of the Democratic National Committee from 1961 
until 1969, and ran the state Democratic Party from 1946 until his 
death in 1975. As the party boss, Bailey was known as a consummate 
backroom deal-maker. Although some critics contend that she is too 
rooted in the politics of the past, Mrs. Kennelly argues forcefully 
that she is ``not an old-style politician.'' But her stump style seems 
to reflect an ambivalent attitude toward modern campaigning. It can 
be forceful at one point, then turn quickly uncomfortable the next. 
At a recent Democratic town committee meeting in Rocky Hill she warmed 
up what had been a largely silent audience with a rousing speech. 
Explaining her decision to run, she said: ``I was looking back at 
Connecticut and I could see we were not what we had been. Not first 
any longer in education, or preserving our environment. Not first 
in protecting our kids. So I decided to run for governor and you all 
supported me. Well, let me tell you: if I thought I was right then, 
I know I am right now!'' But 15 minutes later she gave a somewhat 
disjointed speech at a meeting of a N.A.A.C.P. chapter, shifting awkwardly 
between her campaign theme of ``two Connecticuts,'' praise for the 
hiring record of the federal government and a call for equal wages 
for minorities. Even her ardent supporters acknowledge that her campaign 
style suffers by comparison with that of her opponent, Rowland, a 
first-term Republican who is 21 years her junior. He tends to be smooth, 
quick on his feet and quick to utter sound-bites, while Mrs. Kennelly 
is more halting and deferential than Rowland, who tends to be more 
aggressive. Any Democrat, no matter how good a campaigner, would have 
a tough time this year against Rowland, whose term has been a period 
of economic gains and budget surpluses. A poll conducted by Quinnipiac 
College found that 83 percent of the state's registered voters are 
satisfied ``with the way things are going'' in Connecticut. Rowland 
has also made Mrs. Kennelly's run more difficult, according to many 
politicians here, by moderating some of his positions. Last year, 
for example, he successfully reached compromises with the Democratic 
Legislature on tax cuts and health care. Since Mrs. Kennelly's first 
race for Congress in a special election in January 1982, she has faced 
no serious contenders in her largely Democratic district around Hartford. 
As a result, she had no need to undertake big media efforts, debate 
an opponent or respond to serious criticism. In a belated recognition 
of the importance of professional strategists, she hired both a new 
manager and a new spokesman in the middle of the race. Mrs. Kennelly 
also failed in the early stages to pick a single theme to shape her 
campaign. In recent weeks a friend of Mrs. Kennelly's, Sen. Barbara 
Mikulski, D-Md., has been urging her to hammer away at a single message 
and to promote herself. ``Barbara Mikulski told me, `The problem with 
you, Barbara, is that you are not shameless,' '' she said. In addition, 
few of Mrs. Kennelly's allies have seemed eager to attack the governor 
very hard, fearful perhaps of alienating voters who support a popular 
incumbent. When early polls showed her running even with Rowland, 
several prominent Democrats were urging her to make the race, but 
now that her campaign has turned sour, they have not been on the trail 
with her. Indeed, at the Rocky Hill rally, three of the statewide 
candidates who share the Democratic ticket with her _ Comptroller 
Nancy Wyman, Attorney General Richard Blumenthal, and Susan Bysiewicz, 
a candidate for Secretary of State _ did not mention her. ``Democrats 
and Republicans are both campaigning on the idea that there is nothing 
wrong,'' said Bill Curry, who lost to Rowland in 1994 and was hoping 
for a rematch but bowed out after Mrs. Kennelly entered. ``Barbara's 
challenge is to show what really is wrong and how you would fix that. 
And it is hard to do that alone.'' She has steadfastly refused to 
make her criticism of Rowland personal, although she has criticized 
him on his administration's efforts on foster care, environmental 
cleanup and higher education financing. ``If I had to go personal 
I just never would have run,'' Mrs. Kennelly said. Howard Reiter, 
a University of Connecticut political science professor, said Mrs. 
Kennelly had chosen safe issues to push during the campaign. ``When 
you have a well-regarded incumbent,'' Reiter said, ``you have to throw 
the rule book out the window. And she is not one to do that.'' Mrs. 
Kennelly resists analyzing her campaign. ``I do not want to do an 
obituary on the campaign,'' she snapped in a recent interview. ``There 
will be plenty of time for that.'' Mrs. Kennelly's campaign aides 
acknowledge that they have no miracle strategy she can use to close 
the gap between her and Rowland. Over the weekend, the next to last 
before the election, she spent most of Sunday at home, attended only 
four minor events, attended no rallies of her own and gave no major 
speeches. On Monday, she visited a high school in Windham, where few 
of those listening to her stump speech were even eligible to vote. 
Her schedule over the final days will be busier, but the campaign 
will concentrate only on traditional Democratic constituencies. A 
native of Hartford, Mrs. Kennelly attended parochial schools here 
and Trinity College, a Catholic women's college in Washington. Then 
she began volunteering for Catholic Family Services, providing aid 
to poor Hartford families. She ran for a City Council seat in Hartford 
in 1975 and won. After her husband lost his speakership in the state 
House of Representatives, she successfully ran for Secretary of the 
State in 1978. Then in 1982 she ran for the United States House of 
Representatives. A year later, she won a coveted place on the Ways 
and Means Committee. In 1991, she was appointed to a leadership post 
as deputy whip, and then in 1994 became the highest-ranking woman 
in the House when she was elected vice chairwoman of the House Democratic 
Caucus. Rowland's campaign has attacked Mrs. Kennelly for voting for 
higher taxes, for failing to introduce legislation to help the Hartford 
schools and for coming late to the issue of reforming health maintenance 
organizations. In response, Mrs. Kennelly said that although she had 
voted to raise taxes, she also voted for $275 billion in tax cuts 
last year. She said that because she did not sit on the education 
committee, she had little chance to introduce education bills, and 
that when she contacted the federal Education Department on behalf 
of Hartford, Rowland's office spurned the help. And she said she had 
fought for better health care throughout her career. Supporters say 
that she has a record of getting things done. ``The tragic thing is 
Barbara has a lot to offer,'' said Carl Schiessl, a Democratic state 
representative who is retiring. ``She is a tough, thoughtful, classy 
politician.'' Rowland has also criticized Mrs. Kennelly for casting 
votes against welfare reform. She did vote against some reform provisions 
in committee, but Congressional records show that she also voted in 
favor of the final bill signed by President Clinton. She also points 
to a law she pushed helping low-income families buy homes. And Mrs. 
Kennelly also drafted the bill that became the basis for the 1993 
expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit, which is intended to help 
lift poor working families out of poverty. ``I knew long before reform 
became popular that our welfare system was awful, that it locked women 
and children into a terrible life,'' she said. Although her influence 
declined when the Republicans took over Congress, she helped draft 
a law during the 1997-98 Congressional term to allow people receiving 
Federal disability money to keep some of their financial benefits 
and their medical coverage when they start working. That law was what 
brought her to Torrington last week to receive an award at Prime Time 
House, a nonprofit program that helps prepare mentally ill adults 
for work. The event produced one of those moments where the awkwardness 
disappears. ``I love the sense of freedom here,'' she said as she 
came to the end of her prepared remarks. ``You can feel it.'' To illustrate 
her point, she told of an encounter a few minutes before with a woman 
named Karen, a member of Prime Time House. ``Karen said: `I hate politicians,''' 
she recounted, as the audience laughed. ``I said, `Oh, no, no. You 
can hate politics, but don't hate politicians.' She said, `I hate 
politicians,''' Mrs. Kennelly said as the audience, most of whom seemed 
to know Karen well, laughed. ``I said, `Does that make you feel better?' 
She said, `Yes!' I said, `Good, go right ahead and hate politicians.''' 
At that, the audience gave Mrs. Kennelly a standing ovation. 
</TEXT>
</DOC>